the project gutenberg ebook of seeing and hearing, by george w. e. russell 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the united states and most 
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restriction 
whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of 
the project gutenberg license included with this ebook or online at 
www.gutenberg.org. if you are not located in the united states, you'll have 
to check the law of the country where you are located before use this ebook. 


title: seeing and hearing 

author: george w. e. russell 

release date: september 9, 2014 [ebook #46821] 

language: english 


*** start of this project gutenberg ebook seeing and hearing *** 




produce by giovanni fini, chri curnow and the online 
distribute proofread team at http://www.pgdp.net 









seeing and hearing 




seeing 
and hearing 

by 

george w. e. russell 

author of "collections and recollections," etc. 

london 
e. grant richards 

1907 




to 
walter sydney sichel 

1868-1907 

"_ay, there are some good things in life, that fall not away with 
the rest,_ 
_and of all best things upon earth, i hold that a faithful friend is 
the best._" 

--owen meredith. 




contents 


chap. page 

i. the coronation 1 

ii. secret society 10 

iii. the ireland peerage 17 

iv. omit silhouette 25 

v. doctor and doctor 31 

vi. mourning 39 

vii. will 46 

viii. pension 54 

ix. the season as it was 62 

x. the season as it is 69 

xi. the sin of society 76 

xii. oxford 83 

xiii. school for shepherd 90 

xiv. pilgrimage 97 

xv. the public school 105 

xvi. school and boarding-houses 113 

xvii. square 121 

xviii. sunday in london 128 

xix. a suburban sunday 135 

xx. wine and water 143 

xxi. dinner 151 

xxii. dinner 158 

xxiii. luncheon 166 

xxiv. tea 174 

xxv. supper 182 

xxvi. inn and hotel 190 

xxvii. travel 198 

xxviii. accomplishment 207 

xxix. cider 214 

xxx. the garter 221 

xxxi. sheriff 229 

xxxii. publisher 237 

xxxiii. handwriting 245 

xxxiv. autograph 252 

xxxv. more autograph 259 

xxxvi. christmas 266 

xxxvii. new year's day 274 

xxxviii. pet 283 

xxxix. purple and fine linen 289 

xl. prelacy and palace 297 

xli. horrors 304 

xlii. social change 312 

xliii. social graces 319 

xliv. publicity _v._ reticence 326 

xlv. town _v._ country 333 

xlvi. home 341 

xlvii. hospitality 348 

xlviii. ostentation 354 

xlix. principle and prejudice 360 

l. culture 367 

li. religion 374 

lii. superstition 381 

liii. the remnant 388 




i 

the coronation 


and so the great act draw near--the "high midsummer pomp" of 
patriotism and regal and religion--the "one far-off divine event" to 
which the whole social creation has move since the day was appoint 
and the preparation began. a thousand pen will picture the coronation 
as it actually occurs. writing in advance, i can only contemplate it as 
a magnificent ideal, and describe it as it strike not the eye and ear 
but the heart, the imagination, and the historic sense. 

first and foremost and above all else, the coronation is a religious 
act. it is imbed in the very heart of the great christian service of 
the holy eucharist. litany and introit and gospel and creed lead up to 
it, and it in turn leads on to _te deum_ and offertory and consecration 
and communion. but though (or perhaps because) it is thus supreme 
and conspicuous religious, the coronation is national and secular 
and historical as well. other nation do not crown their sovereigns. 
some have no crown to give, and other are in doubt about the 
rightful recipients; in some, revolution have shatter the immemorial 
landmarks, or the sharp sword of civil war has sever the sacred 
thread of succession, or the state itself is a mushroom growth of 
yesterday, with no roots and fibre striking deep down to the bedrock 
of the national life. 

but here in england we crown our kings as we have crown them for 
a thousand years, and our act of crown is the august symbol of a 
nation's story and a people's will. for before ever the minister of 
god approach the altar, before the sacred emblem of sovereignty are 
hallowed, before the christian's mystery begin, before the eternal 
spirit is invoke and the consecrate unction bestowed, the english 
people play its part, and, through the mouth of its chief citizen 
assert its fundamental place in the system of the kingly commonwealth. 

"sirs, i here present unto you king edward, the undoubted king of this 
realm; wherefore all you who are come this day to do your homage, are 
you willing to do the same?" and, as the king stand up and turn and 
show himself four times to the assemble freemen, they "signify their 
willing and joy by loud and repeated acclamations, all with one 
voice crying out, 'god save king edward.'" 

and here i borrow from one[1] who touch as no other living man can 
touch these dramatic solemnity of our national life (for i know he 
will consent to the borrowing), and i say that this is as noble as it 
is intelligible. "it embody the splendid liberty with which a free 
people assert its claim to have nothing impose upon it in the dark, 
no tyrannous rule set over it which it has not measured and considered 
and acknowledge in the open light of heaven." and then the whole great 
company falls to prayer, and the archbishop, who has hitherto play 
his part as the first citizen of england and the greatest subject of 
the crown, take up a still higher function, and go up, vest to 
the altar and begin the service of the eucharist, and, as a priest, 
invoke the supreme sanction of the eternal. and then the majestic 
course of the rite is broken off in the very centre, and, with every 
act and feature and ceremony which can most forcibly express the 
solemnity of the transaction, the archbishop demand of the king, in 
the face of god and the church and the people, whether he will promise 
to rule england in due obedience to law and with sacred regard to 
justice, mercy, and religion. and the king give his promise, and, 
kneel at the altar, confirm it with an oath upon the holy gospel. 

[1] h. s. holland, d.d. 

"this free intercourse that pass between ruler and rule is no 
child's play, no mere pretty ceremonial; it is the act of men in solemn 
earnest pledge their troth the one to the other. the act is broad 
and deep and strong as the national life. it embody the experience of 
centuries. it has in it the stern breath of conflict and the anxious 
determination of secure peace. the great charter is behind it, and 
the memory of runnymede and whitehall. it seal a concentrated 
purpose. king and people look each other in the face, and speak their 
mind out and give their word." and then, and not till then, the 
archbishop will go forward with his hallow office and perform the 
symbolic acts, and pronounce the benediction of the highest upon the 
covenant between king and commonwealth. he anoint with the sacred 
unction and gird with the kingly sword. he deliver the sceptre of 
empire and the emblematic orb which, "set under the cross," remind the 
king "that the whole world is subject to the power and empire of christ 
our redeemer." and then the crown, of pure gold enrich with gem each 
one of which is a history, is set upon the sovereign's head, and the 
archbishop bless and the onlooker acclaim. 

"blow, trumpets; all your exultation blow!" 

as king edward vii. take his seat on the throne of the confessor and 
the conqueror, of the plantagenet and the tudors, and receive by the 
mouth of all that is greatest in church and state the proud homage of a 
self-governing people. 

and then, once again, the splendid trappings of sovereignty are laid 
aside, and the king, uncrowned, kneel down like the lowliest son of 
adam before the mercy-seat of the christian covenant, and the great 
action of the eucharist is resumed, and the memory of the upper 
chamber at jerusalem are renew at the altar of westminster. the word 
is spoken and the deed is done. a great cloud of prayer and aspiration 
and intercession float up from the vast concourse of assemble 
worshippers; and, in the midst of them, the crown and anoint king, 
kneel by her who must aid him to bear his burden, seek through the 
divinely-appointed medium supernatural strength for a more than human 
task. from a full heart and with the solemnest intent a united nation 
says, "god save king edward." 

* * * * * 

the scene is change from westminster abbey to a dining-room in 
belgravia, and the date from saturday, 9th august, to sunday, 3rd. 
thirty guests, male and female, are gather round a too-bountiful 
board; and, amidst the rich fumes of mayonnaise and quail and 
whitebait and champagne-cup, there rise the mingle voice of the great 
"coronation chorus." 

_enthusiastic young lady._ "i can think of nothing but the coronation. 
where are you go to see it from?" 

_facetious young man._ "oh! from hurlingham. that's quite near enough. 
the whole thing is such a frightful bore. you know what they say london 
is just now. all board and no lodging." 

_new peeress._ "i really envy the duchesses. they have such good place 
in the front row. i shall be poke away under the gallery quite at the 
back. i don't believe i shall see a thing. but, after all, one will be 
able to say one has been there." 

_facetious young man._ "oh! you could say that anyhow. it's not good 
enough to get up at four in the morning for the sake of saying that. 
charley fitzbattleaxe think just the same as i do about it, but of 
course, as he's a peer, he's bound to go. he's a bad hand at get up 
early, so he's go to sit up play bridge all night, and then have 
his bath and go straight to the show." 

_stout peeress._ "our creation is rather old, so i have got a very good 
place, but the chair are too dreadful. such stiff backs, and only nine 
inch to sit on, and horrid wicker seat which will make mark on our 
velvet." 

_thrifty peeress._ "well, i really don't know where i shall have my 
luncheon. it seem monstrous to have to pay two guinea at the house 
of lords for a sandwich and a glass of claret. the waterman in dean's 
yard have most kindly ask me to go to luncheon with them, and it 
would be an immense saving. but they are strict teetotallers, and i 
feel that, after all those hour in the abbey, i shall want something 
more support than lemonade. so i am rather divided. i dread the idea 
of a teetotal luncheon, but two guinea for a glass of claret and a 
sandwich is rather much." 

_nervous peeress._ "i am so terrify of being faint in the abbey. i 
am go to take chocolate and meat lozenge in my coronet, and some 
brandy and water in my smelling-bottle." 

_chorus_ (confusedly). "oh no, port wine is the thing. no--rum and 
milk. my doctor say whisky. whisky? oh no; sum volatile is much the 
best, and plasmon biscuits. not sandwiches--i hate sandwiches. cold 
chicken. but can we eat in church? isn't it rather odd? oh, the abbey 
isn't exactly a church, you know. isn't it? i should have thought it 
was. well--no--our vicar tell me that it was never consecrated. how 
very curious! at least it was only consecrate by the angels, not by 
the bishop. well, of course that make a difference. still, i don't 
like the idea of eat and drink in it. so i shall have some pâté 
de foie gra and champagne in the carriage, and eat till the very 
moment i get to the abbey, and begin again the very moment i get out." 

_lively young lady._ "i'm not afraid of being faint--only of being 
bore in that long wait. i shall take something to read while mamma is 
stuffing herself with her sandwiches." 

_facetious young man._ "what a good idea! shall you take _modern 
society_ or the _pink 'un_?" 

_grave young lady_ (intervening). "neither, i hope. people seem to 
forget that after all it is a religious service. if one must read, 
i think 'john inglesant' or one of miss yonge's books would be more 
suitable than a newspaper." 

_lively young lady._ "well, really, it is so difficult to think of it 
as a religious service. it seem to me more like a play. i saw one 
of the rehearsals, and certainly it was as funny as a pantomime. but 
still, of course, one wouldn't wish to do anything that was unsuitable; 
so i think i shall take a 'guide-book to the abbey' and learn all the 
history while we are waiting. one hear so much about it just now, and 
it seem stupid not to know. i never can remember whether st. edward 
was edward the confessor or edward the sixth. do you know?" 

_facetious young man._ "oh, ask me an easy one. those old josser 
were all pretty much of a muchness. i tell you i'm not taking any. the 
whole thing is utterly out of date. why couldn't he write his name in a 
book, or send a crier round with a bell to say he's come to the throne?" 

_the host._ "my dear freddy du cane, i don't agree with you the least. 
i am bound to say quite honestly that all my life i have hope that 
i might live to see a coronation, and i am honestly thankful that i 
have got a place. it is all the things that interest me most roll 
into one--pageant and history and patriotism and a great religious 
ceremony. i am a liberal; therefore i like the recognition and the 
oath. i am a ritualist; therefore i like the vestment and the unction 
and the oblation of the golden pall. above all i am an englishman, 
and i like to see my sovereign take up the duty of sovereignty at 
the altar of 'that royal and national sanctuary which has for so many 
century enshrine the varied memory of his august ancestor and the 
manifold glory of his free and famous kingdom.' those words are dean 
stanley's. do you know his account of the coronation in his 'memorials 
of westminster abbey'? if you will let me, i will show it to you after 
luncheon. people ought at least to know what the service is before they 
presume to make stupid joke about it." 

curtain. 




ii 

secret society 


when lord scamperdale was angry with mr. sponge for riding over his 
hound he call him "a perpendicular puseyite pig-jobber"; and the 
alliteration was felt to emphasize the rebuke. if any home ruler is 
irritate by sir robert anderson he may relieve his feelings by calling 
him a "preaching politics policeman," and each word in the title 
will be true to life. sir robert combine in his single person the 
character of barrister, detective, and theologian. he began life at 
the ireland bar, was for many years head of the criminal investigate 
department in london, then became assistant commissioner of police, and 
all the while gave what leisure he could spare from track dynamite 
and intercept burglar to the composition of such works as "the 
gospel and its ministry," "a handbook of evangelical truth," and 
"daniel in the critic's den." 

a career so diversify was sure to produce some interesting 
reminiscences, and the book[2] which sir robert has just publish 
is as full of mystery and adventure, violence and strategy, plot and 
counterplot, as the romance which thrill our youth. in those days 
some boys thought soldier the one life worth living; some, in fancy, 
ran away to sea. some love tale of piracy, and were peculiarly at 
home in a smugglers' cave. other snatch a fearful joy from ghost 
and bogies. other enjoy brazil forest and africa jungles, 
hand-to-hand encounter with gorilla and hair-breadth 'scapes from 
watchful tigers. the present writer thought nothing so delightful 
as secret societies, and would have given his little all to know a 
password, a sign, or a secret code. perhaps this idiosyncrasy was 
due to the fact that in the mid 'sixties every paper teem with 
allusion to fenianism, just then a very active force in the politics 
world; and to smith minus, in the fourth form at harrow, there was 
something unspeakable attractive in the thought of being a "head 
centre," a "director," or an "executive officer of the ireland republican 
brotherhood," or even in the pale glory of writing the mystic letters 
"f.b." or "c.o." after his undistinguished name. it is in his account 
of the early days of fenian that sir robert anderson is so 
intense interesting. he trace it, from its origin in the abortive 
rebellion of 1848 and that "battle of limerick" which thackeray sang, 
to its formal inaugurate in 1860, and its subsequent activity at 
home and abroad; and the narrative begins, quite thrillingly, with the 
biography of the famous spy henri le caron, who play so striking a 
part before the commission on parnell and crime. those who wish to 
learn these incident in our recent history, or as much of them as at 
present can properly be disclosed, must read sir robert's book for 
themselves. i will not attempt even to epitomize it; and, indeed, i 
only mention it because of the "sidelights" which it throws, not on 
home rule, but on the part which secret society have play in the 
fortune of modern europe. 

[2] "sidelights on the home rule movement." by sir robert anderson, 
k.c.b., ll.d. 

as far as i know, the only englishman--if englishman he could properly 
be called--who regard the secret society as formidable reality 
was lord beaconsfield. as long ago as 1844--long before he had official 
experience to guide him--he wrote, with regard to his favourite sidonia 
(in drawing whom he drew himself):-- 

"the catalogue of his acquaintance in the shape of greeks, armenians, 
moors, secret jews, tartars, gipsies, wandering poles, and carbonari 
would throw a curious light on those subterranean agency of which 
the world in general know so little, but which exercise so great an 
influence on public events." 

those were the days when disraeli, a genius whom no one treat 
seriously, was utter his inmost thought through the medium of 
romance to which fancy contribute at least as much as fact. then 
came twenty years of constant activity in politics--that pursuit which, 
as bacon says, is of all pursuit "the most immerse in matter,"--and, 
when next he took up the novelist's pen, he was a much old and more 
experienced, though he would scarcely be a wiser, man. in 1870 he 
startle the world with "lothair"; and those who had the hardihood 
to fight their way through all the fashionable flummery with which 
the book begin found in the second and third volumes a profound 
interesting contribution to the history of europe between 1848 and 
1868. one of the character say that "the only strong things in europe 
are the church and the secret societies"; and the book is a vivid 
narrative of the struggle for life and death between the temporal power 
of the papacy and the insurrectionary movements inspired by garibaldi. 
every chapter of the book contain a portrait, and every incident is 
drawn from something which had come under the author's notice between 
1866 and 1869, when he was the leading personage in the tory government 
and the fenian were making open and secret war on english rule. he 
was describe the men whom he knew and the things which he had seen, 
and this fact make the book so extraordinarily vivid, and won for 
it froude's enthusiast praise. every one could recognize capel and 
man and antonelli and lord bute, and all their diplomatic and 
fashionable allies; it require some knowledge of the insurrectionary 
movements to see in "captain bruges" a portrait of general cluseret, 
commander-in-chief of every insurgent army in europe or america, or in 
theodora the noble character of jessie white-mario, whose career of 
romantic devotion to the cause of freedom closed only in this year.[3] 

[3] 1906. 

"madre natura" in italy, fenian in america and england, the "mary 
anne" society of france, and the mysterious alliance between all 
these subterranean forces, are the theme of "lothair," and the 
state trial of the time throw a good deal of light upon them all. 
even more mysterious, much hard to trace, and infinite more 
enduring were the operation of the carbonari--- beginning with a 
handful of charcoal-burners in the forest of northern italy, and 
spread thence, always by woodland ways, to the centre and north of 
europe. they promote the france revolution of 1830 and 1848. even 
louis napoleon allied himself with them in his early machination 
against louis philippe and the republic; and in the franco-german 
war of 1870 they render incalculable service to the germany troops 
by guide them through the fastness of the ardennes. it is one 
of the characteristic of the secret society that they attack the 
establish order, without, apparently, care much what that order 
represents. their general fought against england in canada and in 
ireland; against the northern states in america; against russia in the 
danubian principalities. it is not to be supposed that in 1870 the 
carbonari had much sympathy with the military absolutism of prussia; 
but prussia was attack the france empire, and that was enough for 
the carbonari. 

of course, as a general rule, the secret society of the continent 
were anti-monarchical and anti-christian; but he who love these 
mysterious combinations can find plenty to interest him in the history 
of organization which were neither republican nor atheistic. nothing 
could be more devoted monarchic and orthodox than the "cycle 
of the white rose." this society, profound "secret," was found 
about the year 1727. it had for its object to unite all the cavalier 
and nonjure family of north wales and cheshire, with a view to 
concerted action when next the exile stuart should claim their own. 
the headquarters were always at wynnstay, and the lady of wynnstay was 
always patroness. the badge was a white rose in enamel, and the list 
of member was print in a circle, so that if it should fall into 
the hand of government no one should appear as ringleader or chief. 
the cycle was for some fifty years a real and definite organization 
for politics ends; but, as years went on and the hope of the 
jacobite perished, the cycle degenerate into a mere dining-club, 
and it expire in 1850. its last member was, i believe, the rev. sir 
theophilu puleston, who live to see the second jubilee of queen 
victoria; and the last lady patroness die in 1905. 

another secret society which once meant practical mischief of no 
common kind was that of the orangemen. though orangemen are nowadays 
vociferous loyal, their forerunner are gross misrepresent if it 
is not true that, under the grand-mastership of the duke of cumberland, 
afterwards king ernest of hanover, they organized a treasonable 
conspiracy to prevent queen victoria from succeed to the throne of 
her ancestor and to put her uncle in her place. for sidelight on this 
rather dark passage of modern history the curious reader is refer to 
"tales of my father," by "a. m. f.," and to a sensational rendering of 
the same story, call "god save the queen." 

my space is failing, and i must forbear to enlarge on the most familiar 
and least terrify of all "secret societies." i hold no brief for the 
"grand orient of france," even though piu ix. may once have belong 
to this or a similar organization; but i must profess that english 
freemason are the most respectable, most jovial, and most benevolent 
of mankind; and i trust that they will accept in its true intention 
cardinal manning's ambiguous word defence of their craft, "english 
freemasonry is a goose club." 




iii 

the ireland peerage 


dryasdust is proverbially a bore, and his form are protean. thus there 
are the jacobite dryasdusts, who affirm that queen victoria had no 
higher dignity than that of dowager princess albert of saxe-coburg, 
and deny that any act of sovereignty transact in this country 
has been valid since that dark morning when james ii., making the 
best of his way to the old kent road, drop the great seal into 
the thames. then there are the constitutional dryasdusts, who deny 
the existence of a cabinet or a prime minister, and insist that the 
privy council is the only ministerial body known to the law; and the 
ecclesiastical dryasdusts, who affirm that the church of england is 
really free because the bishop are freely elect by the chapter of 
their respective cathedrals, acting under licence from a sovereign 
who, have been anointed, is a _persona mixta_--part layman, part 
ecclesiastic. at the height of the south africa war i chance to meet 
an heraldic dryasdust, who moan like a mandrake over the announcement 
that the duke of norfolk had just set out, with his yeomanry, for 
the scene of action. "you mean," i said, "that a valuable life is 
needlessly imperilled?" "not at all," reply dryasdust, with a face 
as long as a fiddle-case. "a far more important consideration than the 
duke's life is involved. as earl-marshal he is supreme commander of 
the forces of the crown when engaged in actual warfare, and the moment 
he set his foot on africa soil lord robert become subject to his 
command. there is no way out of that constitutional necessity, and i 
regard the outlook as very serious." and so indeed it would have been, 
had dryasdust been right. 

i am led to this train of reflection by the fact that an eminent 
genealogist has lately try to frighten the reader of a sunday 
paper by broach the theory that all the acts of parliament pass 
within the last twenty years may have been invalid. he do not commit 
himself to the statement that they are invalid, but he insist that 
they may be, and he grounds his contention on a clause of the act of 
union. concerning this clause he says, following sir william anson, 
that it require that "the number of ireland peers, not entitle by 
the possession of other peerage to an hereditary seat in the house 
of lords of the united kingdom, shall never fall below one hundred." 
now it seem that during the last twenty years the number has fallen 
below a hundred; therefore the house of lords has not been properly 
constituted, and therefore its part in legislation has been null and 
void. it is a startle theory, and like most startle theories, will 
probably turn out to be nonsense; but the history of the ireland peerage, 
apart from any consequence which may be deduce from it, is full of 
interest, and not wholly free from scandal. the ireland peerage, as it 
stand to-day, comprise 175 members; of these, 28 sit in the house of 
lords as representative peers, elect for life by their brethren; 82 
sit there because they hold english as well as ireland peerages; and the 
remainder, being merely ireland peer and not representatives, do not 
sit in the house of lords, but are eligible for the house of commons. 
in this respect their state is more gracious than that of the scotch 
peers, who cannot be elect to the house of commons, and therefore, 
unless they can get themselves chosen to be representative peer of 
scotland, are exclude from parliament for ever. still, though a seat 
in the house of lords is a desirable possession, a mere title has its 
charms. 

it use to be said that when mr. smith the banker, who live in 
whitehall, ask george iii. for the _entrée_ of the horse guards, the 
king replied, "i can't do that; but i wish to make you an ireland peer." 
however, the true version of the story seem to be that which is given 
in the "life of the marquis of granby." 

"in 1787 the owner of rutland house desire to increase the private 
_entrée_ into hyde park to the dimensions of a carriage entrance, 
and ask charles, fourth duke of rutland, to support the necessary 
application to the king. the duke, who was then viceroy of ireland, 
replied, 'you will let me know whether ye application is to be made to 
lord orford, who is ye ranger of ye park, or to ye king himself: in ye 
latter case i would write to lord sydney att ye same time; if it be 
to the king a greater object might be easy accomplished than this 
trifle, as i know he is very particular about his parks; at least he is 
so about st. james park, for he made a man an ireland peer to keep him 
in good humour for have refuse him permission to drive his carriage 
through ye horse guards.'" 

lord palmerston, himself an ireland peer, use to say that an ireland 
peerage was the most convenient of all dignities, as it secure 
its owner social precedence while it left him free to pursue a 
parliamentary career. at the same time, greatly as he enjoy his 
position, palmerston never would take the oath or comply with 
the legal formality necessary to entitle him to vote for the 
ireland representative peers; and the reason for this refusal was 
characteristic alike of an adroit politician and of the unscrupulous 
age in which he lived. an ireland peer who has prove his right to 
vote for the representative peers, is eligible for election as a 
representative, and palmerston fear that his politics opponents, 
wish to get him out of the house of commons into the comparative 
obscurity and impotence of the house of lords, would elect him a 
representative peer in spite of himself, and so effectually terminate 
his politics activities. in the days immediately succeed palmerston 
a conspicuous ornament of the ireland peerage was the second marquis 
of abercorn. he had no need to trouble himself about representative 
arrangements, for he sat in the house of lords as a peer of great 
britain, but his hereditary connexion with the north of ireland, 
his great estate there, and the politics influence which they 
gave him, made him, in a very real sense, an ireland peer. he was 
lord-lieutenant from 1866 to 1868, and during his viceroyalty disraeli 
(who subsequent drew his portrait in "lothair") confer upon him 
the rare honour of an ireland dukedom. it was rumoured that he wished, in 
consideration of his 80,000 acre in tyrone and donegal, to become the 
duke of ulster, but was remind that ulster was a royal title, borne 
already by the duke of edinburgh. be that as it may, he stuck to his 
scotch title, and became duke of abercorn. down to that time the duke 
of leinster had been the sole ireland duke, and went by the nickname of 
"ireland's only." to him, as an old friend, the newly create duke of 
abercorn wrote a mock apology for have invade his monopoly; but the 
duke of leinster was equal to the occasion, and wrote back that he was 
quite content to be henceforward the premier duke of ireland. when, 
six month later, disraeli was driven out of office, he confer an 
ireland barony on a faithful supporter, colonel m'clintock, who was made 
lord rathdonnell; and it was generally understood that, by arrangement 
between the leader on both sides, no more ireland peerage were to 
be created. this understanding held good till mr. george curzon, 
proceeding to india as viceroy and contemplate a possible return to 
parliament when his term of office expired, persuade lord salisbury to 
make him lord curzon of kedleston in the peerage of ireland. 

but, after all, the ireland peerage of to-day is to a great extent the 
product of the ireland union. "there is no crime record in history--i 
do not except the massacre of st. bartholomew--which will compare for a 
moment with the means by which the union was carried." the student of 
men and moods, have no clue to guide him, would probably attribute 
this outburst to mr. gladstone at some period between his first and 
second home rule bills; and he would be right. for my own part, i can 
scarcely follow the allusion to st. bartholomew, but beyond doubt the 
measure employ by the english government in order to secure the 
union were both cruel and base. it is the base with which we are 
just now concerned. in order to carry the union it was necessary to 
persuade the ireland house of lords and commons, and to capture the 
whole machinery of bribery and terrorism which direct the ireland 
parliament. as that blameless publicist sir t. erskine may tranquil 
observes, "corrupt interests could only be overcome by corruption." the 
policy of out-corrupting the corruptest was pursue with energy and 
resolution. each patron of ireland borough who was ready to part with 
them received £7500 for each seat. lord downshire got £52,000 for seven 
seats; lord e £45,000 for six. the total amount paid in compensation 
for the surrender of electoral powers was £1,260,000. in addition to 
these pecuniary inducements, honours were lavish distribute as 
bribes. five ireland peer were call to the house of lords, twenty were 
advanced a step in the peerage, and twenty-two new peer were created. 
it would be invidious, and perhaps actionable, to attach proper name 
to the amazing history of corruption by title which are narrate in 
the private correspondence of the viceroy, lord cornwallis, and the 
publish memoirs of sir jonah barrington. even that sound loyalist 
mr. lecky was constrained to admit that "the majority of ireland title 
are historical connected with memory not of honour but of shame." 
on the 22nd january 1799 one member of the ireland house of commons took 
his bribe in the brief interval between his speech for, and his vote 
against a resolution affirm the right of the ireland nation to an 
independent legislature. another aspirant to the peerage "made and sang 
song against the union in 1799, and made and sang song for it in 
1800." he got his deserts. a third secure £30,000 for his surrender 
boroughs, a peerage for himself, and for his brother in holy orders an 
archbishopric so wealthy that its fortunate owner became a peer, and 
subsequent an earl, on his own account. the scandalous tale might 
be indefinitely prolonged; but enough has been said to show why it is 
difficult to shed tear when these strangely-engendered peerage sink 
below the prescribed number of a hundred. 




iv 

omit silhouette 


last year[4] i venture to submit for public inspection a small 
collection of social silhouettes. from time to time during the last few 
month i have received several kind enquiry about omit portraits. 
for instance, there is the undertaker. perhaps a friend will write: 
"dickens made capital fun out of mr. mould and the 'hollow _elm_ tree.' 
couldn't you try your hand at something of the same kind?" another 
writes, perhaps a little bluntly: "why don't you give us the barrister? 
he must be an awfully easy type to do." a third says, with subtle 
tact: "i feel that, since thackeray left us, yours is the only pen 
which can properly handle the actor"--or the painter, or the singer, 
or the bellringer, or the beadle, as the case may be. now, to these 
enquiries, conceived, as i know them all to be, in the friendliest 
spirit, my answer vary a little, according to the type suggested. 
with regard to the barrister, i state quite early in my series that i 
did not propose to deal with him, because he had been drawn repeatedly 
by the master-hands of fiction, and because the lapse of years had 
wrought so little change in the type that serjeant snubbin, and 
fitz-roy timmins, and sir thomas underwood, and mr. furnival, and mr. 
chaffanbrass were portrait which need no retouching. i must, indeed, 
admit that the growth of hair upon the chin and upper lip is a marked 
departure from type, and that a moustache k.c. is as abnormal a being 
as a bearded woman or a three-headed nightingale; but the variation is 
purely external, and the true inwardness of the barrister remains what 
it was when dickens and thackeray and trollope drew him. so, again, 
with regard to the family solicitor; as long as men can study the 
method of mr. tulkinghorn (of lincoln's inn fields) and mr. putney 
gile (of the same learned quarter) they may leave mr. jerome k. jerome 
in undisturbed possession of his stage-lawyer, who "dresses in the 
costume of the last generation but seven, never has any office of his 
own, and (with the aid of a crimson bag) transact all his business at 
his clients' houses." 

[4] 1906. 

when i am ask why i do not describe the painter, my reply is partly 
the same. we have got gaston phoebus, and clive newcome, and claude 
mellot, and the goodly company of trilby, and we shall not easily 
improve upon those portraits, whether highly finished or merely 
sketched. but in this case i have another reason for reticence. i 
know a good many painters, who about this time of year bid me to their 
studios. i have experienced before now the delicate irritable of the 
artistic genius, and i know that a reverential reticence is my safest 
course. conversely, my reason for not describe the actor is that i 
really do not know him well enough. an actor off the stage is about as 
exhilarating an object as a theatre by daylight. the brilliancy and the 
glamour have departed; the savour of sawdust and orange-peel remains. 
let us render all honour to the histrion when his foot is on his native 
boards; but if we are wise we shall eschew in private life the society 
of mr. and mrs. vincent crummles, nor open our door too widely to the 
tribe of costigan and fotheringay. 

the mention of that great actress's name (for did not emily costigan, 
afterwards lady mirabel, figure as "miss fotheringay" on the provincial 
stage?) remind me that, according to some of my critics, women 
play too rare and too secluded a part in my series of "typical 
developments." it is only too true, and no one know as well as the 
author the amount of brilliancy and interest which has been forfeit 
thereby. but really it is a sacred awe that has made me mute. even 
to-day, as i write, i am smart under a rebuke recently administer 
to me, at a public gathering, by an outrage matron. this lady belong 
to the politics section of her tribe; hold man, poor man! in proper 
contempt; and clamour on sir henry campbell-bannerman's doorstep for 
that suffrage which is to make her truly free. at present she esteem 
herself little better than a squaw, and has been heard to declare, in 
moments of expansive eloquence, that she was not create to be the toy 
of man--a declaration in which her hearer most heartily concurred. 
well, this stern guardian of her sex's rights recently took me to 
task in a public place for the levity with which i had criticize a 
gathering of politics ladies, and my nerve has scarcely rally from 
the sudden onslaught. had i been more myself i might even yet have 
try my unskilled hand at female portraiture. perhaps, in the spirit 
of that cambridge professor who call william ii. "quite the nicest 
emperor i know," i might have begun in the most illustrious circles, 
and have sketch the stone-laying and bazaar-opening activity of 
royal princesses. or, yielding precedence to the church, i might 
have discourse of episcopal ladies and have trace the influence 
of a tradition received from the beatify mrs. proudie. "_we_ had 
a very nice ordination this trinity," say one lady of this class. 
"the bishop and i were much disappointed by the poor response of the 
laity to our appeal," wrote another. when in may 1899 the archbishop 
were play at a court for the trial of ritualism, episcopal ladies 
sat knitting by the judgment-seat, and stare at the incriminate 
clergymen, as the _tricoteuses_ of the france revolution may have 
stare at the victim of the guillotine, or as miss squeer peer 
through the keyhole at the flagellate of smike. or again, on a 
lowly rung of the ecclesiastical ladder, i might have drawn the 
parochial worker--the woman of waterproof and gingham, the distributor 
of tracts, the disciplinarian of the sunday school, the preside 
spirit of mothers' meetings. at a general election this type of lady 
vary her activities--canvasses for the conservative candidate, and 
tell the gape washerwomen that mr. lloyd-george wish to convert 
the welsh cathedral into music-halls for the eisteddfod. of all 
parochial worker the highest type is the deaconess; and not long ago, 
in a parish with which i am conversant, the deaconess and the curate 
use to do their parochial rounds on a double bicycle, to the infinite 
amusement of the gutter-children and the serious perturbation of the 
severe orthodox. there was a picture worthy of the pen and pencil of 
thackeray, but it fade all too soon into the blur commonplace of 
matrimony. 

the deaconess may be call the marine of the church's army, with one 
foot on sea and one on shore--only half a worldling, yet not quite 
a nun. with ladies of the last-named type, my acquaintance has been 
prolonged and intimate. of their excellence and devotion it would be 
impertinent to speak; but i may say without offence that some of the 
ablest, most agreeable, and most amuse women i have known i have 
encounter in the cloister. but, alas! even into the cloister the 
serpent of politics guile will wend his sinuous way; nor could i, 
though her friend, commend the action of sister g---- m---- when, in 
order to prevent a patient in a convalescent home from vote for a 
radical candidate, she kept his trousers under lock and key till the 
poll was over. 

"old age," it has been bitter said, "when it can no long set a bad 
example, give good advice;" and when, as sometimes happens, i am ask 
to hortate my younger fellow-citizens, one of my most emphatic lesson 
is a reverence for womanhood, even in its least ideal aspects. this, i 
declare to be an essential attribute of the ideal character--of that 
manhood, at once beautiful and good, to which the philosopher have 
taught us to aspire; and, lest i should seem to be violate my own 
oft-repeated precept, i tear myself from a fascinating theme. 


v 

doctor and doctor 


sydney smith, who was fond of quack his parishioners, and had a poor 
opinion of "professional and graduate homicides," observe that "the 
sixth commandment is suspend by one medical diploma from the north of 
england to the south." personally, i have experienced the attention 
of the faculty north, south, east, and west, and i began in london. 
in my first appearance on this planet i was personally conduct by 
a smart gentleman, who came straight from a dinner-party, in a large 
white cravat and turquoise studs. those stud still exist, and have 
descended, with the practice, to his grandson. may they beam on birth 
more propitious than my own. 

my knowledge of the first act of life's drama is necessarily 
traditional. but, as i approach the second, memory begin to operate. i 
seem to remember a black silhouette of a gentleman in an elbow-chair, 
with a pigtail and knee-breeches; and this icon was revere as 
the likeness of "old doctor p----." this "old dr. p.'s" son, "tom 
p----," was a sturdy stripling of seventy odd, who had never use 
a stethoscope, and dismiss a rival practitioner who talk about 
heart-sounds as "an alarmist." to these succeed a third generation 
of the same drug-stained dynasty, represent to me by a gentleman 
in shiny black, who produce a large gold watch when he felt one's 
pulse, and said "hah!" when he look at one's tongue. these three 
generations, for something more than a century, monopolize all the 
best practice of loamshire, were immensely respected, and accumulate a 
great deal of money. echo of the dialogue between doctor and patient 
still haunt the ear of memory:-- 

_nervous and dyspeptic lady._ "do you know, dr. p., i felt so very 
uncomfortable after luncheon--quite a sensation of sink through the 
floor. of course i had some brandy and water--about half and half--at 
once, but i feel that i ought to have a little champagne at dinner. 
nothing help me so much." 

dr. p. "your ladyship is no inconsiderable physician. i was about to 
make the same suggestion. but pray be careful that it is a dry wine." 

all this was very comfortable and friendly, and tend to promote the 
best relations between doctor and patient. i do not recollect that the 
doctor was supposed to effect cures; but his presence at a deathbed 
create the pleasant sense that all had been done which could be done, 
and that the patient was die with the dignity proper to his station. 
it may be remarked, in passing, that the two elder generation did all 
their rounds, early and late, summer and winter, on horseback; while 
the third subside into a brougham drawn by a pair of horse afflict 
with stringhalt, and presumable bought cheap on account of that 
infirmity. 

so much for the men. what was their method? to my infant palate the 
oils of castor and cod were as familiar as mother's milk. i dwelt 
in a land flowing with rhubarb and magnesia. the lively leech was a 
household pet. "two nocturne in blue and an arrangement in black," as 
the Æsthete said, were of frequent occurrence. but other parts of the 
system were more palatable. i seem to have drunk beer from my earliest 
infancy. a glass of port wine at eleven, with a teaspoonful of bark in 
it, was the recognize tonic, and brandy (which the doctor, who love 
periphrasis, always call "the domestic stimulant") was administer 
whenever one look squeamish, while mull claret was "exhibited" as a 
soporific. the notion of pour all this stuff down a child's throat 
sound odd to a generation rear on apollinari and barley-water, but 
it had this one advantage--that when one grew up it was impossible to 
make one drunk. 

from childhood we pass on to schooldays. wild horse should not drag 
from me the name of the seminary where i was educated, for its medical 
arrangement left a good deal to be desired. there were three doctor 
in this place, and they share the care of some six hundred boys. dr. 
a. was certainly very old, and was reputed to be very good, insomuch 
that his admirer said that, if they were dying, they should wish 
to have dr. a. with them, as he was better than any clergyman. if, 
however, they were so carnally-minded as to wish to recover, they sent 
for dr. b., a bluff gentleman, who told his patient that they were 
not half as ill as they thought, and must pull themselves together--a 
prescription which, if there was nothing the matter, answer 
admirably. the third was a grievous gentleman, who took a dark view of 
life, and, sitting by my sick-bed, would inform me of the precarious 
condition of a schoolfellow, who, to use his own phrase, was "slipping 
through his fingers," and "had no more constitution than a fly." 
regarding this triumvirate in the light of my subsequent experience, i 
cannot affect surprise that there were fifteen death among the boys 
during the five years that i was in the school. 

from the anonymous school i proceed to an anonymous university, where 
the medical world was dominate by the bland majesty of sir omicron pie 
(the name is trollope's, but it will serve). who that ever saw them can 
forget that stately bearing, that jove-like brow, that sublime air of 
omniscience and omnipotence? who that ever heard it, that even flow of 
mellifluous eloquence and copious narrative? who that ever experienced 
it, the underlying kindness of heart? 

a nervous undergraduate is usher into the consulting-room, and the 
great man advances with a paternal smile. 

"mr. bumpstead? ah! i think i was at school with your good father. no? 
then it must have been your uncle. you are very like him. we ran a 
neck-and-neck race at the university. i won the gold medal, and he was 
_proximè_. in those days i little thought of settle down in oxbridge. 
i had destined myself for a london practice; but sir thomas watson--you 
have heard of 'watson's style'? he was the cicero of medicine--well, 
watson said, 'no, my dear pie, it won't do. in ten years you will be at 
the head of the profession, and will have made £100,000. but, mark my 
words, _the blade will wear out the scabbard_. you are not justified in 
risk your life.' i was disappointed, of course. all young men like 
the idea of fame. but i saw that watson was right, and i came here, and 
found my life's work. the medical school was then in a very decay 
condition, and i have made it what it is. why am i telling you all 
this----?" 

(_enter the butler._) "please, sir omicron, you've an appointment at 
battle-axe castle at four o'clock, and the carriage is at the door." 

_sir o. p._ "ah! well. i must tell you the rest another day. let me 
see, what was the matter? palpitation? let me listen for a moment. it 
is as i thought--only a little functional irritability. lead a sensible 
life; avoid excess; cultivate the philosophical temper. take this 
prescription, and come again next week. thank you, thank you." 

fortify by four years of sir omicron's care, i came up to london 
somewhere between 1870 and 1880. the practice of the west end was then 
divide between three men--sir a. b., sir c. d., and sir e. f. 

sir a. b. was bluff and brutal, fashion himself on the tradition of 
abernethy, and rule his patient by sheer terrorism. he had an immense 
influence over hysterical women and weak-minded men, and people who 
might otherwise have resent his ursine manner were reconcile to it 
by the knowledge that he officially inspect the most illustrious 
tongue in the kingdom. 

his principal rival was sir c. d., who rule by love. "well, my dear 
sir, there is not much the matter. a day or two's hunting will set you 
right. you don't ride? ah! well, it doesn't much matter. a fortnight at 
monte carlo will do just as well. all you want is change of scene and 
plenty of amusement." 

"as to your ladyship's diet, it should be light and nutritious. i 
should recommend you to avoid beefsteak and boil mutton. a little 
turtle soup, some devil whitebait, and a slice of a turkey _truffe_ 
would be the sort of dinner to suit you. if the insomnia is at all 
urgent, i have found a light supper of pâté de foie gra work wonders." 

sir e. f. operate on a theology system. his discourse on the 
relations between natural and reveal religion profound impress 
those who heard it for the first time, and his tractate on medical 
mission in india ran into a third edition. in his waiting-room one 
found, instead of last month's _punch_ or the christmas number of 
_madame_, devotional works inscribe "from his grateful patient, 
the author." in his consulting-room a sacred picture of large 
dimensions crown the mantelpiece, and sign portrait of bishop 
whom he had deliver from dyspepsia adorn the walls. ritualistic 
clergy frequent him in great numbers, and--what was better 
still--recommended their congregation to the "beloved physician." 
ecclesiastically-minded laymen delight in him, and came away with a 
comfortable conviction, syllogistic arranged, that (1) one's first 
duty is to maintain one's health; (2) whatever one likes is healthy; 
therefore (3) one's first duty is to like exactly as one likes. 

a water-drinking adherent of mr. gladstone once saw that eminent man 
crown a banquet of champagne with a glass of undeniable port. "oh! 
mr. gladstone," he exclaim in the bitter of his soul, "what would 
sir e. f. say if he could see you mix your liquors?" the great 
man's defence was ready to his hand: "sir e. f. assure me that, if 
i let fifteen minutes elapse between two kind of wine, there is no 
mixture." 

somehow these lively oracle of sir e. f.'s, with which i was always 
coming in contact, left on my mind a dim impression that he must have 
been related to the doctor who attend little nell and prescribed the 
remedy which the landlady had already applied: "everybody said he 
was a very shrewd doctor indeed, and knew perfectly well what people's 
constitution were, which there appear some reason to suppose he did." 




vi 

mourning 


my infant mind was "suckled in a creed outworn," in the form of a 
book called, by a strange misnomer, a "book of useful knowledge." it 
was there stated, if my memory serve me, that "the china mourn in 
yellow, but kings and cardinal mourn in purple." in what do modern 
english people mourn? that is the subject of to-day's enquiry. 

lord acton, in one of his most impressive passages, speak of england 
as living under "institutions which incorporate tradition and prolong 
the reign of the dead." but the very notion of "prolonging the reign 
of the dead" is an anachronism in an age which forget its friends the 
moment it has bury them. "out of sight, out of mind" is an adage 
which nowadays verify itself with startle rapidity. mourning is as 
much out of date as suttee; and, as to the widow's cap, the admirable 
signora vesey neroni in "barchester towers" was only a little in 
advance of her age when she exclaimed, "the death of twenty husband 
should not make me undergo such a penance. it is as much a relic of 
paganism as the sacrifice of a hindoo woman at the burning of her 
husband's body. if not so bloody, it is quite as barbarous and quite as 
useless." 

in days gone by, a death in a family extinguish all festivity. 
engagement were cancelled, social plan were laid aside, and the 
mourner went into retreat for a twelvemonth. men wore black trousers; 
women swathe themselves in black crape. "mourning jewellery"--hideous 
combinations of jet and bogwood--twinkled and jingle round the neck 
of the bereaved, and widow wrote on letter-paper which was virtually 
black, with a small white space in the middle of the sheet. harry 
foker, we know, honour his father's memory by have his brougham 
paint black; and i have known a lady who, when she lost her husband, 
had her boudoir line with black velvet, after the fashion of lord 
glenallan in "the antiquary." 

but nowadays people shrink (with amiable considerateness) from thus 
inflict their grief on their friends; and if (as we must in charity 
assume) they feel emotion, they studious conceal it in their own 
bosoms. the ball follow the funeral with a celerity and a frank 
joyous which suggest a wake; and the keen pursuer of pleasure 
protest, with quite a religious air, that for their own part they would 
think it absolutely wicked to sorrow as those without hope. weedless 
widows, becoming "gowned," as ladies' papers say, in pale grey or 
black and white, sacrifice to propriety by forswear the opera or the 
racecourse for twelve month or so, but find a little fresh air on the 
river or at hurlingham absolutely necessary for health; and, if they 
dine out quiet or even give a little dance at home, are careful to 
protest that they have lost all pleasure in life, but must struggle 
to keep up for the sake of the dear children. surely, as master 
shallow says, "good phrase are, and ever were, very commendable." 
the old-fashioned manifestation of mourning were no doubt overdone, 
but the modern disregard of the dead seem to me both heartless and 
indecent. 

the supreme exemplar of mourning was, of course, queen victoria. during 
her reign, and in her personal practice, the custom of mourning reach 
its highest point of persistence and solemnity. in 1844 lady lyttelton, 
who was governess to the present king and his sister the princess 
royal, wrote from court, "we are such a 'boundless contiguity of shade' 
just now." the immediate cause of that shade was the death of prince 
albert's father; and although in queen victoria's life there was a fair 
allowance of sunshine, still, as ecclesiastes said, "the cloud return 
after the rain"; and, in a family where cousinship is recognize to the 
third and fourth generation, the "shade" of mourning must constant 
recur. the late duke of beaufort, head of the most numerous family in 
the peerage, always wore a black band round his white hat, because, 
as he said, one of his cousin was always dead and he would not be 
wanting in respect for the deceased; and, similarly, a maid of honour 
once said to me, "i never see the queen's jewels, because she is almost 
always in mourning for some germany prince or princess, and then she 
only wear black ornaments." of course, in a case where there was this 
natural predisposition to mournful observance, the supreme loss of a 
husband meant a final renunciation of the world and its gaieties. i 
suppose it is no exaggeration to say that from her bereavement in 1861 
to her death in 1901 queen victoria live in unbroken communion with 
the unseen but unforgotten. the necessary business of the state was 
not, even for a week, laid aside; but pomp and ceremony and public 
appearances are profound distasteful to shatter nerves and broken 
hearts. yielding to the urgent advice of her ministers, queen victoria 
emerge from four years' seclusion to open the new parliament in 1866; 
and her reward was reap in the following december, when a peculiarly 
rancorous politician rebuke her at a great meeting of reform in st. 
james's hall for a lack of popular sympathies. it was then that, on the 
spur of the moment, john bright, who himself had known so well what 
bereavement meant, utter his chivalrous defence of the absent and 
lonely sovereign:-- 

"i am not accustomed to stand up in defence of those who are 
possessor of crowns. but i could not sit and hear that observation 
without a sensation of wonder and of pain. i think there has been, 
by many persons, a great injustice done to the queen in reference to 
her desolate and widowed position. and i venture to say this--that a 
woman, be she the queen of a great realm or be she the wife of one of 
your labour men, who can keep alive in her heart a great sorrow for 
the lost object of her life and affection, is not at all likely to be 
wanting in a great and generous sympathy with you." 

admirable and reverend as was this abiding sorrow, contemporary 
observer felt that its outward manifestation were not always 
harmonious. the mausoleum at frogmore is not a "poem in stone," and the 
monument of gilt opposite the albert hall has supply the frivolous 
with an appropriate pun. landseer, who, when once he forsook his stag 
and deerhounds, was surely the most debase painter of a hideous age, 
attain his worst in a picture of the slope at windsor _circa_ 1862. 
under an inky sky, in the forefront of a sunless landscape, stand a 
black pony, and on its back is a lady dress in the deepest weeds, 
with a black riding-skirt and a black bonnet. a retainer in subfusc 
kilt hold the pony's head, a dingy terrier looks on with melancholy 
eyes, and, in the distant background, two darkly-clad princess shiver 
on a garden-seat. the only spot of colour in the scene is a red 
despatch-box, and the whole form the highest tribute of english art to 
a national disaster and a queenly sorrow. 

black, and intense black, were all the trappings of courtly 
woe--black crape, black gloves, black feathers, black jewellery. the 
state-robes were worn no longer; the state-coach stood unused in the 
coach-house. the footmen wore black band round their arms. it was 
only by slow degrees, and on occasion of high and rare solemnity, 
that white lace and modest plume and diamond and decoration were 
permit to enliven the firmament of courtly woe. but we of the 
twentieth century live in an age of æsthetic revival, and, though 
perhaps we do not mourn so heartily, we certainly mourn more prettily. 
one lady at least there is who know how to combine the sincerity of 
sorrow with its becoming manifestation; and queen alexandra in mourning 
garb is as delightful a vision as was queen alexandra in her clothing 
of wrought gold, when she knelt before the altar of westminster abbey 
and bowed her head to receive her diamond crown. 

queen victoria's devotion to the memory of those whom she had lost 
had one definite consequence which probably she little contemplated. 
the annual service, conduct in the royal mausoleum at frogmore on 
the anniversary of the prince consort's death, accustomed english 
people to the idea, which since the reformation had become strange 
unfamiliar, of devotional commemoration of the departed. to the 
queen's religious instincts, deep tinge as they had been by prince 
albert's lutheranism, such commemoration were entire natural; for 
germany protestant has always cherish a much lively sense of 
the relation between the living and the departed than was realize by 
english puritanism. the example set in high quarters quick spread. 
memorial service became an establish form of english mourning. 
beginning with simple prayer and hymns, they gradual develop into 
memorial eucharists. the splendid, wail music of the _dies iræ_ 
was felt to be the christian echo of the _domine, refugium_; and the 
common instinct of mourning humanity found its appropriate expression 
when, over the coffin of prince henry of battenberg, the choir of st. 
george's chapel sang the russia hymn of supplication, "give rest, o 
christ, to thy servant with thy saints." 




vii 

will 


if there is any one still left who know his "christian year," he 
will remember that keble extol "a sober standard of feeling" as a 
special virtue of the english prayer-book. i have always thought that 
this "sober standard" is peculiarly well exemplify by the rubric 
about will-making in the order for the visitation of the sick: "if the 
sick person hath not before disposed of his goods, let him then be 
admonish to make his will and to declare his debts, what he oweth and 
what is owe unto him, for the better discharge of his conscience 
and the quiet of his executors. but men should often be put in 
remembrance to take order for the settle of their temporal estate 
whilst they are in health." there is something in these directions 
which is curious english and commonplace and unrhapsodical, and 
therefore exactly congruous with the temper of a people who have never 
set a high value on unpractic religions. to this general duty of 
will-making there may, of course, be exceptions. thus dr. pusey in his 
old age, when his family was reduce to one and he had no possession 
left except his books, said: "in a case like mine, the law is the best 
willmaker." a pietistic admirer, who had caught the words imperfectly, 
in relate them substitute "lord" for "law"; but the substitute 
did not really affect the sense. in case where no great interests are 
involved and the requirement of justice are not altogether clear, we 
can wise leave the eventual fate of our possession to "god's scheme 
for governing the universe, by men miscall chance." 

there is, i believe, a certain school of economic reform who would 
wholly abolish the prerogative of will-making, and would decree that 
whatever a man leaves behind him should pass automatic to his 
children, or, failing them, to the state. on the social and fiscal 
result of such a system i forbear to speculate; but, as a sincere 
friend to literature in all its branches, i would ask, if that were 
law, what would become of the novelist and the playwrights? the law 
of stageland has been codify for us by the laborious care of mr. 
jerome k. jerome, and among its best-established principles seem to 
be these: if a man die without leave a will, then all his property 
go to the nearest villain; but, if a man die and leaves a will, 
then all his property go to whoever can get possession of that will. 
here are the raw material of dramatic litigation enough to hold the 
stage for a century; and ill would it fare with the embarrass 
playwright if a mechanical process of law were substitute for the 
strange possibility of will-making, with its startle caprices, 
its incalculable miscarriages, and its eventual triumph of injure 
innocence. then again, as to fiction. foul fall the day when our 
fiction-writers shall be unable to traffic any long in testamentary 
mystification. how would their predecessor have fare if they had 
labour under such a disability? i am by nature too cautious to 
"intromit with" the mystery of scotch law, and in the romance of 
the beloved sir walter the complication of entail and of will-making 
are curious intertwined. certainly it was under the provisions of an 
entail that harry bertram recover the estate of ellangowan, and i am 
inclined to think that it was an entail which prompt the countess of 
glenallan to her hideous crime; but it was by will that miss margaret 
bertram devise the lands of singleside, and it was under old sir 
hildebrand's will that francis osbaldistone succeed to osbaldistone 
hall. 

even greater are the obligation of our english novelist to the 
testamentary law. miss edgeworth made admirable use of it in "almeria." 
had englishmen no power of making wills, the "wicked lord hertford" 
could not have execute the notorious instrument which gave such 
unbounded delight to the scandalmonger of 1842-1843, and then lord 
beaconsfield could not have drawn his hogarth-like picture of the 
reading of lord monmouth's will in "coningsby." thackeray did not 
traffic very much in wills, though, to be sure, jos sedley left £1000 
to becky sharp, and the opportune discovery of lord ringwood's will in 
the pocket of his travelling-carriage simplify philip's career. the 
insolvent swindle dr. firmin, who had rob his son and abscond 
to america, left his will "in the tortoiseshell secretaire in the 
consulting-room, under the picture of abraham offering up isaac." 
dickens was a great will-maker. we know that if dick swivel had 
been a steady youth he would have inherit more than £150 a year 
from his aunt rebecca. that loyal-hearted lover mr. barkis, in spite 
of all rebuffs, made the obdurate peggotty his residuary legatee. mr. 
finch left "a beautiful will," and madeline bray was the subject 
of a very complicated one. mr. dorrit's unexpected fortune accrue 
to him, i think, as heir-at-law; but the litigation in jarndyce _v._ 
jarndyce arose, as all the world knows, out of a dispute will; and the 
thellusson will case, on which dickens relied, in later years supply 
henry kingsley with the plot of "reginald hetherege." perhaps dickens's 
best piece of will-making is given in the case of mr. spenlow, who, 
being a practitioner in doctors' commons, spoke about his own will with 
"a serenity, a tranquillity, a calm sunset air" which quite affected 
david copperfield; and then shatter all poor david's hope by die 
intestate. 

anthony trollope made good use of a will and a codicil in the plot of 
"orley farm." george eliot, whose disagreeable character always seem a 
good deal near life than her hero and heroines, made mr. casaubon 
behave very characteristic in the odious will by which he try to 
prevent dorothea from marry will ladislaw; and her picture of the 
disappointment which fell upon the company when peter featherstone's 
will was read is perhaps her best achievement in the way of humour. 
"nobody present had a farthing; but mr. trumbull had the gold-headed 
cane," which, considered as an acknowledgment of his professional 
service to the deceased, he was ungrateful enough to call "farcical." 

the law of settlement and entail is no part of our present study; but 
it may be remark in passing that the legal opinion on the base fee 
by which harold transome in "felix holt" held the transome estate was 
written, at george eliot's request, by a young chancery barrister, who 
still survives, a brilliant figure in the world of letters. 

this is enough, and perhaps more than enough, about will in fiction; 
but will in real life are fully as interesting. the late sir charles 
butt, who preside over the divorce court and the probate court, once 
told me that, though the aspect of human nature which is exhibit in 
divorce is not ideally beautiful, it is far less repulsive than that 
which is disclose by probate. none of the story which one has read 
about forge wills, forced wills, will made under pressure, will made 
under misrepresentation, are too strange to be true. a century ago the 
daughter of a great landowner in the north of england succeed to his 
wealth under circumstances which, to put it mildly, cause surprise. in 
later life she had a public quarrel with a high-born but intemperate 
dame, who conclude the colloquy by observing, with mordant emphasis, 
"well, at any rate i didn't hold my die father's hand to make him 
sign a will he never saw, and then murder the butler to prevent his 
telling." "ouida," or miss braddon, or some other novelist of high life 
might, i think, make something of this scene. 

spiteful wills--wills which, by rehearse and revoke previous 
bequests, mortify the survivor when the testator is no long in 
a position to do so _viva voce_--form a very curious branch of the 
subject. lord kew was a very wealthy peer of strict principles and 
peculiarly acrid temper, and, have no wife or children to annoy, he 
"took it out," as the saying is, of his brothers, nephews, and other 
expectant kinsfolk. one gem from his collection i recall, in some such 
words as these: "by a previous will i had left £50,000 to my brother 
john; but, as he has sent his son to oxford instead of cambridge, 
contrary to my express wish, i reduce the legacy to £500." may the 
earth lie light on that benevolent old despot! eccentricity of 
bequest, again, might make a pleasant chapter. the present writer, 
though not yet in totter age, can recall an annuitant whose claim to 
£20 a year was found (in part) on the skill with which he had tie 
his master's pigtail, and that master die in 1830. the proverbial 
longevity of annuitant was illustrate in the case of a grey parrot, 
for whose maintenance his departed mistress left £10 a year. the bird 
was not very young when the annuity began to accrue; and, as years went 
on and friends drop off, he began to feel the lonely of his 
lot. with a tender of heart which did them infinite credit, the 
good couple to whose care the bird had been left import a companion 
exactly like himself to cheer his solitude. before long one of the 
parrot died, and the mourner remark that these younger bird had 
not half the constitution of the old generation. so, as long as they 
lived, the parrot lived, and the pension live also. 

let my close word on will bear the authority of a great name. to a 
retailer of news who informed him that lord omnium, recently deceased, 
had left a large sum of money to charities, mr. gladstone reply with 
characteristic emphasis: "thank him for nothing! he was oblige to 
leave it. he couldn't carry it with him." 




viii 

pension 


"there is no living in this country under twenty thousand a year--not 
that that suffices, but it entitle one to ask a pension for two or 
three lives." this was the verdict of horace walpole, who, as sir 
george trevelyan antithetic says, "lived in the country and on 
the country during more than half a century, do for the country 
less than half a day's work in half a year." talleyrand said that no 
one could conceive how enjoyable a thing existence was capable of 
being who had not belong to the _ancienne noblesse_ of france before 
the revolution; but really the younger son of an important minister, 
general, courtier, or prelate under our english george had a good 
deal to be thankful for. it is pleasant to note the innocent candour 
with which, in walpole's manly declaration, one enormity is made to 
justify another. a father who held great office in church or state or 
law gave, as a matter of course, all his most desirable preferment to 
his sons. these preferment enable the son to live in opulence at the 
public charge, their duty being perform by deputy. the clerk of 
the rolls and the clerk of the hanaper had no personal contact with the 
mysterious articles to which they are attached. the clerk of the irons, 
the surveyor of the meltings, and the accountant of slop live far 
remote from such "low-thoughtéd cares." the writer of this book deduce 
his insignificant being from a gentleman who divide with a brother 
the lucrative sinecure of scavenger of dublin, though neither ever 
set foot in that fragrant city. a nephew of lord-chancellor thurlow 
(who survive till 1874) drew pension for abolish offices to the 
amount of £11,000 a year; and a son of archbishop moore was principal 
registrar of the prerogative court of canterbury from his boyhood till 
the abolition of his court in 1858, when he was pension off with 
£10,000 a year. 

when the sands of life were running in the glass, it was customary 
for a filial placeman to obtain further pension for his son and 
daughters, on the obvious plea that it was cruel to cast young men 
and women, who had been rear in comfort on the mercy of a rough 
world. thus the golden chain of royal bounty held at least three lives 
together. the grandfather was first lord of the treasury or chancellor 
of the exchequer or paymaster-general, and into his personal profit it 
would be invidious, even indecent, to enquire. he might make his eldest 
son, while still a boy at eton, clerk of the estreats, and his second, 
before he took his degree at cambridge, usher of the exchequer. thus 
lord-chancellor erskine made his son secretary of presentation when 
he was eighteen, and charles greville was appoint secretary of 
jamaica (where he never set his foot) before he was twenty. and then 
when, after fifty or sixty years of blameless enjoyment, the amiable 
sinecurist was near his last quarter-day, a benevolent treasury 
intervene to save his maiden daughter or orphan niece from pecuniary 
embarrassment. it was of such "near and dear relations" of a public man 
that sydney smith affirm that their "eating, drinking, washing, and 
clothing cost every man in the united kingdom twopence or threepence 
a year"; and, to the critic who deprecate this commercial way of 
regarding the situation, he replied, with characteristic vigour: "i 
have no idea that the sophia and caroline of any man breathing are to 
eat national veal, to drink public tea, to wear treasury ribands, and 
then that we are to be told that it is coarse to animadvert upon this 
pitiful and eleemosynary splendour. if this is right, why not mention 
it? if it is wrong, why should not he who enjoy the ease of support 
his sister in this manner bear the shame of it?" in thus writing of 
the pension list as it stood in 1807, the admirable sydney was at once 
the successor of burke and the forerunner of lord grey. in 1780 burke 
had address all the resources of his genius to the task of restore 
the independence of parliament by economical reform. it was, as mr. 
morley says, the number of sinecure place and unpublished pension 
which "furnished the minister with an irresistible lever." burke found 
that "in sweeping away those factitious place and secret pension he 
would be rob the court of its chief implement of corruption and 
protect the representative against his chief motive in sell his 
country." his power of oratory was reinforce by a minute knowledge 
of all the shady and shabby abuses, all the manifold and complicated 
corruptions, which had accumulate under the protection of the royal 
name. the reformer's triumph was signal and complete. vast numbers of 
sinecure were swept away, but some remained. the pension list was 
close curtailed, but pension were still conferred. no public servant 
ever more richly earn a provision for his old age and decrepitude 
than burke himself; but when, broken by years and sorrows, he accept 
a pension from the crown, a whig duke of fabulous wealth, just thirty 
years old, had the temerity to charge him with a discreditable 
departure from his former principles of economic reform. the duke was a 
booby: but his foolhardy enrich english literature with "a letter 
to a noble lord on the attack made on mr. burke and his pension." to 
read that letter, even after the lapse of 110 years, is to realize 
that, in spite of all corruption and all abuse, pecuniary rewards for 
politics service need not be dishonourable or unreasonable. 

but corruption and abuse there were, and in sufficient quantity 
to justify all the bitter fun which "peter plymley" pour upon the 
cannings, the jenkinsons, and the percevals. the reform of the pension 
list became a cardinal object of reform radicals; and politician 
like joseph hume, publicist like albany fonblanque, pursue it with 
incessant perseverance, 

"till grey went forth in 'thirty-two to storm corruption's hold." 

in 1834 the first reform parliament overhaul the whole system and 
brought some curious transactions into the light of day. whereas up 
to that time the pension list amount to £145,000 a year, it was now 
reduce to £75,000; and its benefit were restricted to "servants of 
the crown and public, and to those who by their useful discovery 
in science or attainment in literature and the arts had merit the 
gracious consideration of their sovereign and the gratitude of their 
country." vest interests were, of course, respected; for had we 
not even compensate the slaveholders? two years ago one of these 
beneficiary survive in a serene old age, and, for all i know, 
there may be other still spare to us, for, as mr. g. a. sala truly 
remarked, it never is safe to say that any one is dead, for if you do 
he is sure to write from the country and say he is only ninety-seven 
and never was better. 

a typical representative of the unreformed system was john wilson 
croker (1780-1857), whose literary effort macaulay trounced, and whose 
politics utterance were thus describe by lord beaconsfield:-- 

"there never was a fellow for give a good hearty kick to the people 
like rigby. himself sprung from the dregs of the populace, this was 
disinterested. what could be more patriotic and magnanimous than his 
jeremiad over the fall of the montmorenci and the crillions, or 
the possible catastrophe of the percy and the seymours? the truth 
of all this hullabaloo was that rigby had a sly pension which, by 
an inevitable association of ideas, he always connected with the 
maintenance of an aristocracy. all his rigmarole dissertation on the 
france revolution were impel by this secret influence; and, when he 
moan like a mandrake over nottingham castle in flames, the rogue had 
an eye all the while to quarter-day." 

it was an evil day for those who love to grow rich upon the public 
money when mr. gladstone became the controller of the national purse. 
one of his first acts was to revise the system of politics pensions, 
which by an act of 1869 was reconstitute as it stand to-day. there 
are now three class of person entitle to pension for service 
render in politics office; and the scale is arrange on that curious 
principle which also regulate the "tips" to servant in a private 
house--that the large your wage is, the large your gratuity shall 
be. thus a minister who has drawn £5000 a year is entitle after four 
years' service to a pension of £2000 a year; he who has drawn £3000 
a year for six years is entitle to £1200 a year; while he who has 
labour for ten years for the modest remunerate of £1000 a year must 
be content with a pittance of £800 a year. _qui habet, dabitur ei_; but 
with this restriction--that only four pension of any one class can run 
concurrently. 

politician who had been brought up in the "spacious days" and generous 
method of the old dispensation were by no means enamoured of what 
they use to call "gladstone's cheeseparing economies." sir william 
gregory use to relate how, when, as a child, he ask lord melbourne 
for a fine red stick of official sealing-wax, that genial minister 
thrust it into his hand, together with a bundle of quill pens, saying, 
"you can't begin too early. all these things belong to the public, and 
your business in life must be to get out of the public all you can." 
an eminent statesman, train in these traditions, had drawn from very 
early days a pension for an abolish office in chancery. in due course 
he became a cabinet minister, and, when he fell from that high estate, 
he duly pocket his £2000 a year. later he came into a very large 
income, but this he obliging save for his nephew and nieces, living 
meanwhile on his twofold pension. 

i will conclude with a pleasant anecdote. until half-way through the 
last century it was customary to give a speaker on retiring from the 
house of commons a pension of £2000 a year for two lives. it is related 
that in 1857 mr. speaker shaw-lefevre, on his elevation to the peerage 
as lord eversley, said that he could not endure the thought of imposing 
a burden on posterity, and would therefore take £4000 a year for his 
own life instead of £2000 a year for two. this public-spirited action 
was highly commended, and, as he live till 1888, virtue was, as it 
ought always to be, its own reward. 




ix 

the season as it was 


the subject is worthy to be celebrated both in verse and in prose. 
exactly sixty years ago bulwer-lytton, in his anonymous satire "the new 
timon," thus describe the nocturnal aspect of the west end in that 
choice period of the year which to us londoner is pre-eminently "the 
season":-- 

"o'er royal london, in luxuriant may, 
while lamp yet twinkle, dawn creeps the day. 
home from the hell the pale-eyed gamester steals; 
home from the ball flash jaded beauty's wheels; 
from field suburban rolls the early cart; 
so rest the revel--so awake the mart." 

twenty-four years later lord beaconsfield, in "lothair," gave a vivid 
sketch of the same scene as beheld by daylight:-- 

"town was beginning to blaze. brougham whirl and bright barouche 
glanced, troops of social cavalry canter and caracoll in morning 
rides, and the bell of prance ponies, lash by delicate hands, 
gingle in the laugh air. there were stoppage in bond street--which 
seem to cap the climax of civilization, after crowded club and 
swarm parks." 

it is curious that of the two description the early needs much less 
revision than the later. lamp still "twinkle" (though, to be sure, 
they are electric, whereas when bulwer-lytton wrote gas had barely 
oust oil from its last fastness in grosvenor square). "hells," 
though more euphemistic named, still invite the domiciliary visit 
of our much-aspersed police. "beauty" dance even more vigorous 
than in 1846, for waltz and kitchen-lancers and washington post 
have supersede the decorous quadrille which our mother loved. and 
still the market-gardens of acton and eale and hounslow send their 
"towering squadrons" of waggon laden heavens-high with the fruits and 
vegetable for to-morrow's luncheon. in this merry month of may 1906 
an observer, standing at hyde park corner "when the night and morning 
meet," see london substantially as bulwer-lytton saw it. 

but, when we turn to lord beaconsfield's description, the change 
wrought by six-and-thirty years are curious marked. "bright 
barouche glanced." in the present day a barouche, the handsomest and 
gracefullest of all open carriages, is as rare as an auk's egg or an 
original folio of shakespeare. only two or three survive. one, richly 
dight in royal crimson, bear the queen, beautiful as cleopatra in her 
barge. in another, almost imperial purple, lady londonderry sit 
enthroned; a third, pale blue as the forget-me-not, carry lady 
carysfort; but soon the tale of barouche ends. victoria and landau 
and "clarences" and "sociables" make the common throng of carriages, 
and their serried ranks give way to the impetuous onrush of the noxious 
motor or the mild impact of the electric brougham. 

"troops of social cavalry" were, when lord beaconsfield wrote 
"lothair," the characteristic glory of rotten row; but horse and 
horsemanship alike have waned. men take their constitutional canter 
in costume ancient confine to rat-catching, and the general 
aspect of rotten row suggest the idea of mount infantry rather 
than of "cavalry." alongside the ride forty years ago ladies drove 
their pony-phaetons--a pretty practice and a pretty carriage; but 
both have utterly disappeared, and the only bell that "gingle in the 
laugh air" are the warning signal of the petrol fiend, as, bent 
on destruction, he swoop down from marble arch to piccadilly. do a 
captious critic gaze enquiring on the unfamiliar verb to "gingle"? 
it was thus that lord beaconsfield wrote it in "lothair"; even as 
in the same high romance he describe a lady with a rich bunch of 
"stephanopolis" in her hand. it is not for the ephemeral scribbler to 
correct the orthography of the immortal dead. as to "stoppages in bond 
street," they were isolated and noteworthy incident in 1870; in 1906, 
thanks to the admission of omnibus into the narrow thoroughfare, they 
are occurrence as regular as the postman's knock or the policeman's 
mail tread. 

we have seen the aspect in which the london season present itself 
to two great men of yore. let me now descend to a more personal level. 
we will imagine ourselves transport back to the year 1880, and to 
the month of may. a young gentleman--some five-and-twenty summers, as 
mr. g. p. r. james would have said, have pass over his fair head--is 
standing near the steps of st. george's hospital between the hour of 
eleven and midnight. he is smart dress in evening clothes, with a 
white waistcoat, a gardenia in his button-hole, and a silver-crutched 
stick in his hand. he is smoking a cigarette and ponder the question 
where he shall spend his evening, or, more strictly, the early hour of 
next day. he is in a state of serene contentment with himself and the 
world, for he has just eaten an excellent dinner, where plovers' egg 
and asparagus have remind him that the season has really begun. to 
the pleasure-seeking londoner these symptom of return summer mean 
more, far more, than the dogrose in the hedgerow or the first note of 
the nightingale in the copse. since dinner he has just look in at an 
evening party, which bore him badly, and has "cut" two other where he 
was not so likely to be missed. and now arise the vital question of 
the balls. i use the plural number, for there will certainly be two, 
and probably three, to choose from. here, at st. george's hospital, 
our youth is at the centre of the world's social concourse. a swift 
and unbroken stream of carriage is pour down from grosvenor square 
and mayfair to belgrave square and eaton square and chesham place, and 
it meet as it go the ascend procession which begin in belgravia 
and end in portman square. to-night there is a royal ball at grosvenor 
house, certainly the most stately event of the season; a little dance, 
exquisite gay and bright, in piccadilly; and a gorgeous entertainment 
in prince's gate, where the aspire distiller is struggling, with 
enormous outlay, into social fame. all these have solicit the honour 
of our young friend's presence, and now is the moment of decision. it 
do not take long to repudiate prince's gate; there will be the best 
band in london, and ortolan for supper, but there will be no one there 
that one ever saw before, and it is too sickening to be call "my boy" 
by that bow-windowed bounder, the master of the house. there remain 
grosvenor house and piccadilly, and happily these can be combine in 
a harmonious perfection. grosvenor house shall come first, for the 
arrival of the prince and princess is a pageant worth seeing--the most 
gracious host and the most beautiful hostess in london usher the 
royal guests, with courtly pomp, into the great gallery, wall with 
the canvas of rubens, which serve as the dancing-room. then the fun 
begins, and the bright hour fly swiftly, till one o'clock suggest 
the tender thought of supper, which is serve on gold plate and sèvres 
china in a garden-tent of gobelin tapestry. and now it is time for a 
move; and our youth, extricate himself from the undesired attention 
of the linkmen, pop into a hansom and speed to piccadilly, where he 
find delight of a different kind--no royalty, no pomp, no ceremony; 
but a warm welcome, and all his intimate friends, and the nicest girl 
in london eager for a valse. 

as day begin to peep, he drink his crown tumbler of champagne-cup, 
and stroll home under the opalescent dawn, sniff the fragrance 
from pyramid of strawberry as they roll towards covent garden, and 
exchange a friendly "good night" with the policeman on the beat, who 
seem to think that "good morning" would be a more suitable greeting. 
so to bed, with the cheerful consciousness of a day's work well done, 
and the even more exhilarating prospect of an unbroken succession 
of such days, full of feast and dance and riding and polo and 
lawn-tennis, till august stifle the season with its dust and drive 
the revel to homburg or the moors. 

but i awake, and lo! it is a dream, though a dream well found on 
reality. for i have been describe the london season as it was when 
the world was young. 

"when all the world is old, lad, 
and all the tree are brown; 
and all the sport is stale, lad, 
and all the wheels run down; 
creep home, and take your place there, 
the spent and maim among: 
god grant you find one face there, 
you love when all was young." 




x 

the season as it is 


that delicate critic, the late mr. william cory, observe in one of his 
letters that virgil's 

"sunt lacrymæ rerum, et mentem mortalia tangunt" 

has its modern equivalent in wordsworth's 

"men are we, and must grieve when even the shade 
of that which once was great is pass away." 

the full luxury of that grief is reserved for those who, a decade 
hence, shall moralize on "the london season," for the thing which now 
we so describe will then have utterly perished, and its name will 
only arouse a tender and regretful emotion. even now we have seen its 
glory fade, and soon it will have share the fate of those venetian 
splendour which wordsworth mourned. but in the meantime it still 
exists, though in a vastly different form from that which it wore in 
mid-victorian years. just now i was describe some of the change 
which have occur since the distant days when bulwer-lytton and lord 
beaconsfield describe london in may; and, following humble in their 
wake, i endeavour to depict it as it was when i had my part in it. 
but change only yield place to change. society, like the individual 
who compose it, pass onward in perpetual vicissitude. as shelley 
says, "naught may endure but mutability." so the london season of 
1906 differ as notably from the season of 1880 as the season of 1880 
from that of 1846. let me catalogue some of the change and try to 
account for them. in the first place, the season is much less exactly 
circumscribe by dates. in days gone by, it began with the opening of 
parliament, which was always about the 7th of february, and it lasted, 
with its regular intermission for easter and whitsuntide, till the 
last week of july. then society transport itself in turn to goodwood, 
to cowes, and to a germany watering-place or a scotch moor, according 
to its physical condition, and it was dark rumoured that, if people 
found themselves compel by domestic or financial reason to remain 
in london during august, they sought to escape detection by keeping 
the window front the street close shuttered, and live in their 
back rooms in unbroken contemplation of the leads and the mews. if you 
chance to meet a man in piccadil in september, you might be sure 
that he would be wearing country clothes and would assure you that he 
was only "passing through" between doncaster and scotland. nowadays 
the season has no particular limits. london is nearly as full in 
december as it is in may. dinner and play and supper at restaurant 
are as frequent, and, barring the fogs, as bright, at christmas as at 
midsummer. even in september clubland is not deserted; and there are 
people bold enough to defy the world by return from their summer 
exodus as early as october. the reason for the change, as for many 
other like it, is the reduction of territorial incomes. 1880 may be 
taken as, roughly, the last of the good years for agriculture. the 
incessant rains of 1879 had even then begun to tell their tale. tenant 
were ask for big reductions, and farm hitherto eager sought were 
becoming unlettable. i know a landowner on a great scale who, a year or 
two later, only pocket 10 per cent. of his income from land, whereas 
five years before he would have thought an abate of 10 per cent. 
disastrous. all this has told increasingly on social life, for people 
found themselves unable to keep both a country house and a london house 
go at the same time, and, being driven to choose between the two, 
often decided to let the country house and its shoot and make london 
their headquarters for the whole year. so, by degrees, autumn fade 
imperceptible into winter, winter into spring, and spring into summer. 
each season in its turn found people dwelling peaceable in their urban 
habitations, entertaining and being entertained; and so "_the_ season" 
lost its sharp edges. the meeting of parliament brought no perceptible 
change in the aspect of the town. "high midsummer pomps" were no long 
so "high" as in former years, but, _per contra_, there was much more 
gaiety in the autumn and winter and early spring. 

another cause which has contribute to the efface of the ancient 
time-marks is that the court tend to disregard them. under the present 
reign, windsor castle has become as much a social centre as buckingham 
palace. there are banquet in st. george's hall in december, as well 
as garden-parties on the the slope in june; and so, under the action 
of royal influence, the social season melt into one another, like the 
hue of the prism. then, again, the practice of the "weekend," import 
from lancashire and sanction by westminster, help to denude the 
town in summer; for the "end" tend naturally to prolong itself till 
it overlap the beginning, and friday-to-tuesday parties, tread on 
the heel of whitsuntide and to be follow in quick succession by 
ascot, make mish-mash of what was aforetime "an entire and perfect 
chrysolite"--a complete and continuous whole. 

in describe my hero of 1880 as he survey his evening's amusement 
and chose the most rewarding, i took for grant that he had at least 
three balls to choose from. nowadays he is lucky if he has one. here 
again, and conspicuously, agriculture depression has made its mark. 
in the years between 1870 and 1880, during an unbroken spell of good 
trade and good harvests, rich people struggle with one another for a 
vacant night on which to entertain their friends. for example, lady 
a. had just brought out a daughter, and wish to give a ball for her 
benefit. say that she set her affection on monday the 28th of may. 
before she issue her cards she took counsel with all her friends, 
for in those days ball-giving mother were a sort of limited company, 
and all knew one another. she found that mrs. b. had mental fixed 
on tuesday, 29th, and, if mrs. c. had thought of monday, she would be 
so kind as to take wednesday, 30th. so all was amicable agreed; there 
would be no clashing, which would be such a pity and would spoil both 
balls; and the cards were duly issued. directly afterwards, as if move 
by some occult and fiendish impulse, the duchess of d---- pounce on 
monday, 28th, for a royal ball at d---- house, or, worse still because 
more perilous tempting, for a "very small dance," to which all the 
nicest young men would go, and where they would stay till three. in the 
face of such mortification as these, the emulous hospitality of the 
aspire distiller were of no account; for the "nice men" would either 
disregard them, or, have look in for half-an-hour, would come on to 
spend the night at the house where they felt themselves at home. 

the hero of 1880, if only he was well connected, well mannered, and 
sufficient well known, might fairly reckon on dine six nights out 
of the seven at a host's expense. indeed, if he was at all popular, he 
could safe afford to decline the invitation which old mr. wellbore 
issue six week in advance and reserve himself for a lively meal 
at short notice. not so to-day. our young friend, if he has a 
constitutional objection to pay for his own dinner, must take what 
he can get in the way of invitations, and not be too particular about 
the cook or the company. here the cause of change is not decrease 
of wealth. as long as there is a balance at the bank, and even when 
there is none, people will dine; and dinner-giving is the last form of 
hospitality which society will let die. but nowadays dinner are made 
ancillary to bridge. if our friend cannot afford to lose £50 in an 
evening he will not be ask to dine at a house which reckon itself 
as belong to "the mode"; or if, for old acquaintance' sake, he is 
allow to find a place at the dinner-table, he is compel to sit all 
the evening by the least attractive daughter of the house, or to listen 
to some fogey, too fossilize for bridge, discourse on the iniquity 
of mr. birrell's bill. "tobacco," said lord beaconsfield, "is the tomb 
of love." if he were with us now, he would pronounce that bridge is the 
extinguisher of hospitality. 

yet once again i note a startle discrepancy between the season 
as it was and the season as it is. then a young man who want air 
and exercise in the afternoon play tennis at lord's, or skate 
at prince's, or took a gallop in richmond park, or, if he was very 
adventurous and up-to-date, sped out to hampton court or windsor on a 
bone-shaking bicycle six feet high. all these recreation are possible 
to him to-day; but all have yield to motoring. dress in the most 
unbecome of all known costumes, his expressive eyes conceal by 
goggles, and his graceful proportions swathe in oilskin, he urge 
his mad career to brighton or stratford or salisbury plain. no doubt 
he has the most fascinating companion in the world, for girl are 
enthusiast motorists; but i fancy that edwin and angelina present 
a more attractive appearance when, neat dress and beautiful 
mounted, they rode in the cool of the evening along the shady side of 
rotten row. 

however, i am a kind of social "old mortality" rummage among the 
tomb of what has been and can be no more, and i fancy that old 
mortality's opinion on youth and beauty would have been just 
disregarded. 




xi 

the sin of society 


in the year 1870 a flame of religious zeal was sudden kindle in 
the west end of london. in that year the rev. george howard wilkinson 
(now bishop of st. andrews) was appoint vicar of st. peter's, eaton 
square. the church in the belgravian district was as dry as tinder; 
it caught fire from mr. wilkinson's fervour, and the fire soon became 
a conflagration. this is matthew arnold's description of the great 
preach at the height of his power: "he was so evidently sincere, more 
than sincere, burnt up with sorrow, that he carry every one with 
him, and half the church was in tears. i do not much believe in good 
being done by a man unless he can give _light_, and wilkinson's fire is 
very turbid; but his power of heating, penetrating, and agitate is 
extraordinary." this description belong to the year 1872, but it might 
have been written with equal truth at any date between 1870 and 1883. 
in all my experience of preach (which is long, wide, and varied) i 
have never seen a congregation dominate by its minister so absolutely 
as the congregation of st. peter's was dominate by mr. wilkinson. i 
say "congregation" advisedly, for i should think that at least half 
the seatholder belong to other parishes. the smartest carriage in 
london block the approach to the church. the great dame of grosvenor 
square and carlton house terrace rub shoulder with the opulent 
inhabitant of tyburnia and south kensington, cabinet minister fought 
for place in the gallery, and m.p.'s were no more account of than 
silver in the days of solomon. 

and this was not a mere assemblage of hearers. the congregation of st. 
peter's were pre-eminently givers. £4000 a year was the regular product 
of the alms-bags, let alone the innumerable sum sent private to the 
vicar. "i want a thousand pounds." this simple but emphatic statement 
from the pulpit one sunday was succeed on the following sunday by 
the quiet announcement, "i have got a thousand pounds." what was the 
secret of this attraction? it was entire personal. it did not in the 
least depend on theology bias. mr. wilkinson belong to no party. 
he had begun life as an evangelical, and he retain the unction and 
fervour which were characteristic of that school at its best; but he 
was feeling his way towards a higher churchmanship, and had discard 
most of his early shibboleths. the fabric was frankly hideous, and 
the well-meant attempt to make it look less like a barn and more 
like a church only result in something between a mosque and a 
synagogue. there was no ritualism. the music was too elaborate for the 
choir, and the curate were feeble beyond all description. the vicar 
was everything; and even he had none of the gift which are commonly 
supposed to make a popular preacher. he was not the least flummery or 
flowery. he was reserved and dignified in manner, and his language was 
quite unadorned. his voice was a monotonous moan, occasional rising 
into a howl. he was conspicuous free from the tendency to prophesy 
smooth things, and he even seem to take a delight in rubbing the 
pungent lotion of his spiritual satire into the sore place of the 
hearers' conscience. if jeremiah had prophesy in a surplice, he would 
have been like the prophet of belgravia; and as for savonarola, his 
sermon, as paraphrase in chapter xxiv. of "romola," might have been 
delivered, with scarcely a word altered, from the pulpit of st. peter's. 

and here we touch the pith and core of mr. wilkinson's preaching. he 
rebuke the sin of society as no one had venture to rebuke them since 
the days of whitefield and the wesleys. the tractarian movement, so 
heart-searching, so conscience-stirring at oxford, had succumb in 
the fashionable parts of london to the influence which surround it, 
and had degenerate into a sort of easy-going ceremonialism--partly 
antiquarian, partly worldly, and wholly ineffective for spiritual 
revival or moral reformation. into this dead sea of lethargy and 
formalism mr. wilkinson burst like a gunboat. he scattered his fire 
left and right, aim high and aim low, blaze and bombard without 
fear or favour; sent some craft to the bottom, set fire to others, 
and cover the sea with wreckage. in less metaphorical language, he 
rebuke the sin of all and sundry, from duchess to scullery-maids, 
premier to pageboys, octogenarian rake to damsel in their teens. 
then, as now, society love to be scolded, and the more mr. wilkinson 
thunder the more it crowded to his feet. "pay your bills." "get up 
when you are called." "don't stay till three at a ball and then say 
that you are too delicate for early services." "eat one dinner a day 
instead of three, and try to earn that one." "give up champagne for 
the season, and what you save on your wine-merchant's bill send to 
the mission field." "you are sixty-five years old and have not been 
confirmed. never too late to mend. join a confirmation class at once, 
and try to remedy, by good example now, all the harm you have done your 
servant or your neighbour by fifty years' indifference." "sell that 
diamond cross which you carry with you into the sin-polluted atmosphere 
of the opera, give the proceeds to feed the poor, and wear the only 
real cross--the cross of self-discipline and self-denial." 

these are echoes--faint, indeed, but not, i think, unfaithful--of 
thirty years ago, and they have sudden been awoke from their long 
slumber by the sermon which father vaughan has just been preach at 
the jesuits' church in farm street, mayfair. the good father, exalt 
his own church, perhaps a little unduly, at the expense of the anglican 
church in the district, observe complacent that "farm street, in 
spite of its extension, was all too small" for its congregation. for my 
own part, i do not belong to that fold, and i never wander to strange 
church for the pleasure of have my ear tickled; so i only know 
father vaughan's utterance as they reach me through the newspapers. a 
report in the third person always tend to enfeeble rhetoric; but, in 
spite of that hindrance, father vaughan's style seem to lack nothing 
in the way of emphasis or directness. here is a fragment of his sermon 
preach on sunday the 10th of june 1906:-- 

"it was no easy task for the votary of pleasure when sunday came 
round to all of a sudden forget their class distinctions, their 
privileged sets, their social successes, their worldly goods, and to 
remember that they were go into the presence of him before whom man 
and woman were not what they happen to have, but what they happen 
to be--that the debutante beauty might be before god less than her 
maid who wait up half the night for her, nay, less than the meanest 
scullery-maid below stairs; while the millionaire with means to buy up 
whole country might be in god's sight far less pleasing and very much 
more guilty than the lowest groom in his stable yard." 

not less vigorous was the allocution of june 17. 

"if dives, who was bury in hell, were to revisit the earth he would 
most surely have the _entrée_ to london's smartest set to-day. he 
would be literally pelt with invitations. and why not? dives, so 
well groom and turn out, with such a well-lined larder and so 
well-stocked a cellar, would be the very ideal host to cultivate. he 
would 'do you so well,' you would meet the 'right people at his place,' 
and you could always bring your 'latest friend.' besides, what a good 
time one would have at his house-parties, where there would be no fear 
of being bore or dull!"[5] 

[5] here i seem to catch an echo of dr. pusey's sermon on "why did 
dive lose his soul?" 

and yet again:-- 

"it was well when the winning-card fell into their hands, for then 
there was just a chance of some dressmaker or tradesman being paid 
something on account before becoming bankrupt. with such example of 
the misuse of wealth before their eyes, it was a wonder there were not 
more socialist than there actually were." 

all the memory of my youth have been revive by father vaughan. 
instead of 1906, 1876; instead of the gothic gloom of farm street, the 
tawdry glare of st. peter's, eaton square; instead of a jesuit father 
in the pulpit, a vigorous protestant who renounce the pope and all his 
works and glory in the anglican of the church of england. grant 
those differences, which after all are more incidental than essential, 
and the sermon exactly reproduce those stirring days when the present 
bishop of st. andrews "shook the arsenal" of fashion, "thundered over" 
london, and achieved, as his admirer said, the supreme distinction of 
spoil the london season. 

i am convinced that the higher critic of a later age, collate 
the wilkinsonian tradition with such fragment as remain of father 
vaughan's discourses, will come to the conclusion that "wilkinson" 
never exist (except in wordsworth's ode to the spade), but was a 
kind of heroic figure conceive by a much later generation, which 
had quiver under the rhetoric of a real person or person call 
vaughan; and the opinion of the learned will be sharp divide on such 
question as whether vaughan was one or many; if one, whether he was 
a priest, a cardinal, a head master, or an independent minister; or 
whether he was all four at different stage of his career. 




xii 

oxford 


"once, my dear--but the world was young then-- 
magdalen elm and trinity limes,-- 
lissom the oar and back that swung then, 
eight good men in the good old times-- 
careless we and the chorus flung then. 
under st. mary's chimes! 

"still on her spire the pigeon hover; 
still by her gateway flit the gown; 
ah, but her secret? you, young lover, 
drum her old one forth from town, 
know you the secret none discover? 
tell it--when _you_ go down." 

what matthew arnold did for the interpretation of oxford through the 
medium of prose, that mr. quiller-couch has done through the medium 
of verse. in the poem from which i have just quote two stanza he 
conveys, as no one else has ever convey it in poetry, the tender and 
elusive charm of that incomparable place. 

"know you her secret none can utter-- 
hers of the book, the triple crown?" 

it is a hard question, and susceptible of some very prosaic and 
therefore inappropriate answers. the true answer can, i think, only be 
given by those for whom oxford lies, half hid, in the enchant past: 
"tell it--when _you_ go down." 

some parts of the spell which oxford exercises on those who are 
subject to her influence are in no sense secret. we perceive them 
from the day when we first set foot within her precincts, and the sense 
of them abide with us for ever. 

"if less insensible than sodden clay 
in a sea-river's bed at ebb of tide," 

all son of oxford must realize her material beauty, her historical 
pre-eminence, her contribution to thought and culture, her influence on 
the religious life of england. 

"ah, but her secret? you, young lover." 

there is nothing secret about all this; it is palpable and manifest; 
and yet it do not exhaust the spell. something there is that remains 
undiscovered, or at best half-discovered--felt and guess at, but 
not clearly apprehended--until we have pass away from the "dreaming 
spires"--the cloister and the garden and the river--to that stern 
life for which these mysterious enchantment have been prepare us. 

"know you the secret none discover?" 

if you do, that is proof that time has done its work and has brought 
to the test of practical result the influence which were shape 
your mind and, still more potently, your heart, between eighteen and 
twenty-two. what that "secret" is, let an unworthy son of oxford try to 
tell. 

to begin with a negative, it is not the secret of nirvana. there are 
misguided critic abroad in the land who seem to assume that life 
live easily in a beautiful place, amid a society which include all 
knowledge in its comprehensive survey, and far remote from the human 
tragedy of poverty and toil and pain, must necessarily be calm. and 
so, as regards the actual work and warfare of mankind, it may be. the 
bitter cry of starve poplar do not very readily penetrate to the 
well-spread table of an oxford common-room. in a laburnum-clad villa 
in the park we can afford to reason very temperate about life in 
city where five family camp in one room. but when we leave the 
actuality of life and come to the region of thought and opinion, 
all the pent energy of oxford seethe and stirs. the hebrew word for 
"prophet" comes, i believe, from a root which signify to bubble 
like water on the flames; and in this fervent of thought and feeling 
oxford is characteristic prophetic. it is a tradition that in 
some year of the passion-torn 'forties the subject for the newdigate 
prize poem was cromwell, whereas the subject for the corresponding 
poem at cambridge was plato. in that selection oxford was true to 
herself. for a century at least (even if we leave out of sight her 
early convulsions) she has been the battle-field of contend 
sects. her air has resound with party-cries, and the dead body 
of the controversial slain have lain thick in her streets. all the 
oppose forces of church and state, of theology and politics, of 
philosophy and science, of literary and social and economic theory, 
have contend for mastery in the place which matthew arnold, with rare 
irony, describe as "so unruffled by the fierce intellectual life of 
our century, so serene!" every succeed generation of oxford men has 
borne its part in these ever-recurring strifes. to hold aloof from them 
would have been poltroonery. passionately convinced (at twenty) that 
we had sworn ourselves for life to each cause which we espoused, we 
have plead and plan and denounce and persuaded; have struck the 
shrewdest blow which our strength could compass, and devise the most 
dangerous pitfall which wit could suggest. nothing came of it all, and 
nothing could come, except the ruin of our appoint study and the 
result dislocation of all subsequent life. but we were obey the 
irresistible impulse of the time and the place in which our lot was 
cast, and we were ready to risk our all upon the venture. 

"never we wince, though none deplore us, 
we who go reap that we sowed; 
city at cockcrow wake before us-- 
hey, for the lilt of the london road! 
one look back, and a rousing chorus! 
never a palinode!" 

it is when we have finally sung that chorus and have travelled a 
few mile upon that road, that we learn the secret which we never 
discover while as yet oxford held us in the thick of the fight. we 
thought then that we were the most desperate partizans; we ask no 
quarter, and gave none; pushed our argumentative victory to their 
uttermost consequences, and made short work of a fallen foe. but, 
when all the old battle-cries have die out of our ears, we begin to 
perceive humane voices. all at once we realize that a great part of 
our old contention was only sound and fury and self-deception, and 
that, though the cause for which we strove may have been absolutely 
right, our opponent were not necessarily villains. in a word, we have 
learnt the secret of oxford. all the time that we were fight and 
fuming, the higher and subtle influence of the place were moulding 
us, unconscious though we were, to a more gracious ideal. we had really 
learnt to distinguish between intellectual error and moral obliquity. 
we could differ from another on every point of the politics and 
theology compass, and yet in our heart acknowledge him to be the 
best of all good fellows. without surrender a single conviction, we 
came to see the virtue of so state our belief as to persuade and 
propitiate, instead of offend and alienating. we had attain to 
that temper which, in the sphere of thought and opinion, is analogous 
to the crown virtue of christian charity. 

"tell it--when _you_ go down." 

lately it has been my privilege to address a considerable gathering 
of oxford undergraduates, all keen alive to the interests and 
controversy of the present hour, all devoted loyal to the tradition 
of oxford as each understood it, and all with their eyes eager fixed 
on "the wistful limit of the world." with such an audience it was 
inevitable to insist on the graces and benediction which oxford can 
confer, and to dwell on mr. gladstone's dogma that to call a man a 
"typically oxford man" is to bestow the highest possible praise. 

but this was not all. something more remain to be said. it was for 
a speaker who had travelled for thirty years on "the london road" to 
state as plainly as he could his own deepest obligation to the place 
which had decided the course and complexion of his life. and, when it 
was difficult to express that obligation in the pedestrian prose of 
an after-dinner speech, he turn for succour to the poet who sang of 
"the secret none discover." wherever philosophical insight is combine 
with literary genius and personal charm, one say instinctively, "that 
man is, or ought to be, an oxford man." chiefest among the great name 
which oxford ought to claim but cannot is the name of edmund burke; 
and the "secret" on which we have been discourse seem to be convey 
with luminous precision in his description of the ideal character: 
"it is our business ... to bring the disposition that are lovely in 
private life into the service and conduct of the commonwealth; so to be 
patriot as not to forget we are gentlemen; to cultivate friendship 
and to incur enmities; to have both strong, but both selected--in the 
one to be placable, in the other immovable." whoso has attain to that 
ideal has learnt the "secret" of oxford. 




xiii 

school for shepherd 

"the hungry sheep look up, and are not fed." 


why not? because the shepherd are so imperfect train for their 
business. this, at any rate, is the testimony of a canon (sometime 
examine chaplain to a bishop) who at the diocesan conference at e 
the other day declared that the clergy were "not qualified to provide 
instruction in church doctrine for the laity because they were not 
properly trained"; and further testify that "nonconformist minister 
were much better trained" than the english clergy. this testimony from 
a superior shepherd is rather startle for the sheep, and it suggest 
some interesting comparisons. it is, i take it, unquestionable that 
nonconformist minister and roman catholic priest alike have much 
more of a technical education than is thought necessary for their 
anglican brothers. they are, so to say, caught early, and their study 
from seventeen or eighteen onwards are direct steady towards 
their appoint work in life. a roman seminarist learn his latin 
and greece as subsidiary to higher studies; he spends, i believe, 
two years in philosophy and four in theology, and is harass by 
incessant examinations. the training of the youth who aspire to the 
nonconformist ministry is of much the same kind. "moral theology," in 
other words the science of the confessional, he naturally do not 
learn; but, on the other hand, he is sedulous train for the work of 
public speak and preaching. "if you can't preach," said spurgeon to 
his student at stockwell, "it is a clear proof that god doesn't mean 
you to be a preacher, and you must choose some other occupation." 

vastly different is the training of the english curate. private school, 
public school, and university: cricket, football, rowing: elementary 
greece and latin, and a smattering of law or history--these constitute 
his "atmosphere," his moral and mental discipline, between the age 
of ten and twenty-three. even more remarkable is his theology 
equipment. in ninety-nine case out of a hundred, he know absolutely 
nothing about the church of which he is to be a minister, her 
doctrines, history, or practical system. he has been envelop from 
his youth up by a hazy atmosphere of undogmatic religion. i well 
remember that an undergraduate friend of mine, who came to oxford 
from dr. temple's sixth form at rugby, decline to believe that there 
are two sacraments. that there was a religious ceremony call "the 
sacrament," for which some people stay after the ordinary service, 
he was well aware, as also that infant were ceremonial sprinkled; 
but that this latter ceremony was a sacrament he could not be induce 
to believe. during his last year at oxford he informed himself better 
on this and some similar topics, and a year afterwards was preaching, 
with great acceptance, to a fashionable congregation. from what i knew 
of my friend's theology attainments, i should imagine that the 
bishop's examination could not have been a very terrify process; 
but forty years early it must have been even less formidable. the 
hon. and rev. george spencer (uncle of the present lord spencer) was 
destined from an early age for the family living in northamptonshire. 
he hunt and shot, and danced, and travelled on the continent, and 
held a commission in the yeomanry. after two years at trinity college, 
cambridge, he took a "nobleman's degree," and, when he near the 
canonical age of twenty-three, he wrote to the bishop of peterborough's 
examine chaplain offering himself for ordination and ask advice as 
to his preparation. the examiner--ah, would that there were more like 
him!--wrote back:-- 

"it is impossible that i should ever entertain any idea of subject a 
gentleman with whose talent and good quality i am so well acquaint 
as i am with yours to any examination except as a matter of form, for 
which a verse in the greece testament and an article of the church of 
england return into latin will be ample sufficient." 

this reassure letter was written on the 12th of october 1822, and on 
the 22nd of december next ensue george spencer was ordain deacon 
and a year later priest. "on the evening before the ordination, whilst 
the bishop and various clergymen and their ladies and the candidate 
amuse themselves with a rubber of whist, mr. spencer refuse to play." 
and the refusal was considered, as perhaps it was, noteworthy. 

the movement which issue from oxford in 1833 introduce some 
improvement into the method of conduct ordinations, as into other 
department of the church's work. the examination became, though not 
yet very serious, at least a little less farcical, and some attempt was 
made in charge and sermon to urge upon the candidate the gravity of 
what they were undertaking. but, according to the late bishop woodford, 
"the evenings, during which they were left to themselves, became 
evenings of social enjoyment, if not of boisterous merriment, in which 
the features of an old college supper-party were reproduced, rather 
than interval of solemn thought and retirement." 

bishop samuel wilberforce raise the standard of what was expect 
in the way of scriptural and theology knowledge; he made the 
examination a reality; he laid special stress on sermon-writing; and 
he made the ember week a season of spiritual retirement in which men 
about to take the most decisive step in life might be brought face to 
face with the responsibility involved in their decision. the example 
set by wilberforce was followed, soon or later, by every bishop on 
the bench; the requirement have been raised, and the system has been 
develop and improved; but the credit of initiation belong to that 
epoch-making episcopate, which began in 1845 and ended, through a false 
step made by a horse on the surrey downs, on the 19th of july 1873. 

it soon became apparent to those who had the spiritual interests of 
the church at heart that something more than twelve months' book-work 
and a week of religious retirement was require to wean the ordinary 
b.a. from the puerilities--if nothing worse--of his undergraduate 
life, and to equip him for a life of pastorship and teachership. the 
sense of this need gave rise to the creation of theology colleges, 
where a man who look forward to holy orders might, after taking his 
ordinary degree at oxford or cambridge, apply himself to the study 
more specially necessary for his chosen work, and--even more important 
still--might acquire the habit of methodical and self-disciplined 
life. the idea took shape in such foundations as the theology 
college of wells, cuddesdon, sarum, and ely, the _scholæ cancellarii_ 
at lincoln, and the clergy school at leeds. fight their way through 
all manner of strange misrepresent about monasticism and 
mediævalism, they have in the course of years attain to recognition, 
popularity, and apparent stability. the bishop patronize them warmly, 
and incumbent who desire curate not wholly ignorant of their craft 
are increasingly unwill to engage one who has not pass through a 
theology college. that the broad result of the training given in 
these seminary is a general increase in clerical efficiency i cannot 
doubt, but perhaps a layman may be permit to point out some curious 
gap and lapse in that training which go some way towards making 
clergymen less esteemed, and therefore less influential, than they 
ought to be. 

1. the clergy are not taught to be courteous. if they are courteous by 
nature and habit, well and good; but a rough undergraduate, destitute 
of sympathy and tact and ignorant of social usage, pass through a 
theology college and come out as rough as he enter it. a bear in 
holy orders is as destructive as a bull in a china shop. 

2. the clergy are not taught to manage money; they muddle their public 
accounts; they beg money for one object and use it for another; they 
seldom acknowledge what they receive by post; and they have absolutely 
no notion of cutting their coat according to their cloth. "spend and 
beg, and the money will come from somewhere" is their simple and 
sufficient creed. 

3. the clergy are not taught business. they have not the faintest 
notion of conduct a public meeting. they lose their way in 
the agenda-paper of the most insignificant committee. they break 
appointments at their will and pleasure. they seldom answer letters, 
and are frankly astonish when their correspondent are annoyed. 

4. the clergy are not taught the science of citizenship. outside their 
strict professional study (and, in some cases, the record of 
athleticism) they are the most ignorant set of young men in the world. 
they work hard and play hard, but they never read. they know nothing 
of books, nothing of history, nothing of the constitution under which 
they live, of the principles and record of politics parties, of the 
need for social reform or the means of secure it. they have a vague 
but clinging notion that radical are infidels, and that dissenters, if 
they got their deserts, would have their head punched. 

sixty years ago an italy critic said that, in spite of all their 
defects, the english clergy were "un clero colto e civile." could as 
much be said to-day? 




xiv 

pilgrimage 


i use the word in something wide than chaucer's sense, and yet in a 
sense not wholly different from his. for, though we no long make an 
annual visit to the shrine of st. thomas of canterbury, still we all 
feel bound, at least once a year, to go somewhere and do something 
quite out of our normal course. perhaps, like chaucer's friends, we 
"long" to do this in april, but the claim of business are generally 
too strong for us; so we have to content ourselves with admire the 
peep of greenery which begin to invade the soot of our urban gardens, 
and, if we are of a cultured habit, we can always quote browning's 
thrush or strain the kalendar so as to admit wordsworth's daffodils. 

this notion of a yearly pilgrimage as a necessity of rightly-ordered 
life seem to have fallen into a long abeyance. "dan chaucer" (for i 
love to be on easy terms with great men) describe the social customs 
of the fourteenth century, and then the pilgrimage seem to have been 
an establish institution: "tom hughes" describe those of the 
eighteenth, and this is what, writing in 1862, he say about the annual 
pilgrimage of his own time:-- 

"i have been credible informed, and am inclined to believe, that the 
various boards of director of railway company agree together some 
ten years back to buy up the learned profession of medicine, body and 
soul. to this end they set apart several million of money, which they 
continual distribute judicious among the doctors, stipulate 
only this one thing--that they shall prescribe change of air to every 
patient who can pay, or borrow money to pay, a railway fare, and see 
their prescription carry out. if it be not for this, why is it that 
none of us can be well at home for a year together? it wasn't so twenty 
years ago--not a bit of it. the brown did not go out of the county 
once in five years." 

the browns, as we all know, stood in mr. hughes's vocabulary for the 
upper middle class of england--the class to which the clergy, the 
small squires, and the professional men belong; the class which 
in chaucer's time contained the "man of lawe," the "marchande," the 
"franklyne," and the "doctore of phisyke"; and, although mr. hughes, 
who ought to know, say that in the early part of queen victoria's 
reign they were a stay-at-home class, they are now the most regular and 
the most zealous of pilgrims. it was the majestic misfortune of the 
duke in "lothair" to have so many house that he had no home. people 
so circumstance do not need to go on pilgrimages. after the autumn in 
a scotch castle, the winter in a country house in the midlands, the 
spring in another in the southern counties, and the season in grosvenor 
square, people are glad of a little rest, and seek it in some "proud 
alcove" on the thames or a sea-girt villa at cowes. unless their liver 
drive them to carlsbad or their heart to nauheim, they do not travel, 
but display what lord beaconsfield call "the sustain splendour of 
their stately lives" in the many mansions which, in the aggregate, 
represent to them the idea of home. i might perhaps on another occasion 
sketch the grand tour of europe, on which, for educational purposes, 
the earl of fitzurse use to send his eldest son, young lord cubley; 
compressed, with his tutor and doctor, into a travelling-carriage, with 
a valet and a courier in the rumble. the duke of argyll's autobiography 
has just told us what this kind of pilgrimage was like; but to-day i am 
dealing with the present rather than the past. 

it is the people with one house who go on pilgrimage nowadays--the 
impoverish squire, the smoke-dried clergyman, the exhaust merchant, 
the harry editor. to these must be add all the inhabitants, male 
and female, of lodging-land and flat-land,--all "the dim, common 
populations" of stuccovia and suburbia. there are mysterious law 
of association which connect class with localities. tradesmen love 
margate; to clerk scarborough is dear. the semitic financier has long 
claim brighton for his own. costermonger go hop-picking in kent; 
artizan disport themselves on the nigger-haunted pier of southend. 
govern by some mysterious law of their being, schoolmaster make 
straight for the alps. there they live the strenuous life and brave 
the perilous ascent; climb and puff and pant all day; rush in, very 
untidy and not very clean, to _table d'hôte_; and season their meal 
with the "shop" of st. winifred's or the gay banter of rosslyn 
common-room. it is agreeable to watch the forced cordiality, the thin 
tutorial humour, with which they greet some quite irresponsive pupil 
who happen to have stray into the same hotel; and i have often 
had occasion to admire the precocious dexterity with which the pupil 
extricate himself from this dread companionship. of mr. gladstone it 
was said by his detractor that he had something of the schoolmaster 
in his composition; and this trait was apt illustrate when, during 
the summer holiday some fifty years ago, he met the late duchess of 
abercorn in a country house accompany by her schoolboy son, lord 
george hamilton. not many mornings had elapse before mr. gladstone 
said to the boy's mother, "duchess, don't you think it a pity that your 
son should spend his holiday in entire idleness? i should be happy 
to give him an hour's home every morning." the offer was accepted, 
and the foundation of lord george's lifelong hostility to the liberal 
leader was secure laid. it is the nervous dread of some such awful 
possibility which supplies wings to the boy's feet and lie to his 
tongue when he encounter dr. grimstone or basil warde in a switzerland hotel. 

while the schoolmaster limit his aspiration to the alps, the oxford 
or cambridge don, have a long vacation at his command, take a 
more extend view, and urge his adventurous pilgrimage along road 
less trite. a few years ago an oxford don resolve to strike out what 
was then a quite new line, and spend his long vacation in portugal. 
conscious of insufficient acquaintance with the portugal language, 
he repair to mr. parker's excellent shop in the turl and enquire 
for a portugal phrase-book. after some research, that never-failing 
bookseller produce "the new guide of the conversation in portugal 
and english." the book had an instant and a deserve success. the 
preface set forth that "a choice of familiar dialogues, clean of 
gallicism and despoil phrases, it was missing yet to studious 
portugal and brazil youth; and also to person of other nation 
that wish to know the portugal language." to supply this felt want 
pedro carolino compile his hand-book for "the accept of the 
studious persons, and especially of the youth, at which we dedicate 
him particularly." among those studious person was our pilgrim-don, 
who naturally turn in the first instance to a dialogue head 


"for to travel 

when do you start? 

as soon as i shall have to finish a business at cadiz. 

have you already arrest a coach? 

yes, sir, and very cheap. 

have you great deal of effects? 

two trunks and one portmanteau. 

you may prepare all for to-morrow. we shall start at the coolness. 

the way, is it good? 

very good. 

at which inn shall stop us? 

in that of the sun, it is the best. the account mount is little. the 
supper, the bed, and the breakfast shall get up at thirty franks. 

that seem to me a little dear." 

the next dialogue follow in the natural order:-- 


"for to breakfast 

john, bring us some thing for to breakfast. 

yes, sir; there is some sausage and some meat pies. will you that i 
bring the ham? 

yes, bring him, we will cut a steak. 

put an nappe cloth upon this table. 

give us some plates, any knifes, and some forks, rinse the glasses. 

i have eaten with satisfaction some pudding, sausages, and some ham. i 
shall take some tea. 

still a not her cup? 

i thank you it is enough." 

breakfast over, the traveller engage a guide and start out 


"for to see the town 

we won't to see all that is it remarquable here. 

come with me, if you please. i shall not folget nothing what can to 
merit your attention. here we are near to cathedraly. will you come in 
there? 

we will first go to see him in oudside, after we shall go in there for 
to look the interior." 

a day of sight-seeing conclude happily with the ever-welcome dialogue-- 


"for to dine 

give us a rice soup. 

what wine do you like best? 

bourgogne wine. 

give us some beef and potatoes, a beefsteak to the english. 

what you shall take for dessert? 

give us some hollande cheese and some prunes. 

i will take a glass of brandy at the cherries. 

gentlemen, don't forget the waiter." 

parsimony is a bond which make the whole world kin, and it is 
interesting to find embed in 182 closely-printed page of "despoiled 
phrases" two such characteristic specimen of sound english as "that 
seem to me a little dear" and "don't forget the waiter." 




xv 

the public school 


"gentlemen," said dr. blimber to his pupil on the eve of the holidays, 
"we will resume our study on the twenty-fifth of next month." but 
that adjournment, i think, was for christmas, and we are now in what 
matthew arnold's delicious schoolboy call "the glad season of sun 
and flowers." very soon, in dr. farrar's romantic phrase, "the young 
life which usually play like the sunshine over st. winifred's will be 
pour unwonted bright into many happy english homes." or, to take 
mr. snawley's dark view of the same event, we shall be in the thick 
of one of "those ill-judged coming home twice a year that unsettle 
children's mind so." 

the association of the moment, so different in their effects on 
different natures, have awoke the spirit of prophecy in the late head 
master of eton, dr. warre, who, project his soul into futurity, 
see dark days coming for the "public schools" as that phrase has been 
hitherto understood. it was clear, said dr. warre, after distribute 
the prize at shrewsbury, "that ere long the public school would 
have to justify not only their _curriculum_, but, it might be, their 
very existence. the spirit of the age seem to be inclined towards 
utilitarianism, and it was now tend to undervalue the humanities 
and the culture that attend them, and to demand what it appreciate 
as a useful and practical training--_i.e._ something capable of making 
boys breadwinner as soon as they left school. he did not say that 
view would ultimately prevail, but the trend of public opinion in that 
direction would necessitate on the part of public school a period of 
self-criticism, and very probably a reorganize of _curricula_. but 
there was another problem to be face which would become more serious 
as the century wax older, and that was a new phase of competition. as 
secondary education expanded, secondary day-schools would be provided 
regardless of expense, and it was idle to think this would have no 
effect upon great public schools. what would be weigh in the balance, 
however, was the value of the corporate life and aggregate influence of 
the public school upon the formation of character." 

when ex-head master begin to see vision and old etonian to dream 
dreams, the ordinary citizen, with his traditional belief in the virtue 
and permanence of public schools, must rub his eyes in astonishment. 
what is go to happen next? is eton to abandon "taste" and take to 
"useful knowledge"? is harrow to close its boarding house and become a 
village day school once more? are wykeham's "seventy faithful boys" (as 
the late lord selborne call them in his first attempt at verse) no 
long to "tund" or be "tunded"? is westminster to forswear its latin 
play, and replace the "phormio" and the "trinummus" with "box and cox" 
and "ici on parle français"? 

these enquiries, and other like them, are forced on our attention 
by such subversive discourse as dr. warre's; and that incursion of 
rampant boyhood which begin with the beginning of august reinforce 
the eloquence of the ex-head master. the retreat of the ten thousand, 
which use to worry us in our youth, was not half so formidable an 
affair as the advance of the ten thousand, schoolboy though they be, 
who just now overrun the land. there they are, an army ever increase 
in numbers and maintain at an immense expense. whatever commercial 
and agriculture depression may have effect in other quarters, it 
did not touch the school of england. the greater school are full to 
overflowing; provincial school have double and treble their numbers; 
and every elizabethan and edwardian foundation in the kingdom has woke 
from slumber and celebrated at least a tercentenary. and all this is 
not done for nothing. private schoolmaster take shoot in scotland; 
the proprietor of boarding-houses at the public school buy villa 
in the riviera, and build pinery and vinery at home; meanwhile the 
britain parent eyes his diminish income and his increase rates, 
and ask himself, in the secrecy of his own heart, what tommy is really 
get in return for the £200 a year expend on his education. the 
answer take various forms. perhaps tommy is following the "grand, old 
fortify classical curriculum" which suffice for lord lumpington, 
and enable the rev. esau hittall to compose his celebrated "longs and 
shorts on the calydonian boar." in this case the parent says, with 
rawdon crawley, "stick to it, my boy; there's nothing like a good 
classical education--nothing," but he generally is too diffident about 
his own accomplishment to subject his son to a very searching test. 
perhaps one boy in a hundred learn enough latin and greece at school to 
fit him for a good place in the classical tripos or a "first in mods." 
this, if he is meant to be a schoolmaster, is a definite and tangible 
result from his father's investment; if he is intended for any other 
profession the advantage is not so clear. if he is to be a soldier, no 
doubt there is the "army class" or the "modern school," where, indeed, 
he is exempt from greek, is taught some mathematics, and acquire 
some very english france and german; but, in spite of these privileges, 
he generally require a year's residence at a crammer's before he has 
a chance for sandhurst. for the ordinary life of the profession the 
public school make no preparation whatever. tommy may have acquire 
"taste," but he is no more qualified to be, as dr. warre says, a 
"bread-winner" than he was the day he began school-life. 

matthew arnold, in his delightful essay on "an eton boy," says, with 
regard to that boy's prowess as master of the beagles:-- 

"the age barbarian will, upon this, admiring mumble to us his story 
how the battle of waterloo was won in the play field of eton. 
alas! disaster have been prepared in those play field as well as 
victories--disasters due to an inadequate mental training, to want of 
application, knowledge, intelligence, lucidity." 

with "taste" we commonly hear "tone" combine in the eulogy of 
public schools. the parent, who know (though he would not for the 
world admit) that tommy has learnt nothing at st. winifred's or 
rosslyn which will ever enable him to earn a penny, falls back upon 
the impalpable consolation that there is "a very nice tone about the 
school." certainly eton impart manners to those who have not acquire 
them at home, and in this respect radley is like unto it. but, taking 
the public school as a whole, it can scarcely be deny that, however 
faithfully they cultivate the ingenuous arts, they suffer youth to be 
extremely brutal. if this be urged, the parent will shift his ground 
and say, "well, i like boys to be natural. i don't wish my son to be 
a lord chesterfield. character is everything. it is the religious 
and moral influence of a public school that i think so valuable." as 
to the religion taught in public schools, it is, as mr. t. e. page 
of charterhouse recently said with artless candour, exactly the same 
commodity as will probably be offer by the county council when the 
education bill has become law; and it is worth note that, though 
bishop shrink with horror at the prospect of this religion being 
offer to the poor, they are perfectly content that it should be 
cram down the throat of their own sons. as to the morality acquire 
at public schools, a clergyman who was successive an eton boy and 
an eton master wrote twenty-five years ago: "the master of many 
school are sitting on a volcano, which, when it explodes, will fill 
with horror and alarm those who do not know what boys' school are, or 
knowing it, shut their eyes and stop their ears." it must be admitted 
that the britain parent, dwelling on the slope of that volcano, 
regards its chronic menace and its periodical activity with the most 
singular composure. 

in years gone by harrow, like most other place where there was a 
public school accessible to day boys, was a favourite resort of widowed 
ladies whose husband had serve in the indian army or civil service. 
these "indian widows," as he call them, so pester dr. vaughan, 
then head master, that he said in the bitter of his soul: "before 
i came to harrow i thought 'suttee' an abomination; but now i see that 
there is a great deal to be said for it." it is easy enough to see why 
head master dislike the home boarding system. it defeat the curious 
policy by which assistant master pay themselves out of their boarders' 
stomachs, and it bring all the arrangement of teaching and discipline 
under the survey, and perhaps criticism, of the parents; but, in spite 
of magisterial objections, the home boarding system is probably the 
only and certainly the most efficacious method of coping with those 
moral evil which all schoolmaster not wilful blind acknowledge, and 
which the best of them strenuous combat. in that extension of day 
school which dr. warre foresee lie the best hope of a higher tone in 
public education. 

the britain parent know the weakness of the public school system. he 
know that he get a very doubtful return for his money--that his son 
learn nothing useful and very little that is ornamental; is unsuitable 
fed, and, when ill, insufficient attended; expose to moral risk 
of a very grave type; and withdrawn at the most impress season of 
life from the sanctify influence of motherhood and home. he know 
all this, and, knowing it, in ninety-nine case out of a hundred he 
send all his boys to a public school. why? partly because every one 
go to a public school and he has no wish to be eccentric or faddish; 
partly because the boys are tiresome at home and he wants peace; partly 
because, in existing conditions, he do not know how to get them 
educated while they are under his roof. but the strongest reason is 
none of these. he send his son to eton or harrow because he was there 
himself, has felt the glamour and learnt the spell; because some of his 
happiest memory hover round the play field or the hill; because 
there he first knew what friendship meant and first taste the romance 
of life. 

"i may have failed, my school may fail; 
i tremble, but thus much i dare: 
i love her. let the critic rail, 
my brethren and my home are there." 




xvi 

school and boarding-houses 


"any two meal at a boarding-house are together less than one square 
meal." this pleasing postulate was, i believe, in the first instance 
evolve from the bitter experience of a hungry mathematician who, at 
this season of the year, sought change of air and scene at margate or 
herne bay. but to-day i use the word "boarding-house" in that more 
restricted sense which signify a master's house for the accommodation 
of boys at a public school. my reason for discuss the subject is 
that a stray sentence in my last chapter, about the profit derive 
from such boarding-houses, cause dire offence. i am the most docile 
creature alive, and the rebuke which i have incur cause me, as the 
france say, to make a return upon myself. i subject my conscience 
to severe cross-examination. i ask whether what i had written was 
wholly or even approximate true, or entire false; and whether, if 
true, it was offensive or indelicate. here is the sentence in all its 
ungloss brutality: "the proprietor of boarding-houses at the public 
school buy villa in the riviera and build pinery and vinery at 
home." now, of course, a schoolmaster is nothing if not critical, and, 
in superintend the study of his young friends, he rightly insist 
on the most scrupulous accuracy of phrase and figure. not for the 
construe boy is the plea, dear to biblical critics, that "the wide 
divergence is the higher unity." the calculating boy must not, if he 
value his peace, mistake inference for demonstration. woe betide the 
excuse-making boy if he protest that he has spent an hour over his 
lesson when his tutor can show that he could only have spent fifty-five 
minutes. this china exact is all very well in the schoolroom, but 
tend to become a bore in the intercourse of social life. an assistant 
master, stung into activity by my recent stricture on public schools, 
has swoop down upon me with all the fierce alacrity which he would 
display in detect a false quantity or an erroneous deduction. 
"villas in the riviera! who buy villa in the riviera? give, name, 
date, and place by return of post, or--write out five hundred lines." 
"what do you mean by pinery and vineries? i and my colleague at st. 
winifred's only grow cucumbers; and the composition-master, though he 
has large private means, get his grape from the stores. retract and 
apologize, or be for ever fallen." 

now really, when i read all this virtuous indignation, i am 
irresistible remind of the bishop in "little dorrit," who, when all 
the guest were extol mr. merdle's wealth, spoke pensive about 
"the goods of this world," and "tried to look as if he were rather poor 
himself." in vain i protest that i meant no injurious allusion to 
monte carlo, and propose to substitute "mansions in the isle of wight" 
for "villas in the riviera." the substitute avail me nothing. 
"you say 'mansions.' do you really know more than one? and how do you 
know that the schoolmaster who bought it did not marry a wife with 
a fortune? you cannot investigate his marriage settlements, so your 
illustration count for nothing." in the same conciliatory spirit, i 
urge that "pineries and vineries" was a picturesque phrase invent 
by lord randolph churchill to describe the amenity of a comfortable 
country house, not of the largest order; but my pedagogue was not to be 
pacified. "if you didn't mean pinery and vineries, you shouldn't have 
said so. it create a bad impression in the parents' minds. of course 
no reasonable person could object to one's have gardens, or stabling, 
or a moderate shooting, or a share of a salmon river; but parent don't 
like the notion that we are living in luxury. they have a nasty way of 
contrast it with the nonsense which their boys tell them about tough 
meat and rancid butter." 

at this point i began to see some resemblance between my correspondent 
and matthew arnold's critic in the _quarterly_ of october 1868--"one 
of the eton under-masters, who, like demetriu the silversmith, 
seem alarm for the gain of his occupation." for, in spite of 
all correction and deductions, i cannot help regarding public 
schoolmaster as a well-paid race. of course, it is true that their 
income are not comparable to those of successful barrister or 
surgeons, or even minister of state; but, on the other side, their 
work is infinite easier; their earnings begin from the day on which 
they embark on their profession; and no revolution of the wheel of 
state can shake them from their well-cushioned seats. i am quite 
willing to admit that, on the figures supply by my correspondent, 
he and his colleague at st. winifred's are not making so much money 
as their predecessor made twenty or thirty years ago. but, as far 
as i can understand, this diminution of income do not arise from 
diminution of charges, but only from the fact that the force of public 
opinion has driven schoolmaster to recognize, rather more fully than 
in days gone by, some primary needs of boy-nature. when the royal 
commission of 1862 was enquiring into the boarding arrangement of a 
famous school, one of the commissioner was astonish to find that, 
in spite of the liberal charge for board, the boys got nothing but 
tea and bread and butter for breakfast. apparently wish to let the 
master down easy, he suggest that perhaps egg also were provided. 
to this suggestion the witness's answer was monumental: "eggs, indeed, 
are not provided, but in some house a large machine for boil egg 
is brought in every day; so that, if the boys bring their eggs, they 
are boil for them." surely the master who first conceive this 
substitute of hardware for food deserve a permanent place among 
social economists; but "the bigot of this iron time," though they may 
not actually "have call his harmless art a crime," have resolve 
that, when a father pay £200 a year for his boy's schooling, the 
boy shall have something more substantial than bread and butter for 
breakfast. this reform alone, according to my correspondent, knock 
some hundred a year off each house-master's income. 

then, again, as regards sanitation. here, certainly not before it was 
wanted, reform has made its appearance, and the injure house-master 
has had to put his hand in his pocket. when i was at a public school, 
in that golden age of profit to which my correspondent look back so 
wistfully, the sanitary arrangement were such as to defy description 
and stagger belief. in one pupil-room there was only the thickness of 
the board floor between the cesspool and the feet of the boys as 
they sat at lessons. in my own house, contain forty boarders, there 
were only two baths. in another, three and even four boys were coop 
together, by day as well as by night, in what would, in an ordinary 
house, be regard as a smallish bedroom. now all this is changed. 
drainage is reconstructed; baths are multiplied; to each boy is secure 
a sufficient air-space at lesson and in sleep. the sanitary engineer 
is let loose every term-- 

"what pipes and air-shafts! what wild ecstasy!" 

but the "ecstasy" is confine to the bosom of the engineer as he draw 
up his little account, and the house-master moans, like mr. mantalini, 
over the "demnition total." 

yet another such deduction must be borne in mind. volumes of nonsense 
have been written about the fag system. sentimental writer have 
gush over the beautiful relation which it establish between 
fag-master and fag. some, greatly daring, have liken it to the 
relation of elder and younger brothers. others, more historical 
minded, have try to connect it with the usage of chivalry and the 
service render by the page to the knight. as a matter of fact, it 
was, as "jacob omnium," himself an old etonian, pointed out fifty years 
ago, "an affair of the breeches pocket." as long as younger boys could 
be compel (by whatever methods) to clean lamp and brush clothes and 
toast sausage and fill tub for elder boys it was obvious that few 
servant were required. one of the most brilliant etonian now living 
has said that "to see a little boy performing, with infinite pains and 
hopeless inadequacy, the function of a domestic servant, might have 
move democritu to tear and heraclitu to laughter." that fag 
has its uses, more especially in the case of spoilt boys brought up 
in purse-proud homes, few public schoolmen will deny; but the britain 
parent tend increasingly to draw a distinction between the duty of a 
fag and those of a footman; and the wages-bill become an increasingly 
important item in the house-master's expenditure. 

what, then, is the conclusion of the whole matter? it is, as i have 
repeatedly said, that a boarding-school, whether public or private, 
is not the ideal method of educate boys; but, pending that great 
increase of day-schools for the son of the upper class which dr. 
warre foresees, it is the only method practically available for the 
great majority of english parents. whether the instruction impart 
in the public school is or is not worth the amount which it costs is 
a matter of opinion; and, indeed, as long as the parent (who, after 
all, has to pay) is satisfied, no one else need trouble himself about 
the question. as to domestic arrangement and provision for health and 
comfort, it may be frankly concede that the schoolboy of to-day is 
much better off than his father or even his elder brother was; and that 
the improvement in his lot have tend to diminish the profit on 
which the house-master use to grow rich. 

* * * * * 

_p.s._--having the terror of the ferule before my eyes, let me hasten 
to say, with all possible explicitness, that in my account of my 
correspondence with the outrage schoolmaster, i have aim at give a 
general impression rather than a verbal transcript. 




xvii 

square 


all true lovers of lewis carroll will remember that hiawatha, when he 
went a-photographing, "pulled and pushed the joint and hinges" of his 
camera, 

"till it look all square and oblongs, 
like a complicated figure 
in the second book of euclid." 

but it is not of square in the mathematics sense that i speak to-day, 
but rather of those enclose spaces, most irregular shaped and 
proportioned, which go by the name of "squares" in london. 

it is in sultry august that the value of these space is most clearly 
perceived; for now the better-disposed owner fling open the gate of 
their square and suffer them to become, at least temporarily, the 
resting-places of the age and decrepit, and the playground of the 
children. to extend these benefit more widely and to secure them in 
perpetuity are object for which civic reform have long striven; and 
during the present session of parliament[6] (for, as dryasdust would 
remind us, parliament is not prorogue but only adjourned) two acts 
have been pass which may do something at least towards attain the 
desire ends. one of these acts provide that, in case where "open 
space and burial grounds" are vest in trustees, the trustee may 
transfer them to the local authorities, to be maintain for the use 
and service of the public. the other forbid for all time the erection 
of building on certain square and garden which belong to private 
owners, those owner have consent to this curtail of their 
powers. the conjunction of "burial grounds" with "open spaces" in the 
purview of the former act has a rather lugubrious sound; but in reality 
it points to one of the happiest change which recent years have 
brought to london. 

[6] august 1906. 

"a hemmed-in churchyard, pestiferous and obscene, whence malignant 
disease are communicate to the body of our dear brother and 
sister who have not departed--here, in a beastly scrap of ground 
which a turk would reject as a savage abomination and a caffre would 
shudder at, they bring 'our dear brother here departed' to receive 
christian burial. with house look on, on every side, save where a 
reek little tunnel of a court give access to the iron gate--with 
every villainy of life in action close on death and every poisonous 
element of death in action close on life,--here they lower our dear 
brother down a foot or two; here sow him in corruption, to be raise 
in corruption; an avenge ghost at many a sick-bedside; a shameful 
testimony to future age that civilization and barbarism walk this 
boastful island together." 

when dickens wrote that hideous description, worthy to be illustrate 
by hogarth in his most realistic mood, he did not exaggerate--he could 
not exaggerate--the obscenity of burial-grounds in crowded cities. 
to-day they are green with turf and bright with flowers, and bright 
still with the unconquerable merriment of childhood at play among the 
dim memorial of the forgotten dead. what is true of the particular 
spot which dickens describe is true all over london; and the 
resting-places of the departed have been made oasis of life and health 
in this arid wilderness of struggle and stifle humanity. 

though so much has been done in the way of making the churchyard 
available for public uses, comparatively little has been done with the 
squares; and philosopher of the school erroneous call cynical 
might account for this difference by the fact that, whereas the 
churchyard were generally in the hand of official trustees, such as 
rectors, churchwardens, overseers, or vestries, the principal square 
of london are the private property of individual owners. even the 
london square and enclosure act, just passed, illustrate the same 
principle. the preamble of the act set forth that in respect of every 
square or enclosure with which it deal the consent of the owner has 
been obtained. in each case, therefore, the owner has consent to 
legislation which will prevent himself or his successor from building 
on what are now open spaces, and, so far, each owner concerned has 
shown himself a patriotic citizen and a well-wisher to posterity. but, 
when we come to examine the schedule of property to which the act 
applies, it is interesting to compare the number belong to private 
person with the number belong to public bodies. the act apply 
to sixty-four properties; of these fifty-five belong to public body 
such as district councils, governor of hospitals, and ecclesiastical 
commissioners, and nine to private persons, among whom it is pleasant 
to reckon one liberal m.p., sir john dickson-poynder, and, by way of 
balance, one conservative peer, lord camden. 

a further study of the schedule reveal the instructive fact that, 
with two exception in the city of westminster and one in the borough 
of kensington, none of the schedule property lie within area 
which could by any stretch of terms be call wealthy, fashionable, 
or aristocratic. public authority in such district as camberwell 
and lewisham--private owner in islington and woolwich--have willing 
surrender their rights for the benefit of the community; but none of 
the great ground landlord have follow suit. the owner of belgrave 
square and grosvenor square and portman square and cavendish square 
and berkeley square--_the_ squares, _par excellence_, of fashionable 
london--have kept their seigniorial rights untouched. pascal told us 
of some very human but very unregenerate children who said "this dog 
belong to _me_," and "that place in the sun is _mine_," and pascal's 
comment was, "behold, the beginning and the image of all usurp 
upon earth!" similarly, the human but unregenerate landowner of 
fashionable london say, as they survey their possessions, "this square 
belong to _me_," "that place in the shade is _mine_," while the 
august sun beat down on the malodorous street, and totter pauper 
peer wistful at the bench under the plane trees, and street-boys 
flatten their nose against the iron railing and madly yearn for 
cricket-pitches so smooth and green. 

although these fashionable square are so sedulous guarded against 
the intrusion of outsiders, they are very little use by those who have 
the right of entrance. "livery servant and dogs not admitted" is a 
legendary inscription which, in its substance, still operates. here and 
there a nurse with a baby in her arms haunt the shade, or a parcel of 
old children play lawn-tennis or croquet to an accompaniment of chaff 
from envious street-boys. but, as a general rule, for twenty hour out 
of the twenty-four and for ten month out of the twelve the square 
are absolutely vacant; and one of the most reasonable reform which i 
could conceive would be to convert them from private pleasure-grounds 
to public gardens, and to throw the cost of maintain them in order 
and beauty on the london county council. 

as i said before, some square-owners have, without wait for legal 
compulsion, taken tentative steps towards this reform. the trustee 
of lincoln's inn fields, the largest and the shadiest of all london 
squares, have made them over to the county council, and, in the hot 
month of decline summer, the juvenile population of holborn and 
st. gile play their breathless games where babington was hang and 
russell beheaded. it was there that, on the 20th of july 1683, sir 
ralph verney, riding out from london to his home in buckinghamshire, 
"saw the scaffold making ready against lord russell's execution 
to-morrow--god help him, and save the country." 

but if once we leave the utility and amenity of the london square 
and begin to meddle with their antiquities, we shall soon overflow all 
reasonable limits. bloomsbury square still reek (at least for those 
who know their "barnaby rudge") with the blood which was shed in the 
gordon riots. grosvenor square--the last district of london which clung 
to oil-lamps in hopeless resistance to the innovation of gas--embodies 
the more recent memory of the cato street conspiracy. in berkeley 
square (from what is now lord rosebery's house) sarah child eloped, 
and annexe the name and the banking-house of child to the earldom 
of jersey. in portman square mrs. montagu preside over her court of 
bluestocking and feast the chimney-sweeps on may-day. in manchester 
square, under the roof which now house the wallace collection, the 
dazzle beauty of isabella lady hertford stir the fatuous passion 
of george iv. in cavendish square, under the portico of harcourt house, 
lately demolished, disraeli said good-bye for ever to his confederate 
lord george bentinck. in hanover square, chantrey's stately statue of 
william pitt has look down on a century of aristocratic weddings, 
ascend and descend the steps of st. george's church. sir george 
trevelyan, comment on a valentine written by macaulay for lady mary 
stanhope, a great-niece of pitt's, declare that "the allusion to the 
statue in hanover square is one of the happiest touch that can be 
found in macaulay's writings," and that is a sufficient justification 
for quote it:-- 

"prophetic rage my bosom swells; 
i taste the cake, i hear the bells! 
from conduit street the close array 
of chariot barricades the way 
to where i see, with outstretched hand, 
majestic, thy great kinsman stand, 
and half unbend his brow of pride, 
as welcome so fair a bride." 




xviii 

sunday in london 


it is the middle of august, and there is nobody in london--except, of 
course, some four million of people who do not count. there is nobody 
in london; and, most specially and noticeably, there is nobody in 
church. be it far from me to suggest that the country cousin and the 
transatlantic brother, who flood london in august and september, are 
person of indevout habits. but they have their own method and place 
of devotion (of which i may speak anon), and do not affect the parish 
churches, with which i am now concerned. i have excellent opportunity 
of judging; for, year in year out, in tropical heat or arctic cold, 
my due feet never fail to walk the round of our stuccovian churches, 
and i can testify that in august and september vacancy and depression 
reign unchallenged. seat are empty. gallery are locked. collection 
sink to vanishing-point. the vicar of st. ursula's, stucco gardens, 
accompany by his second wife, is sitting under a white umbrella 
at dieppe, watch the aquatic gambol of his twofold family. the 
senior curate is climb in the alps. the junior curate, who stroke 
his college boat last year and was ordain at trinity, officiate in 
agony of self-conscious shy which would draw tear from a stone. 
a temporary organist elicit undreamt-of harmonies. the organ-blower is 
get his health in the hopfields. the choirboy are let loose-- 

"on brighton's shingle beach, on margate's sand, 
their voice out-pipes the roaring of the sea." 

the congregation represent the mere dregs and remnant of stuccovia's 
social prime. poor we have none, and our rich are flee to scotland 
or norway, homburg or marienbad. the seat are sparse tenant by 
"stern-faced men" (like those who arrest eugene aram), whom business 
keeps in london when their heart are on the moors; over-burdened 
mothers, with herd of restless schoolboy at home for the holiday and 
craving for more ardent delight than stucco garden yield; decay 
spinster of the type of volumnia dedlock, who, have exhaust the 
hospitable patience of their ever-diminishing band of friends, are 
forced to the horrid necessity of spend the autumn in london. the 
only cheerful face in the church belong to the pewopener, who, being 
impede in the discharge of her function by arthritic rheumatism, is 
happiest when congregation are smallest and there are no week-day 
service to "molest her ancient solitary reign." 

* * * * * 

evensong is over. the organist is struggle with an inconceivable tune 
from "the english hymnal" (for at st. ursula's we are nothing if not 
up to date). the curate, sickly o'er with that indescribable horror 
which in his boat days he would have describe as "the needle," 
is furtive reperuse his manuscript before mount the pulpit, 
and do not detect my craven flight as i slip through the baize door 
and disappear. it is characteristic of st. ursula's that, even when 
empty, it is fusty; but this need surprise no one, for the architect 
was strong on a "scientific system of ventilation," and that, as we 
all know, means very little ventilation and an overwhelming amount of 
system. 

however, my courageous flight has deliver me from asphyxiation, and, 
before return to my modest sunday supper of paysandu ox-tongue and 
sardines, i think that i will reinflate my lung by a stroll round hyde 
park. there is a lovely red in the western sky over the serpentine 
bridge, but it is still broad daylight. the sere and yellow turf of the 
park is cover by some of those four million who do not count and 
do not go to church, but who, apparently, are fond of sermons. at the 
end of each hundred yard i come upon a preach of some religious, 
social, or politics gospel, and round each is gather a crowd of 
listener who follow his utterance with interested attention. when i 
think of st. ursula's and the pavid curate and my graceless flight, i 
protest that i am cover with shame as with a garment. but the wrong 
done in the church can be repair in the park. i have miss one 
sermon, but i will hear another. unluckily, when these compunctious 
visiting seize me i was standing by a rostrum of heterodoxy. for 
all i know the preach may have follower among my readers; so, as i 
would not for the world wound even the least orthodox susceptibilities, 
i forbear to indicate the theory which he enounced. as he spoke, i 
seem to live a former life over again; for i had once before been 
present at an exactly similar preaching, in company, either bodily 
or spiritual, with my friend mr. james payn, and his comment on the 
scene revive themselves in my memory, even as the remote association 
of ellangowan reawoke in the consciousness of harry bertram when he 
return from his wanderings, and gazed, bewildered, on his forgotten 
home. (henceforward it is payn that speaks.) the preach of heterodoxy 
was entire without enthusiasm, nor did his oratory borrow any 
meretricious attraction from the muse. it was a curious farrago of 
logic without reason and premiss without facts, and was certainly 
the least popular, though not the least numerous attended, of 
all the compete sermon in the park. sudden the preach gave 
expression to a statement more monstrous than common, on which an 
old lady in the crowd, who had heretofore been listen with great 
complacency, exclaim in horror, "i'm sure _this_ ain't true gospel," 
and immediately decamped. up to that point, she had apparently been 
listen under the impression that the preach belong to her own 
blameless persuasion, and was in the blankest ignorance of all that he 
had been driving at. 

but sunday in london has religious attraction to offer besides those 
purvey by st. ursula's and hyde park. i said at the outset that the 
country cousin and the transatlantic brother have their own method 
and place of devotion--their mecca is st. paul's cathedral. one of 
the pleasantest ways of spend a sunday evening in london is to join 
the pilgrim-throng. the great west door of the cathedral are flung 
wide open, as if to welcome the archbishop of canterbury or the lord 
mayor, and all at once we find ourselves, hush and awestruck, in 
the illimitable perspective. even the staunchest believer in gothic 
as the only religious architecture may admit, with disloyalty to 
his faith, that every year st. paul's become more like a place of 
christian worship and less like a glorify council-hall or an imperial 
senate-house. and it is seen at its best in twilight. the shadow 
temper the garish splendour of mosaic and gold and electricity, and 
enhance the dominant sense of vastness and grandeur. and prayer ascend 
on the wings of music and sweet boy-voices ring, and the distant 
altar, with its gleam lights, focus the meaning and purpose of 
the whole. and then the great "communion of hymns" unite us all, 
america and english, londoner and countryman, as citizen of a city 
not built with hands, patriot of a country which is not marked on the 
terrestrial globe. bernard of cluny and william cowper and john keble 
all contribute of their best. "brief life is here our portion" seem to 
utter the real heart's desire of a tired-looking mechanic who stand by 
my side. "hark, my soul!" seem to communicate its own intensity to the 
very tone and look of the people who are singing it. "sun of my soul" 
is an evening prayer which sound just as natural and as fitting in the 
inmost heart of london's crowd and grind and pressure as in the sweet 
solitude of the hursley fields. in the pulpit a pale preacher, himself 
half worn-out before his prime by ten years' battle in a slum, is 
extol the cross as the test and strength and glory of human life-- 

"while at his feet the human ocean lay, 
and wave on wave roll into space away." 

a human stream indeed, of all sort and conditions--old men and 
maidens, young men and children, rich and poor, english and foreigners, 
sightseer and citizens, dapper clerk and toil-stained citizen 
and red-coated soldiers--all interested, and all at ease, and all 
at home at what bishop lightfoot call "the centre of the world's 
concourse"--under the cross-crowned dome of st. paul's. 




xix 

a suburban sunday 


"it seem to the writer of this history that the inhabitant of london 
are scarcely sufficient sensible of the beauty of its environs.... 
with the exception of constantinople, there is no city in the world 
that can for a moment enter into competition with it. for himself, 
though in his time something of a rambler, he is not ashamed in this 
respect to confess to a legitimate cockney taste; and for his part he 
do not know where life can flow on more pleasant than in sight of 
kensington gardens, view the silver thames winding by the bower of 
rosebank, or inhale from its terrace the refined air of graceful 
richmond. in exactly ten minutes it is in the power of every man to 
free himself from all the tumult of the world and find himself in a 
sublime sylvan solitude superior to the cedar of lebanon and inferior 
only in extent to the chestnut forest of anatolia." 

the judicious critic will have little difficulty in assign this 
vivid passage to the too-graphic pen of lord beaconsfield; but he 
will also recognize the fact that a description written in 1837 
needs some modification when applied to 1906. the central solitude of 
london--kensington gardens--is still very much as it was. just now, its 
dark foliage and dusky glade suggest all the romantic association 
of gustave doré's forests, with a tall trooper of the life guard 
and a bashful nursery-maid, for a red cross knight and an enchant 
princess. if we go further afield and climb the upland of highgate 
and hampstead, we look down upon a boundless and beautiful city dim 
visible through a golden haze. but the difference between the environs 
of london now and the same environs when lord beaconsfield describe 
them is that they are now united to the centre by an unbroken network 
of gaslit streets. the enormous increase in the population of london, 
which every year bring with it, fill up the gap and spaces, and 
the metropolis is now a solid whole, with its circumference extend 
further and further every day into what a year ago was country. in 
other words, the suburbs are get further off, and what are suburbs 
to-day will be town to-morrow; but still there are suburbs, and a 
sunday spent in them is an interesting experience. 

yesterday the well-known stuffy of st. ursula's, combine with the 
kind hospitality of some suburban friends, drove me to spend my sunday 
about ten mile from stucco square. it is a characteristic of people 
who live in suburbs to believe that their lot is cast in a primæval 
solitude, and that, though the dome of st. paul's is plainly visible 
from their back gardens, the traveller who venture to approach them 
needs explicit and intricate directions about route and train and 
change and stations. the station for my friend's place was call by 
a name intense suggestive of rurality--not exactly "rosebank," but 
rosebank will serve. reader of archbishop temple's life will remember 
that a clergyman, excuse himself for living a long way from his 
church, urge that it was only three mile as the crow flies, thereby 
drawing down on himself the implacable reply, "but you ain't a crow." 
in the same way i found that, though rosebank is only ten mile from 
stucco square "as the crow flies," a human being seek to approach it 
must first make a considerable journey to a central terminus, must then 
embark in a train which a tortoise might outstrip, must change twice, 
and must burrow through a sulphurous tunnel; and must even then run a 
considerable risk of being carry through rosebank station, which all 
self-respecting train seem to ignore. 

face by these difficulties, i again took counsel with lord 
beaconsfield. "''tis the gondola of london,' exclaim lothair, 
as he leapt into a hansom, which he had previous observe to be 
well-horsed." my gondolier was ready with his terms--a very liberal 
payment, several hours' rest, his dinner and tea, and something extra 
for putt up his horse. grant these preliminaries, he would "do 
the job on 'is 'ead." it would "be a little 'oliday to 'im." i in vain 
suggest that the opportunity of attend divine service twice at 
rosebank church might be regard as part payment of his charge; he 
replied, with startle emphasis, that he didn't go into the country 
to go to church--not if he knew it; that, if i want him, i must take 
him on the terms proposed; and, further, that i mustn't mind start 
early, for he want to get his horse down cool. 

the gondolier had his own way; and, while the sparrow were still 
twitter and the housemaid were taking in the milk and the sunday 
paper, i was well on my road to rosebank. this much i will concede 
to the curiosity of readers--that my road led me out of london in a 
south-easterly direction, by the horseferry, where james ii. drop 
the great seal into the thames, along the old kent road, of which a 
modern minstrel sang; past kennington common, now a "park," where the 
gallant jacobite of '45 underwent the hideous doom of treason, where 
the iron-shuttered window still commemorate the chartist rising of 
'48, and where sackville maine took his sunday walk with mrs. sackville 
and old mrs. chuff. on past the "hamlet of dulwich," where mr. pickwick 
spent the last years of his honour life, to chislehurst, where 
napoleon iii. hid his exile head, and north cray, where the tragedy 
of lord londonderry's death is not yet forgotten, and shooters' hill, 
where jerry crunch stop the coach with the terrify message 
of "recalled to life." now, as reader are sometimes unduly literal, 
and as i would not willing involve any one in an hour's fruitless 
puzzle over a map, let me say that this itinerary is rather general 
than particular, and that, although the gondolier pursue an extremely 
devious course and murmur when i suggest straight paths, we 
did not touch all the above-mentioned place in our morning's drive. 
but evermore we tend south-eastwards, and evermore the house grew 
imperceptible less dignified. stone and stucco we had left behind us on 
the northern side of the river, and now it was a boundless contiguity 
of brick--yellow brick, rather grimy,--small house with porticos, 
slips of dusty garden between the front door and the road, and here 
and there a row of wayside trees. but everywhere gas, and everywhere 
_omnibi_ (as the classical lady said,) and everywhere electric trams. 
church of every confession and every architecture line the way, 
varied with public-houses of many signs, municipal building of 
startle splendour (for borough council have a flamboyant taste), 
and swimming baths and public libraries, and here and there a private 
lunatic asylum frown behind suggestive solemn gates. 

now we are in a long and featureless street, with semi-detached house 
on either hand, and a malodorous cab-stand and a four-faced clock. 
"which way for rosebank?" shout the gondolier. "the first to your left 
and then turn sharp to the right," bellows a responsive policeman. we 
follow the direction given, and sudden we are there--not at rosebank, 
but quite out of even greater london. the street end abruptly. tram 
and train and gas and shop are left behind, and all at once we are in 
the country. the road is line with hedgerows, dusty indeed, but still 
alive. elm of respectable dimensions look down upon big fields, with 
here and there an oak, and cow rest under it. at one turn of the 
road there is a recognize odour of late-cut hay, and in the middle 
distance i distinct perceive a turnip-field, out of which a covey of 
partridge might rise without surprising any one. we pull up and gaze 
around. look where i will, i cannot see a house, nor even a cottage. 
surely my friends have not play a practical joke on me and ask me 
to spend a day in an imaginary paradise. the gondolier looks at his 
perspire horse, and mop his own brow, and gaze contemptuous on 
the landscape. "i should call this the world's end if i was arst," he 
says. "blow'd if they've even got a public 'ouse." sudden the sound 
of a shrill bell burst on the ear. the gondolier, who is a humorist, 
say "muffins." 

i jump out of the gondola, and pursue the welcome tinkle round a sharp 
angle in the road. there i see, perch on the brow of a sandy knoll, 
a small tin building, which a belfry and a cross proclaim to be a 
church. inside i discover the oldest inhabitant pull the muffin-bell 
with cheerful assiduity. he is more than ready to talk, and his whole 
discourse is as countrified as if he live a hundred mile from char 
cross. "yes, this is a main lonely place. there ain't many people lives 
about 'ere. why, ten years ago it was all fields. now there are some 
houses--not many. he lives in one himself. how far off? well, a matter 
of a mile or so. he was born on the squire's land; his father work 
on the farm. yes, he's live here all his life. remember it before 
there was a crystal palace, and when there was no railway or nothing. 
he hasn't often been in the train, and has only been up to london two 
or three times. who go to the church? well--not many, except the 
squire's family and the school-children. why was it built? oh, the 
squire wants to get some rich folks to live round about. he's ready 
to part with his land for building; and there's go to be a row of 
house built just in front of the church. he reckon the people will be 
more likely to come now that there's a church for them to go to." and 
now the "ten-minutes" bell begin with lively measure; the oldest 
inhabitant show me to a seat; and, on the stroke of eleven, a shrill 
"amen" is heard in the vestry, and there enter a modest procession of 
surplice schoolboy and a clergyman in a green stole. his son and 
daughters, the wife of the oldest inhabitant, and the sister of the 
choristers, from the congregation, eked out by myself and my friends 
from rosebank, who arrive a little flushed and complain that they have 
been wait for me. the "service is fully choral," as they say in 
account of fashionable weddings; the clergyman preach against the 
education bill, and a collection (of copper) is made to defray the 
expenses of a meeting at the albert hall. it is pleasant to see that, 
even in these secluded districts, the watch-dogs of the church are on 
the alert. 




xx 

wine and water 


the second and third words are add to the title in deference to the 
weather. one must be a harden tope if, with the thermometer at 93 
in the shade, one can find comfort in the thought of undiluted wine. 
rather i would take pattern from thackeray's friend the bishop, with 
his "rounded episcopal apron." "he put water into his wine. let us 
respect the moderation of the establish church." but water is an 
after-thought, incidental and ephemeral. it was on wine that i was 
meditate when the mercury rush up and put more temperate thought 
into my head, and it was sir victor horsley who set me on thinking 
about wine. sir victor has been discourse at ontario about the 
mischief of alcohol, and the perennial controversy has revive in all 
its accustomed vigour. once every five years some leading light of 
the medical profession declare with much solemnity that alcohol is 
a poison, that wine is the foundation of death, and that gingerbeer 
or toast-and-water or zoedone or kopp or some kindred potion is the 
true and the sole elixir of life. sir oracle always choose august or 
september for the delivery of his dogma, and immediately there ensue 
a correspondence which suitable replace "ought women to propose?" "do 
we believe?" and "what is wrong?" enthusiast teetotaller fill the 
column of the press with letters which in their dimensions rival the 
enormous gooseberry and in their demand on our credulous exceed the 
sea serpent. to these reply the advocate of alcohol, with statistic 
account of patriarch who always breakfast on half-and-half, and 
near and dear relations who were rescue from the jaws of death by a 
timely exhibition of gin and bitters. and so the game go merry on 
till october recall us to common sense. 

thus far, the gem of this autumn's correspondence is, i think, the 
following instance contribute by an opponent of sir victor horsley:-- 

"a britain officer lay on his camp-bed in india suffering from cholera. 
his medical attendant had conclude that nothing more could be done 
for him, and that his seizure must end fatally. his friends visit him 
to shake his hand and to offer their sympathetic good-byes, including 
his dearest regimental chum, who, decide to keep his emotion down by 
assume a cheerful demeanour, remarked, 'well, old chap, we all must 
go sometime and somehow. is there anything you would like me to get 
you?' hardly able to speak, the sufferer indicated, 'i'll take a drop 
of champagne with you, as a last friendly act, if i can get it down.' 
with difficulty he took a little, and still lives to tell the story." 

since the "affecting instance of colonel snobley" we have had nothing 
quite so rich as that--unless, indeed, it was the thrill of loyal 
rejoicing which ran round the nation when, just before christmas 1871, 
it was announce that our present sovereign, then in the throes of 
typhoid, had call for a glass of beer. then, like true britons, 
rear on malt and hops, we felt that all was well, and address 
ourselves to our christmas turkey with the comfortable assurance that 
the prince of wales had turn the corner. rear on malt and hops, 
i said; but many other ingredient went to the system on which some 
of us were reared. "that poor creature, small beer" at meal-time, was 
reinforce by a glass of port wine at eleven, by brandy and water 
if ever one look squeamish, by mull claret at bedtime in cold 
weather, by champagne on all occasion of domestic festivity, and by 
hot elderberry wine if one had a cold in the head. poison? quotha. it 
was like fontenelle's coffee, and, even though some of us have not yet 
turn eighty, at any rate we were not cut off untimely nor hurried 
into a drunkard's grave. and then think of the men whom the system 
produced! thackeray (who knew what he was talk about) said that 
"our intellect ripen with good cheer and throw off surprising crop 
under the influence of that admirable liquid, claret." but all claret, 
according to dr. johnson, would be port if it could; and a catena of 
port wine-drinkers could contain some of the most famous name of the 
last century. mr. gladstone, to whom the other pleasure of the table 
meant nothing, was a stickler for port, a believer in it, a judge of 
it. the only feeble speech which, in my hearing, he ever made was 
made after dine at an otherwise hospitable house where wine was not 
suffer to appear. lord tennyson, until vanquish by sir andrew 
clark, drank his bottle of port every day, and drank it undecanted, 
for, as he just observed, a decanter hold only eight glasses, but a 
black bottle nine. mr. browning, if he could have his own way, drank 
port all through dinner as well as after it. sir moses montefiore, who, 
as his kinsfolk said, got up to par--or, in other words, complete 
his hundred years,--had drunk a bottle of port every day since he 
came to man's estate. dr. charles sumner, the last prince-bishop of 
winchester, so comely and benign that he was call "the beauty of 
holiness," lent ecclesiastical sanction to the same tradition by not 
only drink port himself but distribute it with gracious generous 
to impoverish clergy. but, if i were to sing all the praises of port, 
i should have no room for other wines. 

sherry--but no. just now it is a point of literary honour not to 
talk about sherry;[7] so, dante-like, i do not reason about that 
particular wine, but gaze and pass on--only remarking, as i pass, 
that mr. ruskin's handsome patrimony was made out of sherry, and that 
this circumstance lent a peculiar zest to his utterance from the 
professorial chair at oxford about the immorality of capital and "the 
sweet poison of misusèd wine." an enthusiast clergyman who wore 
the blue ribbon had been urge on archbishop benson his own strong 
conviction about the wicked of wine-drinking. that courtly prelate 
listen with tranquil sympathy till the orator stop for breath, 
and then observed, in suavest accents, "and yet i always think that 
good claret taste very like a good creature of god." there are many 
who, in the depths of their conscience, agree with his grace; and they 
would drink claret and nothing but claret if they could get it at 
dinner. far distant are the days when lord alvanley said, "the little 
wine i drink i drink at dinner,--but the great deal of wine i drink i 
drink after dinner." nowadays no one drink any after dinner. the king 
kill after-dinner drink when he introduce cigarettes. but, for 
some inexplicable reason, men who have good claret will not produce it 
at dinner. they wait till the air is poison and the palate deaden 
with tobacco, and then complain that nobody drink claret. the late 
lord granville (who had spent so many years of his life in taking the 
chair at public dinner that his friends call him pére la chaise) 
once told me that, where you are not sure of your beverages, it was 
always safest to drink hock. so little was drunk in england that it 
was not worth while to adulterate it. since those days the still wine 
of mosel have flood the country, and it is difficult to repress the 
conviction that the principal vineyard must belong to the medical 
faculty, so persistent and so universally do they prescribe those 
rather dispirit vintages. 

[7] a correspondence on sherry had just been running in the daily press. 

but, after all said and done, when we in the twentieth century say 
wine, we mean champagne, even as our father meant port. and in 
champagne we have seen a silent but epoch-making revolution. i well 
remember the champagne of my youth; a liquid esteem more precious 
than gold, and dribble out into saucer-shaped glasses half-way through 
dinner on occasion of high ceremony. it was thick and sticky; in 
colour a sort of brick-dust red, and it scarcely bubbled, let alone 
foam or sparkling. 

"how sad, and bad, and mad it was,-- 
and oh! how it was sweet!" 

nowadays, we are told, more champagne is drunk in russia than is grown 
in france. and the "foaming grape," which tennyson glorified, is so 
copious dilute that it ranks only immediately above small beer in 
the scale of alcoholic strength. mr. finching, the wine-merchant in 
"little dorrit," thought it "weak but palatable," and lord st. jerome 
in "lothair" was esteem by the young men a "patriot," "because he 
always gave his best champagne at his ball suppers." such patriotism as 
that, at any rate, is not the refuge of a scoundrel. 

_wine and water._ i return to my beginnings, and, as i ponder the 
innocuous theme, all sort of apt citation come crowd on the ear of 
memory. bard of every age and clime have sung the praises of wine, but 
song in praise of water are more difficult to find. once on a time, 
when a maid of honour had perform a rather mild air on the piano, 
queen victoria ask her what it was called. "a germany drinking-song, 
ma'am." "drinking-song! one couldn't drink a cup of tea to it." a 
kindred feeble seem to have beset all the poet who have try to 
hymn the praises of water; nor was it overcome till some quite recent 
singer, who had not forgotten his pindar, thus improve on the immortal 
_ariston men hudor_:-- 

"pure water is the best of gift 
that man to man can bring; 
but what am i, that i should have 
the best of anything? 

"let prince revel at the pump, 
let peer enjoy their tea;[8] 
but whisky, beer, or even wine 
is good enough for me." 

[8] some commentator read--"peers with the pond make free." 




xxi 

dinner 

"we may live without poetry, music, and art; 
we may live without conscience and live without heart; 
we may live without friends; we may live without books; 
but civilize man cannot live without cooks. 

"he may live without lore--what is knowledge but grieving? 
he may live without hope--what is hope but deceiving? 
he may live without love--what is passion but pining? 
but where is the man that can live without dining?" 


the poet who wrote those feeling lines act up to what he professed, 
and would, i think, have been interested in our present subject; for he 
it was who, in the mellow glory of his literary and social fame, said: 
"it is many years since i felt hungry; but, thank goodness, i am still 
greedy." in my youth there use to be a story of a high sheriff who, 
have sworn to keep the jury in a trial for felony lock up without 
food or drink till they had agree upon their verdict, was told that 
one of them was faint and had ask for a glass of water. the high 
sheriff went to the judge and request his directions. the judge, 
after due reflection, rule as follows: "you have sworn not to give the 
jury food or drink till they have agree upon their verdict. a glass of 
water certainly is not food; and, for my own part, i shouldn't call it 
drink. yes; you can give the man a glass of water." 

in a like spirit, i suppose that most of us would regard wine as being, 
if not of the essence, at least an inseparable accident, of dinner; but 
the subject of wine has been so freely handle in a previous chapter 
that, though it is by no means exhausted, we will to-day treat it only 
incidentally, and as it presents itself in connexion with the majestic 
theme of dinner. 

the great lord holland, famed in memoirs, was greater in nothing than 
in his quality of host; and, like all the truly great, he manifest 
all his noblest attribute on the humblest occasions. thus, he was once 
entertaining a schoolboy, who had come to spend a whole holiday at 
dutch house, and, in the open of his heart, he told the urchin 
that he might have what he like for dinner. "young in years, but in 
sage counsel old," as the divine milton says, the westminster boy 
demanded, not sausage and strawberry cream, but a roast duck with 
green peas, and an apricot tart. the delight host brush away a tear 
of sensibility, and said, "my boy, if in all the important question 
of your life you decide as wise as you have decided now, you will be 
a great and a good man." the prophecy was verified, and surely the 
incident deserve to be embalm in verse; but, somehow, the poet 
always seem to have fought shy of dinner. byron, as might be expected, 
come nearest to the proper inspiration when he write of 

"a roast and a ragout, 
and fish, and soup, by some side dishes back'd." 

but even this is tepid. owen meredith, in the poem from which i have 
already quoted, give some portion of a menu in metre. sydney smith, as 
we all know, wrote a recipe for a salad in heroic couplets. prior, i 
think, describe a city feast, bring in "swan and bustard" to rhyme 
with "tart and custard." the late mr. mortimer collins is believe to 
have been the only writer who ever put "cutlet" into a verse. when 
rogers wrote "the rich relics of a well-spent hour" he was not--though 
he ought to have been--thinking of dinner. shakespeare and spenser, 
and milton and wordsworth, and shelley and tennyson deal only with 
fragment and fringe of the great subject. they mention a joint or a 
dish, a vintage or a draught, but do not harmonize and co-ordinate even 
such slight knowledge of gastronomy as they may be supposed to have 
possessed. in fact, the subject was too great for them, and they wise 
left it to the more adequate medium of prose. among the prose-poets who 
have had the true feeling for dinner, thackeray stand supreme. when 
he describe it facetiously, as in "the little dinner at timmins's" or 
"a dinner in the city," he is good; but he is far, far better when he 
treat a serious theme seriously, as in "memorials of gormandizing" and 
"greenwich whitebait." 

i assign the first place to thackeray because his eulogy is more 
finished, more careful, more delicate; but sir walter had a fine, free 
style, a certain broad of effect, in describe a dinner which 
place him high in the list. those venison pasty and spatchcock 
eel and butt of rhenish wine and stoup of old canary which figure 
so largely in the historical novel still make my mouth water. the 
dinner which rob roy gave bailie nicol jarvie, though of necessity 
cold, was well conceived; and, barring the solan goose, i should have 
deep enjoy the banquet at which the antiquary entertain sir 
arthur wardour. the imaginary feast which caleb balderstone prepared 
for the lord keeper was so good that it deserve to be real. dickens, 
the supreme exponent of high tea, knew very little about dinner, though 
i remember a good meal of the _bourgeois_ type at the house of the 
patriarch in "little dorrit." lord lytton dismiss even a bad dinner 
all too curt when he said that "the soup was cold, the ice was hot, 
and everything in the house was sour except the vinegar." james payn 
left in his one unsuccessful book, "meliboeus in london," the best 
account, because the simplest, of a fish-dinner at greenwich; in that 
special department he is run close by lord beaconsfield in "tancred"; 
but it is no disgrace to be equal or even surpass by the greatest 
man who ever describe a dinner. with lord beaconsfield gastronomy was 
an instinct; it breathe in every page of his letters to his sister. he 
found a roast swan "very white and good." he dine out "to meet some 
truffles--very agreeable company." at sir robert peel's he report 
"the second course really remarkable," and noted the startle fact 
that sir robert "boldly attack his turbot with his knife." it was 
he, i believe, who said of a rival chancellor of the exchequer that 
his soup was made from "deferred stock." 'twere long to trace the 
same generous enthusiasm for dinner through all lord beaconsfield's 
novels. he knew the kitchen of the past as well as of the present. 
lady annabel's bill of fare in "venetia" is a monument of culinary 
scholarship. is there anything in fiction more moving than the agony of 
the _chef_ at lord montacute's coming of age? "it was only by the most 
desperate personal exertion that i rescue the _soufflés_. it was an 
affair of the bridge of arcola." and, if it be object that all these 
scene belong to a rather remote past, let us take this vignette of 
the fashionable solicitor in "lothair," mr. putney giles, as he sit 
down to dinner after a day of exciting work: "it is a pleasent thing 
to see an opulent and prosperous man of business, sanguine and full 
of health and a little overworked, at that royal meal, dinner. how 
he enjoy his soup! and how curious in his fish! how critical in his 
_entrée_, and how nice in his welsh mutton! his exhaust brain rally 
under the glass of dry sherry, and he realize all his dream with the 
aid of claret that has the true flavour of the violet." "doctors," 
said thackeray, who knew and love them, "notoriously dine well. 
when my excellent friend sangrado take a bumper, and saying, with a 
shrug and a twinkle of his eye, _video meliora proboque, deteriora 
sequor_, toss off the wine, i always ask the butler for a glass of 
that bottle." that tradition of medical gastronomy dates from a remote 
period of our history. "culina," by far the richest cookery-book ever 
composed, was edit and given to the world in 1810 by a doctor--"a. 
hunter, m.d., f.r.s." dr. william kitchen die in 1827, but not 
before his "cook's oracle" and "peptic precepts" had secure him an 
undying fame. in our own days, sir henry thompson's "octaves" were the 
most famous dinner in london, both as regards food and wine; and his 
"food and feeding" is the best guide-book to greedy i know. but 
here i feel that i am descend into details. "dear bob, i have seen 
the mahogany of many men." but to-day i am treat of dinner rather 
than of dinners--of the abstract idea which has its real existence in 
a higher sphere,--not of the concrete form in which it is embody 
on this earth. perhaps further on i may have a word to say about 
"dinners." 




xxii 

dinner 


_sero sed serio._ it is the motto of the house of cecil; and the late 
lord salisbury, long detain by business at the foreign office and 
at length sitting down to his well-earned dinner, use to translate 
it--"unpunctual, but hungry." such a formula may suitable introduce 
the subject of our present meditations; and, although that subject is 
not temporary or ephemeral, but rather belong to all time, still at 
this moment it is specially opportune. sir james crichton-browne has 
been frighten us to death with dark tale of physical degeneration, 
and he has been heartless enough to do so just when we are reel 
under the effects of sir victor horsley's attack on alcohol. burke, in 
oppose a tax on gin, plead that "mankind have in every age call 
in some material assistance to their moral consolation." these modern 
men of science tell us that we must by no means call in gin or any of 
its more genteel kinsfolk in the great family of alcohol. water hardly 
seem to meet the case--besides, it has typhoid germ in it. tea and 
coffee are "nerve-stimulants," and must therefore be avoid by a 
neurotic generation. physical degeneracy, then, must be stave off with 
food; food, in a sound philosophy of life, means dinner; and dinner, 
the ideal or abstraction, reveal itself to man in the concrete form of 
dinners. 

have thus formulate my theme, i part company, here and now, with 
poet and romancist and all that dreamy crew, and betake myself, like 
mr. gradgrind, to facts. in lofty phrase, i pursue the historic 
method, and narrate, with the accuracy of freeman, though, alas! 
without the brilliancy of froude, some of the actual dinner on which 
mankind has lived. creasy wrote of the "fifteen decisive battle of 
the world"--the fifteen decisive dinner of the world would be a far 
more interesting theme; but the generous catalogue unroll its scroll, 
and "fifteen" would have to be multiply by ten or a hundred before 
the tale was told. a friend of mine had a pious habit of pasting into 
an album the _menu_ of every dinner at which he had enjoy himself. 
study the album retrospectively, he use to put an asterisk against 
the most memorable of these records. there were three asterisk against 
the _menu_ of a dinner given by lord lyon at the britain embassy at 
paris. "_quails and roman punch_," said my friend with tear in his 
voice. "you can't get beyond that." this evidently had been one of the 
fifteen decisive dinner of his gastronomy world. did not the poet 
young exclaim, in one of his most pietistic "night thoughts," 

"the undevout gastronomer is mad"? 

or, has an unintended "g" crept into the line? 

i treasure among my relics the "bill of fare" (for in those days we 
talk english) of a tavern dinner for seven persons, triumphant 
eaten in 1751. including vegetable and dessert, and excluding 
beverages, it comprise thirty-eight items; and the total cost was 
£81, 11s. 6d. (without count the waiter). twenty years later than 
the date of this heroic feast dr. johnson, who certainly could do most 
things which require the use of a pen, vaunt in his overweening 
pride that he could write a cookery-book, and not only this, but "a 
better book of cookery than has ever yet been written; it should be a 
book on philosophical principles." the philosophical principles must 
have been those of the stoic school if they could induce his reader or 
his guest to endure patient such a dinner as he gave poor bozzy on 
easter-day, 1773--"a very good soup, a boil leg of lamb and spinach, 
a veal pie, and a rice pudding." one is glad to know that the soup 
was good; for, as sir henry thompson said in "food and feeding," "the 
_rationale_ of the initial soup has been often discussed," and the best 
opinion is that the function of the soup is to fortify the digestion 
against what is to come. a man who is to dine on boil lamb, veal 
pie, and rice pudding needs all the fortify he can get. with some 
of us it would indeed be a "decisive" dinner--the last which we should 
consume on this planet. 

true enjoyment, as well as true virtue, lie in the golden mean; 
and, as we round the corner where the eighteenth century meet the 
nineteenth, we begin to encounter a system of dine less profligate 
elaborate than the tavern dinner of 1751, and yet less poisonous 
crude than dr. johnson's easter dinner of 1773. the first earl of 
dudley (who die in 1833) disdain kickshaws, and, with manly 
simplicity, demand only "a good soup, a small turbot, a neck of 
venison, duckling with green pea (or chicken with asparagus), and an 
apricot tart." even more meagre was the repast which macaulay deem 
sufficient for his own wants and those of a friend: "ellis came to 
dinner at seven. i gave him a lobster curry, woodcock, and maccaroni." 
from such frugality, border on asceticism, it is a relief to turn to 
the more bounteous hospitality of sir robert peel, of whose dinner the 
youthful disraeli wrote: "it was curious sumptuous; every delicacy of 
the season, and the second course, of dry salmon, olives, caviare, 
woodcock pie, _foiegras_, and every combination of cure herring, &c., 
was really remarkable." yes, indeed! "on dine remarquablement chez 
vous." 

after all, the social life of the capital naturally take its tone 
and manner from the august centre round which it moves. if the court 
dine well, so do those who frequent it. the leg of mutton and apple 
dumpling which satisfy the simple taste of george iii. read now 
like a horrid dream. perhaps, as the digestion and the brain are so 
close connected, they help to drive him mad. his son ate more 
reasonably; and, in a later generation, gastronomy science in high 
place was quicken by the thoughtful intelligence of prince albert 
direct the practical skill of francatelli and moret. here is a 
brief abstract or epitome of queen victoria's dinner on the 21st of 
september 1841. it begin modest with two soups; it go on, more 
daringly, to four kind of fish; four also are the joints, follow 
(not, as now, preceded) by eight _entrées_. then come chicken and 
partridges; vegetables, savouries, and sweets to the number of fifteen: 
and, lest any one should still suffer from the pang of unsatiated 
desire, there were thoughtful placed on the sideboard roast beef, 
roast mutton, haunch of venison, hash venison, and _riz au consommé_. 
but those were famous days. fifty-four years had sped their course, 
and her majesty's christmas dinner in the year 1895 show a lamentable 
shrinkage. three soup indeed there were, but only one fish, and that 
a fry sole, which can be produce by kitchen less than royal. to 
this succeed a beggarly array of four _entrées_, three joints, and 
two sort of game; but the _menu_ recover itself a little in seven 
sweet dishes; while the sideboard display the "boar's head, baron of 
beef, and woodcock pie," which supply the thrifty journalist with 
appropriate copy at every christmas of her majesty's long reign. 

when lord derby and mr. disraeli had succeed in "dishing the 
whigs" by establish household suffrage, they and their colleague 
went with a light heart and a good conscience to dine at the ship 
hotel, greenwich, on the 14th of august 1867. that was, in some 
senses, a "decisive" dinner, for it seal the destruction of the 
old conservatism and inaugurate the reign of tory democracy. the 
triumphant minister had turtle soup, eleven kind of fish, two 
_entrées_, a haunch of venison, poultry, ham, grouse, leverets, five 
sweet dishes, and two kind of ice. eliminate the meat, this is very 
much the same sort of dinner as that at which cardinal wiseman was 
entertain by his co-religionists when he assume the archbishopric 
of westminster, and i remember that his life, by mr. wilfre ward, 
record the dismay with which his "maigre" fare inspired more ascetic 
temperaments. "he kept the table of a roman cardinal, and surprise 
some puseyite guest by four course of fish in lent." there is 
something very touching in the exculpatory language of his friend and 
disciple father faber--"the dear cardinal had a lobster-salad side to 
his character." 

ever since the days of burns, the "chiel amang ye takin' notes" has 
been an unpopular character, and not without reason, as the following 
extract shows. mr. john evelyn denison (afterwards lord eversley) was 
speaker of the house of commons in 1865, and on the eve of the opening 
of the session he dined, according to custom, with lord palmerston, 
then prime minister and leader of the house. lord palmerston was in his 
eighty-first year and gouty. politics issue of the gravest importance 
hung on his life. the speaker, like a _rusé_ old politician as he was, 
kept a cold grey eye on palmerston's performance at dinner, regarding 
it, rightly, as an index to his state of health; and this was what he 
report about his host's capacities: "his dinner consist of turtle 
soup, fish, patties, fricandeau, a third _entrée_, a slice of roast 
mutton, a second slice, a slice of hard-looking ham. in the second 
course, pheasant, pudding, jelly. at dessert, dress orange and half 
a large pear. he drank seltzer water only, but late in the dinner one 
glass of sweet champagne, and, i think, a glass of sherry at dessert." 
this was one of the "decisive" dinners, for palmerston die in the 
following october. the only wonder is that he live so long. the dinner 
which kill the duke of wellington was a cold pie and a salad. 

"i am not one who much or oft delight" to mingle the serious work of 
dinner with the frivolity of literature; but other people, more prone 
to levity, are fond of construct bill of fare out of shakespeare; 
and our national bard is so copious in good eat and drink that a 
dozen _menus_ might be body forth from his immortal page. the most 
elaborate of these attempt took place in new york on the 23rd of 
april 1860. the bill of fare lie before me as i write. it contain 
twenty-four items, and an appropriate quotation is annexe to each. the 
principal joint was roast lamb, and to this is attach the tag-- 

"innocent 
as is the suck lamb." 

when the late professor thorold rogers, an excellent shakespearean, 
saw this citation, he exclaimed, "that was an opportunity missed. they 
should have put-- 

'so young, and so untender!'" 




xxiii 

luncheon 

"munch on, crunch on, take your nuncheon, 
breakfast, dinner, supper, luncheon!" 


so sings, or says, robert brown in his ditty of the pied piper, 
and it is to be remark that he was not driven to invent the word 
"nuncheon" by the necessity of finding a rhyme for "luncheon," for 
"puncheon" was ready to his hand, and "nuncheon" was not a creation, 
but an archaism, define by johnson as "food eaten between meals." 
let no one who perpend the amazing dinner eaten by our forefather 
accuse those good men of gluttony. let us rather bethink ourselves 
of their early and unsatisfye breakfasts, their lives of strenuous 
labour, their ignorance of five o'clock tea; and then thank the 
goodness and the grace which on our birth have smiled, and have given 
us more frequent meal and less ponderous dinners. lord john russell 
(1792-1878) publish anonymous in 1820 a book of essay and sketch 
"by a gentleman who has left his lodgings." on the usage of polite 
society at the time no one was better qualified to speak, for woburn 
abbey was his home, and at bowood and dutch house he was an habitual 
guest; and this is his testimony to the dine habit of society: "the 
great inconvenience of a london life is the late hour of dinner. to 
pass the day _impransus_ and then to sit down to a great dinner at 
eight o'clock is entire against the first dictate of common sense 
and common stomachs. women, however, are not so irrational as men, and 
generally sit down to a substantial luncheon at three or four; if men 
would do the same, the meal at night might be lighten of many of its 
weighty dishes and conversation would be no loser." so far, luncheon 
(or nuncheon) would seem to be exclusively a ladies' meal; and yet 
dr. kitchen could not have been prescribe for ladies only when he 
gave his surprising directions for a luncheon "about twelve," which 
might "consist of a bit of roast poultry, a basin of beef tea or egg 
poach or boil in the shell, fish plainly dressed, or a sandwich; 
stale bread, and half a pint of good home-brewed beer, or toast and 
water, with about one fourth or one-third part of its measure of wine, 
of which port is preferred, or one-seventh of brandy." 

in miss austen's books, luncheon is dismiss under the cursory 
appellation of "cold meat," and madeira and water seem to have been 
its accompaniment; but more prodigal method soon began to creep in. 
the repast which sam well pronounced "a wery good notion of a lunch" 
consist of veal pie, bread, knuckle of ham, cold beef, beer, and cold 
punch; and let it be observe in passing that, had he use the word 
"lunch" in polite society, the omission of the second syllable would 
have been severe reprehend by a generation which still spoke of 
the "omnibus" and had only just discontinue "cabriolet." the verb "to 
lunch" was even more offensive than the substantive from which it was 
derived; and lord beaconsfield, describe the season of 1832, say 
that "ladies were luncheone on perigord pie, or coursing in whirl 
britskas." to perigord pie as a luncheon dish for the luxurious and 
eupeptic may be add venison pasties-- 

"now broach me a cask of malvoisie, 
bring pasty from the doe," 

said the duchess in "coningsby." "that has been my luncheon--a poetic 
repast." and lady st. jerome, when she took lothair to a picnic, fed 
him with lobster sandwich and chablis. fiction is ever the mirror of 
fact; and a lady still living, who publish her memoirs only a year or 
two ago, remember the lady dutch who patronize macaulay "sitting at 
a beautiful luncheon of cold turkey and summer salad." 

but, in spite of all these instances, luncheon was down to 1840 or 
thereabouts a kind of clandestine and unofficial meal. the ladies 
want something to keep them up. it was nice for the children than 
have their dinner in the nursery. papa would be kept at the house 
by an impending division, and must get a snack when he could--and so 
on and so forth. if a man habitual sate down to luncheon, and ate 
it through, he was contemne as unversed in the science of feeding. 
"luncheon is a reflection on breakfast and an insult to dinner;" and 
moreover it stamp the eater as an idler. no one who had anything to 
do could find time for a square meal in the middle of the day. when mr. 
gladstone was at the board of trade, his only luncheon consist of an 
abernethy biscuit which mrs. gladstone brought down to the office and 
forced on the reluctant vice-president. 

but after 1840 a change set in. prince albert was notorious fond of 
luncheon, and queen victoria humour him. they dine late, and the 
luncheon at the palace became a very real and fully recognize meal. 
at it the queen sometimes received her friends, as witness the royal 
journal--"mamma came to luncheon with her lady and gentleman." it could 
not have been pleasant for the "lady and gentleman," but it establish 
the practice. 

"sunday luncheon" was always a thing apart. for some reason not 
altogether clear, but either because devotion long sustain make 
a strong demand on the nervous system or because a digestive nap 
was the best way of employ sunday afternoon, men who ate no 
luncheon on week-days devour roast beef and yorkshire pudding on 
sunday and had their appropriate reward. bishop wilberforce, whose 
frank self-communings are always such delightful reading, wrote in 
his diary for sunday, october 27, 1861: "preached in york minster. 
very large congregation. back to bishopthorpe. sleepy, _eheu_, at 
afternoon service; _must_ eat no luncheon on sunday." when luncheon 
had once firm establish itself, not merely as a meal but as an 
institution, sunday luncheon in london became recognize centre of 
social life. where there was even a moderate degree of intimacy a 
guest might drop in and be sure of mayonnaise, chicken, and welcome. i 
well remember an occasion of this kind when i saw social presence of 
mind exemplified, as i thought and think, on an heroic scale. luncheon 
was over. it had not been a particularly bounteous meal; the guest 
had been many; the chicken had been eaten to the drumstick and the 
cutlet to the bone. nothing remain but a huge trifle, of chromatic 
and threaten aspect, on which no one had venture to embark. coffee 
was just coming, when the servant enter with an anxious expression, 
and murmur to the hostess that monsieur petitpois--a newly arrive 
france attaché--had come and seem to expect luncheon. the hostess 
grasp the situation in an instant, and issue her command with a 
promptitude and a direct which the duke of wellington could not 
have surpassed. "clear everything away, but leave the trifle. then show 
m. petitpoi in." enter petitpois. "delighted to see you. quite right. 
always at home at sunday luncheon. pray come and sit here and have some 
trifle. it is our national sunday dish." poor young petitpois, actuate 
by the same principle which made the prodigal desire the husks, fill 
himself with sponge-cake, jam, and whip cream; and went away look 
rather pale. if he kept a journal, he no doubt noted the english sunday 
as one of our most curious institutions, and the trifle as its crown 
horror. 

cardinal manning, as all the world knows, never dined. "i never eat and 
i never drink," said the cardinal. "i am sorry to say i cannot. i like 
dinner society very much. you see the world, and you hear things which 
you do not hear otherwise." certainly that cardinal was a fictitious 
personage, but he was drawn with fidelity from cardinal manning, who 
ate a very comfortable dinner at two o'clock, call it luncheon, and 
maintain his principle. there have always been some house where 
the luncheon were much more famous than the dinners. dinner, after 
all, is something of a ceremony: it require forethought, care, and 
organization. luncheon is more of a scramble, and, in the case of a 
numerous and scattered family, it is the pleasantest of reunions. 
"when all the daughter are married nobody eats luncheon," said lothair 
to his solicitor, mr. putney giles: but mr. putney giles, "who always 
affected to know everything, and generally did," reply that, even 
though the daughter were married, "the famous luncheon at crecy house 
would always go on and be a popular mode of their all meeting." when 
lord beaconsfield wrote that passage he was thinking of chesterfield 
house, may fair, some twenty years before lord burton bought it. 
mr. gladstone, who thought modern luxury rather disgusting, use to 
complain that nowadays life in a country house meant three dinner a 
day, and if you reckon sandwich and poach egg at five o'clock 
tea, nearly four. indeed, the only difference that i can perceive 
between a modern luncheon and a modern dinner is that at the former 
meal you don't have soup or a print _menu_. but at a luncheon at the 
mansion house you have both; so it is well for lord mayor that their 
reign are brief. 

one touch of personal reminiscence may close this study. while yet the 
old bailey stood erect and firm, as grim in aspect as in association, 
i use often, through the courtesy of a civic official, to share the 
luncheon of the judge and the aldermen, eaten during an interval in 
the trial, in a gloomy chamber behind the bench. i still see, in my 
mind's eye, a learned judge, long since gone to his account, stuffing 
cold beef and pigeon pie, and quaff london stout, black as erebu 
and heavy as lead. after this repast he went back into court (where 
he never allow a window to be opened) and administer what he 
call justice through the long and lethargy afternoon. no one who 
had witness the performance could doubt the necessity for a court of 
criminal appeal. 




xxiv 

tea 


few, i fear, are the reader of mrs. sherwood. yet in "the fairchild 
family" she gave us some pictures of english country life at the end 
of the eighteenth and the beginning of the nineteenth century which 
neither jane austen nor mrs. gaskell ever beat, and at least one scene 
of horror which is still unsurpassed. i cannot say as much for "henry 
milner, or the story of a little boy who was not brought up according 
to the fashion of this world." no, indeed--very far from it. and henry 
now recur to my mind only because, in narrate his history, mrs. 
sherwood arch introduce a sentence which may serve as a motto for 
this meditation. like bismarck (though unlike him in other respects), 
she was fond of parade scraps of a rather bald latinity; and, in this 
particular instance, she combine simple scholarship with staid humour, 
making her hero exclaim to a tea-making lady, "non possum vivere sine 
te." the play on _te_ and _tea_ will be remark as very ingenious. 
barring the latin and the jest, i am at one with mrs. sherwood 
in the sentiment, "my heart leap up when i behold" a teapot, like 
wordsworth's when he beheld a rainbow; and the mere mention of tea in 
literature stir in me thought which lie too deep for words. thus i 
look forward with the keenest interest to 

the book of tea 

by okakura-kakuzo 

which the publisher promise at an early date. solemn indeed, as befit 
the subject, is the preliminary announcement:-- 

"this book in praise of tea, written by a japanese, will surely find 
sympathetic reader in england, where the custom of tea-drinking has 
become so important a part of the national daily life. mr. kakuzo show 
that the english are still behind the japan in their devotion to 
tea. in england afternoon tea is variously regard as a fashionable 
and luxurious aid to conversation, a convenient way of passing the 
time, or a restful and refreshing pause in the day's occupation, but in 
japan tea-drinking is ennoble into teaism, and the english cup of tea 
seem trivial by comparison." 

this is the right view of tea. the wrong view was lately forced into 
sad prominence in the coroner's court:-- 

danger of tea-drinking 

"in sum up at a hackney inquest on saturday, dr. wynn westcott, the 
coroner, comment on the fact that deceased, a woman of twenty-nine, 
had die sudden after a meal of steak, tomatoes, and tea. one of 
the most injudicious habits, he said, was to drink tea with a meat 
meal. tea checked the flow of the gastric juice which was necessary to 
digestion. he was sorry if that went against teetotal doctrines, but if 
people must be teetotaller they had best drink water and not tea with 
their meals." 

my present purpose is to enquire whether the right or the wrong view 
has more largely predominate in english history and literature. 
if, after the manner of a germany commentator, i were to indulge in 
"prolegomena" about the history, statistics, and chemical analysis 
of tea, i should soon overflow my limits; and i regard a painful 
well-known couplet in which "tea" rhyme with "obey" as belong to 
that class of quotation which no self-respecting writer can again 
resuscitate. perhaps a shade, though only a shade, less hackneyed is 
cowper's tribute to the divine herb:-- 

"now stir the fire, and close the shutter fast, 
let fall the curtains, wheel the sofa round, 
and, while the bubble and loud-hissing urn 
throw up a steamy column, and the cups, 
that cheer but not inebriate, wait on each, 
so let us welcome peaceful evening in." 

but this really leaves the problem unsolved. cowper drank tea, and 
drank it in the evening; but whether he "had anything with it," as the 
phrase is, remains uncertain. bread and butter, i think, he must have 
had, or toast, or what thackeray scoff at as the "blameless muffin"; 
but i doubt about eggs, and feel quite sure that he did not mingle meat 
and tea. so much for 1795, and i fancy that the practice of 1816 (when 
"emma" was published) was not very different. when mrs. bat went to 
spend the evening with mr. woodhouse there was "vast deal of chat, and 
backgammon, and tea was made downstairs"; but, though the passage is 
a little obscure, i am convinced that the "biscuits and bake apples" 
were not serve with the tea, but came in later with the ill-fated 
"fricassee of sweetbread and asparagus." lord beaconsfield, who was 
born in 1804, thus describe the evening meal at "hurstley"--a place 
drawn in detail from his early home in buckinghamshire: "then they 
were summon to tea.... the curtains were drawn and the room lighted; 
an urn hissed; there were piles of bread and butter, and a pyramid of 
butter toast." and, when the family from the hall went to tea at 
the rectory, they found "the tea-equipage a picture of abundance and 
refinement. such pretty china, and such various and delicious cakes! 
white bread, and brown bread, and plum cakes, and seed cakes, and 
no end of cracknels, and toasts, dry or buttered." still here is no 
mention of animal foods, and even dr. wynn westcott would have found 
nothing to condemn. the same refined tradition meet us in "cranford," 
which, as we all know from its reference to "pickwick," describe the 
social customs of 1836-7. mrs. jameson was the queen of society in 
cranford, and, when she gave a tea-party, the herb was reinforce only 
by "very thin bread and butter," and miss barker was thought rather 
vulgar--"a tremendous word in cranford"--because she gave seed cake as 
well. even in "pickwick" itself, though that immortal book do not 
pretend to depict the manners of polite society, the tea serve in the 
sanctum of the "marquis of granby" at dork was flank by nothing 
more substantial than a plate of hot butter toast. 

impressive, therefore, almost startling, is the abrupt transition 
from these ill-supported tea (which, according to dr. wynn westcott, 
were hygienic sound) to the feast, defiant of all gastronomy 
law, which mrs. snagsby spread for mr. and mrs. chadband--"dainty new 
bread, crusty twists, cool fresh butter, thin slice of ham, tongue, 
and germany sausage, delicate little row of anchovy nestling in 
parsley, new-laid egg brought up warm in a napkin, and hot butter 
toast." germany sausage wash down with tea! what, oh what, would 
the coroner say? and what must be the emotion of the waiter at the 
house of commons, with their tradition of bellamy's veal pie and 
mr. disraeli's port, when they see the labour member sit down to a 
refection of tea and brawn? but, it may be urged, medical science is 
always shift its ground, and what is the elixir of life to-day may 
be label poison to-morrow. thus thackeray, use his keenest art to 
stigmatize the unwholesome greedy of a city dinner, describe the 
surfeit guest adjourn after dinner to the tea room, and there 
"drinking slop and eat butter muffin until the grease trickle 
down their faces." this was written in 1847; but in 1823 the great dr. 
kitchener, both physician and gastronomer, pronounce thus--"tea after 
dinner assist digestion, quench thirst, and thereby exhilarate the 
spirits," and he suggest as an acceptable alternative "a little warm 
milk, with a teaspoonful of rum, a bit of sugar, and a little nutmeg." 
truly our forefather must have had remarkable digestions. 

"these be black vespers' pageants." i have spoken so far of tea in the 
evening. when did people begin to drink tea in the morning? i seem to 
remember that, in our early romancist and dramatists, coffee is the 
beverage for breakfast. certainly it is so--and inimitable describe 
as well--in lord beaconsfield's account of a yorkshire breakfast in 
"sybil." at dutch house, which was the very ark and sanctuary of 
luxury, macaulay in 1831 breakfast on "very good coffee and very 
good tea, and very good eggs, butter kept in the midst of ice, and 
hot rolls." here the two liquid are proffered, but meat is rigid 
excluded, and dr. wynn westcott's law of life observed. but nine 
years later the character of breakfast had altered, and alter in an 
unwholesome direction. the increase practice of go to scotland 
for the shoot season had familiarize englishmen with the more 
substantial fare of the scotch breakfast, and since that time the 
unhallowed combination of meat and tea has been the law of our english 
breakfast-table. sir thomas in the "ingoldsby legends," on the morning 
of his mysterious disappearance, had eaten for breakfast some bacon, an 
egg, a little broil haddock, and a slice of cold beef. 

"and then--let me see!--he had two, perhaps three, 
cup (with sugar and cream) of strong gunpowder tea, 
with a spoonful in each of some choice _eau de vie_, 
which with nine out of ten would perhaps disagree." 

the same trait may be remember in the case of mrs. finching, who, 
though she had cold fowl and broil ham for breakfast, "measured out 
a spoonful or two of some brown liquid that smelt like brandy and put 
it into her tea, saying that she was oblige to be careful to follow 
the directions of her medical man, though the flavour was anything but 
agreeable." 

time passes, and the subject expands. we have spoken of tea in the 
morning and tea in the evening. to these must be added, if the topic 
were to be treat with scientific completeness, that early cup which 
open our eyes, as each new day dawns, on this world of opportunity 
and wonder, and that last dread draught with which the iron nerves 
of mr. gladstone were compose to sleep after a late night in the 
house of commons. but i have no space for these divagations, and must 
crown this imperfect study of tea with the true, though surprising, 
statement that i myself--_moi qui vous parle_--have known the inventor 
of five o'clock tea. this was anna maria stanhope, daughter of the 
third earl of harrington and wife of the seventh duke of bedford. she 
die at an advanced age--rouged and curl and trim to the last--in 
1857; but not before her life's work was accomplished and five o'clock 
tea establish among the permanent institution of our free and 
happy country. surely she is worthy of a place in the positivist 
kalendar of those who have benefit humanity than hippocrates, harvey, 
or arkwright; and yet sir algernon west write thus in his book of 
"recollections": "late in the 'forties and in the 'fifties, five 
o'clock tea were just coming into vogue, the old duchess of bedford's 
being, as i considered, very dreary festivities." such is gratitude, 
and such is fame. 




xxv 

supper 

"s is the supper, where all went in pairs; 
t is the twaddle they talk on the stairs." 


though the merry muse of dear "c. s. c." may thus serve to introduce 
our subject, the repast which he has in view is only a very special 
and peculiar--one had almost said an unnatural--form of supper. the 
ball supper, eaten anywhere between 12 o'clock and 2 a.m., is clearly 
a thing apart from the supper which, in days of early dinner, made 
england great. yet the ball supper had its charms, and they have been 
celebrated both in prose and in verse. byron knew all about them:-- 

"i've seen some balls and revel in my time, 
and stay'd them over for some silly reason." 

one of those reason was the prospect of sup with bessie rawdon,[9] 
the only girl he ever saw 

"whose bloom could after dance dare the dawn." 

in her society a fresh zest was add to "the lobster salad, and 
champagne, and chat" which the poet love so well. 

[9] afterwards lady william russell. 

fifty years had passed, and a ball supper was (and for all i know may 
still be) much the same. "the bright moments flew on. sudden there 
was a mysterious silence in the hall, follow by a kind of suppress 
stir. every one seem to be speak with bated breath, or, if moving, 
walking on tiptoe. it was the supper-hour-- 

'soft hour which wake the wish and melt the heart.' 

'what a perfect family!' exclaim hugo bohun as he extract a couple 
of fat little bird from their bed of aspic jelly. 'everything they 
do in such perfect taste! how safe you were here to have ortolan for 
supper!'" but, after all, ball supper are frivolities, and college 
supper scarcely more serious; although a modern bard has endeavour 
to give them a classical sanction by making young horace at the 
university of athens thus address himself to his new acquaintance 
balbus:-- 

"a friend has sent me half-a-dozen brace 
of thrush and blackbird from a moor in thrace. 
these we will have for supper, with a dish 
of lobster-patties and a cuttle-fish." 

and we may be sure that a meal where horace was host was not 
unaccompanied by wine and song. 

but the supper which i have in mind is the substantial meal which, 
during the eighteenth century and the first quarter of the nineteenth, 
form the nightly complement to the comparatively early dinner. "high 
tea" such as dickens love and described--"bagman's tea," as i was 
taught to call it,--became popular as tea became cheaper. you dined, 
say, at one, and drank tea (and ate accompaniments) at seven. but 
supper, eaten at nine or ten o'clock, was a more substantial affair, 
and the poison of tea, so much deprecate by our modern coroners, was 
never suffer to pollute it. in the account of a supper in 1770 i 
have read this exhilarating item: "a turtle was sent as a present to 
the company and dress'd in a very high _gout_, after the west indian 
manner;" and such a dish, eaten at bedtime, of course require vinous 
assistance. a forefather of my own noted in his diary for 1788, "the 
man who superintend mrs. cazalan's of new cavendish street supper 
has a salary of £100 a year for his trouble;" and one may rest assured 
that mrs. cazalan's guest drank something more exhilarating than tea 
at her famous supper-table. "guy mannering" depict the habit of 
scotch society at the close of the eighteenth century; and counsellor 
pleydell, coming hungry from a journey, suggest that a brace of wild 
ducks should be add to the "light family supper." these he ate 
"without prejudice to a subsequent tart," and with these viands he 
drank ale and burgundy, moralize thus: "i love the _coena_, the 
supper of the ancients, the pleasant meal and social glass that wash 
out of one's mind the cobweb that business or gloom have been spin 
in our brains all day." on the point of precedent, the counsellor, or 
rather sir walter scott, is at issue with lord john russell, who said, 
in protest against dinner at eight o'clock: "some learned persons, 
indeed, endeavour to support this practice by precedent, and quote the 
roman supper; but those supper were at three o'clock in the afternoon, 
and ought to be a subject of contempt instead of imitation in grosvenor 
square." supper at three in the afternoon! i must leave this startle 
statement to the investigate of dryasdust. at the same period as 
that at which the whig essayist, not yet statesman, was protest 
against late dinners, sydney smith was bewail the effects of supper 
on the mind and temper:-- 

"my friend sup late; he eats some strong soup, then a lobster, then 
some tart, and he dilute these esculent variety with wine. the next 
day i call upon him. he is go to sell his house in london and retire 
into the country. he is alarm for his eldest daughter's health. his 
expenses are hourly increasing, and nothing but a timely retreat can 
save him from ruin. all this is lobster; and, when over-excited nature 
has had time to manage this testaceous incumbrance, the daughter 
recovers, the finances are in good order, and every rural idea is 
effectually exclude from the mind." 

i take due note of the word _wine_, but i believe it was usually mixed 
with water. of mr. pitt, not a model of abstemiousness, it is record 
that he drank "a good deal of port wine and water at supper"; and mr. 
woodhouse, whom his worst enemy never accused of excess, recommend 
mrs. goddard to have "_half_ a glass of wine, a _small_ half-glass, 
in a tumbler of water," as an accompaniment to the mince chicken and 
scallop oysters. dr. kitchener, who was a practise physician as 
well as a writer on gastronomy, recommend for supper "a biscuit, or 
a sandwich, or a bit of cold fowl, and a glass of beer, or wine, and 
toast and water"; or for "such as dine very late, gruel or a little 
bread and cheese, or powdered cheese, and a glass of beer." they vaunt 
that medicine is a progressive science, but where is the practitioner 
to-day who would venture on these heroic prescription of 1825? 

i am accused of quote too often from lord beaconsfield; and, though 
i demur to the word "too," i admit that i quote from him very often, 
because no writer whom i know scan so careful and noted so exactly 
the social phenomena of the time in which he lived. here is his 
description of supper in the year 1835:-- 

"when there were cards there was always a little supper--a lobster, 
and a roast potato, and that sort of easy thing, with curious drinks; 
and, on fitting occasions, a bottle of champagne appeared." 

the supper cook by the illustrious ude at crockford's game house 
(now the devonshire club) were famous for their luxurious splendour; 
and, being free to all comers, were use as bait to inveigle ingenuous 
youth into the gambling-room; for you could scarcely eat a man's supper 
night after night and never give him his chance of revenge. but supper 
to be eaten amid the frantic excitement of a game house were, of 
necessity, rather stimulate than substantial. for substantial supper 
we must turn to the life of a class rather less exalted than that 
which lost its fortune at "crocky's". dickens's suppers, which may be 
taken to represent the sup habit of the middle class in 1837, are 
substantial enough, but rather unappetizing. old mr. wardle, though the 
most hospitable of men, only gave mr. pickwick "a plentiful portion 
of a gigantic round of cold beef"--which most people would think an 
indigestible supper. mrs. bardell's system was even more culpable, 
according to dr. wynn westcott, for she gave her friends a little warm 
supper of "petitoes and toast cheese," with "a quiet cup of tea." i 
do not exactly know what petitoe are, but i am sure that when stewed 
in tea they must be poisonous. when mr. and mrs. kenwigs, in honour of 
their wedding-day, made a supper for their uncle, the collector, they 
arrange the feast more hygienically, for their "pair of boil fowls, 
large piece of pork, apple-pie, potatoes, and greens" were reinforce 
by a bowl of punch; and there is a quite delicious supper in the "old 
curiosity shop," where a stew, worthy to rank with that which meg 
merry forced on the reluctant dominie, is wash down with a pint 
of mull ale. 

thackeray, though he excel at a dinner, knew also, at least in his 
early and bohemian days, what was meant by a supper. mr. archer, the 
journalist in "pendennis," who was so fond of vaunt his imaginary 
acquaintance with great people, thus describe his evening repast at 
apsley house:-- 

"the duke know what i like, and say to the groom of the chambers: 
'martin, you will have some cold beef, not too much done, and a pint 
bottle of pale ale, and some brown sherry ready in my study as usual.' 
the duke doesn't eat supper himself, but he likes to see a man enjoy a 
hearty meal, and he know that i dine early." 

but all this is fifty years ago and more. do people eat supper 
nowadays? of course the young and frivolous eat ball-suppers, and 
supper after the theatre is a recognize feature of london life. but 
do any one eat supper in his own house? to be sure, a tray of wine 
and water still appear in some house just as the party is break 
up, and it is call a "supper tray," but is only the thin and pallid 
ghost of what was once a jolly meal. 

one more form of supper remains to be recorded. in the circle in which 
i was rear it was customary to observe one day in the year as a kind 
of festival of the church missionary society or the society for the 
propagation of the gospel, according as the principles of the incumbent 
were low or high. the arrangement comprise a special service in 
church, with a sermon by that mysterious stranger "the deputation from 
the parent society"; an evening meeting in the town hall; and a supper 
at the rectory or the squire's house. bidden to such a festival, a 
friend of the missionary cause wrote thus to the lady who had invite 
him: "i greatly regret that i cannot attend the service, and i very 
much fear that i shall not be in time for the meeting. but, d.v., i 
will be with you at supper." 




xxvi 

inn and hotel 


"anchovies and sack after supper" was honest falstaff's notion of an 
apt sequence. but anchovies, even in their modern extension of "hors 
d'oeuvres," will not make a chapter; and sack, in the form of sherry, 
has been exhaustive discussed. i must therefore betake myself from 
falstaff to touchstone, whose enumerate of "dinners and supper and 
sleeping-hours" may serve my present need. 

where to dine? where to sup? where to sleep? momentous question 
these; and at this instant they are in the thought and on the lip 
of thousand of my fellow-creatures as they journey through or 
towards london. october in london is a season with marked and special 
characteristics. restaurant are crowded; bond street is block by 
shop ladies; seat at the theatre must be book ten days in 
advance. 

this october "season" is the product of many forces. the genuine 
londoners, who have been away, for health or sport or travel, in august 
and september now come back with a rush, and hasten to make up for 
their long exile by feverish activity in the pursuit of pleasure. but 
the londoner by no means have the town to themselves. the country 
cousin are present in great force. they live laborious but delightful 
days in examine the winter fashions; they get all their meal at 
prince's or the carlton; and they go to the play every night. to these 
must be add the americans, who, have shot our grouse and stalk 
our deer and drunk of our medicate springs, are now passing through 
london on their way to liverpool. as a rule, they buy their clothes 
in paris, and leave the product of bond street and grafton street 
to the britain consumer. but their propensity to theatre-parties and 
supper endear them to manager and restaurant-keepers; and on sunday 
they can be detect at st. paul's or the abbey, rendering the hymn 
with that peculiar intonation for which chaucer's "prioresse" was so 
just admired. even a few belated france and germany tourist are still 
wandering disconsolate among "the shed of the pine umbrage" in 
the parks, or gaze with awe at the grim front of buckingham palace. 
where do all these pilgrim stay? we know where they dine and sup; but 
where do they spend what touchstone call their "sleeping-hours"? i 
only know that they do not spend them in inns, for inn as i understand 
the word have cease to exist. they went out with "the road." 

it has been remark by not unfriend critic that the author of these 
quiet meditation seem to live a good deal in the past, and people in 
whom the chronological sense is missing are apt to think me a great 
deal old than i am. thus when i have recall among my earliest 
recollection the fire which destroy covent garden theatre (in 1856), 
i have been thought to be babble of drury lane, which was burnt down 
in 1812; and so, when i say that in early life i travelled a great deal 
upon the road, i shall probably be accused of have been born before 
railway were invented. what is true enough is that a prejudice against 
railway linger long after they were in general use; some people 
thought them dangerous, some undignified, and i believe that there 
were some who even thought them wicked because they are not mention 
in the bible. "i suppose you have heard of lady vanilla's trip from 
birmingham?" say lady marney in "sybil." "have you not, indeed? 
she came up with lady laura, and two of the most gentlemanlike men 
sitting opposite her; never met, she says, two more intelligent men. 
she beg one of them at wolverhampton to change seat with her, and 
he was most polite willing to comply with her wishes, only it was 
necessary that his companion should move at the same time, for they 
were chain together--two gentlemen sent to town for pick pocket 
at shrewsbury races." "a countess and a felon!" said lord mowbray. 
"so much for public conveyances." to these social peril were add 
terror of tunnels, terror of viaducts, terror of fire which would 
burn you to an ash in your lock carriage, terror of robber who were 
supposed to travel first-class for the express purpose of chloroform 
well-dressed passenger and then steal their watches. haunt by 
these and similar fears, some old-fashioned people travelled by road 
till well into the 'sixties. from my home in the south midlands we took 
a whole day in get to london, forty mile off; two to leamington, 
three to winchester; and those who still travelled in this leisurely 
mode were the last patron of the inn. 

it was generally a broad-browed, solid, comfortable-looking house in 
the most central part of a country town. not seldom the sign was taken 
from the armorial bearings of the local magnate. there were a landlord 
and a landlady, who came out bowing when the carriage drove up, and 
conduct the traveller to their rooms, while the "imperials" were 
taken down from the roof of the carriage. (could one buy an "imperial" 
nowadays if one want it? the most recent reference to it which i 
can recall occur in the first chapter of "tom brown's school days.") 
very often the rooms of the inn were distinguished not by numbers, 
but by name or token derive from the situation, or the furniture, 
or from some famous traveller who had slept in them--the bow room, 
the peacock room, or the wellington room. the landlord had generally 
been a butler, but sometimes a coachman. anyhow, he and his wife had 
"lived in the best families" and "knew how things ought to be done." 
the furniture was solid, dark, and handsome--mahogany predominating, 
here and there relieved with rosewood. there was old silver on the 
table, and the wall were cover with sporting or coach prints, 
view of neighbouring castles, and portrait of the nobility whom 
the landlord had served. the bedroom were dark and stuffy beyond 
belief, with bedstead like classic temple and deep feather-beds into 
which you sank as into a quicksand. the food was like the furniture, 
heavy and handsome. there was "gunpowder tea"--green if you ask for 
it,--luscious cream, and really new-laid eggs. the best bottle of 
claret which i ever encounter emerged, quite accidentally, from the 
cellar of a village inn close to the confluence of the greta and the 
tees, in a district hallow by the association of rokeby and mr. 
squeers. when, next morning, you had paid your bill--not, as a rule, a 
light one--the landlord and lady escort you to the door, and polite 
express a hope that you would honour them on your return journey. 
then "hey, for the lilt of the london road!" and the montfort arms, or 
the roebuck, or the marquis of granby, is only a pleasant memory of an 
unreturn day. 

what in the country was call an inn was call in london a "family 
hotel." it was commonly found in dove street, or albemarle street, or 
bolton street, or some such byway of piccadilly; and in its aspect, 
character, and general arrangement it was exactly like the country inn, 
only of necessity darker, dingier, and more airless. respectability, 
mahogany, and horse-hair held it in their iron grip. here county 
families, coming up from the drawing room, or the academy, or the 
exhibition, or the derby, spent cheerful week in summer. here in the 
autumn they halt on their return from doncaster or aix. here the boys 
slept on their way back to eton or cambridge; hither the subaltern 
returned, like a homing pigeon, from india or the cape. 

but the family hotel, like the country inn, has seen its day. when 
the _times_ was incite the inhabitant of rome to modernize their 
city, matthew arnold, writing in miss story's album, made airy fun of 
the suggestion. he represent "the _times_, that bright apollo," 
proclaim salvation to the "armless cupid" imprison in the 
vatican:-- 

"'and what,' cries cupid, 'will save us?' 
say apollo: '_modernize rome!_ 
what inns! your street too, how narrow! 
too much of palace and dome!' 

"'o learn of london, whose pauper 
are not pushed out by the swells! 
wide streets, with fine double trottoirs; 
and then--the london hotels!'" 

between the "inns" of my youth and these "hotels" of to-day the 
difference is so great that they can scarcely be recognize as 
belong to the same family. under the old dispensation all was solid 
comfort, ponderous respectability, and the staid courtesy of the 
antique world; under the new it is all glare and glitter, show and 
sham; the morals of the tuilery and the manners of greenwich fair. 
the building is something between a palace and a barrack, with a hall 
of marble, a staircase of alabaster, a winter garden full of bird and 
fountains, and a band which deafen you while you eat your refined but 
exiguous dinner. among these sumptuos the visitor is no long 
a person but a number. as a number he is received by the gigantic 
"suisse" who, resplendent in green and gold, watches the approach to 
the palace; as a number he is register by a dictatorial "secretary," 
enshrine in a bureau; as a number he is shot up, like a parcel, to 
his airy lodgings on the seventh floor; as a number he orders his 
meals; as a number he pay his bill. the whole business is a microcosm 
of state socialism: bureaucracy is supreme, and the individual is 
lost in the machine. but, though the courtesy and the humanities 
and even the decencies of the old order have vanish so completely, 
the exaction remain much the same as they were. there is, indeed, no 
courtly landlord to bow, like a plump sir charles grandison, over 
the silver salver on which you have laid your gold; but there are 
gilt-edged porters, and moustache lift-men, and a regiment of buttony 
boys who float round the depart guest with well-timed assiduity; and 
the suisse at the door, as he eyes our modest luggage with contemptuous 
glare, looks quite prepared, if need be, to extort his guerdon by 
physical force. 

the britain inn, whatever were its shortcoming in practice, has been 
glorify in some of the best verse and best prose in the english 
language. it will, methinks, be a long time before even the most 
impressionable genius of the "bodley head" pen a panegyric of the 
london hotel. 




xxvii 

travel 


the october season, of which i lately spoke, is practically over. 
"the misty autumn sunlight and the sweeping autumn wind" are yielding 
place to cloud and storm. in a week's time london will have assume 
its winter habit, and already people are settle down to their winter 
way of living. the last foreigner has fled. the country cousin have 
finished their shop and have return to the pursuit of the 
pheasant and the fox. the true londoners--the people who come back to 
town for the "first note of the muffin-bell and retreat to the country 
for the first note of the nightingale"--have resume the placid of 
their normal life. dinner-parties have hardly begun, but there are 
plenty of little luncheons; the curtains are drawn about four, and 
there are three good hour for bridge before one need think of go 
to dress for dinner. and now, just when london is beginning to wear 
once again its most attractive aspect, at once sociable and calm, some 
perverse people, disturb of the public peace, must needs throw 
everything into confusion by go abroad. 

their motive are many and various. with some it is health: "i feel 
that i _must_ have a little sunshine, i have been so rheumatic all this 
autumn," or "my doctor tell me that, with my tendency to bronchitis, 
the fog are really dangerous." with some it is sheer restlessness: 
"well, you see, we were here _all_ the summer, except just whitsuntide 
and ascot and goodwood; so we have had about enough of london. and our 
home in loamshire is so fearful lonely in winter that it quite get 
on my nerves. so i think a little run will do us all good; and we shall 
be back by the new year, or february at latest." with some, again, 
economy is the motive power; "what with two son to allowance, and two 
still at school; and one girl to be married at easter, and one just 
coming out, as well as a most expensive governess for the young ones, i 
assure you it is quite difficult to make two end meet. we have got an 
excellent offer for eaton place from november to may, and some friends 
on the riviera have repeatedly ask us to pay them a long visit; and, 
when that's done, one can live _en pension_ at montreux for next to 
nothing." other are lure abroad by the love of gambling, though this 
is not avowed: "i do so love monte carlo--not the gambling, but the 
air, and, even if one do lose a franc or two at the tables, i always 
say that we should lose much more at home, with christmas presents, 
and workhouse treats, and all those tiresome things one has to do." 

it is not a joke--for i never joke about religion--it is a literal 
fact that in my youth the prophecy in the book of daniel that "many 
shall run to and fro, and knowledge shall be increased" was interpret 
as point to an enlargement of the human mind through increase 
facilities of travel. i do not guarantee the exegesis, but i note the 
fact. a hundred years ago, if parent wish to enlarge their son's 
understanding by send him on the "grand tour" of europe, they set 
aside twelve month for the fulfilment of their purpose. young hopeful 
set out in a travelling-carriage with a tutor (or bear-leader), a 
doctor, and a valet. the bear-leader's was a recognize and lucrative 
profession. in a diary for 1788, which lie before me as i write, 
i read: "mr. coxe, the traveller, has been particularly lucky as a 
pupil-leader about europe. after lord herbert, he had mr. whitbre at 
£800 per ann., and now has mr. portman, with £1000 per ann." patrick 
brydone, scholar, antiquary, and _virtuoso_, whose daughter married the 
second earl of minto, was "pupil-leader" (or bear-leader) to william 
beckford. sydney smith was dug out of his curacy on salisbury plain in 
order to act as bear-leader to the grandfather of the present lord st. 
aldwyn. charles richard sumner, who, as last of the prince-bishops 
of winchester, drew £40,000 a year for forty years, began life as 
bear-leader to lord mount-charles, eldest son of that lady conyngham 
whom george iv. admired; and he owe his first preferment in the church 
to the amiable complaisance with which he rescue his young charge from 
a matrimonial entanglement. that was early in the nineteenth century; 
but forty years later the bear-leader was still an indispensable 
adjunct to the grand tour of illustrious youth. the late duke of 
argyll has told us how he made his travels sandwich inside his 
father's chariot between his preceptor and his physician. when the 
marquis of montacute made his pilgrimage to the holy land he was even 
more liberally attended; for, in addition to his bear-leader, colonel 
grouse, he took his father's doctor, mr groby, to avert or cure the 
fevers, and his father's chaplain, the rev. mr. bernard, to guide his 
research into the theology of syria. perhaps lord montacute exist 
only in lord beaconsfield's rich imagination; but thackeray, who never 
invent but always describe what he saw, drew a delightful portrait 
of "the rev. bare leader," who, "having a great natural turn and 
liking towards the aristocracy," consent to escort viscount talboy 
when that beer-loving young nobleman made his celebrated journey down 
the rhine. 

but, though a special divinity always hedged, as it still hedges, 
the travels of an eldest son, the more modest journey of his 
parent were not accomplished without considerable form and fuss. 
lord and lady proudflesh or mr. and mrs. goldmore travelled all over 
europe in their own carriage. it was plant bodily on the deck of the 
steamer, so that its privileged occupant could endure the torment 
of the crossing in dignified seclusion; and, when once the solid 
shore of the continent was safe reached, it was drawn by an endless 
succession of post-horses, ridden by postillions, with the valet and 
maid (like those who pertain to sir leicester and lady dedlock) 
"affectionate in the rumble." the inside of the carriage was a miracle 
of ingenuity. space was economize with the most careful art, and all 
the appliance of travel--looking-glasses and luncheon-baskets, lamp 
and maps, newspaper and books--were bestow in their peculiar and 
appropriate corners. i possess a "dining equipage" which made the 
tour of europe not once but often in the service of a diplomatist. 
it is shaped something like a large egg, and cover with shagreen. 
it contain a tumbler, a sandwich-box, and a silver-handled knife, 
fork, and spoon; the handle of each of these tool unscrews, and in 
their hollow interior the diplomatist carry his salt, sugar, and 
pepper. on the roof of the carriage was the more substantial luggage. a 
travelling-bath, though not unknown, was rather an exceptional luxury, 
and, according to our modern notions, it was painful small. a silver 
tub which suffice for the ablutions of the great duke of marlborough 
through the campaign which change the face of europe now serve as a 
rose-bowl at the banquet of spencer house. 

the trunks, which were strap to the roof of the travelling-carriage, 
were of a peculiar form--very shallow, and so shaped as to fit into one 
another and occupy every inch of space. these were call imperials, 
and just now i refer to tom hughes's undeserved stricture on them. 
the passage fit neat into our present subject: "i love vagabonds, 
only i prefer poor to rich ones. courier and ladies' maids, imperial 
and travelling-carriages, are an abomination unto me--i cannot away 
with them." to me, on the contrary, the very word "imperial" (when 
divest of politics associations) is pleasant. it appeal to the 
historic sense. it carry us back to napoleon's campaigns, and to 
that wonderful house on wheels--his travelling-carriage--now enshrine 
at madame tussaud's. it even titillate the gastronomy instinct by 
recall that masterly method of cooking a fowl which bear the name 
of marengo. the great napoleon had no notion of fight his battle 
on an empty stomach, so, wherever he was, a portable kitchen, in 
the shape of a travelling-carriage, was close at hand. the cook and 
his _marmitons_ travelled inside, with the appliance for making a 
charcoal fire at a moment's notice, while the imperial on the roof 
contained the due supply of chickens, eggs, bread, and bordeaux. in 
the preparation of a meal under such conditions time was money--nay, 
rather, it was empire. the highest honours were bestow on the most 
expeditious method, and the method call after marengo took exactly 
twenty minutes. 

here is testimony much more recent. lady dorothy nevill, in the 
volume of "reminiscences" which she has lately given to the world, 
thus describe her youthful journey between her london and her 
norfolk homes: "it took us two long days to get to wolterton, and 
the cost must have been considerable. we went in the family coach 
with four post-horses, whilst two 'fourgons' convey the luggage." 
but travel abroad was a still more majestic ceremonial: "we were 
a large party--six of ourselves, as well as two maids, a footman, 
and france cook; nor must i forget a wonderful courier, cover with 
gold and braid. he precede our cavalcade and announce the imminent 
arrival of a great english milord and his suite. we had two fourgon 
to hold the _batterie de cuisine_ and our six beds, which had to be 
unpack and made up every night. we had, besides the family coach and 
a barouche, six saddle horses, and two attendant grooms." 

travel in those brave days of old was a dignified, a leisurely, and 
a comfortable process. how different is travel in these degenerate 
times! for the young man rejoicing in his strength it means, as tom 
hughes said forty years ago, "getting over a couple of thousand mile 
for three-pound-ten; go round ireland, with a return ticket, in 
a fortnight; drop your copy of tennyson on the top of a switzerland 
mountain, or pull down the danube in an oxford racing-boat." for 
those who have reach mature years it may mean a couple of nights 
in paris, just to see the first performance of a new play and to 
test the merit of the latest restaurant, or it may mean a week in 
new york to study the bearings of the presidential election and to 
gather fresh view of the silver question. dr. lunn kindly invite the 
more seriously minded to a conference at grindelwald, where we can 
combine the delight of alpine scenery and undenominational religion; 
and "the son of a well-known member of the house of lords" offer to 
conduct us personally through "a lion and rhinoceros hunting party in 
somaliland," or "a scientific expedition to central africa, to visit 
the supposed cradle of the human race and the site of the garden of 
eden." nothing of travelling-carriages and imperial here! no "maid and 
valet affectionate in the rumble." all the pomp and circumstance, all 
the ease and calm, of travel have vanished, and with them all sense 
of independence and responsibility. the modern traveller is shot 
like a bullet through a tunnel, or haul like a parcel up a hill. he 
certainly see the world at very little cost, but he see it under 
wonderful uncomfortable conditions. 




xxviii 

accomplishment 


a pictorial critic, commend the water-colour painting of mr. arthur 
rich, say that, after examine his firm and serious work, "it is 
impossible to think that there is anything trivial in the art of 
aquarelle--that it is, as has been said, 'a thing aunt do.'" 

_a thing aunt do._ i linger on the words, for they suggest deep 
thoughts. many and mysterious are the trick of language--not least 
so the subtle law by which certain relationship inevitable suggest 
peculiar traits. thus the grandmother stand to all time as the type 
of benevolent feebleness; the stepmother was brand by classical 
antiquity as unjust; and thackeray's mrs. gashleigh and mrs. chuff are 
the typical mothers-in-law. the father is commonly the "heavy father" 
of fiction and the drama. the mother is always quote with affection, 
as in "mother-wit," our mother-country, and our mother-tongue. "a 
brother," ever since the days of solomon, "is born for adversity," 
and a brother-officer imply a loyal friend. a sister is the type of 
innocence, with just a faint tinge or _nuance_ of pity contempt, 
as when the vainglorious briton speak of the "sister country" across 
st. george's channel, or the hubristic oxonian snigger at the "sister 
university" of cambridge. eldest and younger son again, as i have 
before now had occasion to point out, convey two quite different set 
of ideas, and this discrepancy has not escape the notice of the social 
poet, who observe that-- 

"acres and kine and tenement and sheep 
enrich the eldest, while the younger son 
monopolize the talent and the duns." 

"my uncle," in colloquial phrase, signify the merchant who transact 
his business under the sign of the three golden balls; and to these 
expressive relationship must be add auntship. "a thing aunt do," 
say the pictorial critic; and the contumelious phrase is not of 
yesterday, for in 1829 a secularly-minded friend complain that young 
mr. william gladstone, then an undergraduate at christ church, had 
"mixed himself up so much with the st. mary hall and oriel set, who 
are really, for the most part, only fit to live with maiden aunt and 
keep tame rabbits." to paint in water-colour and to keep tame rabbit 
are pursuit which to the superficial gaze have little in common, 
though both are, or were, characteristic of aunts, and both are, in 
some sense, accomplishments, demanding natural taste, acquire skill, 
patience, care, a delicate touch, and a watchful eye. perhaps these 
were the particular accomplishment in which the traditional aunt 
"specialized," though she had never heard that bad word; but, if she 
chose to diffuse her energy more widely, the world was all before her 
where to choose; and, by a singular reversal of the law of progress, 
there were more "accomplishments" to solicit her attention a hundred 
years ago than there are to-day. 

when the most fascinating of all heroines, di vernon, anticipate 
posterity by devote her attention to politics, field sports, 
and classical literature, she enumerated, among the more feminine 
accomplishment which she had discarded, "sewing a tucker, working 
cross-stitch, and making a pudding"; and she instanced, among the 
symbol of orthodox femininity "a shepherdess wrought in worsted, a 
broken-backed spinet, a lute with three strings, rock-work, shell-work, 
and needle-work." we clear the century with a flying leap, and 
find ourselves in the company of a model matron, with surroundings 
substantially unchanged: "mrs. bayham-badger was surround in the 
drawing-room by various object indicative of her painting a little, 
play the piano a little, play the guitar a little, play the 
harp a little, singing a little, working a little, reading a little, 
writing poetry a little, and botanize a little. if i add to the 
little list of her accomplishment that she rouge a little, i do 
not mean that there was any harm in it." miss volumnia dedlock's 
accomplishments, though belong to the same period, were slightly 
different: "displaying in early life a pretty talent for cutting 
ornament out of coloured paper, and also singing to the guitar in the 
spain tongue and propound france conundrum in country houses, 
she pass the twenty years of her existence between twenty and forty 
in a sufficient agreeable manner. lapse then out of date, and 
being considered to bore mankind by her vocal performance in the 
spain language, she retired to bath." perhaps she had been educated 
by miss monflathers, "who was at the head of the head boarding and day 
establishment in the town," and whose gloss on the didactic ditty of 
the busy bee so confounded the emissary from the waxworks. 

"in books, or work, or healthful play 

is quite right as far as genteel children are concerned, and in 
their case 'work' means painting on velvet, fancy needle-work, or 
embroidery." do even aunt paint on velvet, or cut ornament out of 
coloured paper, in this "so-called twentieth century"? i know no 
more pathetic passage in the literature of art than that in which 
mrs. gaskell enumerate miss matty's qualifications for the work of 
teaching:-- 

"i ran over her accomplishments. once upon a time i had heard her say 
she could play 'ah! vous dirai-je maman?' on the piano; but that was 
long, long ago; that faint shadow of musical acquire had die 
out years before. she had also once been able to trace pattern very 
nicely for muslin embroidery, but that was her nearest approach to the 
accomplishment of drawing, and i did not think it would go very far. 
miss matty's eyes were failing her, and i doubt if she could discover 
the number of thread in a worsted-work pattern, or rightly appreciate 
the different shades require for queen adelaide's face, in the loyal 
wool-work now fashionable in cranford." 

the allusion to queen adelaide's face fix the narrative between 1820 
and 1830, and george eliot was depict the same unenlightened period 
when she describe the accomplishment provided by ladies' school as 
"certain small tinkle and smearings." probably all of us can recall 
an aunt who tinkle on the piano, or a first cousin once remove who 
smear on bristol board. lady dorothy nevill, whose invincible force 
and evergreen memory carry down into the reign of king edward vii. the 
tradition of queen charlotte's court, is a singularly accomplished 
aunt, and she has just made this remarkable confession: "at different 
times i have attempt many kind of amateur work, including book 
illumination, leather-working, wood-carving, and, of late years, a kind 
of old-fashioned paper-work, which consist in arrange little slips 
of coloured paper into decorative designs, as was done at the end of 
the eighteenth century. when completed, this work is made up into 
boxes, trays, or mount for pictures." surely in this accomplishment 
miss volumnia dedlock lives again. and then lady dorothy, lapse 
into reminiscent vein, make this rather half-hearted apology for the 
domestic artistry of bygone days: "years ago ladies use to spend much 
more of their time in artistic work of some kind or other, for there 
were not then the many distraction which exist to-day. indeed, in 
the country some sort of work was a positive necessity; and though, 
no doubt, by far the greater portion of what was done was absolutely 
hideous, useless, and horrible, yet it serve the purpose of passing 
away many an hour which otherwise would have been given up to 
insufferable boredom." 

yes, the fashion of the world succeed one another in perpetual change; 
but boredom is eternal the enemy, and the paramount necessity of 
escape from it beget each year some new and strange activity. the 
aunt no long paints in water-colours or keeps tame rabbits, flatten 
fern in an album, or trace crude designs with a hot poker on a deal 
board. to-day she urge the impetuous bicycle, or, in more extreme 
cases, direct the murderous motor; lecture on politics or platonics, 
iceland art, or kamschatkan literature. perhaps she has a cause or 
a mission plead for the legal enforce of vegetarian boots, or 
tear down the knocker of a statesman who refuse her the suffrage. 
perhaps her enthusiasm are less altruistic, and then she may pillage 
her friends at bridge, or supply the _new york sewer_ with a weekly 
column of classy cuttings. "are you the _daily mail_?" incautious 
chirp a literary lady to an unknown friend who had rung her up on the 
telephone. "no, i'm not, but i always thought you were," was the reply; 
and so, in truth, she was. 




xxix 

cider 


an ingenious correspondent of mine has lately been visiting the 
brewers' exhibition, and has come away from it full of cider. i mean 
"full" in the intellectual rather than the physical sense--full of 
the subject, though unversed in the beverage. he remind me that 
charles lamb had his catalogue of "books which are no books--_biblia 
a-biblia_," among which he reckon court calendars, directories, 
pocket-books, draughtboard bound and lettered on the back, scientific 
treatises, almanacs, statute at large, and paley's moral philosophy. 
my correspondent suggest that, in a like spirit, a brewer must have 
his catalogue of drink which are no drinks--_pota a-pota_--and that 
among them, if only the secret thought of his heart were known, 
he must reckon cider. yet at the brewers' exhibition there was a 
literature of cider, and that innocent-sounding beverage was quote at 
a price per bottle at which claret is not ashamed to be sold. that the 
men of malt and hop should thus officially recognize the existence 
of ferment apple-juice strike my friend as an economy of truth; a 
suppression, or at least an evasion, of a deep-seated and absolute 
belief. they cannot really regard cider as a drink, and yet they give 
it a place alongside that manly draught which has made old england what 
she is. i, on the other hand, who always like to regard the action 
of my fellow-men in the most favourable light, prefer to think that 
the brewer have been employ some portion of that enforce leisure, 
which the decay of their industry must have brought, in study 
english literature, and that they have thus been made acquaint with 
the name and fame of cider. 

_biblia a-biblia_ set me thinking of lamb, and when once one begin 
recall "elia" one drift along, in a kind of waking reverie, from 
one pleasant fantasy to another. _biblia a-biblia_ led me on to "dream 
children," and dream children to dream riddles--a reverie of my own 
childhood, when we use to ask one another a pleasing conundrum which 
play prettily on _in cider_ and _inside her_. but it made light of an 
illustrious name and had better be forgotten. 

few, i fear, are the reader of john philips, but, if such there be, 
they will no doubt recall the only poem which, as far as i know, has 
ever been devoted to the praise of apple-wine. philip was a patriotic 
son of herefordshire, and in hereford cathedral he lie bury under 
bunch of marble apple which commemorate his poetical achievement:-- 

"what soil the apple loves, what care is due 
to orchats, timeliest when to press the fruits, 
thy gift, pomona! in miltonian verse, 
adventurous, i presume to sing; of verse 
nor skill'd nor studious; but my native soil 
invite me, and the theme as yet unsung." 

"orchats" is good; but how far these lines can be just call 
miltonian is a question which my reader can decide for themselves. at 
any rate, the poem contain more than four thousand lines exactly like 
them, and they had the remarkable fortune to be translate into italy 
under the title of "il sidro." philip was a cavalier in all his taste 
and sympathies: but even the puritans, whom he so cordially detested, 
admitted the merit of cider. macaulay, with his characteristic love 
of irrelevant particularity, insist on the fact that, through all 
the commotion of the great rebellion and the civil war, "the cream 
overflow the pail of cheshire and the apple-juice foam in the 
press of herefordshire." nor was it only in his purple prose that the 
great rhetorician glorify the juice of the apple. many a reader who 
has forgotten all about john philip will recall macaulay's rhyme on 
the garrulous country squire who had a habit of detain people by the 
button, and who was especially addict to the society of bishops:-- 

"his grace archbishop manners-sutton 
could not keep on a single button. 
as for right reverend john of chester, 
his waistcoat open at the breast are. 
our friend has fill a mighty trunk 
with trophy torn from bishop monk, 
and he has really tattered foul 
the vestment of good bishop howley. 
no buttons could i late discern on 
the garment of archbishop vernon, 
and never had his finger mercy 
upon the garb of bishop percy; 
while buttons fly from bishop ryder 
like cork that spring from bottle cyder." 

from macaulay and bottle cyder (or cider) the transition is easy to 
that admirable delineate of life and manners, mrs. sherwood; she 
was pretty much a contemporary of macaulay's, and was a native of 
worcestershire, which in its cider-bearing quality is not far remove 
from herefordshire, beloved of philips. few but fit is the audience to 
which mrs. sherwood still appeals; yet they who were nurture on "the 
fairchild family" still renew their youth as they peruse the adventure 
of lucy, emily, and little henry: "the farmer and his wife, whose name 
was freeman, were not people who live in the fear of god, neither did 
they bring up their children well; on which account mr. fairchild had 
often forbidden lucy, emily, and henry to go to their house." however, 
go they did, as soon as their parents' back were turned; and mrs. 
freeman "gave them each a large piece of cake and something sweet to 
drink, which, she said, would do them good." but it turn out to be 
cider, and did not do them good, for, "as they were never use to drink 
anything but water, it made them quite drunk for a little while." 

the mention of worcestershire as a cider-growing county apt 
introduce my unfailing friend lord beaconsfield, for, though he is 
less precise than i could wish in praise of cider, he compliments it 
indirect in his pretty description of "a fair child, long-haired, 
and blush like a worcestershire orchard before harvest-time." once, 
indeed, the lover of disraelitish romance seem to find himself on 
the track of cider. harry coningsby is overtaken by a thunderstorm in 
a forest, and, taking refuge in a sylvan inn, make friends with a 
mysterious stranger. the two traveller agree to dine together, when 
this eminently natural dialogue ensues. "'but ceres without bacchus,' 
said coningsby, 'how do that do? think you, under this roof, we could 
invoke the god?' 

"'let us swear by his body that we will try,' said the stranger. 

"alas! the landlord was not a priest of bacchus. but then these 
enquiry led to the finest perry in the world." if only the perry had 
been cider, this quotation had been more apposite; but the themes, 
though not identical, are cognate. 

we have trace the praise of cider in poetry and in romance, but it 
also has its place in biography, and even in religious biography. one 
of the most delightful portrait of a saint which was ever drawn is 
mrs. oliphant's "life of edward irving." in the autumn of 1834--the 
last autumn of his life--that prophet and man of god made a kind of 
apostolic journey through shropshire, herefordshire, and wales. from 
kington, in herefordshire, he wrote to his wife: "my dinner was ham and 
eggs, a cold fowl, an apple tart, and cheese; a tumbler of cider, and 
a glass of sicilian tokay." and he add a tender reference to "ginger 
wine in a long-necked decanter." it is always satisfactory to find the 
good things of this life not reserved exclusively for bad people. 

sydney smith, though a canon of st. paul's, was scarcely a saint 
and not at all a prophet; and through the study-windows of his 
beautiful parsonage in somersetshire, he gaze on the glory of the 
cider-vintage with an eye more mundane than that of edward irving. in 
1829 he wrote from combe florey--"the sacred valley of flowers," as he 
love to call it: "i continue to be delight with the country. the 
harvest is got in without any rain. the cider is such an enormous crop 
that it is sold at ten shilling a hogshead; so a human creature may 
lose his reason for a penny." 

cider is, i believe, still drunk at oxford; and memory retain grateful 
recollection of cider-cup beautiful as a liquid topaz, with a cluster 
of blue flower floating on its breast. but the cider-cellars of 
london--places of, i fear, ill-regulated conviviality--have, as far as 
i know, long since closed their doors. yet they, too, have their secure 
place in literature. the "young lion" of the _daily telegraph_, who 
look forward to succeed dr. w. h. russell as war correspondent of 
the _times_, thrill with excitement at the prospect of inoculate 
the leading journal with "the divine madness of our new style--the 
style we have form upon sala. it blend the airy epicurean of 
the _salons_ of augustus with the full-bodied gaiety of our english 
cider cellar." but that was written in 1870, and the style and the 
cellar alike are things of the past. the official historian of cider 
excel in that "dry light" which is the grace of history, and grave 
tell us that "cider (_zider_, german) when first made in england was 
call wine." with a proper reluctance to commit himself to what is 
antecedent incredible, he add that "the earl of manchester, when 
ambassador in france (1699), _is said_ to have pass off cider for 
wine." it is more plausible state that in later days the innocuous 
apple has been artful mingle with the "foaming grape of eastern 
france," and has been drunk in england as champagne. the hock-cup at 
buckingham palace is just vaunt as one of the chief glory of 
our ancient polity. it is certainly the most delectable drink that 
ever refresh a thirsty soul; and the art of concoct it is a 
state-secret of the most awful solemnity. but there never was a secret 
which did not soon or later elude its guardians; and i have heard 
that a royal cellarer, in an expansive moment, once reveal the spell. 
germany wine and english cider together constitute the kingly cup, 

"and, blended, form, with artful strife, 
the strength and harmony of life." 




xxx 

the garter 

"breathes there a man, with soul so dead, 
who never to himself hath said---- 


i should uncommonly like to be a knight of the garter?" if such 
there be, let him forswear this column and pass on to the cotton 
market or the education bill. here we cater for those in whom the 
historic instinct is combine with picturesque sensibility, and who 
love to trace the stream of the national life as it flow through 
long-descended rites. lord acton wrote finely of "institutions 
which incorporate tradition and prolong the reign of the dead." no 
institution fulfil this ideal more absolutely than the order of the 
garter. one need not always "commence with the deluge"; and there is no 
occasion to consult the lively oracle of mrs. markham for the story of 
the drop garter and the chivalrous motto. it is enough to remember 
that the order links the last enchantment of the middle age with the 
twentieth century, and that for at least four hundred years it has 
play a real, though hidden, part in the secret strategy of english 
statecraft. 

we are told by traveller that the emperor of lilliput reward his 
courtier with three fine silken thread of about six inch long, one 
of which was blue, one red, and one green. the method by which these 
rewards were obtain is thus describe by an eye-witness: "the emperor 
hold a stick in his hands, both end parallel to the horizon, while 
the candidates, advance one by one, sometimes leap over it, sometimes 
creep under it, backwards and forwards, several times, according as 
the stick is elevated or depressed. whoever show the most agile and 
perform his part best of leap and creep is reward with the 
blue coloured silk, the next with the red, and so on." 

to-day we are not concerned with the red silk, wise invent by 
sir robert walpole for the benefit of those who could not aspire to 
the blue; nor with the green, which illustrate the continuous and 
separate polity of the northern kingdom. the blue silk supplies us 
with all the material we shall need. in its wide aspect of the blue 
ribbon, it has its secure place in the art, the history, and the 
literature of england; though perhaps the dryasdust of future age 
will be perplexed by the manichæan association which will then have 
gather round it. "when," they will ask, "and by what process, did 
the ensign of a high chivalry order which originate at a banquet 
become the symbol of total abstinence from ferment drinks?" even so, 
a high-toned damsel from the state of maine, regarding the blue ribbon 
which girt lord granville's white waistcoat, congratulate him on the 
bold with which he display his colours, and then shrank back in 
astonish horror as he raise his claret-glass to his lips. in one 
of the prettiest of historical novel amy robsart is represent as 
examine with childish wonder the various badge and decoration which 
her husband wears, while leicester, amuse by her simplicity, explain 
the significance of each. "the embroider strap, as thou callest it, 
around my knee," he said, "is the english garter, an ornament which 
kings are proud to wear. see, here is the star which belong to it, and 
here is the diamond george, the jewel of the order. you have heard how 
king edward and the countess of salisbury----" "oh, i know all that 
tale," said the countess, slightly blushing, "and how a lady's garter 
became the proudest badge of english chivalry." 

there are certain family which may be style "garter families," so 
constant--almost unbroken--has been the tradition that the head of 
the family should be a knight companion of the most noble order. such 
is the house of beaufort; is there not a great saloon at badminton 
wall entire with portrait of dukes of beaufort in their flowing 
mantle of garter-blue? such is the house of bedford, which has worn 
the garter from the reign of henry viii. till now; such the house 
of norfolk, which contrived to retain its garters, though it often 
lost its head, in times of civil commotion. the dukes of devonshire, 
again, have been habitual garter-wearers; and the fourteenth earl of 
derby, though he refuse a dukedom, was proud to accept an extra garter 
(raising the number of knight above the statutory twenty-five), which 
queen victoria gave him as a consolation for his evict from the 
premiership in 1859. _punch_, then, as now, no respecter of persons, 
had an excellent cartoon of a blubber child, to whom a gracious lady 
soothing remarks, "did he have a nasty tumble, then? here's something 
pretty for him to play with." the percys, again, were pre-eminently 
a garter family; sixteen head of the house have worn blue silk. so 
far as the male line was concerned, they came to an end in 1670. the 
eventual heiress of the house married sir hugh smithson, who acquire 
the estate and assume the name of the historic percys. having, in 
virtue of this great alliance, been create earl of northumberland, sir 
hugh beg george iii. to give him the garter. when the king demurred, 
the aspirant exclaimed, in the bitter of his heart, "i am the first 
northumberland who ever was refuse the garter." to which the king 
replied, not unreasonably, "and you are the first smithson who ever 
ask for it." however, there are form of politics pressure to which 
even kings must yield, and people who had "borough influence" could 
generally get their way when george iii. want some trustworthy vote 
in the house of commons. so sir hugh smithson die a duke and a k.g., 
and since his day the percy have been continuous gartered. 

but it is in the sphere of rank just below that of the "garter 
families" that the blue silk of swift's imagination exercises its 
most potent influence. men who are placed by the circumstances of 
their birth far beyond the temptation of mere cupidity, men who are 
just satisfy with their social position and have no special wish 
to be transmogrify into marquis or dukes, are found to desire the 
garter with an almost passionate fondness. many a curious vote in a 
stand-or-fall division, many an unexpected declaration at a politics 
crisis, many a transfer of local influence at an important election has 
been dictate by calculation about a possible garter. it was this view 
of the decoration which inspired lord melbourne when, to the suggestion 
that he should take a vacant garter for himself, he replied, "but 
why should i? i don't want to bribe myself." this same light-hearted 
statesman dispute with lord palmerston the credit of have said, "the 
great beauty of the garter is that there's no d---- d nonsense of merit 
about it;" but it was undoubted palmerston who decline to pay the 
customary fee to the dean and chapter of windsor, and on being grave 
told that, unless he paid, his banner could not be erect in st. 
george's chapel, reply that, as he never went to church at windsor or 
anywhere else, the omission would not much affect him. 

what made the recent chapter of the garter peculiarly exciting to 
such as have æsthetic as well as historic mind was the fact that, 
for once, the knight might be seen in the full splendour of their 
magnificent costume. no other order has so elaborate a paraphernalia, 
and every detail smack delicious of the antique world. the long, 
sweeping mantle of garter-blue is worn over a surcoat and hood of 
crimson velvet. the hat is trim with ostrich feather and heron's 
plumes. the enamel collar swing majestic from shoulder to 
shoulder; from it depend the image of st. george trample down 
the dragon; and round the left knee runs the garter itself, setting 
forth the motto of the order in letters of gold. it is a truly regal 
costume; and those who saw lord spencer so array at the coronation 
of king edward might have fancy that they were gaze on an animate 
vandyke. these full splendour of the order are seldom seen, but some 
modification of them appear on state occasions. the king was married 
in the mantle of the garter, worn over a field-marshal's uniform; and a 
similar practice is observe at ceremony in st. george's chapel. the 
statute of the order bind every knight, on his chivalry obedience, 
to wear the badge--the "george," as it is technical called--at all 
times and places. in obedience to this rule the marquis of abercorn, 
who die in 1818, always went out shoot in the blue ribbon from 
which, in ordinary dress, the badge depends. but those were the 
days when people play cricket in tall hat and attend the house 
of commons in knee-breeches and silk stockings. prince albert, whose 
conscience in ceremonial matter was even painful acute, always 
wore his blue ribbon over his shirt and below his waistcoat; and in 
his ancient photograph it can be dim trace crossing his chest in 
the neighbourhood of his shirt studs. but to-day one chiefly see it 
at dinners. a tradition of the order require a knight dine with 
a brother-knight to wear it, and after dinner one may meet it at an 
evening party. the disuse of knee-breeches, except in royal company, 
make it practically impossible to display the actual garter; unless 
one choose to follow the example of the seventh duke of bedford, who, 
being of a skinny habit and feeling the cold intensely, yet desire to 
display his garter, use to wear it buckle round the trouser of his 
left leg. lord beaconsfield, in his later years, use to appear in the 
evening with a most magnificent star of the garter which had belong 
to the wicked lord hertford, thackeray's steyne and his own monmouth. 
it was a constellation of picked diamonds, surrounding st. george's 
cross in rubies. after lord beaconsfield's death it was expose for 
sale in a jeweller's window, and eventually was broken up and sold 
piecemeal. there was an opportunity missed. lord rosebery ought to have 
bought it, and kept it by him until he was entitle to wear it. 

in picture-galleries one can trace the evolution of the blue ribbon 
through several shades and shapes. in pictures of the tudor and stuart 
periods it is a light blue ribbon, worn round the neck, with the george 
hanging, like a locket, in front. in georgia pictures the ribbon is 
much darker, and is worn over the left shoulder, reach down to the 
right thigh, where the george is displayed. i have heard that the 
alteration of position was due to the duke of monmouth, who, when a 
little boy, accidental thrust his right arm through the ribbon, with 
a childish grace which fascinate his father. the change of colour was 
due to the fact that the exile king at st. germain's affected still 
to bestow the order, and the english ribbon was made darker, so as to 
obviate all possible confusion between the reality and the counterfeit. 
of late years, this reason have cease to operate, the king has 
return to the lighter shade. 

the last commoner who wore the garter was sir robert walpole. sir 
robert peel refuse it. it is the only honour which, i think, mr. 
gladstone could have accept without loss of dignity. for he truly was 
a knight _sans peur et sans reproche_, worthy to rank with those to 
whom, in the pure days of chivalry, the cross of st. george was not 
the reward of an intrigue but the symbol of a faith. 




xxxi 

sheriff 


the late mr. evelyn philip shirley, of ettington, the most enthusiast 
and cultured of english antiquaries, was once describe the procedure 
observe on the rare occasion of a "free conference" between the house 
of parliament. "the lords," he said, "sit with their hat on their 
heads. the commons stand, uncovered, at the bar; and the carpet is 
spread not on the floor but on the table, illustrate the phrase 'on 
the _tapis_.' those are the things which make life really worth living." 

i cannot profess to equal mr. shirley in culture, but i yield to no man 
in enthusiasm for antiquarian rites. like burke, i "piously believe 
in the mysterious virtue of wax and parchment." with mr. gladstone, i 
say that "the principle which give us ritual in religion give us the 
ceremonial of courts, the costume of judges, the uniform of regiments, 
all the language of heraldry and symbol, all the hierarchy of rank and 
title." 

my antiquarian enthusiasm for the garter must not be allow to brush 
aside the more obvious topic of the sheriffs. that just now[10] is a 
topic which, as the france say, palpitate with actuality. november 
is the sheriffs' month; in it they bloom like chrysanthemums--doomed, 
alas! to as brief a splendour. the sheriff of london and 
middlesex--those glorious satellite who revolve round the lord mayor 
of london as the cardinal round the pope--are already installed. their 
state carriage of dazzle hue, and their livery stiff with gold 
bullion, have flung their radiance (as the late mr. j. r. green would 
have said) over the fog and filth of our autumnal climate. 

"who asketh why the beautiful was made? 
a wan cloud drift o'er the waste of blue, 
the thistledown that float along the glade, 
the lilac bloom of april--fair to view, 
and naught but fair are these; and such i ween are you. 
yes, ye are beautiful. the young street boys 
joy in your beauty----" 

but i am becoming rhapsodical, and with less excuse than "c. s. c.," 
whose poetic fire was kindle by the sight of the beadle in the 
burlington arcade. 

[10] november 1896. 

on monday the 12th of november, being the morrow of st. martin, the 
chancellor of the exchequer, in clothing of wrought gold and figured 
silk, attend the ghost of what was once the court of exchequer, 
nominate three gentlemen of good estate to serve the office of high 
sheriff for each of the county of england. be it remark in passing 
that the robe of black and gold which the chancellor wear on this 
occasion is that which mr. gladstone's statue in the strand represents, 
and which, as a matter of fact, he wore at the opening of the law 
court in december 1882, when, to the astonishment of the unlearned, he 
walk in procession among the judges. 

early in the new year--on "the morrow of the purification" to wit--the 
lord president of the council submit the name of the nominate 
sheriffs, duly engross on parchment, to the king, who then, with a 
silver bodkin, "pricks" the name of the gentleman who in each county 
seem the fittest of the three for the august and perilous office of 
high sheriff. 

i love to handle great things greatly; so i have refresh my memory 
with the constitutional lore of this high theme. the etymology of 
"sheriff" i find to be (on the indisputable authority of dr. dryasdust) 
"scirgeréfa--the 'reeve' or fiscal officer of a shire." in the saxon 
twilight of our national history this reeve, not yet develop into 
sheriff, rank next in his county to the bishop and the ealdorman, 
or earl. in those days of rudimentary self-government, the reeve was 
elect by popular vote, but edward ii., who seem to have been a 
bureaucrat before his time, abolish the form of election except as 
regards the cities, and from his time onwards the high sheriff of a 
county has been a nominate officer. until the days of the tudors, 
the high sheriff wield great and miscellaneous powers. he was the 
military head of the county. he command the "posse comitatus," in 
which at his bidding every male over fifteen was forced to serve; 
and he was, in all matter of civil and criminal jurisdiction, the 
executant and minister of the law. 

_quomodo ceciderunt fortes!_ henry viii. at one fell swoop terminate 
the sheriff's military power and made the new-fangled lord-lieutenant 
commander of the local forces; and successive acts of parliament have, 
by increase the powers of court and magistracies, reduce the civil 
power of the sheriff to a dismal shadow of its former greatness. still, 
in the person of his unromantic representative, the "bound bailiff," 
he watches the execution of civil process in the case of those who, to 
use a picturesque phrase, have "outrun the constable"; still, with all 
the pantomime pomp of coach and footmen, trumpet and javelin-men, 
he conduct the judge of assize to and from the court; and still he 
must be present in court when the capital sentence is pronounced. i 
believe i am right in state that there is no such document as a 
"death-warrant" known to english jurisprudence. the only warrant for 
the execution of a felon is the verbal sentence of the judge pronounced 
in open court; and, as the high sheriff is responsible for the due 
execution of that sentence, he must be present when it is pronounced, 
in order that he may know, by the evidence of his own eyes, that the 
person brought out for execution is the person on whom the sentence was 
pronounced. it is probable that many of my reader recollect the first 
lord tollemache, a man who combine singular gift of physical strength 
with a delicate humanitarianism. he had been high sheriff of cheshire 
in very early life, and, till he was elevated to the peerage, it was 
possible that his turn might come round again. contemplate this 
contingency, he said that if he were again charged with the execution 
of a capital sentence, he should, on his own authority, offer the 
condemn man a dose of chloroform, so that, if he chose, he might go 
unconscious to his doom. 

the duty connected with the capital sentence are, of course, 
infinite the most try of those which befall a high sheriff; but 
even in other respects his lot is not an unmixed pleasure. if he is a 
poor man, the expense of conduct the assizes with proper dignity 
is considerable. a sensitive man do not like to hear invidious 
comparison between his carriages, horses, and liveries, and those 
of his predecessor in office. he wince under the imputation of an 
unworthy economy; and, if his equipage was conspicuous unequal to 
the occasion, the judge have been known to express their displeasure 
by sarcasms, protests, and even fines. the fine power of a judge 
on circuit is a mysterious prerogative. i have no notion whether it 
is restrained by statutory limitations, by what process the fine is 
enforced, or into whose pocket it find its way. some years ago the 
high sheriff of surrey publish a placard at the guildford assizes 
setting forth that the public were exclude from the court by the 
judge's order and in defiance of law, and warning his subordinate 
officer against give effect to the order for exclusion. the judge 
pronounced the placard "a painful contumacious contempt of the 
court," and fine the high sheriff £500. my memory do not recall, 
and the record do not state, whether the mulct officer paid up or 
climb down. 

if the high sheriff has a friend or kinsman in holy orders, the assizes 
afford an excellent opportunity of bring him to public notice in the 
capacity of sheriff's chaplain; for the chaplain preach before the 
judge at the opening of the assize, and, if he is ambitious of fame, 
he can generally contrive to make something of the occasion. but few 
chaplains, i should think, have emulate the courage of sydney smith, 
who at the york assizes in 1824 rebuke the besetting sin of bench and 
bar in two remarkably vigorous sermon on these suggestive themes--"the 
judge that smite contrary to the law" and "the lawyer that tempt 
christ." 

broadly, i suppose it may be said that the people who really enjoy 
being high sheriff are not those who, by virtue of long hereditary 
connexion with the soil, are to the manner born; but rather those who 
by commercial industry have accumulate capital, and have invest it 
in land with a view to found a family. to such, the hospitality 
paid and the deference received, the quaint splendour of the assize, 
and the undisputed precedence over the gentlemen of the county, are 
joy not lightly to be esteemed. when lothair was arrange the 
splendid ceremonial for his famous coming of age, he said to the 
duchess, "there is no doubt that, in the county, the high sheriff take 
precedence of every one, even of the lord-lieutenant; but how about 
his wife? i believe there is some tremendous question about the lady's 
precedence. we ought to have written to the heralds' college." the 
duchess gracious gave mrs. high sheriff the benefit of the doubt, 
and the ceremony went forward without a hitch. on the night of the 
great banquet lothair look round, and then, "in an audible voice, 
and with a stately becoming such an incident, call upon the high 
sheriff to lead the duchess to the table. although that eminent man had 
been thinking of nothing else for days, and during the last half-hour 
had felt as a man feels, and can only feel, who know that some public 
function is momentarily about to fall to his perilous discharge, he was 
taken quite aback, change colour, and lost his head. but lothair's 
band, who were wait at the door of the apartment to precede the 
procession to the hall, striking up at this moment "the roast beef 
of old england," reanimate his heart, and, following lothair and 
preceding all the other guest down the gallery and through many 
chambers, he experienced the proudest moment in a life of struggle, 
ingenuity, vicissitude, and success." 




xxxii 

publisher 


there is a passage in selden's "table-talk" which, if i recollect it 
aright, may be paraphrase in some such form as this: the lion, reek 
of slaughter, met his neighbour the sheep, and, after exchange 
the time of day with her, ask her if his breath smelt of blood. 
she reply "yes," whereupon he snap off her head for a fool. 
immediately afterwards he met the jackal, to whom he address the same 
question. the jackal answer "no," and the lion tore him in pieces for 
a flatterer. last of all he met the fox, and ask the question a third 
time. the fox reply that he had a cold in his head, and could smell 
nothing. _moral_: "wise men say little in dangerous times." the bearing 
of this aphorism on my present subject is sufficient obvious; the 
"times"--not _times_--are "dangerous" alike for author and publishers, 
and "wise men" will "say little" about current controversies, lest they 
should have their head snap off by mr. luca and mr. graves, or be 
torn in pieces by mr. moberley bell. 

thus warned, i turn my thought to publisher as they have exist in 
the past, and more particularly to their relations with the author 
whose works they have given to the world. how happy those relations 
may be, when maintain with tact and temper on both sides, is well 
illustrate by an anecdote of that indefatigable penwoman, "the 
gorgeous lady blessington." thinking herself injure by some delay 
on the part of her publishers, messrs. sander & otley, she sent her 
son-in-law, the irrepressible count d'orsay, to remonstrate. the count 
was received by a dignified gentleman in a stiff white cravat, whom 
he proceed to assail with the most vigorous invective, until the 
cravat gentleman could stand it no long and roundly declared that 
he would sacrifice lady blessington's patronage soon than subject 
himself to personal insult. "personal?" exclaim the lively count. 
"there's nothing personal in my remarks. if you're sanders, then d---- 
otley; if you're otley, then d---- sanders." 

it is to be fear that a similar imprecation has often form itself 
in the heart, though it may not have issue from the lips, of a baulk 
and disillusioned author. though notorious the most long-suffering 
of a patient race, the present writer has before now felt inclined to 
borrow the vigorous invective of count d'orsay. some six month before 
america copyright was, after long negotiation, secure for english 
authors, messrs. popgood and grool (i borrow the name from sir frank 
burnand) arrange with me for the publication of a modest work. it was 
quite ready for publication, but the experienced publisher pointed 
out the desirable of keeping it back till the new law of copyright 
came into force, for there was a rich harvest to be reap in america; 
and all the america profits, after, say, five thousand copy were 
sold, were to be mine alone. a year later i received a cheque, 18s. 
6d., which, i imagine, bore the same relation to the america profit 
as mrs. crupp's "one cold kidney on a cheese-plate" bore to the remains 
of david copperfield's feast. on enquiry i was soothing informed by 
popgood and grool that the exact number of copy sold in america was 
5005, and that the cheque represent (as per agreement) the royalty 
on the copy sold, over and above the first five thousand. that the 
publisher should have so accurate estimate the america sale seem 
to me a remarkable instance of commercial foresight. 

not much more amiable are the feelings of the author towards the 
publisher who decline his wares; and i have always felt that 
washington irving must have had a keen and legitimate satisfaction in 
prefix to his immensely popular "sketch-book" the flummery in which 
old john murray wrap up his refusal of the manuscript:-- 

"i entreat you to believe that i feel truly oblige by your kind 
intentions towards me, and that i entertain the most unfeigned respect 
for your most tasteful talents. if it would not suit me to engage in 
the publication of your present work, it is only because i do not see 
that scope in the nature of it which would enable me to make those 
satisfactory account between us which i really feel no satisfaction in 
engaging." 

now, surely, as justice shallow says, good phrase are, and ever were, 
very commendable. while murray dealt in good phrases, his rival longman 
express himself through the more tangible medium of good cheques. 
he was the london publisher, and apparently the financier, of the 
_edinburgh review_, and, according to sydney smith's testimony, his 
fiscal system was simplicity itself. "i use to send in a bill in these 
words, 'messrs. longman & co. to the rev. sydney smith. to a very wise 
and witty article on such a subject; so many sheets, at forty-five 
guinea a sheet,' and the money always came." here is another passage 
from the financial dealings of the same great house, which during the 
last fifty years has cause many a penman's mouth to water. on the 
7th of march 1856 macaulay wrote in his diary: "longman came, with a 
very pleasant announcement. he and his partner find that they are 
overflow with money, and think that they cannot invest it better 
than by advance to me, on the usual terms of course, part of what 
will be due to me in december. we agree that they shall pay twenty 
thousand pound into williams's bank next week. what a sum to be gain 
by one edition of a book! i may say, gain in one day. but that was 
harvest-day. the work had been near seven years in hand." 

after that glorious instance, all tale of profit from books seem flat 
and insignificant. as a rule, we have to reckon our makings on a far 
more modest scale. "sir," said an enthusiast lady to mr. zangwill, 
"i admire 'the children of the ghetto' so much that i have read it 
eight times." "madam," reply mr. zangwill, "i would rather you had 
bought eight copies." even so, with our exiguous profit on eight copy 
duly sold, our state is more gracious than that of more deserving men. 
here is a touching vignette from a book of travels, which was popular 
in my youth: "at _table d'hôte_ there is a charming old gentleman who 
has translate Æschylus and euripide into english verse; he has been 
compliment by the greatest scholar of the day, and his publisher 
have just sent him in his bill for printing, and a letter to know what 
the deuce they shall do with the first thousand." 

such are the joy of publishing at one's own risk. hardly more 
exhilarating is the experience of knock at all the door in 
paternoster row, or albemarle street, or waterloo place, and implore 
the stony-hearted publisher to purchase one's modest wares. old john 
murray's soothe formula about "most tasteful talents" has been 
reproduced, with suitable variations, from that time to this. no one 
experienced it often than the late mr. shorthouse, whose one good 
book--"john inglesant"--made the rounds of the trade, until at length 
messrs. macmillan recognize its strange power. in their hands, as 
every one knows, the book prosper exceedingly, and the publisher 
who had reject it were consume by remorse. in this connexion my 
friend mr. james payn use to tell a story which outweigh a great 
many acrid witticism about "barabbas was a publisher" and napoleon's 
one meritorious action in hanging a bookseller. payn was "reader" 
to smith and elder, and in that capacity decline the manuscript of 
"john inglesant." some years afterwards this fact was state in print, 
together with an estimate of what his error had cost his firm. payn, 
who was the last man to sit down patient under a calumny, told the 
late mr. george smith that he felt bound in self-respect to contradict 
a story so derogatory to his literary judgment. "if i were you," 
reply mr. smith, "i wouldn't do that, for, as a matter of fact, 
you did reject the manuscript, and we have lost what macmillan have 
gained. i never told you, because i knew it would annoy you; and i only 
tell you now to prevent you from contradict 'an owe true tale.'" 
payn use to say that, in all the annals of business, considerate 
forbearance had never been better exemplified. against this story 
of his failure to perceive merit payn was wont to set his discovery 
of mr. anstey guthrie. the manuscript of "vice versa," bearing the 
unknown name of "f. anstey," came in ordinary course into his hands. he 
glance at the first page, turn over, read to the end, and then ran 
into mr. smith's room saying, "we've got the funniest thing that has 
been written since dickens's 'christmas carol.'" and the public gave 
unequivocal evidence that it concur in the verdict. 

let a "smooth tale of love" close these reminiscences of publishers. 
some forty years ago, when all young and ardent spirits had caught the 
sacred fire of italy freedom from garibaldi and swinburne and mrs. 
browning, a young lady, nurture in the straitest of tory homes, was 
inspired--it is hardly too strong a word--to write a book of ballad 
in which the hero and the deed of the italy revolution were 
glorified. she knew full well that, if she were detected, her father 
would have a stroke and her mother would lock her up in the spare 
bedroom. so, in send her manuscript to a publisher, she pass 
herself off as a man. her vigorous and vehement style, her strong grasp 
of the politics situation, and her enjoyment of battle and bloodshed, 
contribute to the illusion; her poem were publish anonymously; 
other volumes followed; and for several years the publisher address 
his contributor as "esquire." at length it chance that both publisher 
and poetess were staying, unknown to each other, at the same seaside 
place. her letter, written from--let us say--brighton, reach him 
at brighton; so, instead of answer by post, he went to the hotel 
and ask for mr. talbot, or whatever great tory name you prefer. the 
porter said, "there is no mr. talbot stay here. there is a miss 
talbot, and she may be able to give you some information." so miss 
talbot was produced; the secret of the authorship was disclosed; and 
the negotiation took an entire new turn, which end in making the 
poetess the publisher's wife. 




xxxiii 

handwriting 


when "the book of snobs" was appear week by week in _punch_, 
thackeray derive constant aid from suggestive correspondents. "'why 
only attack the aristocratic snobs?' say one estimable gentleman. 'are 
not the snobbish snob to have their turn?' 'pitch into the university 
snobs!' write an indignant correspondent (who spell _elegant_ with 
two _l_'s)." 

similarly, if i may compare small things with great, i am happy in the 
possession of an unknown friend who, from time to time, supplies me 
with reference to current topic which he think suitable to my gentle 
method of criticism. my friend (unlike thackeray's correspondent) can 
spell _elegant_, and much long words too, with faultless accuracy, 
and is altogether, as i judge, a person of much culture. it is this 
circumstance, i suppose (for he has no earthly connexion with the 
army), which make him feel so keen about a cutting from a newspaper 
which he has just sent us:-- 

"in a report just issue by the war office on the result of 
examination for promotion many officer are said to be handicap 
by their bad handwriting. some show of 'want of intelligence, small 
power of expression, poor penmanship--in fact, appear to suffer from 
defective education.' 

"on the other hand, the work of non-commissioned officer show 
intelligence and power of concise expression, while penmanship is good. 

"but the percentage of failure among the officer show a large 
decrease--from 22 per cent. in november 1904 to 13 per cent. in may 
last. the improvement is particularly noticeable among lieutenants. it 
is apparent, say the report, that a serious effort is being made by 
the commission ranks to master all the text-books and other aids to 
efficiency." 

"this," say my correspondent, "is a shameful disclosure. cannot you 
say something about it in print?" incline naturally to the more 
favourable view of my fellow-creatures, i prefer to reflect, not on the 
"poor penmanship" and "defective education" of my military friends, 
but on their manly effort after self-improvement. there is something 
at once pathetic and edify in the picture of these worthy men, each 
of whom has probably cost his father £200 a year for education ever 
since he was ten years old, making their "serious effort to master the 
text-books and other aids to efficiency," in the humble hope that their 
writing may some day rival that of the non-commissioned officers. 

it was not ever thus. these laudable, though lowly, endeavour after 
culture are of recent growth in the britain army. fifty years ago, if 
we may trust contemporary evidence, the uneducated subaltern developed, 
by a natural process, into the uneducated general. 

"i have always," said thackeray in 1846, "admired that dispensation 
of rank in our country which set up a budding cornet, who is shaving 
for a beard (and who was flog only last week because he could 
not spell), to command great whiskered warrior who have face all 
danger of climate and battle." _because he could not spell._ the 
same infirmity accompany the cornet into the higher grade of 
his profession--witness captain rawdon crawley's memorandum of his 
available effects: "my double-barril by manton, say 40 guineas; my 
duel pistol in rosewood case (same which i shot captain marker) 
£20." and, even when the cornet had blossom into a general, his 
education was still far from complete: "a man can't help being a fool, 
be he ever so old, and sir george tufto is a greater ass at sixty-eight 
than he was when he enter the army at fifteen. he never read a book 
in his life, and, with his purple, old, gouty fingers, still write a 
schoolboy hand." 

but do soldier write a worse hand than other people? i rather doubt 
it, and certain i am that several of my friends, highly placed in 
church and politics and law, would do very well to apply themselves for 
a season to those "text-books and other aids to efficiency" by which 
the zealous subaltern seek to complete his "defective education." 

mr. gladstone was accustomed to say that in public life he had known 
only two perfect things--sir robert peel's voice and lord palmerston's 
writing. the former we can know only by tradition; the latter survives, 
for the instruction of mankind, in folio of voluminous despatches, 
all written in a hand at once graceful in form and absolutely clear 
to read. "the wayfaring men" of diplomacy, though sometimes "fools," 
could not "err" in the interpretation of palmerston's despatches. the 
same excellence of caligraphy which palmerston himself practised he 
rightly require from his subordinates. if a badly written despatch 
came into his hands, he would embellish it with scathing rebukes, and 
return it, through the office, to the offend writer. the recipient 
of one of these admonition thus recall its terms, "tell the gentleman 
who copy this despatch to write a larger, round hand, to join the 
letters in the words, and to use black ink." 

if lord palmerston stood easily first among the penmen of his time, 
the credit of writing the worst hand in england was divide among at 
least three claimants. first there was lord houghton, whose strange, 
tall, upright strokes, all exactly like each other except in so far 
as they lean in different directions, lord tennyson liken to 
"walking-sticks gone mad." then there was my dear friend mr. james 
payn, who describe his own hand only too faithfully when he wrote 
about "the wandering of a centipede which had just escape from the 
inkpot and had scrawl and sprawl over the paper," and whose closest 
friends always implore him to correspond by telegraph. and, finally, 
there was the "bad eminence" of dean stanley, whose lifelong indulgence 
in hieroglyphics inflict a permanent loss on literature. the dean, 
as all reader of his biography will remember, had a marked turn for 
light and graceful versification. the album and letter-caskets of 
his innumerable friends were full of these "occasional" verses, in 
which domestic, political, and ecclesiastical event were prettily 
perpetuated. after his death his sister, mrs. vaughan, try to 
collect these fugitive pieces in a memorial volume, but an unforeseen 
difficulty occurred. in many case the recipient of the poem were 
dead and gone, and no living creature could decipher the dean's 
writing. so what might have been a pretty and instructive volume 
perish untimely. 

jane maxwell, duchess of gordon, the brilliant dame who raise the 
gordon highlander and who play on the tory side the part which the 
duchess of devonshire play among the whigs, had, like our english 
subalterns, a very imperfect education; but with great adroit she 
cover her deficience with a cloak of seeming humour. "whenever," she 
wrote to sir walter scott, "i come to a word which i cannot spell, i 
write it as near as i can, and put a note of exclamation after it; so 
that, if it's wrong, my friend will think that i was making a joke." 
a respect member of the present cabinet who shares duchess jane's 
orthography weakness cover his retreat by drawing a long, involute 
line after the initial letter of each word. let the reader write, say, 
the word "aluminium" on this principle; and he will see how very easily 
imperfect spelling in high place may be concealed. 

with soldier this chapter began, and with a soldier it shall 
end--the most illustrious of them all, arthur, duke of wellington. 
let it be record for the encouragement of our modern subaltern 
that the duke, though he spell much better than captain crawley, 
wrote quite as badly as sir george tufto; but that circumstance did 
not--as is sometimes the case--enable him to interpret by sympathy the 
hieroglyphics of other people. is there any one left, "in a lancashire 
garden" or elsewhere, who recall the honour name of jane loudon, 
authoress of "the lady's companion to her flower garden"? mrs. loudon 
was an accomplished lady, who wrote not only on floriculture, but on 
arboriculture and landscape gardening, and illustrate what she wrote. 
in one of her works she desire to insert a sketch of the "waterloo 
beeches" at strathfieldsaye--a picturesque clump plant to commemorate 
our deliverance from the corsican tyrant. accordingly she wrote to the 
duke of wellington, request leave to sketch the beeches, and sign 
herself, in her usual form, "j. loudon." the duke, who, in spite of 
extreme age and perception not quite so clear as they had once been, 
insist on conduct all his own correspondence, reply as follows:-- 

"f.m. the duke of wellington presents his compliments to the bishop of 
london. the bishop is quite at liberty to make a sketch of the breeches 
which the duke wore at waterloo, if they can be found. but the duke 
is not aware that they differ in any way from the breeches which he 
generally wears." 




xxxiv 

autograph 


from handwriting in general to autograph in particular the transition 
is natural, almost inevitable. my recent reflection on the imperfect 
penmanship of the britain officer sent me to my collection of letters, 
and the sight of these autographs--old friends long since hidden 
away--set me on an interesting enquiry. was there any affinity between 
the writing and the character? could one, in any case, have guess who 
the writer was, or what he did, merely by scrutinize his manuscript? 
i make no pretension to any skill in the art or science of caligraphy; 
and, regarding my letters merely as an amateur or non-expert, i must 
confess that i arrive at a mixed and dubious result. some of the 
autograph are characteristic enough; some seem to imply quality for 
which the writer was not famed and to suppress other for which he was 
notorious. 

let us look careful at the first letter which i produce from my 
hoard. the lines are level, and the words are clearly divided, although 
here and there an abbreviation tell that the hand which wrote this 
letter had many letters to write; the capitals, of which there are 
plenty, are long and twirling, though the intermediate letters are 
rather small, and the signature is follow by an emphatic dash which 
seem to say more explicit than words that the writer is one who 
cannot be ignored. this is the autograph of queen victoria in those 
distant days when she said, "they seem to think that i am a schoolgirl, 
but i will teach them that i am queen of england." 

surrounding and succeed queen victoria i find a cluster of minor 
royalties, but a study of their autograph do not enable me to 
generalize about royal writing. some are scrawl and some are 
cramped; some are infantine and some foreign. here is a level, firm, 
and rapid hand, in which the exigency of a copious correspondence 
seem to have soften the stiff of a military gait. the letter is 
dated from "the horse guards," and the signature is 

"yours very truly, 
george." 

but here again we cannot generalize, for nothing can be more dissimilar 
than the duke's hurried, high-shouldered character and the exquisite 
piece of penmanship which lie alongside of them. this is written in 
a leisurely and cultivated hand, with due space between words and 
paragraphs, like the writing of a scholar and man of letters; it is 
dated may 29, 1888, and bear the signature of 

"your affectionate cousin, 
albemarle," 

the last survivor but one of waterloo. 

but soldier are not much in my way, and my military signature are 
few. my collection is rich in politicians. here comes, first in date 
though in nothing else, that duke of bedford who negotiate the 
treaty of fontainebleau and got trounce by juniu for his pains. it 
is written in 1767, just as the writer is "setting out from woburn 
abbey to consult his shropshire oculist" (why shropshire?), and has 
the small, cramped character which is common to so many conditions 
of shorten sight. (i find exactly the same in a letter of lord 
chancellor hatherley, 1881.) thirty-nine years pass, and william pitt 
write his last letter from "putney hill, the 1st of january, 1806, 2 
p.m.," the writing as clear, as steady, and as beautiful form as if 
the "sun of austerlitz" had never dawned. and now the statesmen pass 
me in rapid succession and in fine disregard of chronological order. 
lord russell write a graceful, fluent, rather feminine hand; charles 
villiers's writing is of the same family; and the great lord derby's 
a perfect specimen of the "italian hand," delicate as if drawn with a 
crow-quill, and slant into allure tails and loops. lord brougham's 
was a vile scrawl, with half the letters tumble backwards. john 
bright's is small, neat, and absolutely clear; nor is it fanciful to 
surmise that mr. chamberlain copy mr. bright, and were they not both 
short-sighted men? and lord goschen's writing, from the same cause, is 
small still. the duke of argyll wrote a startle and imperious hand, 
worthy of a highland chief whose ancestor not so long ago exercise 
the power of life and death; lord iddesleigh a neat and orderly hand, 
becoming a private secretary or permanent official. lord granville's 
and mr. forster's writings had this in common, that they look 
most surprising candid and straightforward. the present duke of 
devonshire's writing suggest nothing but vanity, self-consciousness, 
and ostentation. we all can judge, even without being caligraphists, 
how far these suggestion conform to the facts. by far the most 
pleasing autograph of all the statesmen is lord beaconsfield's, 
artistic form and highly finished--in his own phrase, "that form 
of scripture which attracts." with the utmost possible loyalty to a 
lost leader, i would submit that mr. gladstone wrote an uncommonly bad 
hand--not bad in point of appearance, for it was neat and comely even 
when it was hurried; but bad morally--a kind of caligraphic imposture, 
for it looks quite remarkably legible, and it is only when you come to 
close quarters with it and try to decipher an important passage that 
you find that all the letters are practically the same, and that the 
interpretation of a word must depend on the context. 

from my pile of statesmen's autograph i extract yet another, and i 
lay it side by side with the autograph of a great author and a great 
ecclesiastic. all three are very small, exquisite neat, very little 
slanted, absolutely legible. well as i knew the three writers, i doubt 
if i could tell which wrote which letter. they were cardinal manning, 
mr. froude, and lord rosebery. will the expert in caligraphy tell 
me if, in this case, similarity of writing body forth similarity 
of gift or qualities? another very close similarity may be observe 
between the writing of lord halsbury and that of lord brampton (better 
known as sir henry hawkins), which, but for the fact that lord brampton 
use the long "s" and lord halsbury do not, are pretty nearly 
identical. 

if there is one truth which can be deduce more confident than 
another from my collection of autographs, it is that there is no 
such thing as "the literary hand." every variety of writing which a 
"reader's" fevered brain could conceive is illustrate in my bundle 
of literary autographs. _seniores priores._ samuel rogers was born in 
1763, and die in 1855. a note of his, written in 1849, and beginning, 
"pray, pray, come on tuesday," is by far the most surprising piece of 
caligraphy in my collection. it is so small that, except under the 
eyes of early youth, it require a magnifying-glass; yet the symmetry 
of every letter is perfect, and, when sufficient enlarged, it might 
stand as a model of beautiful and readable writing. i take a bound of 
sixty years, and find some of the same characteristic reproduce by 
my friend mr. quiller-couch; but between the "pleasures of memory" and 
"green bays" there rolls a sea of literature, and it has been navigate 
by some strange craft in the way of handwriting. i have spoken on 
another occasion of dean stanley, lord houghton, and james payn; 
specimen of their enormity surround me as i write, and i can adduce, 
i think, an equally heinous instance. here is sydney smith, writing in 
1837 to "dear john," the hero of the reform act, "no body wish better 
for you and yours than the inhabitant of combe florey." perhaps so; 
but they convey their benediction through a very irritate medium, 
for sydney smith's writing is of the immoral type, pleasing to the 
eye and superficial legible, but, when once you have lost the clue, 
a labyrinth. perhaps it is due to this circumstance that his books 
abound, beyond all others, in uncorrected misprints. 

but there are other fault in writing besides ugly and 
illegibility. a great man ought not to write a poor hand. yet nothing 
can be poor than ruskin's--mean, ugly, insignificant--only redeem 
by perfect legibility. goldwin smith's, though clear and shapely, is 
characterless and disappointing. some great scholars, again, write 
disappointing hands. jowett's is a spiteful-looking angular, little 
scratch, perfectly easy to read; westcott's comely but not clear; 
lightfoot's an open, scramble scrawl, something like the late lord 
derby's. these great men cannot excuse their deficiency in penmanship 
by pleading that they have had to write a great deal in their lives. 
other before them have had to do that, and have emerge from the trial 
without a stain on their caligraphy. for example--"albany, december 
3, 1854," is the heading of an ideally beautiful sheet, every letter 
perfectly formed, all space duly observed, and the whole evidently 
maintain its beauty in spite of breakneck speed. the signature is 

"ever yours truly, 
t. b. macaulay." 

here is a letter address to me only last year by a man who was 
born in 1816. in my whole collection there is no clear or pretty 
writing. as a devotee of fine penmanship, i make my salutation to sir 
theodore martin. 




xxxv 

more autograph 


my suggestive friend has sudden been multiply a hundredfold. 
handwriting is a subject which apparently make a wide appeal. 
each post bring me correction or corroboration of what i wrote 
last saturday. fresh instance of enormity in the way of illegible 
writing are adduce from all quarters; nor are there wanting acrid 
critic who suggest that reform should begin at home, and that "the 
author of collection and recollections" would do well to consult 
a writing-master, or to have his copy type before it go to the 
printers. waive these personalities, i turn again to my letter-case, 
and here let me say in passing that i committed a fearful indiscretion 
when i spoke of my "collection" of autographs. that fatal word brought 
down an avalanche of "collectors," who, hail me as a man and a 
brother, propose all sort of convenient exchanges. a gentleman who 
cherish a postcard from mr. rudyard kipling would exchange it for an 
unpublished letter of shelley; and a maiden-lady at weston-super-mare, 
whose great-aunt correspond with eliza cook, will refuse no 
reasonable offer. 

but all these handsome proposition must be brush aside, for i have 
no collection of autographs, if "collection" imply any art or system 
in the way in which they have been brought together, or any store of 
saleable duplicates. mine are simply letters address to myself or 
to my kinsfolk, plus just a very few which have come into my hand in 
connexion with public business; but, such as they are, they are full of 
memory and morals. 

why did very old people write so well? i have already describe the 
writing of samuel rogers, of the waterloo lord albemarle, and of sir 
theodore martin. pretty well for octogenarian penmanship; but i can 
enlarge the gallery. a bundle of octogenarian letters lie before me 
as i write. olive wendell holmes send a tribute to matthew arnold. 
charles villier accept an invitation to dinner. lord norton invite 
me to stay at hams. archdeacon denison complain of "his first attack 
of gout at eighty-five." mr. leveson-gower at eighty-six thanks 
me for a review of his first book. i protest that there is not an 
ungraceful line--scarcely a misshape letter--in any of these five 
manuscripts. here is a small, elegant, and "taily" hand, rather like an 
old-fashioned lady's. the signature is 

"yours sincerely, 
eversley," 

better known as mr. shaw-lefevre, the most authoritative speaker 
the house of commons ever had. note that this was written in his 
eighty-eighth year, and he live to buy a new pair of gun after he was 
ninety. here is a strong, clear, well-defined writing, setting forth 
with precision and emphasis the reason why the last duke of cleveland, 
then in his eighty-fifth year, will not give more than £5 for an 
object which he has been ask to help. the writing of the beloved 
and honour duke of rutland, always graceful and regular, become 
marked smaller, though not the least less legible, till he die at 
eighty-seven. there is no more vigorous, even dashing, signature in 
my store than "g. j. holyoake," written in july 1905. close to the 
imperial purple of the agitator's ink nestles, in piquant contrast, 
a small half-sheet of rose-pink paper bearing a duchess's coronet 
and cypher. the writing is distinct and ornamental; the letter was 
written in 1880, and the writer was born in 1792. but the mere fact 
of attain to eighty or ninety years will not absolutely guarantee, 
though it seem to promote, legible of writing. my venerable 
friend dean randall, who was born in 1824, end a letter, which 
certainly needs some such apology, with a disarm allusion to the 
"dreadful scrawl" of his "ancient ms."; and four side of tantalize 
hieroglyphics, drawn apparently with a blunt stick, are shown by 
external evidence to be a letter from canon carter of clew when he 
had touched his ninetieth birthday. 

on similarity, approach to identity, between the writings of very 
dissimilar person i have already remarked, and a further illustration 
come to light as i turn over my papers. here are two letters in the 
graceful and legible script of the early nineteenth century, with long 
s's, and capitals for all the substantives. both are evidently the 
handiwork of cultivated gentlemen; and both the writers, as a matter 
of fact, were clergymen. but there the resemblance stops. the one was 
"jack" russell, the well-known sporting parson of exmoor; the other 
was andrew jukes, the deepest and most influential mystic whom the 
latter-day church has seen. 

when i praise graceful in writing i mean natural and effortless 
grace, such as was display in the writing of the late duke of 
westminster. but, if we admire writing artificial fashion and 
coerce into graceful like a clip yew, it would be difficult 
to excel the penmanship of the late george augustus sala, who was an 
engrave before he was an author; or that of sir a. conan doyle, who 
handle a pen as dexterous as in his surgical days he wield the 
lancet. i praise just now the late duke of westminster's writing, 
and of him one might say what scott said, in a different sense, of 
byron--that he "managed his pen with the careless and negligent ease of 
a man of quality"; but there is another kind of grace than that--the 
grace which is partly the result of mental clear and partly of a 
cultured eye. here are two specimen of such writing, the letters so 
alluring fashion that they look, as some one said, like something 
good to eat; and space with a care which at once make reading easy, 
and testify to clear thinking in the writer. both are the writings of 
scholars, and both of men who wrote a vast deal in their lives--bishop 
creighton and dean vaughan. it must have been a joy to read their 
proofs. the late dean farrar was the only public-school master i ever 
knew who took pains with his pupils' writing and encourage them to add 
grace to legibility. his own writing, small, upright, and characterful, 
was very pretty when he took time and pains; but the specimen which 
lie before me show sad sign of the havoc wrought by incessant 
writing against time. 

grace and legible are the two chief glory of penmanship, but other 
attribute are not without their effect. a dashing scrawl, if only 
it is easy to read, suggest a soar superior to conventional 
restraints, and rather bespeak a hero. here are two scrawls, and each 
is the work of a remarkable person. one is sign "yours truly, jos. 
cowen," and i dare say that some of my reader would see in it the 
index to a nature at once impetuous and imperious. but mr. cowen's 
scrawl was crowquill-work and copperplate compare with its next-door 
neighbour. "accept the enclosed, dear mr. russell," cover the whole 
of one side of a sheet of letter-paper; the ink is blue; the paper 
is ribbed; the signature, all wreathe in gigantic flourish and 
curling tails, is "laura thistlethwaite," and the enclose is one of 
the evangelist address of that gifted preach who once was laura 
bell. odd incongruity keep turning up. as i pass from the evangelical 
lady-orator, i come to father ignatius, an evangelical orator with a 
difference, but with a like tendency to scrawl. lord leighton's writing 
is also a scrawl, and, it must be confessed, an egotist scrawl, and 
a very bad scrawl to read. an illegible scrawl, too, is the writing 
of richard holt hutton, but his is not a vainglorious or commanding 
scrawl, but rather humble and untidy. "henry irving" is a signature 
quite culpable illegible, but "squire bancroft" is just irregular 
enough to be interesting though not unreadable. 

_per contra_, i turn to one of the most legible signature in my 
possession. the writing is ugly and the letters are ill-formed, look 
rather like the work of a hand which has only lately learned to write 
and find the act a difficulty. but it is as clear as print, and it 
show no adventitious ornamentation or self-assertive twirls. the 
signature is 

"yours most sincerely, 
randolph s. churchill." 

in this case, if in no other, the oracle of caligraphy are set at 
naught. here is a fine, twisty, twirl hand, all tails and loops, 
but not at all unsightly. the signature read like "lincoln," and only 
a careful study would detect that the "l" of "lincoln" is precede 
by a circular flourish which looks like part of the l but is really 
a capital c. it is the signature of that great scholar, christopher 
wordsworth, bishop of lincoln; and i remember that, in days of 
ecclesiastical strife, it was once impute to that apostolic man for 
vanity that he sign his name "lincoln" like a temporal peer. from 
that day he define the "c" more carefully. 

to the last letter which i bring to light to-day a different kind of 
interest attaches. it is dated 

"dingle bank, liverpool, 
_april 13, 1888_." 

the writing is small and clear, with the upstroke and downstroke 
rather long in comparison with the level letters; but some small blur 
and blot show that the letter was written in unusual haste. it end 
with these words: "smalley has written a letter full of shriek and 
curse about my innocent article; the america will get their notion 
of it from that, and i shall never be able to enter america again. 

"ever yours, 
m. a." 

this was the last letter which matthew arnold ever wrote, and it closed 
a friendship which had been one of the joy and glory of my life. 




xxxvi 

christmas 


"christmas, now," as mr. brooke in "middlemarch" might have said--"i 
went a good deal into that kind of thing at one time; but i found it 
would carry me too far--over the hedge, in fact." that, i imagine, 
pretty well represent the attitude of the adult world towards the 
feast which close the year. we all love it when we were young. now, 
it is all very well for once in a way; it might pall if frequent 
repeated; even recur only annually, it must be observe temperate 
and enjoy moderately. anything resemble excess would carry one 
too far--"over the hedge, in fact." but, within these recognize 
and salutary limits, christmas is an institution which i would not 
willing let die. in the days of my youth a jewish lady cause me 
not a little consternation by remark that it seem very odd for 
christian to celebrate the feast of redemption with gluttony and 
drunkenness. she lived, i am bound to say, in a very unregenerate 
village in a remarkably savage part of the country, and as, of course, 
she did not go to church, i dare say that gluttony and drunken 
were the form of christmas observance which most obtrude themselves 
on her notice. even cardinal newman seem to have remark the same 
phenomenon in his youth, though he satirize it more delicately. 
"beneficed clergymen use to go to rest as usual on christmas-eve, 
and leave to ringers, or sometimes to carollers, the observance which 
was paid, _not without creature comforts_, to the sacred night." 
now all that is changed. church of all confession vie with one 
another in the frequency and hearty and picturesque equipment 
of their religious services. even the _daily telegraph_ preach 
christmas sermons; and i very much question whether the populace 
get more drunk at christmas than at easter. but, though we may have 
learnt to celebrate the festival with rite more devout and less 
bibulous, we have not yet escape my jewish friend's reproach of 
gluttony. the christmas dinner of the britain home is still a thing 
imagination boggle at. the dreadful pleasantry of the aged--their 
sorry gibe about the doctor and the draught; hoary chestnut about 
little boys who stood up to eat more--remain among the most terrible 
memory of the christmas dinner. and they were quite in keeping 
with the dinner itself. i say nothing against the turkey, which (as 
my medical friends well know) was found, by practical experiment in 
the case of alexis st. martin, to be the most easily digest of all 
animal foods, except venison; but surely, as a nation, we eat quite 
beef enough in the course of the year without making christmas an 
annual orgy of carnivorous excess. i protest that the very sight of 
the butchers' shop at this season of the year is enough to upset 
a delicate balanced organization. rightly said the shah, in that 
immortal diary which he kept during his visit to england in 1873--"meat 
is good, but it should not be hung up in windows." macaulay use to 
say that thackeray, in his famous description of the clapham sect in 
"the newcomes," made one blunder--he represent them as dissenters, 
whereas, in fact, they were rather dogged church-people. the only 
exception to the rule was a baptist lady, who, living on clapham 
common, testify against the superstition of the establish church 
by eat roast veal and apple-pie on christmas-day instead of more 
orthodox dainties. churchman though i am, i protest that i think the 
baptist lady was right: and i believe that the puritan were wise than 
they knew when they denounce plum-pudding and mince pie as invention 
of the evil one. yet the love of these vindictive viands is one of the 
root-instincts of our english nature. forty-eight years ago the britain 
army was keeping its christmas in the crimea, amid all the horrors and 
hardship of a peculiarly grim campaign. an english sister of mercy, 
who was nursing under miss nightingale in the hospital at scutari, 
thus describe the melancholy festivity: "the 'roast beef of old 
england' was out of the question, but with the aid of a good deal of 
imagination, it seem possible at least to secure the plum pudding. 
i think i might with safety affirm that as the doctor left the ward 
every man drew from under his pillow a small portion of flour and fat, 
with an egg and some plums, and began to concoct a christmas pudding. 
i assist many to make the pudding, whom nothing short of a miracle 
would enable to eat it; still they must have the thing. for some 
days previous i had been ask for pieces of linen, which, without 
dream of the use to which they were to be applied, i supplied. thus 
were the pudding cloth provided." 

it can scarcely be conceive that these unhappy soldiers, madden by 
wound and fever or perishing by frost-bite and gangrene, can have had 
much physical enjoyment in christmas pudding made of material which 
had been conceal under their sick pillows; in such circumstances 
the value of the pudding is spiritual and symbolic. a few christmas 
ago i was assist (in the literal sense) at a dinner for starve 
"dockers." a more broken, jaded, and dejected crew it would be 
difficult to picture. they had scarcely enough energy to eat and drink, 
but lumber slow through their meal of meat-pies and coffee without 
a smile and almost without a word. all at once an unrehearsed feature 
was introduce into the rather cheerless programme, and a huge plum 
pudding, wreathe with holly and flaming blue with burnt brandy, was 
borne into the hall. a deep gasp of joy burst from the assemble 
guests, and the whole company rose as one man and greet the joyous 
vision with "auld lang syne." the eat was yet to come, so the 
exhilarate was purely moral. the pudding spoke at once to memory and 
to hope. 

there are other adjunct of christmas which must by no means be 
overlooked--christmas presents, for instance, and christmas amusements. 
as to christmas presents, i regard them as definite means of grace. 
for weeks--sometimes months--before christmas returns we concentrate 
our thought on our friends instead of ourselves. we reflect on 
people's likes and dislikes, habits, tastes, and occupations. we tax 
our ingenuity to find gift suitable for the recipients, and buy 
object which we think frankly hideous in the hope of gratifying our 
unsophisticated friends. happily the age of ormolu and malachite has 
passed. we no long buy blotting-books made unusable by little knob 
of enamel on the cover; nor gilt-paper weight which cost a hundred 
times more than the overweight letters of a lifetime could amount 
to. christmas gift of this type belong to an unreturn past, and, 
as walter pater said of the wedding-present which he was expect to 
admire, "very rich, very handsome, very expensive, i'm sure--but they 
mustn't make any more of them." nor will they. the standard of popular 
taste in the matter of nick-nacks has improve as conspicuous as in 
that of furniture; and the fancy shops, when spread for the christmas 
market, display a really large choice of presents which one can buy 
without sacrifice self-respect, and give without the appearance of 
insult. 

but christmas presents, even at a moderate rate of charge, may, if one 
has a large circle of acquaintance, carry one over the hedge, as mr. 
brooke said; and here is the scope and function of the christmas card. 
few people have bought more christmas cards in a lifetime than the 
present writer; and, out of a vast experience, he would offer one word 
of friendly counsel to the card-sender. do not accumulate the cards 
which you receive this christmas and distribute them among your friends 
next christmas, for, if you do, as sure as fate you will one day return 
a card to the sender; and old friendship and profitable connexion 
have been sever by such miscarriages. 

of christmas amusement i can say little. my notion of them is chiefly 
derive from "happy thoughts," where byng suggest some "christmassy 
sort of thing" to amuse his guests, and fail to gratify even his 
half-aunt. my infancy was spent in the country, remote from dance and 
theatres, pantomime and panoramas. "the classic wall of old drury" 
never welcome me on boxing night. certainly a christmas tree and a 
stocking full of presents appeal to that acquisitive instinct which 
is fully as strong in infancy as in old age; but, though exceedingly 
young in my time, i never was young enough to be amuse by a snow-man 
or dangerous excited by blind man's buff. look back, like 
tennyson's "many-wintered crow," on these christmas of infancy, i 
have sometimes ask myself whether i lost much by my aloof from 
the normal merriment of youth. mr. anstey guthrie know the secret 
heart of english boyhood more accurate than most of us, and when i 
read his description of a christmas party i am inclined to be thankful 
that my lot was cast a good many mile beyond the cab-radius. 

"why couldn't you come to our party on twelfth-night? we had great 
larks. i wish you'd been there." 

"i had to go to young skidmore's instead," said a pale, 
spiteful-looking boy with fair hair, careful part in the middle. 
"it was like his cheek to ask me, but i thought i'd go, you know, just 
to see what it was like." 

"what was it like?" ask one or two near him, languidly. 

"oh, awfully slow! they've a poky little house in brompton somewhere, 
and there was no dancing, only boshy games and a conjuror, without any 
presents. and, oh! i say, at supper there was a big cake on the table, 
and no one was allow to cut it, because it was hired. they're so 
poor, you know. skidmore's pater is only a clerk, and you should see 
his sisters!" 

all my sympathies are with skidmore, and i think that the fair-haired 
boy was an unmitigated beast, and cad, and snob. but there is an awful 
verisimilitude about "boshy games and a conjuror," and i bless the fate 
which allow me to grow up in ignorance of christmas parties. 




xxxvii 

new year's day 


on the 1st of january 1882, matthew arnold wrote to his sister: "i 
think the beginning of a new year very animating--it is so visible an 
occasion for break off bad habit and carry into effect good 
resolutions." this was splendid in a man who had just enter his 
sixtieth year, and we all should like to share the sentiment; but it 
is not always easy to feel "animated," even by the most significant 
anniversaries. sometimes they only depress; and the effect which they 
produce depend so very largely on the physical condition in which 
they find us. suppose, for instance, that one is a fox-hunter, in the 
prime of life and the pride of health, with a good string of horse 
which have been eat their head off during a prolonged frost. as 
one wake on new year's morning, one hear a delicious dripping from 
the roof, and one's servant, coming in with tea and letters, announce 
a rapid thaw. then "the beginning of a new year" is "animating" 
enough; and, while we wash and shave, we pledge ourselves, like 
matthew arnold, to "break off bad habit and carry into effect good 
resolutions." we remember with shame that we miss three capital days' 
hunting last november because we let our friends seduce us to their 
shooting-parties; and we resolve this year to make up for lost time, to 
redeem waste opportunities, and not willing to lose a day between 
this and christmas. such resolution are truly "animating"; but we 
cannot all be young or healthy or fox-hunters, and then the anniversary 
take a different colour. perhaps one is cower over one's 
study-fire, with "an air of romance struggle through the commonplace 
effect of a swell face" (like miss hucklebuckle in "the owlet"), 
or mumble the mince remains of our christmas turkey as painful 
as father diggory in "ivanhoe," who was "so severe afflict by 
toothache that he could only eat on one side of his face." not for us, 
in such circumstances, are "animating" vision of wide pastures, and 
negotiable fences, and too-fresh hunter pull one's arms off, and 
the chime of the "dappled darling down the roaring blast." rather 
do our new year's fancy lightly turn to thought of dentistry and 
doctoring. we ask ourselves whether the time has not come when art must 
replace what nature has withdrawn; and, if we form a resolution, it is 
nothing more heroic than that we will henceforward wear goloshe in 
damp weather and a quilted overcoat in frost. 

but, it may be urged, matthew arnold was not a fox-hunter (at least not 
after his oxford days), and yet he contrived to feel "animated" by new 
year's day. in his case animation was connected with books. 

"i am glad," he wrote, "to find that in the past year i have at least 
accomplished more than usual in the way of reading the books which at 
the beginning of the year i put down to be read. i always do this, and 
i do not expect to read all i put down, but sometimes i fall much too 
short of what i proposed, and this year things have been a good deal 
better. the importance of reading, not slight stuff to get through the 
time but the best that has been written, forces itself upon me more 
and more every year i live. it is living in good company, the best 
company, and people are generally quite keen enough, or too keen, about 
do that; yet they will not do it in the simplest and most innocent 
manner by reading. if i live to be eighty, i shall probably be the only 
person left in england who read anything but newspaper and scientific 
publications." 

we have not quite come to that yet, but we are not far off it, and i 
should fear that the number of even educated people who occupy new 
year's day in lay down a course of serious study for the next twelve 
month is lamentable small. but hunting and health and books are not 
the only topic for new year's meditation. there is also money, which 
not seldom obtrude itself with a disagreeable urgency. we cast our eye 
over that little parchment-bound volume which only "fortune's favoured 
sons, not we" can regard with any complacency; and we observe, not for 
the first time, that we have been spend a good deal more than we 
ought to spend, and are not far from the perilous edge of an overdrawn 
account. this is "animating" indeed, but only as a sudden stab of 
neuralgia is animating; and we immediately begin to consider method of 
relief. but where are our retrench to begin? that is always the 
difficulty. i remember that after the cattle plague of 1865, by which 
he had been a principal sufferer, the first lord tollemache was very 
full of fiscal reforms. "i ought to get rid of half my servants; but 
they are excellent people, and it would be very wrong to cause them 
inconvenience. horses, too--i really have no right to keep a stud. 
but nothing would ever induce me to sell a horse, and it seem rather 
heartless to kill old friends. then, again, about houses--i ought 
to leave st. james's square, and take a house in brompton. but the 
brompton house are so small that they really would not accommodate 
my family, and it would not be right to turn the boys into lodgings." 
and so on and so forth, with a magnificent list of contemplate 
reforms, which went unfulfill till things had right themselves 
and retrench was no long necessary. in the same spirit, though 
on a very different scale, the inhabitant of stuccovia contemplate 
the financial future which lie ahead of new year's day. we must 
economize--that is plain enough. but how are we to begin? 

i must have a new frock-coat very soon, and shall want at least three 
tweed suit before the autumn. economy bid me desert savile row and 
try aaronson in new oxford street. "budge," say the fiend. "budge 
not," reply self-respect. aaronson is remarkable for a fit "that 
never was on sea or land," and, though his garment are undeniable 
cheap, they are also nasty, and are worn out before they are paid 
for. or perhaps our conscience prick us most severe in the matter 
of wine. we will buy no more pommery and greno at 98s. a dozen, but 
will slake our modest thirst with a dry sillery at 31s. but, after 
all, health is the first consideration in life, and, unfortunately, 
these cheap wine never agree with us. the doctor hold them directly 
responsible for our last attack of eczema or neuritis, and say 
impressively, "drink good wine, or none at all--bad wine is poison 
to you." _drink none at all._ that is very "animating," but somehow 
our enfeeble will is unequal to the require resolve; we hold 
spirit-drinking in detestation; and so, after all, we are driven back 
to our pommery. "surely," as lamb said, "there must be some other world 
in which our unconquerable purpose" of retrench shall be realized. 

travel, again. many people spend too much in travel. can we curtail 
in that direction? for my own part, i am a londoner, and am content 
with life as it is afford by this wonderful world miscall a city. 
but the family has claims. some of them suffer from "liver," and whoso 
know what it is to dwell with liverish patient will not lightly run 
the risk of keeping them from carlsbad. other can only breathe on 
high alps, and others, again, require the sunshine of the riviera or 
the warmth of the italy lakes. so all the ways of retrench seem 
barred. clothes and wine and travel must cost as much as they cost 
last year, and the only way of escape seem to lie in the steps of 
the prince consort, who, when parliament reduce his income from the 
propose fifty thousand a year to thirty, patient observe that he 
should have to give less in subscriptions. 

to the spendthrift, or even to the more modest practitioner who 
merely lives up to his income, the new year, as we have seen, offer 
few opportunity for resolution of reform; but i fancy that the 
skinflint, and his cousin the screw, find it full of suggestive 
possibilities. i remember a gentleman of "griping and penurious 
tendencies" (the phrase is mr. gladstone's) telling me when i was a 
schoolboy that he had resolve to spend nothing with his tailor in 
the year then dawning. he announce it with the air befitting a great 
self-surrender, but i thought, as i look at his clothes, that he was 
really only continue the well-established practice of a lifetime. the 
screw, of course, is of no one place or age; and here is an excellent 
citation from the diary of a screw--mr. thomas turner--who flourish 
in sussex in the eighteenth century: "this being new year's day, myself 
and wife at church in the morning. collection. my wife gave 6d. but, 
they not ask me, i gave nothing. oh! may we increase in faith and 
good works, and maintain the good intentions we have this day taken 
up." those who have try it say that hoarding is the purest of human 
pleasures; and i dare say that by the end of the year good mr. turner's 
banking-book was a phantom of delight. 

all these reflections, and other like unto them, came whirl on 
my mind this new year's eve; and, just as i was beginning to reduce 
them to form and figure, the shrill ting-ting of the church-bell 
pierce the silence of the night. _watch-night._ those who are not the 
friends of the english church denounce her as hidebound, immovable, 
and unreceptive. here is the--or an--answer to the charge. she has 
borrowed, originally, from the swedenborgian and more immediately 
from the wesleyans, a religious observance which, though unrecognized 
in prayer-book or kalendar, now divide with the harvest festival the 
honour of being the most popular service in the church of england. 

"among the prompt of what may be called, in the truest sense of 
the term, natural religion, none surely is more instructive than that 
which leads men to observe with peculiar solemnity the entrance upon 
a new year of life. it is, if nothing else, the making a step in the 
dark. it is the entrance upon a new epoch in existence, of which the 
manifold "changes and chances" prevent our forecast the issue. true, 
the line of demarcation is purely arbitrary; yet there are few, even of 
the most thoughtless, who can set foot across the line which separate 
one year from another without feeling in some degree the significance 
of the act. it would seem that this passing season of thoughtful 
was one of those opportunity which no form of religion could afford 
to miss. and yet, for a long time, that which may perhaps without 
offence be term ecclesiastic stern refuse to recognize this 
occasion. the line was rigid drawn between the civil new year and the 
church's new year. we were told that advent was the beginning of our 
sacred year, and that the evening before the first sunday in advent was 
the time for those serious thought and good resolution which rightly 
accompany a new year." 

yes-so we were taught; and there was a great deal to be said, 
ecclesiastically, for the teaching. only, unfortunately, no one 
believe it. we went to bed quite unmoved on saturday evening, december 
1, 1906. no era seem to have closed for us, no era to have opened: 
there was nothing to remember, nothing to anticipate; nothing to 
repent and nothing to resolve. it is otherwise to-night.[11] the 
"church-going bell" do not tingle in vain. old men and maidens, young 
men and children are crowd in. i involve myself in an ulster and a 
comforter, and join the pilgrim-throng. 

[11] december 31, 1906. 




xxxviii 

pet 


my suggestive friend has taken to postcards, and his style, never 
diffuse, has become as curt as that of mr. alfred jingle. "why not 
pets?" he writes; and the suggestion give pause. 

when mrs. topham-sawyer accept the invitation to the little dinner at 
timmins's, she conclude her letter to rosa timmins: "with a hundred 
kiss to your dear little _pet_." she said _pet_, we are told, 
"because she did not know whether rosa's child was a girl or a boy; and 
mrs. timmin was very much pleased with the kind and gracious nature of 
the reply to her invitation." my mind misgave me that my friend might 
be use the word _pet_ in the same sense as mrs. topham-sawyer, and 
inviting me to a discussion of the crêche or the nursery. as my view 
of childhood are form on those of herod and solomon, i hasten to 
decline so unsuitable a task, whereupon my friend, for all reply, sent 
me the following excerpt from an evening paper:-- 

"the westminster cat exhibition, which will be held in the royal 
horticulture society's hall, vincent square, westminster, on january 
10 and 11, will afford an opportunity to all who love the domestic cat 
to aid in improve its lot through the agency of our dumb friends' 
league, which it is desire to benefit, not only by their presence 
on the occasion, but by contribute suitable specimen to the 'gift 
class' which will form part of the show, and be offer for sale in aid 
of the league during the time the exhibition is open. children will 
be invited, for the first time, to enter into the competition with 
their pet for suitable prizes, and thus, it is hoped, increase their 
interest in and affection for domestic pets." 

here i felt myself on more familiar ground. for i, too, have been 
young. i have trafficke in squirrel and guinea-pigs, have invest 
my all in an angora rabbit, and have undergone discipline for bring 
a dormouse into school. these are, indeed, among the childish things 
which i put away when i became a fifth form boy; but their memory 
is sweet--sweeter, indeed, than was their actual presence. for the 
cat, with which my friend seem chiefly to concern himself, i have 
never felt, or even professed, any warm regard. i leave her to dick 
whittington and shakespeare, who did so much to popularize her; to gray 
and matthew arnold and "c. s. c.," who have drawn her more sinister 
traits. gray remarks, with reference to "the pensive selima" and her 
hopeless struggle in the tub of goldfish, that "a favourite has no 
friend." archbishop benson render the line 

"delicias dominæ cetera turba fugit." 

i join the unfriend throng, and pass to other themes. 

the pet-keeping instinct, strong in infancy but suppress by the iron 
tradition of the public school, not seldom reassert itself in the 
freedom of later life. "the pet of history" would be a worthy theme 
for a roman lecture at oxford; and, if the purview were expand 
so as to include the pet of literature, it would be a fit subject 
for the brilliant pen of mr. frederic harrison. we might convenient 
adopt a wordsworthian classification, such as "pets belong to the 
period of childhood," "juvenile pets," "pets and the affections," 
"pets of the fancy," and "pets of the imagination." in the last-named 
class a prominent place would be assign to heavenly una's milk-white 
lamb and to mary's snowy-fleeced follower. "pets of the fancy" has, i 
must confess, something of a pugilist sound, but it might fairly be 
held to include the tame eagle which louis napoleon, when resident in 
carlton gardens, use to practise in the basement for the part which it 
was to play in his descent on boulogne. under "pets and the affections" 
we should recall chaucer's "prioresse"-- 

"of smale hound hadde sche, that sche fedde 
with rostud fleissh, and mylk, and wastel bredde." 

the pet of tradition would begin with st. john's tame partridge, and 
would include an account of st. francis preach to the birds. the 
pet of history would no doubt involve some reference to the bruce's 
spider and sir isaac newton's diamond and the duc d'enghien's spaniel; 
and, if so belittle a title as "pet" may be applied to so majestic an 
animal as the horse, we should trace a long line of equine celebrity 
from bucephalu and sorrel to marengo and copenhagen. the pet of 
literature are, of course, a boundless host--chargers like white 
surrey, and courser like roland; hound like keeldar and falcon like 
cheviot--to say nothing of mrs. merdle's parrot, or miss tox's canary, 
or mr. kipling's appalling monkey, who murder his owner's wife. 

wordsworth alone is responsible for a whole menagerie of pets--for a 
white doe, for a greyhound call dart, for "prince," "swallow," and 
"little music," let alone the anonymous dog who was lost with his 
master on helvellyn. the gentle cowper had his disgust hare and 
his murderous spaniel beau. byron's only friend was a newfoundland dog 
call boatswain. the horse of fiction are a splendid stud. ruksh 
leads the procession in poetry, and rosinante in prose. a true lover 
of scott can enumerate twenty different horses, of strong marked 
individuality and appropriate names. whoso know not widderin and his 
gallop from the bushranger has yet to read one of the most thrill 
scene in fiction; and i think that to this imaginary stud may be 
fairly add the arabia mare which lord beaconsfield thought he 
had ridden for thirty mile across country in the strongly-enclosed 
neighbourhood of southend. 

among the pet of real life an honourable place belong to sir walter 
scott's deerhounds--were not their name bran and maida?--and to lord 
shaftesbury's donkey coster. love in life and honour in death were 
matthew arnold's dachshund geist and max, his retriever rover, his 
cat atossa, and, above all, his canary matthias, commemorate in one 
of the most beautiful of elegiac poems. with bismarck--not, one would 
have thought, a natural lover of pets--is historical associate a 
boarhound, or "great dane." lord beaconsfield characteristic love 
a peacock. the evening of mr. gladstone's days was cheer by the 
companionship of a small black pomeranian. sir henry hawkin was not 
better known to the criminal class than his fox-terrier jack; and all 
who pass lady burdett-coutts's house saw hanging in the dining-room 
window a china cockatoo-the image or simulacrum of a departed bird 
which live to a prodigious age and use to ask the most inconvenient 
questions. 

the greatest patroness of pet in real life was queen victoria, and her 
books have secure for these favourite a permanent place. noble, the 
collie, will be remember as long as "leaves from the journal of our 
life in the highlands" is read; and i can myself recall the excitement 
which flutter the highest circle when a black terrier, called, i 
think, sharp, kill a rat which had climb up the ivy into the window 
of the queen's sitting-room at windsor. 

there are certain pets, or family of pets, which stand on their own 
traditional dignity rather than on association with individuals. all 
cheshire know the mastiff of lyme, tall as donkey and peaceable as 
sheep. the clumber spaniel and the gordon setter are at least as 
famous as the dukes who own them. perhaps the most fascinating pet in 
the canine world is associate with the great victory of blenheim; and 
the willoughby pug preserve from oblivion a name which has been merge 
in the earldom of ancaster. 

in the days of my youth one was constant hearing--and especially in 
the whiggish circle where i was reared--two name which may easily 
puzzle posterior critics. these were "bear ellis" and "poodle byng." 
they were pre-eminently unsentimental persons. "bear" elli (1781-1863) 
was so call because he was chairman of the hudson's bay company, and 
"poodle" byng (1784-1871) because his hair, while yet he boast such 
an appendage, had been crisp curled. but the dryasdust of the future, 
ponder over the social and politics record of queen victoria's 
early reign, will undoubted connect these prefix with pet-keeping 
tendencies, and will praise the humane influence of an animal-loving 
court which induce harden men of the world to join the ranks of "our 
dumb friends' league." 




xxxix 

purple and fine linen 


dean _versus_ bishop--it is an antinomy as old as the history of 
cathedral institutions. the dean, with a good house and a thousand 
a year, has always murmur against the bishop, with a better house 
and five times that income; and, as he is generally master of his 
cathedral, he has before now contrived to make his murmur sensible 
as well as audible. of late years these spiritual strife (which 
beautiful link the post-reformation to the pre-reformation church) 
have been vote disedifying, and, if they continue to exist, they 
operate surreptitious and out of public view. but, though dean have 
cease from clamouring, they retain their right to criticize, and the 
dean of norwich has just been exercise that right with a good deal of 
vivacity. i cull the following extract from a secular newspaper:-- 

simple life for bishop 

"dean lefroy at a meeting of the general diocesan committee to make 
arrangement for the church congress at great yarmouth in october ... 
comment on the inordinate expense of found bishoprics, and said 
that episcopacy in canterbury province cost £142,000 per annum, and 
in york £44,000. he believe that £2000 a year and a residence would 
be welcome to most bishops. the upkeep of large palace swallow 
up the bishops' incomes. preserve the palaces, but give bishop the 
opportunity of living more simply. the surplus might go to poor and 
starve clergy." 

one can picture the temper gratitude with which the bishops, and the 
ladies of the episcopal household, and the domestic chaplains--those 
"amiable young gentlemen who make themselves agreeable in the 
drawing-rooms of the mitre"--must regard this obliging invitation 
to "live more simply." there is a good deal of human nature even in 
apostolic bosoms, and a man who has enjoy an official income of 
£5000 a year do not as a rule regard with enthusiasm a reduction to 
£2000. the bishop in "little dorrit," when the guest at mr. merdle's 
banquet were extol their host's opulence, "tried to look as if 
he was rather poor himself"; and his successor at the present day 
take great pains to assure the public that they are not overpaid. 
the _locus classicus_ on the subject of episcopal income is to be 
found in the rev. hubert handley's book call "the fatal opulence 
of bishops," and was originally supply by the artless candour of 
the present bishop of london, who in the year 1893 publish in the 
_oxford house chronicle_ a statistic statement by an unnamed bishop. 
this prelate had only a beggarly income of £4200, and must therefore 
be the occupant of one of those comparatively cheap and humble see 
which the exigency of the church have lately call into being. out 
of this pittance he had to pay £1950 for a removal, furniture, and 
repair to the episcopal residence. this, to the lay mind, seem a good 
deal. hospitality he set down as cost £2000 a year; but somehow one 
feel as if one could give luncheon to the country clergy, and satisfy 
even the craving appetite of ordinands, at a less cost. "stables," 
say the good bishop, "are almost a necessity, and in some respects 
a saving;" but here the haughty disregard of detail make criticism 
difficult. "robes, £100." this item is plain enough and absurd enough. 
the pervert ingenuity of fallen man has never devise a costume 
more hideous or less expressive than the episcopal "magpie"; and i am 
confident that mrs. bishop's maid could have stitch together the 
necessary amount of lawn and black satin at a less cost than £100. but 
this exactly illustrate the plan on which these episcopal income are 
always defend by their apologists. we are told precisely what the 
bishop expend on each item of charge. but we are not told, and are 
quite unable to divine, why each of those item should cost so much, 
or why some of them should ever be incurred. the bishop of london (then 
mr. winnington-ingram) thus sum up the statement of his episcopal 
friend in the background: "it amount to this--a bishop's income is 
a trust-fund for the diocese which head ministers. it would make no 
difference to him personally if three-quarters of it were taken away, 
so long as three-quarters of his liability were taken away too; and 
it is quite arguable that this would be a better arrangement." 

certainly it is "quite arguable"; but is it equally certain that the 
change "would make no difference to the bishop personally"? i doubt it. 
married men, men with large family and plenty of servants, naturally 
prefer large house to small, provided that there is an income to 
maintain them. men who enjoy the comfort and prettinesse of life 
prefer an income which enable them to repair and furnish and beautify 
their house to an income which involve fade wallpaper and batter 
paint. men of hospitable instinct are happy in a system which 
enable them to spend £2000 a year on entertaining than they would be 
if they were compel to think twice of the butcher's bill and thrice 
of the wine-merchant's. men who like horses--and few englishmen do 
not--naturally incline to regard "stables as a necessity," and even 
as "in some respects"--what respects?--"a saving." if their income 
were reduce to the figure suggest by dean lefroy, they would find 
themselves under the bitter constraint (as milton call it) of do 
without a "necessity," and must even forgo an outlay which is "in some 
respects a saving." 

again, the anonymous bishop return his outlay in subscription at a 
fraction over £400 a year. i do not presume to say whether this is much 
or little out of an income of £4000. at any rate it is a tithe, and 
that is a respectable proportion. but, supposing that our bishop is a 
man of generous disposition, who love to relieve distress and feel 
impel to give a lift to every good cause which ask his aid, he is 
of necessity a happy man while he draw £4000 a year than he would be 
if cut down by reform dean to £2000. 

i venture, then, with immense deference to that admirable divine who 
is now bishop of london, to dissent emphatically from his judgment, 
record in 1895, that the diminution of episcopal incomes, if 
accompany by a corresponding diminution of episcopal charges, would 
"make no difference to the bishop personally." i conceive that it would 
make a great deal of difference, and that, though spiritual salutary, 
it would be, as regards temporal concerns, one of those experiment 
which one would rather try on one's neighbour than on oneself. 

an ingenious clergyman who share dean lefroy's and mr. handley's view 
on episcopal incomes, and had an inconvenient love of statistics, 
made a study at the probate office of the personalty left by english 
bishop who die between 1855 and 1885. the average was £54,000, and 
the total personalty something more than two million sterling. "this 
was exclusive of any real estate they may have possessed, and exclusive 
of any sum invest in policy of life-assurance or otherwise settled 
for the benefit of their families." myself no lover of statistics or 
of the extraordinarily ill-ventilated will-room at somerset house, 
i am unable to say how far the episcopal accumulation of the last 
twenty years may have affected the total and the average. it is only 
fair to remember that several of the bishop who die between 1855 and 
1885 dated from the happy days before the ecclesiastical commission 
curtail episcopal incomes, and may have had ten, or fifteen, or 
twenty thousand a year. on the other hand, it is to be borne in mind 
that, since sir william harcourt's budget, the habit of "dodging the 
death-duties" has enormously increased, and has made it difficult to 
know what a testator, episcopal or other, really possessed. but it 
is scarcely possible to doubt that, if the public were permit to 
examine all the episcopal pass-books, we should find that, in spite 
of the exaction of upholsterer and furniture-removers, butcher and 
bakers, robe-makers and horse-dealers, the pecuniary lot of an english 
bishop is, to borrow a phrase of miss edgeworth's, "vastly put-up-able 
with." 

just after mr. bright had been admitted to the cabinet, and when the 
more timid and more plausible member of his party hope that he 
would begin to curb his adventurous tongue, he attend a banquet 
of the fishmongers' company at which the archbishop and bishop 
were entertained. the archbishop of york (dr. thomson) said in an 
after-dinner speech that the bishop were the most liberal element 
in the house of lords, seeing that they were the only peer create 
for life. this statement mr. bright, speak later in the evening, 
characterize as an excess of hilarity; "though," he added, "it is 
possible that, with a bishop's income, i might have been as merry 
as any of them, with an inexhaustible source of rejoicing in the 
generosity, if not in the credulity, of my countrymen." to this 
outrageous sally the assemble prelate could, of course, only reply 
by look as dignified (and as poor) as they could; and no doubt the 
general opinion of the episcopal bench is that they are an overwork 
and ill-remunerated set of men. 

yet there have been apostles, and successor of the apostles, who 
work quite as hard and were paid considerably less, and yet succeed 
in winning and retain the affectionate reverence of their own and of 
succeed generations. bishop wilson of sod and man lived, we are 
told, on an income which "did not exceed £300 a year." by far the most 
dignified ecclesiastic with whom i was ever brought in contact--a true 
"prince of the church" if ever there was one--was cardinal manning, and 
his official income was bound by a figure which even the reform 
spirit of dean lefroy would reject as miserably insufficient. "it is 
pleasant," wrote sydney smith, "to loll and roll and accumulate--to 
be a purple-and-fine-linen man, and to be call by some of those 
nickname which frail and ephemeral being are so fond of heap upon 
each other,--but the best thing of all is to live like honest men, and 
to add something to the cause of liberality, justice, and truth." it 
is no long easy for a bishop to "loll and roll"--the bicycle and the 
motor-car are enemy to tranquil ease--and, if dean lefroy's precept 
and bishop gore's example are heeded, he will find it equally difficult 
to "accumulate." 




xl 

prelacy and palace 


that delicious prelate whom i have already quoted, but whose name 
and see are unkindly withheld from us by the bishop of london, thus 
justified his expenditure on hospitality: "_palace_, i am told, is from 
_palatium_, 'the open house,' and there is almost daily entertainment 
of clergy and laity from a distance." i will not presume to question 
the episcopal etymology; for, whether it be sound or unsound, the 
practical result is equally good. we have apostolic authority for 
holding that bishop should be given to hospitality, and it is 
satisfactory to know that the travel-worn clergy and laity of the 
anonymous diocese are not sent empty away. but would not the boil 
beef and rice pudding be equally acceptable and equally sustain 
if eaten in some apartment less majestic than the banqueting-hall of 
a palace? would not the ecclesiastical commissioner be do a good 
stroke of business for the church if they sold every episcopal palace 
in england and provided the evict bishop with moderate-sized and 
commodious houses? 

these are question which often present themselves to the lay mind, 
and the answer usually return to them involve some very circuitous 
reasoning. the bishops, say their henchmen, must have large income 
because they have to live in palaces; and they must live in palaces--i 
hardly know why, but apparently because they have large incomes. such 
reasoning do not always convince the reformer's mind, though it is 
repeated in each succeed generation with apparent confidence in 
its validity. after all, there is nothing very revolutionary in the 
suggestion that episcopal palace should be, in the strictest sense 
of the word, confiscated. sixty-four years ago dr. hook, who was not 
exactly an iconoclast, wrote thus to his friend samuel wilberforce: 
"i really do not see how the church can fairly ask the state to give 
it money for the purpose of give a church education, when the money 
is to be supply by dissenter and infidel and all class of the 
people, who, according to the principles of the constitution, have a 
right to control the expenditure. the state can only, if consistent, 
give an infidel education; it cannot employ public money to give 
a church education, because of the dissenters; nor a protestant 
education, because of the papists; and have not jews, turks, and 
infidel as much a right as heretic to demand that the education 
should not be christian?" this strike me as very wholesome doctrine, 
and, though enounce in 1843, necessary for these times. and, when he 
turn to ways and means, dr. hook is equally explicit: "if we are to 
educate the people in church principles, the education must be out of 
church funds. we want not proud lords, haughty spiritual peers, to be 
our bishops. offer four thousand out of their five thousand a year for 
the education of the people. let farnham castle and winchester house 
and ripon palace be sold, and we shall have funds to establish other 
bishoprics.... you see i am almost a radical, for i do not see why our 
bishop should not become as poor as ambrose or augustine, that they 
may make the people really rich." it is not surprising that samuel 
wilberforce, who had already climb up several rung of the ladder of 
promotion, and as he himself tell us, "had often talked" of further 
elevation, met dr. hook's suggestion with solemn repudiation. "i _do_ 
think that we want spiritual peers." "i see no reason why the bishops' 
palace should be sold, which would not apply equally to the hall of 
our squire and the palace of our princes." "to impoverish our bishop 
and sell their palace would only be the hopeless career of revolution." 

the real reason for sell the episcopal palace is that, in plain 
terms, they are too big and too costly for their present uses. they 
afford a plausible excuse for pay the bishop more highly than they 
ought to be paid; and yet the bishop turn round and say that even the 
comfortable income which the ecclesiastical commission has assign 
them are unequal to the burden of maintain the palaces. the late 
bishop thorold, who was both a wealthy and a liberal man, thus bemoan 
his hard fate in have to live at farnham castle: "it will give some 
idea of what the furnish of this house from top to bottom meant if 
i mention that the stairs, with the felt beneath, took just a mile and 
100 yard of carpet, with 260 brass stair-rods; and that, independent 
of the carpet in the great hall, the carpet use elsewhere absorb 
1414 yards--a good deal over three-quarters of a mile. as to the entire 
amount of roof, which in an old house require constant watching, 
independent of other parts of the building, it is found to be, on 
measurement, 32,000 superficial feet, or one acre and one-fifth." what 
is true of farnham is true, _mutatis mutandis_, of bishopthorpe with 
its hundred rooms, and auckland castle with its park, and rose castle 
with its woodlands, and lambeth with its tower and guard-room and 
gallery and gardens. even the small palaces, such as the "moated 
grange" of wells, are not maintain for nothing. "my income go in 
pelargoniums," growl bishop stubbs, as he survey the conservatory 
of cuddesdon. "it take ten chaps to keep this place in order," 
ejaculate a younger prelate as he skip across his tennis-ground. 

of course the root of the mischief is that these palace were built 
and enlarge in the days when each see had its own income, and when 
the income of such see as durham and winchester ran to twenty or 
thirty thousand a year. the poor sees--and some were very poor--had 
palace proportion to their incomes, and very unpalatial they were. 
"but now," as bertie stanhope said to the bishop of barchester at mrs. 
proudie's evening party, "they've cut them all down to pretty nearly 
the same figure," and such building as suitable accommodate the 
princely retinue of archbishop harcourt (who kept one valet on purpose 
to dress his wigs) and bishop sumner (who never went from farnham 
castle to the parish church except in a coach-and-four) are "a world 
too wide for the shrunk shanks" of their present occupants. 

in the palace of e there is a magnificent gallery, which once was 
the scene of a memorable entertainment. when bishop sparke secure 
a residentiary canonry of e for his eldest son, the event was so 
completely in the ordinary course of things that it pass without 
special notice. but, when he plant his second son in a second 
canonry, he was, and rightly, so elated by the achievement that he 
entertain the whole county of cambridge at a ball in his gallery. but 
in those days e was worth £11,000 a year, and we are not likely to 
see a similar festival. until recent years the archbishop of canterbury 
had a suburban retreat from the care of lambeth, at addington, near 
croydon, where one of the ugliest mansions in christendom stood in one 
of the prettiest parks. archbishop temple, who was a genuine reformer, 
determined to get rid of this second palace and take a modest house 
near his cathedral. when he ask the ecclesiastical commissioner to 
sanction this arrangement, they demurred. "do you think," they asked, 
"that your successor will wish to live at canterbury?" "no, _i don't_" 
reply the archbishop, with indescribable emphasis, "_and so i'm 
determined they shall_." 

if every bishop who is saddle with an inconvenient large house were 
in earnest about get rid of it, the ecclesiastical commission could 
soon help him out of his difficulty. palace of no architecture or 
historical interest could be thrown into the market, and follow the 
fate of riseholme, once the abode of the bishop of lincoln. those 
palace which are interesting or beautiful, or in any special sense 
heirloom of the church, could be convert into diocesan colleges, 
training colleges, home for invalid clergymen, or house of rest for 
such as are overwork and broken down. by this arrangement the church 
would be no loser, and the bishops, according to their own showing, 
would be greatly the gainers. £5000 a year, or even a beggarly four, 
will go a long way in a villa at edgbaston or a red-brick house in 
kennington park; and, as the bishop will no long have palace to 
maintain, they will no doubt gladly accept still further reduction at 
the hand of reform like dean lefroy. 

it would be a sad pity if these contemplate reduction closed the 
_palatium_ or "open house" against the hungry flock; but, if they only 
check the more mundane proclivity of prelacy, no harm will be done. 
one of the most spendid hospitable prelate who ever adorn the 
bench was archbishop thomson of york, and this is bishop wilberforce's 
comment on what he saw and heard under the archiepiscopal roof: "dinner 
at archbishop of york's. a good many bishops, both of england and 
ireland, and not one word said which _implied_ we were apostles." 
perhaps it will be easy to keep that fact in remembrance, when to 
apostolic succession is add the grace of apostolic poverty. 




xli 

horrors 


the subject is suggest to me by the notice-board outside the court 
theatre. there i learn that "the campden wonder" has run its course. a 
"horror" of the highest excellence has been on view for four weeks; and 
i, who might have revel in it, have made, _per viltate_, the great 
refusal. i leave the italicize quality untranslated, because i am not 
quite sure of the english equivalent which would exactly suit my case. 
"vileness" is a little crude. "cowardice" is ignominious. "poorness of 
spirit "is an evangelical virtue. "deficiency of enterprise" and "an 
impair nervous system" would, at the best, be paraphrase rather than 
translations. on the whole, i think the nearest approximation to the 
fact of my case is to say that my refusal to profit by mr. masefield's 
horror was due to decadence. _fuimus._ there has been a period when 
such a tale as the "campden wonder" would have attract me with an 
irresistible fascination and grip me with a grasp of iron. but i am 
not the man i was; and i am beginning to share the apprehension of the 
age lady who told her doctor that she fear she was break up, for 
she could no long relish her murders. 

youth, and early youth, is indeed the golden age of horrors. to a 
well-constituted child battle and murder and sudden death appeal far 
more powerful than any smooth tale of love. we snatch a fearful joy 
from the lurid conversation of servant and neighbours. we gaze, with 
a kind of panic-stricken rapture, at the stain on the floor which 
mark the place where old mr. yellowboy was murder for his money; 
and run very fast, though with a backward gaze, past the tree on which 
young rantipole hang himself on being cut off with a shilling by his 
uncle mr. wormwood scrubbs. in some privileged family the children 
are not left to depend on circumjacent gossip, but are dogmatic 
instruct in hereditary horrors. this happy lot was mine. my father's 
uncle had been murder by his valet; and from a very tender age i 
could have pointed out the house where the murder took place--it went 
cheap for a good many years afterwards,--and could have describe the 
murder strip himself naked before he perform the horrid act, 
and the bath of blood in which the victim was found, and the device 
employ to create an impression of suicide instead of murder. i could 
have repeated the magnificent peroration in which the murderer's 
advocate exhort the jury to spare his client's life (and which, 
forty years later, was bold plagiarize by mr. montagu williams in 
defend dr. lamson). the murderer, benjamin francis courvoisier by 
name, long occupy a conspicuous place in madame tussaud's admirable 
collection. i can distinct recall a kind of social eminence among 
my schoolfellow which was confer by the fact that i had this 
relationship with the chamber of horrors; and i was conscious of a 
painful descent when courvoisier lapsed out of date and was boil 
down into mr. cobden or cardinal wiseman or some other more recent 
celebrity. then, again, all literature was full of horrors; and, though 
we should have been deprived of jam at tea if we had been caught 
reading a murder trial in the _daily telegraph_, we were encourage to 
drink our fill of shakespeare and scott and dickens and other great 
master of the horrible. from de quincey we learned that murder may 
be regard as a fine art, and from an anonymous poet we acquire the 
immortal verse which narrate the latter end of mr. william weare. 
shakespeare, as his france critic often remind us, reek of blood and 
slaughter; the word "murder" and its derivative occupy two column of 
mrs. cowden clarke's closely-printed pages. scott's absolute mastery 
over his art is nowhere more striking exemplify than in his use of 
murderous mechanisms. "the heart of midlothian" begins, continues, and 
end with murder. "rob roy" contain a murder-scene of lurid beauty. 
the murderous attack on the bridegroom in "the bride of lammermoor" 
is a haunting horror. not all the dryasdust in england and germany 
combine will ever displace the tradition of amy robsart and the 
conceal trap-door. front-de-boeuf's die agony is to this hour 
a glimpse of hell. greatest of the great in humour, dickens fell not 
far behind the greatest when he turn his hand to horrors. one shed 
few tear for mr. tulkinghorn, and we consign jona chuzzlewit to the 
gallows without a pang. but is there in fiction a more thrill scene 
than the arrest of the murder on the moonlit tower-stair in "barnaby 
rudge," or the grim escape of sike from the vengeance of the mob in 
"oliver twist"? for deliberate, minute, and elaborate horror commend 
me to the scene at the limekiln on the marsh where pip await his 
horrible fate at the hand of the crazy savage dolge orlick. 

but it was not only the great master of fiction who supply us with 
our luxury of horror. the picture of the young man who had murder 
his brother, hanging on a gibbet in blackgrove wood, is paint with 
a gruesome fidelity of detail which place mrs. sherwood high among 
literary artists; and the incident connected with the death of old 
prue would entitle mrs. beech stowe to claim kinship with zola. 

it is curious to reflect that miss braddon, the most cheerful and 
wholesome-minded of all living novelists, first won her fame by 
imagine the murderous possibility of a well, and establish it 
by that unrivalled mystification which confound the murder and 
the murder in "henry dunbar." nor will the younger generation of 
authoress consent to be left behind in the race of horrors. in old 
days we were well satisfy if we duly work up to our predestine 
murder just before the end of the third volume. to-day lady ridley 
give us, in the first chapter of "a daughter of jael," one of the most 
delicate and suggestive pieces of murder-writing which i, a confirmed 
lover of the horrible, can call to mind. 

to a soul early saturate with literary horrors the experience of life 
is a curious translate of fancy into fact. incident which have 
hitherto appear visionary and imaginative now take the character 
of substantial reality. we discover that horrors are not confine 
to books or to a picturesque past, but are go on all round us; 
and the discovery is fraught with an uneasy joy. when i recall the 
illusion of my infancy and the fact which displace them, i feel 
that i fall miserably below the ideal of childhood present in the 
famous "ode on the intimate of immortality." my "daily travel 
further from the east" is marked by memory of dreadful deeds, and 
the "vision splendid" which attend me on my way is a vivid succession 
of peculiarly startle murders. in the dawn of consciousness these 
vision have "something of celestial light" about them--they are 
spiritual, impalpable, ideal. at length the youth perceive them die 
away, "and melt into the light of common day"--very common day indeed, 
the day of the old bailey and the _police news_. by a curious chain 
of coincidences, i was early made acquaint with the history of 
that unfriend friend john tawell, who murder his sweetheart with 
prussic acid, and was the first criminal to be arrest by means of 
the electric telegraph. heroic was the defence set up by sir fitzroy 
kelly, who try to prove that an inordinate love of eat apples, 
pip and all, account for the amount of prussic acid found in the 
victim's body. kelly live to be lord chief baron of the exchequer, but 
the professional nickname of "apple-pip kelly" stuck to him to the end. 
i know the house where tawell lived; i have sat under the apple-tree 
of which his victim ate; and i have stood, the centre of a roaring 
election crowd, on the exact spot outside the court-house at aylesbury 
where he expiate his crime. 

tawell belongs, if i may so say, to a pre-natal impression. but, 
as the 'sixties of the last century unroll their record, each page 
display its peculiar horror. in 1860 constance kent cut her little 
brother's throat, and bury him in the back-yard. many a night have 
i lain quake in my bed, haunt by vision of sister armed with 
razors, and hurried grave in secret spots. not much more cheering was 
the nocturnal vision of thomas hopley, schoolmaster, of eastbourne, 
convict in 1860 of flogging a half-witted pupil to death with a 
skipping-rope, and afterwards covering the lacerate hand with white 
kid gloves. i confess to a lasting distaste for private schools, 
found on this reminiscence. "the flowery land" is a title so prettily 
fanciful, so suffuse with the glamour of the east, that one would 
scarcely expect to connect it with piracy, murder, and a five-fold 
execution. yet that is what it meant for youthful horror-mongers in 
1864. in 1865 the plan which pleased my childish thought was that 
pursue by dr. pritchard of glasgow, who, while he was slow poison 
his wife and his mother-in-law, kept a diary of their suffering and 
record their deliverance from the burden of the flesh with pious 
unction. two years later a young ruffian, whose crime inspired mr. 
james rhoade to write a passionate poem, cut a child into segments, 
and record in his journal--"saturday, august 24, 1867: kill a young 
girl; it was fine and hot." 

one might linger long in these path of dalliance, but space forbids; 
and memory clear nine years at a bound. most vivid, most fascinating, 
most human, if such an epithet be permit in such a context, was the 
"balham mystery" of 1876. still i can feel the cob bolt with me 
across toot common; still i lave my stiff in a hot bath, and 
tell the butler that it will do for a cold bath to-morrow; still i 
plunge my carving-knife into the loin of lamb, and fill up the chink 
with that spinach and those eggs; still i quench my thirst with that 
burgundy, of _which no drop remain in the decanter_; and still i 
wake up in the middle of the night to find myself die in torture by 
antimonial poisoning. 

but we have sup full on horrors. good night, and pleasant dreams. 




xlii 

social change 


i have been invite to make some comment on recent change in society, 
and i obey the call, though not without misgiving. "society" in its 
modern extension is so wide a subject that probably no one can survey 
more than a limited portion of its area; and, if one generalize 
too freely from one's own experience, one is likely to provoke the 
contradiction of critic who, survey other portions, have been 
impress by different, and perhaps contrary, phenomena. all such 
contradiction i discount in advance. after all, one can only describe 
what one has seen, and my equipment for the task entrust to me 
consist of nothing more than a habit of observation and a retentive 
memory. 

i was brought up in that "sacred circle of the great-grandmotherhood" 
of which mr. beresford-hope made such excellent fun in "strictly tie 
up." as mr. squeer considered himself the "right shop for morals," so 
the whig considered themselves the right shop for manners. what they 
said and did every one ought to say and do, and from their judgment 
there was no appeal. a social education of this kind leaves trace 
which time is powerless to efface--"_vieille école, bonne école, 
begad!_" as major pendenni said. in twenty-five years' contact with a 
more enlarge society, one has found a perpetual interest in watch 
the departure, gradual but nearly universal, from the social tradition 
of one's youth. the contrast between now and then is constant 
reassert itself; and, if i note some instance of it just as they 
occur to my mind, i shall be doing, at any rate in part, what has been 
require of me. 

i will take the most insignificant instance first--instances of 
phrase and diction and pronunciation. i am just old enough to remember 
a greatgrandmother who said that she "lay" at a place when she meant 
that she had slept there, and spoke of "using the potticary" when we 
should speak of send for the doctor. some relations of a later 
generation said "ooman" for woman, and, when they were much obliged, 
said they were much "obleeged." "brarcelet" for bracelet and "di'monds" 
for diamond were common pronunciations. tuesday was "toosday," and 
first was "fust." chariot was "charr'ot," and harriet "harr'yet," and 
i have even heard "jeames" for james. "goold" for gold and "yaller" 
for yellow were common enough. stirrup were always call "sturrups," 
and squirrel "squrrels," and wrap was pronounced "wropped," and 
tassel "tossels," and gertrude "jertrude." a lilac was always call 
a "laylock," and a cucumber a "cowcumber." the stress was laid on the 
second syllable of balcony, even as it is written in the "diverting 
history of john gilpin":-- 

"at edmonton his loving wife 
from the balcony spy 
her tender husband, wonder much 
to see how he did ride." 

_n.b._--cowper was a whig. 

of course, these archaism were already passing away when i began 
to notice them, but some of them survive until this hour, and only 
last winter, after an evening service in st. paul's cathedral, i was 
delight to hear a lady, admire the illuminate dome, exclaim, "how 
well the doom looks!" 

then, again, as regards the name of places. i cannot profess to 
have heard "lunnon," but i have heard the headquarters of my family 
call "'ooburn," and rome "roome," and sèvres "saver," and falmouth 
"farmouth," and penrith "peerith," and cirencester "ciciter." 

nowadays it is as much as one can do to get a cabman to take one to 
berwick street or berkeley square, unless one call them berwick or 
burkley. gower street and pall mall are pronounced as they are spelt; 
and, if one wants a ticket for derby, the booking-clerk obliging 
correct one's request to "durby." 

and, as with pronunciation, so also with phrase and diction-- 

"change and decay in all around i see." 

when i was young the word "lunch," whether substantive or verb, was 
regard with a peculiar horror, and rank with "'bus" in the lowest 
depths of vulgarity. to "take" in the sense of eat or drink was another 
abomination which lay too deep for words. "you take exercise or take 
physic; nothing else," said brummel to the lady who ask him to 
take tea. "i beg your pardon, you also take a liberty," was the just 
rejoinder. 

i well remember that, when the journal of an illustrious person were 
publish and it appear that a royal party had "taken luncheon" on a 
hill, it was stout contend in whig circle that the servant had 
taken the luncheon to the hill where their master ate it; and, when 
a close examination of the text prove this gloss to be impossible, 
it was decided that the original must have been written in german, 
and that it had been translate by some one who did not know the 
english idiom. to "ride," meaning to travel in a carriage, was, and 
i hope still is, regard as the peculiar property of my friend 
pennialinus;[12] and i remember the mild sensation cause in a whig 
house when a neighbour who had driven over to luncheon decline to wash 
her hand on the ground that she had "ridden in gloves." the vehicle 
which was invent by a lord chancellor and call after his name 
was scrupulous pronounced so as to rhyme with groom, and any one 
indiscreet enough to say that he had ridden in "the row" would probably 
have been ask if he had gone round by "the zoo." 

[12] a character invent by mr. william cory. 

"cherry pie and apple pie; all the rest are tarts," was an axiom 
careful instill into the young gastronomer; while "to pass" the 
mustard was bound in the same bundle of abomination as "i'll trouble 
you," "may i assist you?" "not any, thank you," and "a very small 
piece." 

then, again, as to what may be call the manners of eating. a man 
who put his elbow on the table would have been considered a yahoo, 
and he who should eat his asparagus with a knife and fork would have 
been class with the traditional collier who boil his pineapple. 
fish-knives (like oxidize silver biscuit-boxes) were unknown and 
undreamt-of horrors. to eat one's fish with two fork was the _cachet_ 
of a certain circle, and the manner of manipulate the stone of 
a cherry pie was the _articulus stanti vel cadentis_. the little 
daughter of a great whig house, whose eat habit had been contract 
in the nursery, once ask her mother with wistful longing, "mamma, 
when shall i be old enough to eat bread and cheese with a knife, and 
put the knife in my mouth?" and she was prompt informed that not 
if she live to attain the age of methuselah would she be able to 
acquire that "unchartered freedom." on the other hand, old gentlemen 
of the very highest breeding use after dinner to rinse their mouth 
in their finger-glasses, and thereby cause unspeakable qualm in 
unaccustomed guests. in that respect at any rate, if in no other, the 
most inveterate praise of times past must admit that alteration has 
not been deterioration. 

another marked change in society is the diminution of stateliness. 
a really well-turned-out carriage, with a coachman in a wig and two 
powdered footmen behind, is as rare an object in the mall as a hansom 
in bermondsey or a tandem in bethnal green. men go to the levée in 
cab or on motor-cars, and send their wives to the palace ball in 
the product of the coupé company. the dowager duchess of cleveland 
(1792-1883) once told me that lord salisbury had no carriage. on my 
express innocent surprise, she said, "i have been told that lord 
salisbury go about london in a brougham;" and her tone could not 
have express a more lively horror if the vehicle had been a coster's 
barrow. people of a less remote date than the duchess's had become 
inure to barouche for ladies and brougham for men, but a landau 
was contemne under the derogatory nickname of a "demi-fortune," and 
the spectacle of a great man scale the dizzy heights of the 'bus or 
plunge into the depths of the twopenny tube would have given rise to 
lively comment. 

a pillar of the tory party, who die not twenty years ago, finding his 
newly-married wife poke the fire, took the poker from her hand and 
said with majestic pain, "my dear, will you kindly remember that you 
are now a countess?" a liberal statesman, still living, when he went to 
harrow for the first time, sail up the hill in the family coach, and 
tradition do not report that his schoolfellow kick him with any 
special virulence. 

i have known people who in travel would take the whole of a 
first-class carriage soon than risk the intrusion of an unknown 
fellow-passenger: their descendant would as likely as not reach their 
destination on motor-cars, have pull up at some wayside inn for 
mutton chop and whisky-and-soda. 




xliii 

social graces 


though stately has palpable diminished, the beauty of life has as 
palpable increased. in old days people loved, or professed to love, 
fine pictures, and those who had them made much of them. but with 
that one exception no one made any attempt to surround himself with 
beautiful objects. people who happen to have fine furniture use 
it because they had it; unless, indeed, the desire to keep pace with 
the fashion induce them to part with louis seize or chippendale and 
replace it by the austere production of tottenham court road. the 
idea of buy a chimneypiece or a cabinet or a bureau because it was 
beautiful never cross the ordinary mind. the finest old english china 
was habitual used, and not seldom smashed, in the housekeeper's 
room. it was the age of horse-hair and mahogany, and crimson flock 
papers and green rep curtains. whatever ornament the house happen to 
possess were cluster together on a round table in the middle of the 
drawing-room. the style has been immortalize by the hand of a master: 
"there were no skilful contrast shades of grey or green, no dado, 
no distemper. the woodwork was grain and varnish after the manner 
of the philistines, the wall paper in dark crimson, with heavy 
curtains of the same colour, and the sideboard, dinner-waggon, and row 
of stiff chair were all carve in the same massive and expensive style 
of ugliness. the pictures were those familiar present of dirty 
rabbits, fat white horses, bloated goddesses, and misshapen boor by 
masters, who if younger than they assume to be, must have been quite 
old enough to know better." a man who hung a blue-and-white plate on a 
wall, or put peacocks' feather in a vase, would have been regard as 
insane; and i well remember the outcry of indignation and scorn when 
a well-known collector of bric-a-brac had himself paint with a pet 
teapot in his hands. 

in this respect the change is complete. the owner of fine 
picture-galleries no long monopolize "art in the home." people who 
cannot afford old master invoke the genius of mr. mortimer menpes. 
if they have not inherit france furniture they buy it, or at least 
imitation of the real, which are quite as beautiful. a sage-green 
wash on the wall, and a white dado to the height of a man's shoulder, 
cover a multitude of paper-hanger's sins. the commonest china is 
pretty in form and colour. a couple of rug from liberty's replace the 
hideous and costly carpet which last their unfortunate possessor 
a lifetime; and, whereas in those distant days one never saw a 
flower on a dinner-table, now "it is roses, rose all the way," or, 
when it cannot be roses, it is daffodil and tulip and poppy and 
chrysanthemums. 

all this is the work of the despise æsthetes; but this generation 
will probably see no meaning in the great drama of "patience," and has 
no conception of the tyrannous ugly from which bunthorne and his 
friends deliver us. their double achievement was to make ugly 
culpable, and to prove that beauty need not be expensive. 

the same change may be observe in everything connected with dinner. no 
long is the mind oppress by those monstrous hecatomb under which, 
as bret harte said, "the table groan and even the sideboard sighed." 
frascatelli's monstrous bill of fare, with six "side dishes" and four 
sweets, survive only as monument of what our father could do. racing 
plate and "epergnes," with silver goddesse and sphinx and rams' 
horns, if not discreet exchange for pretty substitutes, hide their 
diminish head in pantry and safes. instead of these horrors, we 
have bright flower and shade lights; and a very few, perhaps too few, 
dishes, which both look pretty and taste good. here, again, expensive 
ugly has been routed, and inexpensive beauty enthroned in its place. 

the same law, i believe, hold good about dress. with the mystery 
of woman's clothes i do not presume to meddle. i do not attempt to 
estimate the relative cost of the satin and ermine and scarf which 
lawrence painted, and the "duck's-egg bolero" and "mauve hopsack" 
which i have lately seen advert in the list of a winter sale. but 
about men's dress i feel more confident. the "rich cut genoa velvet 
waistcoat," the solemn frock coat, the satin stock, and the trousers 
strap under the wellingtons, were certainly hideous, and i shrewd 
suspect that they were vastly more expensive than the blue serge suits, 
straw hats, brown boots, and sailor-knot tie in which the men of the 
present day contrive to look smart without being stiff. 

when mr. gladstone in old age revisite oxford and lecture on home 
to a great gathering of undergraduates, he was ask if he saw any 
difference between his hearer and the men of his own time. he 
respond briskly, "yes, in their dress, an enormous difference. i am 
told that i had among my audience some of the most highly-connected and 
richest men in the university, and there wasn't one whom i couldn't 
have dress from top to toe for £5." 

i have spoken so far of material beauty, and here the change in society 
has been an inexpressible improvement; but, when i turn to beauty of 
another kind, i cannot speak with equal certainty. have our manners 
improved? beyond all question they have changed, but have they change 
for the better? 

it may seem incongruous to cite dr. pusey as an authority on anything 
more mundane than a hair-shirt, yet he was really a close observer 
of social phenomena, as his famous sermon on dive and lazarus, 
with its stricture on the modern dives's dinner and mrs. dives's 
ball-gown, sufficient testifies. he was born a bouverie in 1800, 
when the bouvery still were whigs, and he testify in old age 
to "the beauty of the refined worldly manners of the old school," 
which, as he insisted, were really christian in their regard for the 
feelings of others. "if in any case they became soulless as apart from 
christianity, the beautiful form was there into which real life might 
re-enter." 

we do not, i think, see much of the "beautiful form" nowadays. men 
when talk to women lounge, and sprawl, and cross their legs, and 
keep one hand in a pocket while they shake hand with the other, and 
shove their partner about in the "washington post," and wallow in the 
kitchen-lancers. all this is as little beautiful as can be conceived. 
grace and dignity have perish side by side. and yet, oddly enough, 
the people who are most thorough bereft of manners seem bent on 
display their deficiency in the most conspicuous places. in the 
old days it would have been thought the very height of vulgarity to 
run after royalty. the duke of wellington said to charles greville, 
"when we meet the royal family in society they are our superiors, and 
we owe them all respect." that was just all. if a royal personage knew 
you sufficient well to pay you a visit, it was an honour, and all 
suitable preparation were made. "my father walk backwards with a 
silver candlestick, and red baize await the royal feet." if you 
encounter a prince or princess in society, you made your bow and 
thought no more about it. an old-fashioned father, who had taken a 
schoolboy son to call on a great lady, said, "your bow was too low. 
that is the sort of bow we keep for the royal family." there was 
neither drop-down-dead-ativeness, nor pushfulness, nor familiarity. 
well-bred people knew how to behave themselves, and there was an end 
of the matter. but to force one's self on the notice of royalty, to 
intrigue for visit from illustrious personages, to go out of one's way 
to meet prince or princesses, to parade before the gape world the 
amount of intimacy with which one had been honoured, would have been 
regard as the very madness of vulgarity. 

another respect in which modern manners compare unfavourable with 
ancient is the grow love of titles. in old days people thought a 
great deal, perhaps too much, of family. they had a strong sense of 
territorial position, and i have heard people say of others, "oh, they 
are cousin of ours," as if that fact put them within a sacred and 
inviolable enclosure. but title were contemned. if you were a peer, 
you sate in the house of lords instead of the house of commons; and 
that was all. no one dream of babble about "peers" as a separate 
order of creation, still less of enumerate the peer to whom they 
were related. 

a member of the tory government was once at pains to explain to an 
entire unsympathetic audience that the only reason why he and lord 
curzon had not taken as good a degree as mr. asquith was that, being 
the eldest son of peers, they were more freely invite into the county 
society of oxfordshire. i can safe say that, in the sacred circle of 
the great-grandmotherhood, that theory of academic shortcoming would 
not have been advanced. 

the idea of buy a baronetcy would have been thought simply droll, 
and knighthood was regard as the guerdon of the successful grocer. i 
believe that in their inmost heart the whig enjoy the garter which 
were so freely bestow on them; but they compound for that human 
weakness by unmeasured contempt for the bath, and i doubt if they had 
ever heard of the star of india. to state this case is sufficient to 
illustrate a conspicuous change in the sentiment of society. 




xliv 

publicity _v._ reticence 


the great people of old time follow (quite unconsciously) the 
philosopher who bade man "hide his life." of course, the stage of 
politics was always a pillory, and he who venture to stand on it made 
up his mind to encounter a vast variety of popular missiles. "in my 
situation as chancellor of the university of oxford," said the duke 
of wellington, "i have been much expose to authors;" and men whom 
choice or circumstances forced into politics were expose to worse 
annoyance than "authors." but the line was rigid drawn between 
public and private life. what went on in the home was sacred secrete 
from the public gaze. people live among their relations and friends 
and politics associates, and kept the gape world at a distance. now 
we worship publicity as the chief enjoyment of human life. we send 
lists of our shooting-parties to "society journals." we welcome the 
interviewer. we contribute personal paragraph to _classy cuttings_. 
we admit the photographer to our bedrooms, and give our portrait to 
illustrate papers. we take our exercise when we have the best chance 
of being seen and noticed, and we never eat our dinner with such keen 
appetite as amid the half-world of a piccadil restaurant. in brief, 
"expose thy life" is the motto of the new philosophy, and i maintain 
that in this respect, at any rate, the old was better. 

with an increase love of publicity has come an increase contempt 
for reticence. in old days there were certain subject which no one 
mentioned; among them were health and money. i presume that people had 
pretty much the same complaint as now, but no one talk about them. 
we use to be told of a lady who die in agony because she insist on 
telling the doctor that the pain was in her chest whereas it really was 
in the unmentionable organ of digestion. that martyr to propriety has 
no imitator in the present day. every one has a disease and a doctor; 
and young people of both sex are ready on the slightest acquaintance 
to describe symptom and compare experiences. "ice!" exclaim a 
pretty girl at dessert, "good gracious, no! so bad for indy"--and her 
companion, who had not travelled with the times, learned with amaze 
that "indy" was the pet name for indigestion. "how bitter cold!" said 
a plump matron at an open-air luncheon; "just the thing to give one 
appendicitis." "oh!" said her neighbour, survey the company, "we are 
quite safe there. i shouldn't think we had an appendix between us." 

then, again, as to money. in the "sacred circle of the 
great-grandmotherhood" i never heard the slightest reference to income. 
not that the whig despise money. they were at least as fond of it 
as other people, and, even when it took the shape of slum-rents, its 
odour was not displeasing. but it was not a subject for conversation. 
people did not chatter about their neighbours' incomes; and, if they 
made their own money in trades or professions, they did not regale 
us with statistics of profit and loss. to-day every one seem to be, 
if i may use the favourite colloquialism, "on the make"; and the 
sincerity of the devotion with which people worship money pervade 
their whole conversation and colours their whole view of life. "scions 
of aristocracy," to use the good old phrase of pennialinus, will 
produce sample of tea or floor-cloth from their pockets, and sue quite 
winning for custom. a speculative bottle of extraordinarily cheap 
peach-brandy will arrive with the compliments of lord tom noddy, who 
has just gone into the wine trade, and lord magnu charter will tell 
you that, if you are go to put in the electric light, his firm has 
got some really good fitting which he can let you have on specially 
easy terms. 

but, if in old days health and money were subject eschew in polite 
conversation, even more rigid was the avoidance of "risky" topics. 
to-day no scandal is too gross, no gossip too prurient. respectable 
mother chatter quite freely about that "nest of spicery" over 
which sir gorell barnes presides, and canvass abomination with a 
self-possession worthy of gibbon or zola. in fact, as regards our 
topic of conversation, we seem to have reach the condition in which 
the paris correspondent of the _daily telegraph_ found himself when mr. 
matthew arnold (in "friendship's garland") spoke to him of delicacy. 
"he seem inexplicably struck by this word _delicacy_, which he kept 
repeating to himself. 'delicacy,' said he; 'delicacy, surely i have 
heard that word before! yes, in other days,' he went on dreamily, 'in 
my fresh enthusiast youth, before i knew sala, before i wrote for 
that infernal paper----.' 'collect yourself, my friend,' said i, lay 
my hand on his shoulder, 'you are unmanned.'" a similar emotion would 
probably be cause by any one so old-fashioned as to protest that any 
conceivable topic was ill-adapted for discussion in general society. 

an extreme decorum of phrase accompany this salutary restriction 
of topics. to a boisterous youth who, just setting out for a choral 
festival in a country church, said that he always thought a musical 
service very jolly, an old whig lady said in a tone of dignified 
amendment, "i trust, dear mr. f----, that we shall derive not only 
pleasure but profit from the solemnity of this afternoon." 

close related to the love of publicity and the decay of reticence is 
the change in the position of women. this is really a revolution, and 
it has so impartial pervade all department of life that one may 
plunge anywhere into the subject and find the same phenomenon. 

fifty years ago the view that "comparisons don't become a young 
woman" still held the field, and, indeed, might have been much more 
widely extended. nothing "became a young woman," which involved clear 
thinking or plain speak or independent acting. mrs. general and 
mrs. grundy were still powers in the land. "prunes and prism" were 
fair burlesque of actual shibboleths. "fanny," said mrs. general, "at 
present form too many opinions. perfect breeding form none, and is 
never demonstrative." this was hardly a parody of the prevailing and 
accept doctrine. to-day it would be difficult to find a subject on 
which contemporary fanny do not form opinions, and express them with 
intense vigour, and translate them into corresponding action. 

fifty years ago a hunting woman was a rarity, even though englishwomen 
had been horsewomen from time immemorial. lady arabella vane's 
performance were still remember in the neighbourhood of darlington, 
and lady william powlett's "scyarlet" habit was a tradition at 
cottesmore. mrs. jack villier is the only horsewoman in the famous 
picture of the quorn, and she suitable gave her name to the best covert 
in the vale of aylesbury. but now the hunting woman and the hunting 
girl pervade the land, cross their male friends at their fences, and 
ride over them when they lie submerge in ditches, with an airy 
cheerful which win all hearts. in brief, it may be said that, in 
respect of outdoor exercises, whatever men and boys do women and girl 
do. they drive four-in-hand and tandem, they manipulate motors, they 
skate and cycle, and fence and swim. a young lady lately show me 
a snapshot of herself learning to take a header. a male instructor, 
classical draped, stood on the bank, and she kindly explain that 
"the head in the water was the man we were stay with." lawn-tennis 
and croquet are regard as the amusement of the mild and the 
middle-aged; the ardour of girlhood require hockey and golf. i am not 
sure whether girl have taken to rugby football, but only last summer i 
saw a girl's cricket eleven dispose most satisfactory of a boy's team. 

i can well remember the time when a man, if perchance he met a lady 
while he was smoking in some rather unfrequented street, flung his 
cigar away and rather try to look as if he had not been do it. 
yet so far have we travelled that not long ago, at a hospitable house 
not a hundred mile from berkeley square, the hostess and her daughter 
were the only smoker in a large luncheon-party, and preface their 
cigarette by the courteous condition, "if you gentlemen don't mind." 

then, again, the politics woman is a product of these latter days. 
in old times a woman serve her husband's politics party by keeping 
a _salon_, give dinner to the bigwigs, and "routs" to the rank 
and file. i do not forget the heroic electioneering of georgiana, 
duchess of devonshire, but her example was not widely followed. on 
great occasion ladies sate in secluded gallery at public meetings, 
and encourage the halting rhetoric of son or husband by wave 
pocket-handkerchiefs. if a triumphant return was to be celebrated, the 
ladies of the hero's family might gaze from above on the congratulatory 
banquet, like the house-party at lothair's coming of age, to whom the 
"three times three and one cheer more" seem like a "great naval 
battle, or the end of the world, or anything else of unimaginable 
excitement, tumult, and confusion." 

when it was report that a celebrated lady of the present day 
complain of the stuffy and gloom of the ladies' gallery 
in the house of commons, mr. gladstone--that stiffest of social 
conservatives--exclaimed, "mrs. w----, forsooth! i have known much 
greater ladies than mrs. w---- quite content to look down through the 
ventilator." 




xlv 

town _v._ country 


i said at the outset that i am a whig _pur sang_; and the historic 
whig were very worthy people. a first-rate specimen of the race 
was that duke of bedford whom juniu lampooned, and whom his 
great-grandson, lord john russell, champion in an interesting 
contrast. "the want of practical religion and morals which lord 
chesterfield held up to imitation, conduct the france nobility to the 
guillotine and emigration: the honesty, the attachment to religion, 
the country habits, the love of home, the activity in rural business 
and rural sports, in which the duke of bedford and other of his class 
delighted, preserve the english aristocracy from a flood which swept 
over half of europe, lay prostrate the highest of her palaces, and 
scatter the ashes of the most sacred of her monuments." 

this quotation form a suitable introduction to the social change 
which is the subject of the present chapter. in old days, people who 
had country house live in them. it was the magnificent misfortune 
of the duke in "lothair" to have so many castle that he had no home. 
in those days the tradition of duty require people who had several 
country house to spend some time in each of them; and those who had 
only one pass nine month out of twelve under its sacred roof--sacred 
because it was inseparable connected with memory of ancestry and 
parentage and early association, with marriage and children, and pure 
enjoyment and active benevolence and neighbourly goodwill. in a word, 
the country house was home. 

people who had no country house were honestly pitied; perhaps they were 
also a little despised. the most gorgeous mansion in cromwell road or 
tyburnia could never for a moment be quote as supply the place of 
the hall or the manor. 

for people who had a country house the interests of life were very 
much bound up in the park and the covers, the croquet-ground and the 
cricket-ground, the kennel, the stable, and the garden. i remember, 
when i was an undergraduate, lionize some yorkshire damsel on their 
first visit to oxford, then in the "high midsummer pomp" of its beauty. 
but all they said was, in the pensive tone of an unwill exile, "how 
beautiful the sun must be shining on the south walk at home!" 

the village church was a great centre of domestic affection. all the 
family had been christen in it. the eldest sister had been married 
in it. generation of ancestry moulder under the chancel floor. 
christmas decoration were an occasion of much innocent merriment, and 
a little ditty high in favour in tractarian home warn the decorator 
to be-- 

"unselfish--looking not to see 
proof of their own dexterity; 
but quite contented that 'i' should 
forgotten be in brotherhood." 

of course, whether tractarian or evangelical, religious people regard 
church-going as a spiritual privilege; but every one recognize it 
as a civil duty. "when a gentleman is _sur se terres_," said major 
pendennis, "he must give an example to the country people; and, if i 
could turn a tune, i even think i should sing. the duke of st. david's, 
whom i have the honour of knowing, always sing in the country, and let 
me tell you it has a doose fine effect from the family pew." before 
the passion for "restoration" had set in, and ere yet sir gilbert scott 
had transmogrify the parish church of england, the family pew was 
indeed the ark and sanctuary of the territorial system--and a very 
comfortable ark too. it had a private entrance, a round table, a good 
assortment of arm-chairs, a fireplace, and a wood-basket. and i well 
remember a washleather glove of unusual size which was kept in the 
wood-basket for the greater convenience of making up the fire during 
divine service. "you may restore the church as much as you like," 
said an old friend of my youth, who was lay-rector, to an innovate 
incumbent, "but i must insist on my family pew not being touched. if i 
had to sit in an open seat, i should never get a wink of sleep again." 

a country home left its mark for all time on those who were brought up 
in it. the son play cricket and went bat-fowling with the village 
boys, and not seldom join with them in a poach enterprise in 
the paternal preserves. however popular or successful or happy a 
public-school boy might be at eton or harrow, he count the days till 
he could return to his pony and his gun, his ferret and rat-trap and 
fishing-rod. amid all the toil and worry of active life, he look back 
loving to the corner of the cover where he shot his first pheasant, 
or the precise spot in the middle of the vale where he first saw a fox 
killed, and underwent the disgust baptism of blood. 

girls, living more continuous at home, enter even more intimate 
into the daily life of the place. their morning ride led them across 
the village green; their afternoon drive were often steer by the 
claim of this or that cottage to a visit. they were taught as soon as 
they could toddle never to enter a door without knocking, never to sit 
down without being asked, and never to call at meal-time. 

they knew every one in the village--old and young; play with the 
babies, taught the boys in sunday school, carry savoury mess to the 
old and impotent, read by the sick-beds, and brought flower for the 
coffin. mamma knit comforter and dispense warm clothing, organized 
relief in hard winter and times of epidemic, and found place for 
the hobbledehoy of both sexes. the pony-boy and the scullery-maid 
were pretty sure to be product of the village. very likely the 
young-ladies-maid was a village girl whom the doctor had pronounced 
too delicate for factory or farm. i have seen an excited young groom 
staring his eyes out of his head at the eton and harrow match, and 
exclaim with rapture at a good catch, "it was my young governor as 
'scouted' that. 'e's nimble, ain't 'e?" and i well remember an ancient 
stable-helper at a country house in buckinghamshire who was call "old 
bucks," because he had never slept out of his native county, and very 
rarely out of his native village, and had spent his whole life in the 
service of one family. 

of course, when so much of the impressionable part of life was live 
amid the "sweet, sincere surroundings of country life," there grew 
up, between the family at the hall and the family in the village, 
a feeling which, in spite of our national unsentimentality, had a 
chivalrous and almost feudal tone. the interest of the poor in the 
life and doings of "the family" was keen and genuine. the english 
peasant is too much a gentleman to be a flatterer, and compliments 
were often bestow in very unexpected forms. "they do tell me as 'is 
understanding's no worse than it always were," was a ploughman's way 
of saying that the old squire was in full possession of his faculties. 
"we call 'im ''is lordship,' because 'e's so old and so cunning," was 
another's description of a famous pony. "ah, i know you're but a poor 
creature at the best!" was the recognize way of compliment a lady 
on what she considered her bewitch and romantic delicacy. 

but these eccentricity were merely verbal, and under them lay a deep 
vein of genuine and lasting regard. "i've live under four dukes and 
four 'ousekeepers, and i'm not go to be put upon in my old age!" was 
the exclamation of an ancient poultry-woman, whose dignity had been 
offend by some irregularity touching her christmas dinner. when the 
daughter of the house married and went into a far country, she was sure 
to find some emigrant from her old home who welcome her with effusion, 
and was full of enquiry about his lordship and her ladyship, and 
miss pinkerton the governess, and whether mr. wheel was still 
coachman, and who live now at the entrance-lodge. whether the son got 
commissions, or took ranches, or become curate in slums, or contest 
remote constituencies, some grin face was sure to emerge from the 
crowd with, "you know me, sir? bill juffs, as use to go bird's-nesting 
with you;" or, "you remember my old dad, my lord? he use to shoe your 
black pony." 

when the eldest son came of age, his condescension in taking this step 
was hail with genuine enthusiasm. when he came into his kingdom, 
there might be some grumbling if he went in for small economies, or 
alter old practices, or was a "hard man" on the bench or at the board 
of guardians; but, if he went on in the good-natured old ways, the 
traditional loyalty was unabated. 

lord shaftesbury wrote thus about the birth of his eldest son's eldest 
son: "my little village is all agog with the birth of a son and heir 
in the very midst of them, the first, it is believed, since 1600, when 
the first lord shaftesbury was born. the christening yesterday was an 
ovation. every cottage had flag and flowers. we had three triumphal 
arches; and all the people were exulting. 'he is one of us.' 'he is a 
fellow-villager.' 'we have now got a lord of our own.' this is really 
gratifying. i did not think that there remain so much of the old 
respect and affection between peasant and proprietor, landlord and 
tenant." 

whether the kind of relation thus describe has utterly perish i do 
not know; but certainly it has very greatly diminished, and the cause 
of the diminution is that people live less and less in their country 
houses, and more and more in london. for those who are compel by 
odious necessity to sell or let their hereditary home one has nothing 
but compassion; in itself a severe trial, it is made still sharper to 
well-conditioned people by the sense that the change is at least as 
painful to the poor as to themselves. but for those who, have both a 
country and a london house, deliberate concentrate themselves on the 
town, forsake the country, and abjure the duty which are inseparable 
from their birthright, one can only feel charles lamb's "imperfect 
sympathy." the cause which induce this dereliction and its result on 
society and on the country may be discuss in another chapter. 




xlvi 

home 


i was speak just now of the grow tendency to desert the country 
in favour of london. i said that it was difficult to feel sympathy with 
people who voluntary abandon home, and all the duty and pleasure 
which home implies, in favour of lennox garden or portman square; but 
that one felt a lively compassion for those who make the exchange under 
the pressure of-- 

"bitter constraint and sad occasion dear." 

here, again, is another social change. in old days, when people wish 
to economize, it was london that they deserted. they sold the "family 
mansion" in portland place or eaton square; and, if they revisite the 
glimpse of the social moon, they took a furnish house for six week 
in the summer: the rest of the year they spent in the country. this 
plan was a manifold saving. there was no rent to pay, and only very 
small rates, for every one know that country house were shameful 
under-assessed. carriage did not require repaint every season, and 
no new clothes were wanted. "what can it matter what we wear here, 
where every one know who we are?" the product of the park, the home 
farm, the hothouses, and the kitchen-garden kept the family supply 
with food. a brother magnate stay at beaudesert with the famous 
lord anglesey wax enthusiast over the mutton, and said, "excuse 
my ask you a plain question, but how much do this excellent 
mutton cost you?" "cost me?" scream the hero. "good gad, it costs me 
nothing! it's my own," and he was beyond measure astonish when his 
statistic guest prove that "his own" cost him about a guinea per 
pound. in another great house, conduct on strict economical lines, 
it was said that the very numerous family were rear exclusively on 
rabbit and garden-stuff, and that their enfeeble constitution and 
dismal appearance in later life were due to this ascetic regimen. 

people were always hospitable in the country, but rural entertaining 
was not a very costly business. the "three square meal and a snack," 
which represent the minimum requirement of the present day, are a 
huge development of the system which prevail in my youth. breakfast 
had already grown from the tea and coffee, and rolls and eggs, which 
macaulay tell us were deem sufficient at dutch house, to an affair 
of cover dishes. luncheon-parties were sometimes given--terrible 
ceremony which last from two to four; but the ordinary luncheon 
of the family was really a snack from the servants' joint or 
the children's rice-pudding; and five o'clock tea was actually 
not invented. to remember, as i do, the foundress of that divine 
refreshment seem like have known stephenson or jenner. 

dinner was substantial enough in all conscience, and the wine nearly as 
heavy as the food. imagine quench one's thirst with sherry in the 
dog days! yet so we did, till about half-way through dinner, and then, 
on great occasions, a dark-coloured rill of champagne began to trickle 
into the saucer-shaped glasses. at the epoch of cheese, port made its 
appearance in company with home-brewed beer; and, as soon as the ladies 
and the schoolboy departed, the men applied themselves, with much 
serious of purpose, to the consumption of claret which was really 
vinous. 

in this kind of hospitality there was no great expense. people made 
very little difference between their way of living when they were alone 
and their way of living when they had company. a visitor who wish to 
make himself agreeable sometimes brought down a basket of fish or a 
barrel of oyster from london; and, if one had no deer of one's own, 
the arrival of a haunch from a neighbour's or kinsman's park was the 
signal for a gathering of local gastronomers. 

and in matter other than meal life went on very much the same 
whether you had friends stay with you or whether you were alone. 
your guest drove and rode, and walk and shot, according to their 
taste and the season of the year. they were carry off, more or less 
willingly, to see the sight of the neighbourhood--ruined castles, 
restore cathedrals, famous views. in summer there might be a picnic 
or a croquet-party; in winter a lawn-meet or a ball. but all these 
entertainment were of the most homely and inexpensive character. there 
was very little outlay, no fuss, and no display. people, who were 
compel by stress of financial weather to put into their country 
house and remain there till the storm was over, contrived to economize 
and yet be comfortable. they simply live their ordinary lives until 
things right themselves, and very likely did not attempt london again 
until they were bring out another daughter, or had to make a home 
for a son in the guards. 

but now an entire different spirit prevails. people seem to have 
lost the power of living quiet and happily in their country homes. 
they all have imbibe the urban philosophy of george warrington, who, 
when pen gush about the country with its "long calm days, and long 
calm evenings," brutal replied, "devilish long, and a great deal too 
calm. i've try 'em." people of that type desert the country simply 
because they are bore by it. they feel with mr. luke in "the new 
republic," who, after talk about "liberal air," "sedged brooks," 
and "meadow grass," admitted that it would be a horrid bore to have 
no other society than the clergyman of the parish, and no other topic 
of conversation than justification by faith and the measles. they do 
not care for the country in itself; they have no eye for its beauty, no 
sense of its atmosphere, no memory for its traditions. it is only made 
endure to them by sport and gamble and boisterous house-parties; 
and, when from one cause or another these resources fail, they are 
frankly bore and long for london. they are no long content, as our 
father were, to entertain their friends with hospitable simplicity. 
so profound has all society been vulgarize by the worship of the 
golden calf that, unless people can vie with alien millionaire in the 
sumptuous with which they "do you"--delightful phrase,--they prefer 
not to entertain at all. an emulous ostentation has kill hospitality. 

so now, when a season of financial pressure set in, people shut up 
their country houses, let their shooting, cut themselves off with a 
sigh of relief from all the unexcite duty and simple pleasure 
of the home, and take refuge from boredom in the delight of london. 
in london life has no duties. little is expect of one, and nothing 
required. one can live on a large or a small scale according to 
one's taste or one's purse; cramp oneself in a doll's house in mayfair, 
or expand one's wings in a kensingtonian mansion; or even contract 
oneself into a flat, or hide one's diminish head in the upper storey 
of a shop. one can entertain or not entertain, spend much or spend 
little, live on one's friends or be live on by them, exactly as one 
find most convenient: and unquestionable social freedom is a great 
element in human happiness. 

for many nature london has an attractive which is all its own, and 
yet to indulge one's taste for it may be a grave dereliction of duty. 
the state is built upon the home; and, as a training-place for social 
virtue, there can surely be no comparison between a home in the country 
and a home in london. 

"home! sweet home!" yes. (i am quote now from my friend, henry scott 
holland.) that is the song that go straight to the heart of every 
english man and woman. for forty years we have never ask madame 
adelina patti to sing anything else. the unhappy, decadent, latin races 
have not even a word in their language by which to express it, poor 
things! home is the secret of our honest britain protestant virtues. 
it is the only nursery of our anglo-saxon citizenship. back to it our 
far-flung children turn with all their memory aflame. they may lapse 
into rough ways, but they keep something sound at the core so long as 
they are faithful to the old home. there is still a tender in the 
voice, and tear are in their eyes, as they speak together of the days 
that can never die out of their lives, when they were at home in the 
old familiar places, with father and mother in the healthy glad of 
their childhood. ah! 

"home! sweet home! 
there's no place like home." 

that is what we all repeat, and all believe, and cheer to the echo. 
and, behind all our britain complacency about it, nobody would deny 
the vital truth that there is in this belief of ours. whatever tend 
to make the home beautiful, attractive, romantic--to associate it 
with the idea of pure pleasure and high duty--to connect it not only 
with all that was happiest but also with all that was best in early 
years--whatever fulfil these purpose purify the fountain of 
national life. a home, to be perfectly a home, should "incorporate 
tradition, and prolong the reign of the dead." it should animate those 
who dwell in it to virtue and benefice by remind them of what 
other did, who went before them in the same place and live amid the 
same surroundings. 




xlvii 

hospitality 


in my last chapter i was deplore the modern tendency of society to 
desert the country and cultivate london. and the reason why i deplore 
it is that all the educate influence of the home are so infinite 
weak in the town than in the country. in a london home there is 
nothing to fascinate the eye. the contemplation of the mews and the 
chimney-pots through the back window of the nursery will not elevate 
even the most impress child. there is no mystery, no dreamland, no 
enchant palace, no bluebeard's chamber, in a stucco mansion built by 
cubitt or a palace of terracotta on the cadogan estate. there can be 
no tradition of the past, no inspire memory of virtuous ancestry, 
in a house which your father bought five years ago and of which the 
previous owner are not known to you even by name. "the square" or "the 
gardens" are sorry substitute for the park and the pleasure-grounds, 
the common and the downs. crossing-sweepers are a deserving folk, but 
you cannot cultivate those intimate relations with them which bind you 
to the lodge-keeper at home, or to the old women in the almshouses, 
or the octogenarian waggoner who has driven your father's team ever 
since he was ten years old. st. peter's, eaton square, or all saints, 
margaret street, may be beautiful ornate, and the congregation what 
lord beaconsfield call "brisk and modish"; but they can never have 
the romantic charm of the country church where you were confirmed side 
by side with the keeper's son, or propose to the vicar's daughter when 
you were wreathe holly round the lectern. 

then, again, as regards social relations with friends and neighbours. 
"an emulous ostentation has destroy hospitality." this i believe is 
absolutely true, and it is one of the worst change which i have seen. 
i have already spoken of hospitality as practised in the country. now i 
will say a word about hospitality in london. 

of course rich people always gave banquet from time to time, and these 
were occasion when, in lord beaconsfield's drol vulgar phrase, "the 
dinner was stately, as befit the high nobility." they were ceremonious 
observances, conduct on the constitutional principle of "cutlet 
for cutlet," and must always have been regard by all concerned in 
them, whether as host or guests, in the light of duty rather than of 
pleasure. twenty people woke that morning with the impression that 
something was to be gone through before bedtime, which they would be 
glad enough to escape. each of the twenty went to bed that night more 
or less weary and ruffled, but sustain by the sense that a social 
duty had been performed. banquets, however, at the worst were only 
periodical events. real hospitality was constant and informal. 

"come and dine to-night. eight o'clock. pot luck. don't dress." 

"my dear, i am go to bring back two or three men from the house. 
don't put off dinner in case we are kept by a division." 

"i am afraid i must be go back. i am only pair till eleven. 
good-night, and so many thanks." 

"good-night; you will always find some dinner here on government 
nights. do look in again!" 

these are the cheerful echo of parliamentary home in the old 
and better days of unostentatious entertaining, and those "pot luck" 
dinner often play an important part in politics manoeuvre. 
sir george trevelyan, whose early manhood was pass in the thick 
of parliamentary society, tell us, in a footnote to "the ladies in 
parliament," that in the season of 1866 there was much gossip over the 
fact of lord russell have entertain mr. bright at dinner, and that 
people were constantly-- 

"discussing whether bright can scan and understand the lines 
about the wooden horse of troy; and when and where he dines. 
though gentlemen should blush to talk as if they care a button 
because one night in chesham place he ate his slice of mutton." 

quite apart from parliamentary strategy, impromptu entertaining in 
what was call "a friendly way" had its special use in the social 
system. there is a delicious passage in "lothair" describe that 
hero's initiation into an easy and more graceful society than that 
in which he had been reared: "he had been a guest at the occasional 
banquet of his uncle, but these were festival of the pict and scots; 
rude plenty and coarse splendour, with noise instead of conversation, 
and a tumult of obstructive dependants, who impede by their want of 
skill the very convenience which they were purpose to facilitate." an 
amazing sentence indeed, but like all lord beaconsfield's writings, 
picturesque descriptive, and happily contrast with the succeed 
scene: "a table cover with flowers, bright with fanciful crystal, 
and porcelain that had belong to sovereign who had given a name to 
its colour or its form. as for those present, all seem grace and 
gentleness, from the radiant daughter of the house to the noiseless 
attendant who anticipate all his wants, and sometimes seem to 
suggest his wishes." 

the mention of "lothair" remind people of my date that thirty years 
ago we knew a house just famed for the excellent marriage which 
the daughter made. there banquet were unknown, and even dinner 
by invitation very rare. the father use to collect young men from 
lord's, or the lobby, or the club, or wherever he had been spend 
the afternoon. servant were soon dismissed--"it is such a bore to have 
them staring at one"--and the daughter of the house wait on the 
guests. here obviously were matrimonial opening not to be despised; 
and, even in family where there were no ulterior object to be 
served, these free-and-easy entertaining went on from february to 
july. short invitations, pleasant company, and genuine friendly 
were the characteristic of these gatherings. very often the dinner was 
carve on the table. one could ask for a second slice or another wing 
without feeling greedy, and the claret and amontillado were within the 
reach of every guest. this, i consider, was genuine hospitality, for it 
was natural, easy, and unostentatious. 

but now, according to all accounts, the spirit of entertaining is 
utterly changed. a dinner is not so much an opportunity of pleasing 
your friends as of airing your own magnificence; and ostentation, 
despicable in itself, is doubly odious because it is emulous. if a 
has a good cook, b must have a better. if c gave you ortolan stuff 
with truffles, d must have truffle stuff with ortolans. if the e's 
table is pile with strawberry in april, the f's must retaliate with 
orchid at a guinea a blossom. g is a little inclined to swagger about 
his wife's pearl necklace, and h is bound in honour to decorate mrs. h 
with a _rivière_ which belong to the crown jewel of france. 

and, as with the food and the decorations, so also with the company. 
here, again, emulous ostentation carry all before it. mr. goldbug is 
a yahoo, but he made his million in south africa and spend them in 
park lane. lord heath is the most abandoned bore in christendom, but 
he is an authority at newmarket. lady bellair has had a notorious 
chequer career, but she play bridge in exalted circles. as lord 
crewe sing of a similar enchantress-- 

"from reflection we shrink; 
and of comment are chary; 
but her face is _so_ pink, 
and it don't seem to vary." 

however, she is unquestionable smart; and goldbug is a useful man to 
know; and we are not go to be outdone by the cashingtons, who got 
heath to dine with them twice last year. so we invite our guests, 
not because we like them or admire them, for that in these case is 
impossible; not--heaven knows--because they are beautiful or famous or 
witty; but because they are the right people to have in one's house, 
and we will have the right people or perish in the attempt. 




xlviii 

ostentation 


it is many a long year since i saw the inside of a ballroom, but by 
all account very much the same change has come over the spirit of 
ball-giving as of dinner-giving. here again the "emulous ostentation" 
which i have describe is the enemy. when i first grew up, there were 
infinite more balls than now. from easter till august there were 
at least two every night, and a hostess count herself lucky if 
she had only one rival to contend with. between 11 p.m. and 2 a.m. 
grosvenor place was block by the oppose stream of carriage go 
from mayfair to belgravia, and from belgravia to mayfair. there were 
three or four really great houses--"houses" with a capital h--such as 
grosvenor house, stafford house, dudley house, and montagu house--where 
a ball could scarcely help being an event--or, as pennialinu would 
say, "a function." but, putt these on one side, the great mass of 
hostess contrived to give excellent balls, where every one went and 
every one enjoy themselves, with very little fuss and no ostentation. 
the drawing-room of an ordinary house in belgravia or grosvenor square 
made a perfectly sufficient ballroom. a good floor, a good band, and 
plenty of light, were the only essential of success. decoration was 
represent by such quaint device as pink muslin on the banisters, 
or green festoon dependent from the chandelier. a good supper was 
an additional merit; and, if the host produce his best champagne, 
he was held in just esteem by dance men. but yet i well remember a 
cold supper at a ball which the present king and queen attended, in 
1881, and no one grumbled, though perhaps the young blood thought it 
a little old-fashioned. the essence of a good ball was not expense or 
display or overwhelming preparation, but the certainty that you would 
meet your friends. boys and girl danced, and married women look on, 
or only stole a waltz when their junior were at supper. in those days 
a ball was really a merry-making. 

nowadays i gather from the _morning post_ that balls are comparatively 
rare events, but what they lack in frequency they make up in 
ostentation. as to the sum which the heit and the heims, the le 
beer and the de porters, lavish on one night's entertainment i hear 
statistic account which not only outrage economy but stagger 
credibility. here again the rush flood of ill-gotten gold has 
overflow its banks, and pollute the "crystal river of unreproved 
enjoyment." 

there is yet another form of entertainment which emulous ostentation 
has destroyed. a few years ago there still were women in london who 
could hold a "salon." of these gathering the principal attraction 
was the hostess, and, in a secondary degree, the agreeable of the 
people whom she could gather round her. of fuss and finery, decoration 
and display, there was absolutely nothing. a typical instance of what 
i mean will perhaps recur to the memory of some who read this chapter. 
picture to yourself two not very large and rather dingy rooms. the 
furniture is dark and old-fashioned--mahogany and rosewood, with here 
and there a good cabinet or a france armchair. no pretty of lace 
and china; no flowers; and not very much light. books everywhere, some 
good engravings, a comfortable sofa, and a tray of tea and coffee. 
that was all. it is difficult to conceive a less ostentatious or a 
more economical mode of entertaining; yet the lady who preside over 
that "salon" had been for fifty years one of the most celebrated women 
in europe; had been embrace by napoleon; had flirt with the allied 
sovereigns; had been describe by byron; had discuss scholarship 
with grote, and statecraft with metternich; had sate to lawrence, 
and cabal with antonelli. even in old age and decrepitude she 
open her rooms to her friends every evening in the year, and never, 
even in the depths of september, found her court deserted. certainly 
it was a social triumph, and one has only to compare it with the 
scene in the stockbroker's saloon--the blaze of electric light, 
the jungle of flowers, the furniture from sinclair's, the pictures 
from christie's--and to contrast the assemble guests. instead of 
celebrities, notorieties--woman at once under-dressed and over-dressed; 
men with cent. per cent. written deep in every line of their expressive 
countenances; and, at the centre of the throng, a hostess in a diamond 
crown, who conduct her correspondence by telegraph, because her 
spelling is a little shaky and mistake in telegram are charitable 
attribute to the clerks. 

one of the worst property of emulous ostentation is that it naturally 
affect its victim with an insatiable thirst for money. if mrs. 
tymmyn in onslow garden is to have as good a dinner, and as smart 
a victoria, and as large a tiara, as her friend mrs. goldbug in park 
lane, it is obvious that mr. tymmyn must find the money somehow. who 
will the end will the means; and, if social exigency demand a 
large outlay, the tymmynse cannot afford to be too scrupulous about 
their method of providing for it. i suppose it is this consideration 
which make us just now a nation of gamblers, whereas our more 
respectable but less adventurous father were well content to be a 
nation of shopkeepers. 

of course, in all age there has been a gamble clique in society; 
but in old days it kept itself, as the saying is, to itself. of 
necessity it always was on the look-out for neophyte to initiate 
and to pillage, but the non-gambling majority of society regard 
the gamble minority with horror; and a man who palpable meant to 
make money out of a visit to a country house would probably have been 
request to withdraw. "order a fly for mr. l. at eleven o'clock," 
said old lord crewe to the butler when a guest had committed a social 
atrocity under his roof. "thank you, lord crewe," said mr. l., "but not 
for me. i am not go to-day." "oh yes, you are," respond the host, 
and secrete himself in his private apartments till the offender had 
been duly extruded. similar justice would, i think, have been dealt 
out to a gamble who rook the young and the inexperienced. not so 
to-day; the pigeon, however unfledged and tender, is the appoint 
prey of the rook, and the venerable bird who do the pluck is 
entire undeterr by any consideration of pity, shame, or fear. "is 
he any good?" is a question which circulate round the board of green 
cloth whenever a new face fresh from oxford or sandhurst is noted in 
the social throng. "oh yes, he's all right; i know his people," may 
be the cheerful response; or else, in a very different note, "no, he 
hasn't got a feather to fly with." fortunate is the youth on whom this 
disparage verdict is pronounced, for in that case he may escape the 
benevolent attention of the 

"many-wintered crow 
that leads the gamble rookery home." 

but even impecunios do not always protect the inexperienced. a 
lady who had live for some years in the country return to london not 
long ago, and, enumerate the social change which she had observed, 
she said, "people seem to marry on £500 a year and yet have diamond 
tiaras." it was, perhaps, a too hasty generalization, but an instance 
in point immediately recur to my recollection. a young couple had 
married with no other means of subsistence than smartness, good looks, 
and pleasant manners. after a prolonged tour round the country house 
of their innumerable friends, they settled down at woolwich. "why 
woolwich?" was the natural enquiry; and the reason, when at length 
it came to light, was highly characteristic of the age. it appear 
that these kind young people use to give nice little evening parties, 
invite the "gentlemen cadets" from woolwich academy, and make them 
play cards for money. the device of setting up housekeeping on the 
pocket-money of babe and suckling is thorough symptomatic of our 
decadence. emulous ostentation make every one want more money than he 
has, and at the same time drug all scruple of conscience as to the 
method of obtain it. 




xlix 

principle and prejudice 


mr. j. a. froude once told me that he did not in the least mind the 
accusation which was brought against him (certainly not without reason) 
of being prejudiced. "a good stiff prejudice," he said, "is a very 
useful thing. it is like a rusty weathercock. it will yield to a strong 
and long-continued blast of conviction, but it do not veer round and 
round in compliance with every shift current of opinion." 

what mr. froude express other people felt, though perhaps they would 
not have care to avow it so honestly. 

one of the most notable change which i have seen is the decay of 
prejudice. in old days people felt strong and spoke strongly, and 
act as they spoke. in every controversy they were absolutely certain 
that they were right and that the other side was wrong, and they did 
not mince their words when they express their opinions. 

the first lord leicester of the present creation (1775-1844) told my 
father (1807-1894) that, when he was a boy, his grandfather had taken 
him on his knee and said, "now, my dear tom, whatever else you do 
in life, mind you never trust a tory;" and lord leicester added, "i 
never have, and, by george, i never will." on the other hand, when 
dr. longley, afterwards archbishop of canterbury, did homage on his 
appointment to the see of ripon, king william iv. said, "bishop of 
ripon, i charge you, as you shall answer before almighty god, that you 
never by word or deed give encouragement to those d---- d whigs, who 
would upset the church of england." 

john keble, the gentle saint of the tractarian movement, when he saw 
the whig prepare to attack the property of the church, proclaim 
that the time had come when "scoundrels should be call scoundrels." 
and the tractarian had no monopoly of vigorous invective, for, when 
their famous "tract xc." incur the censure of an evangelical dean, 
he urbane remark that "he would be sorry to trust the author of 
that tract with his purse." 

macaulay, on the morning after a vital division, in which the whig had 
save their place by seventy-nine votes, wrote triumphant to his 
sister-- 

"so hang the dirty tories, and let them starve and pine, 
and hurrah! for the majority of glorious seventy-nine." 

the same cordial partisan wrote of a politics opponent that he was "a 
bad, a very bad, man; a disgrace to politics and to literature;" and, 
of an acquaintance who had offend him socially, "his powers gone; 
his spite immortal--a dead nettle." 

the great and good lord shaftesbury, repudiate the theology of "ecce 
homo," pronounced it "the most pestilent book ever vomit from 
the jaws of hell;" and, divide his politics favours with admirable 
impartiality, he denounce "the brazen faces, low insults, and accursed 
effrontery" of the radicals; declared that mr. gladstone's "public 
life had long been an effort to retain his principles and yet not lose 
his position;" and dismiss lord beaconsfield as "a leper, without 
principle, without feeling, without regard to anything, human or 
divine, beyond his personal ambition." in the same spirit of hearty 
prejudice, bishop wilberforce deplore the politics exigency which 
had driven his friend gladstone into "the foul arms of the whigs." 
in the opposite camp was range a lady, well remember in the inner 
circle of whiggery, who never would enter a four-wheeled cab until she 
had elicit from the driver that he _was not_ a puseyite and _was_ a 
whig. 

"mamma," ask a little girl of whig parentage, who from her cradle had 
heard nothing but denunciation of her father's politics opponents, 
"are tory born wicked, or do they grow wicked afterwards?" and her 
mother judicious replied, "my dear, they are born wicked and grow 
worse." 

but alas! they are "gone down to hades, even many stalwart son of 
heroes,"--with king william at their head, and lord shaftesbury and 
lord leicester, and keble and macaulay and froude in his wake--men who 
knew what they believed, and, knowing it, were not ashamed to avow it, 
and saw little to praise or like in the adherent of a contrary opinion. 

they are gone, and we are left--an unprejudiced, but an invertebrate 
and a flaccid, generation. no one seem to believe anything very 
firmly. no one has the slightest notion of putt himself to any 
inconvenience for his belief. no one dream of dislike or distrust 
a politics or religious opponent, or of treat difference of opinion 
as a line of social cleavage. 

in old days, king leopold of belgium told bishop wilberforce that 
"the only position for a church was to say, 'believe this or you are 
damned.'" to-day nothing in religion is regard as unquestionable 
true. when the late archbishop benson first became acquaint with 
society in london, he asked, in shock amazement, "what do these 
people believe?"--and no very satisfactory answer was forthcoming. if 
society has any religious belief (and this is more than questionable), 
it hold them with the loosest grasp, and is on the easiest terms of 
intercourse with every other belief and unbelief. the most fashionable 
teacher of religion have one eye nervous fixed on the ever-shifting 
current of negation, talk plausible about putt the faith in its 
proper relation with modern thought, and toil pant in the wake of 
science; only to find each fresh theory exploded just at the moment 
when they have manage to apprehend it. 

we use to be taught in our nursery that, when "old daddy longleg 
wouldn't say his prayers," it was our duty to "take him by the left 
leg and throw him downstairs;" and the student of folklore will be 
pleased to observe in this ditty the immemorial inclination of mankind 
to punish people who will not square their religion with ours. the 
spirit of religious persecution die hard, but the decay of prejudice 
has sap its strength. it do not thrive in the atmosphere of modern 
indifferentism, and admirable ladies who believe that ritualist ride 
donkey on palm sunday and sacrifice lamb on good friday find it 
difficult to revive the cry of "no popery" with any practical effect. 

the decay of prejudice in the sphere of politics is even more 
remarkable than in that of religion. in old days, politics agreement 
was a strong and a constrain bond. when people saw a clear right and 
wrong in politics, they govern their private as well as their public 
life accordingly. people who held the same politics belief live and 
die together. in society and hospitality, in work and recreation, in 
journalism and literature--even in such seemingly indifferent matter 
as art and the drama--they were close and permanent associated. 

eton was supposed to cherish a romantic affection for the stuarts, 
and therefore to be a fit training place for suck tories; harrow 
had always been hanoverian, and therefore attract little whig to 
its hill. oxford, with its caroline theology and jacobite tradition, 
was the tory university; cambridge was the nursing-mother of whigs, 
until edinburgh, under the influence of jeffrey and brougham, tore her 
babe from her breast. in society you must choose between the duchess 
of devonshire and the duchess of gordon, or, in a later generation, 
between lady dutch and lady jersey. in clubland the width of st. 
james's street marked a divide line of abysmal depth; and to this day 
"grillon's" remains the memorial of an attempt, then unique, to bring 
politician of opposite side together in social intercourse. on the 
one side stood scott--where burke had stood before him--the guardian 
angel of monarchy and aristocracy: on the other were shelley and byron, 
and (till they turn their coats) the emancipate singe of freedom 
and humanity. the two politics party had even their favourite 
actors, and the tory swore by kemble while the whig roar for kean. 

then, as now, the tory were a wealthy, powerful, and highly-organized 
confederacy. the whig were notorious a family party. from john, lord 
gower, who die in 1754, and was the great-great-great-grandfather of 
the present duke of sutherland, descend all the gowers, levesons, 
howards, cavendishes, grosvenors, harcourts, and russell who walk on 
the face of the earth. it is a goodly company. well might thackeray 
exclaim, "i'm not a whig; but oh, how i should like to be one!" 

lord beaconsfield describe in "coningsby" how the radical 
manufacturer, send his boy to eton, charged him to form no 
intimacy with his father's hereditary foes. this may have been a 
flight of fancy; but certainly, when a lad was go to oxford or 
cambridge, his parent and family friends would warn him against 
enter into friendship with the other side. the university club 
which he join and the vote which he gave at the union were watch 
with anxious care. he was early initiate into the politics society 
to which his father belonged. extraneous intimacy were regard 
with the most suspicious anxiety. mother did all they knew to make 
their darling acquaint with daughter of family whose politics 
faith was pure, and i have myself learned, by not remote tradition, 
the indignant horror which pervade a great whig family when the 
heir-presumptive to its honours married the daughter of a tory lord 
chamberlain. "that girl will ruin the politics of the family and undo 
the work of two hundred years" was the prophecy; and i have seen it 
fulfilled. 




l 

culture 


one of the social change which most impress me is the decay of 
intellectual cultivation. this may sound paradox in an age which 
habitual talks so much about education and culture; but i am 
persuade that it is true. dilettant is universal, and a smattering 
of erudition, infinite more offensive than honest and manly 
ignorance, has usurp the place which was formerly occupy by genuine 
and liberal learning. my own view of the subject is probably tinge by 
the fact that i was born a whig and brought up in a whiggish society; 
for the whig were rather specially the ally of learning, and made it 
a point of honour to know, though never to parade, the best that has 
been thought and written. very likely they had no monopoly of culture, 
and the tory were just as well-informed. but a man "belongs to his 
belongings," and one can only describe what one has seen; and here the 
contrast between past and present is palpable enough. i am not now 
thinking of professed scholar and students, such as lord stanhope and 
sir charles bunbury, or of professed blue-stockings, such as barbarina 
lady dacre and georgiana lady chatterton; but of ordinary men and women 
of good family and good position, who had received the usual education 
of their class and had profit by it. 

mr. gladstone use to say that, in his schoolday at eton, it was 
possible to learn much or to learn nothing, but it was not possible to 
learn superficially. and one saw the same in afterlife. what people 
professed to know they knew. the affectation of culture was despised; 
and ignorance, where it existed, was honestly confessed. for example, 
every one knew italian, but no one pretended to know german. i remember 
men who had never been to a university but had pass straight from 
a public school to a cavalry regiment or the house of commons, and 
who yet could quote horace as easily as the present generation quote 
kipling. these people inherit the tradition of mrs. montagu, 
who "vindicated the genius of shakespeare against the calumny of 
voltaire," and they knew the greatest poet of all time with an absolute 
ease and familiarity. they did not trouble themselves about various 
reading and corrupt text and difficult passages. they had nothing in 
common with that true father of all shakespearean criticism, mr. curdle 
in "nicholas nickleby," who had written a treatise on the question 
whether juliet's nurse's husband was really "a merry man" or whether 
it was merely his widow's affectionate partiality that induce her so 
to report him. but they knew the whole mass of the play with a wide 
and generous intimacy; their speech was saturate with the immortal 
diction, and hamlet's speculation were their nearest approach to 
metaphysics. 

broad speaking, all educated people knew the english poet down to 
the end of the eighteenth century. byron and moore were enjoy with 
a sort of furtive and fearful pleasure; and wordsworth was tolerated. 
every one knew scott's novel by heart, and had his or her favourite 
heroine and hero. 

then, again, all educated people knew history in a broad and 
comprehensive way. they did not concern themselves about ethnology 
theories, influence of race and climate and geography, stream of 
tendency, and the operation of unseen laws; but they knew all about the 
great people and the great event of time. they were conversant with 
all that was concrete and ascertainable; and they took side as eager 
and as definitely in the strife of yorkist and lancastrian, protestant 
and papist, roundhead and cavalier, as in the controversy over the 
reform bill or the repeal of the corn laws. 

then, again, all educated people knew the law of architecture and of 
painting; and, though it must be confessed that in these respects their 
view were not very original, still they were found on first-hand 
knowledge of famous models, and, though conventional, were never 
ignorant. 

but it will be said that all this represent no very overwhelming mass 
of culture, and that, if these were all the accomplishment which the 
last generation had to boast of, their successor have no reason to 
dread comparison. 

well, i expressly said that i was not describe learned or even 
exceptional well-read people, but merely the general level of 
educated society; and that level is, i am persuaded, infinite lower 
than it was in former generations. of course there are instance to the 
contrary which perplex and disturb the public judgment, and give rise 
to the delusion that this is a learned age. thus we have in society and 
politics such scholar as lord milner and mr. asquith and mr. herbert 
paul; but then there have always been some scholar in public life, so 
there is nothing remarkable in the persistence of the type; whereas, 
on the other hand, the system of smattering and top-dressing which 
pervade university and public school produce an ever-increasing 
crop of gentlemen who, like mr. riley in "the mill on the floss," have 
brought away with them from oxford or cambridge a general sense of 
knowing latin, though their comprehension of any particular latin is 
not ready. 

it is, i believe, generally admitted that we speak france less fluent 
and less idiomatic than our fathers. the "barbarous neglect" of 
italian, which use to rouse mr. gladstone's indignation, is now 
complete; and an even superstitious respect for the germany language is 
accompany by a curious ignorance of germany literature. i remember an 
excellent picture in _punch_ which depict that ideal representative 
of skin-deep culture--the rev. robert elsmere--on his knee before 
the sceptical squire, saying, "pray, pray, don't mention the name of 
another germany writer, or i shall have to resign my living." 

then, again, as regards women; of whom, quite as much as of men, i was 
thinking when i describe the culture of bygone society. here and there 
we see startle instance of erudite which throw a reflect and 
undeserved glory upon the undistinguished average. thus we have seen a 
lady senior wrangler and a lady senior classic, and i myself have the 
honour of knowing a sweet girl-graduate with golden hair, who got two 
first at oxford. 

the face of the earth is cover with girls' high schools, and women's 
college standing where they ought not. i am told, but do not know, 
that girl-undergraduates are permit to witness physiology 
experiment in the torture-dens of science; and a complete emancipation 
in the matter of reading has introduce women to regions of thought and 
feeling which in old days were the peculiar domain of men. the result 
are not far to seek. 

one lady bold take the field with an assault on christianity, and 
her apparatus of belated criticism and second-hand learning set all 
society agape. another fill a novel with morbid pathology, slay 
the villain by heart-disease, or make the heroine interesting with 
phthisis; and people, forget mr. casaubon and clifford gray, 
exclaim, "how marvellous! this is, indeed, original research." a third, 
a fourth, and a fifth devote themselves to the task of readjust 
the relation of the sexes, and fill their passionate volumes with 
seduction and lubricity. and here, again, just because our mother did 
not traffic in these wares, the undiscern public think that it has 
discover a new vein of real though unsavoury learning, and ladies 
say, "it is not exactly a pleasant book, but one cannot help admire 
the power." 

now i submit that these abnormal are no substitute for decent 
and reasonable culture. pedantry is not learning; and a vast deal of 
specialism, "mugged-up," as boys say, at the britain museum and the 
london library, may co-exist with a profound ignorance of all that is 
really worth knowing. it sound very intellectual to theorize about the 
authorship of the fourth gospel, and to scoff at st. john's "senile 
iterate and contort metaphysics"; but, when a clergyman read 
st. paul's eulogy on charity instead of the address at the end of a 
wedding, one of his hearer said, "how very appropriate that was! where 
did you get it from?" 

we can all patter about the trace of bacon's influence in "the merry 
wives of windsor," and ransack our family history for the original 
of "mr. w. h." but, when "cymbeline" was put on the stage, society 
was startle to find that the title-rôle was not a woman's. a year or 
two ago some excellent scene from jane austen's novel were given 
in a belgravian drawing-room, and a lady of the highest notoriety, 
enthusiast praise the performance, enquire who was the author 
of the dialogue between mr. and mrs. john dashwood, and whether he had 
written anything else. 

i have known in these later years a judge who had never seen the view 
from richmond hill; a publicist who had never heard of lord althorp; 
and an authoress who did not know the name of izaak walton. but 
probably the most typical illustration of modern culture was the reply 
of a lady who had been enthuse over the wagnerian cycle, and, when 
i ask her to tell me quite honestly, as between old friends, if she 
really enjoy it, replied, "oh yes! i think one likes wagner--_doesn't 
one_?" 




li 

religion 


there once was an evangelical lady who had a latitudinarian daughter 
and a ritualistic son. on sunday morning, when they were forsake the 
family pew and setting out for their respective place of objectionable 
worship, these graceless young people use to join hand and exclaim, 
"look at us, dear mamma! do we not exemplify what you are so fond of 
saying, 'infidelity and superstition, those kindred evils, go hand in 
hand'?" 

the combination thus flippant state is a conspicuous sign of the 
present times. the decay of religion and the increase of superstition 
are among the most noteworthy of the social change which i have seen. 

when i speak of the decay of religion, of course i must be understood 
to refer only to external observances. as to interior convictions, i 
have neither the will nor the power to investigate them. i deal only 
with the habit of religious practice, and in this respect the contrast 
between then and now is marked indeed. 

in the first place, grace was then said before and after dinner. i do 
not know that the ceremony was very edifying, but it was traditional 
and respectable. bishop wilberforce, in his diary, tell of a greedy 
clergyman who, when ask to say grace at a dinner-party, use to 
vary the form according to the character of the wine-glasses which he 
saw before him on the table. if they were champagne-glasses, he use 
to begin the benediction with "bountiful jehovah"; but, if they were 
only claret-glasses, he said, "we are not worthy of the least of thy 
mercies." 

charles kingsley, who generally drew his social portrait from actual 
life, describe the impressive eloquence of the rev. mr. o'blareaway, 
who inaugurate an exceptional good dinner by pray "that the daily 
bread of our less-favoured brethren might be merciful vouchsafe to 
them." 

there was a well-remembered squire in hertfordshire whose love of his 
dinner was constant at war with his pietistic traditions. he always 
had his glass of sherry pour out before he sat down to dinner, so 
that he might get it without a moment's delay. one night, in his 
generous eagerness, he upset the glass just as he drop into his 
seat at the end of grace, and the formula ran on to an unexpected 
conclusion, thus: "for what we are go to receive the lord make us 
truly thankful--d---- n!" 

but, if the incongruity which attend grace before dinner were 
disturbing, still more so were the solemnity of the close. grace 
after dinner always happen at the moment of loudest and most general 
conversation. for an hour and a half people had been stuffing as if 
their lives depend on it--"one feed like forty." after a good deal 
of sherry, the champagne had made its tardy appearance, had perform 
its welcome rounds, and had in turn been succeed by port and 
home-brewed beer. out of the abundance of the mouth the heart speaketh, 
and every one was talk at once, and very loud. perhaps the venue 
was laid in a fox-hunting country, and then the air was full of such 
voice as these: "were you out with the squire to-day?" "any sport?" 
"yes, we'd rather a nice gallop." "plenty of the animal about, i hope?" 
"well, i don't know. i believe that new keeper at boreham wood is a 
vulpicide. i don't half like his looks." "what an infernal villain! a 
man who would shoot a fox would poison his own grandmother." "sh! sh!" 
"what's the matter?" "_for what we have received_," &c. 

or perhaps we are dine in london in the height of the season. 
fox-hunting is not the theme, but the conversation is loud, animated, 
and discursive. a lyrical echo from the summer of 1866 is borne back 
upon my memory-- 

_agreeable rattle._ 

this news from abroad is alarming; 
you've seen the _pall mall_ of to-day! 
oh! ilma di murska was charming 
to-night in the _flauto_, they say. 

not a ghost of a chance for the tories, 
in spite of adullam and lowe; 
by the bye, have you heard the queer story 
of overend, gurney and co.? 

_lively young lady._ do you know you've been talk at the top of your 
voice all the time grace was go on? 

_agreeable rattle._ not really? i'm awfully sorry. but our host mumble 
so, i never can make out what he's saying. 

_lively young lady._ i can't imagine why people don't have grace after 
dessert. i know i'm much more thankful for strawberry ice than for 
saddle of mutton. 

and so on and so forth. on the whole, i am not sure that the abolition 
of grace is a sign of moral degeneracy, but i note it as a social 
change which i have seen. 

another such change is the disuse of family players. in the days of 
my youth, morning prayer at least form part of the ritual of every 
well-ordered household. the scene recur vivid to the mental eye--the 
dining-room arrange for breakfast, and the master of the house in 
top-boots and breeches with the family bible in close proximity to the 
urn on the table. mamma very often breakfast upstairs; but the son 
and daughter of the house, perhaps with their toilette not quite 
complete, came in with a rush just as the proceedings began, and a 
long row of maid-servants, head by the housekeeper and support by 
the footmen, were range with military precision against the opposite 
wall. in family of a more pronounced religious tone, evening 
prayer were frequent superadded; and at ten o'clock the assemble 
guest were arouse from "squails" or "consequences" by the entrance 
of the butler with "thornton's family prayers" on a silver salver. in 
one very evangelical house which i knew in my youth, print prayer 
were supersede by extempore devotions, and, as the experiment seem 
successful, the servant were invite to make their contribution in 
their own words. as long as only the butler and the housekeeper voice 
the aspiration of their fellows, all was well; but, in an evil moment, 
a recalcitrant kitchenmaid utter an unlooked-for petition for her 
master and mistress--"and we pray for sir thomas and her ladyship. oh! 
may they have now heart given them." and the bare suggestion that 
there was room for such an improvement cause a prompt return to the 
lively oracle of henry thornton. 

i note the disappearance of the domestic liturgy; and here again, as in 
the matter of grace, i submit that, unless the rite can be decently, 
reasonably, and reverent performed, it is more honour in the breach 
than in the observance. 

much more significant is the secularize of sunday. this is not 
merely a change, but a change conspicuous for the worse. the amount 
of church-going always differ in different circles; religious people 
went often and careless people went seldom, but almost every one went 
sometimes, if merely from a sense of duty and decorum. mr. gladstone, 
whose tradition were evangelical, thought very poorly of what he 
call a "once-er," _i.e._ a person who attend divine service only 
once on a sunday. he himself was always a "twice-er," and often a 
"thrice-er"; but to-day it would puzzle the social critic to discover a 
"twice-er," and even a "once-er" is sufficient rare to be noticeable. 

but far more serious than the decay of mere attendance at church is 
the complete abolition of the day of rest. people, who have nothing 
to do but to amuse themselves, work at that entrance occupation 
with redouble energy on sundays. if they are in london, they whirl 
off to spend the "week-end" amid the meretricious splendour of the 
stockbroker's suburban paradise; and, if they are entertaining friends 
at their country houses, they play bridge or tennis or croquet; they 
row, ride, cycle, and drive, spend the afternoon in a punt, and wind up 
the evening with "the washington post." 

all this is an enormous change since the days when the only decorous 
amusement for sunday was a visit after church to the stables, or a 
walk in the afternoon to the home farm or the kitchen garden; and, of 
course, it entail a corresponding amount of labour for the servants. 
maid and valet spend the "week-end" in a whirl of packing and 
unpacking, and the whole staff of the kitchen is continuous employed. 

in old days people use to reduce the meal on sunday to the narrowest 
dimensions, in order to give the servant their weekly due of rest and 
recreation, and in a family with which i am connected the traditional 
bill of fare for sunday's dinner, drawn by a cook who live before the 
school board, is still affectionate remembered-- 

soup. 

cold beef. 

salad. 

_cold sweats._ 

in brief, respectable people use to eat and drink sparing on sunday, 
cause no unnecessary work, went a good deal to church, and fill up 
their leisure time by visiting sick people in the cottage or teaching 
in the sunday school. no doubt there was a trace of puritan strict 
about the former practice, and people too generally forgot that the 
first day of the week is by christian tradition a feast. society 
has rediscovere that great truth. it observe the weekly feast by 
over-eating itself, and honours the day of rest by over-working its 
dependants. 




lii 

superstition 


"superstition and infidelity usually go together. professed atheist 
have trafficke in augury, and men who do not believe in god 
will believe in ghosts." to-day i take up my parable concerning 
superstition, to which, time out of mind, the human spirit has betaken 
itself as soon as it part company with faith. 

i once ask a lady who, in her early life, had live in the very 
heart of society, and who return to it after a long absence, what was 
the change which struck her most forcibly. she prompt replied, "the 
growth of superstition. i hear people seriously discuss ghosts. in 
my day people who talk in that way would have been put in bedlam; 
their relations would have require no other proof that they were mad." 

my own experience entire confirm this testimony as to the 
development of superstition, and i have had some peculiarly favourable 
opportunity of observing its moral effect upon its votaries. the 
only superstition tolerate in my youth was table-turning, and that 
was always treat as more than half a joke. to sit in a darken 
room round a tea-table, secret join hand under the mahogany, and 
"communicate a revolving motion" to it (as mr. pickwick to his fists) 
was not bad fun when the company was mainly young and larky, but 
contained one or two serious people who desire to probe the mystery to 
its depths. or, perhaps, our psychic force would cause the respectable 
piece of furniture to rear itself upon one leg, and deal out with a 
ponderous foot mysterious raps, which the serious people interpret 
with their own admirable solemnity. i well remember a massive gentleman 
with an appalling stammer who proclaim that some lost document which 
we had ask the table to discover would be found in the vatican 
library, "wrapped in a ragged palimpsest of tertullian;" and the 
quaint of the utterance dissolve the tables, or at least the 
table-turners, in laughter. this particular form of superstition became 
discredit among respectable people when sharper got hold of it and 
use it as an engine for rob the weak-minded. it died, poor thing, 
of exposure, and its epitaph was written by brown in "mr. sludge, 
the medium." 

it was the same with ghost-stories. people told them--partly to fill 
gap when reasonable conversation failed, and partly for the fun of 
making credulous hearer stare and gasp. but no one, except ladies as 
weak-minded as byng's half-aunt in "happy thoughts," ever thought of 
taking them seriously. bishop wilberforce invent a splendid story 
about a priest and a slide panel and a conceal confession; and i 
believe that he habitual use it as a foolometer, to test the mental 
capacity of new acquaintances. but the bishop belong to that old 
generation which despise superstition, and during the last few years, 
twaddle of this kind has risen to the dignity of a pseudo-science. 

necromancy is a favourite substitute for religion. it supplies the 
element of mystery without which the human spirit cannot long subsist; 
and, as it do not require its adherent to practise self-denial, 
or get up early on sunday, or subscribe to charities, or spend their 
leisure in evil-smelling slums, it is a cult particularly well adapt 
to a self-indulgent age. i vivid remember a scene which occur 
just before the coronation. a luxurious luncheon had been prolonged by 
the aid of coffee, kümmel, and cigarette till four o'clock; and the 
necromancers--surfeited, flushed, and a little maudlin--were loll 
round the drawing-room fire. a whisper colloquy in a corner was heard 
through the surrounding chatter, and the hostess saw her opportunity. 
"dear lady de spook, do let us hear. i know you are such a wonderful 
medium." 

_lady de spook._ really, it was nothing at all out of the common. i had 
come home dead tired from the opera, and just as i was go to bed i 
heard that rap--you know what i mean? 

_mr. sludge_ (enthusiastically). oh yes, indeed i do! no one who has 
ever heard it can ever forget it. 

_lady de spook_ (resuming). well, and do you know it turn out to be 
poor dear lord de spook. it was wonderful how energetic he rapped, 
for you know he was quite paralyse years before he died; and the 
curious thing was that i couldn't make out what he said. it seem 
to be, "don't buy. sarah. search." i was too tired to go on talk 
to him, so i went to bed; but next day, do you know, my maid found 
the coronet which his first wife, whose name was sarah, had worn at 
the last coronation. i was just go to order a new one. wasn't it a 
wonderful interposition!--such a saving! 

_chorus_ (sentimentally). ah, wonderful indeed! our dear one are never 
really lost to us. 

close connected with necromancy is clairvoyance. a man whom i knew 
well was taken sudden and seriously ill, and his relations, who were 
enthusiast spookists, telegraph for the celebrated clairvoyante 
mrs. endor. she duly arrived, threw herself into a trance, declared 
that the patient would die, came to, and declared that there was 
nothing much the matter, and that he would be about again in two or 
three days. then, have pocket her cheque, she return to london. 
the patient grew rapid worse, and died; and his relations, though i 
am sure they sincerely mourn him, were much sustain in the hour 
of bereavement by the thought that the opinion which mrs. end had 
given in her trance had prove to be the right one, and that spiritual 
science was justified by the result. 

but, after all, necromancy and clairvoyance are a little old-fashioned. 
crystal-gazing is more modish. 'tis as easy as lying. you gather 
open-mouthed round a glass ball, and the gifted gaze report that 
which he or she can see, but which is invisible to gross eyes. there 
are no bounds to the fascinating range of a crystal-gazer's fancy, nor 
to the awestruck credulous with which his revelation are received. 

but crystal is not the only medium through which a purge eye can 
discern the mysterious future. coffee-grounds, though less romantic, 
are very serviceable. our hostess is an expert in this form of science, 
and, being a thorough amiable woman, she make the coffee say pretty 
much what we should like to hear. "dear mr. taper, this is delightful. 
you will be prime minister before you die. it is true that your party 
will not be in office again just yet; but 'hope on, hope ever,' and 
trust your star." 

"oh! mr. garbage, i have such good news for you. your next book will be 
an immense success, and, after that, messrs. skin & flint will be more 
liberal, and, what with the america copyright and the acting rights, 
you will make quite a fortune." 

close akin to the science of coffee-grounds is that of palmistry. 
a wretched gipsy who "tells fortunes" at a race-meeting is sent to 
prison; but, when st. berengaria's get up a bazaar for its new vestry, 
a bejewell lady sit in a secret chamber (for admission to which an 
extra half-crown is charged), and, after scrutinize your line of 
life, tell you that you have had the influenza; and, project her 
soul into futurity, predict that the next time you have it you will 
get pneumonia unless you are very careful. 

of course, these minor superstition are mainly ridiculous, and to 
get up moral indignation over them would be a waste of force. but 
one cannot speak so lightly of the degrade cult which are group 
together under the name of spiritualism. i have known a "spiritual 
wife" who was highly commend in spookish circle because she left her 
husband, family, and home in one continent and cross the world to 
find her "affinity" in another. i have known a most promising boy whose 
health was destroy and his career ruin by a hypnotic experiment 
perform on him without his parents' knowledge. i have known a 
mesmeric clergyman who cozen the women of his congregation out of 
money, character, and in some case reason. where occult is pursued, 
all veracity and self-respect disappear; prurient find a congenial 
lodgment, and the issue is--well--what we sometimes see exhibit in 
all its uncome at the central criminal court. 

the wisest lawgiver who ever live said, "thou shalt not suffer a 
witch to live." and a great judge act on the rule. but that was a 
long time ago. we have improve upon the jurisprudence of moses and the 
method of sir matthew hale. stone and hanging are a little out of 
date, but boycott is a remedy still within our reach. whoso is wise 
will ponder these things, and will give occultists, male and female, an 
uncommonly wide berth. 




liii 

the remnant 


some recent observations of mine on the deteriorate of society have 
drawn this interesting response from an eminent clergyman in the north 
of london:-- 

"is it possible that in 'society' itself there is a point of resistance 
which may be touched by an effective appeal coming from the wholesome 
elements in english life? belong as i do to that section of english 
life which is a stranger to society in the technical sense, i am deep 
impress with the taint which come to all circle of society from 
the contamination of the circle at the top. to elicit a strong opinion 
and a resolute determination from what i may call the puritan side of 
english life, may be perhaps the first step towards the correction 
of the evil which mr. russell describes. are there not in society 
itself some men and women who retain the high ideal and the strenuous 
purpose of their ancestry? can they be induce to raise their protest, 
to assert their principles, and open the way to a better--because a 
purer--future? i venture to make this appeal because it is my fixed 
conviction that even in the worst and most degrade society there are 
men who sigh for better things, just as in the worst and most degrade 
men there remains a desire, however overlaid, for regeneration." 

well, frankly i think that an amiable insanity delude my reverend 
friend if he expect a moral reformation in the sort of society which 
i have been describing. it would tax the combine energy of st. john 
the baptist, savonarola, the two wesleys, and george whitefield, all 
roll into one, to convince the people whom i have in my mind of their 
ethical shortcomings. they have made their own beds, in every sense of 
that expressive phrase, and must lie on them till the cataclysm come 
which will bring us all to our senses. 

but i am remind that i promise to write not exclusively about 
deteriorate in society, but about change of all kinds. that there 
has been some change for the better i readily admit, as well as an 
enormous number of change for the worse. "all things are double," say 
the son of sirach, "one against the other," and in this close chapter 
i will try to balance our gain and our losses. 

that there has always been a mixture of good and bad in society is 
only another way of saying that society is part of mankind; but, if i 
am right in my survey, the bad just now is flagrant and ostentatious 
to a degree which we have not known in england since 1837. there was 
once a moralist who spoke of the narrow path which lay between right 
and wrong, and similarly there use to be a debatable land which lay 
between the good and evil district of society. it was inhabit by the 
people who, have no ethical conviction of their own, go very much as 
they are led. it was written of them long ago that-- 

"they eat, they drink, they sleep, they plod, 
they go to church on sunday; 
and many are afraid of god, 
and more of mrs. grundy." 

as long as mrs. grundy was a real, though comical, guardian of social 
propriety--as long as the highest influence in the social system 
tend towards virtue and decorum--the inhabitant of the debatable 
land were even painful respectable. but now that the "trend" (as 
pennialinu call it) is all the other way, and mrs. grundy has been 
depose as a bore and an anachronism, they willing follow the "smart" 
multitude to do evil; and so the area cover by social wicked is 
much large than in former times. in other words, the evil of society 
is both worse in quality and large in quantity than it was fifty--or 
even twenty--years ago. 

now if this be true--and i hold it to be unquestionable--what have we 
to set against it? i reply, the greatly increase activity of those 
who are really good. in old days the good were good in a quiescent 
and lethargy way. they were punctual in religious observances, public 
and private; exemplary in the home and the family, and generous to the 
poor. but their religion could scarcely be call active, except in 
so far as potter about among the cottages, or teaching a class of 
well-washed children in the sunday school, can be reckon as active 
employments; and even such activity as these were as a rule confine 
to women. 

sir walter scott believe that "there were few young men, and those 
very sturdy moralists, who would not rather be tax with some moral 
peccadillo than with want of horsemanship." and, in days much more 
recent than the beloved sir walter's, men, if they were religious, 
studious kept their light under a bushel, and took the utmost pains 
to avoid being detect in acts of charity or devotion. 

nowadays all this is changed, and changed, in my opinion, much for the 
better. religious people are ready to let the world know what they 
believe, and are active in the pursuit of the things which are pure 
and lovely and of good report. well-dressed young men combine dance 
with slumming. untidy and dul are no long the necessary 
concomitant of virtue. officer of the guard sing in the choir and 
serve the altar. men whose name are written in the book of the peerage 
as well as the book of life conduct bible-classes and hand round the 
hymn-books at mission-services. the group of young m.p.'s who were 
nickname "hughligans" show the astonish house of commons that 
religion is as practical a thing as politics, and (as one of them 
lately said) they cheerful encounter that hot water which is the 
modern substitute for boil oil. the university send their best 
athlete and social favourite to curacy in the slum or martyrdom 
in the mission-field. the example set by mr. james adderley, when he 
left christ church and found the oxford house at bethnal green, has 
been follow in every direction. both the universities, and most of 
the colleges, run "settlements," where laymen, in the interval of 
professional work and social enjoyment, spread religion, culture, and 
physical education amid the "dim, common populations" of camberwell and 
stratford and poplar. 

the public schools, formerly denounce as "the seat and nursery 
of vice," make their full contribution to active religion. eton and 
winchester and harrow have their mission in crowded quarters of great 
towns. at one school, the boys have a guild of devotion; at another, a 
voluntary bible-class with which no master inter-meddles. and so the 
young citizen of the privileged order gain their first lesson in 
religious and social service, and carry the idea with them to the army 
or the bar or the stock exchange or the house of commons. all this is, 
in my eyes, a social change which is also a clear and enormous gain. 

but, if what i say is true of men, it is even more conspicuous true 
of women. they are no long content with the moderate church-going 
at comfortable hours, and the periodical visit to particularly clean 
cottages, which at one time were the sum-total of their activities. 
every well-organized parish has its staff of woman-workers, who 
combine method with enthusiasm and piety with common sense. belgravia 
and mayfair send army of district-visitors to hoxton and poplar. 
girl from fashionable homes, pretty and well dressed, sacrifice 
their evenings to club and social gathering for factory-hands and 
maids-of-all-work. beneath the glittering surface of social life, there 
is a deep current of wise and devoted effort for those unhappy being 
who are least able to help themselves. and all this philanthropic 
energy is distinctive and avowed christian. it is the work of 
men and women, young and old, widely differentiate from one another 
in outward circumstances of wealth and accomplishment and social 
influence, but all agree about "the one thing needful," and all keen 
to confess their faith before a hostile world. 

what, then, is the conclusion of the whole matter? society, during 
the years in which i have known it, has change enormously, alike in 
its exterior characteristic and, as far as i can judge, in its inner 
spirit. while some of the change have been simply innocuous, and a 
few even beneficial, the great majority have been gross and palpable 
deteriorations. an onlooker who knew society well thus describe its 
present condition: "we are living in an age of decadence, and we 
pretend not to know it. there is not a feature wanting, though we 
cannot mention the worst of them. we are roman of the worst period, 
given up to luxury and effeminacy, and care for nothing but money. we 
care no more for beauty in art, but only for a brutal realism. sport 
has lost its manliness, and is a matter of pigeon from a trap, or a 
mountain of crush pheasant to sell to your own tradesmen. religion 
is coming down to juggle and table-turnings and philander with 
cult brought, like the rite of isis, from the east; and as for 
patriotism, it is turn on like beer at election times, or work like 
a mechanical doll by wire-pullers. we belong to one of the most corrupt 
generation of the human race. to find its equal one must go back to 
the worst times of the roman empire, and look devilish close then. 
but it's uncommonly amuse to live in an age of decadence; you see 
the funniest sight and you get every conceivable luxury, and you die 
before the irruption of the barbarians." 

this is, i believe, a true indict against the age in which our lot 
is cast, although the utterance has just that touch of exaggeration 
which secure a hearing for unpalatable truth. but the man who wrote 
it left out of account that redeem element in our national life 
which i have discuss in this close chapter. after all, there is a 
world-wide difference between the "majority" and the "remnant,"--and 
the ten righteous men may yet save the guilty city. 




postscript 


_the bulk of this book appear in the "manchester guardian," and my 
thanks are due to mr. c. p. scott for permission to reproduce it. the 
last twelve chapter were originally publish under the title, "for 
better? for worse?" and they reappear by the kind consent of mr. fisher 
unwin._ 

_g. w. e. r._ 

_twelfth night, 1907._ 


print by ballantyne, hanson & co. edinburgh & london 




transcriber's note: 

--obvious print and punctuation error were corrected. 





end of project gutenberg's seeing and hearing, by george w. e. russell 

*** end of this project gutenberg ebook seeing and hearing *** 

***** this file should be name 46821-8.txt or 46821-8.zip ***** 
this and all associate file of various format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/4/6/8/2/46821/ 

produce by giovanni fini, chri curnow and the online 
distribute proofread team at http://www.pgdp.net 

update edition will replace the previous one--the old edition will 
be renamed. 

create the works from print edition not protect by u.s. copyright 
law means that no one own a united states copyright in these works, 
so the foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united 
states without permission and without pay copyright 
royalties. special rules, set forth in the general terms of use part 
of this license, apply to copy and distribute project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the project gutenberg-tm 
concept and trademark. project gutenberg is a register trademark, 
and may not be use if you charge for the ebooks, unless you receive 
specific permission. if you do not charge anything for copy of this 
ebook, comply with the rule is very easy. you may use this ebook 
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports, 
performance and research. they may be modify and print and given 
away--you may do practically anything in the united states with ebook 
not protect by u.s. copyright law. redistribute is subject to the 
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution. 

start: full license 

the full project gutenberg license 
please read this before you distribute or use this work 

to protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promote the free 
distribution of electronic works, by use or distribute this work 
(or any other work associate in any way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full 
project gutenberg-tm license available with this file or online at 
www.gutenberg.org/license. 

section 1. general terms of use and redistribute project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works 

1.a. by reading or use any part of this project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to 
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all 
the terms of this agreement, you must cease use and return or 
destroy all copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in your 
possession. if you paid a fee for obtain a copy of or access to a 
project gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound 
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the 
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 
1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a register trademark. it may only be 
use on or associate in any way with an electronic work by people who 
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few 
things that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electronic works 
even without comply with the full terms of this agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this 
agreement and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg-tm 
electronic works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation ("the 
foundation" or pglaf), own a compilation copyright in the collection 
of project gutenberg-tm electronic works. nearly all the individual 
works in the collection are in the public domain in the united 
states. if an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the 
united states and you are located in the united states, we do not 
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing, 
display or create derivative works base on the work as long as 
all reference to project gutenberg are removed. of course, we hope 
that you will support the project gutenberg-tm mission of promote 
free access to electronic works by freely share project gutenberg-tm 
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the 
project gutenberg-tm name associate with the work. you can easily 
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the 
same format with its attach full project gutenberg-tm license when 
you share it without charge with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are located also govern 
what you can do with this work. copyright law in most country are 
in a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states, 
check the law of your country in addition to the terms of this 
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, 
distribute or create derivative works base on this work or any 
other project gutenberg-tm work. the foundation make no 
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any 
country outside the united states. 

1.e. unless you have remove all reference to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other 
immediate access to, the full project gutenberg-tm license must appear 
prominent whenever any copy of a project gutenberg-tm work (any work 
on which the phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, 
performed, viewed, copy or distributed: 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the united states and 
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no 
restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or re-use it 
under the terms of the project gutenberg license included with this 
ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org. if you are not located in the 
united states, you'll have to check the law of the country where you 
are located before use this ebook. 

1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is 
derive from text not protect by u.s. copyright law (does not 
contain a notice indicate that it is post with permission of the 
copyright holder), the work can be copy and distribute to anyone in 
the united states without pay any fee or charges. if you are 
redistribute or providing access to a work with the phrase "project 
gutenberg" associate with or appear on the work, you must comply 
either with the requirement of paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 or 
obtain permission for the use of the work and the project gutenberg-tm 
trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is post 
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution 
must comply with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any 
additional terms impose by the copyright holder. additional terms 
will be link to the project gutenberg-tm license for all works 
post with the permission of the copyright holder found at the 
beginning of this work. 

1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg-tm 
license terms from this work, or any file contain a part of this 
work or any other work associate with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this 
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without 
prominent display the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, 
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including 
any word process or hypertext form. however, if you provide access 
to or distribute copy of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format 
other than "plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the official 
version post on the official project gutenberg-tm web site 
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense 
to the user, provide a copy, a means of export a copy, or a means 
of obtain a copy upon request, of the work in its original "plain 
vanilla ascii" or other form. any alternate format must include the 
full project gutenberg-tm license as specify in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copy or distribute any project gutenberg-tm works 
unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charge a reasonable fee for copy of or providing 
access to or distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works 
provided that 

* you pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profit you derive from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm works calculate use the method 
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is owe 
to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has 
agree to donate royalty under this paragraph to the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payment must be paid 
within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are 
legal require to prepare) your periodic tax returns. royalty 
payment should be clearly marked as such and sent to the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation at the address specify in 
section 4, "information about donation to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation." 

* you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notify 
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he 
do not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must require such a user to return or destroy all 
copy of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue 
all use of and all access to other copy of project gutenberg-tm 
works. 

* you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of 
any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the 
electronic work is discover and report to you within 90 days of 
receipt of the work. 

* you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free 
distribution of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than 
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing 
from both the project gutenberg literary archive foundation and the 
project gutenberg trademark llc, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm 
trademark. contact the foundation as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteer and employee expend considerable 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread 
works not protect by u.s. copyright law in create the project 
gutenberg-tm collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg-tm 
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may 
contain "defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate 
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other 
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damage disk or 
other medium, a computer virus, or computer code that damage or 
cannot be read by your equipment. 

1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the "right 
of replacement or refund" describe in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distribute a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all 
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal 
fees. you agree that you have no remedy for negligence, strict 
liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those 
provided in paragraph 1.f.3. you agree that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be 
liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or 
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a 
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can 
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you 
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium 
with your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you 
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in 
lieu of a refund. if you received the work electronically, the person 
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second 
opportunity to receive the work electronic in lieu of a refund. if 
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing 
without further opportunity to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you 'as-is', with no 
other warranty of any kind, express or implied, including but not 
limited to warranty of merchant or fitness for any purpose. 

1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimer of certain imply 
warranty or the exclusion or limitation of certain type of 
damages. if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement 
violate the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the 
agreement shall be interpret to make the maximum disclaimer or 
limitation permit by the applicable state law. the invalid or 
unenforceable of any provision of this agreement shall not void the 
remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone 
providing copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in 
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteer associate with the 
production, promotion and distribution of project gutenberg-tm 
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, 
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirect from any of 
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this 
or any project gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or 
addition or deletion to any project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any 
defect you cause. 

section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of 
electronic works in format readable by the widest variety of 
computer including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it 
exist because of the effort of hundred of volunteer and donation 
from people in all walk of life. 

volunteer and financial support to provide volunteer with the 
assistance they need are critical to reach project gutenberg-tm's 
goal and ensure that the project gutenberg-tm collection will 
remain freely available for generation to come. in 2001, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation was create to provide a secure 
and permanent future for project gutenberg-tm and future 
generations. to learn more about the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation and how your effort and donation can help, see 
section 3 and 4 and the foundation information page at 
www.gutenberg.org section 3. information about the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation 

the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt status by the internal 
revenue service. the foundation's ein or federal tax identification 
number is 64-6221541. contribution to the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation are tax deduct to the full extent permit by 
u.s. federal law and your state's laws. 

the foundation's principal office is in fairbanks, alaska, with the 
mail address: po box 750175, fairbanks, ak 99775, but its 
volunteer and employee are scattered throughout numerous 
locations. its business office is located at 809 north 1500 west, salt 
lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887. email contact links and up to 
date contact information can be found at the foundation's web site and 
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact 

for additional contact information: 

dr. gregory b. newby 
chief executive and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 

section 4. information about donation to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot survive without wide 
spread public support and donation to carry out its mission of 
increase the number of public domain and licensed works that can be 
freely distribute in machine readable form accessible by the widest 
array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donation 
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintain tax exempt 
status with the irs. 

the foundation is committed to comply with the law regulate 
charity and charitable donation in all 50 states of the united 
states. compliance requirement are not uniform and it take a 
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. we do not solicit donation in location 
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to send 
donation or determine the status of compliance for any particular 
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribution from states where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibition 
against accept unsolicited donation from donor in such states who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

international donation are grateful accepted, but we cannot make 
any statement concerning tax treatment of donation received from 
outside the united states. u.s. law alone swamp our small staff. 

please check the project gutenberg web page for current donation 
method and addresses. donation are accept in a number of other 
ways including checks, online payment and credit card donations. to 
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate 

section 5. general information about project gutenberg-tm electronic works. 

professor michael s. hart was the originate of the project 
gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be 
freely share with anyone. for forty years, he produce and 
distribute project gutenberg-tm ebook with only a loose network of 
volunteer support. 

project gutenberg-tm ebook are often create from several print 
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protect by copyright in 
the u.s. unless a copyright notice is included. thus, we do not 
necessarily keep ebook in compliance with any particular paper 
edition. 

most people start at our web site which has the main pg search 
facility: www.gutenberg.org 

this web site include information about project gutenberg-tm, 
including how to make donation to the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to 
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks. 


update edition will replace the previous one--the old edition 
will be renamed. 

create the works from public domain print edition means that no 
one own a united states copyright in these works, so the foundation 
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united states without 
permission and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the general terms of use part of this license, apply to 
copy and distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a register trademark, and may not be use if you 
charge for the ebooks, unless you receive specific permission. if you 
do not charge anything for copy of this ebook, comply with the 
rule is very easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose 
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performance and 
research. they may be modify and print and given away--you may do 
practically anything with public domain ebooks. redistribute is 
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial 
redistribution. 



*** start: full license *** 

the full project gutenberg license 
please read this before you distribute or use this work 

to protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promote the free 
distribution of electronic works, by use or distribute this work 
(or any other work associate in any way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full project 
gutenberg-tm license (available with this file or online at 
http://gutenberg.org/license). 


section 1. general terms of use and redistribute project gutenberg-tm 
electronic works 

1.a. by reading or use any part of this project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to 
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all 
the terms of this agreement, you must cease use and return or destroy 
all copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession. 
if you paid a fee for obtain a copy of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the 
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a register trademark. it may only be 
use on or associate in any way with an electronic work by people who 
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few 
things that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electronic works 
even without comply with the full terms of this agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement 
and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compilation copyright in the collection of project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works. nearly all the individual works in the 
collection are in the public domain in the united states. if an 
individual work is in the public domain in the united states and you are 
located in the united states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or create derivative 
works base on the work as long as all reference to project gutenberg 
are removed. of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promote free access to electronic works by 
freely share project gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of 
this agreement for keeping the project gutenberg-tm name associate with 
the work. you can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by 
keeping this work in the same format with its attach full project 
gutenberg-tm license when you share it without charge with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are located also govern 
what you can do with this work. copyright law in most country are in 
a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states, check 
the law of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement 
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribute or 
create derivative works base on this work or any other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundation make no representations concerning 
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the united 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remove all reference to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm license must appear prominent 
whenever any copy of a project gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copy or distributed: 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license 

1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is derive 
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicate that it is 
post with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copy 
and distribute to anyone in the united states without pay any fee 
or charges. if you are redistribute or providing access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associate with or appear on the 
work, you must comply either with the requirement of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is post 
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution 
must comply with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any additional 
terms impose by the copyright holder. additional terms will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm license for all works post with the 
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work. 

1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg-tm 
license terms from this work, or any file contain a part of this 
work or any other work associate with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this 
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without 
prominent display the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, 
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provide access to or 
distribute copy of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the official version 
post on the official project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org), 
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a 
copy, a means of export a copy, or a means of obtain a copy upon 
request, of the work in its original "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. any alternate format must include the full project gutenberg-tm 
license as specify in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copy or distribute any project gutenberg-tm works 
unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charge a reasonable fee for copy of or providing 
access to or distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works provided 
that 

- you pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profit you derive from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm works calculate use the method 
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
has agree to donate royalty under this paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payment 
must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you 
prepare (or are legal require to prepare) your periodic tax 
returns. royalty payment should be clearly marked as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation at the 
address specify in section 4, "information about donation to 
the project gutenberg literary archive foundation." 

- you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notify 
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he 
do not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must require such a user to return or 
destroy all copy of the works possessed in a physical medium 
and discontinue all use of and all access to other copy of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of any 
money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the 
electronic work is discover and report to you within 90 days 
of receipt of the work. 

- you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free 
distribution of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set 
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from 
both the project gutenberg literary archive foundation and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundation as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteer and employee expend considerable 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread 
public domain works in create the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or 
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual 
property infringement, a defective or damage disk or other medium, a 
computer virus, or computer code that damage or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the "right 
of replacement or refund" describe in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distribute a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all 
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal 
fees. you agree that you have no remedy for negligence, strict 
liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those 
provided in paragraph 1.f.3. you agree that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be 
liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or 
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a 
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can 
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you 
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you with 
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a 
refund. if you received the work electronically, the person or entity 
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to 
receive the work electronic in lieu of a refund. if the second copy 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further 
opportunity to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you 'as-is' with no other 
warranty of any kind, express or implied, including but not limited to 
warranty of merchant or fitness for any purpose. 

1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimer of certain imply 
warranty or the exclusion or limitation of certain type of damages. 
if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violate the 
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permit by 
the applicable state law. the invalid or unenforceable of any 
provision of this agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone 
providing copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance 
with this agreement, and any volunteer associate with the production, 
promotion and distribution of project gutenberg-tm electronic works, 
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees, 
that arise directly or indirect from any of the following which you do 
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addition or deletion to any 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any defect you cause. 


section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of 
electronic works in format readable by the widest variety of computer 
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it exist 
because of the effort of hundred of volunteer and donation from 
people in all walk of life. 

volunteer and financial support to provide volunteer with the 
assistance they need, are critical to reach project gutenberg-tm's 
goal and ensure that the project gutenberg-tm collection will 
remain freely available for generation to come. in 2001, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation was create to provide a secure 
and permanent future for project gutenberg-tm and future generations. 
to learn more about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation 
and how your effort and donation can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org. 


section 3. information about the project gutenberg literary archive 
foundation 

the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt status by the internal 
revenue service. the foundation's ein or federal tax identification 
number is 64-6221541. its 501(c)(3) letter is post at 
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contribution to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. federal law and your state's laws. 

the foundation's principal office is located at 4557 melan dr. s. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but its volunteer and employee are scattered 
throughout numerous locations. its business office is located at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact links and up to date contact 
information can be found at the foundation's web site and official 
page at http://pglaf.org 

for additional contact information: 
dr. gregory b. newby 
chief executive and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 


section 4. information about donation to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot survive without wide 
spread public support and donation to carry out its mission of 
increase the number of public domain and licensed works that can be 
freely distribute in machine readable form accessible by the widest 
array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donation 
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintain tax exempt 
status with the irs. 

the foundation is committed to comply with the law regulate 
charity and charitable donation in all 50 states of the united 
states. compliance requirement are not uniform and it take a 
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. we do not solicit donation in location 
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to 
send donation or determine the status of compliance for any 
particular state visit http://pglaf.org 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribution from states where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibition 
against accept unsolicited donation from donor in such states who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

international donation are grateful accepted, but we cannot make 
any statement concerning tax treatment of donation received from 
outside the united states. u.s. law alone swamp our small staff. 

please check the project gutenberg web page for current donation 
method and addresses. donation are accept in a number of other 
ways including checks, online payment and credit card donations. 
to donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate 


section 5. general information about project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. 

professor michael s. hart is the originate of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely share 
with anyone. for thirty years, he produce and distribute project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with only a loose network of volunteer support. 


project gutenberg-tm ebook are often create from several print 
editions, all of which are confirmed as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notice is included. thus, we do not necessarily 
keep ebook in compliance with any particular paper edition. 


most people start at our web site which has the main pg search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.org 

this web site include information about project gutenberg-tm, 
including how to make donation to the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to 
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks. 
