the project gutenberg ebook of the living mummy, by ambrose pratt 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license 


title: the living mummy 

author: ambrose pratt 

illustrator: louis d. fancher 

release date: february 23, 2019 [ebook #58944] 

language: english 


*** start of this project gutenberg ebook the living mummy *** 




produce by mary glenn krause, martin pettit and the online 
distribute proofread team at http://www.pgdp.net (this 
file was produce from image generous made available 
by the internet archive/american libraries.) 






[illustration: 

the living mummy 

i swear by the king of heaven & of earth-- 

_frontispiece_ _page 244_] 




_the_ living mummy 

by 
ambrose pratt 

_with four illustration in color by_ 
louis d. fancher 

[illustration: decoration] 

_second edition_ 

new york 
frederick a. stoke company 
publisher 


copyright, 1910, by frederick a. stoke company 

_all rights reserved_ 

[illustration: logo _february, 1910_] 




the living mummy 




contents 

chapter page 
i. concerning the son of hap 1 

ii. a patient of the desert 13 

iii. two lie 25 

iv. the sarcophagus's perfume 29 

v. the shadow in the cave 42 

vi. enter doctor belleville 53 

vii. the one goddess 62 

viii. ottley show his hand 75 

ix. a cool defiance 90 

x. the capture of the coffin 96 

xi. good-bye to the nile 104 

xii. the meeting 111 

xiii. hubbard is jealous 124 

xiv. the pushful man 131 

xv. a quaint love pact 138 

xvi. lady helen prescribe for her husband 145 

xvii. the sÉance 155 

xviii. the unseen 173 

xix. the first victim 184 

xx. lady helen's medicine operate 193 

xxi. hubbard's philosophy of life 204 

xxii. the dead hand 211 

xxiii. i set out for the east 220 

xxiv. the gin is sprung 226 

xxv. the mummy talks 238 

xxvi. a pleasant chat with a murder 246 

xxvii. unbound 262 

xxviii. the struggle in the chamber 275 

xxix. save by fire 293 

xxx. the last 305 




the living mummy 




chapter i 

concerning the son of hap 

preface 
i was hard at work in my tent. i had almost complete translate 
the inscription of a small stele of amen-hotep iii, dated b. c., 
1382, which with my own effort i had discovered, and i was feeling 
wonderful self-satisfied in consequence, when of a sudden i heard a 
great commotion without. almost immediately the tent flap was lifted, 
and migdal abu's black face appeared. he look vastly excited for an 
arab, and he roll his eyes horribly. "what do you want?" i demand 
irritably. "did i not tell you i was not to be disturbed?" 

he bent almost double. "excellency--a white sheik has come riding on an 
ass, and with him a shameless female, also white." 

"the dickens!" i exclaimed, for i had not seen a europe for nine 
weeks. 

migdal abu advanced with hand outstretched. "excellency, he would have 
me give you this." 

i took "this," and swore soft underbreath at the humourless 
pomposity of my unknown countryman. it was a pasteboard 
carte-de-visite. and we--in the heart of the libya desert! 

with a laugh i look at the thing and read his name--"sir robert 
ottley." 

"what!" i said, then sprang a-foot. ottley the great egyptologist. 
ottley the famous explorer. ottley the eminent decipher of cuneiform 
inscriptions. ottley the millionaire whose prodigal in the cause of 
learning had in ten short years more than double the common stock of 
knowledge of the history of the shepherd kings of the nile. i had been 
longing since a lad to meet him, and now he had come unasked to see me 
out on the burning sands of yatibiri. 

tremble with excitement, i caught up a jacket, and hardly wait to 
thrust my arms into the sleeves, rush out of the tent. 

before me, sitting on an ass that was already sound asleep, despite a 
plague of flies that play about its eyes, was a little bronze-faced, 
grizzled old man attire from head to foot in glisten white duck 
and wearing on his head an enormous pith helmet. my arabs, glad of an 
excuse to cease work, squat round him in a semi-circle. 

"sir robert ottley!" i cried. "a thousand welcomes." 

"you are very good," he drawled. "i presume you are dr. pinsent." 

"at your service." 

he stoop a little forward and offer me his hand. 

"will you not dismount?" i asked. 

"thank you, no. i have come to ask a favour." then he glance round him 
and began deliberate to count my arabs. 

i survey him in blank astonishment. he possessed a large hawk-like 
nose, a small thin-lipped mouth and little eyes twinkling under brow 
that beetled. 

"twelve, and two of them are good for nothing; mere weeds," said sir 
robert. 

then he turn to me with a smile. "you will forgive me?" he asked, 
add quickly, "but then arab are cattle. there was no personal 
reflection." 

"a cup of coffee," i suggested. "the sun is dreadful. it would refresh 
you." 

"the sun is nothing," he replied, "and i have work to do. i am camp 
on the southern slope of the hill of rakh. it is twelve miles. i have 
found the tomb for which i have been searching seven years. i thought i 
had enough arabs. i was mistaken." 

"you may have the use of mine and welcome," i observed. 

he gave a queer little bow. "he give twice who give quickly. the 
sarcophagus is in a rock hole forty feet beneath the level of the 
desert. i simply must have it up to-night." 

"they shall start at once, and i shall go with them; i am as strong 
as six," i replied. then i shout some orders to migdal abu. when i 
turn it was to gasp. a woman had materialise from the sunbeams. i 
had completely forgotten that sir robert had a female companion. all 
my eyes had been for him. i swung off my hat and stammer some tardy 
words of welcome and invitation. 

sir robert interrupt me. "my daughter--dr. pinsent," he drawl in 
slow, passionless tones. "my daughter do not require any refreshment, 
thank you, doctor." 

"i am too excited," said a singularly sweet voice. "father's discovery 
has put me into a fever. i really could not eat, and coffee would choke 
me. but if you could give me a little water." 

i rush into my tent and return with a brim metal cup. "the 
arab have broken all my glass ware," i said apologetically. 

she lift her veil and our eyes met. she was lovely. she smile and 
show a set of dazzle teeth. the incisor were inlaid with gold. i 
remark the fact in a sort of self-defensive panic, for the truth is 
i am a shy idiot with pretty women. thank goodness she was thirsty and 
did not notice my confusion. two minutes afterwards i was mount on 
my donkey, and we were off on the long tramp to the hill of rakh, the 
arab trail behind us in a thin ill-humoured line. we maintain 
the silence of bad temper and excessive heat until the sun sank into 
the sand. then, however, we wipe our foreheads, said a cheerful 
good-bye to the flies that had been torment us, and woke up. 

"i am immensely oblige to you, dr. pinsent," said sir robert. 

"so am i," said miss ottley. 

"the boot is on the other foot," i replied. "it's kind of you to permit 
me to be present at your triumph. is it a king?" 

"no," said miss ottley, "a priest of amen of the eighteenth dynasty." 

"oh, a priest." 

miss ottley bridle at my tone. "no king was ever half as interesting 
as _our_ priest," she declared. "he was a wonderful man in every way, a 
prophet, a magician, and enormously powerful. besides, he is believe 
to have committed suicide for the sake of principle, and he predict 
his own resurrection after a sleep of two thousand years." 

"he has been dead 3285 years," sigh sir robert. 

"is that his fault?" cry the girl. 

"it falsify his prophecy." 

she shrug her shoulders. 

"ptahmes was his name," said sir robert, turning to me. "he was the 
right-hand man of amen-hotep iv; but when that king change his 
religion and his name and became akhenaten and a devotee of the old 
worship of heliopolis, ptahme apparently kill himself as a protest 
against the deposition of amen, his particular divinity." 

"read that," said miss ottley. 

she hand me a page of type-written manuscript. 

it ran as follows: 

"hearken to the orders which are put upon you by ptahmes, name 
tahutimes, son of mery, son of hap. 

"all my ways were regulate even as the pace of an ibis. the 
hawk-headed horu was my protector like amulet upon my body. i train 
the troops of my lord. i made his pylon 60 cubit long in the noble 
rock of quartzite, most great in height and firm as heaven. i did 
not imitate what had been done before. i was the royal scribe of the 
recruits. muster was done under me. i was appoint judge of the 
palace; overseer of all the prophets of the south and of the north. i 
was appoint high priest of amen in the capital--king of all the gods. 
i was made the eyes and ear of the king: keeper of my lord's heart and 
fan-bearer at the king's right hand. great men have come from afar to 
bow themselves before me, bring presents of ivory and gold, copper, 
silver and emery, lazuli, malachite, green felspar and vase of mern 
wood inlaid with white precious stone sometimes bearing gold at one 
time 1000 deben (200 pound weight). for my fame was carry abroad 
even as the fame of the king, 'lord of the sweet wind.' and there 
was spoken of me by the son of paapi that my wisdom was of a divine 
nature, because of my knowledge of futurities. yet on the sixth day of 
the month of pakhon in the 18th year i desire to rest. my lord, at the 
solicit of the great royal wife and mother nefertiti, has put off 
the worship of his predecessors. the name of amen is proscribe from 
the country. ra is proscribe from the country. horu is proscribe 
from the country. aten is set up in their place and worship in the 
land. my lord has even change his name. apiy is the high priest of the 
new god that is from the mesopotamian wilderness. amen, king of the 
gods, dandle my lord and is forsaken and proscribed. i am an old man 
and would rest: although my lord has not forsaken me. he has appoint 
me overseer of all his works. therefore, shall you carry me to the 
temple of kak, and give my body to the hand of the priest of amen who 
will wrap me in the linen sheet of horu without remove my heart, my 
entrails or my lungs. then you shall carry me to khizebh and enclose 
me in the place prepared for me; and cover my tomb to a depth of five 
fathom with the sand of the desert at that hour when no man looks or 
listens. do this even as i command, and as royal scribe i trace the 
order with my pen. but you shall place my papyri and the sign by which 
i shall be known, and the stele of ivory engrave with the directions 
to the priest of amen who are to wake me from my sleep at the distant 
hour, in the tomb that is prepared for my body in the temple of 
merenptah and in such manner that i shall there appear to sleep. and 
all these things you shall do, or my curse shall pursue you and your 
children and their children for the space of four hundred lives. nor 
shall you remove the endowment of my gift nor touch them where they 
lie under a penalty of great moment." 

i strained my eyes to catch the last words, for the dark was 
already setting down upon the desert; and i was profound interested. 

"wonderful!" i said, as i return her the document. "a papyrus, of 
course?" 

"yes, one of several. father found it seven years ago at die el 
batiri." 

"i had not heard." 

sir robert coughed. "no," said he, "nor anyone else. i have never 
publish it. it did not come to me in the usual way. i bought it from 
an arab who had rifle the tomb in which it was discovered." 

"and the other papyri and the ivory stele?" i questioned. 

"they are in my possession, too." 

"they enable you doubtless to locate the real tomb that hold the 
body?" 

"they helped." 

then silence supervened. to me it was fill with wonder. i could not 
help ask myself what circumstances could possibly have induce 
ottley to withhold so valuable an historic treasure for so many years 
from the world. such a course of action was utterly oppose to all 
practice, and the unwritten but immutable law of scientific research. 
it seem strange at odds, too, with the man's reputed character. it 
would have cover him with glory to have placed his discovery before 
the society to which we both belonged. and a dozen incident related 
of him far and wide, prove that he was not indifferent to praise and 
fame. he read my thought probably, for at length he clear his throat 
and spoke. 

"there were reason why i should not blazon the find abroad," he said. 

"no doubt," i observed, with unintentioned dryness. 

"one papyrus speak of a golden treasure," he went on quietly. "if 
published, it would have set thousand look for the tomb. in that 
case the chance are that the body of ptahme would have been destroy 
by some vandal intent solely on pillage." 

"you assume a great responsibility," i remarked. i simply had to say 
it, for i was angry, and his explanation appear puerile to me. 

"do you dispute my right?" he demand coldly. 

i shrug my shoulders. "it is not for me to say, sir robert. 
doubtless when the time come you will be able to satisfy the society 
and the world that you have act rightly." 

"i admit no responsibility," he answered; "and permit me to observe 
that you are talk nonsense. i owe no duty to communicate the result 
of my purchase or discovery to any society or to the world." 

"true, sir robert. an action for damages could not lie against you." 

"sir!" he cried. 

"father," said miss ottley, "how can dr. pinsent's foolish sarcasm 
affect you? besides, we need his arabs." 

"quite so," said sir robert. "we need his arabs. how bright the stars 
shine to-night, dr. pinsent." 

the cool impudence of the pair struck me dumb. i shook with passion. 
for a moment i thought of calling a halt and return the way we had 
come to my own camp with my arabs. but for my curiosity to see the 
tomb of ptahme very probably i should have done so. in a few seconds, 
however, my rage cooled, and my uppermost feeling was admiration mixed 
with mirth. i had never been treat with such open and absurd contempt 
before. it was a refreshing experience. i burst of a sudden into a peal 
of laughter. miss ottley join me in the exercise. but sir robert rode 
on like a hook-nosed sphinx. 

"i knew i could not be mistaken," said miss ottley. "you should thank 
god for your sense of humour, dr. pinsent." 

"and who is benefit from it at this moment, i should like to know?" 
i retorted. "the thanks are due from you, i fancy." 

"deo gratias!" she flashed. "in sober truth, we need your arab sadly." 

"i repeat, i am glad to be of use." 

"we shall use you, but not necessarily in the cause of your society. 
understand that fully." 

"you mean?" 

"that you must not expect to share our secrets." 

"in plain words, you will not let me help you open the sarcophagus." 

"your penetration is remarkable." 

"and if----" 

"and if," she interrupt quickly, "you require a reward for the 
courtesy we ask and you accord or have promise to accord, you have 
but to name a sum in cash to have it paid." 

"or----" said i, stung to the quick. 

"or," she flashed, "return! you are at liberty to make your choice. 
yours are not the only arab in egypt. at a pinch we can wait a day or 
two. it is for you to say." 

i tore off my hat. "miss ottley--my arab are yours for as long as you 
require them!" i furiously announced. "good day to you. sir robert, 
good day!" 

then i drag the head of my ass round and set his face to my 
camp. the beast, however, would hardly budge, and i had to belabour 
him unmerciful to induce him to trot. never did man make a more 
undignify exit from circumstances of indignity. and it did not need 
miss ottley's mock laughter to assure me that i look ridiculous. 
i could have strangle her with all the cheerful in life; and from 
that moment i have cherish an ineradicable hatred of donkeys. sir 
robert did not open his lips. he did not even return my angry salute. 
almost choke with rage, i finally got out of range of miss ottley's 
laughter. then i dismount and told the desert just what i thought of 
her and her father. it was almost midnight when i reach my camp, for, 
to crown all, i neglect the stars in my passion, and for two hour 
lost my way. 




chapter ii 

a patient of the desert 


i spent the next two days in absolute solitude, and got through a 
tremendous quantity of toil. in fact, i add two whole chapter to my 
treatise on the nile monument and i arrange the detail of a third. 
by the end of that time, however, i was ravenous hungry. i had been 
too engross in labour to think of eat anything but biscuits. and 
appetite at last turn me out of the tent. i look around for my 
arab and saw sand and sky--no living thing--oh, yes, there was my 
donkey. the little beast had eaten his way through a truss of straw, 
and was asleep. strolling over to the ruin pylon, i glance down into 
the hole my arab had excavated. it was empty. "gad!" i exclaimed. 
"they must still be working for ottley." i had to build a fire and turn 
cook, wil nilly. later, fortify with the pleasant conviction of a 
good dinner, i turn my telescope on the hill of rakh. an arab stood 
on the treeless summit leaning on a rifle whose barrel glitter in the 
sunlight. i was puzzled. he was manifest post there as sentinel, 
but why? i watch him till dark, but he did not move. that night i 
shot a jackal--omen of disaster. it was long before i slept. yet i 
seem only to have slumber a moment or two when i awoke. a voice 
call my name aloud. "dr. pinsent! dr. pinsent!" i start upright and 
listened, nerves on edge. 

"dr. pinsent!" 

"who calls?" i shouted. 

"i--may ottley." 

"miss ottley!" i hop out of my bag bed like a cricket. "just a 
moment." i struck a light and, grab at my clothes, proceed to 
dress like mad. thus for thirty seconds; then i remember how i had 
been treated, and went slower. then i thought--"pinsent, you're a 
cad--she's a woman, and perhaps in trouble." so i got up steam again 
and call out, "nothing wrong, i hope?" 

"yes," said miss ottley. well, here was a woman of business, at any 
rate. she seem to know the use of words, and value them accordingly. 
waste not, want not. i drew on my jacket and lift the flap. an arab 
rustle past me. 

"hello!" said i. "not so fast, my man." 

but it was miss ottley. i step back, bewildered. her hair was tuck 
away in a sort of turban, and she was wrap from head to heel in 
a burnous that had once been white--very long ago. but the costume, 
though dirty, was becoming. she sank upon a camp stool and ask at 
once for water. she seem very tired. my bag was empty. i hurried 
off without a word to the barrel in the temple. when i return she 
was asleep where she sat. i touched her shoulder and she start 
up, suppress a scream. "now," said i, as she put down the cup. 
miss ottley stood up. "a bad thing has happened," she began. "the 
sarcophagus was fill with treasure, gold and silver in bars, and 
other things. the arab went mad. my father fought like a paladin and 
held them off for a day and a half. but soon after dark this evening a 
caravan arrived. the fight was renew and my father was wounded. the 
arab secure the treasure and flee into the desert. the dragoman only 
kept faith with us. he has gone by the river to khonsu for troops. i 
hurried here for you. i ran almost all the way. will you come? father 
is very ill. he has lost a lot of blood. he was shot in the shoulder." 

i nodded, caught up my revolver and surgical pack and rush out of the 
tent. in two minutes i had saddle the donkey. miss ottley was standing 
by the door of the tent. i lift her on the beast and we start off 
in silence. an hour later she spoke. 

"there is one thing i like about you," she announced. "you haven't much 
to say for yourself, but you are a worker." 

"tu quoque," i replied. "you must have done that twelve mile in record 
time. it is not yet two o'clock." 

"i made it in two hours, i think." 

"you are an athlete, by jove!" 

"i am no bread-and-butter miss, at any rate. this donkey has a bad 
pace, don't you think?" 

i kick the brute into a trot and ran beside it. the hill of rakh soon 
began to loom large among the stars on the horizon. "i suppose you were 
pretty wild at our cavalier treatment of you the other evening," said 
miss ottley. 

"well, yes," i admitted. 

"we were sorry when the fight came." 

"no doubt," said i. 

"it serve us right, eh?" 

"that is my opinion." 

"do you bear malice still?" 

"i am thinking of your father's wound." 

"that atones?" 

"your twelve-mile run helps." 

"but you are still angry with us?" 

"does it matter? i am serving you." 

"be generous," said miss ottley. "we have been sufficient punished. 
not only have we lost the treasure, but there was no mummy in the 
sarcophagus." 

"be a lady and apologise," i retorted. 

"no," said she, with a most spirited inflection. "it is not a woman's 
place." 

"then be silent or change the topic," i growled. 

she was silent. we arrive an hour later at the mountain. i was bath 
in perspiration and as tired as a dog. but miss ottley had no time 
to notice my condition. she slip off the donkey and hurried away 
through the small of the three pylon that front a small temple 
hollow out of the rock face of the hill. there was no sign of tent, 
so i conclude that sir robert had made his camp within the temple. i 
hitch the ass to a stake and cool off, thank providence for a 
cool breeze that swept up from the placid surface of the nile. day was 
already showing sign of breaking, and a broad flight of long-legged 
flamingo hurried its coming with a flash of scarlet just above the 
eastern horizon. the distant howling of a hyena was borne to me in 
fitful snatch on the wind. the earth was wrap in mystery and 
melancholy. oh, egypt! egypt, land of sun-lit space and illimitable 
shadows; of grandeur and of squalor without peer; of happy dream and 
sad awakenings; of century inglorious oblivious of glory; of sleep 
and sphinx-browed, age-bound silences; of dark smile and impotent 
despair. what a mistress for a man of curiosity and of imagination! 
little wonder that since i had been caught in her magic and most 
jealous spell the face of no human being had possessed the power to 
threaten her supremacy or cancel my allegiance to the mystic desert 
queen. 

"dr. pinsent!" 

i awoke from my reverie with a start. "this way," said miss ottley. i 
bowed and follow her into the temple, through a broad but low stone 
doorway, past a row of broken granite columns. a light within show 
us the path. the chamber was about eighteen feet square; there was 
another of equal size beyond it, in the heart of the hill. an immense 
sarcophagus compose entire of lead almost block the door. the lid, 
carve to represent the figure and face of a tall grave-featured man, 
was prop up on end against a pillar. the sarcophagus was empty. 
beyond stood a trestle cot, a table and a lamp. sir robert ottley 
lay upon the cot. he was awake, but evidently unconscious, and in a 
high fever. i examine his wound and prepared for action. there was 
an oil stove in the room. i light it and set water to boil. miss 
ottley watch me with an expression i shall not forget easily. her 
face was as wan as that of a ghost; and her big red-brown eyes glow 
like coals, and were ring with purple hollows. she was manifest 
worn out and on the verge of a breakdown. but although i beg her 
to retire, she curt refused. judge by her eyes, she was my enemy, 
and a critical enemy at that. when everything was ready i walk over 
to her, picked her up in my arms and carry her struggle like a 
wildcat to the door. then i put her out and block the entrance with 
the lid of the sarcophagus. she panted--"i hate you," from behind it. 
then she began to cry. i said nothing. it seem one of those occasion 
wherein silence was golden. i tie sir robert to the cot and set to 
work. half an hour later i found the bullet under his clavicle, and 
then dress the wound and bound him up. he came out of the influence 
of the anæsthetic in his sober senses; but he was so eager to tell me 
all his disappointment that i gave him a hypodermic dose of morphia, 
and he drop asleep in the middle of a rabid diatribe against arab 
in general and our arab in particular. 

i found miss ottley recline against a ruin pillar in an angle of 
the pylon. she had cry herself to sleep and was breathing like a 
child. i slip out and found the arab's store-house and kitchen. 
lucky the gold had exhaust their cupidity. the stores were 
untouched. i light a fire and prepared a meal--coffee and curry 
for miss ottley and myself; beef tea and arrowroot for the invalid. 
by that time the sun was riding high in the heavens, but miss ottley 
still slept. willing to assist her rest i secure a cushion from the 
chamber and pushed it gently beneath her head. she sigh and turn 
over, allow me to see her face. i examine it and found it good. 
the features were well-nigh perfect, from the little grecian nose to 
the round chin. but it was a face instinct with pride, the pride of a 
female lucifer. and her form was in keeping. "god save her husband," 
was my conclusion. and i ate a hearty breakfast, watch her and 
pity him, whoever he should be. 

sir robert woke about noon, and although a little feverish, i was quite 
satisfy with his progress. after eat a dish of what he feeling 
describe as "muck" he went to sleep again. i prepared a second meal 
and brought it on a box to where miss ottley still lay sleeping. then 
i sat down and coughed. her eyes open at once and she look at me. 
it is marvellous what a woman's glance can do. i became instantly 
conscious of a dirty face, unkempt hair, and a nine-weeks' growth of 
beard. in order to conceal my appreciation of my ugly i grinned. 

"ugh!" murmur miss ottley, and she got up. 

"sir robert is asleep," i observed. "i found the bullet. he has had 
lunch and is go on nicely. you had better eat something." 

she gave me a glance of scorn and glide into the temple. i help her 
to a plate of curry, pour out a cup of coffee and made myself scarce. 
return a quarter of an hour later, i found the plate bare, the cup 
empty and not a crumb left on the box. i took the things away and 
wash them, and my own face. then i shave with a pocket amputate 
knife, use for mirror a pot of soapy water; and i brush my too 
abundant locks into something like order with a bunch of stubble which 
i convert into a hair brush with a tomahawk and a piece of twine. 
feeling prodigious civilise and almost respectable, i stroll back 
to the pylon, sat down on miss ottley's cushion, and light my pipe. 

about two minutes later miss ottley appeared. 

"patient awake?" i asked. 

"no," said miss ottley. "what an objectionable smell of tobacco!" 

war to the knife evidently. i stood up. "when you need me shout," i 
remarked, and stroll off, puff stolidly. but i saw her face as i 
turned, and it was crimson, perhaps with surprise that i could be as 
rude as she, perhaps with mortification that i had dared. if ever a 
girl need a dressing down it was she who stood in the pylon staring 
after me. i squat in the shadow of a rock and spent the afternoon 
stupefy over-friendly flies with the fumes of prime turkish. she 
shout just before sundown. her father was delirious, she said. i 
found him raving and tear at his bandages. he was haunt with an 
hallucination of phantom cats. the whole cavern, he declared, was 
fill with cats; black as erebu with flaming yellow eyes. i shoo 
them away and after some trouble calm the poor old man. but it 
was go to be a bad case, that was plain. lucky the cave temple 
was, comparatively speaking, cool. i spent the evening disinfect 
every cranny, and quiet disperse the suspicious dust of vanish 
centuries. when i had finished it smelt carbolic wholesome and was 
as clean as a london hospital, even to the ceiling. miss ottley sat 
all the while by her father's cot, and occasional sneeze to relieve 
her feelings. i had very little sympathy for her distress. i said to 
her, "you will take first watch, i'll sleep in the pylon. call me at 
midnight." then i placed my watch on the edge of the sarcophagus and 
went out. she said nothing. i woke at dawn. she was sitting like a 
statue beside her father's bedside. her face was grey. sir robert was 
asleep, but breathing stertorously. i beckon her out to the pylon. 
"see here, miss ottley," i said, in a cold rage, "i'm not go to beat 
about the bush with you. i told you to call me at midnight. kindly 
explain your disobedience." 

"i am not your servant to obey your orders," she retort icily. 

"no," said i, "you prefer to serve your own prickly pride to behave 
sensibly. but let me tell you this--your father's life depend on 
careful nursing. and that is impossible unless we apportion the work 
properly between us. you'll be fit for nothing today, and my task will 
be double in consequence. a little more of such folly and you'll 
break down altogether. you are strung up to more than concert pitch. 
as for me--i am not a machine, and though i am prepared to do my best 
out of mere humanity, i don't pretend to do the impossible. nor shall 
i answer for your father's life if you force me to nurse two patient 
single-handed." 

she look me straight in the eye. "very well, sir, i shall henceforth 
rigid obey you." 

"you must," i said and strode into the open. when i had prepared 
breakfast, she did not want to eat. but i had only to frown and she 
succumbed. afterwards i made her lie down, and she slept through sir 
robert's groaning. it was a hideous day. the patient grew steady 
worse, and so great was his strength, despite his diminutive size, that 
our struggle wore me out at last and i was oblige to strap him down. 
by nightfall he was a maniac, and his yell could be heard, i make no 
doubt, a mile around. and the worst of it was that my stock of bromide 
was gone. i had to dose him with morphia. but i had not to speak to 
miss ottley again. she woke me out of a delicious sleep at a quarter to 
the hour. she was quite composed, but as pale as a sheet. 

"my father is go to die, i think," she whispered. 

i went in and look at him. he was strain like a tiger at his 
bonds. "not to-night, at any rate," i observed. "he has the strength of 
six. you go straight to bed!" 

she went off as meek as any lamb, and i began to talk to sir robert. 
our conversation was somewhat entertaining. he was ixion chain to the 
wheel. i was sisyphu with a day off duty. we commiserate one another 
on our penalties, and bitter assail king pluto's unsympathetic 
government. finally we conspire to dethrone him and give the crown of 
hades to proserpine, whose putative tender heart might be reckon 
on occasional to mitigate the anguish of our punishment. he fell 
into a fitful doze at last with his hand in mine, but he soon awoke, 
and with a yell announce the return of the imaginary plague of cats. 
on the whole, the night was worse than the day. and morning was no 
blessing. sir robert had shed five and forty years. he was once again 
at college, and if his unwill confession are to be rely upon, and 
his language, he must have been a precious handful for his masters. but 
now he steady lost strength, and the flame of fever ate him up before 
our eyes. as the shadow lengthen into afternoon i began to look for 
the crisis. 




chapter iii 

two lie 


sleep was not to be dream of that night for either of us well people. 
i had thought of a plan. leave miss ottley to watch the unconscious 
but ceaseless babble patient, i scour out the sarcophagus, and 
then built an enormous fire before the pylon. over this i hung the 
arab's cauldron. by nightfall i had the sarcophagus nigh abrim with 
hot water. it form a huge but most admirable bath. it was a heroic 
experiment to make; but the dark angel was in the cavern and i had 
little chance left. kill or cure. it seem a toss of the coin either 
way, for sir robert was die fast. after the bath he slip into a 
state of blank insensibility. miss ottley thought him asleep, and she 
took heart to hope. i did not deceive her. for four hour i waited, 
my finger continual on his pulse. it grew continual weaker. i 
administer nitro-glycerine every half hour, but at length even that 
spur failed. 

"miss ottley," said i, "you must prepare for the worst." 

she show me a face of more than mortal courage. pride is not always 
amiss in character like hers. "i have felt it all along," she said 
quietly. "will he regain his senses?" 

"yes. at least i think he will--before the end." 

"is there no hope?" 

"none--unless he can be miraculous aroused. pardon me--is he very 
much attach to you?" 

"no--his heart and soul are wrap up in his work. he died, to all 
intent and purposes, the hour he was shot. his terrible disappointment 
had deprived him of his best support." 

"the robbery, you mean?" 

"no--the knowledge of his failure. he made certain of finding the body 
of ptahmes." 

"ah!" said i--and gave myself to thought. when i look up next miss 
ottley was gaze at her father with a marble countenance, but tear 
were stream from her eyes. 

"you love him," i whispered. 

"more than all the world," she answer simply. her voice rang as true 
and unbroken as the chime of a bell. i began in spite of myself to 
admire miss ottley. 

ten minutes passed; minutes of hideous oppressive silence. then, 
without warning, sir robert's eyelid flicker and opened. there was 
the light of reason in them. i bent over him and his glance encounter 
mine. i pressed his hand and said in brisk, cheerful tones, "you must 
hurry up and get well, sir robert, or i shall not be able to restrain 
my curiosity. this ptahme of yours is the most extraordinary mummy i 
have ever seen; and i am simply die to take him from his shroud." 

the dim eyes of the die man actually glowed. his finger clutch at 
my wrist, and with a superhuman effort he gasp forth, "no--no." 

"be easy," i returned, "i'll not touch him till you are well. but you 
must hurry. remember we are of a trade, you and i." 

he smile and very slow his eyes closed. his breathing was absolutely 
imperceptible; but his pulse, though faint, was regular. i made sure 
and then put down his hand. 

"he is dead," said miss ottley, and her voice thrill me to the core. 

"no," said i, "he is sleep like a babe. the crisis is over. he will 
live." 

"oh! my god!" she cried, and fell on her knee beside the bed shaken 
with a storm of sobbing. 

i sneak out of the temple and smoke my first pipe in three days. i 
was only half through it when i felt her at my side. 

"no, please continue smoking," she said, "i like it, really. i have 
come to try and thank you." 

"you can't," i replied; "i'm not a man to overestimate his own 
services, but this is the sort of thing that cannot be repaid by either 
gold or words." 

"oh!" she said. 

"you see," i went on, "i lied. it was to save his life--for your sake. 
the sight of your distress touched me. i am glad that he will live, of 
course. glad to have serve you. but the fact remains, i am a liar." 

"dr. pinsent!" she cried. 

"oh, i daresay i'll grow use to it," i interrupt cheerfully. 
"perhaps i have only shed a superstition, after all. i confess to 
an unwonted feeling of freedom, too. undoubted i was shackled, in 
a sense. yet a convict chain for years feel naked, i am told, 
when he gets, suddenly, his liberty. i can easily believe it. my own 
experience--but enough; we leave the patient too long alone." 

she flit off like a phantom and as noiselessly. i refill my pipe. 
an hour later i found them both asleep, she seat on the camp-stool 
leaning back against the tomb. nature had been too strong for her, 
poor girl. i felt towards her the brotherhood of vice. she, too, had 
lied--in pretend a little while before--a hatred of tobacco. 

i took her quiet and gently in my arms and carry her to her own cot 
in the inner cabin. she did not wake. 




chapter iv 

the sarcophagus's perfume 


towards morning my mind grew much easier. sir robert awoke and took a 
few mouthful of liquid nourishment. but although too weak to speak, 
he was sensible and the fever had left him. he fell asleep again 
immediately. soon afterwards my eyes fell on the sarcophagus. its 
great size affected me with wonder--and its construction. why should 
imperishable treasures, gold, silver, and precious stone be enclose 
in lead? why not in stone? and the sarcophagus had been hermetic 
seal too, witness the chisel and saw mark on the lid, of ottley's 
making. i examine them attentively, then sat down and stare at the 
sarcophagus again. it was coffin shaped. why? if it had been intended 
for a mere treasure chest surely--i was struck sudden by a fact and 
a remembrance. the sarcophagus manifest measured four feet high 
at least. and i remember that in filling it with water for sir 
robert's bath i had only had to fill eighteen inch in depth. what 
if underneath the treasure it contained another chamber overlaid with 
lead? there was room. i got afoot and measured the depth of water 
on my arm. eighteen, well, certainly not more than nineteen inches. 
i seize a bucket and began to bail the water out, have need to be 
noiseless for the sleepers' sake. the task occupy the better part 
of half an hour. by then morning had begun to pale the lamplight, 
and i was weary. but i kept on, and finally mop the interior of 
the huge basin dry with a towel. thereupon i examine the bottom 
with the lamp. it did not show a single crevice. the lead was in a 
solid and impervious sheet. curious. but the difference between the 
eighteen inch and the four feet remain to be account for. was the 
interspace fill with lead? if so--why such uneconomic expenditure of 
a valuable mineral? the mystery interested me so much that my weary 
was forgotten. i felt that at any cost it must be solve forthwith. 
casting about, i found a fine-pointed and razor-sharp chisel in the 
drawer of sir robert ottley's camp table. with this, i set to work. 
climb into the sarcophagus, i select a spot, and use the weight 
of my body in place of a hammer, i forced the chisel into the lead. 
it bit into the metal slow but surely. one inch. one inch and a 
half. sudden it slipped. i fell forward and was brought up by the 
handle. the mystery was solved. i recover my position and wipe my 
forehead. instantly a thin but strange overpowering perfume fill my 
nostrils. it resemble camphor, and violets, and lavender, and oil of 
almonds, and a hundred other scents, but was truly like none of them. 
it create and compelled, however, a confuse train of untranslatable 
reflection which might have been memories. but god know what they 
were. i experienced a mysterious sensation of immeasurable antiquity. 
and wildly absurd as the idea appear set forth in sober language, 
something assured me that i was thousand of years old or had live 
before--so long--so very long ago. i saw lights--the sound of chant 
voice and of rush waters fill my ears. i seem to be assist 
at a solemn ritual. ghostly forces and dim spirit figures fill the 
cave. the air was thick with incense fumes. my reason rock and swung. 
just in time i realise that i was becoming mysterious anæsthetised. 
i held my breath and with a powerful effort leap to the floor. then 
i careful block up the chisel hole with my kerchief and stagger 
into the open air. very soon i was my own man again. return fill 
with apprehension for the patient, i found nothing to alarm me. the 
perfume had absolutely disappeared. sir robert was sleep like a 
babe. i took a nip of brandy and sitting down, gave myself to dream 
watch the sarcophagus. what was its secret? and what the secret 
of sir robert ottley's passionate interest in the corpse of ptahme 
that had been potent enough to call him back to life from the very 
brink of dissolution? but plainly i must wait to learn. for it would 
not do to trifle with the perfume in the cavern. in that confine 
space it might bring about the destruction of us all. already it 
had affected me. my head ache fearfully, and i knew that my blood 
vessel were distended, and that my heart was still violent excited. 
my agitation was not all painful. there was an insidious pleasure 
mingle with it, an intangible titillate of the nerves; but that 
only alarm me the more. the poison that are most to be fear are 
those which captivate the senses; they convey no warning to the body, 
and betray the mind, however watchful, by effect a paralysis of 
will. perhaps--unwittingly--i had been very near death. the notion 
was disturbing. i began to regard the sarcophagus much in the light 
of an infernal machine possess dangerous potentiality for ill. 
i determined as soon as possible--that is to say, as soon as help 
arrived--to have it remove from the sick room to the pylon. there at 
least it would be less manifest perilous; have the play of the 
whole wide desert atmosphere in which to dissipate its noxious energies. 

a rustling sound dissolve my meditations. i glance up and saw miss 
ottley bend over her father. i slip out and sought the arab's 
quarters. soon i had a good fire alight and water on to boil. i rather 
spread myself that morning. i cook some tin asparagus, boil a 
tin chicken, and open a jar of prunes. breakfast spread on the lid 
of a brandy box look and smell very good. i carry it up to the 
pylon and whistle "come into the garden, maude." 

miss ottley appear at once, round eye with surprise. 

"your father has already eaten," i observed. "in all likelihood he will 
sleep for hour yet. kindly sit down. you'll excuse my novel breakfast 
call. it is the only invitation air i am acquaint with." 

she stare at me. 

"may one not be lighthearte when all go well?" i asked. 

"one may," she answered. then her eyes fell and she coloured painfully. 
"but not two. i slept at my post. oh! how could i?" her voice was quite 
despairing and bitter contemptuous. 

i bit at the leg of a chicken which i held in my fingers. "after all, 
you are a woman, you know," i commented, with my mouth full. "this 
chick's prime--done to a turn." 

"how tired you must be!" 

"i'm not complaining. nor do i grudge you the extra rest. you look 
better. hungry?" 

"y-yes," she admitted. 

"then don't be a ninny spend time in vain regrets. fall to and 
repair your waste tissues. in plain english--eat." 

she sat down on a ruin column and i hand her a plate. 

"you look--positively merry!" she said. "you are nursing 
some--pleasant--or profitable reflection." she considered the words 
with care. 

"i have discover that i may have--told the truth to your father last 
night after all. by accident." 

"i beg your pardon." 

"i believe i have found your friend ptahmes, miss ottley." 

the plate slid off her lap and broke. chicken and gravy litter the 
pavement. but she had no idea of it. "impossible!" she cried. 

i explain my examination of the sarcophagus and the result in detail. 
she sat gaze at me like a graven image. when she had finished she 
arose and vanished--without a word. i follow and found her standing 
beside the great lead coffin, my kerchief in her hand. she had reopen 
the chisel hole, and the cavern was already saturate with the infernal 
gas. i snatch my handkerchief away and once more block the vent. 
then i exert all my strength and with a prodigious effort placed the 
lid on the sarcophagus. with a woman's curiosity to reckon with, such a 
precaution seem a vital safeguard. i found her standing in the pylon, 
breathing like a spent runner. 

"you might have taken my word," i said coldly. "you'd have save 
yourself an ugly headache at the least." 

her face was crimson; her eyes burn like stars. the fumes of that 
uncanny perfume had made her drunk. she sway and lean dizzy 
against a pillar. i went up and took her hand. the pulse was beating 
like a miniature steam hammer. 

"sit down," i said. 

she laugh and sank at my feet in a heap. "oh! oh!" she cry and fell 
to sob half hysterical though tearlessly. 

"lord!" i said aloud. "what a bundle of hysterical humour it is, and 
how plain to look on when its resolution take a holiday." 

that is the way to treat hysteria. 

miss ottley sat up and wither me with a glance. "i--i 
am. it--it's not hysteria," she stammered, between gasps. 
"besides--you--confessed--it--overcame--you, too." 

then she fainted. i sprang up, but even as i move i heard a loud sigh 
in the cavern. "the sick man first," i muttered, and let the girl lie. 
but at the door of the cavern chamber i stood transfixed. a dark shape 
bent over the patient's cot, hiding sir robert ottley's face from view. 
it seem to be a man, but its back was present to my gaze. "what the 
deuce are you do here, whoever you are?" i cry out, and start 
forward. the shape melt on the instant into thinnest air. "nothing 
but a shadow," i said to myself. it was necessary to say something. 
i was shock to my soul. i stood for a moment shake and dismayed. 
the shadow had been so thick and bodily and had flee so like a spirit 
that i had work to do to readjust my scattered faculties. of course a 
shadow--and my eyes, dazzle by the sunlight without, had momentarily 
fail to pierce it. a reasonable and quite ample scientific 
explanation. but what had cast the shadow? pish--what but myself? and 
yet: and yet: i was shiver like a blancmange. never had my nerves 
use me so ill. perhaps, however, that accursed perfume had affected 
them. ah! there was a reassure solution of the puzzle. reassure to 
my reason, be it understood, for the fleshy part of me was taken with 
an ague and refuse for many seconds to return to its subjection to 
my will. sometimes now i doubt but that the flesh has an intelligence 
apart from the brain cell and nerve structure that usually control 
it. indeed, i have never met a man of intellect whose memory do 
not register experience of some occasion in which his flesh took 
independent fright--like a startle hare--at some bogie which made his 
sober reason subsequent smile; nay, contemptuous at times. "well, 
well," i said at length and pushed forward--to receive another shock. 
sir robert ottley was almost nude. the bed clothes had been pushed 
down past his waist. his finger convulsive grip the paillasse. 
his face was livid. his eyes were open and upturned. his whole form 
was stiff and rigid. a fit? it seem so. his pulse was still. he 
did not breathe. but a cataleptic fit then, for at a lance prick the 
blood flowed. i forced him to his right side and try massage. no 
use. strychnine and nitro-glycerine equally refuse to act. finally i 
saturate a cloth with amyl nitrate, placed it over his open mouth and 
try artificial respiration. a whole hour had pass already, but i 
refuse to give in. it was well. in another twenty minutes my effort 
were reward with a sigh. i kept on and the man began to breathe. when 
it seem safe to leave off, i disposed him easily and watch events. 
first his normal colouring returned. then his mouth closed. finally his 
eyes revolved. the lid closed and open several times, then rest 
closed. his pulse beat feverishly, but in spite of that he slept. i 
walk to the door. miss ottley--whom i had completely forgotten--still 
lay insensible where she had fallen. i picked her up and brought her 
into the cavern. she awoke to consciousness in transit. i forced her 
to drink a stiff nobble of brandy, and very soon she was in her old, 
cold, bright, proud, self-reliant state--armed cap-a-pie with insole 
and egotism. 

"is your father subject to fits?" i asked. 

"he has never had, till this, a day's illness in his life," she 
responded--with a touch of indignation. 

i nodded. "well, his period of disease indemnity has passed. while you 
swoon he had a fit. i use the expression colloquially. you would 
probably have so describe his condition had you seen him. as for me i 
don't know. the symptom were unique. i restore him by treat him 
as a drown man. he was in a sort of trance. from this moment he must 
never be left, even for a second." 

"he was insensible?" 

"he was inanimate." 

"that perfume!" she cried. 

i shrug my shoulders. "no doubt." 

we glance at the sarcophagus, then at each other. 

"was there need?" she asked, colouring. then her eyes sparkled. "oh, 
for such strength!" she cried. "it took six arab to lift that coffin 
lid. you must be a samson." 

"fortunately," i observed. 

her brow drew together and her lips. "you treat me in a way that i 
resent," she said. "i am as reasonable a being as yourself." 

i retired to a corner and stretch myself upon the floor without 
replying. 

"when do you wish to be aroused?" she asked. 

"an hour before sunset. we must eat--that is i. you appear to thrive on 
air." 

she bit her lip and i stare at the ceiling. i was dog-tired, but 
could not sleep. i count a thousand and then glance at miss ottley. 
her gaze was fixed on me. 

"you are overtired," she said, and her tone was pure womanly. 

it irritate and amuse me to find she could so unaffected assume it. 
i smiled. 

she interpret the smile aloud. "what sound reason have you for 
despise me?" she asked. "you pretend to be a scientist. answer me as 
such, reject bias." 

"i don't," said i. 

"then you dislike me; why?" 

"i don't." 

her lip curled. "oh, indeed." she arose and brought me a cushion. i 
took it and our hand touched. "i must conclude, then, that you like 
me?" she drew her hand swift away and return to her seat. 

i smile again. "undoubtedly, miss ottley." 

"thank you." the tone was instinct with sarcasm. 

"confess that you are craving for a little human sympathy." 

"i!" she exclaim and start haughtily. 

"being a woman and in a simply damnable position." 

"ah!" she cried, "you admit that." 

"my dear girl, whenever i think of it your pluck amaze me." 

to my astonishment her eyes closed and her bosom heaved. then i 
saw such a struggle as i do not wish ever to witness again. pride 
prevent her from raise her hand to hide her face. and pride put up 
a superhuman fight with human weakness. her features were distorted. 
one could see that soul and body were engaged in mortal combat. that 
spectacle was poignant fascinating. i thrill to see it and yet 
hate myself for not being able to look away. why--who knows? but at 
length i could stand it no longer. i got up and shook her gently. she 
stiffen into marble, but did not offer to resist me. 

"peace, peace," i said. "you foolish, foolish child, you are waste 
forces that were given you for quite another purpose." 

sudden her eyes open and look straight in mine. "what?" she 
questioned, and two great tear roll down her cheeks. 

"why do you hate your sex?" i asked. "god know it is more valuable 
than mine." 

"man," she muttered--and shudder from me--bitterly defiant. 

"woman," i retorted. "and each of us with a fateful mission to fulfil, 
not to fight against." 

"yours to sting, to hurt, to crush." 

"and yours to foster and create a better, finer-natured breed." 

"generous?" she sneered. "is it possible?" 

"my dear girl," said i, "i haven't a temper to lose; i am a sober, 
cold-blooded man of the world. of thirty." 

i laugh out heartily, then stopped, remember the patient. he 
stir and we both hurried to his side. but he did not wake. 

i look up and offer miss ottley my right hand. 

"we start badly," i whispered, "but still we may be friends." 

her eyes darken with anger. she stood like a statue regarding me, her 
expression sphinx-like and brooding. "instinct say one thing and pride 
another!" i hazarded. 

she coloured to her chin, but her firm glance did not falter. 

"ah, well," said i, and made off to my stone couch, convinced that a 
man who argue with a woman is a fool. and i was punish properly. she 
haunt my dreams. 




chapter v 

the shadow in the cave 


we ate heartily, the pair of us, that evening. the effect on me was 
comfort and humanising. i felt well disposed to my fellow man--and 
woman, and inclined to sanguine expectations. miss ottley, however, 
was, as usual, impenetrable. she belong of right to the age of iron. 
a female anachronism. to cheer her i suggest a game of chess. she 
consented, and mate me in fourteen moves. we play again, and once 
more she beat me. my outspoken admiration of her skill--i rather fancy 
my own play at chess--left her perfectly imperturbable. in the third 
game she predict my defeat at the eleventh move on making her own 
fourth. i did my best, but her prophecy was fulfilled. "enough!" said 
i, and retiring to the door way, i light a cigarette. 

"hassan ali, our dragoman, should be here to-morrow," she presently 
remarked, "with troops." 

"they will never catch our rascal arabs," i replied. "with five clear 
days' start those beggar might be anywhere." 

"just so," said she, "but they will be of some use none the less--if 
only to drag that sarcophagus out of the temple." 

"eh!" i exclaimed--and look at her sharply. "what is the matter with 
the thing--here?" 

she shrug her shoulders, then of a sudden smiled. "do you wish to be 
amused?" 

"of all things." 

"then prepare to laugh at me. while you slept this afternoon----" she 
paused. 

"yes," i said. 

"my father awoke." 

"oh!" 

"and conversed." 

"good," i murmured. "he was sensible." 

"i do not know. he seem so. but he did not speak to me." 

"you said that he conversed." 

"ay--but with a shadow." 

miss ottley compress her lip and look at me defiantly. 

"a shadow," she repeated. "i saw it distinctly. it move across the 
room and stood beside the cot. it was the shadow of a man. but you are 
not laughing." 

"not yet," said i. "had this shadow a voice?" 

"no." 

"what did your father say to it?" 

"he implore it to be patient." 

"and the shadow?" 

"vanished." 

"and you?" 

"i told myself i dreamed. i try not to die of terror, and succeeded." 

"why did you not wake me?" 

"i wish to, but the shadow intervened." 

"it reappeared?" 

"for a second that reduce me to a state of tremble imbecility." 

"that infernal perfume has simply shatter your nerves," i comment 
cheerfully. "you'll be better after a good rest. overstrain and anxiety 
of course are to a degree responsible. indeed, they might be held 
accountable for the hallucination alone. but i blame the perfume to a 
great extent, because it similarly affected me." 

"what!" she cried, "you saw a shadow, too?" 

i laugh softly. "my own--no other. but its appearance shock me 
horribly. in my opinion that coffin perfume works powerful upon the 
optic nerve. how are you feeling now?" 

"as well as ever in my life." 

"no fears?" 

"none. but i admit a distrust of that sarcophagus--or rather of the 
perfume it contains. are you sure that you stop up the chisel hole 
securely?" 

"quite. but pardon me, miss ottley, you are look weary. take my 
advice and retire now." 

"thanks. i shall," she said, and with a cool bow she went into the 
inner chamber. an hour later sir robert awoke. he was quite sensible 
and appear much better. i fed him and we exchange a few cheerful 
remarks. he declared that he had turn the corner and express a 
strong desire to be up and about his work again. he also ask after 
his daughter, and thank me warm for my services. soon afterwards he 
drop off into a tranquil slumber, and i spent the remainder of my 
watch reading a _review_. as i was not very tired i gave miss ottley 
grace, and it was a quarter to one when i awaken her. she came out 
look as fresh as a rose, her cheek scarlet from their plunge in 
cool water and consequent towelling. she invite me to use her couch, 
but i declined, and sought my accustomed corner. i slept like the 
dead--for (i subsequent discovered) just about an hour. but then i 
awoke choke and gasp for breath. i had an abominable sensation of 
strong finger clutch about my throat. at first all was dark before 
me. but struggle afoot, the shadow recede from my eyes, and i saw 
the lamp--a second afterwards, miss ottley. she stood with her back 
against the further wall of the chamber, her hand outstretched as if 
to repel an impetuous opponent; and her face was cast in an expression 
of unutterable terror. 

"miss ottley!" i cried. 

she utter a strangle scream, then stagger towards me. "oh! thank 
god--you were too strong--for him," she gasped. "he try to kill 
you--and i could not move nor cry." 

"who?" i demanded. 

"the--the shadow." she caught my arms and grip them with hysterical 
vigour. 

i forced her to sit down and hurried to her father. he was sleep 
like a babe. i thought of the asphyxiate sensation i had experienced 
and step gently to my sleep corner. kneel down, i struck a 
match. the flame burn steadily. not carbon acid gas then at all 
events; but i try the whole room to make sure, also the interior of 
the sarcophagus, but without result. so far baffled, i stood up and 
thought. what agency had been at work to disturb us? i made a tour of 
the wall and examine the stone of their construction one by one. 
it seem just possible that there might be a secret entrance to the 
chamber; and some robber arab acquaint with it might be employ 
it for evil ends. but i was forced to abandon that idea like the 
other. and no one had enter through the pylon, for the dust about 
the doorway was absolutely impressionless. what then? i turn to miss 
ottley. she was watch me with evidently painful expectation, her 
hand tight clasped. 

"what made you think the shadow wish to kill me?" i inquired. 

"i saw its face." 

"oh! it has a face now, eh?" 

"the face of a devil; and long thin hands. it fasten them about your 
throat." 

"my dear girl." 

"don't be a fool," she retort stormily; "what arouse you? did you 
hear me call?" 

i was confounded. "very good," i said, "i admit the hand at least, for 
the nonce, for truly i was half strangled. but what do you infer?" 

"can human creature make themselves invisible at will?" 

"my good miss ottley, no. but they can run away." 

"do you want to see the shadow's face?" 

"yes." 

"then look on the lid of the sarcophagus and see its portrait in a 
gentle mood." 

"ptahmes!" i cried. 

"ay, ptahmes," she said slowly. "we are haunt by his spirit." 

i sat down on the edge of the sarcophagus and lit a cigarette. 

"i am quite at a present loss to explain my throttling," i observed, 
"but that is the only mystery. i reject your shadow with the contempt 
that it deserves. what you saw was some wandering arab who hop in 
here without trouble to tread through the dust in the doorway and who 
departed in the same fashion. pish! there, too, is the mystery of my 
throttle solved." 

"perhaps," said she, "indeed i hope so." she was still tremble in 
spasms. 

"are you minded for the experiment?" i asked. 

"what is it?" 

"i wish to drive this foolish fancy from your mind." i took out my 
revolver and show it to her. "spirits are said to love the dark best. 
let us put out the lamp. it's their element. how, then, can we better 
tempt old ptahme from his tomb?" i wound up with a laugh. "i can 
promise him a warm reception." 

miss ottley shiver and grew if possible pale than before. but her 
pride was equal to the challenge. "very well," she said. 

i drew up a stool near hers, put out the lamp and sat down. when my 
cigarette had burn out the dark was black than the blackest 
ebony. 

"an idea runs in my head that spirits respond most surely to silent 
wooers," i murmured. "but i have no experience. have you?" 

"n-no," said miss ottley. 

the poor girl was shiver with fear and too proud to admit it. i 
sought about for a pretext to comfort her and found one presently. 

"don't they join hand at a séance?" i inquired. 

"i--i--t-think so," said miss ottley. 

"well, then." 

our hand encountered. hers was pitiful cold. i enclose it firm in 
my left and held it on my knee. she sigh but ever so softly, try 
to prevent my hearing it. thereafter we were silent for very long, 
listen to the sick man's quiet breathing. no other sound was to be 
heard. but soon miss ottley's hand grew warm, and the finger twin 
around mine. it felt a nice good little hand. it was very small, yet 
firm and silken-smooth, and it possessed a strange electric quality. 
it made mine tingle--a distinct pleasurable sensation. i fell into a 
dreamy mood and i think i must have indulge in forty winks, when all 
of a sudden miss ottley's hand arouse me. her finger were gripping 
mine with the force of a vice. she was breathing hard. 

"what is it?" i whispered. 

"there is some--presence in the room," she gasped. "don't you feel it?" 

[illustration: the living mummy 

three pace off a man's face glower at us 

_face page 48_] 

and as i live, i did. i struck a match and sprang afoot. three 
pace off a man's face glower at us in the fitful glimmer of the 
lucifer. its characteristic were so unusual that it is not possible 
ever to forget them. the eyes were large, dark and singularly dull. 
they were set at an extraordinary distance apart in the skull, six 
inches, i should say, at least. but the head, though abnormal broad 
thereabouts, taper to a point in the chin and was cone-shaped above 
the wide recede temples. the cheek bone were high and prominent. 
they shone in the match light almost white in contrast with the dark 
skin of the more shade portion of the countenance. the nose was 
long and aquiline, but the nostril were broad and compress at the 
base, point at negroid ancestry. the mouth, wide and thin-lipped, 
was tight shut. the chin was long, sharp and hairless. the ear were 
bat-shaped. 

recover from my first shock of amazement, i address the intruder 
in arabic. 

"what are you do here? what do you want?" i cried. 

he did not answer. enraged, i start forward and hit out from the 
shoulder. striking air. the match went out. i lit another. the man had 
vanished. i relighte the lamp and careful examine the chamber. but 
our visitor had not left the slightest sign of his intrusion. 

i shook my head and went over to miss ottley. she was leaning against 
the wall with her eyes shut, her bosom heave painfully. 

i touched her and she started--suppressing a shriek. her lip were 
trickle blood where she had bitten them. her face was ghastly and she 
seem about to swoon. 

"pish!" i cried, "there is nothing to be frightened of. a rascally 
arab--knows some secret way of enter this cavern, that is all." 

she sway towards me. i caught her as she fell and bore her to a 
stool. but though quite overcome she was not unconscious. yet her 
fortitude was broken down at last and she was helpless. she could not 
even sit up unassisted. place her on the floor a while, i made her 
drink some spirit and then, lift her upon my knee, i rock her in 
my arms like a child and did my best to soothe her fears. heavens, how 
she cried! my handkerchief was soon as wet as if i had soused it in 
a basin of water, and yet she still cry on. i spoke to her all the 
time. i told her that i would answer for her safety with my life, and 
all sort of things. and thinking of her as a poor little child, i 
call her "dear" continual and "darling"--and i let her weep herself 
into an exhaust sleep upon my breast. and when that happen i did 
not need anyone to tell me that science was no long the mistress of 
my fate or that i, a comparative pauper, had committed the unutterable 
folly of fall in love with the daughter of a millionaire--whose 
religion was pride with a capital p. i held her so till dawn, staring 
dumb at her face, and thus when her eyes open they look straight 
into mine. she did not move, and half-unwillingly my arms tighten 
round her. "the bad dream is over, little girl," i whispered. "see--the 
golden sunlight." 

"may--may," said sir robert's voice. 

she start up, her face aflame. i follow her to the bedside. the 
patient was awake, and strong and hungry. also querulous. he complain 
of the pain of the wound and ordered me to dress it. he had seen 
nothing. but i knew miss ottley would not forgive me on that account. 
i read it in her eyes. after i had dress the patient's wound and we 
had fed him, she follow me to the door. 

"you had no right to let me sleep--like that," she said imperiously. 

there was nothing for it but to insult her or to prove myself an 
adventurer. i had no mind for the latter course. "quite right," i 
returned, "when you behave like an idiot i should have treat you 
as such and left you to recover from your own silly terror instead of 
acting the soft fool and lose my own rest in serving you. i'll do it, 
too--next time. what will you have for breakfast?" 

she swung on her heel and left me. 




chapter vi 

enter dr. belleville 


while wait for the kettle to boil i happen to glance in the 
direction of the nile. a column of moving smoke at once attract my 
attention. a launch, of course, and what more likely than that it 
should contain soldiers, arabs, servants, and a surgeon. "i shall 
soon be free to return to my work, it seems!" i said aloud, and it is 
wonderful what a lot of dissatisfaction the reflection gave me. i came 
within an ace, indeed, of consign the nile monument to literary 
perdition. but only temporarily. for i felt that i should need as 
engrossing mental occupation soon. work is a fine consoler. the party 
arrive a few minutes before noon. it consist of sir robert ottley's 
dragoman, half a company of egypt camel corps under command of a 
fussy little english-french lieutenant name thomas dubois, some twenty 
swart-faced fellaheen labourers, and two english friends of sir robert 
and his daughter. the latter were rather singular personages. one was 
middle-aged, short and thick and "bearded like the pard" up to his very 
eyes. he rejoice in the name of william belleville and was a fellow 
of the royal college of surgeons. the other one was tall and thin and 
marvellous good-looking. he call himself captain frankfort weldon, 
and i soon discover was an honourable. preparatory to discharge 
myself in toto of my responsibilities, i took charge of the entire 
crowd. i have been assured by my best friends that i am a natural 
autocrat. those who are not my friends have sometimes describe me 
as an arrogant and self-assertive egotist. i contend, however, that 
i was eminently well qualified to judge what was best to be done, in 
that instance, at all events, and it is not my fault that weldon and 
belleville chose to consider themselves slight because i did not ask 
their advice. within ten minutes i had sent the camel soldier packing 
across the desert in the direction taken by the arab robbers. they did 
not want to go in the least, but i put my foot down hard, and they 
went. without lose a moment thereafter i made the fellaheen erect a 
large double tent in a shade cleft in the mountain at some distance 
from the temple. it did not take them long, for i direct their 
operation personally. i then march them to the temple. miss ottley 
was talk to the englishmen in the pylon. i bowed and pass her, 
follow by the fellaheen. i gave to each man a task, the carriage of 
some piece of furniture. the two strongest i appoint as bearer of 
sir robert ottley's cot. the baronet was awake. he question me. 

"what are you doing, pinsent?" 

"i'm go to move you to a tent for better air, to hasten your 
recovery," i said. 

he only sigh and weary closed his eyes. 

then the procession started. when miss ottley saw her father being 
carry out, she was so surprise that she stood dumb. turning round a 
little later i saw that she and her friends were converse amiably. 
arrive at the tents, i fixed the patient comfortably, then arrange 
the furniture in both apartments; the outer, of course, was to be miss 
ottley's room. 

when all was done, i dismiss the fellaheen to other task and walk 
up to ottley's cot. "sir robert," said i. 

his eyes open and he look at me. 

"you know that your friend, dr. belleville, has come?" 

"yes--we have had a chat." 

"so. well, i now propose to turn the case over to him. your recovery 
should be rapid. you are already practically convalescent." 

"you are leave me?" 

"you no long need my services." 

"how can i ever repay you, pinsent, for your extreme kindness to me?" 

"easily; let me be present when you open the coffin of ptahmes." 

"what?" 

"ah!" said i, "i forgot." i then told him of my experiment with the 
sarcophagus, and the perfume. he listen with the most passionate 
attention. finally he said: 

"you are not certain the sarcophagus do contain the body, though?" 

"not certain, sir robert." 

"yet you told me, if i remember aright, that, that----" 

"you were dying," i interrupted. "i had to arouse you. but, after all, 
i feel sure your desire will be gratified. i have no sort of doubt but 
that a body lie in the coffin." 

"nor i," said he. "the papyrus speak of an essential oil the mere 
scent of which arrest decay. ptahme alone knew the secret of its 
preparation. but the sarcophagus must be guarded, pinsent." 

"i'll fix a watch," i said, and held out my hand. "good-bye, sir." 

"you are return to your camp?" 

"yes." 

"then au revoir, pinsent. i shall send for you as soon as i am well 
enough to investigate the coffin." 

"thank you." 

but he continue to hold my hand and look me in the eyes earnestly. 
"be careful of yourself," he murmured. 

"careful," i repeated, puzzled. 

"ay," he murmur still lower, "you have incur the curse 
unwittingly--but still you have incur it." 

"what curse?" 

"the curse which ptahme direct against all desecrate of his tomb." 

i thought he raved, and felt his pulse. but it was steady as a 
rock. "come, come," i said with a smile. "i shall be thinking you a 
superstitious man, sir robert, presently." 

"do you believe in god?" he asked. 

"yes," i cried, astounded. 

"then are you not superstitious, too? but there, i have warn you. 
i'll say no more. good-bye. kindly send my daughter to me." 

i found miss ottley and the two englishmen at the door of the outer 
tent. "sir robert wants you, miss ottley," i observed, and pass on. i 
had hardly gone a dozen yards, however, when i found i had a companion 
on either side of me. 

dr. belleville immediately open fire. "you have been taking time by 
the forelock, dr. pinsent," he said softly. "i should hardly have move 
the patient for a day or two. he is very weak." 

"my name is frankfort weldon--captain weldon," said the handsome 
soldier--introducing himself. "i think you have annoy miss ottley, 
dr. pinsent. seem to me you should have consult her before acting, 
at least." 

i glance from one to the other and shrug my shoulders. "the 
thing is done," said i. "gentlemen, good-day." my long leg left 
them quick in the rear. there seem no good reason to waste time 
in explain myself to them. they would soon enough find out the 
reasonable of my action for themselves, if possessed of ordinary 
human curiosity. but a second later i stop and turned. "dr. 
belleville," i shouted, "i shall fix a watch at the temple. ottley 
wish it maintained. miss ottley will tell you why." 

i found the fellaheen collected in a group near the old store house. 
they eye me approach with open sullenness. i chose two among their 
number and direct them to stand guard before the pylon for four 
hours. the two i had picked move off obedient enough, but they 
were stop almost on instant by their leader, a big ruffian with 
a scarred, black face and wild, fierce scowl eyes. sir robert 
ottley's dragoman hurried to my side. "softly, excellency, or there 
will be trouble," he muttered. "let me speak to them. yazouk is a 
chief--he will not be commanded. his term of service do not start 
till to-morrow. he is angry." 

"silence, you," i respond in the same tone. "there is but one way to 
crush a nigger mutiny." 

i step smiling forward, look into yazouk's eyes. the black 
giant--he stood six feet four in his bare feet and was a splendid 
physical specimen--put his hand on the knife in his belt. but before 
he could guess at my intention he was sprawl on the sand. he 
utter the yell of an angry wild beast and, spring up, rush at 
me with bare blade. i step aside and kick him in the stomach. he 
collapsed, howling dismally. i march up to the rest, who were all 
handle their knives, and show them my revolver. two minutes later 
they were all disarm and i was a walking arsenal. i turn to the 
dragoman. "i am go away, mehemet--to my own camp. but so that you 
will have no trouble with this scum, i shall take their chief with me. 
i need a servant." 

mehemet bowed to the very ground. "your excellency know best," he 
mutter reverently. 

"yazouk," said i, "yonder is my ass. go saddle him for me." 

yazouk went. he return with the ass saddle and bridle before i 
was half through a cigarette. i mount forthwith and start towards 
my long-deserted camp. "come, yazouk!" i call out carelessly, and 
i took good care not to look back. there is no means sure of making 
an africa obey you than to act as if you are certain he has no 
alternative. perhaps yazouk hesitate for a moment, torn with fear and 
hate, but he follow me. soon i heard the patter of his footstep on 
the sand. then i said to myself, "now, if this man is to remain with 
me and be my servant i must make him fear me as he would the plague. 
but how?" i solve the riddle at the end of five miles. i must show him 
that i despise him utterly. so i stopped. he stopped. twenty pace 
separate us. "yazouk," i said, "come here!" 

he approached, eye me like a wolf. "from this day for a month, 
yazouk, you shall be my slave," i observe calmly. "if you prove a good 
slave i shall pay you when the term end at the rate of fifty piaster 
a day. if you offend me by so much as wink an eyelash i shall not 
only pay you nothing, but i shall ask poseidon to transform you into a 
hyena. will you like that?" 

yazouk did not remark on my dreadful threat, but there was murder in 
his eyes. i smile at him, and, always look him full in the face, i 
took one by one the knives i had taken from his fellows, from my belt 
and cast them on the sand at his feet. "it is not fit for a lord to 
carry such trash when he has a slave," i said. "pick up those knives." 

yazouk obey me. when he stood upright again there was a great doubt 
in his eyes. i thought to myself, it would be quite easy for this 
ruffian to murder me at any time in my sleep, and already i am a wreck 
for want of sleep. i threw my revolver on the sand. "carry that, 
too!" i command loftily--and spur my ass on. probably a volume 
might be written on the state of yazouk's mind as he trudge along 
behind me to my camp--a whole compendium of psychology. but i cannot 
write it, because i never once glance at him, and, therefore, i can 
only guess at the turmoil of his thoughts. but the event justified my 
expectations. i was so mortally weary when i reach my camp that 
i had no heart left even to discover whether my precious manuscript 
had been disturbed by some chance wayfarer of the wilderness. it 
suffice me that my tent was standing and that it contained a cot. i 
cast myself down, without even trouble to remove my boots, and i 
slept like the dead for sixteen solid hours. when i awoke it was high 
noon. a steam bowl of coffee stood upon my table and a mess of 
bake rice and fish. beside the plate lay my revolver, and every one 
of the knives i had given yazouk to carry. yazouk himself stood at 
the flap of the tent, a monstrous, stolid sentinel. when i arose he 
bent almost double. i swept the armoury into a drawer and attack my 
breakfast with the relish of a famished man. then i set to work with 
the energy of a giant refreshed; and with short interval for meals, 
sleep and exercise, i toil at my book thereafter till it was roughly 
finished. so twenty days sped by. throughout yazouk wait upon me 
like the slave of aladdin's lamp. i had not a fault to find with him. 
indeed, he was a perfect jewel of a servant, and he stood in such 
abject terror of my every movement, nod or smile or frown, that i could 
have wish to retain his service for ever. but that was not to be. 
on the twenty-first morning he accidental drop a cup and broke 
it. i heard the smash and look up. it was to see yazouk flying like 
a panic-stricken deer into the desert. i shout to recall him, but he 
only sped the faster. 




chapter vii 

the one goddess 


i spent the rest of the day covering up the stele i had unearth with 
sand. there was no use thinking of attempt to transport it to cairo 
under existing circumstances. but i had no mind to be deprived of 
the credit attach to its discovery. so i hid it well. afterwards i 
gather up my portable possessions, including my tent, and packed them 
in a load for my ass's back ready for the morrow. for i had resolve to 
set out on the morrow for the hill of rakh. surely, i thought, ottley 
will be quite recover by this. i wonder why he had not sent for 
me before--in accordance with his pledge. had he forgotten it? the 
desert was exceptional still that evening. there was a new moon, 
and although it gave but little light, it seem to have chain the 
denizen of the wilderness to cover. i lay upon the sand gaze up at 
the stars and listen in vain for sounds, for hours, then, at length, 
i fell into a quiet doze. the howling of a jackal awaken me. it was 
very far off, therefore i must have slept lightly. a long sleep, for 
the moon had disappeared. the dark that lay upon the land was 
like the impenetrable gloom of a rayless cave. but the heaven were 
spangle with twinkling eyes, that beam upon me very friendly wise. 
i had lost all desire to repose, but i had found a craving for a pipe. 
i took out my old briar-wood, therefore, charged it to the brim and 
struck a match. "my god!" i gasp and scramble afoot. the tall arab 
who had terrify miss ottley in the cave temple at rakh stood about 
three pace off intent regarding me. i struck a second match before 
the first had burn out, then felt for my revolver. 

"tell me what it is you want," i cry in arabic, "and quickly, or i 
fire." 

he did not speak, but very slow he move towards me. i raise the 
pistol. "stop," i said. he did not stop. "then have it!" i cried, and 
pull the trigger. 

he did not flinch from the blistering flash of the discharge. it 
seem to me that it should have sear his face and that the bullet 
should have split his skull. i had a momentary glimpse of a ghastly, 
brownish-yellow visage and of two dull widely separate eyes peer 
into mine. then all was dark again and i was struggle as never i had 
struggle in my life before. long, stiff finger clutch my throat. 
a rigid wood-like form was pressed against my own and my nostril 
were fill with a sickly penetrating odour which i all too sharp 
recognised. it was the perfume that had issue from the sarcophagus of 
ptahme when i drove my chisel through the lead. at first i grasp 
nothing but air. but clutch wildly at the things that grip my 
throat, i caught hand at last compose of bone. there was no flesh 
on them, or so it seem to me. yet it was good to grip something. 
it gave me heart. i had a horrible feeling for some awful seconds of 
contend with the supernatural. but those hand were hard and firm. 
they compress my windpipe. back and fro we writhed. i heard nothing 
but my own hard breathing. i was being slow strangled. it was very 
hard to drag those hand apart. but i am strong, strong than many men 
who earn their living by exhibit to the vulgar feat of strength. 
impel by fear of death, i exert my reserve of force, and driving 
will and muscle into one supreme united effort i tore the death grip 
from my neck and flung the arab off. utter a sob howl of relief 
and rage, i follow him and caught him by the middle. then stoop 
low, i heave him high and dashed him to the ground. there came a sound 
of snap wood or bones, but neither sigh nor cry of any sort. "we'll 
see," i growled, and struck a match. the sand before me was dinted, 
but deserted. the arab had vanished. my senses rock in horrify 
astonishment. my flesh crept. a cold chill of vague unreasoning terror 
caught me. i listened, all my nerves taut strained, peer wildly 
round into the dark. but the silence was unbroken. nothing was to be 
heard, nothing was to be seen. were it not for the dint sand and the 
mark of feet other than my own where we had step and struggled, i 
could have come to the conclusion i had dreamed. after a while spent 
in soothe panic fears, i sneak off to my baggage and extract 
from the pile a candle lamp. this i light and, returning, search 
the sands on hand and knees. the stranger's footprint were long 
than my own and they were toe-marked. plainly, then, he had stolen on 
me naked-footed. look wide around the dint made by his fall body 
i came presently upon some more of them. they were each a yard apart, 
and led towards the hill of rakh. yet only for a little while. soon 
they grew faint and fainter. finally they disappeared. torture by 
the mystery of it all, i halt where the footprint vanish and, 
putt out the lamp, squat on the ground to wait for dawn. it came 
an hour later, but it told me nothing fresh. indeed, it only render 
the riddle more intolerable maddening. where had my arab gone? and how 
had he come? for there was not a single footprint leading to the camp. 
of course he might have thrown a cloak before him on which to walk; 
and thus he might have progress and left no trace. but wherefore 
such extraordinary caution? and why should he be so anxious to conceal 
himself? it was hard to give up the riddle, but easy to abandon 
than to solve it. calling philosophy to my aid and imagination, i 
determined that my arab was some mad hermit upon whose solitude ottley 
had intrude in the first instance, and i in the second. and that he 
had conceive a particular animosity for some unknown reason against 
my humble self and wish to kill me. without a doubt, he had some 
secret hiding-place and fear lest i should seek to discover it. 
perhaps he had found some treasure of which he had constitute himself 
the jealous guardian. i felt sure, at any rate, that he was mad. his 
action had always been so peculiar and his speechless so baffling 
and astonish and crass unreasonable. but he or someone had kill 
my donkey. i found the poor beast lie in a hollow, dead as cæsar. a 
knife had been employed, a long, sharp-pointed knife--perhaps a sword. 
it had search out the creature's heart and pierce it. i made a hasty 
autopsy in order to be sure. the circumstance was most exasperating. it 
condemn me to the task of being my own beast of burthen. and the load 
was not a light one. i made, however, the best of a bad job, and have 
fortify myself with a good breakfast, i start off laden like a 
pack-horse for the hill of rakh. have cover four miles, i stopped. 
miss ottley and captain frankfort weldon had sudden come into view. 
they were mounted. i sat down on my baggage, light a cigarette and 
waited. common elementary christian charity would compel them to offer 
me a lift. it was a good thought. it is not right that a man should 
work like a beast. and, besides, it was cheering to see miss ottley 
again. she came up look rather care-worn and a good deal surprised. 
i arose and doff my hat like a courtier. captain weldon touched his 
helmet with his whip by way of salute. he might have just step out 
of a bandbox. i felt he did not like me. the girl look at me with 
level brows. 

"sir robert well and strong again?" i asked. 

"quite," said miss ottley. 

"we were on our way to pay you a visit," observe the captain. 

"sir robert wants me," i hazarded. 

miss ottley shrug her shoulders. "does he?" she asked, then add 
with a tinge of irony, "you seem content to be one of those who are 
always neglect until a need arise for their services. do it appear 
impossible that we might have contemplate a friendly call?" 

"i have no parlour tricks," i explained. 

her lip curled. "you need not tell me. you left without trouble to 
bid me as much as a good-day. how long ago? three weeks. why?" her tone 
was really imperious. 

"but i left a benediction on the doorstep," i responded. "you look 
cross and i was in a hurry." 

her eyes blazed; they were beautiful to see. "where are you going?" she 
demanded. 

"to call on your father." 

"you have a load," observe the captain. 

"a mere nothing." 

"is not that a tent?" 

"i am shift camp." 

"that nigger chap--yazouk--came along last evening. but he vanish 
during the night. we fancy something might have happened." 

"oh, yazouk. he broke a cup and fear i would turn him into a hyena, 
so he ran away." 

"what!" shout the captain. 

"a superstitious creature," i shrugged. 

the captain shook with laughter. "we wonder how you had tame him," 
he chuckle presently--"after the bout. 'pon honour, you serve him 
very prettily. straight from the shoulder and savate, too. the dragoman 
declare you have the evil eye." 

"have you lost your donkey, dr. pinsent?" demand miss ottley. 

"he expire sudden last evening." 

captain weldon frown and sat up very straight in his saddle. 

"eh?" he said and look a question. 

"i had an arab visitor. my visitor or another kill my donkey with a 
knife. i should like to have caught him in the act." 

"my dream," said miss ottley, and caught her breath. 

"by jove," said the captain, "it is really wonderful--but wait--you had 
a visitor, doctor?" 

"i believe it." 

"did he offer to attack you?" 

"the spirit of the cavern!" cry the girl. 

"a lunatic of an arab," i retorted, "and so little of a spirit that i 
had hard work to prevent him throttle me." 

"but the face. did you see the face?" 

"our friend of the cavern," i admitted. 

miss ottley glance at the captain, then back at me. she was as white 
as a lily. 

"i knew it," she said. "i saw him kill the donkey and steal upon 
you--in a dream. his hand were bloody--and, look, there is blood still 
on your throat." 

"my cask was empty, so perforce i could not wash," i murmured. the 
captain look thunderstruck. "it's the most wonderful thing," he kept 
repeating, "the most wonderful thing in the world." 

"and i never thought of look in the mirror. it was packed up," i 
went on. i took out a rather grimy kerchief and began to rub at my neck. 

"has that wretched arab--worried you at all--since i left, miss ottley?" 

"i have seen him twice--and once more" (she shuddered) "in my dream." 

"and where did you see him out of dreams?" 

"once in the cavern and once in my father's tent. each time at night. 
each time he vanish like a shadow." 

"did anyone else see him?" 

"my father and captain weldon." 

"the most hideous brute i ever saw," comment the captain; "you could 
put a good-sized head between his eyes. and such eyes. dull as mud, but 
horrible intelligent." 

"well, well," said i. "we'll know more about him some day soon, 
perhaps, that is, if we stay long enough at the hill of rakh. he has a 
hiding thereabouts--without a doubt. your father is pine to open the 
tomb of ptahmes, i suppose, miss ottley?" 

"he has open it," she answered. 

"oh!" i exclaimed--and stop dead in the act of name sir robert a 
thankless perjurer. 

the girl was look at me hard. "you are surprised?" 

"curious," i growled. it was hard to say, for i was furious. 

"i cannot enlighten your curiosity," she said. 

"no?" 

"he permit no one to be present to assist him. it took place the day 
before yesterday in the cave temple. and the tomb is now closed again." 

"you are then unaware what is discovered?" 

"perfectly." 

"and sir robert?" 

"you will find my father greatly changed, dr. pinsent." 

"indeed." 

"he seem to be quite strong, but he has age notably, and he will 
hardly condescend to converse with anyone, even me. moreover, the 
subject of ptahme is tabooed. the very name enrage him. dr. 
belleville has forbidden it to be mention in his hearing." 

"humph!" said i. "if my donkey were alive i should go to kwansu 
straight. but as it is i shall have to trespass for a stretch on your 
preserve at rakh. i hate it, too, for your father has broken faith 
with me." 

"ah!" cry the girl. "he promise that you should help him open the 
tomb." 

"exactly." 

"you must not be hard on him. i believe that he is not quite himself." 

"oh! i am accustomed to that sort of treatment from the ottleys," i 
replied. 

it was brutal beyond question, but i was past reckoning on nicety 
with rage. captain weldon turn scarlet and raise his whip. "dr. 
pinsent," he cried, "you forget yourself. for two pins----" then he 
stopped--having met my eyes. i laugh in his face. "why not?" i 
query jibingly. "it would be not only chivalrous--a lady look 
on--but safe. have you ever seen a st. bernard hurt a spaniel?" 

he went deathly and slash me with his whip. poor boy. i never blame 
him. i'd have done the same myself. as for me, the blow descended and 
cool my beastly temper, which was an unmitigated blessing. i took 
his whip away and gave it back to him. then i laugh out, tickle at 
the humour of the situation, though it only told against myself. "i 
had intended accept your offer of your mule for my belongings," i 
chuckled. "you haven't offer him, but that's a detail. and now i 
can't." i shook with laughter. 

weldon leap on instant to the ground. "do, do!" he almost groaned. 

he was a generous youngster. "and forgive me!" he said. "if you can--it 
was a coward blow." 

"gladly i'll forgive you," i replied, and we clasp hands. 

"i'll help you load the beast," said he. 

but i put my foot on my baggage. "that mule," i said, "belongs to sir 
robert ottley. i'll not risk the break of his back." 

we look at one another and i saw the captain understood me. he turn 
rather sheepish away, but did not mount immediately. 

miss ottley was gaze over the desert. "you must know you are behave 
like a child," she cutting remarked. 

i shook my head at the captain. "that means you are keeping a lady 
waiting," i observed. 

he smile wry in spite of himself. "scottish, are you not?" he asked. 

"from aberdeen." 

he climb on the mule's back. "i'm thinking dr. pinsent would like to 
be alone," he said. 

miss ottley nod and they rode off together. i picked up my swag and 
trudge after them. it was dry work. about twenty minutes later miss 
ottley rode back alone. she did not beat about the bush at all. 

"i want you to put your things on my donkey," she said; and slip 
afoot, she stood in my path. 

"not to-day," said i. 

"but i'm in trouble, i need your help," she muttered. 

"with such a cavalier as frankfort weldon?" i inquired. 

she coloured. 

"and dr. belleville. old friends both, i am led to fancy." 

she bit her lips. 

"and both of them in love with you," i went on bluntly. 

"dr. pinsent," said miss ottley, "it is my opinion that my father is 
not quite right in his mind." 

"dr. belleville is a f. r. c. s.," said i. 

"i am afraid of him--my own father," she said, in a tragic tone. "i 
have a feeling that he hate me, that he wants to--to destroy me." 

"captain weldon would lay down his life for you, i think," said i. 

she put a hand on my breast and look me straight in the eye. "i could 
not tell this to dr. belleville, nor to the other," she half whispered. 

i thrill all over. "all right," i said, cheerily. "just stand aside 
till i load your little beastie, will you?" 

her whole face light up. "ah! i knew you would not desert me," she 
said. 

but we did not speak again all the way to the hill of rakh. we were too 
busy thinking; the two of us. when we arrive she flit off, still 
silent. captain weldon came to me. "i want you to share my tent," said 
he. "i have a tub for you in waiting, and some fresh linen laid out, if 
you'll honour me by wearing it." 

"you are a brick," i replied, and took his arm. but at the door of 
the biggest tent in the whole camp to which he brought me i pause in 
wonder. it was a sort of lady's bower within. the floor was laid with 
rugs, and the slope canvas wall were hung with silken frills; and 
women's photograph litter the fold-up dressing-table. they were all 
of the same face, though, those latter; the face of miss ottley. 

"sybarite!" i cried. 

he winced, then square his shoulders. "well--perhaps so," he said with 
a smile. 

"but your gallery has only one goddess," i commented, point to a 
picture. 

he gave a shame-faced little laugh. "you see, doctor, i have the 
happiness to be engaged to marry miss ottley," he explained. then he 
left me to my tub. 




chapter viii 

ottley show his hand 


the captain's linen he had laid out for my use on his damask-covered 
cot was compose of the very finest silk. even the sock were silk. i 
was positively ashamed to draw my stain and work-worn outer garment 
over them; and i thought, with a sigh, of my two decent suit of tweed 
lying, like the dutchman's anchor, far away--in a cairo lodging-house, 
to be precise. i shave with the captain's razor and wonder why i did 
not in the least mind rest indebted to his courtesy. the removal of 
my beard laid bare the weal the captain's whip had raised. perhaps that 
was the reason. he came in just as i had finished and he saw the weal 
on instant. "i wish to the lord you'd just blacken one of my eyes," he 
said remorsefully. "the sight of that make me feel an out-and-out cad. 
not ten minutes before it happen miss ottley had been telling me the 
angel of goodness you had been to her." 

i sat down on the edge of the cot and grinned. "it give me quite a 
distinguished appearance," i replied, "and, say, didn't it give me back 
my temper nicely, too." 

"little wonder you were wild," said he. "but why didn't you break me up 
while you were about it? you could have, easily enough. lord! how big 
and strong you are." 

"and ugly," i supplemented. 

he flushed all over his face. "you make me feel a silly girl-man by 
comparison," he cried. "a man ought to be ugly and strong-looking like 
you. i'd give half my fortune to possess that jaw." 

"what a boy it is!" i said delightedly, for i was proud of my jaw, and 
i love flattery. 

"i'm have a cot made now; it will be put over there for you. you'll 
share my diggings, won't you? i want us to be friends," beam the 
captain. 

there was something so ingenuous and charming in his frank that i 
assent at once. 

"it's funny," he said afterwards. "but i detest you at first. have 
a cigar. this box of cabana is for you. they're prime. i've more 
in my kit when they are finished. lie down and rest while you smoke 
one, won't you? lunch won't be ready for an hour yet, and you must be 
fagged." 

i wasn't a bit, but i lay back and puffed a mouthful of delicious smoke 
with a long-drawn sigh of luxury. 

"you needn't talk. miss ottley say you don't like talking," said 
the captain. he lit a cigar and sat down on his kit box. "i'm a real 
gabbler, though," he confessed. "do you mind?" 

"no, fire away, sonny!" 

he fired. it was all about himself and miss ottley: how they had been 
brought up together, predestine sweethearts: how they had quarrel 
and made up and quarrel again: how really and truly in their heart 
they adore each other: and how--if it had not been for the girl's 
intense devotion for her father, they would have been married long 
ago. he characterise sir robert as an extremely selfish man, who, 
ever since his wife's death, had use his daughter as a servant and 
secretary because he could get no other to serve him as well and 
intelligently. "but he doesn't really care for her a straw," conclude 
the captain. "and he would sacrifice her without remorse to his beastly 
mummy hobby for ever if i'd let him. but i won't. i'm go to put my 
foot down presently. i've wait long enough. he has done nothing but 
drag her all over europe translate papyri for him for the last six 
years. and she has work for him like a slave. it's high time she had 
a little peace and happiness." 

"translating papyri," i repeated. "a scholar, then?" 

"between ourselves," reply the captain, "sir robert's fame as 
a scholar and an egyptologist rest entire upon his daughter's 
labours. without her he would be unknown. she did all the real work. he 
reap the credit. she is three times the scholar he is, and i know a 
frenchman who regards her knowledge of cuneiform as simply marvellous. 
he is a professor of ancient languages, too, at the sorbonne, so he 
ought to know." 

"queer she never mention a word of it to me," said i. 

"oh!" cry the captain, "she is the modestest, sweetest creature 
in the universe. i sometimes think she is positively ashamed of her 
extraordinary ability. whenever i speak of it she apologises--and say 
she only learned the things she know to be a help to her dear old 
father. dear old father, indeed! the selfish old swine ought to be 
suppressed. he loathe me because he fear i'll persuade her to leave 
him. if she wasn't so useful she could go to the deuce for all he'd 
care. but it's got to end soon or i'll know the reason why. don't you 
think i'm right? we've been engaged now seven years." 

"i consider you a model of patience," i replied. 

"besides," said the captain, start off on a new tack, "the old man 
is positively uncanny. it's my belief he has an underhanded motive in 
his love for mummies, especially for his latest find, this ptahmes. 
he's a spook-hunter, you know--and he told me one day in an unguarded 
moment that he expect to live a thousand years." 

"what's a spook-hunter, captain?" 

"oh! i mean a spiritualist. he has a medium chap, he keeps in london--a 
rascally beggar who bleed thousand a year out of him. they have 
séances. the medium scamp pretend to go into a trance and tell him 
all sort of rubbish about the nile kings and prophets and wizard 
and magician and the elixir of life. it is dashed unpleasant for me, 
i can tell you. there's always some wild yarn go round the clubs. 
and as i'm known to be ottley's prospective son-in-law, i have the 
life chaff out of me in consequence. the latest was that the medium 
chap--oscar neitenstein is his name--put ottley in the way of finding 
an old theban prophet's tomb--this very ptahmes, don't you know. and 
though he has been underground 4000 years, neitenstein has fool 
ottley into expect to find the prophet still alive. it's too idiot 
to speak seriously about, of course; but on my honour the yarn drove me 
out of england. it got into the comic papers. ugh! you know what that 
means. but i'm not sorry in one way. so i've come here to have it out 
with ottley. and i'm go to--by gad." 

"you haven't spoken to him yet?" 

"i have, but he treat me like a kid. told me to run away and play and 
allow serious people to work. i storm a bit, but it was no use. it 
made him so angry that he nearly took a fit--and i had to leave. since 
then he has been shut up with his infernal mummy, in that cave temple 
over there--and he won't even let his daughter go within yard of the 
door. that's curious, isn't it?" 

"very." 

"and there's that business about the mysterious arab," went on the 
captain. "the ugly horror that try to throttle you and has been 
frighten miss ottley. she think it's a ghost. but i reckon not." 

"ah!" 

"i reckon sir robert know all about that arab, though he pretend he 
do not know. in my opinion it's another of those spook medium of 
his, and he is keeping the ugly beast hidden away somewhere. probably 
the fellow is some awful criminal who has got to hide. sir robert would 
shelter hill or even that australia wife-murderer deem if he said 
he was a medium." 

"you extend my mental horizon," i remarked. "the arab mystery is 
clearing up." 

the captain simply beamed. "so glad you catch on," he said. "do you 
know, i am depend heap upon you in this business." 

"how?" 

the monosyllable disconcert the captain. he stutter and haw for 
a while. but, finally, he blurt out, "well, you see, she won't leave 
her father under existing circumstances on any account, that's the 
trouble. but i'm hope if we can convince the old man he is being 
fool by a pack of scoundrel he will return to his sober senses and 
live sensibly, and then----" he paused. 

"and then--wedding bells," i suggested. 

"exactly," reply the captain. "and see here, i have a plan." 

"ah!" 

"it's to lay for that arab, as a first step--and catch the brute." 

"and what then?" 

the captain look rather foolish. "well," he said, "well--oh!--we'd 
be guide by circumstances then, of course. we might induce him to 
confess--don't you think?" 

i could not help laughing. "if you want to know what i think," i said, 
"it is, that you are in the position of a man who know what he wants 
but do not in the least understand how to get it. still count on my 
help. if we can lay the arab by the heel we shall not harm anyone 
deserving of consideration, and we will put miss ottley's mind at rest, 
at all events; i hate to think that she is worried by the rascal. what 
do you propose?" 

"i thought of hiding by the temple to-night. i pass it late last 
evening, and though sir robert was ostensible alone, i could swear i 
heard voices. what do you say?" 

"certainly." 

"shake," said the captain. we shook. "now let's go to lunch," said he. 
we went. 

"that's belleville's shanty," observe the captain, point to a 
neighbouring tent. "i don't like the fellow, do you?" 

"i don't know him." 

"he's a spook-hunter like sir robert." 

"ah!" 

"the beggar is in love with miss ottley." 

"oh!" 

"he had the impudence to tell her to her face one day that she would 
never marry me. he declared that it was written--by spooks, i suppose. 
one of these days i'll have to break his head for him. but he is not a 
man you can easily quarrel with. you simply can't insult him. he come 
up smile every time." 

"an unpleasant person." 

"a bounder," said the captain with intense conviction. "lord, how hot 
it is!" 

we enter the eat tent as he spoke. the table was already laid. dr. 
belleville stood near the head of it talk to miss ottley. a couple 
of soudanese flit about affecting to be busy, but effect very 
little. at sight of me both shudder back against the canvas and stood 
transfixed. one held a spoon, the other a plate. they look extremely 
absurd. i told them in arabic that only the dishonest had occasion to 
fear the evil eye, and took a seat. instantly both rush to serve me. 
my companions, not possess the evil eye, were forced to wait. miss 
ottley became satirical, but i was hungry and her shaft glance off 
the armour of my appetite. when i had finished my first helping of 
currie she sat down. "there's no use wait for father," she sighed. 
"i shall take his lunch to him by-and-by." 

dr. belleville echo the sigh. "my dear young lady," said he, "permit 
me now," and he vanish a minute later carry a tray. 

"you see," said the captain, sotto voce, to me. 

"more currie," i said, addressing, not the captain, but the tent. 
immediately one of the soudanese slip and sprawl on the floor in 
his eager to serve. the other leap over his fellow's prostrate 
body and whisk away my plate. he return it loaded in about five 
seconds. miss ottley broke into a half-hysterical laugh. it kept up so 
long that at last i look at her in surprise. she had a knife and fork 
before her, but nothing else; also the captain. "what is the matter?" i 
demanded. 

"look," she gurgled. following her finger i turn and saw both 
soudanese standing like statue behind me. "wretches," i cried, "have 
you nothing else to do?" 

they utter a joint howl of terror and flee from the tent. but the 
joke had staled. i took after them hot foot, caught them and drove them 
back to work, to find that my companion in the meanwhile had help 
themselves. dr. belleville, however, enter a moment later, and at a 
nod from me the tremble soudanese became his abject slaves. 

dr. belleville had something to say. "the negro are frightened of 
you," he began. 

"they fancy i have the evil eye." 

"humph!" cry the doctor. "talk german--they understand english. it's 
not that." 

"what then?" 

"sir robert ottley sent one of them to you--with a message--last night. 
he return this morning with three rib broken. he is lie in the 
hospital tent now--in a high fever." 

"a tall, thin man--the eyes set far apart in the skull?" i asked. 

dr. belleville shook his head. "no. short, thick-set, snub-featured, 
but a giant in strength." 

"how did he explain his accident?" 

"that unwitting he anger you." 

"the man is a liar," i declared indignantly. "i had a set-to with 
a skulk rogue last night. that is true enough. but the fellow i 
encounter and threw was tall than myself." 

the doctor shrug his shoulders. "it was a dark night, i believe." 
then a minute later--"ottley is much annoyed. this meeraschi was an 
excellent subject. ottley was experiment with him." 

"how?" 

"hypnotically." 

i glance at the others, but they were talk apart. 

"ottley sent me a message?" i asked, return to the doctor. 

"yes," reply belleville between mouthfuls. he was gulp down his 
lunch like a wolf in a hurry. "he wants you," he went on. 

"needless to say i received no message." 

"needless?" repeated belleville. "and you here?" 

the tone was so insult that i arose and walk quiet out of the 
tent. the sun was blazing hot. i thought of the cool cave temple and 
wander towards it. why not see sir robert at once? why not, indeed. 
two black sentinel guarded the middle pylon, skulk in the shadow of 
a column. when i approach they stood bolt upright. they were armed 
with rifles. they barred the way. 

"ottley!" i shouted. "ottley!" and once again "ottley!" 

at the third the little baronet's face appear in the stone doorway. 

"oh! pinsent," he said, and stare at me. i read doubt in his glance, 
some fear and anger and uneasiness. but there was much else i could not 
read. his skin was as yellow as old parchment, and he did not look a 
well man by any means. 

"it is roasting--here," i observed. 

he swallow audibly, as a woman do recover from tears. "ah, 
well," he said. "come in--here." 

the black vastly relieved, it appeared, lower their arms and gave me 
passage. sir robert, however, still block the door. i traverse the 
pylon and stood before him. "we can talk here," said he. 

but i had no mind to be treat like that. i look him in the face 
and talk to him like this: "i am not welcome. i can see it. but it 
matter nothing to me. i have rights. i gave you back your life. you 
made me a promise. you broke your promise. that relieve me of any need 
to be conventional. i am curious. i intend to satisfy my curiosity. 
invite me into the cavern and show me what you have there to be seen. 
or i shall put you aside and help myself. i can do so. your black do 
not frighten me, armed or unarmed. as for you, pouf! now choose!" 

"dr. pinsent," said sir robert. (he was shake like an aspen.) "in 
about ten minutes my dragoman is setting out for cairo. if you will 
be good enough to bear him company he will hand you at the end of the 
journey my cheque for a thousand pounds." 

"i ought to have told you," i murmured, "that it is a point of honour 
with me to keep my word." 

"two thousand," said sir robert. 

"at all costs," said i. 

"five thousand!" he cried. 

"you rich little cad!" i growled, and look into the muzzle of a 
revolver. 

sir robert's eyes, seen across the sights, glitter like a maniac's. 
"go away!" he whispered. "go--or----" 

i thought of an old, old policeman trick and assume an expression of 
sudden horror. "take care," i cried. "look out--he will get you." 

the baronet swung around, gasp and ghastly. in a second i had him by 
the wrist. 

"what was it?" he almost shrieked. 

"a policeman's trick," i answer coldly, and disarm him. 

"curse you! curse you!" he howled, and double his fists, he rush 
at me, calling on his black the while. the latter gave me momentary 
trouble. but it was soon over. i prop them up like lay figures 
against the columns, facing each other, afterwards, and extract the 
charge from their guns. look over the sand, i saw miss ottley 
and dr. belleville and the captain walking under umbrella towards 
the tanks. i felt glad not to have disturbed them. sir robert had 
disappear within the cavern. i follow him. he had put on a large 
masque which entire cover his face, and he was fumble with 
the screw stopper of a huge glass jar at the farthest corner of the 
cavern. the sarcophagus had been overturned. it now rest in the 
centre of the cavern, bottom upwards. and on the flat, leaden surface 
of the bottom was stretch out, stiff and stark, the naked body of a 
tall, brown-skinned man. the body glisten as if it had been rub 
with oil. it was almost fleshless, but sinew and tendon stood out 
everywhere like tighten cords. one might almost have taken it for a 
mummy. it had, however, an appearance of life--or rather, of suspend 
animation, for it did not move. i wonder and step close to 
examine it. i look at the face, and recognise the arab who had 
attack me on the previous night, the arab who had frightened miss 
ottley and myself more than once. his mouth was tight shut; his eyes 
were, however, open slightly. he did not seem to breathe. i put my 
finger on his cheek, and pressed. the flesh did not yield. i ran 
my eyes down his frame and utter a cry. three of his rib were 
broken. then i felt his pulse; it was still. the wrist was as rigid as 
steel--the arm, too--nay, the whole man. "he is dead," i exclaim at 
last, and look at sir robert. the little baronet was re-stoppering 
the glass jar, but he held a glass in one hand half fill with some 
sort of liquid. presently he approach me--but most marvellous 
slowly. 

[illustration: the living mummy 

i felt his pulse 

_face page 88_] 

"this man is dead," i said to him. "he attack me last night. i threw 
him and perhaps broke his ribs. but i did not kill him, for he fled. 
how come it he is dead?" 

sir robert, for answer, threw at my feet the contents of the jar. then 
i understood why he wore the masque. the cavern was fill with the 
fumes of the deadly perfume of the sarcophagus on instant. one sniff 
and my senses were rocking. i held my breath, but in spite of that the 
cavern swung round me with vertiginous rapidity. 

it seem best to retire. i did so, but how i hardly know. somehow 
or another i reach the pylon, pass the black and step upon 
the sand. about fifty pace off i saw a beautiful grove of palm tree 
sudden spring up out of the desert. such magic was most astonishing. 
i said to myself, "they cannot be real, of course. i am merely 
imagine them." but their shade was so delicious inviting that i 
simply had to accept its challenge. i enter the grove and sat down 
beside a little purl stream of crystal water. it was very pleasant 
to dip my hand in it. presently a lovely naiad rose up out of the 
pool, seize my hand and pressed them to her lips. that was pleasant, 
too. then she came and sat quite near me on the bank of the rill and 
drew my head upon her lap and stroke cool finger through my hair, 
croon a tender love song all the while. that was pleasantest of all. 
but her croon made me drowsy. like the lorelei's song, it charm 
away my senses, and i slept. 




chapter ix 

a cool defiance 


of course, i had swooned, and equally, of course, not on the bank of a 
rivulet and under the cool shade of palm trees, but in the full blaze 
of the mid-day sun and on the smooth, unprotected burning surface of 
the desert. it was the accursed sarcophagus perfume that had work the 
mischief. fortunately miss ottley saw me fall; otherwise i might have 
had a sunstroke. belleville and the captain carry me between them to 
the shade of one of the pylons, and belleville open a vein in my left 
arm--a proceeding i am prevent from comment on by consideration 
of professional etiquette. happily, i recover consciousness in time 
to save a little of my precious blood. i told belleville my opinion of 
him in one comprehensive scowl, which he interpret correctly, i am 
glad to say, and then got up. i bandage my arm myself and made off for 
the captain's tent. that gentleman follow me. there arrived, i cast 
myself upon the cot and swore at ease. weldon listen in spellbound 
admiration. he afterwards assured me that he had never before 
encounter such proficient fluency in objurgation and invective. i 
was madder than a hatter, and the more because i was as weak as a cat, 
and i want to be strong, with all my soul. yet, five days pass 
before i felt well enough to be able to attack the task in front of me. 
meanwhile, i told the captain very little and miss ottley nothing. how 
could i let her know i knew her father to be a confounded old rascal? 
she was very good. she visit me every day and spent hour reading 
aloud by my bedside, while the captain and i watch her face and 
thought much the same thoughts; though i took care, for my own part, 
not to let my features reflect the fatuous devotion of the captain's. 
on the sixth morning i found i could lift that young man shoulder-high 
with one hand without wanting to sit down and pant afterwards, so i got 
up. it was just after daylight. the captain want to accompany me, but 
i thought differently. he was annoyed, but i let him watch me from the 
tent flap. i found sir robert talk to dr. belleville at the door of 
the cave temple. his greeting was quite affectionate. "so glad you are 
better again, my dear young friend," he said, and he warm invite me 
into the chamber. it was almost empty. the jar of perfume had gone; the 
sarcophagus had disappeared. it contained only a table and a cot. "sit 
down," said sir robert. 

"where is the sarcophagus?" i demanded. 

the old rascal grinned. "i had it quiet transfer last night on a 
truck to a punt," he replied, "while you were enjoy your beauty 
sleep. dr. belleville and i have not been to bed at all. it is now on 
the road to cairo--and england." 

i sat down on the cot. "and the dead arab?" i questioned. 

dr. belleville choke back a laugh. sir robert smiled. 

"the dead arab you saw was the mortal casket of ptahmes," said he. 
"i am not surprise at your mistake. the body is in a perfect state 
of preservation. it is not a mummy in any sense of the expression. i 
regret very much that your sudden indisposition prevent you from 
examine it close and me from explain the circumstances of its 
preservation and discovery on the spot. however, i can tell you this 
much now. we found it steep in an essential oil which an hermetic 
process had defend from evaporation. the oil began to evaporate 
immediately it was expose to the air: but i contrived to save a 
certain quantity with which, later, i purpose to experiment in london. 
the egypt authority have been very good to me. they have given 
me all necessary powers to deal with my discovery as i please. i tell 
you this lest professional jealousy should lead you to attempt any 
interference with my actions." 

"in plain words, sir robert, you wish me to understand that your 
discovery is for you and not for the world." 

"hardly that, my dear pinsent. merely that i propose to choose my 
own time for taking the world into my confidence--and that of dr. 
belleville," he added, bowing to his friend. 

"an unusual course for a professed scientist to adopt." 

"i have very little sympathy with conventionality," coo sir robert. 

"and i," said belleville. 

"the point of view of two burglars," i observed. i scowl at 
belleville. 

"you shall be as rude as you please. you save my life," said sir 
robert. 

dr. belleville clear his throat. "ahem--ahem," said he, "the 
discourtesy of the disappointed is--ahem--is a tribute to the merit of 
the more successful." 

in my rage i descended to abuse. "you are a nasty old swindler," i said 
to sir robert, "but your grey hair protect you for the present. but, 
as for you, sir," i turn to belleville, "you black bull-dog--if you 
dare so much as to open your lip to me again, i'll wring your flabby 
nose off." 

the baronet turn scarlet; the doctor went livid; but neither of them 
said a word. 

i strode to the door intend to quit, but there rage master me 
again. i swung on heel and once more face them. "one word more," 
i grate out; "you're not done with me yet, either of you. i'm a 
peaceful man by nature, but no man tread on my toe with impunity. 
spiritualist or spirit-summoners you are, i hear. weldon call you 
spook-hunters--a very proper term. you'll need all the money you 
possess between you and all the spirits' help you'll buy from your 
rascal spirit-rappers to keep me from your trail. look for the 
elixir of life, i'm told. it will go hard if i don't help you find it. 
the elixir of public ridicule, that i'll turn upon you, will hand your 
name down to posterity. i'll help you to that much immortality, at 
least, and gratis, too. good-day to you!" 

"dr. pinsent!" shout ottley. 

i pause and glance at him across my shoulder. he gaze at me with 
eyes that simply blazed. 

"be warned," he hissed, "if you value your life, let me and mine alone. 
i'll send a cheque to your tent to-day; keep it, call quits, and i'm 
done with you. i owe you that consideration, but no more." 

"and suppose, on the other hand----" 

"cross me and you shall see. you sleep sometimes, i suppose. my 
emissary will not always find you wakeful. he never sleeps." 

"your rascal arab!" i shouted. 

"pah!" he cried. 

"murderer, it was to you i owe that rough and tumble a week ago at my 
own camp in the desert." 

"to me," he mumbled. "to me. whom else? my agent are spirits and 
invisible. they do not love you for despise them. they have torture 
in reserve for you when you are dead and you, too, are a spirit. but i 
would be merciful--i shall send you a cheque. return it at your peril. 
now go, go, go." 

on a sudden i was cold as ice. the man was evidently insane. he seem 
on the brink of a fit. he was froth at the mouth. 

"softly, softly, sir robert," i said soothingly. "no need for 
excitement. calm yourself; after all this is a business transaction." 

"oh!" he gasped, then broke into a wild laugh. "a mere matter of price. 
i should have known it; a scotchman!" 

"exactly," said i. "and my price is a million. good-morning." 

the whole camp was astir. the negroes' tent were all down and rolled. 
the mule and ass were being loaded heavily. evidently sir robert 
was about to flit after the corpse of ptahmes. i found miss ottley and 
the captain talk over the apparent move. the girl was agitated. she 
had not been consulted. it was not a time to mince matters. i told her 
frankly everything that had pass between her father and myself, and 
hardly had i finished, when she rush off hot foot to visit him. the 
captain went with her. i made a passable good breakfast. 




chapter x 

the capture of the coffin 


about noon--i saw no one but black in the meanwhile--the captain came 
with a letter. "from sir robert--catch!" said he. i tore it open. a 
single sheet of note enclose a cheque sign in blank. "dear dr. 
pinsent," ran the letter. "you will find that my signature will be 
honour for any sum it may please you to put upon my life in your 
esteem. permit me to express a hope that you will not hurt my vanity in 
your selection of numerals. 

"sincerely yours, robert ottley." 

i hand the note to weldon. he read it and whistle loud and long. 

"you might beggar him!" he cried. "the man is stark mad." 

"either that or he has made a truly wonderful discovery," i rejoined. 
"and there is belleville to consider. that man, i fancy, is a 
rascal--but also a sane one." 

"it has me beat," said the handsome captain. "the whole thing from 
start to finish. ottley is up there now spoon his daughter like 
a lover. he was as sweet as pie to me, too. i feel like a stranded 
jelly-fish. what will you do?" 

i enclose the cheque in a blank cover, seal it and gave it to the 
captain. 

"will you be my courier?" 

"of course," said he, and swung off. 

he return at the end of my third cigar, with a second letter. it ran, 
"my dear young friend, your refusal has deep pained me. the more, 
because it deprive me of the pleasure of your company on the road to 
cairo. i beg you, nevertheless, to choose from my stores all that you 
may require that may serve you during your continue sojourn at rakh. 
we start at sunset for the nile and north. 

"ever yours attachedly, 
"r. ottley." 

when the captain had master this precious effusion, he collapse upon 
a stool. "he intend to leave you here alone in the desert. it's--it's 
marooning, nothing less!" he gasped. 

i light a fourth cigar and lay back thinking hard. in ten minutes i 
had made up my mind. i sat up. the captain was anxious watch me. 
"see here, my lad," i said, "in that bundle yonder is the manuscript 
of a book i have been working hard upon for three years and more. it 
is the very heart of me. take good care of it. one of these days--if i 
live--i'll call for it at your diggings in london. i have your address 
in my notebook." 

"oh! oh! oh!" said the captain. "but what's the game?" 

"diamond cut diamond. i'm go a journey. but i'll say no more. mad 
or sane, you are eat ottley's salt, and are beholden to him for his 
paternity of the exceptional gifted young woman you propose to marry. 
good-bye to you." 

i held out my hand. he sprang up and wrung it hard. "you are sure you 
are do right?" he asked. 

i fill my pocket with his cigars. "i am sure of nothing," i replied, 
as i did so, "except this--i have been abominable ill-used by a man who 
under heaven owe his life to me--and this--i resent it." 

i put on my helmet, nod and left the tent. 

the captain cry out, "good luck!" five minutes later i turn and 
wave my hand to him. he was still standing by the tent flap gaze 
after me. i thought to myself, "he is as honest as he is good to look 
upon. he will make may ottley a gallant husband." i am a reasonably 
bad christian, and quite as selfish as many worse, but somehow or 
another the reflection brought no aftermath of bitterness. the 
handsome, happy-hearted boy--he was little else for all his three and 
thirty years--had crept into my heart, and i felt somehow the chamber 
he occupy was next door to that wherein may ottley's visage was 
enshrined. but i had work to do; so i turn the key on both. the sun 
was so hideous hot that i was forced to hasten slowly. but i reach 
the nile under two hours, and found, as i expected, sir robert ottley's 
steam launch moor to the bank. her smoking funnel had been the 
beacon of my march. she was in charge of an old france pilot, a turkey 
engineer, and four levantines, piratical-looking stokers, mongrel all. 
i stalk aboard with an air of paramount authority. the frenchman came 
forward, bowing. he wore a sort of uniform. "steam up, captain?" i 
asked. 

"since morning, monsieur!" he replied. 

"then kindly push off at once. i must overtake the punt that start 
last night without delay." 

his mouth opened. "but monsieur," he protested, "i----" 

"you waste time," i interrupted. 

he rub his hand nervous together. "but monsieur is unknown to me. 
i have my written orders from sare roberrrrt. doubtless monsieur has 
authority. but monsieur vill perrceive----" 

"that you are a punctilious old fool," i retorted. "here is my 
authority!" what i show him was a revolver. he jumped, i vow, two 
feet in the air, and hasty retreated. but i follow more quick 
still, and forced him to the bridge. there he became very voluble, 
however; so much so, indeed, that i was constrained to cock my pistol. 
that settled him. he thunder out his orders and we were soon racing 
at ten knot an hour down stream. when round the nearest bend to 
the hill of rakh the temptation was very strong in me to sound the 
steamer's whistle. but i am proud to say that i refrained. it would 
have been a little-minded thing to do. about midnight, feeling weary, 
i ran the steamer's nose gently into a mud bank, drove the captain 
down to the deck and lock him with the rest of the crew in the 
engine-house. then i forage round for eatables, made a hearty supper 
and snatch about five hours' sleep. when morning came i awoke as 
fresh and strong as a young colt. after bath and breakfast, i release 
my prisoners, made them eat and then push off the bank. we lost an 
hour at that job, but, at length, it was accomplished, and our race 
for the punt recommenced. we overhaul it about four o'clock the same 
afternoon. it was just an ordinary flat-bottomed nile abomination, 
tow by a tiny, panting, puffing-billy, with twenty yard of good 
manilla. twelve arab squat round the sarcophagus. seat on the 
sarcophagus, under a double awning, was a burly-looking englishman. 
he was smoking a pipe, and one look at his face told me exactly why 
he had been entrust with sir robert ottley's priceless treasure. he 
was, as plain as daylight, a gentleman if one ever lived, a brave man, 
too, shrewd and self-reliant and as incorruptible devoted to his duty 
as a bull-dog with a thief's hand between his jaws. i wonder if i 
would get the better of him. as a first step towards that desideratum, 
i assured the france captain that i entertain too much regard for him 
to put him to a lingering death should he disobey me. i had previous 
lock the rest of the crew in the engine-house. then we bore down 
on the punt and i shout for the tug to be stopped. this was done. 
as it lost way, we nose up, go easy until we were alongside the 
punt. then i ordered half speed astern until we, too, were stationary. 
some power of suction or attraction began immediately to draw the two 
craft together. the tug, however, continue to remain, say thirty 
feet off. the englishman ordered out rope fender and ask me what 
the blazes i was doing. i answer that i had come after him from sir 
robert ottley--which was in a sense perfectly true--and that he could 
hardly expect me to shout out urgent private business before listeners, 
which was also a reasonably veracious statement of the facts. the 
englishman--i never learned his name--observed, with some heat, that he 
would not leave his charge for a second for any man living except sir 
robert ottley; and that if i had something to tell him i must go aboard 
the punt. 

i said "very well," and as the craft touched i help myself to the 
punt with a rope. 

"well, what is it?" he demanded, and he eye me most suspiciously, one 
hand in his breast. doubtless he had there a revolver. had he been 
warned? and of me? it is a thing i have still my doubt about. but i 
look him frankly in the eyes and told him the truth to the very best 
of my ability. 

"it has lately come to sir robert ottley's knowledge," i began, "that 
one of his guests--a man name pinsent" (he start at the name) "has 
conceive a bold design of relieve you of this very charge of yours, 
which you are guard with such praiseworthy solicitude." 

"oh!" said the englishman, "and how would he go about it?" the idea 
appear to tickle him. he laughed. 

"he would follow you and attack you," said i. 

the englishman put his hand on his thigh and simply roared. "he would 
have to swim after me," he chuckled. "there is not another launch save 
these two between here and ham!" 

"i am honestly glad to hear it," i replied, and, indeed, i was. 

"it's a mare's nest," declared the englishman. 

"oh!" said i. "this pinsent is a desperate fellow and resourceful. do 
you know, he actually try single-handed to seize that launch." 

"the _swallow_!" cry the englishman. "impossible." 

"on the contrary!" i retorted. "he succeeded. he stand before you. my 
name is pinsent. permit me!" 

he was a trifle slow-witted, i fancy. he still look puzzled, when his 
face emerge above the nile water, after his dive. but i would not let 
him return to the punt. immediately i discover that the arab were 
only armed with knives. i had taken the trouble to throw overboard all 
the firearm that i could find on the _swallow_; so i just drove them 
aboard the launch and ordered the frenchman to sheer off and return to 
rakh. he was charm at the permission. 

the englishman fire at me twice from the water, but he had to keep 
himself afloat, so he naturally missed. when he was well-nigh drown 
i haul him up with a boat hook. it was easy to disarm him in that 
condition. i had intended to put him on the tug, but i wait too long. 
the tug cut the tow rope before my eyes and without so much as by your 
leave puffed after the _swallow_. the englishman and i were thus left 
lonely on the punt; in middle stream. the current was fairly strong at 
that point and making towards a long, low-lying sweep of reedy flats. 
i had no mind to land there, however, so after tie up the englishman 
neck and crop, i contrived to hoist a sail and steer for the opposite 
bank. 

the englishman and i had nothing to say to each other. no doubt he 
recognise the futility of conversation in the circumstances; as for 
me, i never felt less inclined to talk. about five o'clock we ground 
under the lee of a pretty little promontory. it was populate with 
crocodiles. nice companions--at a distance--crocodiles--musky-smelling 
brutes. 




chapter xi 

good-bye to the nile 


the englishman was evidently something of a gourmet. i found foie gras, 
camembert cheese, pressed sheep's tongue and bottle britain ale in 
his private locker. but he was as sullen as a sore-headed grizzly. he 
sour decline to eat even though i offer to free his hands, and he 
strove to make my dinner unpleasant by volunteer pungent information 
on the punishment provided by law for the crime of piracy, robbery 
under arms, burglary, assault and battery, and false imprisonment. 
those, it seems, were the titular head of some of my delinquencies. 
he felt sure that i would get ten years' hard labour, at least. i did 
not argue the point with him. after dinner i examine the sarcophagus. 
the lid was fasten on with crosswise-running band of hinge steel, 
padlock in the centre. but it was, strange to say, wedged at one 
end with iron bolt about an inch ajar, as if on purpose to allow air 
to pass into the coffin. after a little search i discover a toolbox 
in the shallow hold of the punt; and i attack the band with cold 
chisel and a mallet. ten minutes' work sufficed. i toss the broken 
band aside and lever off the lid. my heart beat like a trip-hammer 
as i look into the coffin. i was prepared for a surprise. i received 
one. my arab gaze up at me. the mysterious arab with the three broken 
ribs, who had frightened miss ottley and try to throttle me and 
whom i had last seen lying--a corpse--in the cave temple at rakh. of 
course, sir robert ottley had declared the corpse in the temple to 
be identical with that of ptahmes, the four thousand years dead high 
priest of amen-ra. but that was ridiculous. i had only had time to make 
a cursory examination of the dead arab in the cave temple, it is true, 
but i am a surgeon, and i had convinced myself that the fellow, so 
far from being a mummy, had not been long dead. i had yet to discover 
an essential error in my cave temple investigation. my very first 
impression had been not death, but suspend animation. and i must have 
been right. the later speedy diagnosis had, in sober truth, misle me. 
the man was not dead. it had been a case of suspend animation. the 
arab lie in the sarcophagus before me was alive. his broken rib 
were neat set and bandaged. otherwise he was swathe from head to 
foot in oiled rags. he was lie in an easy position on his back--upon 
a double feather tick. he was breathing soft but unmistakably. and 
he was awake. his extraordinary eyes--they were set fully five inch 
apart in his abnormal broad skull--were wide open and staring at me 
in a way to make the flesh creep. they were horrible eyes. the whites 
were sepia-coloured, the pupil were yellowish, and the iris of each a 
different shade of black fleck with scarlet spots. his cone-shaped 
forehead was moist and glisten with oil or perspiration. his mouth 
was held open by two small rubber-tipped metal bar join together, 
against which his teeth--great brown fangs--pressed with manifest 
spasmodic energy. 

now what was ottley's purpose in taking such extraordinary pains to 
transport a living arab in a dead man's coffin from rakh to cairo, and, 
perhaps, london? 

perhaps the arab could tell me. burning with curiosity, i stoop down 
and took from his mouth the mechanical contrivance which held the 
jaws apart. the arab utter on the instant a deep, raucous sigh. his 
eyeball roll upwards and became fixed. he appear to have fainted. 
i rush away to procure some water. that water was in the hold. 
seize a dipper, i sprang down the steps, hurried to the cask and 
fill it. the whole business occupy only a few seconds. i certainly 
could not have been away from the deck half a minute, but when i 
return the sarcophagus was empty. the arab had disappeared. utterly 
astounded, i gaze about me. had the whole thing been a dream? it 
appear so, but no--i caught sight of a tall, dark figure making off 
hot foot across the promontory. he had leap ashore, a distance of 
twelve feet or more, and was running towards the desert. in a second 
i was after him. i thought of the crocodile while in mid air; but it 
was too late to turn back at that juncture. my feet landed in a patch 
of oozy sand. i scramble out of it and up the slope among the reeds. 
a loud rustle and a stink of musk warn me of a saurian neighbour. i 
gave a mighty leap and clear the reeds. then i ran as i had never run 
before, for my arab was in front, and a hungry monster came hard upon 
my heels. a log lay in my path. it was another crocodile. i clear it 
with a bound and gain the desert. i was hunt for some seconds, i 
believe, but i never look back, so i do not know at what point the 
saurian gave up the chase. the arab was a marvel. he had a lead of one 
hundred yard and he maintain it. he had three broken rib and i was 
as sound as a bell. yet, at the end of twenty minutes not his breath 
but mine gave out. i was forced to pause for a spell. he ran on. his 
lead doubled. setting my teeth, i resume the chase. but i might have 
spare myself the trouble. he gradual grew farther and farther away 
from me. i did my best, but at last i was compel to admit myself 
beaten. the arab's tall form grew less and less distinguishable against 
the stars. finally it melt into the mists of the horizon. i was alone 
on the desert. i sat down to rest and took counsel with myself. i had 
turn pirate and committed, technically, a number of other atrocious 
crime for absolutely nothing. plainly i could not return to the punt. 

first of all, in order to reach it i should have to face the 
crocodiles. and even should i escape their jaws again, what could i 
do on the river? soon or later i should be caught. and i had a very 
strong suspicion that sir robert ottley would not hesitate, once i was 
in his power, to plunge me into an egypt prison. he had evidence 
enough to get me a long term of hard labour, and i felt little doubt 
but that he would go to a lot of trouble for that, and _con amore_ 
after the way that i had serve him. it did not, therefore, take me 
long to resolve to risk the desert rather than rot in an egypt gaol. 
i had spilt a lot of milk. i was foodless, waterless, and gods know 
where. also, i was as thirsty as a lime kiln. but no use crying. what 
to do? that was the question. for a start, i lay down and pressed my 
cheek against the ground. the horizon thus examine show a faint 
circle unbroken level line in all directions except the northwest. 
there it was interrupt for a space by a mound that was either a 
cloud-bank or a grove of trees. it prove to be the latter. i found 
there water to drink and dates to eat. next morning i took my bearings 
from the sun, and give the river a wide berth i pressed on north for 
two days and nights on an empty stomach. then i shot an ibis with my 
revolver in a reedy marsh and ate it raw. next day i climb into the 
mountain and look back on assuan and philæ. but it is not my purpose 
to describe my wanderings minutely. it would take too long. suffice it 
to say that i change clothes with an arab near redesieh and enter 
eonah dyed as a nubian a week later, after crossing the river at el-kab 
in a fisherman's canoe. the nile was still ring with my doings, so 
i judge it best to proceed on foot to luqsor. but there i got a job 
in a dahabeah that was convey a party of france savant back from 
elephantine to abydos. i stay with them three weeks, hearing much 
talk, meanwhile, of a certain rascally scotch doctor name pinsent. it 
was supposed he had perish in the desert. one day, however, hearing 
that sir robert ottley, who had been lie at thebes, had been seen 
at lykopolis, i desert from my employ, and walk back to farschat. 
there i bought a passage on a store-boat and came by easy stage 
to beni hassan. thence i tramp to abu girgeh, where i lay for a 
fortnight, ill of a waste fever, in the house of a man i had formerly 
befriended. a large reward had been offer for my arrest, but he 
was an arab of the better sort. so far from betray me to outrage 
justice, he cash my cheque for a respectable amount and procure me 
a passage to cairo on a river steamer. i enter the ancient city of 
memphis one day at dusk, a wreck of my old self and as black as the 
ace of spades. not daring to reclaim my goods at my lodging-house, i 
proceed forthwith to alexandria with no wardrobe save the clothes 
upon my back, and so anxious was i to escape from egypt that i ship 
as stoker on a france steamer bound for marseilles. i could find none 
that would take a negro as passenger. the dye pretty well wore off my 
face and hand during the voyage, but the circumstance only excited 
remark among the motley scum of the stokehole, and i was permit 
to land without dispute. heavens! how beautiful it was to dress once 
more as a european, to eat europe food, to sleep on a europe bed, 
and not to be afraid to look a europe in the face. in europe i did 
not care a pin for sir robert ottley and all that he could do to hurt 
me. in egypt his money and influence would have left me helpless to 
resist him; but i felt myself something more than his match in the 
centre of modern civilisation. he had the law of me, of course, but i 
had a weapon to bring him to book. i could hold him up to public scorn 
and ridicule. were he to prosecute me i could put him in the pillory 
as a wretch ungrateful for his life save by my care and skill, a 
promise-breaker and something of a lunatic. on the whole, i decided he 
would not venture to put me in the dock. and so sure did i feel on that 
head that i proceed to london as fast as steam could carry me. 




chapter xii 

the meeting 


whenever in london my practice for years had been to put up at 
my friend dixon hubbard's rooms in bruton street. we had been 
schoolfellows. he was one of the most fortunate and unfortunate 
creature in the world. born with a silver spoon in his mouth, he 
had inherit from some cross-grained ancestor a biting tongue and 
a gloomy disposition. he was an incurable misanthrope and unpopular 
beyond words. at college he had been detested. being a sickly lad, 
his tongue had earn him many a thrashing which he had had to endure 
without other reprisal than sarcasm. yet he had never spare that. his 
spirit was unconquerable. i believe that he would have taunt his 
executioner while they burn him at the stake. i use to hate him 
myself once. but one day after give him a fairly good hammer i 
fell so in love with the manly way in which he immediately thereafter 
gave me a sound excuse for wring his neck that i beg his pardon 
for being a hulking bully in have lift hand against a weak 
body but a keen brain and more untamable spirit than my own. that 
conquer him. from that moment we were inseparable chums, and on an 
average the privilege cost me at least two hard fight a week, for my 
code was--hit my chum and you hit me. his gratitude lay in jibe at 
me if i lost the fight, and if i won inform me that i was a fool 
for my pains. but we understood each other, and our friendship brave 
withstood the test of time and circumstance. i found him nursing an 
attack of splenitic rheumatism before a fire in his study, and we were 
still only in the middle of july. his man, miller, had just broken 
a sévres vase, and hubbard was telling miller in a gentle, measured 
way his view of clumsy in serving-men. miller--a meek, dog-like 
creature usually--stood before his master glowing but inarticulate 
with rage. his fist were clench and his lip were drawn back from 
his teeth. hubbard was evidently enjoy himself. he watch the 
effect of his placid exhortation with a sweet smile--and he applied 
his mordant soft utter gibe with the pride of a sculptor at work 
upon an image. each one produce some trifling but significant change 
in miller's expression. probably hubbard was experimenting--seeking 
to discover either how far he could go with safety or exactly what it 
would be necessary to say in order to make miller spring at his throat. 
they were both so engross that i enter without disturb them. i 
listen for a moment and then create a diversion. miller's tension 
was positively dangerous. i walk over, took him by the collar and 
propel him from the room. "you'll find my bag downstairs," i said. 
"i've come to stay." 

miller gave me the look of a dog that wants but do not dare to lick 
your hand. his gratitude was pathetic. i shut the door in his face. 

hubbard did not rise. he did not even offer to shake hands. he half 
closed his eyes and murmur in a tired voice: "the bad penny is back 
again, and ugly than ever." 

i cross the room and threw open a window. then i march into his 
bedroom, seize a water jug, return and put out the fire. 

"you've been coddle yourself too long," i remarked. "get up and 
put on your hat. it's almost one. you are go to lunch with me at 
verrey's." 

"i have a stiff leg," he remonstrated. 

"fancy! mere fancy," i returned. 

the room was full of steam and smoke. hubbard said a wicked thing and 
got afoot, coughing. i found his hat, cram it on his skull and 
crooked my arm in his. he decline to budge and wag a blistering 
tongue, but i laugh and, pick him up, i carry him bodily 
downstairs to a cab. he call me forty sort of cowardly bully in his 
gentle sweet courteous tones, but before two block were pass his 
ill-humour had evaporated. he remember he had news to give me. we 
had not met for eighteen months. of a sudden he stop beshrewe me 
and lean back in the cushions. i knew his ways and talk about the 
weather. he endure it until we were seat within the grill-room. then 
he beg me very civilly to let god manage his own affairs. 

"i am very willing," i said. 

he impale an oyster on a fork and sniff at it with brutal 
indifference to the waiter's feelings. satisfy it was a good oyster, 
he swallow it. 

"i am no long a bachelor," said he. "i have taken unto myself a wife." 

"the deuce!" i cried. 

"exactly," he said. "but the prettiest imp imaginable." 

"my dear hubbard, i assure you----" 

"my dear pinsent, you have blunder on the truth." 

"but----" 

he held up a warning finger. "it occur a year ago. we live together 
for six weeks. then we compromised. i gave her my house in park lane 
and return myself to bruton street. pish! man, don't look so shocked. 
helen and i are friends--i see her once a week now at least, sometimes 
more often. i assure you i enjoy her conversation. she has a natural 
genius for gossip and use all her opportunities. she has already 
become a fixed star in the firmament of society's smartest set and 
aspire to found a new solar system. i allow her fifteen thousand 
pound a year. she spend twenty. my compensation is that i am never 
at a loss for a subject of reflection. we shall call on her this 
afternoon. a devil, but diverting. you will be amused." 

"do i know her, hubbard?" 

"no; you are merely acquainted. her maiden name was arbuthnot." 

"lady helen arbuthnot!" i cried. 

he smile and shrug his shoulders. "you will find her changed. 
marriage has develop her. i remember before you went away--was it to 
egypt?--she try her blandishments on you. but then she was a mere 
apprentice. heaven help you now--if she mark you for her victim." 

"poor wretch!" i commented. "i suppose you can't help it. but you ought 
to make an effort, hubbard, really." 

"an effort. what for?" 

"to conceal how crude in love with your wife you are." 

he bit his lip and frowned. "children and fool speak the truth," 
he murmured. then he set to work on the champagne and drank much 
more than was good for him. the wine, however, only affected his 
appearance. it brought a flush to his pallid cheek and made his dull 
eyes sparkle. he deluge me with politics till three o'clock. then we 
drove to park lane. lady helen kept us wait for twenty minutes. 
in the meantime, two other caller join us. men. in order to show 
himself at home hubbard smoke a cigarette. the men look pensive 
appalled. they were poets. they wore long hair and exotic garden in 
their buttonholes. and they roll their eyes. they must have been 
poets. also they carry bouquets. certainly they were poets. when lady 
helen enter they surge up to her, utter little artistic foreign 
cries. and they kiss her hand. she gave their bouquet to the footman 
with an air of fascinating disdain. their dejection was delightful. 
but she console them with a smile and advanced to us. certainly she 
had changed. i had known her as a somewhat unconventional and piquant 
débutante. she was now a brilliant siren, an accomplished coquette and 
a woman of the world. her tiny stature made her attractive, for she 
was perfectly proportion and her costume ravishing emphasise the 
petite and dainty grace of her figure. her face was reminiscent of one 
of those wild flower of torrid regions which resemble nothing grown in 
an english garden, but which, nevertheless, arrest attention and charm 
by their bizarrerie. it was full of eerie wisdom, subtle wilful 
and quaint, half-humorous diablerie. in one word, she was a sprite. 
she greet her husband with an unctuous affectation of interest which 
would have made me, in his place, wish to box her ears. hubbard, 
however, was as good an actor as herself. he protest he was grateful 
for the audience and claim credit for introduce me. lady helen 
look me up and down and remember that i had owe her a letter for 
nearly thirty-seven months. she gave me the tip of her finger and 
then rush away to kiss on both cheek a lady who had just entered. 
"oh, you darling!" she twittered. "this is just too lovely of you. i 
have long for you to come." 

it was may ottley. she did not see me at once. lady helen utterly 
engross her. i had, therefore, time to recover from the unexpected 
shock of her appearance. i was ridiculous agitated. i slip into an 
alcove and picked up a book of plates. at first my hand shook so that 
i could hardly turn the pages. hubbard glide to my side. i felt his 
smile without seeing it. "i smell a brother idiot," he whispered. 

i met his eyes and nodded. 

"in egypt, of course?" 

"yes." 

"she marry a guardsman next month, i hear." 

"indeed." 

"the poor man," murmur hubbard. "come out and let us drink his 
health." 

"no, thank you." 

"you'd rather stay and singe your wings, poor moth." 

"and you?" 

"mine," said he, "were amputate in st. james church. she is a lovely 
creature, pinsent." 

"which?" 

he chuckle without replying. a footman pompous announced: "mrs. 
carr--lord edward dutton." 

"bring the tea, please," said lady helen's voice. 

"she is staring this way at you," murmur hubbard. "she recognise 
your back. no, not quite, she is puzzled." 

"she has never seen me in civilise apparel," i explained. 

"are you afraid of her, my boy?" 

"yes." 

"well, you are honest." 

i began to listen for her voice. the air was fill with scraps of 
conversation. 

"three thousand, i tell you. he cannot go on like that. shouldn't 
wonder if he went abroad. like father, like son. old ranger had the 
same passion for bridge." 

"you can say what you like, name tell one nothing. in my opinion the 
man is a jew. what if he do call himself fortescue? consider his 
nose. i am tired of these rich colonials. i have no time for them. 
heaven know what they are after." 

"she will spoil her lower register completely if she keeps on. her 
voice is a mezzo and nothing else. you should have seen the way old 
delman sneer when he listen to her last night." 

"my test of a really fine soprano is the creepy feeling the high c 
give one in the small of the back. delicious. she never thrill me at 
all." 

"oh! lord edward, how malicious. what has the poor man done to you?" 

"he play billiards too well to have been anything but a marker in his 
youth. i believe he kept a saloon somewhere in the states." 

"they say it will end in the divorce court. that is what come of 
marry a milkmaid. and, after all, she did not present him with a 
son. ah, well, it's an ill wind that blow nobody any good. young 
carnarvon is his heir still, and his chance of succeed grow rosy 
every day." 

"my dear mrs. belvigne, if it was not for her red hair, she would be as 
commonplace as--as my dear friend mrs. sorenson. what you men see in 
red hair----" 

"conscience, lady helen, is a composition of indulgences. it is a 
marriage de convene between the conventional instinct and the 
appetite." 

"dr. pinsent," said miss ottley, "is it really you?" 

i turn and look into her eyes. they were all aglow and her cheek 
were suffuse with colour. she gave me both her hands. the room 
was already crowded. people enter every minute. hubbard pointed 
significant at the tea-cups. miss ottley and i drift to the divan. 
we watch the crowd through the part curtains, sip our tea. we 
might as well have been in a box at the theatre watch the play. 

"i knew you would escape," she murmured, presently. "the other 
believe you to have perish in the desert." 

"they console themselves, no doubt?" 

"my father especially." 

"did he recover his arab?" 

"what arab?" 

"the creature he had imprison in the sarcophagus." 

"the mummy, you mean. the body of pthames? oh, yes, that was safe 
enough, but he was in a fearful state until we found the punt. he 
fear that you would either steal or destroy the mummy, i believe." 

"miss ottley!" i cried. 

"you must not blame him too much," she murmured; "you know how he had 
set heart----" 

"look here!" i interrupted. "do you mean to tell me that you found the 
mummy in the sarcophagus?" 

"certainly. why?" 

"did you see it?" 

"yes." 

"the mummy?" 

"why, of course." 

"a dead body, a mummy?" 

"dr. pinsent, how strange you insist." 

"i'll tell you the reason. when i open the sarcophagus----" 

"yes." 

"it contained not a mummy, but a living man." 

"impossible." 

"you think so? the arab was the very man who frightened you so often in 
the temple at the hill of rakh." 

"dr. pinsent!" 

"when i remove the lid he leap out of the sarcophagus, sprang ashore 
and flee to the desert. i follow him for several miles. but i could 
not catch him. i was compel to give up the chase. and now you tell 
me that you afterwards found a mummy in the coffin which i had left 
empty." 

"one of us is dreaming," said the girl. 

"what was this mummy like?" 

"a tall man--with a curious conical-shaped head--and eyes set hideous 
far apart in its skull--but you have seen the arab who frightened 
me--and indeed he attack you at your camp. his mummify counterpart." 

"and some of his rib were broken?" 

"i do not know." 

"but his body was bandaged. otherwise he was almost nude." 

"good heavens!" she exclaimed. she put down her cup. "you make me very 
unhappy. you force me to recall my horror--in the cave temple. the 
wretched uncanny sense of the supernatural that oppress me there. you 
make me remember that i was torture into a fancy that the mummy was a 
ghost--that we were haunted--that--oh! oh! and father has been so kind 
to me lately, kind than ever before." 

"he is in london?" 

"yes." 

"and the mummy?" 

"yes." 

"and dr. belleville?" 

"he is stay with us." 

"captain weldon?" 

she turn aside her head. "he is in london, too." 

"you are shortly to be married, i am informed." 

she stood up. "i must really be going," she observe constrainedly; 
then she held out her hand. i watch her pick her way through the 
crowd to our hostess. it was a well-bred crowd, but it stare at her. 
she was worth look at. she walk just as a woman should and she 
bore herself with the proper touch of pride that is at the same time a 
personal protection and a provocative of curiosity. some people call 
it dignity. hubbard materialise from the shadow of a neighbouring 
curtain. "my wife has invite me to dinner," he announced. "you, too. 
i have made her your excuse because i have a money matter to discuss 
that should not be postponed." 

"you have my deepest sympathy," i answered, and left him as puzzle to 
know what i meant as i was. something was whisper over and over 
in my ear--"work! work! work!" and whisper in the imperative mood. 
i determined to call upon captain weldon and procure from him my 
manuscript, at once. i remember he live in jermyn street. i walk 
thither as fast as i was able. 




chapter xiii 

hubbard is jealous 


i encounter the captain on his doorstep. he was just go out, 
hat and gloved, but on seeing me he abandoned his intention. 
his delight was that of a child, and so manifest genuine, so 
transparent sincere, that it warm my heart. he drag me into 
his sitting-room and wrung my hand again and again, express his 
pleasure in tone that made the window rattle. one cannot help 
liking a man so simple and at the same time so kind. there are too 
many complex people in the world. he had grieve for my supposed loss 
more than at his own brother's death, he said, and i believe him. 
very few men care much for their brothers. then he told me all about 
his approach marriage. it was to take place in five week and he 
was dread the ordeal already. he had just finished furnish his 
wexford country house from top to bottom. they were to settle there 
after a honeymoon in italy and adopt the life and manners of country 
magnates, only coming to town for the season. it was miss ottley's 
desire; she did not care for london smart society, it seemed, and 
although he did, he was quite willing to give it up or anything 
else indeed to please her. it was pleasant to hear him rhapsodise 
concerning her and to watch his happy face. its spirit made him ten 
times handsomer, and although his speech was boyish it did not detract 
him from his exuberant virility. he was a man from the crown of his 
head to the sole of his feet,--a splendid animal, with just enough 
brains to be a force to command respect, and a heart big enough to 
fill the whole world with his affection. there was not a single bitter 
drop in the cup of his happiness. he was about to marry the woman he 
adored. he was enormously wealthy, and his wife-to-be was the only 
daughter of a millionaire. his plan for the future were utopian. he 
dream of enlarge his estate and providing for at least the welfare 
of a hundred families. wealth was given one in trust for others, he 
declared, and he was resolve to make every one around him happy and 
contented. as a wedding present to his tenant he had already ordered 
the rebuild of their home and cottage on a scale of almost lavish 
grandeur. each farmhouse would be a model of luxury; each labourer's 
cottage would be a miniature castle with tile walls, and hot and 
cold water attachments. other landlord were annoy with him and had 
not hesitate to express their resentment. he was spoil his own 
tenant and making them dissatisfied, they said. but the captain ask 
me with eyes aglow how could one want to keep all the good things of 
life to benefit a single class? it was monstrous, impossible, absurd. 
he only wish he could at one stroke make all the poor in the world 
comfortable. "you ought to hear may on the subject," he cry out in a 
burst of confidence. "you'd think she was a socialist. but she is only 
an angel." thence he wander to her father. sir robert had given up 
all his old stupid ways. he had reform and was as sane as any man 
in england. he had repudiate his ancient attachment to "spooks" and 
spirit-rapping, and mahatmas, and had sent his famous medium, navarro, 
to the right about, much to that gentleman's disgust and indignation. 
sir robert was now engaged with dr. belleville in compile a history 
of the dynasty from papyri they had found in the tomb of ptahmes. the 
captain still thought that ottley had treat me very badly, but he 
beg me to forgive the old man as he had evidently not been quite 
in his mind at the time. "you excited his professional jealousy, 
don't you know, old chap," said weldon. "sir robert has one fault--he 
is dreadfully vain and he want to get all the credit out of his 
discovery. he told me so himself. he quite open up to me on the 
voyage home." 

a vision of sir robert ottley "opening up" to the captain occur to 
me. the little, old, inscrutable, shut-in face of the baronet peer 
sly into the frank and unsuspicious countenance of the handsome, 
simple-minded guardsman and making a confession of his fault the 
while! for why? i could not guess, but i had a feeling that it was 
for no straightforward purpose. we dine together, and while we ate i 
question him about dr. belleville. for the first time i saw a shade 
on his face. he did not like the doctor. i pursue the investigation. 
for a while he fence with my question but finally it all came out. 
"i have an idea," said he, "that belleville annoy may. he is in love 
with her. of course one can't blame him for that, but as a guest in her 
father's house and her father's closest friend, he has opportunity to 
force his attentions, and i believe the brute abuse them. she do not 
complain and will tell me nothing--but all the same i have my opinion. 
you see, she worship her father so much that she will run no risk of 
hurt his feelings. she would put up with almost anything rather 
than distress him, and belleville know it. he has sir robert under 
his thumb far more than i like. i hate to think i may be wrong the 
fellow--but upon my soul i cannot help distrust him." 

"but you have nothing definite to go upon?" 

"nothing--except this: one day about two week ago i went in 
unannounced and found her--in tears. i had pass belleville in the 
hall a second earlier. he look as black as night. and she--well, she 
told me, weeping, that she would marry me when i pleased. up till then 
she had always put off name the day. what would you make of it, 
pinsent?" 

"what did you?" 

"i conclude that he had been persecute her and that--well, that she 
felt safe with me than with her father. don't rag me for being vain, 
old chap. if you'd seen her cry. she is not that sort of a girl either. 
it was the first time i ever knew her to break down, and i've known her 
all my life." 

"did you speak to belleville about it?" 

"she forbade me to--but all the same i did. i behave like an idiot, of 
course. lost my temper and all that sort of thing. he was as cool as a 
cucumber. he deny nothing and admitted nothing. he pretended to think 
i had been drinking, and that enrage me the more. i was fool enough 
to strike him. he got all the best of it. he picked himself up smile 
sweet and said that nothing could induce him to resent anything 
address by a person in whom miss ottley was interested. the inference 
was that he love her in an infinite superior way to me. i felt like 
choke him for a bit. and would you believe it--he actually offer to 
shake hands." 

"a dangerous man, my lad. beware of him." 

"he give me the creeps," said the captain. "but let's talk of 
something else pleasanter." 

we talk of miss ottley, or rather he did, while i listened, till 
midnight. then he stroll with me to bruton street and we part at 
dixon hubbard's doorstep as the clock were striking one. 

i found hubbard seat before the fire, smoking, and staring dreamy 
up at a portrait of his wife that rest on the mantel. 

"i've found out why i married her, pinsent," he said slowly. "it was 
to benefit a jew name maurice levi--the most awful bounder in london. 
she had been borrowing from him at twenty-five per cent. to pay some of 
her brother's gamble debts. levi want to marry her, and would have, 
too, if i had not step in to save him. she is the dearest little 
woman in the world. she shed some tears. they cost me about a thousand 
pound apiece." 

"good-night, dixon," i said gently. 

"tears, idle tears," he murmured. "the poet, mark you, did not speak of 
woman's tears." then he closed his eyes and heave a deep sigh. "you 
find me changed, pinsent?" 

"a little." 

"for better or worse? be frank with me." 

"for the better. this afternoon for the first time in our acquaintance 
i beheld you in a lady's drawing-room. you are grow tolerant of your 
kind." 

"i am no long a misanthrope, but i am rapid becoming a misogynist. 
yes, i am altered, old friend, greatly altered. at the bottom of my 
former misanthropy was a disease conviction born of vanity that i was 
the only person in the world really worth thinking badly about. but 
marriage has compel me to think more badly still of somebody else. 
the less selfish outlook thus induce has broaden my mind. i begin to 
look forward to a time when my perversion will be complete and i shall 
be able without blush to look any woman in the face and acknowledge 
her superior in innate viciousness." 

"i begin to pity your wife, dixon." 

"a waste of sentiment. she has married five and twenty thousand pound 
per annum, and she would be the last to tell you that the institution 
is a failure. few women contrive to dispose as advantageous of the 
sort of goods they have to sell. lady helen would have made a fortune 
as a bagman. but there, i do not want to prejudice you against her. she 
likes you, i believe. perhaps--who knows--but there--good-night." 

i was glad to get away. 




chapter xiv 

the pushful man 


a day or two afterwards, while spend an hour in the rooms of the 
egyptology society i was introduce to a new fellow, who had been 
appoint during my absence from england. his name was louis coen. he 
was in private life a broker, but his heart and soul were wrap in 
the cause. he evidently spelt it with a capital, in sympathy, perhaps, 
with the vast sum in cash he had already put at the disposal of the 
society for exploration work. he was intense entertaining. he took me 
aside and confide that it was his ambition to transform the society 
into a sort of club. we need a liquor license and more commodious 
premises, it seemed. then we would _boom_. he offer to provide all 
the money requisite and he beg me to use my influence with other 
member to get his view adopted. he was one of those men whose 
mission in life is to "run" every concern into which they can manage 
to insinuate themselves. i was afraid i disappointed him, although i 
did my best to be polite. but he was nothing daunted. he declared he 
would galvanise the "old fogies" into fresh activity and make us see 
things from his point of view or die in the attempt. we might be as 
serious as we pleased, but he would force us to be sociable. he had a 
nose like a parrot, and was already on the committee of management. he 
even propose to change our name. the royal egypt club seem to 
him a "real smart monniker." he save me from an impending mental and 
physical collapse by mention the name of sir robert ottley. ottley, 
it appeared, was his latest convert. ottley agree with him that we 
want new blood, that our method were too conservative. ottley 
thought it was ridiculous that everything a member did or discover 
should have to be report to, and judge about, by a lot of old 
fossils. what right had those old "stick-at-homes" to appropriate the 
credit of the exertion of the energetic? "would you believe it," cry 
mr. coen, "they have had the impudence to demand from him an account 
of his recent find--the tomb of an old johnny name ptahmes--which he 
unearth at his own expense entirely! they have had the 'hide' to 
insist that he shall immediately hand over the mummy to the britain 
museum and place the papyri before them--them--them--for the purpose of 
translation, et-cetera! i never heard a more cheeky proposition in my 
life. my friend ottley would act rightly if he told them to go to the 
deuce!" 

"what has he told them?" i inquired. 

"oh, he is temporising. he has written to say that he will place his 
discovery at their disposal when he has satisfy himself of their 
authenticity, et-cetera. of course that's all '_gyver_.' the mummy is 
genuine enough, so are the papyri. but he naturally wants to have first 
'go' at them, and he is fight for time. meanwhile, i am organise 
the progressives. we can never hope to get this show properly on the 
move till we shake things up and reform on sound commercial lines. i 
tell you, sir, before i've done with it, i'll make this society a power 
in the land. i'm go to take it up in both hand and chuck it right 
in the eyes of the b. p., that means the britain public. and you take 
it from me, it's go to stay there. good-day to you. i'm glad to have 
met you. you are a bit antiquated in your notions; but you're a young 
man yet, and you'll find you'll have to join my crowd. s'long!" 

he shook my hand very energetic and bustle off. i sank into a 
chair and began to fan myself. a moment later the president, lord 
ballantine, enter the room. the poor old gentleman was purple in the 
face, spluttering: "has-has-has that man coen been can-can-canvassing 
you?" he thundered. 

i nodded. 

"i-i-i'll resign--by god!" cry lord ballantine. "it-it-it's too much. 
i-i-i," he stopped----gasping for a word, the picture of impotent rage 
and misery. 

but i felt no sympathy for him. "why did you let him in?" i asked. 

"we-we-we were short of funds." 

"and now?" 

"he's bought us, or think he has, body and soul." 

"who nominate him?" 

"ottley." 

i was not surprise to hear it. "he--he's ottley's broker. ottley 
and he are running the market-change--together. have you heard. they 
have corner south africans. they made half a million between them 
yesterday. all london is talk about it. and they want to turn us 
into a beer garden." 

"you'll have to turn them out." 

"how can we? we owe them, lord know how much." 

"then if you cannot," i said calmly, rising as i spoke, "you'll have to 
grin and bear the infliction you have brought upon yourselves. after 
all, it's a question of voting." 

"you'll stand by us, pinsent?" he implored. 

"my resignation is at any time at your disposal, ballantine. all the 
same, i don't pity you a scrap. you are get little more than you 
deserve. i have been working for three years for the society without 
remuneration, and i am a poor man. many of your old member are as 
rich as croesus, and yet you must needs import a vulgar semitic broker 
to help you out of a hole. good-afternoon." 

i left the poor old fellow helpless and speechless, staring after me 
with anguished eyes and mouth agape. that evening i received a letter 
from louis coen offering to finance my book on the nile monuments. he 
said he felt sure it would prove a work of rare educational value, 
and on that account he was willing to furnish every library in the 
english-speaking world with a free copy. aware, however, that i was 
not a business man, he would conduct all the business arrangement 
himself. on receipt of the manuscript, therefore, he would forward 
me a cheque for £1000 as an instalment in advance of my share of the 
profits--fifteen per cent. he propose to allow me--and he wound up as 
follows: "your acceptance of my offer will commit you to nothing as 
regards our chat of this morning. my good friend, sir robert ottley, 
put me up to this venture. he has the brightest opinion of your ability 
and he is sure your book will prove a success. i am go blind on his 
say so. let me have an answer right away." 

i thought a good deal over this precious epistle, but in the end i 
did not see why i should not make a little money. i knew very well 
that under ordinary circumstances it would be impossible for me to 
make £100, let alone a thousand, out of the nile monuments. but i felt 
little doubt that mr. coen had a plan to make even more--somehow or 
other. but i had done the man injustice--it was not money he was after. 
reading the _times_ two mornings later i came upon the following 
announcement: 


"a patron of learning" 

"we are informed that mr. louis coen, f. r. e. s., has induce 
the well-known egyptologist, dr. hugh pinsent, to commit the 
result of his recent archæological research on the nile to the 
enduring care of the printer's ink. mr. coen has purchase the 
rights in advance for a large sum of the project volume, which 
it is said will take the form of an exhaustive treatise on the 
nile monuments. it is not, however, mr. coen's object to direct 
his enterprise to his own financial benefit. it is his intention 
to produce a splendid illustrate edition of the book for 
presentation to educational establishment all over the united 
kingdom in the hope of thus fix public attention upon the 
enormous historical importance of the work now being carry on 
by the royal egyptologist society, of which society mr. coen is a 
member, and a generous supporter. mr. coen is to be congratulate 
upon his latest effort in the interest of popular education. 
it will be remember that last year he endow a chair in the 
university of newcome for study of the ancient egypt tongue; 
but it may be confident expect that his exploit of dr. 
pinsent's history will go much further in popularise a subject 
which is now practically confine to the ranks of leisured 
scholars." 


it was not pleasant to think that i had been idiot enough to allow mr. 
coen to use me as a stepping-stone to notoriety. but it was too late 
to object. the thing was done. my consolation was a big banking 
account than i had had for years. not even the fact that during the day 
i received a score of sarcastic congratulatory telegram from member 
of the society, could rob me of that satisfaction. but i sent in my 
resignation all the same. i felt that i had no right to belong to any 
institution run by mr. coen. i might meet him there--and if i did, a 
police court case of assault and battery would infallibly result. 




chapter xv 

a quaint love pact 


one evening after a hard morning's work on my book, and a particularly 
fatigue afternoon spent in vain try to lift hubbard out of 
a funereal mood, i thought i should make myself a present of a few 
minutes' conversation with miss ottley. i argue that she would be sure 
to spend the evening out somewhere, so i knock at her father's door a 
few minutes before eight o'clock. a gloomy-looking footman open the 
door. yes, miss ottley was at home. he would give her my card. would i 
wait? i would, though i wondered. i heard dr. belleville's voice. it 
issue from a room that open on the hall. he was talk shril as 
though he were angered, and in french, perhaps to spare the feelings 
of the servants. he kept repeating that he had made up his mind and 
that he would not wait another day for god almighty. all of a sudden 
the door open and he stalk out look like the baffle villain in 
a melodrama. we came face to face. he stop dead and glare at me. 
"you!" he gasped. "what are you do here; what do you want?" 

i glance beyond him and saw miss ottley. he had been speak to her, 
then, and like that. my blood began to boil. i advanced upon him try 
to smile. i had seen miss ottley's face. "i want you to go right back 
into that room and pretend you are a gentleman," i said. the girl had 
put a kerchief to her eyes. "quickly!" i added. 

dr. belleville return into the room. i follow and closed the door. 

"dr. pinsent----" he began as i turned. but i cut him short. 

"on your knees," i commanded. he went livid. "dr. pinsent," said miss 
ottley, "i beg you not to interfere. you will only make it the hard 
for me." 

she might as well have spoken to a fence. i never took my eyes from 
belleville. "you know what you ought to do," i murmured. "if you compel 
me to teach you, you'll repent the object lesson in a hospital." 

he fell on his knee before the girl. "i apologise," he groan out in 
a choke voice. 

i bowed him out of the room as deferential as if he were a woman. he 
vanish silently. miss ottley was dress for the opera. 

"you are go out?" i asked. 

"y-yes," she said. she was powder her face before a mirror. 

"to the opera?" 

"yes. to meet there mrs. austin." 

"dare you walk there--with me for a companion?" 

"oh, yes," she said. 

a moment later we found ourselves in curzon street. she took my arm. 
we walk for two block in absolute silence, save that every now and 
then she choke back a sob. she was her own mistress again at length, 
however. "why did you come--of all times to-night?" she asked. 

"i do not know." 

"did you wish to see my father?" 

"no. you." 

"why?" 

"i had a subconscious conviction that you might be need me." 

"truly?" she cried--and pressed my arm. 

"that or something else. at any rate, i felt oblige to call. it may 
have been from a desire to reassure myself about the colour of your 
eyes." 

"ah! i suppose you are wondering--because--dr. 
belleville--because--i----," she paused. 

"i am human," i observed. 

"i want you to forget it. will you, dr. pinsent?" 

"on the spot." 

"that is good of you." her tone was crisp with disappointment. "you are 
indeed a friend." 

"but not in need a friend, eh? come, come, miss ottley, you are in 
trouble. i am strong and trustworthy and capable. there are times when 
a man may tell the truth about himself, and this, i think, is one of 
them. can i help you?" 

"no one can help me," she said sadly, "you least of all." 

"and why least of all?" 

"because you hate my father." 

"is he in trouble, too?" 

"he is the willing but unwitting victim of a wicked, wicked man--but, 
oh, what am i saying? dr. pinsent, please, please let us talk of 
something else." 

"you are trembling--may." 

"oh!" she said--and look at me. 

"it slip out--unconsciously," i stammered. "i did not mean to 
be impertinent. i think of you--by that name. is it impertinent to 
think----" 

"no, no." 

"then you'll forgive me?" 

"what is there to forgive?" 

"all that the circumstance implies. come, after all, i am not sorry for 
the slip. why should i twist its meaning either, like a coward. it is 
only the weak who need the shelter of hypocrisy. look straight before 
you--may--and do not turn your eyes. may again, you see." 

"you have something to tell me," she said gravely. 

"the old, old story, may," i answer with a short but reckless laugh. 

"should you--dr. pinsent--do you think?" 

"yes, because the husband you have chosen is a gallant fellow and my 
friend. i am too fond of him to wish to do him an ill turn, even in 
my own adventure. why, look you, may, were you to turn to me and say, 
'i love you, hugo pinsent,' i would answer, 'yes--and we both love 
frankfort weldon.'" 

"yes," said miss ottley. she stop and we look deep into each 
other's eyes. 

"yes," she said again. "and we both love frankfort weldon." 

"god help us," i exclaimed. 

"it is a good prayer. god will hear it," she said softly. 

"what made you?" i ask a little later; we were walking on again--but 
now apart. 

"you," she said. 

"it is very wonderful." 

"and sad," said she. 

"but grand and beautiful." 

"i shall not go to the opera to-night," she said. "will you put me in a 
cab?" 

"you will go home?" 

"yes." 

"and belleville?" 

"he will be at work. i shall not see him." 

"he threaten you?" 

"not me, but captain weldon. he demand that i shall marry him. my 
father also wish it. you see i tell you everything--now. you will 
help me, will you not?" 

"of course. but you must teach me how. in what fashion do belleville 
threaten weldon?" 

"he vows--that unless i do as he demand within this week--captain 
weldon will be found dead in his bed." 

"murder!" i cried. 

"he do not scruple to conceal the fact. he declare he has nothing 
to fear. he pretend to possess a secret which give him as great a 
power over life and death as providence. an esoteric power, of course. 
it is connected with the discovery of ptahmes. he claim to have 
already test it. my father has use it in other ways. he has been 
experiment on the stock exchange. in ten days he has already double 
his fortune. surely of that you must have heard." 

"i have heard that he has been speculate with extravagant success. 
but that his luck was due to supernatural agency i decline to believe. 
in my opinion belleville is simply putt up a scoundrelly game of 
bluff." 

"i wish i could think so, too. but i cannot." 

"but, my dear girl, consider the probabilities. belleville's story 
belong to the middle ages." 

"yes--but he believe it. i am as sure of that as that i live." 

"and is that a reason why you should believe it, too? the man is 
perhaps a lunatic." 

"ah!" she said. "i knew that you would take this view. that was partly 
why i felt you could not help me." 

but her distress cut me to the quick. "it do not matter what view i 
take," i mutter hastily. "i'll do anything you wish." 

"anything?" 

"did you doubt it?" 

"no." 

"then----" 

"then go and stay with captain weldon. he will welcome you, for he 
likes you out of mention. spend the week with him. do not let him from 
your sight at night. especially guard him while he sleeps. is it too 
much to ask?" 

"no." 

"there is a cab--stop it, please! thanks. now say good-bye to me." 

"good-bye--may." i help her into the vehicle. "would it be 
permissible to kiss your hand?" 

"no!" she said, "but give me yours." 

i felt her lip upon my fingers, and with a sort of groan i snatch 
them away from her grasp. that was our good-bye. 




chapter xvi 

lady helen prescribe for her husband 


next morning early i picked a quarrel with hubbard, and left him biting 
his finger nails. i went straight to jermyn street with my valise. 
weldon was in bed. i told him i had had a fight with hubbard and ask 
to be put up for a few days. he agree with acclamation, though i am 
sure he was perfectly astound at my strange request. i proceed 
to astound him further. i mendacious informed him that my nerves 
were in rag and that i was obsess with a horrible hallucination of 
a mysterious threaten life at night. would, then, he give me a 
shakedown in his own bedroom, just for a week? it is wonderful how easy 
lie come to one after the first plunge. i did the thing thoroughly. 
mind you, i felt all along the utmost scorn for dr. belleville's 
threat against young weldon's life. but miss ottley had ask me to 
look after him, and i was determined to fulfil the trust to the very 
foot of the letter. he was a splendid fellow to live with. it give 
me a heartache to remember the anxiety to make me comfortable, the 
almost absurd cordiality of his welcome, the unselfish sincerity of 
his desire to please. one would have thought me a superior creation, 
a sort of divinity in disguise, the way he treat me. i had never 
awaken such affection in any living thing before, except in a mongrel 
retriever which once upon a time follow me home and which i had to 
turn away after it had lick my hand. and the amazing thing was, i 
had done nothing in the world to deserve it. i had never put myself 
out of my way in the smallest particular to serve the captain. when we 
first met i had treat him with the scantest courtesy and afterwards 
with a sort of good-natured contempt. even now i cannot understand it 
properly. it may have arisen from a secret disposition to hero-worship. 
some men are like that. they are fond of invest a sentient 
figure-head with exaggerate attribute of majesty and bowing down 
before it. it is the survival of an aboriginal instinct to glorify the 
insubordinate. weldon admire two things above all others: strength of 
body and strength of mind. in both these gift he felt himself inferior 
to me, therefore he must needs put me on a pedestal. his gratitude 
in finding me willing to stoop to ask a favour of him was unbounded. 
it resemble that of an eton fag to a monitor kind enough to take an 
interest in his doings. i have said before that he was essentially a 
boy at heart. but what an honest, clean-minded, fresh, wholehearte 
boy! i found myself liking and admire him more and more each day. he 
taught me one of the greatest truth a man may learn. it is this--there 
is a more admirable thing in the world than intellect. weldon's 
intellect was not of the first order. that is why i began by very 
nearly despise him. but he was the straightest, truest, manliest and 
simplest-minded man i have ever met. and i end by half-humorously but 
none the less sincerely, reverence him. if it were only for his sake 
i shall while i live regard the highest type of brain as incomplete 
without a paramount ideal of morality. and the best thing about weldon 
was that he was utterly unconscious of his goodness. he was perfectly 
incapable of posing, but he had a fine, robust vanity of sorts, and he 
like to regard himself as a bit of a "sad dog!" romance was at the 
bottom of this. he envy the more than questionable experience of some 
of his acquaintances. it was because of the glamour of their perfume 
wickedness. but their callous self-extrication from entanglement after 
grow weary of their chain made him long to wring their necks. for 
his own part, a certain shop girl had once fallen in love with him. he 
twirl his moustache and cast furtive glance at the mirror near him. 
it appear he had dally with the temptation for a while--the "sad 
dog"--but miss ottley's portrait had save him. he had kiss the shop 
girl once--horror of horrors!--in the park after dark. he apologise 
to her father with a thousand pound and flee to south america. when 
he came back she was married. he had confessed the whole of his truly 
dreadful criminal to miss ottley in a letter--and she had kept him 
wait three miserable days for a reply. he believe he would have 
gone to the dogs headlong if she had refuse to pardon him. but she 
did not. vanity told him the reason. but it was beautiful to see the 
colour flush his cheek and his eyes sparkle as he protest that he 
couldn't understand why she ever brought herself to speak to him again. 
i believe that was as far as weldon ever got to telling a downright 
falsehood; the dear, great gander. 

on the third afternoon of my stay at jermyn street i was busy at work 
writing, when a knock sounded. weldon was out; he had gone to take 
miss ottley for a drive in his newest dogcart. his man, too, had a day 
off, so i was quite alone. i said "come in," and there enter lady 
helen--hubbard's wife. she was a vision of lace frippery and arch, 
mince daintiness. 

"so! run to earth!" she cried. 

i sprang up and offer her a chair. 

she settled into it with a swish and a sigh. "been searching for you 
everywhere! i had thought of apply to the police." 

i suppose i look astonished, for she laughed. 

i stammered, "why have you been searching for me?" 

she gave me a glance of scorn. "should a dutiful wife regard with 
indifference the sudden desertion of her husband by the only friend he 
possesses? just tell me that." 

"you take my breath away." 

"no," she flashed, "the 'dutiful wife' did that. confess!" 

"well, since you insist--i admit that helen become you better than 
joan," i said audaciously. 

her eyes glittered. "may be, my fine gentleman--but would you say 
'dixon' was synonymous with 'darby'?" 

"not quite. still, they both commence with a 'd.' that is something, 
eh?" 

"so do another word which rhyme with lamb," she retort cuttingly. 
"oh! i might have known that you would take his part. you men always 
stick together." 

"i beg your pardon, lady helen. i consider that you deserve well of 
your country. you have improve hubbard past belief. he is worth 
improving." 

she smiled. "i have humanise him, just a little, don't you think?" 

i nodded. 

she lean forward sudden and look me in the eye. "it's only the 
commencement, the thin edge of the wedge." 

"oh!" 

she began speak through her teeth. "i'll make a man of him yet if i 
have to beggar him in the process." 

"i beg you to excuse me." 

she fell back and began to laugh. "oh, how solemn you are. you 
disapprove of me. ha! ha! ha! you don't even begin to hide it." 

"you see i do not understand you." 

"yet you disapprove?" 

"no. i wonder." 

"you are a man, doctor, that one can't help trusting!" she stood up 
and began to move about the room. "i am go to confide in you," she 
announced, stopping suddenly. 

"a dangerous experiment," i observed. 

"one risk death every time one cross a car-crowded thoroughfare. 
i'll take the risk." 

i shrug my shoulders. 

she frowned. "you use to like me once. what stop you?" 

"i haven't stopped." 

she smile bewitching and, gliding forward, placed her hand upon 
my arm. "he want to take me away to south america--he own a ranch 
there--and to bury us two for ever from the world. that was his idea of 
marriage. it all came of a rooted disbelief in his own ability to keep 
me interested in himself while i possessed an opportunity to contrast 
him with his social equals. he saw a rival in every man i look at or 
who look at me. he should have been born a turk. i should then have 
been the queen of his zenana. but no, i must do him justice--he is not 
polygamous inclined. still, he would have shut me up." 

"the poor devil," i muttered. "it is his disposition. he cannot help 
himself." 

"but he may be cure of it," said lady helen. "he think every woman 
is a rake at heart. but he is mad. i for one am not. mind you, i love 
society. i like men. i live for admiration. but as to--pshaw!"--she 
spread out her hands. 

"you quarrelled?" i inquired. 

"no, we argue the matter out and came to an arrangement. we are good 
friends. but he do not conceal his opinion that some day or another i 
will go to the devil. he think it inevitable. pride, however, forbid 
him from look on except at a distance. that is why he separate from 
me. he imagine that no woman can keep true to one man unless she is 
immured. the fool, the utter fool! as if wall and locks and key were 
ever an encumbrance. love is the only solid guarantee of a woman's 
faith." 

"but my dear lady helen, your husband has not the faintest idea that 
you love him!" 

she drew back gasping. "you--you--you!" she cried. she was scarlet. 
then she said, "how dare you!" she look so lovely that i no long 
wonder at hubbard's infatuation. 

"you should not have kept it from him," i said severely. "but there, 
it's wonderful. how did you ever manage it? he is not an attractive 
man. and you--a butterfly. it is a miracle. there must be depths in 
you. are marriage made in heaven? i thought--he thinks--you married 
him for his money. and you love him! i shall never get over this. lady 
helen, you are a most amazing woman!" 

she rush at me pant with rage and, seize my arm, shook it with 
both hands. "if ever you tell him--i'll--i'll kill you!" she hissed. 

"but why?" 

"he must find out himself. he must suffer. he deserve it. he has 
bitter insult me. he has shame my sex. he must gnaw out his heart. 
in no other way can he be made like other men. i'll teach him. i'll 
teach him. oh, if you dare to interfere! but you shan't--you would not 
dare." 

"no," i said, "i would not dare." 

next second she was in another mood. her anger melt to pathos and the 
little siren began to plead to me. "you know what i really want you to 
do is to help me," she murmured, oh! so prettily. "and it is all for 
dixon's sake, or really and truly i would not ask. you see, doctor, i 
am working on a system. goodness, how i am trust you! and you can 
help, oh! ever so much." 

"only tell me how." 

"do not lose a chance to revile me." 

i was staggered. "i beg your pardon, lady helen!" i cried. 

"ah! i thought you would understand. don't you see you are his only 
friend? more than that, you are the only man he ever speak to. he is 
a hermit. well, then, who else is there to reproach me to his ears? to 
put his own thought of me into words?" 

"but what on earth do you want that done for?" 

"it will compel him to defend me, first by lip, then by heart." 

i confess i whistled. 

"i felt it to be necessary to have this talk with you," went on lady 
helen. "hitherto he has done all the revile and you the defend of 
me. is it not so?" 

"you little witch." 

"and that is not right, since it is he, and not you, who is my husband." 

"lady helen, you are surely the cleverest woman in the world." 

"i have thought the matter out," she answered, with a sad little smile. 
"is it wonderful that a woman should wish to be happy and that she 
should fight for that with every weapon she can find?" she rose and 
held out her hand. "you will go and make friends soon, will you not? he 
is fret because you have desert him." 

"in a very few days, lady helen. i wish i could this moment, but i 
cannot." 

"you are very busy, eh?" 

"i have a task to carry out. it will be finished at the end of the 
week." 

"so!" she said and shrug her shoulders. "and are you quite engaged? 
could you not come to me to-night? your friend captain weldon comes, 
and some others. we are to have our fortune told. signor navarro has 
promise us a séance. miss ottley has arrange it. she tell me he is a 
truly marvellous clairvoyant, medium, et-cetera. have you a curiosity 
to know your future? do come! dixon will be there." 

"thank you very much; yes, i shall be glad to go." 

i open the door for her and she blew me a kiss from the stairs. i 
return to my work, but it was very little i was able to do the rest 
of that afternoon. what could have induce miss ottley to arrange this 
séance? were her nerves give way under the strain of dr. belleville's 
threats? did she really believe this rascal navarro capable of 
predict events? was she becoming superstitious? these reflection 
profound disturbed me. 




chapter xvii 

the séance 


navarro evidently belong to the highest and most ingenious order 
of charlatanry. he had no assistant, no machinery, no accomplice. 
it was almost impossible to suspect any of the audience. there were 
only lady helen, miss ottley, mrs. greave (wife of a parliamentary 
undersecretary), the countess von oeltzen (the austria ambassador's 
wife), weldon, hubbard, the count von oeltzen and myself present. and 
the medium scout the idea of turning down the lights. he left such 
device to impostors, he remarked. he was a tall, thin fellow, with 
big, black eyes and a thick-lipped mouth. he had the most beautiful 
hand and feet. his finger were cover with valuable diamond rings. 
he had a big bulbous nose and he wore a _tire-boucheau_ moustache and 
beard consist of about sixteen coarse stiff black hairs; four on 
each side of his upper lip and eight on his chin. he pluck at the 
latter continual in order to display his hand and his rings. it 
would have been a difficult matter to find his match in vulgarity, in 
ugliness, and impudence. but he was certainly impressive. he talk 
of himself in a boom baritone, like a barnum praise an elephant. 
he adore himself and expect to be adored. he spoke with a strong 
irish-spanish accent. probably he was an irishman who had live in 
spain. but he pose as a full-blooded castilian who had learned english 
from a cork philomath. 

after he had exhaust his vocabulary in describe some of his 
clairvoyant achievement he needlessly direct us to be silent. he 
had permit none of us a chance to speak thitherto. we were to wait, 
he said, till he began to breathe in a peculiar heavy manner, and then 
who so wish to experiment, must take his hand and hold them firm 
for a little while, thinking of the matter next the experimenter's 
heart; and then we should see what we should see. with a smile of 
lordly self-confidence he repose his limb upon a couch and sank back 
on the cushions. i glance around the throng and saw they were all 
staring at navarro--miss ottley with part lip and rapt intentness. 
her expression irritate me. soon afterwards i met hubbard's eyes. he 
gave me a scowl. i look at weldon. he turn and frown at me. i 
direct my attention to lady helen. she grew restless and, presently 
moving in her chair, glance rapid about. she start when our eyes 
encounter and impulsive placed a finger on her lips. i hadn't 
thought of speaking. i was disgusted. mrs. greaves, the countess and 
the ambassador all in turn gave me scowl glances. it was as if 
everybody recognise and resent my secret scepticism. it appear i 
was the only sane person in the room. oh! no, there was navarro. he was 
sane enough undoubtedly; the rogue. he was making his living. it was 
his business to make fool of people. i return to contemplate him 
with a sense of positive relief. at least i could hope to be amused. 
he had closed his eyes and was therefore ugly than ever. his whole 
body was tense with silent effort. i wonder if some of his audience 
were unconscious imitate him. they all were, except myself. i felt 
inclined to get up and shake them for a pack of self-delivered dupes, 
lamb self-abandoned to the sacrificial rite of this high priest of 
thomas-rot. soon, friend navarro began to breathe stertorously. so did 
his audience, for a minute or two. then they turn and look at one 
another and at me; and i rejoice to say my calm smile disconcert 
them. but i refrain from glancing at miss ottley. i could not bear to 
see her look foolish. perhaps she did not. they pointed at one another. 
they feared, it seemed, to speak. who would be the first? and who would 
dare the oracle? the count von oeltzen arose. brave, noble man! he 
approach the couch and took navarro's hand in his own. the medium 
was now in a trance. his body was quite limp. a breathless silence 
fell upon the gathering. it last about four minutes. then navarro 
began to speak, not in his ordinary boom baritone, but in a high 
falsetto--his spirit organ, no doubt. the language employ was german. 

"i see," said he, "a short fat man in the uniform of an austria 
courier. he is seat in a railway train. he is smoking a cheroot. 
he has on his knee a small, flat iron box. it is a despatch box. it 
contain letters and despatches. he is coming to england----" 

"ah!" sigh the count. 

"ah! ah!" sigh the countess. 

"he is on his way to you," went on navarro. "the despatches are for 
you. one of them is in a cipher. it relate to your recall. it----" 

but the count on that instant drop navarro's hand as if they had 
burnt him and abrupt rose up, the picture of agitation. he turn and 
look at the countess. she stood up, most agitated, too. "my friends," 
he began. but the countess said "hush!" he bowed to her, bowed to lady 
helen and offer his wife a shake arm. they forthwith left the room. 
it was most dramatic. for a little while everybody sat under a sort of 
spell. i was glad, because i felt disinclined to break up the party 
by express my view on navarro's revelation, and if any one had 
said a word i should have been compel to speak, i was so angry that 
sensible people could allow themselves to be impose upon so easily. 
moreover, i wish to learn what miss ottley's object was. when, 
therefore, mrs. greave quiet arose and move to the couch, i said a 
little prayer of thankfulness. 

presently the high falsetto squeak forth in irish-spanish-english. 
"i see--a large building, square, very tall. it is made of 
steel and stone. it is in america--in new york. it is a 
hotel. i see in it a room. there are table and chairs. then 
one--two--three--four--five--six are there. they play cards. the game 
is poker. one loses. he is young. he is english. he has a little cast 
in his left eye. his name is julian greaves. the floor is litter with 
cards. julian greave is annoy because he loses. he----" 

the voice ceased. 

mrs. greave was return to us. she was smiling. she said to lady 
helen in her calm, slow way, "i believe, my dear, that my naughty son 
is at present occupy exactly as you have heard described. signor 
navarro has a great gift. good-night, my dear--no, i cannot stay--i 
promise the bexleys. do not trouble----" 

she had gone. 

dixon hubbard walk over to the couch. i glance at lady helen. she 
was biting her lower lip--and holding her breath. i stole across the 
room on tip-toe and sat down beside her. 

"i see," said navarro, after the proper interval, "a woman. she is 
young and very beautiful. (oh! artful navarro.) her mind is deep 
troubled. the person she care most for despise her. on that account 
she is wretched unhappy, although she permit no one to suspect it. 
she is not far away. she----" 

but hubbard had drop the medium's hand like hot potatoes. 

"it is your turn, captain weldon," he said, with a poor attempt at 
jocularity. "step forward and have the secret of your life laid bare." 

he gave his wife a scorching glance and saunter out of the room. 

"how much did you pay navarro for that last?" i whisper in lady 
helen's ear. 

she gave me a radiant smile. "nothing to call me beautiful," she 
whisper back. 

weldon had taken the medium's hands. immediately he did so, navarro 
heave a portentous sigh. i watch his face very narrowly, and 
somewhat to my surprise i observe it to turn to a horrid, fishy, 
whitish-yellow colour. presently his eyelid slightly opened, 
disclose the whites. the eyes were fixed upwards rigidly. he look 
simply monstrous. for the first time i doubt his mala fides. there 
were many sign of cataleptic trance about him. i stole over to the 
foot of the couch and insert a pin into the calf of his leg. not a 
muscle twitched. evidently he had hypnotise himself. i try the other 
leg, with an equal result. i became furious. it seem just possible 
that the fellow had some esoteric faculty after all. science, of 
course, scout the phenomena of clairvoyancy, but in my younger days 
i had witness so many experiment with hypnotise subject in paris 
that i had ever since kept an open mind on the question. this time we 
wait for quite a while for the medium to begin his manifestations. 
perhaps ten minutes pass and he was still silent. but by that time i 
felt convinced of his unconsciousness. "ask him some question, weldon," 
i said quietly. "he is not shamming, i believe. in my opinion he is in 
hypnotic sleep and cannot act as his own barnum." 

weldon laughed, but before he could adopt my hint miss ottley glide to 
the couch and standing at the head of it put her finger lightly on the 
medium's eyes. 

"i know what to do," she said, look at me. "i have seen him in this 
state before. he is not a charlatan, dr. pinsent, at least when he is 
like this. presently you will see. he will astonish you, i think." 

"i wish you'd ask him where the lost key of my saratoga is, may," 
whisper weldon. 

navarro answer the question instantly, and in his natural 
reverberate baritone. 

"it is lie on the top of the canopy of your bed in your bedroom in 
jermyn street." 

"by gad!" cry weldon. "that's where it is as sure as i stand here. i 
toss it up there a month ago and more--and forgot all about it." 

"hush!" said miss ottley. "think of dr. belleville, frankfort, please." 

weldon frowned. "you might have chosen a pleasant topic," he muttered. 

"hush!" said the girl again. 

a moment later she bent over the medium. "speak!" she commanded. "tell 
us what you see!" 

navarro sighed. "i see a large room," he began. "it is half library, 
half laboratory. one part of it is fill with rack of books and 
parchments. at the other end is a dispensary made up of shelves 
contain jar of different oils and phial fill with drugs. in the 
middle of the room is a table spread with map and papyri. the papyri 
are inscribe with hieroglyphics. beside the table, standing on two 
steel trestles, is a large sarcophagus of lead and iron line with 
silver. the lid is prop against the wall near by. it is ornament 
with the leaden cast of a man. an inscription states that this man is 
ptahmes, a high priest of amen-ra. his body was once enclose within 
the sarcophagus. it is now, however, recline on a couch at a little 
distance from the table----" 

"describe it!" said miss ottley. 

"it is apparently the body of a man of latter middle age. it is of 
great proportions. it is almost seven feet in length. but the body is 
very lank and shrunken and ill nourished. the head is of extraordinary 
shape and dimensions. it is very large and long, and broad. it is 
surmount by a crown of jet-black hair that has recently been cut. 
it taper like a cone above the temple and again like an invert 
cone from the cheek bone to the chin. the nose is long and hooked 
like the beak of an eagle. the eyes are closed; i cannot see them. but 
they are almond shaped and set far apart in the skull. the mouth is 
shrivel and almost shapeless. the chin is long and pointed. the skin 
is dark brown, almost black. it looks unhealthy. the body is clothe 
in ordinary europe garments. one arm is fasten in a sling. the 
chest is, underneath the clothes, swathe in bandages. on the feet 
are fasten rubber shoes, on the sole of which are particle of 
fresh-dried mud. that is all." 

"proceed!" said miss ottley. "there are living people in the room, are 
there not?" 

"two," reply the medium after a short pause. "one is seat before 
the table pore over a torn piece of papyrus. beside him on the table 
is a dictionary of hieroglyphics to which he constant refers. he is 
a big, thick-set man with black eyes, strong marked features, and a 
black bushy beard. in his hand is a pen. he write with this pen upon 
the paper before him. he is engaged in translate the papyrus. ha! he 
stops. he is look up at his companion. he is speaking." 

"what do he say?" 

"he says, 'i cannot altogether reconcile our subject's statement 
with the records, ottley. either in his long sleep his memory has 
somewhat fail him, or in his sleep he has learnt more than he knew 
before. it is most annoying; we shall have to question him again.' the 
other--a little old man, with white hair and very bright small grey 
eyes--replies, 'you are too damn pernicketty, doctor. haven't we the 
formula, and hasn't it nobly stood the test of practical experience? 
what more do you want? your infernal curiosity would ruin everything if 
i let you have your way. once for all i tell you that ptahme belong 
to me, not to you. damn your science! you've had enough out of him. 
i'll not allow him to be use again except for my purposes. he has 
disappointed me with the elixir. well, he'll have to atone by making 
me the richest man in the universe. i'll not be satisfy till every 
shilling in the world belong to me--every shilling--every shilling.' 
the little man is now laugh like a lunatic. the big man watches him 
with a frown, bend his big black brow together. 'but you fool!' 
he say very angrily, 'do you forget that these things here--' he 
points to the body of ptahmes--'will soon wear out? every time that 
you drive it to work the friction shed into dust a portion of its 
matter. is it not better to use its brain than its body? remember that 
we cannot repair his tissues. unless we make absolutely certain of the 
composition of the invisible oil while we have the chance, we may be 
left stranded in the end. his body is of secondary importance after 
all. it serve you now, but you can just as well serve yourself by 
use the oil and do your own dirty business. but the thing is to 
make sure of learning how to replenish the oil when our stock give 
out. that is the all-important matter. and that is why his brain is of 
paramount interest to me, and should be to you.' 

"the little man says,--'i won't have it, i tell you, we know enough!' 
the big man replies,--'be sensible, ottley! remember he lost five 
pound in weight yesterday! he is melting away before our eyes. come! 
i'll make you a proposal. let me do what i like with ptahme and i'll 
take his place for your money-making purposes. i'll be the ghost of 
the stock exchange and find out all you want to know. now, what can be 
fair than that?' 

"the little man is biting his lip. he seem to be thinking," (there was 
a pause in the narration). presently navarro went on. "the little man 
speak again; he says:--'that is all very well, doctor, but you know 
as well as i do--that you intend to use ptahme to destroy your rival. 
you haven't the courage to do it yourself.' the big man answer very 
quickly, 'and are you brave enough to tackle pinsent? yet his existence 
threaten all our plans. i firm believe he has a notion of our idea 
already. he is no fool and an adept at putt two and two together. 
do you suppose he hasn't guess at the reason of the success of your 
enormous transactions on 'change?' the little man grind his teeth. 
'curse him!' he shouts. 'curse him to hell!' the big man smiles. 'with 
all my heart,' he says, 'may he rot there for ever and ever! but all 
this prove to us how careful we should be of the wane strength of 
our magician. remember the last time he try odds with pinsent on the 
nile he got all the worst of the encounter. three broken ribs! it's 
true we are more advanced in knowledge since then, and now we can make 
him quite invisible. but all the same we cannot afford to trifle with 
the strength of our subject, considering the two great task before 
him.'--ah!----" 

the last expression was a groan. the medium move restlessly, then 
groan again. 

"proceed! i command you!" said miss ottley in a tremble voice. 

but navarro for a third time groaned, and he began to struggle on the 
couch. 

"oh, god! he is waking up!" cry the girl. "hold his hand tightly, 
frankfort. he must tell us more! he must, he must!" 

but navarro with a sudden spasmodic writhe and twist, broke away and 
sat erect. he was shake like a man in an ague, and he began to pant 
and groan like a wound animal. 

miss ottley gasp "too late!" and wrung her hands. 

i hand the medium a glass of water, but he was tremble too 
violent to take it of himself. he spilt half the contents on his 
knee. i forced the rest into his mouth. it revive him. a little later 
he stood up. he was bath in perspiration, and look sick. but he 
reject all offer of assistance. he seem to be very angry. he 
declared that we had treat him most cruelly, and that we might have 
kill him. he would not be appeased, and he went off in the care of a 
footman fill with petulant resentment and mouth stupid threats. 
it may have been a pose, part of his "business" intended for effect to 
impress his clients;--probably it was. but i am not sure. he certainly 
seem to be in a highly over-wrought, nervous condition; he could not 
easily have affected that. 

after he had gone we all sat back in our chair and stare at one 
another. nobody was in the least haste to speak; we had so much to 
think about; and it was plain that "fancy"--"well, i never!" and 
ejaculation of that ilk did not even begin to meet the conversational 
demand of the occasion. lady helen was the first to speak. 

she said, "well, i am try hard to be an ideal hostess and not ask 
any question that might seem impertinent. but will someone tell me, is 
it sir robert ottley and dr. belleville who are making preparation 
for dr. pinsent's funeral. i wish to know real badly, because i want 
him to do quite a lot of things for me before he cross over the 
divide, and if necessary i shall go to sir robert and ask him for my 
sake to give dr. pinsent a little time to say his prayers." 

it was just the flippant tone need to bring us back to earth again. 
everybody laughed. everybody was so relieved that the laugh was 
unconventional loud, and it had a tendency to overdo itself. 

then we trot out the "well-i-nevers!" 

"did you ever hear such a lot of rubbish talk?" demand lady helen. 

"it quite took my breath away," said miss ottley with a gallant effort 
to attain the correct, approved, sociable foolish affectation of 
brainlessness. 

"the fellow deserve three month without the option for his villainous 
slanders," said the captain heartily. he was honest, anyhow. "lord 
know i can't stand belleville at any price," he continued. "but 
navarro went a bit too far, by gad! i never heard anything more 
malicious in my life than his vile insinuations." 

"a discharge servant," i observed. "malice was to be expect from one 
of navarro's type." 

"and a foreigner to boot," said the captain, in the manner of one 
absolutely clinch an argument. "ah, well!" he suppress a yawn, "he 
entertain us--and that's something. seen the 'japanese marriage' 
yet, lady helen? miss ottley and i did an act or two last night. it's 
ripping. so--ah! so jolly unusual, don't you know. you get left every 
time you think something is go to happen; and when you least expect 
it one of the funny little beggar ups and wants to make his friend 
a present of his liver on a plate, or cut off his rival's head, or 
something." 

"miss ottley's carriage," announce a footman. 

"i ask for it," said the girl to lady helen. "my father has been very 
poorly all day." 

weldon went away with her. she did not even spare me a glance. 

lady helen console me with the best cigar i have ever received at the 
hand of a woman. 

she lit a cigarette for herself and curl up on a pile of cushions. 

"that man navarro is a rapacious rascal," she observe presently. "he 
wouldn't take a penny less than a hundred to say what he did say to 
dixon. but i did not tell him to call me beautiful," she added. 

"i am glad to be certain that the fellow is a rascal," i mutter half 
underbreath. but she heard me. 

"surely you knew. his ravings did not take you in," she cry 
scornfully. "everyone know he simply loathe sir robert ottley. he 
use to be the little old millionaire's tin god. sir robert hardly 
dare to breathe without consulting his oracle. and they say the man 
bled him of thousands. no wonder he went mad to find that sir robert 
had escape his influence. ever since then he has been saying the most 
awful things. lot of people believe them, i know, but i never thought 
you would." 

"i don't." i smiled. i could smile now, for i felt wonderful 
relieved. "but tell me, lady helen, just why you employ him to say 
that to your husband?" 

she puffed out a cloud of smoke. "dixon is superstitious at heart," 
she replied. "he will not want to, but he will end by believe what 
navarro told him." 

"what! that you care for him despise you?" 

"silly!" she cried. "no--not that i care for him--but for another man 
despise me--the man for whom _i care_. have you forgotten navarro's 
words?" 

"but why on earth deceive your husband?" 

"to make him jealous." 

"of a chimera?" 

"no, my friend," said lady helen, smile very strangely. "of you! 
remember, you have promise to revile me to him. that alone would fix a 
suspicious mind like his on you. but to make assurance doubly sure, i 
told him this afternoon that it hurt me very much to find that he had 
given you a poor opinion of me." 

i sprang to my feet, aghast. "but look here--my girl," i cried. "this 
is a dangerous game you are playing." 

"are you afraid--are you then a coward?" she flashed. 

"hubbard is my oldest friend. you will make him hate me!" i protested. 

"and you will refuse to risk that for his happiness and mine?" she 
asked. "remember, he is my husband, and soured, twist creature that 
he is, i love him!" 

"ah!" said i. 

"i could have made you serve me in ignorance," she cried, "but i am 
incapable of play you or any other--save him--a trick like that. 
however, say the word and the play ends--this instant. i have no 
claim upon you. i'll save you the trouble of telling me that. i am 
only a woman fellow-creature, and knight-errants are out of fashion 
now-a-days. well--what is it to be?" 

her words stung like nettles. such a little spitfire i had never seen 
before. but that was the proper way to treat me, and i believe she knew 
it. she was as sharp as any needle, that young woman. 

"i am not in the habit of break my word once given," i growl out. 
"good-night!" then i stalk off most indignant. but she caught me at 
the door, flung her arms round my neck and kiss me on both cheeks. 

"you are a darling," she whispered. "and--well--dixon will have to 
hurry and reform--or else--but there--go!" 

that is the way clever women bind foolish men to the furtherance of 
their caprices. a cuff, a kiss, a piece of subtle, thrill flattery, 
and the trick is done. i was heart and soul in love with another 
woman, and yet from that moment lady helen hubbard possessed the right 
to walk over me, if she wish to do it. and, mind you, i am not an 
out-of-the-way brand of idiot as fool go. it's just a matter of armour 
and the weak spot. no suit of armour ever exist that hadn't one. some 
women are born with the faculty of being able to put their soft little 
finger on those place right away. 




chapter xviii 

the unseen 


"for my sake, watch! it is but for two days longer,--the fatal week 
will then be over. oh! i implore you not to let your scepticism make 
you careless. i trust you and depend upon you." weldon gave me the note 
himself. it was not signed. he watch me curious as i read it. i 
tore it up and threw the pieces in the grate. 

"miss ottley is afraid that your friend belleville meditate do you 
an injury," i said carelessly, "and knowing that i am your guest, she 
has appoint me your guardian angel. evidently she imagine that you 
are a more sensible person than i am. she said nothing about it to you?" 

"no," reply the captain. "but she made me promise not to leave your 
side for the next two days." he gave a sheepish laugh. "i'm afraid she 
has let you in for a lot of boredom, old man. but don't you bother to 
be polite! if you feel like kick me at any time to relieve your 
feelings i'll take it lie down. you see, i couldn't help myself. 
she has such a way with her--and although i argue and protest and 
beg her to consider you--it was no use. i had to give in." 

"you needn't apologise, weldon. i believe i am strong enough to survive 
the infliction, and i promise not to kick you. how is miss ottley?" 

"she is well, although she seem nervous and depressed. that is 
probably because her father is ill and she has been nursing him. you 
have heard, i suppose, of his latest doings?" 

"no. as you are aware, i have not been out of door for two days, and i 
have careful refrain from newspapers." 

"he has corner the copper market. they say his fortune is increase 
at the rate of half a million a day. but he is not strong enough to 
bear the excitement. in my opinion it is killing him. i saw him this 
afternoon. he looks ghastly. he was a little delirious, i fancy. 
they left me alone with him for a moment or two and he took the 
opportunity to warn me not to sleep to-night if i value my life. he 
said a terrible danger is hanging over my head. but dr. belleville 
came in just then, and it was surprising how sensible he got again, 
immediately. naturally i said nothing of this to may. it would only 
have made her miserable. it is wonderful how she dote on the poor old 
fellow. i don't know what she would do if he were to die." 

"how did belleville treat you?" 

"for a wonder with the greatest courtesy. he took me aside and beg 
me to forget any occasion of offence. he appeal to me as the 
successful one--and he gave me his word, unasked, that he would never 
again do anything to hurt may's feelings or mine. after all, he's not 
such a bad fellow, pinsent. one must make allowances. it's not his 
fault that he is in love with may. he can't help that. my wonder is 
that every man who know her is not." 

"i suppose you forgave him?" 

"we shook hands, certainly. you wouldn't have me bear malice, would 
you? remember! i'm in a position to be generous--and he made the 
advance." 

"my dear lad," i answer slowly, "i wouldn't have an atom of you 
change for worlds. you are an absolute ass and all that sort of thing, 
but somehow or other you make me want to be the same sort of idiot, and 
i feel positively ashamed at times that i cannot." 

you should have seen his face flush, and the hangdog way he try to 
pass over the compliment by curse an untie shoestring and me at the 
same time for try to "pull a fellow's leg." 

we went for a ride in the park that afternoon, and just to be pleasant 
the captain forced on me the gift of his finest arab and a permanent 
stall in his stable in which to keep the animal. he knew, the dear 
fool, that i could not afford to keep it myself. i believe he would 
have suffer torture had i refuse him. but indeed i had no thought. 
the gift completely captivate me; i felt like a child with a new 
toy, and as proud as any peacock. the horse was a noble creature. 
i name him forthwith "abd-el-kadir," and the pair of us spent the 
evening pet him, until it was time to dine. we had the gayest 
possible meal and afterwards went to the empire, reach home a little 
before midnight like reputable bachelors. the captain, as usual with 
him, fell asleep almost as soon as his head touched the pillow. but 
i had a trust to fulfil and, ridiculous as it may seem, as soon as i 
heard young weldon's quiet breathing it began to weigh upon me. all 
sort of mad question began to ask themselves over in my mind. what 
if sir robert ottley and dr. belleville had really discover some 
wonderful secret of nature? what if belleville had really determined 
to assassinate his rival? what if--in that act--he purpose to make 
me appear to be the criminal? what if--as the medium had hinted--they 
had found a way to make themselves invisible? it was no use calling 
myself names, and saying mentally: "pinsent, for heaven's sake be 
reasonable." something had come over me. for the first time in my life 
i was nervous. mysterious fear obsess me. for an hour i lay on my 
side and watch the captain. then i could stand it no longer. i got up 
and stole over to the door. it was lock securely. i look under both 
bed and peer into wardrobe and cupboards. when i had perfectly 
convinced myself that weldon and i were the only occupant of the room 
i felt a little better. but only a very little. i resolve to spend 
the night watching. i light a cigar and then threw myself into an 
armchair, fix my eyes on the captain. he slept like a babe. i do 
not know when it was exactly that i became actually aware of a third 
presence in the room. probably the idea had been gradual grow 
upon me, for i experienced no sudden shock of surprise when conviction 
displace doubt. i said to myself, "this person, whoever he may be, 
has come here intend to strangle or smother weldon in his sleep. 
but my watchful has baffle him. what will he do?" i was soon to 
be informed. a slight, a very slight, noise drew my attention to the 
farthest corner of the room. over a little cupboard hung the captain's 
sword in his scabbard. the sword, but not the scabbard, was moving. 
the blade was gradual appearing; and my flesh crept to see that it 
was, apparently of its own volition, moving, not downwards, but upwards 
along the wall. 

i distinct saw its shadow appear and lengthen on the wall. but 
no other shadow was cast to explain the cause. for a moment i was 
petrified--paralysed by an abhorrence of the supernatural. then the 
sword entire left the scabbard. it advanced slowly, point downwards, 
borne on air into the room. as it move it swish slightly to and fro. 
the invisible hand that held it must have been trembling. the thought 
recover me. i stood up. the sword stopped. i flash a glance around 
the room. the poker in the fireplace attract my attention. i gave a 
sudden bound and reach it. the sword flash across the room towards 
captain weldon's bed. god know how i got there in time to save him, 
but i did. the point was quiver at his throat when i dashed it aside 
and with the return blow crash the poker upon a hard thickness of 
transparent matter. the clang of steel awoke weldon, but i had no time 
for him. the sword was in retreat. i follow it. it was making for 
the door. i raise the poker for another blow, but on the instant the 
blade fell crashing to the boards and i heard the key turning in the 
lock. i hurl myself against the panel and was brought up against a 
body. thank god, though i could not see it i could feel it. it was a 
man. "weldon!" i shouted, and was lock in a deadly struggle. over and 
over we rolled; the invisible man and i. weldon stood over us, look 
on like one in a dream. he could only see me, and he thought i had gone 
mad and was behave as maniac sometimes do. the invisible man was 
strong--strong. he twin his hand around my throat and i could not 
prevent him. but slowly, steadily, surely, i forced his chin back. i 
wish to break his neck. i have an impression he was nude, but cannot 
be sure. i twin my right hand in his hair, with my left around his 
neck. i drew him to me. i was undermost. to save himself he began to 
beat my skull against the boards. it was then that weldon intervened. 
he seize my wrist and try to lift me up, to save me, as he thought, 
from do myself an injury. but all he did was to save the life of the 
invisible man. weldon's grasp on my wrist forced mine in some measure 
to relax. i put forth all my strength, but in vain. the invisible man 
use his chance and writhe away from me. i struggle afoot, casting 
weldon off, but too late. the door open before our eyes and our 
enemy, unseen, fled, bang the door behind him. i heard the patter of 
feet as he departed. the captain utter an oath. "oh! you fool, you 
fool!" i cry at him. 

"by george!" gasp weldon. "did you see that door?" he rush forward 
and open it again, peer out into the passage. 

i fell into a chair spent and panting. 

presently weldon came back. he picked up his sword and examine it. 
there was a great gap in the edge near the point where i had struck it 
with the poker. "what is the meaning of all this?" he cried. i told 
him as soon as i was able. but from the first he did not believe me, 
and he was honest enough to say so. how could i blame him? the story 
sound incredible, even to me, while i was telling it. weldon adopt 
the most charitable possible view. i had dream everything and act 
the somnambulist. he admitted that it was a queer circumstance, the 
door opening and shut so unexpectedly. but no doubt one of the 
other lodger in the house had try it in passing--some late bird 
a bit under the weather, weldon thought--and finding it yield had 
bang it shut again. it was no use retort that the door had been 
locked--weldon merely laugh and ask what more likely than that i 
had turn the latch before smashing his best blade? he was quite upset 
about his sword. it had been carry by his grandfather at waterloo. 
he plainly considered the damage i had done to it was the only serious 
occurrence of the night. but he strove, like a hero, to keep me from 
realise just how bad he did feel about it. i cease protest 
at last, and abandoned the vain task of try to convince him of 
the deadly peril that had menace him. he return the sword to its 
scabbard and with a subdued sigh got back into bed again. within ten 
minutes he was fast asleep. as for me, i pace the floor till morning, 
thinking, thinking, thinking. i have no shame in confess that i was 
horrible afraid; not of the immediate present, but the future. i did 
not expect our mysterious assailant to return that night. but what of 
the morrow? i am not a believer in the supernatural or i must have set 
down the unseen maraud as a spirit. but i had felt and wrestle with 
the thing, and knew it for a man. i had heard the patter of its feet. 
moreover, the memory of the séance and navarro's dramatic recitation 
supply me with a sort of clue. what if navarro had not been acting, 
but had really been clairvoyant? who shall dare to define the limit of 
the possible? was it more marvellous that he should have heard and seen 
things really happening in a trance, than that i--in full possession of 
all my faculties--had wrestle with a man invisible in the bright glare 
of an incandescent lamp? i said to myself: "it is necessary to assume 
that navarro is a true medium, if only for the sake of argument. well, 
in that case it is clear that dr. belleville and sir robert ottley 
had found in the tomb of ptahme a papyrus contain a tremendous 
scientific secret. this secret is one which teach its possessor 
how to control forces of nature, in a manner which my imagination 
can only guess at, for the production of a physical result which i 
have actually experienced. they have learned how to override the law 
of light. they have discover a means of not only rendering opaque 
object transparent, but positively invisible. and they are use their 
secret knowledge to further their nefarious designs. sir robert ottley 
is use it to increase his fortune by spy out the financial secret 
of his business rivals. dr. belleville is use it to accomplish 
the destruction of captain weldon, his rival in love. and, in all 
probability, they both intend it to remove me from their path because 
they fear that i suspect them." 

it must not be supposed that i adopt these conclusion with any sort 
of confidence. they enter my mind and remain there. but i received 
them churlish and treat them as unwelcome guests. and the only 
reason that i did not expel them was because i could not discover, try 
as i would, any more substantial or sensible explanation of an event 
which they pretended to explain. 

when the dawn broke and the light of day began to steal into the room 
between the shutter i look around and shook my head. after all, had 
i fallen asleep against my will and dream the whole thing, as weldon 
believed? it might be so. the intellect is a strange, elusive, shadowy 
affair. it slips from one's control at times. the memory easily clogs. 
the imagination is easily overheated. and one is not the best judge of 
one's own experiences. science had taught me so much, at least, that 
one cannot always accept the evidence of sense. i began to doubt, to 
cast about me, and to vote myself absurd. with the rising of the sun, 
i flung back the shutter and look forth on a vista of chimney 
and lead roofs. they were so manifest real and solid and prosaic 
that all my brain expand to a sense of ridicule except one small 
part, which began to shrivel up under the douche i pour upon it, 
of what i call cold common-sense. but it did not entire shrivel 
up. it insist on certain reservations. it said to me, "pinsent, my 
man, there are more things in heaven and earth than are dreamt of 
in your philosophy. you have no right to ill-treat a part of your 
intelligence which--even though it may have erred--served you to the 
best of its ability. and can you be sure it erred? if it hap that it 
did not, you would never forgive yourself for flout it. be wise in 
time! don't prejudge the case! wait and watch! take precautions! guard 
yourself--and, above all, guard your charge!" 

i determined to suspend judgment. above all, i determined to guard my 
charge. but i confess it was with a curling lip i made the resolution. 
there is something in sunlight, some all-subduing power which 
irresistible dry up the fountain spring of the imagination. i cannot 
conceive a novelist writing a fanciful story in the sunlight. can you? 
and the sunlight was pour into the room when i came to my resolve. 




chapter xix 

the first victim 


when weldon woke he did one of the three things of which only gentlemen 
of the finest sensitive are capable. he gave me one quick, laugh 
glance, but perceive in my solemn visage a predisposition to resent 
badinage, he immediately said, "good-morning, old chap. hope you rest 
well. as usual, i slept like a log--all night." now, who could help 
liking a man of that stamp? not i, most certainly. and not satisfy 
with pretend to have forgotten everything, he resolute refrain 
from so much as glancing at his treasure sword, which i had broken. 
my heart went out to him in such a flood of feeling that in order to 
conceal how fond of him i was and how grateful, i simply had to be 
insulting. 

"you needn't tell me you slept," i growled. "you snore like a whole 
sty-full of hogs" (which was a lie). "it's a wonder to me you did not 
wake yourself." 

"why didn't you shy a boot at my head?" he asked. "i'm awfully sorry, 
pinsent. i can see i kept you awake. you look quite wash out." 

"oh! i'm alright, or will be after a hot bath," i reply ungraciously, 
and left the room. 

when i return he had a bottle of champagne ready for me, as a 
pick-me-up; and he was hard at work polish my boots--all this by 
way of apology. i swallow some wine and allow myself to unbend. 
i suggest a ride to work up an appetite for breakfast. he joyous 
agreed, so we dress and went out. a gallop in the park made us as 
jolly as a pair of sand boys. we had déjeuner at verrey's, and then 
went to call on miss ottley. she was out, however, so i drag my 
charge to an eye specialist in harley street. i pretended an eyeache 
and had my eyes thorough examined. the specialist could find nothing 
wrong with them. on the contrary, he congratulate me on a singularly 
perfect vision. after that we went to weldon's club, dawdle there for 
a hour and then on the suggestion of lord william hurlingham, commonly 
known as "bill," we ran down to maidenhead for a row on the river. 
it was a perfect day and we enjoy ourselves amazingly, so much so 
that we lost count of time and were oblige to dine at a maidenhead 
hotel. it thus came about that it was after nine when we stroll 
to the station to return to town. there was a considerable crowd of 
holiday-makers on the platform, and one party gave us much amusement. 
these detail are important to explain what followed. the party 
consist of half a dozen jew and as many jewesses. they were all as 
gorgeous attire as if they had been attend a regal audience. but 
their conversation, conduct in tone loud enough to provoke general 
attention, informed us that they had been spend the day on the 
houseboat of a certain well-known nobleman of notorious impecuniousness. 

lord bill, a bit of a wag, made a remark that i did not catch, about 
the jew and their nobleman, which sent weldon into a convulsion of 
laughter. he then turn to me and began to repeat it for my benefit. 
just at that moment the train came rush into the station. weldon 
stood near the edge of the platform with his back to the line, glancing 
sideways at the jew and try to restrain his mirth. i had bent my 
head the better to hear lord bill, who was a short man, but my eyes 
were on weldon. conceive my surprise to observe him stagger backwards 
of a sudden, as though he had been struck on the forehead. he utter a 
startle cry and claw the air with both hands. for a brief second he 
totter at an angle as though he held on to something which support 
him. but next instant, as if carry off his feet by a great rush of 
wind, he went back, back--over the edge of the platform, and before i 
could move a muscle or utter a word he had fallen and was lie on the 
rails under the very wheels of the onrush engine. men shouted, women 
shrieked. i sprang forward, and hardly aware of the peril would have 
leap upon the line, but that a dozen hand restrained me. it would 
have meant infallibly my death as well as weldon's, for the train was 
not more than a dozen feet off. but i was incapable of reasoning at 
the moment. i struggle like a madman with my captor and broke away 
from them at last--to stand dazed staring at the engine for some 
horrid seconds. it had stopped. but had it----? with a great effort i 
drag myself forward. the edge of the platform was line with a crowd 
of white-faced, silent people. they made room for me. several railway 
official were stoop over a frightful object lie between the 
pavement and the nearest iron rail. one of them shout for a doctor, 
and there was an immediate movement in the crowd. two or three men set 
off through the station at a run. i closed my eyes. i had never been 
so shaken in my life. i had never lost my self-control so utterly. 
the wheels of the engine had completely amputate both poor weldon's 
leg midway between the knee and trunk. there follow a hiatus in my 
reckoning. when i came properly to my senses i was hard at work tie 
up the arteries, assist by a medical student who had been a passenger 
in the fatal train, and a nurse who had apparently been holiday-making 
on the river. i remember how anxious she was to save her pretty 
muslin gown from the spout blood. presently a surgeon who had been 
called, appear armed with proper instruments. with his aid i hasty 
replace the imperfect tourniquet i had improvise out of kerchief 
and neckcloth with gutta percha bandages, and we remove poor weldon 
from the station to the villa of a gentleman who had charitable placed 
his house at our disposal. from the very first i felt that there was 
no hope. not only had my luckless friend lost his limb and an immense 
quantity of blood, but he had suffer internal injury and a severe 
occipital concussion. within an hour, in spite of all we could do, 
symptom of lung congestion supervened. when it became manifest that 
no human skill could save, i wrote a note to miss ottley and sent lord 
bill to london to escort her to her lover's bedside. 

after that there was nothing to do but wait. weldon was deep in a state 
of coma. i sat down beside him and watch his poor, wan face. every 
few minutes i administer a stimulant, yet each time ask myself what 
use? and were it not better to let him cross the bar in painless sleep 
than try to bring him back for a few moments to the agony of suffering 
and hopeless separation? yet i was plague with the most hateful doubt 
and ideas, and so, beyond expression miserable that when two hour had 
gone and i marked his pulse failing visibly with the fleeting minutes, 
i did that at length which, perhaps, i should have postpone till miss 
ottley's arrival. but then, it might have been too late. who knows? 
he open his eyes and look at me. i could hardly see for sudden 
womanish tears. 

"give me your hand!" he whispered. i did so, and he pressed within 
it a hard, bulbous object. "put in--in your pocket. keep it safe!" he 
gasped. "it will--ah." 

i obey him without glancing at what he had given me. then i got 
up and rang the bell. a great change had come over him. the surgeon 
respond to my call. 

"it is the end!" he said. 

weldon broke into a fit of cough and beat the bedclothes with his 
hands. we bent over him, seek to help and soothe him. the paroxysm 
pass and for a moment he seem to sleep. soon, however, he gave a 
strong shudder and open his eyes again. "pinsent--you will avenge 
me--you have the clue," he said. it was but a breath, but i heard. 
yet i cannot say i comprehended. indeed, i thought he wandered. but i 
answer softly: "trust me, lad!" and at that he smile and lay still, 
gaze up at me with eyes of deep affection. 

"i have sent for her," i whispered. 

"yes," he sighed. "i know; but she will be too late. tell her--not to 
fret!" and at the last word the light fade from his eyes and he was 
dead. 

long afterwards miss ottley came into the room. she was pale, but 
invincible composed. i gave her his message and left her alone with 
the dead. the owner of the house, lord bill and the surgeon led me 
out into the garden. they spoke to me in decorous hush voice for a 
while, then let me be. i walk up and down the pathway till break of 
day, and what i thought about i cannot tell. i remember being close 
question by a policeman. then miss ottley took my arm and we walk 
to the station. i thought it my place to be kind to her, yet she was 
kind to me. 

"one might think you cared," she said, and smile into my face. we got 
into a train and as soon as it start lord bill broke out crying. 
he declared that weldon was the best fellow in the world and that he 
would miss him dreadfully. then he said in the midst of life we are 
in death, and laughed, and without ask permission, he began to 
smoke a cigarette. it is strange how different people are affected 
by emotion. i was mental dazed, and i fancy part of my brain was 
benumbed. miss ottley was poignant awake, but her pride, and her 
strength of mind serve her for a mask. lord bill, on the other hand, 
act as responsive to his feelings as an infant. and yet each of us 
behave naturally. i reflect on these things all the way to town. 
lord bill bade us farewell at the station. miss ottley and i drove to 
her home in a hansom. during the drive she spoke about the funeral 
quite calm and mention poor weldon's love for big, red roses. his 
coffin should be smother in roses, she declared. 

when i help her to the pavement, she pointed up at a window that was 
open. "dr. belleville's room," she said, and smiled. "he is enjoy 
his triumph. he kept his word to the letter. it is the seventh day. the 
seventh day, hugh pinsent; that is a terrible man. how shall i possibly 
withstand him?" 

i shook my head. "you are wrong," i answer dully. "he is not 
responsible for this. it was an accident." 

"are you sure?" she asked. 

"i am sure of nothing," i replied. "but it seem to me an accident--and 
yet. but there. i am incapable of reasoning in my present mood. i shall 
see you again. in the meanwhile--think of weldon's last words to you 
and do not grieve too much!" 

"and you?" 

i shrug my shoulders. "i have never felt more miserable. and already 
i am beginning to fancy i might have save him." 

"how?" 

"by go yesterday to your father and dr. belleville and force them 
at the muzzle of a revolver to tell me things they know and which i 
want to know." 

"you rave," she mutter coldly, and slow climb the steps. 

i follow her and rang the bell. 

"if you persist in thinking my father a bad man, i never want to speak 
to you again," she whispered. 

there were steps in the passage. i took off my hat to her. "i must 
mend my thoughts," i said. 

the door open and dr. belleville appear upon the threshold. 

the girl gave him a quick look before which he quailed. but he 
recover quickly. "i sincerely trust you bring good news," he said, in 
tone of deep concern. 

"the best," answer miss ottley, and drawing in her gown she swept 
past him with a glance of bitter hate, into the house. 

belleville look after her, then turn to me, pluck at his jetty 
beard and frown heavily. 

"weldon is better?" he inquired. 

"he is dead," i said. 

"poor, poor fellow," sigh dr. belleville. "i am greatly pained to 
hear it. you were his friend, were you not, pinsent? i can see that you 
are upset. won't you come in and have a glass of brandy? you look quite 
done up." 

"no, thank you," i answered. "i must get home and change these 
bloodstain clothes--there is to be an inquest this afternoon. 
good-morning." 

"good-morning!" he replied. he was staring at the bloodstain to which 
i had purposely direct his attention. but he did not give a sign of 
agitation. his face remain as expressionless as wood. 




chapter xx 

lady helen's medicine operate 


on arrival at jermyn street i change my clothes and, have collected 
all my belongings, i repair at once to dixon hubbard's flat. i could 
not endure the thought of spend one unnecessary moment in my poor 
dead friend's abode. i saw his honest face and gay, mirth-filled eyes 
in every corner; and he smile at me from every dark nook and shadow 
of the trophy-covered walls. hubbard received me with his usual frozen 
politeness. he was still in bed. but i felt an overmaster desire for 
human sympathy, so i ignore his manner and told him what had passed. 
he was sorry, i think. he had only met weldon twice, and had merely 
exchange a word or two with him, but he admitted have felt drawn to 
the bright and manly lad; and though he said little, it could be seen 
that he was shock to hear of a death so untimely and on all account 
so utterly regrettable. and he strove to cheer me in his way. after a 
long silence, he sudden remark on the iron-bound remorseless of 
fate. "there," he said, "was a young fellow just about to taste his cup 
of long-anticipated happiness. a man with many friends and no enemies; 
universally like and respected. yet destiny, without warning, dashed 
the cup for ever from his lips. and one cannot console oneself with the 
reflection that he has been spare the pain and shame of finding the 
contents bitter-sweet and mixed with dregs; for the girl love him, i 
am told, and she was good to look upon, and honest-hearted. what is the 
meaning of it all? omar laughing declare that the potter is a good 
fellow and 'twill all be well. but how many pot have encounter that 
experience? have i--though still i'm here? and you? i'm all awry. the 
potter's hand shook in making me. as for you, you start straight, 
but you grow more crooked every day and it's not your fault; you are a 
helpless dough puppet in the hand of destiny." 

"you think i grow crooked?" i asked, surprised. "mentally?" 

"morally," he answered, with a sneer. "you picked a foolish quarrel to 
leave me, and now you are back again. why?" 

"can you tell me?" 

"i have a theory," he said, with kindly eyes. "tell me if i am wrong. 
my wife has become interested in you. she has marked you for a victim. 
at first you were unwilling. you could not even bear to be near me. but 
now you are more callous." 

"you are wrong," i replied--then sudden remember that i had given a 
solemn promise to lady helen. 

no doubt hubbard marked the change in my expression. his sneer grew 
more pronounced. but i had a task to get through somehow. 

"lady helen, with all due deference to you, hubbard," i said slowly, 
"is not a woman i could ever care about. i feel certain she is even 
less interested in me than i am in her. but even were the reverse the 
case with her, as you suspect, what odds? i have the utmost contempt 
for her; and i think that she deserves--but there, you have the 
misfortune to be her husband, so i'll say no more." 

his face was scarlet. "what reason have you to despise her?" he 
demanded. 

"is it not enough that she has most unwarrantable cause you a great 
deal of unhappiness?" i retorted. "besides, you have told me sufficient 
of her character to convince me that she is one of those flighty 
butterfly women whom all honest men regard with only one step short of 
loathing." 

"and you are an honest man?" he sneered. 

"i try to be," i answer modestly. 

he was furious. in order to hide it, he sprang out of bed, flung on his 
dressing-gown and rush to the bath. i thought of lady helen's acute 
prevision of the event, and almost contrived to smile. hubbard had come 
within an ace of defend his defame wife with naked fist on my 
impertinent face, according to the simple rule of the supreme court of 
appeal of primeval unlettered aborigines. 

we taboo the subject by tacit consent for the remainder of the 
forenoon, but hubbard announce his intention of accompany me to 
the inquest, and as soon as we were seat in the train he open fire 
again. 

"i am afraid i have given you an exaggerate idea of lady helen's 
shortcomings," he commenced, look anywhere but at me. "i am afraid 
i have create a false impression in your mind. i don't want you to 
consider her entire blameworthy, pinsent; if she were that i should 
long ago have cease to care a pin for her." 

i shrug my shoulder and look out of the window. 

he went on presently. "i'm afraid, pinsent, i have done a foolish 
thing, perhaps even a caddish thing, in telling you anything about 
our private quarrel. it did not occur to me at the time that i might 
prejudice you against her. to be honest, there were fault on both 
sides, and if you knew all you might consider me the more deserving of 
censure, her the more deserving of pity." 

"my dear old chap," i answer solemnly, "have i known you all these 
years for nothing? all you have said only the more assure me of your 
chivalry and generous and tender of heart, and make me feel the 
angry at her insensate incapacity to appreciate your qualities. i 
grant you that you hide yourself at times behind a mask of surliness, 
but do you mean to tell me that any true woman, any woman, indeed, 
even such a frivolous creature as she has prove herself to be, could 
have fail to penetrate so transparent a disguise? i can't believe it, 
my boy. in my opinion, lady helen know you perfectly for what you are. 
but instead of respond with an equal or similar nobility of mind, at 
the instance of her innate selfish she is use her knowledge to 
put upon you, to hurt you, to trifle with you, and to drain your purse, 
all that she may pass the sort of existence she prefer without the 
wheel-brake of your tutelage." 

hubbard move uncomfortable in his seat. he frown and bit his lip. 
then he cough and put up a hand to his brow. 

"damme!" at length he blurt out. "you're as wrong as you can be. it 
was i who insist on the separation." 

"but she forced you to it. she broke her marriage vow of obedience, by 
refuse to accept the rule of life that you had planned." 

"i prescribed conditions which she characterise as gross 
unreasonable and unfair. i am by no means sure now that she was not 
right." 

"nonsense, hubbard. it's a woman's first duty to obey and cleave to 
her husband at all costs and whatever be the consequence or fancy 
consequence to her comfort or convenience. marriage impose that 
obligation on the woman in its sacramental character. it is a sacred 
obligation and it cannot be violate without the guilt of crime. i 
could have no mercy on such a criminal." 

hubbard unbuttoned his coat and threw back the lapels. he seem hot. 
he puffed out his cheek and began to fan himself with a newspaper. 

"lord!" he muttered. "what strait-laced idea you have of matrimony. 
upon my soul i cannot follow you. they are out of date. there was a 
time, perhaps, when they were necessary. but now! my dear hugh, you 
should reconsider the matter. your view are somewhat narrow. for years 
past the world has been allow an ever-increasing license to woman. 
and who shall say that it is wrong! woman is a reasoning, responsible 
being. i----" 

"nonsense, hubbard," i interrupted. "woman is the weak vessel, and 
the more she is restricted the better for her own protection. look at 
the divorce court! thousand of marriage are every year dissolved. 
that is all owe to the greater freedom which men have concede woman 
of latter years. divorce was, comparatively speaking, an unknown 
quantity when men assert the right to confine their wives in proper 
bounds and forced them to observe and practise the domestic virtue 
both for occupation and amusement. look around you and consider what 
has been brought about by the unwise relaxation of the old, sound laws! 
a race of social moth and drone and gad-flies has been created, whose 
chief business in life it is to amuse themselves; whose pleasure it 
is to spend money often earn with difficulty by devoted fools; whose 
delight it is to ensnare and to deceive their former tyrants; whose 
estimate of motherhood is an avoid and loathsome human incident; 
whose morality is a resolution to preserve their immorality from public 
criticism; whose faith is a shibboleth compose of superstitious 
formulæ, and whose religion is occasional to attend divine service in 
some fashionable church array in the latest thing in headgear and a 
chic france gown." 

hubbard straighten his shoulders. his expression had grown quite 
superior during my tirade, and when it was over, it was plain that he 
look down on me from the heights of a philosophical aconcagua. 

"i would not advertise those opinion if i were you," he observe with 
a slight sneer. "they have a grain of truth in them, but not enough to 
conceal the brand of special advocate. i suppose you do not wish to be 
regard as a social reformer?" 

"i shall be content to reform one woman--if ever i marry," i answered, 
with a straight face, though it was hard to keep it straight. 

"she has my unmeasured sympathy," said hubbard. "once upon a time i was 
a woman-hater--but in my most uncharitable moments i was never such a 
fool as you. you will forgive my plain speaking?" 

"certainly, hubbard, certainly. you are not responsible. it is plain 
to me that lady helen has bewitch you. one of these days you'll be 
laud her as a creature of incomparable excellences--a very paragon 
of merit and a pattern of the virtues. i can see it coming. i am sorry, 
for, of course, i know what she is." 

hubbard turn crimson. he snap his teeth together and rap out: 
"see here, pinsent, we are very old friends, but i'll be damn if i 
allow you to disparage my wife. is that plain?" 

i took out my cigarette case. "perfectly," i murmured. 

he glare at me for a moment, then scowl still more blackly and 
growl deep in throat: "i can't think what has come over you. you 
haven't the least right or cause to hate her. it's positively unmanly. 
especially as she think of you far more highly than you deserve. she 
feel it, too. you must have shown her how you regard her. she made me 
feel a brute." 

"look here, hubbard," i cried, with a nicely assume show of 
indignation, "i want to oblige you and i want to keep the peace between 
us, but i shan't be able to if you keep on defend her when you know 
as well as i----" 

"what?" he thundered. 

"that she is a butterfly!" i thunder back. 

"she is not!" he shouted. 

"she is!" i said. 

"you, you, you imbecile!" splutter my poor friend. "i tell you 
once and for all that is only one phase of her. i don't like it, i 
admit," (he began to cool off), "but still it is only a phase. she is 
in reality a woman of great depth of character." (he was quite cool by 
this.) "i had a conversation with her the other night that astonish 
me. of course, i have always known that she is an educated woman, 
but the extent of her knowledge had previous escape me. she has 
a much more than superficial acquaintance with the modern form of 
speculative philosophy. she has read kant and spencer and nietzsche 
with understanding: and she is now engaged in the study of egypt 
history. you have interested her deep in the subject." 

i shrug my shoulders. "and from all this you conclude?" 

"that i have been an idiot not to recognise long ago that she is 
my intellectual equal. and i have treat her as if she were an 
irresponsible child." 

"but she is a woman." 

"quite so," reply this convert woman-hater, "and because she is a 
woman, and such a woman, she has the power to bless the man fortunate 
enough to win her--her affection--as few men are blessed. now you can 
appreciate my position. i have blind sacrifice my chance. i----" 

"pish!" i interrupted. "tell her what you have told me and be blessed! 
you'll repent it all your life through." 

"it is too late," he groaned. "i have been weigh in the balance and 
found wanting. pride, if nothing else, would always prevent her from 
forgiving me. she--liked me once, i think--but now----" he clear his 
throat and forced a wry smile. "she looks upon me as her treasurer and 
friend. it was my own choice. i have no right to grumble." then he 
burst out suddenly, "but it's damnable, pinsent, damnable!" 

lady helen's medicine was working like a charm. i thought it best 
to let well enough alone. so i made a rude effort and change the 
conversation. we soon reach our journey's end. 

the inquest was a nightmare dream by day. the courtroom was fill 
with poor weldon's relatives. his father, the old baron, ostentatious 
turn his back on me. he seem to think me in some way responsible 
for his son's fate. weldon's sisters, too, whom i knew slightly, 
vouchsafe me no sign of recognition. his younger brother--now the 
heir--was the only member of the family who extend the slightest 
token of civility. he was so manifest delight at the unlooked-for 
promotion of his prospects that i read in his warm hand-grip a secret 
pæan of joy. he had been intended for that limbo of younger son and 
blue-blooded incompetents, the bar. happily, the inquest was soon 
over. i was only in the box five minutes, and a quarter-hour later the 
verdict was recorded: "accidental death." 

hubbard and i return at once to london. there arrived, i plunge 
into work upon my book and for a space of two days i manage to forget 
that the world contained anything but stele and obelisk and mural 
hieroglyph inscription which, though always half obliterate with 
time, had somehow or other to be made sense of and translate into 
english prose. 




chapter xxi 

hubbard's philosophy of life 


weldon's funeral was held on the afternoon of the third day following 
his death. his body was inter in the vault of his family at their 
seat at sartley, in norfolk. i was not invite to attend, but i felt i 
had to go. miss ottley was there with her father and dr. belleville. 
she was clad in deep mourning, and her face was thick veiled. one 
of weldon's sister sob throughout the ceremony, yet i do not 
think she felt her brother's loss half as deep as i did. i heard 
her whisper to her neighbour once--between sobs--(i knelt immediately 
behind her)--"have you ever seen such callousness--not a tear, not 
a sigh?" she was refer to miss ottley. i spent the rest of the 
afternoon on the cliff beside the sea. i did not wish to return by 
the same train as the ottleys, but destiny rule otherwise, although 
i wait for the last. it seem that sir robert had overtax his 
strength and had been oblige to rest. i had hardly taken my seat when 
he was help into the same compartment by belleville and the porter. 
they made him comfortable with cushions, without observing me; but 
miss ottley start as she entered, and raise her veil. "you!" she 
muttered, then pause as if in doubt, eye belleville. a second later 
she let fall her veil again and sat beside me. without ask anyone's 
permission, belleville turn down the light, leave the compartment 
in comparative obscurity. the porter mutter thanks for the tip and, 
departing, lock the door. 

plainly my presence had pass unnoticed. but an exclamation from 
belleville soon show he had discover me. "excuse me, sir," he said, 
"this carriage has been specially reserved." then he recognise me. 
"oh!" he cried. "you--but----" 

but the train had begun to move. i sank back in my corner. belleville 
took the corner opposite. in a few minutes sir robert complain of the 
light, in the manner of a sick man. belleville sprang up and put it out 
altogether. the dark now was absolute. 

"if you will take this side, i can make you comfortable; there is a 
cushion to spare," said belleville's voice. he was not address me. 

"i prefer to remain where i am, thank you," said miss ottley, in a 
frigid tone. 

belleville sat down silently. now and then i caught the glimmer of 
his eyes from the reflection of passing lights, or the glow of the 
engine smoke and steam, wind-blown beside the train. he was staring 
into the corner which i occupied. i felt his hatred wrap and heat 
me like a coat compose of nettles. and the man had occasion, for 
ere long miss ottley's hand stole to mine, and she sigh when mine 
enclose and pressed it close. belleville could not have known, yet 
he must have felt we were in sympathy oppose to him--just as i felt 
his hostile influence. it was a silent ride, but not uninteresting. 
twice belleville unexpected struck a match and flash it in our 
faces. but my rug cover the occupation of our hands. once instinct 
warn me that he was bend forward, peer and prying. i raise my 
foot and brush it in his beard. he fell back, coughing, to prevent 
himself from cursing. it was in that moment probably that he resolve 
upon my death, for i was unable to restrain a low, grim laugh. sir 
robert slept always, even when we pause at station on the road. at 
those times belleville and i exchange pretty courtesies. he would 
offer me his flask, or i would offer him a cigarette. we both refuse 
these charming civilities, but our manner was so dense sugar-coated 
that there might have been detect by a skilled psychometrist a scent 
of honey in the air. and our eyes beam upon each other with the 
sweetest friendliness. needless to say, whenever the engine whistle 
or the train slow down miss ottley's hand left mine. she only spoke 
to me once, and that was on the london platform, while belleville was 
assist her father from the car. 

"do not go out ever between three and five!" she mutter behind her 
veil, without look at me. "i shall come as soon as i can. do not 
call on me! do not reply! just say good-bye!" 

"well--if you'll allow me, i'll say good-bye, miss ottley," i announce 
in ordinary tones. "you might be good enough to let me know your 
opinion of my book at your leisure, for i value your opinion. you will 
have an advance copy in a week or two." 

"most certainly, dr. pinsent. it is kind of you to remember your 
promise. good-bye!" 

i lift my hat and left her; nod to belleville as i passed. he 
look surprised, also distrustful, but he said something polite. sir 
robert saw me, but chose to ignore my existence. 

i walk home to bruton street and found hubbard ensconce before the 
fire. the night was chilly enough to warrant one, despite the season. 
he was staring gloomy into the heart of the glowing coals. 

i help myself to a glass of whisky and took an armchair beside him. 

"i can't stand this. i'll go abroad," he announce at the end of a good 
half hour. 

"what's the matter, hubbard?" 

"oh! i've been there again. i couldn't keep away. she was alone, for a 
wonder." 

"you refer to your wife, i suppose. well?" 

he allow me to finish my cigar before replying, then he said: "i have 
no business to tell you, but i shall. she is in love, and i believe 
with you." 

"nonsense." 

"i wish it were," he answer dreamily, "but it is not. she has 
practically admitted it." 

"that--she care for me?" i cried. 

"no--but for someone. and i am not so great a fool that i cannot 
read between the lines, although she think so. her thought dwell 
constant on you." 

"impossible!" 

he turn and gaze at me. "it's so, old man, upon my honour." 

"you are mistaken, dixon." 

"i know you are as true as steel," he muttered. "that is why i do not 
even feel a wish to thwart the fates. i am nothing but an interloper, 
a marplot. i ought to efface myself. when i am strong enough i shall. 
but i wish you'd be frank with me--hugh, entire frank. you think you 
despise her now, but you are sure you have no other feeling deep at 
heart? think well before you answer, hugh!" 

"why?" 

"because if i were sure that you cared, too, i would find my happiness 
in helping. you are worthy of her--and she--as god hear me, is worthy 
of the best man living." 

"dixon! dixon!" 

"oh! i know this must sound oddly from my lips. but though i've been 
a fool, i'm wise now. i hold a purer, fine faith; a human faith. 
and it is now my deep belief that the greatest crime of all is the 
prevention of the fullest union of predestine mates--and all that 
sin entails--the birth of children generate by the fire of lust and 
hate upon the copperplate of physical and psychic indifference; 
the production of a race prenatal ordain to be degenerates; 
the determination of unhappy soul gall into madness by their 
chains,--their ultimate destruction." 

he got sudden afoot and raise his hand on high. "i tell you, hugh!" 
he cried, with eyes afire, "there is no sure way to damnation, no 
sure path. we are born into this world for one strong purpose which is 
told us by our heart if we will hear them. and this concern ourselves 
not half so much as our potentiality of helping by their proper use 
the unborn spirits placed by providence at our control and mercy. it 
is then for us to choose if we will be servant of the good, to assist 
in their perfection, or the servant of the evil to promote their 
desolate and to advance the stage of their ruin. no human being has 
the right to bring any but a love child into the world. that which is 
not a love child is a child of hate. there is no course between. and 
because the father of a child of hate is a criminal for whom there is 
no punishment conceivable, to a finite mind, acute enough on earth his 
expiate of his crime will but begin at death. you laugh at me." 

"on the contrary," i answer gravely, "i accord with you." 

"then you admit my duty. i should stand aside?" 

"ay--but first be sure, my friend! you love your wife; she may love 
you." 

"i am sure that she do not. but you? it is time, hugh, that you 
answer me." 

i stood up and put a hand on his shoulder. "i love with all my strength 
another woman," i said slowly. "and just as sure i am that i love her 
am i that she love me. are you answered?" 

he stare at me, and in the moment that my eyes held his, his face grew 
dull and grey. "my poor helen," he muttered, "i had hope to help her 
to her happiness." 

"at--any cost?" i demanded. 

"yes, yes," he said. 

"death?" 

"i would have welcome it," he groaned, and turning, he went slow 
from the room. he walk like an old, old man. i had never admire him 
so little, nor like and pity him so much. straightway i wrote a 
note to lady helen and, go out, post it myself. it contained only 
these three words: "it is time." i could trust a woman of her proven 
clever to understand. 




chapter xxii 

the dead hand 


i expect miss ottley next afternoon, and hubbard, as though aware i 
wish to be alone, went out soon after three. but she did not come. 
hubbard return an hour after midnight. he kept me awake by tramp 
about his room until far into the small hours. next morning i found the 
library fill with cord box and hubbard's man padlock the last 
of them. "master's gone to france, and i'm to follow," he announce 
with an air of suppress exultation. "he left this letter for you." 

the letter contained these lines: "i know you at length for the 
cunning scamp you are. how you must have laugh at me. but i forgive 
you. we shall be away a year, at least. as always, everything i have 
is yours. let us find you here on our return. i cannot write more. 
my heart is too full. pinsent, she love me! d. h." the last three 
words were deep underlined. by the end of that week i had complete 
the revision of my book and forward the manuscript to mr. coen. 
afterwards, i was uncomfortable lonely and unoccupied. i wait in 
from three to five every afternoon, but no one came. the rest of the 
days i spent wandering about the street nursing the long sickness 
of too much thinking. the end of it was, i disobey miss ottley and 
went one afternoon to call on her. i might as well have save myself 
the trouble. she was "out," likewise her father and dr. belleville. 
two days later i call again. again everyone was out. then i wrote 
a guarded note and sent it with an advance copy of my book, ask 
for an expression of her opinion. after much waiting, i received a 
long typewritten disquisition challenging on apocryphal authority my 
attribution of a stele superscribe by amen-aken to the fourteenth 
dynasty. it was sign by miss ottley, but i fail to recognise it as 
her composition. one evening, however, have nothing else to do, i 
applied to its verbiage the simple rule of a well-known cipher. this 
gave me an astonish result. "impossible see you without endanger 
your life. constant supervision." but it was worth test the matter 
further. i therefore compose a formal reply to the challenge, showing 
my reason for conclude that amen-aken had unwarrantable alter for 
purpose of his own glorification the historic record of a predecessor. 
i use the same cipher and embody the following message by its aid: 
"shall pass the house before midnight friday. throw letter from window 
explain all! i live to serve you." this document i forward to miss 
ottley enclose in a letter in which i took pains to show that i had 
been disappointed by her criticism, and that i was not anxious for the 
correspondence to be continued. then i wait as patient as possible 
for friday to come round. the hour pass with leaden feet, but they 
passed--and midnight found me in the lane walking slow by the house. 
it was wrap in gloom from roof to basement, but her window was open. 
as the clock began to chime, a white thing flash out and flutter 
to my feet. it was a kerchief weighted with a golden bracelet. i felt 
a paper crinkle in its folds. hasty conceal it within my coat, i 
pressed on and return by a circuitous route to bruton street. soon 
i was pore over my treasure. it was typewritten like the challenge. 
it read: "i have been oblige to typewrite this, because i am a close 
prisoner and am forbidden the use of pen or pencil. but they make 
me work as their stenographer some hour each day--and i was forced 
to seize the opportunity so presented. thank god you understood the 
cipher. if you love me give out that you proceed immediately to egypt. 
then go to paris and return to london under another name and well 
disguised. take lodgings east; and wait until you see in personal 
column of _daily wire_ directions address to 'd. menchikoff!' follow 
them implicitly! am in power of fiends. open opposition perilous. must 
allay suspicion. otherwise forced immediate marriage b." here the 
missive ended. 

i sat down before the fire and thought hard for some minutes. the paper 
was crunch up in my hand. sudden the door opened. i turn my head 
at the sound of the creak, but could see no one. what could have open 
the door? i heard the sound of caught breath, a foot on the door and a 
sigh. in a flash i understood. i had been seen by my enemy pick up 
the letter in the street, and they had sent their invisible messenger 
to win it from me. quick as thought i thrust the paper in the flame 
and sprang afoot. there follow a deep-voiced oath and a rush of air 
fan my face. i struck out with all my strength right and left, half 
beside myself with rage and fear. but my blow encounter nothing 
tangible, and a second later the door bang shut. i was so unnerve 
that i simply walk over and lock it. how can a man fight with an 
enemy he cannot see? or even follow him? when my hand stop shake 
i began to pack up my trunks. i resolve to follow miss ottley's 
bidding to the letter. to-morrow i would announce my departure for 
egypt and cross the channel in order to put belleville off the track. 
meanwhile i ransack my wardrobe. presently i received a shock. from 
an unremembered corner in a chest i brought out the clothes i had 
worn on the day of poor weldon's death. they were cover with dyed 
bloodstains, the blood of my dead friend. i placed them on the table 
and eye them, shuddering. my mind, as if spell-compelled, review 
all the detail of weldon's death. i saw him stagger back, back, and 
fall beneath the wheels of the onrush locomotive. i heard his die 
shriek. once more i struggle desperately, but alas! how vain with 
the dark angel, for his life. once more, as the end approached, i saw 
his glaze eyes open and look into mine. once more i heard his die 
words--"give me your hand!" 

and but--god in heaven! how could i ever have forgotten it! had he not 
given me something--something i had put in my pocket half unconscious 
without look to see what it was--something he had implore me to 
"keep safe." 

i felt my senses rock at the recollection; and then i went hot all 
over with shame, to think of my neglect, my inattention. until that 
moment--despite his die direction, i had utterly forgotten his sad 
trust. and the thing he had given me to keep--where was it now? where, 
indeed, but in the pocket of that coat where i had placed it. oh! it 
was safe enough, no doubt--but that did not absolve me. for week i had 
been a recreant trustee. i had, i saw it now, i had been a coward. i 
felt his death so much that i had resolute put all thought of him 
aside, smother them with work, fear the misery which they must 
bring. and i had been his friend! 

i took up the coat and felt in the pocket. yes, it was there. what 
was it? i drew it out before the light and saw nothing! yet i held 
something heavy and hard. was i go mad? was my sight disease or 
what? i rub my eyes and look again. nothing! i strode over to the 
gas jet and held the thing between my visual organ and the flame. ah! 
something now! but how describe it? i saw a small light blur; a sort of 
shapeless haze off which the rays, the jet of light diffused, recoil 
obliquely. it was not transparent, but neither was it in the true sense 
visible. it seem to defy the light rays, to repulse them rather than 
absorb them. when held directly before the flame i could not see the 
gas jet through it, and yet itself i could not truly see. it confuse 
and disarrange my vision as a watery mote do floating on the surface 
of an eyeball. slow and surely experiment with the thing, i found 
that the farther i withdrew it from the lamp the less sensible my sense 
became aware of its existence. but when i placed it directly against 
the lamp the flame became mysterious obscured. i say mysteriously, 
because the thing cast no discover shadow, and although solid to 
the sense of touch, it was not otherwise apparently opaque. the flame 
still burn behind it, and i still saw the flame, yet not through, 
but over and around an intermediate blur. in that connection the thing 
did not resemble glass. had the reverse been the case i should have 
seen the flame through it directly. as it was, as far as i can make 
out, the impression of the flame was convey to my retina by ray of 
light that did not travel in a straight path. they climb over and 
surround the interpose object first, and thus gave me a slightly 
distort image of the flame; and instead of revealing the obstacle 
which they had to overcome in transit, all they did was to indicate 
vague its situation. thus, above and below the indiscernible point 
where their straight and proper course was interfere with i perceive 
a misty, indefinable haze. and at the point where the ray seem to 
reassemble and readjust themselves to the resumption of their ordinary 
business there was a blur. perhaps the best way to depict the effect 
was to present the hypothesis of a weak flame held up before a strong 
one. this do not exactly describe the phenomenon i witness and 
investigated, but it approximate as close as i can manage. the chief 
points of difference are, that every flame cast a shadow, and this 
thing did not, unless a blur of light be a shadow; and furthermore, a 
flame may be seen even confront with a strong flame, and this thing 
i held was destitute of a perceptible outline. the pity was that i was 
then working without a single clue to any comprehension of the thing; 
and the greater pity is that though my knowledge became fuller, i am 
still ignorant of the action of the property which made the thing 
visually impalpable. i can only guess at them. but i think i guess 
correct when i conjectural assert that it was surface coat with 
some essence which had the power to compel the great majority of the 
light ray to travel along its side and surface and to resume their 
original direction afterwards. i do not pretend to understand how this 
essence could so interfere with and control the law of light. but 
grant that it could, the explanation is a natural one. and though 
scientist may frown at me for advance a theory which i am unable 
to substantiate, i prefer to incur their scorn rather than adopt the 
alternative--supernatural agency. i simply decline to believe in the 
supernatural. it is my profound conviction that nothing has ever 
happen on this planet, however mysterious and inexplicable, which 
has not been produce by a purely and perfectly natural cause. and the 
long i live the more certain do i become that, deep and wonderful as 
our scientific acquaintance with nature undoubted is, we have not yet 
even thorough explore the porch of her palace of secrets, her vast 
treasure-house of wonders. 

but i stray from my subject. it is my present business to relate 
events, not to discuss their basic principles. 

to resume then, after a great while spent in experiment with the 
thing which poor weldon had given me, before the light, i was oblige 
to confess myself baffled. i then fell back upon my other four senses. 
i got out a pair of scale and weigh the thing. it weigh exactly 
seven ounces. then i smelt it. the thing was odourless. i bit it, but 
it was tasteless. yet it yield to my teeth like stiff rubber or 
leather. next i placed it on a sheet of paper and trace its outline 
with a pencil. that was the first really definite result i got. the 
tracing show a bulbous object four inch wide by five long. it was 
shaped something like a pear. its base contained four indentation with 
corresponding round protuberance like knuckles. the apex was ragged. 
next i took a knife and with the blade scratch its surface. a moment 
later a long streak of dark, dry tissue was revealed. i could see it 
plainly. i shook all over with excitement. the mystery seem to be 
clearing up. but even as i took up the knife again i paused, convulse 
with a wild, improbable idea. what if?--but there. i held my breath and 
took the thing before the fire to think its problem out. i sat down. 
my nerves were all jangled. the fire need replenishing. it was low 
and i was cold. i stoop down and heap on some coal. then came a 
thought. i put the thing on a shovel and held it over the grate. heat! 
yes, heat! the greatest of great resolvents. fool not to have thought 
of it before. fool, indeed! one minute--two--three. there was a shadow 
on the shovel. i bent forward. instantly my nostril were assail 
with the unforgettable perfume of the tomb of ptahmes! ah! the flood 
of recollection that came surge at its bidding to my brain! but i 
fought them back. i bent right over the fire--and i made out presently, 
lie on the shovel, the dim form of a tight-clenched human hand. 




chapter xxiii 

i set out for the east 


it was the hand of a mummy. it had been half snapped, half torn from 
the forearm, just above the wrist. thus the edge of the stock were 
ragged and the tendon were drawn out and torn; the bone, however, had 
fracture clearly, just as glass breaks, leave a hard, smooth edge. 
but the hand was not an ordinary mummy's hand. the bone were cover 
with mummify flesh truly, but, although dry, it was neither stiff 
nor brittle. on the contrary, it possessed the tough consistency of 
leather and was resilient and knead like rubber. the phalanges, 
when pull straight, return to their ordinary and original position, 
like springs, immediately the pressure was removed. the colour of the 
skin was a very dark chocolate. it was marvellous preserved. the very 
pore were still discernible, and the vein and artery beneath the 
epidermis, which had been convert by age into fine black cords, could 
be trace with ease. now, whose hand was it? from what mummy torn? and 
how had weldon become possessed of it? i gave up the attempt to solve 
the first two problem as soon as i had mental propound them. the 
third, however, answer itself. i knew weldon too thorough to admit 
a doubt that he would ever have carry about with him such a ghastly 
trophy. like most healthy young englishmen, he had a horror of such 
things. well, then he must have snatch the hand, then invisible, 
from the grasp of someone--in the very moment in which he had been 
fall to his death. but no one had been near him. that is, no one 
visible to us or him. but since the hand had been practically invisible 
until i had subject it to the influence of heat, was it not just 
as likely that it might have been--nay, must have been--carried by 
an invisible person? but that invisible person must have been very 
near weldon. he must have been close enough to have save weldon had 
he chosen. why had he not chosen? why, indeed, unless he had wish 
weldon to die? and if he had wish weldon to die, would it not have 
been easy for him--because invisible--to help weldon to die? easy! 
good heavens, how easy! how appalling easy! and then i remember 
how astonish i had been to see weldon stagger back, step after step, 
to the platform's edge--three steps at least. i understood it now--and 
his startle outcry. he had been assail by an invisible adversary. 
he had been forced back. he had been hurl over the platform--and as 
he fell he had clutch out wildly and seize the mummy's hand. he had 
been foul murdered; and we had watch his murder, comprehend 
nothing. my flesh began to creep as the light of understanding broke 
in upon my brain. for i realise in the same instant that weldon's 
murder was, in all probability, the man who had had most occasion 
to desire his death--belleville--my enemy and the enemy, although 
the lover, of the woman i loved; the wretch in whose power she was 
at that moment. he had warn miss ottley that unless she broke off 
her engagement with weldon her fiancé would die within the week. he 
had died--murdered in cold blood--on the evening of the seventh day. 
belleville had been most terribly faithful to his awful promise. to 
the very letter he had kept his dreadful vow. and now--miss ottley 
was his prisoner in her own father's house; and, no doubt, sir robert 
ottley, sick, enfeeble in body and intellect, was belleville's puppet 
instrument to the furtherance of his atrocious purposes. what chance 
had i--fighting a man so utterly unscrupulous, so strong-willed and 
remorseless, and endow with a power so tremendous and far-reaching 
as the possession of a chemical agent capable of rendering himself 
imperceptible to mortal sight whenever it should please him to make 
use of it? how could i or anybody bring such a man to justice? why, 
even if i should foil his scheme for my undoing, and were it possible, 
as well, to get the better of him to the extent of satisfying myself 
beyond doubt as to his guilt, what court on earth would believe the 
evidence i could bring forward? a tissue of absurdities; a network 
of hypothese and chimeras! i should be laugh at as a madman, a 
foolish visionary; and he would go scot free with undamaged reputation, 
free to work his evil will upon an unconscious and defenceless world. 
belleville's advantage over me was so manifest overwhelming that i 
confess the prospect of enter into a trial of strength and cunning 
with him daunt me. and yet, if i did not, weldon's death would surely 
go unavenged, and miss ottley's fate would be sealed. she would be 
forced into a marriage--somehow or other--with a man she loathed--the 
murder of her dead lover. i felt so sure of this that towards morning 
i resume my packing. i did not go to bed at all. after breakfast i 
went out and call at half a dozen newspaper offices. i saw as many 
journalists, who all promise to paragraph my departure for the east. 
i then wrote a letter to the society stating, guardedly, my intention 
of again visiting the nile; and i caught the afternoon train to dover. 
that night i slept at calais. on the following day i went to paris and 
put myself in the hand of a hairdresser and costumier, who carry on 
a peculiar business at montmartre under the secret surveillance and 
government of the police. for a respectable consideration he effect a 
complete metamorphosis in my appearance. he speckle my black eyebrow 
with silver. he shave off my moustache and beard and dyed my skin a 
jejeune saffron, my hair a bilious iron-brown. he forbade me to wear 
a starch collar. he taught me how to walk like an elderly man; and, 
finally, he provided me with a suit of clothes that fitted fairly 
well, but which could not be said to possess any other virtue. but 
the fellow was well worthy of his hire. when he had finished with me 
i could not recognise myself. the mirror show me a gaunt piece of 
human wreckage. i was to the life a decay gentleman; an unobtrusive 
rakish, elderly degenerate. i was remarkable in nothing except height, 
and even that singular departed as i learned to stoop. in such guise 
i return to london by way of boulogne and folkestone, and i took 
up residence immediately in a tenement-house in soho, to which i had 
been recommend by my friend, the costumier. it was a curious place. 
it was populate by frenchmen, italians, and a sprinkling of swiss, 
and a number of russia politics refugees. i found them a decent lot 
of law-abiding miserables. the majority were derelict of fortune, 
who live like parasite on the toil of some few hardworking, foolish 
artisan among them. and yet, despite their deplorable estate, they 
always had a cheerful word and a smile to spare for a stranger. they 
were a picturesque, interesting people, and i should have like to 
study them under other circumstances. but placed as i was, i conceive 
it best to keep my room as much as possible, and i only went abroad to 
buy a paper and to eat and drink. on the fourth morning the expect 
summons came to hand. it was the first advertisement in the column. 
"d. menchikoff. fearless. doorfront. twelve. unfailing. noiseless. 
open. mizpah." and this i interpret to mean, "fearlessly approach 
the front door at midnight this evening! you will find it open. enter 
without noise! god be with you till we meet!" 




chapter xxiv 

the gin is sprung 


i set out wearing rubber shoe and armed with a loaded revolver. this i 
conceal in my breast pocket. i time myself so nicely that i arrive 
at sir robert ottley's mansion on the fifth stroke of twelve. forthwith 
i mount the steps and soft try the door. it was ajar. i pushed 
it back and entered, close it noiseless behind me. i lock it, 
too. the hall was unlighted and black as erebus. i stood for a moment 
or two listen breathlessly. then i thought i heard a sigh. "may!" i 
whispered. 

i was answer by a sibilant soft "s-sh!" then a hand was laid upon 
my sleeve and i felt myself drawn forward. i gave myself up to be 
guide the more willing that i hardly knew the place. we came to 
a staircase. my guide breathe "s-sh" again, and mutter "stairs." 
we climb them step by step. heavens, how dark it was! afterwards i 
was drawn like a shadow through a maze of thick carpet corridors. 
finally, we stopped. the hand left my arm and i heard a door creak 
open. "come!" whisper my guide. i step towards a dim, dim glow, 
and as i cross the threshold, the door, shut on my entrance, 
graze my arm. 

"at last!" the voice whispered. 

it was a signal. hardly was it utter than a blaze of white light 
stab the darkness. i found myself in an immense apartment, blinking 
foolish into the muzzle of a revolver present at my forehead by dr. 
belleville. our eyes met presently across the sights. his were smile 
coldly. 

"an excellent disguise, dr. pinsent; my sincere congratulations," he 
observed. "it is evident you have obey my instruction to the letter." 

"your instructions," i said. 

"ay. mine." 

"then you----" 

"the cipher was my idea entirely. ah! but you must not blame miss 
ottley. she sign the first letter without understanding. later, 
however, she would not write. she knew. i was oblige to use the 
typewriter, and in order to convince you of the authenticity of the 
letter i threw at your feet last thursday night--my emissary follow 
you home and pretended to wish to wrest it from you. you fell into the 
snare. and now you are here, and no one knows, eh? no one knows?" 

"you think so?" i asked. i was beginning to get back my wits. 

but he only laughed. "it do not matter. the great thing is, you are 
here and in my power. that was all i wanted. now, ottley! now!" 

it was another signal. something hard and heavy crash against my 
skull. for a second i fought for breath against a horrible feeling of 
sickness and impotence, then came blank night and nothingness. i had 
been sandbagged. 

i recover to find that my captor had strap me hand and foot in 
a huge iron chair. i could not move an inch in any one direction, but 
otherwise my situation was tolerably comfortable. belleville sat facing 
me some feet away. he was pluck thoughtful at his big, black 
beard. there was no one else in the room. perceive i was awake, he 
arose and took from a table near him a glass of water, which he brought 
to me. 

"it is not poisoned," he remarked. "i have considerable need of you for 
some time yet." he placed the glass to my lip then, and i drank with 
confidence. i felt better afterwards, but my head ache brave still. 

belleville resume his chair and again began to pluck at his beard. "no 
doubt your head aches," he observed. "i regret have been oblige to 
use you so discourteously, but we have had so much experience of your 
muscular vigour that to have risk a physical encounter would have 
been absurd. we might have been forced to kill you, and that would not 
have suit my plans." 

"indeed," said i. it cost me a painful effort to speak at all. 

"i desire to be perfectly candid with you," said belleville. "but 
before we get down to business it were as well to prove to you how 
completely at my mercy you are." he took, as he spoke, a revolver from 
his pocket and aim careless at the opposite wall. "this apartment 
use to be a shoot gallery," he observed. "all the wall are 
padded." he then discharge the weapon six times in rapid succession. 
the bullet spatter on a plate of steel. the sound of the report 
was simply deafening. a full minute pass before the echo and 
reverberation ceased. all the while belleville smile at me. "no one 
heard but you and i," he said. "the futility, therefore, of waste 
your breath in shouting for help will appeal to you." 

i glance about and found that all the wall i could see were 
windowless. the room was light by electricity. the door was thick 
coat with pad cushion leather. the floor was carpet with one 
vast sheet of rubber. the place was fitted up as a chemical laboratory. 
i count half a dozen glass table litter with retort and dynamos, 
test tube and other instruments. there were big glass case fill 
with porcelain box and phial of drug and large jar contain 
acids. and finally there was one object my eyes rest on with a little 
shock of recognition. this was the sarcophagus of ptahmes. it was 
raise about three feet from the ground upon two steel trestles. the 
great sculpture lid was prop on end against a neighbouring wall. 
but although the coffin was open i could not see within it because the 
edge was almost on a level with my eyes. 

"are you satisfied?" ask belleville presently. he had follow the 
direction of my glance with a sort of half-contemptuous, half-amused 
curiosity, reload his revolver the while. the man evidently 
cherish an immense opinion of himself--but he was as cautious as a 
sage: witness the reload of his weapon--despite the fact that i was 
as helpless as a truss fowl. 

"yes. i am satisfied," i answered. 

"and cool? what i mean is are you perfectly collected? do you feel able 
to engage in conversation? or are you too dazed--or perhaps too angry?" 

"i can promise at least to listen and try to understand you." 

he gave me a sardonic smile. "the under dog is a fool to be sarcastic," 
he said drily. "however, please yourself. listen then! you are no doubt 
aware that it is one of my ambition to marry miss ottley?" 

"yes." 

"captain weldon stood some time since in my road." 

"yes." 

"peace to his ashes," smile the doctor. then he frowned. "but to my 
astonishment i now find that the lady did not care for the gallant 
captain." 

"indeed." 

"indeed and indeed." belleville bit his lip. "but for you," he snarled. 

i was silent. 

"it is almost incredible, but it is true." 

"she has confide in you?" i asked. 

"as a preliminary step to defy me," reply belleville. "it was 
rather silly of her, but perhaps she could not help herself. women, 
even the wisest, are slave to their emotion of the moment. i was 
willing to make all sort of concessions, too. i even offer her your 
life." 

"my life." 

"i offer to permit you to live if she would marry me." 

"and she?" 

belleville bare his teeth just as i have seen a jackal grin. "you 
know how women love to glorify the object of their admiration," he 
said slowly. "in their opinion the men they--they love--are always 
the wisest, the strongest, the most astute and the best. i am free to 
admit, my dear pinsent, that you are by no means a fool. you have no 
doubt a fairly keen intelligence--but miss ottley has placed you on an 
alabaster pedestal--pedestal do i say? a pinnacle! she has actually 
venture to contrast your ability with mine to my disparagement. she 
reject my offer with disdain and challenge me to measure wit with 
you. and when i accept the challenge she calm predict that you 
would defeat and destroy me. it thus became my duty to show her how 
mistaken and fallible in truth is her estimate of me. weldon's death 
taught her nothing, absolutely nothing. she protest that if i was 
really the _deus ex machina_ it only prove me to be an ordinary sort 
of heartless murderer. weldon's particular order of intellect never 
impress her, it appears. but yours, in her eyes, is little short of 
divine. there was no help then but to dispose of you in such a way as 
to open her eyes. it is no boast to say that i could have kill you 
at any time of the day or night i pleased for week past. had i done 
so, however, i should have been constrained so to arrange matters--as 
in weldon's case--as to make your end appear natural; and i'm afraid 
miss ottley would on that account have been inclined to consider, for 
a second time, me a lucky prophet and you the second victim of an 
inscrutable providence. that is her present attitude toward weldon's 
final exit from the stage of life. i was oblige then so to arrange 
matter as to get you into my power, but, _bien entendu_, without the 
fanfare of trumpets. i flatter myself that i have manage very well. 
you may pretend the contrary if you choose, but you'll not convince 
me. i have had your every movement careful followed, and i believe 
that outside of this house there is not a soul in england of your 
acquaintance who has a doubt but that you are on your way to egypt. 
and i have neglect no precaution that could ever give rise to such 
a doubt. immediately you quit your lodgings in soho this evening, 
my emissary enter your room by means of a master key and brought away 
your trunks. no one saw him, for he was invisible; and no one saw your 
trunks depart, for he made them invisible, too. they are at this moment 
in this house. you doubt me?" 

"yes," i cried. "i doubt you; produce them!" 

"i am too comfortable to move," smile belleville. "but here is 
something i found at the bottom of one of them." 

as he spoke he took from his breast pocket the mummy hand poor weldon 
had given me. i could not suppress an exclamation. he had spoken truly 
then. belleville toss the hand upon a table. "i was rather glad to 
get it back," he said. "not that it really mattered; but i wonder who 
had found it. did weldon still cling to it after he was dead?" 

"you scoundrel!" i cried. "it was you--really then? you pushed him over 
the platform?" 

he laughed. "in person, no, but by direction, yes." then he 
became serious. "but let us avoid personalities, if you please. 
we each possess an ugly temper, i believe; and mine is sometimes 
uncontrollable. do you agree?" 

"proceed!" said i. 

he bowed ironically. "there is but little more to tell you now. you 
know almost all you need to know, and enough, i feel sure, to enable 
you to anticipate your fate." 

"you intend to murder me, i suppose?" 

"exactly. but it depend on yourself whether you shall have a painless 
death or no. if you will do what i require you shall have the choice 
between aconite and morphia. if you refuse, well,"--he purse up his 
lips--"you'll live longer, pinsent; yes, you'll live longer--but 
frankly, old chap, you won't like it. i hate you, you know, and i am 
a surgeon, and you are there and i am here; i repeat, i hate you. and 
i am not only a surgeon, i am a skilful surgeon. i am, besides, a 
vivisectionist. that is one of my hobbies. and i'll keep you alive as 
long as possible. for let me yet again assure you i _hate--you--hate 
you, hate you_!" 

there was no doubt of it. he hate me. the emotion was infectious. i 
hate him. i had before; but i now realise how much. after one long 
glance into his gloat eyes i lower mine and ask in a voice i 
strove to render civil: "what is it you want me to do for you?" 

"i want you to play the part of a friendly disembodied ghostly 
match-maker." 

"i fail to understand you." 

"naturally. but listen. i intend to render you invisible. when that is 
done i shall bring miss ottley here. she know your voice. you will 
speak to her. do you see daylight now?" 

"i begin." 

"that is well. you will inform the lady that you are dead, but that 
your spirit is held in durance vile at my command. like all other 
women, she is at heart deep superstitious. she will believe what 
you say and she will conceive a prodigious respect for my power and 
ability. you will assure her that i control your fate and that you can 
only obtain deliverance from unimaginable awful torture at the price 
of her consent to become immediately my wife. well?" 

"a pretty plot," said i. 

"i felt certain it would earn your admiration," he returned. 

"i marvel at your candour!" 

"my dear pinsent," he said, smiling, "complete candour is the privilege 
of the all-powerful, and that am i--at least in your regard. i can 
perfectly afford to be perfectly frank with you, because i can compel 
you to serve me even should you decide to disobey me." 

"indeed, and how?" 

"the thing is as simple as a, b, c. if you are so foolish as to 
refuse to play the part i have assigned, i shall render you three 
parts--instead of entire invisible. i shall make your bonds, however, 
entire invisible. you will then be put to certain electrical torture 
of my invention, and i shall invite miss ottley to observe the 
spectacle of a soul in pain. i confess i should prefer you to behave 
like a sensible ghost and talk to her in the manner i have indicated; 
but you must admit that in the alternative she will, nevertheless, be 
forced to a conclusion flatter alike to my ambition and my pride." 

"is it possible that you are all the heartless scoundrel you pretend? 
can you really find pleasure in the notion of winning the woman you are 
presume to love--by a trick so infamous and despicable?" 

"yes, pinsent, yes." 

"you must be animate by a devil." 

"on the contrary, my dear enemy, i am just an ordinary human being who 
has been seduce by the most extraordinary temptation that has ever 
been offer to a living being. a power has been placed at my disposal 
which put me on a level with the immortal gods of ancient greece. in 
decide to make use of it, i have adopt their idea of morality, 
almost, as it were, perforce. i now make a cult of my convenience, 
and a religion of the indulgence of my instincts. i intend henceforth 
to kill always what i hate, to possess what i love, to seize what i 
covet, and to enjoy what i desire. miss ottley dislike and despise 
me. that has irritate my vanity to such an extent that it is necessary 
to my happiness that i should convert her dislike into subjection, her 
contempt into the unbounded reverence of fear. when she become my wife 
i shall be the master of her millions--her father is on the point of 
dissolution--and i shall be the tyrant of her person. i shall rule her 
with a rod of iron terror. that domination will give me a far greater 
joy than the vulgar pleasure of reciprocate passion. and not the least 
part of it will dwell in the reflection that you, my dear enemy, will 
have so largely and so unwilling contribute to the gratification of 
my sweet will. now you have all the fact before you. my cards are all 
exposed. it is for you to make up your mind what you will do. don't 
decide immediately! there is no hurry. think the matter over. as i am 
rather weary" (he yawn in my face), "i shall now leave you to your 
meditation till the morning. good-night." 

he rose, bowed to me with mock polite and move over to the door. a 
moment later he had gone, and with him the light vanished. i was left 
in the profoundest darkness, and my thought were nearly as colourless 
and sombre as the gloom in which i sat. 




chapter xxv 

the mummy talks 


the sensation of awakening informed me of the surprising fact that i 
had fallen asleep. i was rather proud under the circumstances that i 
had been able to do so. probably i had slept for a long while, too, 
for the laboratory was light up, and it was evident that it had been 
careful dust in the interval. there was a sound of sweeping behind 
my chair, but strain as i would i could not turn my head to see who was 
my companion. "i say," i call out. "i am thirsty. fetch me a glass of 
water, will you?" 

the sweeping stopped. presently steps approach my chair. they pass 
it, and next second i saw the giant arab of the cave temple at rakh, 
the wretch who had attempt to strangle me at my camp, and whom i had 
release from the sarcophagus of ptahme on the nile. he stood before 
me, his extraordinary blood-coloured eyes staring at me with the glaze 
expressionless regard of an automaton. he was clad in a long, yellow 
shapeless garment like a smock, and his feet were shod in leather 
sandals. in one hand he held a broom. very slow he extend his other 
arm before my face, and i saw with a shock of aversion that the hand 
had gone. it had been sever from the wrist and nothing but a stump 
remained. involuntary i thought of the mummy hand which poor weldon 
had given me. it still lay upon the table where dr. belleville had 
toss it, full in my view. it was a left hand. the arab's left hand 
had been lost. the connection was obvious. but--but--of course a mummy 
hand thousand of years old perhaps, could not have grown upon a still 
living, breathing man. living! breathing! the words repeated themselves 
as i gaze at the arab. how like a mummy he appeared! his skin was of 
exactly the same colour as the mummy hand. it had the same shrivel 
appearance, the same leather-like texture. and, good heavens! unless i 
dream he did not breathe! not a movement of his body disclose the 
smallest sign of respiration. i stare at him, appalled. his features 
were fixed and set rigidly. his mouth was closed. his nostril were 
fallen in and glue together. how then could he breathe? and yet there 
was life in his gaunt frame; some animate spirit that control 
its mechanism, for slow his handless arm fell back to his side, 
and he continue to regard me with a steadfast, unwink stare. i 
examine his eyes and found that they were lidless. the lid had 
shrunken back and disappeared. a close inspection show that the 
eyes themselves owe all their lustre to reflect light. the cornea 
was in each orb nothing but a thin gelatinous-like film fill with 
tiny little crinkle that caught up and refract passing ray from 
all directions. the whites were opaque black teguments, dry and dead. 
behind the lens was no sign of any pupil. there was nothing but an 
iris which seem to be compose of dull red dust. 

living! breathing! the arab was a mummy! an animate corpse. oh! of 
course i dreamed. i must have dreamed. i have told myself that so many 
thousand times that it is a marvel the constant reiterate has not 
forced me to believe it. but i do not. nor do i know what to believe. i 
am in as great a maze to understand now as i was then. 

at first i conceive an almost intolerable horror of the thing before 
me. but finding that the arab did not menace me, i gradual became 
accustomed to its most unpleasant and almost ghastly proximity. and 
after a time i felt so strong a fever of thirst that i forced myself to 
speak to it again. 

i ask it for water. it did not move. i became convinced it heard 
but did not comprehend the language i employed. i spoke to it in 
france and germany and in arabic, but still it did not move. finally 
i said to myself, "if it is a mummy, it will be an egypt and will 
understand the tongue of ancient egypt." then i gasp out such a term 
as i believe might have been use by a thirsty theban ask for 
alleviate of his famine. the thing instantly move off behind me. 
presently i heard the sound of fall water, and a moment later a 
glass was pressed to my parch lips. i drain it thankfully, eye 
the while, with a feeling of deep, unconquerable repulsion, the sinewy 
black mummy hand that serve me. i then thank the arab in the same 
tongue which had persuade him to be my minister. he gaze at me a 
while and then move to the table and look at it. he appear to be 
writing, but i could not be sure. i heard a curious, raucous scratch 
sound. thus ten minutes sped by. meanwhile, i shut my eyes and try 
hard to persuade myself that i dreamed. then a sound disturbed me. i 
open my eyes with a start and saw that the arab had return to my 
side. he held a slate before me cover with hieroglyphics. never had i 
greater occasion to bless my knowledge of that ancient language and to 
grateful regard the patient years of labour i had spent acquire it. 
but likewise never had i greater occasion to lament the imperfect 
of my knowledge and defect in my memory. i could understand a portion 
of the message--the greater part indeed--but still a part escape me. 

brief translated, the part i comprehend ran: 

"it is not meet that ptahmes--named tahutimes--son of mery, son of 
hap, high priest of amen-ra and the hawk-headed horus, should be a 
wicked unbeliever's slave.... death explains.... the spirit of a good 
man hurried hence accuse me unanswered at the ... throne.... for time 
unending.... fanet.... king of all the gods.... thus only shall you 
escape the death that threatens. you shall swear to break my stele of 
ivory, to commit my papyri to the flame unread, to burn my body and 
scatter my ashes to the wind of heaven. you shall swear by amen-ra, 
king of earth and heaven, to destroy ... the oppressor and your enemy. 
he has decipher the inscriptions. he has master their meaning. he 
knows. he cannot be permit to live lest i ... and he the enemy exalt 
himself and triumph over you and me.... swear then, and aid shall be 
accord in your hour of need." 

i gather from this message that the ghost of ptahme inhabitate 
the mummy before me; that belleville had possessed himself of some 
stupendous wizard power which enable him to compel the soul and dust 
of ptahme to obey his infamous behests, but that ptahme was his most 
unwill slave. i also gather that ptahme promise me help if i 
would take an oath to kill belleville, to destroy certain papyri and 
an ivory stele in belleville's possession which i must promise not to 
attempt to read, and also to burn the mummify remains of ptahmes, 
and so, i suppose, secure the rest of his trouble spirit. i did not 
pause to reflect on the wild unreal of the happening my senses 
registered. they did not appear indeed unreal to me at all--then. 
on the contrary, i felt that i was confront with a very grave and 
serious proposal, which if i decided to accept would be carry out to 
the letter as regards the assistance promise me, a circumstance that 
would oblige me as an honest man to keep my part of the contract. the 
question remained: would i be justified in solemn swear to compass 
belleville's death? why not? surely he deserve capital punishment if 
ever a man did. by his own confession he had either murder frankfort 
weldon or procure his murder; and he had cold-bloodedly assured me 
that he was relentless resolve to murder me. and there were other 
things to think of. he had given me positive proof of the possession 
of some unknown power over the law of nature which had enable him 
already to commit crime without incur a shadow of legal suspicion. 
were i then to effect my escape from him, it would be my duty as a 
citizen of the state to do all in my power to prevent him working 
further ill in the community. yet i could not bring him to justice. i 
had no evidence to produce against him which the court would not scorn 
and ridicule. the attempt to convict him of the murder he had confessed 
to me, would only result in brand me in all men's eyes as a lunatic. 
he would meanwhile be at liberty to go abroad to work his evil will 
upon the world. he would very soon revenge himself upon me, and destroy 
me in the same diabolical ingenious fashion, perhaps, in which he had 
kill poor weldon. and miss ottley would then be at his mercy, with 
no man living to defend her. she might continue to resist him for a 
time, but in the end a man so unscrupulous and implacable determined 
would be sure to have his way. able to make himself invisible--as i 
believe he could--he might as a last resort rob her of her honour and 
so bend her proud spirit to his wish. it was this thought that finally 
determined me. i look up and said quiet to the patient, wait 
arab: "ptahmes, son of mery, son of hap, once high priest of amen-ra, 
but now i know not what--i swear by the king of earth and heaven to 
destroy the stele and papyri unread if i shall find them, to burn your 
body and scatter the ashes, and to kill your enemy and mine." 

the dark, fixed, corpse-like face of the arab turn forthwith from 
me. he pressed the slate to his bosom with the stump of his left 
wrist and with the right hand rub out the hieroglyph writing. he 
then glide over to the table and replace the slate. i follow his 
movements with the most passionate attention, expect him to return 
and immediately release me from my bonds. but he did no such thing. in 
the contrary, he move slow forward to the great sarcophagus and to 
my great astonishment i saw him climb over the edge and repose himself 
within the tomb. presently he had entire vanish from my sight. i 
could hardly credit my eyes. what was the meaning of his strange act? 
i wait for a few minutes, but he did not reappear. then i call out 
his name aloud: "ptahmes! ptahmes!" 

nothing answer me. 

i rack my brains to string together an implore sentence in the 
ancient tongue of egypt, and have fashion one, i cry it forth 
in tone of passionate entreaty, by turn commanding and beseech 
him to keep his pledge. and not once or twice, but a hundred times, 
did i address him in these ways. but i might as well have cry out 
to the stars. my effort were all unavailing, and at length, weary 
out with them, i desist and abandoned my remain energy to the 
bitter task of reactionary self-reviling. i caustic informed myself 
that my brain had gone wandering. thus until i was hot all over with 
shame. then in a more kindly spirit i cast about for excuse to salve 
my intellectual vanity. i ascribe the whole wild dream that i had 
dream to the blow my poor head had received last night. but all the 
while, deep at heart, i did not believe i had dreamed. i pretended to, 
in order to make sure that i still possessed a critical, scientific 
faculty. but i did not believe it really. i could not. and this fact 
is one more proof to me that faith in all its form depend more upon 
feeling than intellectual conviction. 




chapter xxvi 

a pleasant chat with a murder 


i awoke so much refresh and free from pain that i must have slept for 
many hours. belleville was pinch my shoulder. his black-visaged face 
was curious bilious-looking, and puffy purple hollow underhung his 
eyes. 

"you didn't sleep thus on the bank of the nile," he muttered, with a 
sick man's frown. "you were wakeful enough then. one would think you 
had been drugged." 

"indeed," said i. "but i had need to be wakeful then." 

"who set on the light," he demanded. "i swear i left you in dark. who 
has been here?" 

"your arab," i replied. "he swept out the room and gave me a drink. 
then he climb into the sarcophagus yonder, and unless he went away 
while i slept, there you'll find him." 

the rascal look perfectly astounded. "my arab!" he repeated, staring 
sharp into my eyes. then of a sudden he turn and simply rush over 
to the big lead coffin. stoop over the edge, he peep into the 
interior and seem to be shift something with his hands. his back 
was all i saw, but it move to and fro, and he strained on tiptoe. when 
he stood up his face was scarlet and his eyes were troubled. "swept the 
room, you said, and gave you a drink?" he mutter half to himself. 
with that he took to examine the floor, crawl on hand and knees. 
his peregrination took him behind me, and what he did there or found 
there i do not know; but he rap out an oath and i heard him pace 
up and down, swear in an angry undertone. so five minutes passed, 
then he stalk into my view and show me a very trouble and a very 
angry countenance. 

"you ask my arab for a drink?" he cried. 

"i did," said i. 

"in english?" 

"what else?" 

"did he answer you?" 

"in the kindliest fashion possible. he assuage my thirst." 

"blast him!" cry belleville, all of a tremble with rage. "the villain 
has been trick me. like enough i've loose a force i'll yet have to 
reckon with." 

"i don't comprehend," said i. 

"nor need you," he rap back. "shut your mouth till i address you or 
i'll cut your pry tongue out." the rascal was beside himself, that 
was evident. and since i was quite at his mercy i thought it best to 
do his bidding. he clap a hand to his head and rush once more to 
the sarcophagus. he glare over the edge for a minute, then turn and 
flung out his arms. "for two pin i'd do it now," he gasped. "cut him 
to pieces and burn the parts. it's doubtful if i'll ever get more good 
out of him. but if i do that i'll kill the chance. and yet he's play 
me false already. been laugh in his sleeve at me! but no--he can't 
have meant hurt or he'd have free the prisoner. as easy that as fetch 
him a drink. no doubt he was asked. yet he's not to be trust now, 
that is evident. i'll have to gaol him, too. let's see!" 

he cross the room and caught hold of the lid of the sarcophagus; but 
do what he could he was unable to shift it. i regard his effort 
with a deal of secret amusement. he emerge from the struggle pant 
and with disorder dress, and his temper in a molten glow. but he was 
not beaten. leave the lid alone, he wheel a big lounge over to the 
sarcophagus and, tip it on edge, heave it up athwart the mouth. 
then he pile everything of weight he could find atop of the lounge and 
soon he had built up a pyramid which would have taken a hercules to 
shift, if shut up in the sarcophagus beneath. it was then that i began 
to feel i had been a notable fool in telling belleville anything about 
the "arab." but it was little use crying over spilt milk. 

his labour over, the rascal sank into a chair before me, and began 
fan his hot face with a piece of cardboard. 

"now for our business," he presently observed. "you've probably come to 
some decision, pinsent. i wait to hear it." 

"well," i said, "the thing is in a nutshell. you've promise me nothing 
but a choice of deaths. i may be a fool, but i like life so well that i 
prefer a lingering sort to any other, however painless." 

"you're a fool," he answer shortly, and pout out his loose thick 
lip beyond his beard, so that he seem to have the snout of a hairy 
pig. "you don't know what a pleasure it will be to me to torture you," 
he continued. "i'll make you suffer like the damn before you die." 

"i don't doubt your will; it's your ability which is in question," i 
said, as cool as i was able. "you may think you have me laid here 
very nicely by the heels, dr. belleville, and so you have in seeming. 
but you're not the only man who has a knowledge of the old magic arts 
of ancient egypt. i tell you to your face that i possess a charm no 
whit less potent than the one you found the secret of in yonder tomb. 
and if you force me to use it, why, i shall use it. now put that in 
your pipe and smoke it." 

he stood up at once, greatly surprised, much incredulous, but also a 
little trouble and dubious, as i could see. 

"you think you can bluff me?" he snarled. but i _had_ bluff him. i 
could read it in his eyes. 

i answer him with nothing but a smile. 

he assume a sneer. his eyes glinted. he put his hand in his pocket and 
produce a revolver. he cock the weapon and put it to my temple. 

"well, you've challenge me," he jeered. "in just one minute i'll blow 
your brains out. your charm is now in question!" 

for a few seconds a dark haze of blind terror shut off my power of 
vision. i felt the villain meant to do what he had threatened. his 
nerves had been shaken by what i had said to him about the arab--though 
why, i could not fathom--and my challenge, although the merest bluff, 
had complete their disorder. he was in a spell of panic and it had 
swept his reason and his resolution to the winds. he intended to kill 
me in order to restore his own sense of security, and at once. and i 
was impotent to prevent him. he was count aloud, "one, two, three, 
four." he had got up to fifteen before i even partially awoke out of my 
trance of craven fear. but in the next five seconds i had live a whole 
series of lifetime and i had received an inspiration born of wrath and 
hate and desperate necessity. 

"look in my eyes," i shriek at him. "and listen if you want to live." 

he look at me. i put the strength of my existence into my gaze, and 
i felt a strange, wild thrill of exultation as i saw his eyes dilate 
encounter the glance i threw at him. 

"my death means yours," i hissed. "my monitor stand over you. you'll 
be shrivel as by lightning. we'll go together to the throne of 
god! now shoot if you will and damn your soul for all eternity! 
shoot--shoot!" 

but dr. belleville did not shoot. his hand fell to his side. he 
stagger back, staring at me open-mouthed until the chair arrest 
him. i saw my advantage and pressed it home. 

"stop!" i shouted. "as you value your dirty life. stop! stand still and 
do not turn your head. one movement and we both die. i don't want to 
die for a dog like you." 

he stood like a frozen image. holding his glance with mine, i began to 
mutter in a sing-song way a string of meaningless egypt phrases. 
then the more powerful to impress the superstitious fool-scoundrel, 
all of a sudden i utter a loud heart-rending groan and allow my 
head to fall over on the strap that encircle and sustain my neck. 
but though i only affected to swoon, the frightful amount of will 
force and nervous energy i had expend in the crisis had induce 
a consequential lassitude so enthrall that i came very near to 
faint in reality. and, indeed, it is quite likely that i lost my 
senses for a time. soon, however, i felt water sprinkle on my face and 
slow i raise my head. "a drink!" i gasped. 

a glass was pressed to my lips. i drank thirsty and open my eyes. 
belleville, white-faced but compose now and gloomy frowning, was my 
minister. 

"i make you my compliments," he said in cold, slow, even tones. "you 
have a quick wit and a nerve of iron. i am glad, because they save 
me from a folly. you would cease to be of use to me dead, curse you, 
though i wish you carrion, and will make you worm food before i am much 
older." 

"you'll not live to repent it," i replied. "i've bound your fate with 
mine by tie no mortal can unsolve." 

"enough of that rubbish," he retort harshly. "you cannot haze me 
twice. you could not have at all if i had stop to think or been 
quite well. but i'm liverish and out of sort to-day--the result of 
stay up all night nursing ottley." 

"you'll see when the time comes--if you have the courage," i respond 
in an acrid tone. "you cannot scare me, belleville, because you cannot 
harm me without hurt yourself--and in your deep of heart, you 
rogue, you know it." 

he burst out laughing, but there was a note of nervous in his 
mock mirth that pleased me passing well. 

"pah!" he said at last. "would you sit there truss up like a chooky 
skewer for the table if you had the power you pretend?" 

"idiot!" i snapped. "can electricity unbuckle strap without machinery? 
yet it can splinter rocks without an effort and without assistance." 

"ah!" said he, "ah! so you pretend----" 

"try me!" i interrupted. 

"not i," cry he. "i've encounter so many wonders lately that i'm 
now beginning to regard what i of old considered the impossible as the 
most likely thing of all to happen. i don't believe you, pinsent, but 
neither do i disbelieve you. therefore, acting on the kindly hint you 
dropped, i'll take all sane precautions. au revoir." 

he march to the door, pass out and disappeared. i chew the bitter 
cud of thought for some hours. meanwhile i grew desperate hungry, ay, 
and thirsty, too. there came a time when i would have given the last of 
my possession for a beef-steak and a jug of water. and, oh! how tired 
i was of my position. the blood gradual cease to circulate properly 
through all my parts. my hand became purple. my leg went to sleep. my 
limb were on a rack of pin and needle and even breathing hurt me. 
i did my best by strain at the bonds at interval to promote the 
arterial flow and stop the agony of muscular irritation. but it was a 
poor best, and i sank welcome at length into a benumbed lethargy 
state near akin to stupor, from which i knew i could wake to anguish by 
the merest movement. 

as near as i can guess twelve hour had uncoiled their lethal fold 
before my infernal captor return to the laboratory. one instant i 
was sharp sensible and suffering most damnably. the rogue look 
positively sick and he smelt like a gin palace. he had evidently drunk 
a deal of spirit, but he was not the least intoxicated. "it is over!" 
he cry and threw himself into a chair. 

"what?" i questioned. 

"ottley is dead," said he, "and i am glad of it, all said and done, 
though i work like a galley slave to keep him by me. he was a fine 
cloak for my doings, but he grew wearisome--the fractious old fool--at 
times. and i'm not sure i'd bring him back now--were i able." 

"and miss ottley?" 

"a pretty scene!" he shrug his shoulders, then grimace and 
whistled. "i'm her father's murderer, it seems!" he stretch out 
his arms and yawned. "but she's not responsible, poor thing--grief 
demented. the two consulting physician heartily sympathise with 
me. they knew how i had worked, you see, and sir philip lang himself 
suggest morphia. they've sign a paper give me control of 
her--under their directions i'm trustee of the estate under the will 
besides. lang think she may recover--ultimately, but it is evident 
that she must be confined. she rave of mummies, and spirits, and dead 
men come to life from the sleep of ages, and so forth. it impress 
lang, vastly. he tap his sage old head and mutter 'too much 
learning.' he has a fad that woman's brains are nurture best on pap, 
and i had the tact to humour him. oh! i'm a devilish clever fellow, 
pinsent. what do you think?" 

"there is little doubt of it," i said politely, very politely, indeed, 
for i wish to get as much information from him as i could and also 
something to eat and drink. "with your brains you might do anything. 
i suspect i have hitherto misjudge you. still, i wonder that you are 
not an archbishop. it seem to me the church would give you the proper 
cloak you need to exercise your talent in." 

"gad!" he cried. "there's point in that remark. but between ourselves, 
pinsent, i aim at higher game than spiritual power." 

"temporal," i suggested. 

"the highest," he answered, sitting up. "and what's to prevent me?" he 
ask defiantly. "no man's life is safe from me." 

i was puzzled. "you'd not make yourself eligible for kingship by 
killing kings," i said. 

"kingship be damned," he sneered. "my father was an earl's bastard, but 
as for me, i'm a pure democrat. no, no, i'm go to abolish royalty. 
it has serve its turn." 

"but where do you come in?" 

"the pleasure of the game is mine, the knowledge and the ecstasy of 
power unlimited to make and break." 

"oh! oh! my tiger, have taste blood already, once at least, the 
thirst grow on you." 

"once at least--bah!" he jeered, grin like a fiend. 

"pardon my ignorance," i entreated. "who was your latest victim." 

"navarro," he answered, grin still. "the scamp is a true 
clairvoyant and had to be shut up. he leap from london bridge the 
night you came here and step like a poor rabbit into the trap i laid 
for you." 

"well," said i, in tone husky with throat dry and apparent 
admiration, "that make two--weldon and navarro?" 

"there is a third still," he answered, fairly snap at the bait. "my 
old grandfather, the earl of havelock." 

"and why did you murder him?" 

"for his snobbish refusal to receive me as his kin ten years ago." 

"might one ask how?" 

"it's a story to entertain," he answered, licking his lips. "he was 
over eighty, but he'd kept all his faculties, else ther'd been no joy 
in killing him. a week since, i went to him invisible, enter the 
house with my blood cousin, now the earl, soon after midnight return 
from a carousal. he did not see me, of course, and i took care not to 
let him hear. but little care was needed, the degenerate was filthy 
drunk. it was easy to find the old earl's room, the young man got 
so sober passing it. the door was unlocked, too, so i had no trouble 
first and last. i went over to the old chap's bed and look at him 
and laugh to see. he slept with his mouth wide and his toothless 
gum were hideous funny. his teeth were in a glass of h2o beside the 
bed. i pull his nose to waken him, have first turn on the lights 
full. then i play the ghost of my dead father. 'your hour is come,' 
say i. 'i'm the spirit of your bastard son come to warn you.' he shook 
all over, palsied with fear. 'no--no--no,' he gasped, 'i'm not fit to 
die.' 'you're not fit to live,' i whispered, stern as fate. 'how have 
you treat the son of your bastard son? have you been kind to him and 
help him in the world.' 'mercy, mercy!' he whined. 'i know i have 
been remiss, but give one more chance--another year--a week--a day--and 
i'll do my duty. i'll bar the entail, i'll give him all.' 

"'wretch!' i hissed--and sat me on his chest. it was heaven sweet to 
hear his stifle moans. he did not struggle at all. and my only regret 
was it was so soon over. he broke a vessel and smother in his own 
blood. the papers announce next day that he had die of the syncope of 
senility peaceful while sleeping. ha, ha, ha!" 

i echo the heartless villain's laugh, croak out guffaws. the sound 
irritate him. "stop that raucous row!" he ordered. 

"then stop telling me funny stories, or else give me something to 
drink!" i snapped. 

he sprang afoot at once. "lord!" he cried, "i'm not propose to starve 
you to death. why the deuce did you not remind me? you've been--let's 
see--sixty hour without food." 

"sixty!" i gasped. "impossible." 

"it's a fact," he said, and stalk out of the room. but he return 
within a few minutes carry a tray set with cold meat and wine 
which he set on a little table and wheel before me. then he free my 
right hand and stood over me with a revolver while i ate. but i could 
not eat at once, for the good reason that my arm was paralyzed, and 
minutes pass before i could make use of it. even then it pained like 
a raw scald. but i suppress a reference to its condition and at the 
earliest instant clear the board in the fashion of a famished wolf. 
afterwards he bound me up again, standing behind me to do it, out 
of respect for my strength, no doubt. then he put up his pistol and 
resume his chair. 

"upon my soul, i enjoy a chat with you," he assured me. "you see, 
i have no one else to confide in"--here he grinned--"and there's a 
peculiar pleasure in unbosom to a helpless enemy." 

"the pleasure is mutual," i protest courteously. "no other man has 
given me such mental pabulum." 

he closed one eye in a very vulgar manner, "confess you expire with 
curiosity to hear more of my beautiful fiancée--the woman you love!" 

"the more readily," i responded, "because i know you'll be delight to 
taunt me with the satisfaction of that same curiosity." 

"ah!" said he. "you are a foeman worthy of my steel. my heart warm 
with hate for you; respectful hate." he took out a silver pocket flask 
of spirit and fill the cup. 

at this he began to sip, eye me the while with secret delight at my 
careful repressed impatience. but he was too anxious to torture me 
directly to keep me wait long. 

"she's in a drug sleep this moment," he announced. "i'll keep her 
like that till after the funeral." 

"that's unlike you," i remarked. "it's almost kind." 

"pish!" said he, "i can't afford to let her out of my control even for 
a moment." 

"so?" 

"so." 

"but you will have to let her see her relatives, eh?" 

"fortunately she hasn't one blood relation in england. her mother was 
an australian, a victorian farmer's daughter, and ottley took good care 
not to marry the family. she has never even seen one of her mother's 
people." 

"but her father's?" 

"she is just as fortunately placed, from my point of view, in this 
regard. ottley was the only son. and although i believe there is an old 
maiden aunt twice remove knock round somewhere in wales, i'm not 
afraid of her. she's bed-ridden and a pensioner. as i'm trustee of the 
estate she'll do what i tell her and stay where she is or i'll know the 
reason why." 

"i'm sure you will," i agree with pious fervour. 

"the fates seem to have deliberate conspire to assist me in every 
possible way," continue belleville. "the only real woman friend miss 
ottley had, lady helen hubbard, has gone to south america with her 
husband, and the only man friend who might have help her sit in that 
chair. there is not another soul in england who has either the shadow 
of a right or interest to question my treatment. i'm her sole trustee 
and as well as that her legal guardian, for although she is over age 
she do not come into control of her fortune until she is twenty-seven 
unless she marry in the meanwhile." 

"you propose, of course, that she shall marry you. when?" 

"oh, in a few days' time. it will naturally be a secret marriage 
in order to save scandal. but i'm determined it shall take place 
immediately." 

"and afterwards--how will you treat her?" i had hard work to grind this 
question out. 

belleville gave a nasty laugh. "that depend on herself," he answered. 
"if she is a dutiful, docile wife she will have little cause to 
grumble." 

"and--if not?" 

"you know me and ask that?" he cried. then he laugh again, stood up 
and shook himself. "i'm go to indulge in a nice comfortable sleep," 
he said. "you may not know it, pinsent, but it's almost midnight. take 
my advice and go to by-by, too! pleasant dream to you and au revoir." 
he went out gape with yawns, but he turn out the lights as he went, 
and once more dark enfold me. 




chapter xxvii 

unbound 


it is not worth while describe the next few days. they were quite or 
almost colourless. once each four and twenty hours, belleville, taking 
sound precautions, release me for a short while from my prison chair 
to let me stretch my limb and in the interests of keeping me alive for 
his own purposes. we had very little conversation, for he had fallen 
into a morose and gloomy mood, the result of an attack of insomnia. in 
answer to direct question i learned that sir robert ottley's funeral 
had pass without incident, but that miss ottley's violent grief had 
been succeed by a long stupor. she was being nurse by a creature 
of belleville's, an old frenchwoman name elise lorraine in whom he 
evidently repose a deal of confidence. belleville spent most of his 
time at work in the laboratory, but what he did i could not see, for he 
conduct his labour behind my chair. on one occasion he gave way to 
a savage fit of passion, and without any cause whatever that i could 
perceive, he broke a number of glass implement upon the floor. another 
time, have cut his hand in some experiment, he revenge himself by 
flogging me with a piece of whalebone until my flesh wherever he could 
reach it was cover with weal and blisters. he was not a nice man to 
live with and my hatred of him grew daily more intense. but perforce 
i was civil to him. on the eighth day he enter the room with a 
chalk-white face. i knew at once that something had happened; but i was 
not to learn what it was immediately. he disappear forthwith behind 
my chair and for ten minutes stamp about swear like a pagan. 
then the lights went out of a sudden and he departed in the dark. he 
return about four hour later, but i did not see him enter, although 
he put on the lights immediately. i heard him pass my chair; that 
was all. but a few seconds later a sharp and most acrid irritate 
odour fill the room, and soon afterwards he came forward and sank 
into his accustomed chair, opposite to mine. he look positively 
ghastly. "to-morrow morning england will mourn the loss of her greatest 
physician," he announce in quiver tones. "sir philip lang has just 
committed suicide." 

"what!" i cry in deep astonishment. "sir philip lang!" 

he bare his teeth. "the world will think so," he snarled. "but in 
reality--but there, you shall judge. this afternoon without give me 
notice the fool came to this house, forced his way into the sick room 
and had a long private conversation with may ottley. i do not know 
to what conclusion he came, but she must have persuade him of her 
sanity, for he ordered elise to take her out for a walk; and if it had 
not been that elise refuse to obey him pending my arrival there would 
have been a pretty kettle of fish for me to fry. however, he won't 
trouble me again." 

"you murder him!" i gasped. 

"like an artist," said belleville. "i stole upon him while he sat 
in his private sitting-room at supper and, standing opposite to him 
unseen, i reach out and pour some aconite into his wine. he was 
dead inside a quarter hour, and i took care that he made no outcry. the 
verdict should be suicide, i think. don't you?" 

with that he got up and left me. 

that night while i slept he dose me with chloroform, and while i was 
senseless he drew over my clothes a suit of rubber overalls. he also 
did whatever was necessary to render me invisible, and he gag me 
with a piece of steel thrust under my tongue and secure around my 
throat and neck with fine wire that bit deep in the flesh. i awoke 
groan with agony to find that i was stretch out on the naked 
framework of an iron bed. 

belleville stood over me grasping miss ottley by the hand. when i saw 
her i stop groan as if by instinct. i knew at once that she 
did not see anything except the bed. she look well, but tragic 
sorrowful and wild. she was staring as it were through me. 

"you see nothing," said belleville's hollow voice, "but his spirit lie 
there for all that. it is in my power and cannot escape without i set 
it free. you know my price. it is for you to rule his fate, through me 
if so you wish. 

"what!" he continued, "do you not believe--well, then, look now!" 

of a sudden he flash a blue light lanthorn into my face and he did 
something else which sent a thousand sting current of electric 
anguish quiver along my nerves. i utter a shriek, but the gag 
stifle it to a hiss wail, and then i fell to breathing groans. 
hell can have no worse torment than that villain had devise for my 
undoing. had my mouth been unfettered i should have besought the woman 
i adore for death at any price for rest of pain. as it was i pray 
her with my eyes--and she saw and took a message. 

"let him go!" she sobbed, "and i will marry you. oh, this is horrible!" 

on instant the blue light fade out and a blessed heaven of diminish 
torture gave me peace. 

belleville took from his breast a naked dagger which he put into the 
girl's hand. "strike, then!" he said, "strike here," and he put his 
finger on my breast. 

the devil propose to make his innocent victim a murderess. i saw his 
purpose, and with every atom of my strength i groaned. it was the only 
warning i could send. 

but i had play right into belleville's hands. 

"hear him implore you!" cry belleville. 

"oh! i can't, i can't," she wailed. 

"'tis only a spirit--and it's the only way," he protest warmly. 

miss ottley swung around sudden and drove the dagger at his heart, 
but he had been expect it. he caught her wrist and laughed. then all 
my anguish recommenced. in the midst of it, made desperate, the girl 
lean right across the bed and struck. the blade glance down upon a 
rib and deep pierce my side. providence, surely, had direct the 
blow. she withdrew the dagger, then scream aloud to see it dripping 
with blood. belleville caught her in his arms and bore her roughly 
back. he bent her body on a table until she was as helpless as a dove, 
then took the blade and drew the horrid thing across her lips; so they 
were carmine with my blood. 

"by this and this you'll remember you are mine," he said, and kiss 
her lip till his were bloody, too. then the two stare deep into each 
other's eyes. 

"i've kill his body; you, his soul," said belleville. "we're well 
mated, you and i. there--i've no long any fear you'll hurt yourself. 
you'll be henceforth too much afraid of him to die." 

he let her go, and stood away from her. she sway erect, then came 
forward till she stood beside me. i held my very breath for fear that 
she would hear. i don't know why. 

"it is all a trick--a cruel, devilish trick. there's nothing there!" 
said the girl, her bosom heave as she spoke. 

belleville laugh like a hyena. "feel--if you dare!" he cried. 

but she took him at his word. her hand went out and, guide by a dark 
blotch which, as afterwards i learned she saw, she put them on my wound 
and drew them swift back ensanguined. then horror settled on her like 
a black cloud on a mountain top. she turn about with one loud gasp 
sigh and sank down in a lifeless heap at belleville's feet. 

soon afterwards i swooned, too, from pain and loss of blood. when i 
awoke my wound was neat bandaged, and i was once more seat in my 
chair. 

belleville sat opposite smoking a cigar. he was dress very smart 
in a frock suit and a tall hat was set jaunty on his brow. he wore a 
geranium in his buttonhole. his face was wreathe in smiles. a bottle 
of champagne was set before him on a table and he sip at a glass 
with an air of triumphant good-humour. 

i found that i could speak; my gag had been removed. 

"water!" i implore him. 

he started, then pressed forward with his glass. "where the devil is 
your mouth?" he said. 

he could not see me, that was plain. 

"here!" said i. "water." 

"it is my wedding morn--and you shall toast me in wine or go 
thirsting," he rap out. 

then he found my lip and i drank life into my veins. i have never 
taste draught one-half so glorious. 

"i was married less than an hour ago," he said, "at a registrar's 
office. she's no long miss ottley, pinsent." 

i was silent. 

"do you hear me, man?" he demanded. 

"i hear," i answered. 

he nod his head and smiled. "i suppose you are wonder why you're 
still alive, eh?" 

"you'll die when i die," i mutter wearily. "you are afraid to kill 
me, that is why." 

"bosh!" he flash back. "i have a better reason far. to-morrow she 
will be my wife indeed--a maid no longer--pinsent. it was worth keeping 
you alive to gloat on that." 

"oh! i see." 

"but you don't see everything, pinsent. she insist upon seeing your 
body to-day in order to be sure that you are dead." 

"ah!" 

"she still has a lingering doubt that i have trick her, and she has 
sworn on the cross that unless i produce your corpse for her inspection 
she will take her own life rather than--you can guess what, pinsent." 

"yes--i can guess." 

"so you see the time draw nigh for you to die." 

"god only knows." 

the villain frowned. "but before you go you must do something for me." 

"and that?" 

"you must write her a letter telling her that your only hope of soul 
resurrection and salvation lie in her obey me. she now consider me 
a dangerous magician, but i want her to regard me as a sort of deity." 

"i will not do it, belleville. you ought to know me better by this." 

"i think you will," said he. "that is if you really care for her. you 
see it will save her a lot of--let's call it inconvenience. with such a 
weapon as your message i can rule her kindly. but rule her in any case 
i shall. if you deny me i'll gag you this moment so you can't make a 
sound, then i'll bring her here and beat her as i would a dog. how will 
you like that?" 

"i'll write the letter," i said huskily. 

a few minutes later the thing was done, and i had sign my name to 
the atrocious expression of his demand. to transcribe them i am too 
ashamed. 

"what now?" i asked. 

"the last scene in the last act," said he, as he put the letter in 
his pocket. "i may tell you that i intend always to keep your body by 
me--for her to look at--if she ever show a mind to mutiny." 

"in spirits?" i questioned. 

"the embalm oil of the prince of old egypt. i found the receipt in 
ptahmes' tomb," he answered. "i propose to convert you into a mummy." 

with that he took off his hat and coat, roll up his sleeve and put 
on a huge oil-skin apron. "i'll not kill you till the last moment 
necessary," he observed. "in fact, you'll be half-mummy before you 
die; i have a curiosity to discover if the process of substitute is 
painful. i rather think it must be." 

he move over as he spoke to the sarcophagus and began to shift the 
object that seal up the mouth. it took him some minutes to do so, 
and as he put down the couch, last of all, one of the castor crash 
upon his toe. he cursed the misfortune like a madman and dance 
about the floor on one foot like a dervish, winding up by striking 
me brutal with closed fist on the lips. that gave him back his 
self-control. 

"i'll teach you to laugh at me," he growled. then he return to his 
work and stoop over the great coffin he haul out the lifeless 
mummy that had rest there so long. for an instant i glimpse the 
strange dead features of the dust of ptahme which so striking 
resemble the effigy carven on the lid of the sarcophagus and also the 
arab who had twice in egypt attempt to destroy me. then belleville 
careless threw the thing upon the couch; and traverse the room to 
where stood three glass jar fill with a dark viscous fluid. one by 
one he roll these on end across the floor till all three stood beside 
the coffin. afterwards he disappear behind my chair, return soon, 
his head cover with a long breathing mask. i watch him--one may 
guess with what passionate attention. he unscrew the stopper of the 
nearest jar, seize the thing bodily in his arms and pour out the 
contents into the sarcophagus. a curious cloud-like steam arose that 
haze the prospect, but soon it dissipated. the air was fill with the 
perfume i had first smelt in the cave temple of the hill of rakh. but 
it was not altogether overpowering. it made my pulse throb and brought 
a great rush of blood to my head and hand and feet much as would the 
scent of amyl nitrate. but it did not take away my senses. belleville, 
protect by his mask, was in no way affected. he quick unstoppered 
the second jar, and add its contents to the first. then he turn and 
approach me, taking off his helmet as he came. the action apprise 
me that the wonderful perfume had almost die away. there was now a 
healthy and stimulate odour in the room that resemble boil tar. 
evidently the two jar had contained different chemicals. a loud, 
seething, bubble sound was plainly to be heard; it came from the 
sarcophagus. 

belleville sat down and wipe his forehead with a handkerchief. "we 
must give the stuff ten minutes to mix," he said and, taking out his 
watch, he glance at the time. "it's twenty past eleven," he remarked. 
"you'll begin to mummify at the half hour precisely, pinsent, so if you 
are a religious man you'd best compose your soul in prayer." 

i am not ashamed to say that i follow his advice. i closed my eyes 
and ask the omnipotent for remission of my sins. and since it seem 
to me that my hour had come, i resolute put aside my detest 
of the monster who design to murder me, and i even ask for his 
forgiveness, too. then a great, deep, splendid peace mantle over me, 
and for the first time in my life i truly realise the little of 
man's existence and the majesty of resignation. it was almost worth 
while to go through all i had been compel to endure to experience 
at the end that mood of grand, calm dignity. i felt almost sublime 
detached from my surroundings. i open my eyes at last and said with 
perfect calm: 

"i am ready, belleville." 

he stood up and stretch out his arms, yawn widely. then of a 
sudden everything was dark. 

"what in hell----?" shout belleville. i heard him rush forward 
curse angrily, then he stumble and fell headlong to the floor amidst 
a crash of glass. in the same instant unseen hand fumble over me. my 
bonds sudden relax and i was free. i stood up, stiff but quiver 
in every nerve. there follow a rasp sound, a match flicker into 
light, and i saw belleville rising from the ruins of a broken jar. he 
held the lucifer above his head, and it show standing at an angle 
between us the tall frame of the arab of the cave temple at rakh. 

belleville rip out an oath. there came a blind flash of light and 
the deafen report of a revolver. i stagger from the chair to the 
wall and lean against it, helpless as a babe. the echo were still 
thundering in rolling wave of brain-dazing sound from wall to wall 
when the pitch black of the room was again relieved by the glare 
of electricity. belleville had succeed in turning on the lights. he 
stood by the door peer all about him. for a moment i thought all was 
up. i was free, certainly, but my muscle were so cramped and tautene 
that i could hardly move a finger. i was not fit to contend against 
a breath of wind, let alone a burly ruffian like the doctor. but the 
next instant i remember i was still invisible. i could not see my own 
hand held before me, and i had immediate proof that he was unable to 
perceive me. 

"where are you, pinsent? are you hurt?" he cried. 

i did not answer, but, following his glance, i look at the couch and 
there i saw what utterly astound me. the mummy of ptahme lay upon 
the couch in exactly the same attitude as when belleville had flung 
it there aside from the sarcophagus. who, then, or what, had set me 
free? i examine the apartment eagerly, but saw nothing living save 
belleville, who with cock revolver thrust out before him now step 
forward cautious into the room, wave his arms about him as he 
walked, and muttering, as he walked, through clench teeth a string of 
angry blasphemies. 




chapter xxviii 

the struggle in the chamber 


the advantage i possessed was dangerous minimise by my physical 
incapacity, but i hoped, given time, to get back some measure of 
strength. the great thing was to preserve my liberty until i had 
acquire force enough to use it. i speedy realise that i could not 
remain where i was, for belleville was making towards me and reflection 
would soon teach him that weakness would compel me to seek a prop 
for my support. but i fear to move lest the sound should betray my 
whereabouts. for the same reason i almost fear to breathe. i thought 
to myself, "oh, that he would fire again so that i could move elsewhere 
under cover of the noise." 

once or twice he seem to look me in the eye. he made a zigzag to my 
chair. there he pause and listened. i cease to breathe. only six feet 
separate us. but impatience consume him. "tell me where you are!" 
he growled, "or by the lord when i catch you i'll tear you limb from 
limb." i breathe while he spoke and cease when he stopped. 

"you can't escape me!" he snarled. "i've only to light my blue lamp 
and i'll find you in a minute. but if you put me to that trouble and 
make me waste my precious oil besides, well, look out, that's all!" 

i clench and unclenched my hands; the use of them was coming back to 
me. 

"very well," said belleville. he pass my chair and stalk to the 
other end of the room, where he open a cabinet. i move slow 
and painful to the very centre of the room. then i stood stock 
still. belleville, returning, pause within a foot of me. he carry 
a bull's-eye lanthorn. this he put upon the table, and presently he 
struck a match. a moment later a round shaft of intense blue radiance 
shot across the room and marked a moon-shaped sphere on the wall. it 
began to flit along the wall, up and down from the very floor to the 
height of a man's chest, until it touched the corner. then it flash 
back twice over the same path, and afterwards attack the next wall. 
soon or later it would be bound to encounter and, perhaps, discover 
me. but belleville was only a few feet off. perhaps if i sank down 
the shaft would pass over me without touching. at least i could try. 
suppress a shriek of agony, i crouch upon my hand and knees. then 
came another thought. slow and laborious i began to crawl near 
and near to my enemy. the blue shaft was now shoot right over my 
head. i crept behind him and, breathing noiselessly, stood up. if 
i had possessed a tithe of my strength i might have reach out and 
caught his neck and strangle him with ease. but i dare not risk it. 
all on a sudden he utter an oath. the lamp had gone out. "damn the 
thing!" he growled. putt down his revolver on the table, he open 
the lamp and peer in at the smoking wick. we were now face to face 
and his cock weapon lay within eighteen inch of my hand. i try 
my finger and found that they were reasonably supple. the blood was 
stream through the puffy vein and vesicles. the operation hurt 
horribly; in fact, i was one mass of crude, raw, painful man flesh. but 
now i was full of hope and despite the muscular torment of return 
animation i felt that my vigour was returning. belleville snuff the 
wick and struck a match along the table. the head came off. he took 
another and rub it on the sole of his shoe, stoop slightly to do 
so. as he move i reach out and twin my finger round the hilt of 
his revolver. but i had not the strength to lift it up. i cannot paint 
the agony of that experience. i exert every atom of my will, but my 
hand was like a putty puppet. tantalus never suffer torture half as 
keen. withdraw my hand, i put the finger in my mouth and suck 
the still half-lifeless digits. meanwhile, the lamp flicker alight; 
belleville took up his revolver and resume his task. i watch him 
hungrily. the blue shaft once more began to play and stab the walls. 
it dart hither and thither, like an incandescent elf, dance up 
and down and round and round, and into every hole and cranny of the 
room. but it did not find me out, because moving round and round the 
table as belleville move i always kept behind him. but this could not 
last for ever, and, indeed, the end came too soon. belleville utter 
sudden a savage curse and swung round full upon me. perhaps i had 
made some sound that had betray me to his nerve-strained senses. i do 
not know. he cried, "ha! at last," and fire point blank. the bullet 
whistle past my temple. the smoke of the discharge flame blue in the 
ray of the lanthorn. i fell upon the table and thrust it like a ram 
with all my force against my adversary. he fire again and once more 
missed, but ere he could repeat his tactics the table struck him and 
the lanthorn fell. he stagger back and the lanthorn roll underneath 
the table. i pushed the table forward and kick the lanthorn with my 
foot. it went out. belleville, recover his equilibrium, stood like 
an image peer straight at me and listening. yet he did not see me: 
and for the moment i was safe, for the table was between us. but the 
man had brains. judge swift where i was most likely to be, he gave 
an unexpected spring and vaulted clear across the obstacle. i had just 
time to step back ere he landed. he swung his arms about like flails, 
but failing immediately to find me, his ugly temper must needs flare 
up in curses. it was just what i need to cover the sound of my 
movements. i evade him and return to the table, and then he knew 
not where i was. in a few moments he realise his folly and, once more 
relapse into silence, he took up his lamp. but the oil had either 
been waste or was exhausted. the wick refuse to catch. he groan 
out a blasphemous oath on this discovery, and rush down to the 
cabinet, from which first he had procure the lanthorn. i follow him 
as swift as i could, have care to make no sound, and while he was 
filling the lamp with oil from a beautiful carven vase of solid gold 
egypt ware of the fifteenth dynasty, i once more put my hand upon 
the hilt of his revolver, which he had momentarily laid upon the edge 
of the cabinet. but this time i found i could hold and use it, too. 
shadow-like, i caught it up and put my finger on the trigger. then i 
back away a yard or two and lean upon a case of glass and steel. 

"belleville!" said i. 

he start as though an adder had stung him, then seeing his pistol 
gone, he let both vase and lanthorn fall in his dismay and swung on 
heel to face my voice. 

"it's my turn now," i muttered. "hands above your head--up, man, 
up--higher--higher!" he saw the muzzle point at his breast and 
sullen obeyed. i made him walk backwards to the chair that formerly 
had prison me and sit in it. and then, the steel pressed to his ear 
to keep him still, i managed, with one hand, to pass a strap around 
his throat and buckle it. afterwards i similarly bound his wrist 
and ankles. when all was done i was so sore spent, so hideous full 
of weary pain, that i lay upon the floor and sank immediately into a 
trouble sleep. belleville woke me with his struggle to get free. 
somehow or other he had pry himself on tiptoe backward, and the heavy 
chair, overbalancing, had drag him over in its fall. that i had 
not heard, but the weight of iron and his own body was all curious 
pressed upon one forearm, and the pain of it set him groan like a 
wound bull. the strangest thing of all was that this arm was free. 
somehow or other he had writhe it loose. after i had tie it up again 
i sat down to think what i should do. i was not, however, in the mood 
to sit in judgment on him then, for although much strong from my 
sleep, the exertion hurt, and every pang i suffer was too powerful 
an advocate of vengeance to let me try the rascal soberly. i need 
food and drink. not finding any in the room, i try the door and 
after some short search, made out its fastening--a simple but clever 
slip of prodigious strength. i found the key to it in belleville's 
pocket. he was madly anxious to be made acquaint with his fate, but i 
turn a deaf ear to all his questions, and slip out of the room, 
i slam the door on his solicitations. i found myself in a long, 
blind passage, light with a single jet, with another pad door 
set in its farthest end. this open to the same key as the first. it 
gave me egress on a second passage, which led by three right angle 
to a big velvet-draped arch and a bifurcate maze of broad-balconied 
corridors. here i saw the natural light of day for the first time in 
more than a week. ah! how i revel in it. i stop before an open 
window and peer forth on a wall courtyard and the blank, tall wall 
of a neighbouring mansion beyond. street sound percolate to my ears. 
it was like coming back to life from the grave. drawing back from the 
window, after some deep, delicious moments, i look to find my body 
and my hand and feet. but i could not see aught but vague, delusive 
shadows, though the sunbeam glisten on me. the phenomenon fill 
me with a new sense of marvel and uncertainty. i had to pinch myself 
to make sure i was not a disembodied phantom--such stuff as dream 
are made of. yet i was real enough to touch, thank heaven. reassured, 
i made for the nearest door and soft try it. within was a man's 
bedroom--belleville's, perhaps. it was untenanted. the next apartment 
was a sitting-room. it was also untenanted, but it contained a table, 
cover-spread for two. with a sigh of joy, i enter and hurried to the 
table. under the first cover was a cold partridge pie. i did not touch 
the others, but, lord, how i enjoy that pie! i might have been a 
wolf--and then champagne! later, seduce by an open cigar-box on the 
mantel, i threw myself upon a lounge and lit a weed. in ten minutes i 
was my own man again, and almost comfortable, for the torment that had 
rack my wretched muscle on reawakene from their tether lethargy, 
were disappear fast. but i was not permit long rest. warn by 
a tap on the door, i had barely time to toss my cigar into the grate, 
when the door open and a short, squat negro step into the room. 
he carry a salver of sweetmeat to the table; he stop short and 
utter a guttural exclamation of surprise. next instant he was join 
by a companion, but no negro, an arab, a tall, thin arab, who was the 
living counterpart of the mummify corpse of ptahme i had left in the 
laboratory, and of the mysterious scoundrel who had attempt my life 
in the cave temple at rakh, and at my camp on the bank of the nile. i 
was so utterly astound that i wonder i did not shout out my amazement. 

the negro spoke in arabic. "by allah, he has eaten and alone," he 
cried. "now tell me, ptahmes, how a man shall serve a master with so 
little feeling for his servants." 

the arab stalk solemn over to the table and eye the ruin pie. 

"he hungered. he ate. may his shadow increase," he drawled. 

"for my part," retort the nubian, with an ill-natured scowl, "his 
shadow may wither and i shall not grieve. it is impossible to please 
him." 

"his gold is good and hard and yellow and much," said the arab, in a 
sort of sing-song. 

"add to that ill-got," reply the negro, "and i shall be an echo to 
your speech. natamkin tell me that the lady weep still, though no 
more a prisoner, and he took her forth into his whirl babel town 
this morning. he has put a spell on her to deprive her of her gold." 

"what matter if he shares it with his slaves?" demand the arab. 

"i fear him," said the nubian. 

"i also," drawl the arab. "but guard your idle tongue uromi! he may 
be listen to us now." 

the negro shudder and made as if to hasty depart. but the arab 
laughed, and he stop look both angry and ashamed. 

"allah!" he exclaimed, "you laugh, but you may have spoken true." 

"ugh!" said the arab, "he has big fish to fry--the white man you 
entice into the room of wonders die to-day." 

"you--know that, ptahmes!" 

"ay--i am to help him to embalm the body. now i think of it, i wonder 
he has eaten. i was to stir the pot while he made merry with the lady 
over wine--the unbelieving dog. at one of the clock he ordered me to go 
to him. 'tis almost time." 

"will you not fear to stay alone in that great room of magic, ptahmes?" 

"like enough, uromi, but i shall think me of the pay and work with 
tight-shut eyes till he returns." 

"what has he promise you?" 

"five pieces of gold, uromi. do you covet them?" 

"i would not cross the threshold of that room for ten times five." 

"you have a chicken's heart, uromi." 

"and you a miser's gizzard." 

the arab utter a sardonic laugh. "get to your woman's work!" he 
sneered. "and clear those things away! you had better tell natamkin to 
serve the lady in her room!" 

"and you--oh, great lord!" growl the nubian, with elephantine sarcasm. 

the arab, however, did not trouble himself to answer. with a mien of 
princely dignity he stalk in silence to the door and vanished. 

i said to myself, "there, without doubt, go the man who, in the nick 
of time, release me from my bonds. he is my friend." the reflection 
gave me substantial satisfaction, for much against my will i had 
hitherto been compel to ascribe my salvation to a supernatural 
agency. but now all was changed. without doubt the arab had been 
secret watch over me, and when the time came he turn out 
the lights, rush into the laboratory and unfastened my straps. 
afterwards, he had adroit manage to escape before belleville could 
turn on the lights again. no doubt, too, this arab was the man of 
my dream, who had bargain with me to kill belleville when i got 
free, to destroy the mummy of ptahmes, the priest of amen-ra--and his 
papyri and steles. why he should have driven such a bargain i could 
not fathom. and why, moreover, he should have taken the trouble to 
impersonate the mummy and pretend he could not speak, i was also at a 
loss to understand. sudden i remember that the animate mummy of my 
dream had converse with me in the tongue of ancient egypt per medium 
of a slate and had seem not to understand modern arabic. also, his 
left hand had been removed--and this arab enjoy the undiminished 
use of his. my head whirl at the contemplation of these essential 
contradictions. were they one and the same man or not? was it possible 
that belleville's arab servant could be a professor of the language 
of sesostris? and i recollected, too, how close i had scrutinise 
the ghostly mummy's face and realise its utter deadness. the mystery, 
after all, was not to be as easily solve as my first warm flush of 
fancy had conceived. realise this, i put it out of mind and arose to 
address myself to the practical affair that lay before me. the nubian 
was in the act of quit the room, laden with a heavy tray of dishes. 
i follow him out into the corridor and leisurely made back to the 
laboratory. i met nobody en route, but once inside the blind passage, 
which open on my old prison chamber, i became aware that something 
had gone wrong. the air was heavy with the mysterious scent of the 
sarcophagus. moreover, the door of the laboratory which i had been 
careful to shut close was now ajar. instinctively, i slip the key i 
had just use on the outer door, into my mouth and hurried soft up 
the passage. there a bewilder surprise await me. the laboratory 
was apparently untenanted by living beings. the mummy of ptahme still 
lay upon the couch. the strap which had fasten belleville to the 
chair were all unfastened and belleville himself had disappeared. yet 
there were noise in the room, noise of footfall and the tinkle 
of glass. presently i saw a large glass phial move quiet from a 
marble slab and stand poised in air. a second later the stopper, 
which had been laid beside it, sprang up, too, and settled neat in 
the phial's mouth. then the bottle leap up high into the air and 
settled, with mysterious precision, on a shelf. i stare at these 
wonders half-understanding, half-dazed. but soon i comprehend all. 
belleville's voice speak in arabic came to me through the hush. 

"that will do, i think. there only remains for us to steal upon him now 
and take him by surprise. serve me well in this, ptahmes, and i shall 
treble your reward." 

"the man is of iron strength, master," answer the arab's voice. "it 
is true that we are two to one and he is unsuspicious, but i should 
like well to have a knife." 

"nonsense," retort belleville. "i cannot make steel invisible. we 
must needs trust to the sandbags. now lead on to the lady's room and 
take care from this moment that you make no sound." 

on this i left the doorway and, slip into the opposite corner, 
pressed flat against the wall. presently the door creak open and i 
heard the noise of breathing. i follow it as gently as a shadow, 
halting sharp when i could not hear it or it grew too near. i was 
weaponless--for i had left belleville's revolver in the laboratory 
ere for the first time leave it. but still, i dare not arm myself, 
for to have done so would have given my adversaries, soon or later, 
a certain clue to my position; and my only hope of worst them now 
consist in preserve my absolute invisible and at the same 
time knowing where, in the general sense, they were. my first great 
difficulty arose in the passage of the outer door. i dare not slip 
out with them, and since they lock it after them, i was forced to 
wait some time before i deem it safe to open it again. thus, when i 
reach the outer passage there was absolutely nothing left to guide 
my steps. however, i hurried to the arch and thence look forth along 
the bifurcate corridor. seeing and hearing nothing, i sank to the 
floor, and like an indian pressed my ear against the boards. one 
far-off panel a little later creak distinctly. wood, though carpeted, 
is a fine sound conductor. this gave me the direction. hot foot i 
follow it. but soon i came to a corner and beyond a short, wide 
cul-de-sac, with three closed doors. here i stop with strain ear 
and listen with a beating heart and bated breath. the conspirator 
were there, beyond the scope of doubt; and presently i knew the door 
they wish to pass. i saw the handle turn and heard a sigh. "locked," 
murmur a voice in english--then in arabic it breathed. "keep close 
by me, ptahmes, hold my coat!" three sharp rap follow on the panels. 
a voice that thrill me, ask within the room, "who is there?" 

a voice, the clever twist voice of belleville, answer in a sharp 
falsetto from without, "it is i, my dear young lady, sir philip lang." 

the door was immediately open and i saw the sad face of my sweetheart. 

"sir philip!" she cried--then, seeing no one, she stopped, dismayed. of 
a sudden she utter a shriek and fell back into the room, back, back, 
clasp her hand to her neck and struggle to cry out. i guess the 
reason instantly--belleville had seize her by the throat. i sprang 
to her assistance, but pause again--by a miracle, in time--just 
across the threshold. miss ottley--i shall not, cannot call her mrs. 
belleville, though, indeed, she was--went spin across the room, 
free, i saw. i slip along the wall beside the lintel and waited, 
holding breath. what next? the door slam and the bolt shot in answer 
to my question. then came a long silence. miss ottley stood beside the 
farthest wall, support herself on the back of a saddle-bag chair, 
a picture of horror and fear personified. i would have given all the 
world for liberty to soothe her fears, to take her in my arms and 
comfort her. but it was not to be. everything depend on my cunning 
and my silence. tear my glance from her ashen face, i look around 
the room. it was her bedroom. the bed occupy one corner. beside the 
canopy was an open window through which the light stream in, striking 
full upon the door. against another wall stood a duchesse toilet table 
and a huge bemirrore clothes chest of carven ivory and ebony. the 
floor was cover with a thick pile carpet of dark crimson hue. the 
window curtains were of purple velvet. the bed's canopy of crimson 
silk. the wall were paint black and gold. it was, indeed, a mourning 
chamber. 

"who is it--who is it?" gasp the white-faced, black-robed mourner. i 
glance at her again and saw that one hand was pressed tight to her 
side. 

no answer coming, she repeated her demand with more composure. then a 
curious thing happened. a board creaked, and look swift at the 
floor, i saw the imprint of a foot marked in the pile. it vanish 
and the pile sprang up again resiliently, but, twenty inch farther 
onward towards the girl, a second sole-shaped hollow form itself 
and there remained. an instant's flash search disclose three 
others. i now knew for certain the position of my enemies, and with a 
wild heart-throb of joy i nerve myself for action. the shape of the 
footmark show me that both men face the girl, and that they were 
standing about a yard apart. with two noiseless strides, i step 
behind the rearmost. then i stoop and seize a pair of hard, lean 
thigh and heave a body up and sent it hurling through the air above 
the second set of footprints. "i've got you again, you dog!" i cried; 
then step back swift and noiseless to my former place. the trick 
was perfectly successful. silent, save for their heavy breathing and 
the tremble of their feet, the rascal writhe and stamp about the 
room, locked, doubtless, in a close embrace, although i could not see 
them. as for me, i slip presently to a chair, caught it up, and 
guide by a sound, i brought it crashing down upon the head of one of 
them. there follow a heavy groan, then a dagger blade flash out of 
nothingness and once, twice, thrice, it rose and fell. murder was being 
done before my eyes, but i had only half a mind to stay it, and indeed, 
before i could the knife had vanish into mist again, and all to be 
seen was a dark flow of scarlet fluid that well in air and sank upon 
the carpet. i wait spellbound. which was alive--which was dead? 

belleville's voice put the question at rest suddenly. "well done, 
ptahmes," he gasp in arabic. "he had me throttle when you struck. 
you shall have fifty pound for this day's work." 

"thanks, good master." i return and edge towards his voice. but at 
that moment miss ottley fell in a swoon, and death could hardly have 
avail to keep me from her side. with a bound i was across the room, 
and in another second she was in my arms. 

belleville must have seen, but thinking me the arab, instead of 
chiding, he commend me. "carry her to the laboratory," he commanded. 
"i'll follow with this carrion. we must dispose of it. nay, wait. i'll 
go first. damn him, how he bleeds!" he add in english. then a little 
later, "he is wonderful light for so tall and strong a man." 

by then he must have had the arab's body in his arms. i heard heavy 
footfall stamp to the door. carry my burden, i follow them. 
the door open and we both pass out. i hate the thought of taking 
my sweetheart to that room of horror, but i could not bear to leave 
her where she had been so terrified, to recover by herself. and in the 
next place i did not dare to let belleville even for a moment out of 
my reach. he would soon be bound to discover his mistake and then the 
fight would be renew with the advantage all on his side, since he 
was armed with a weapon, which, it was evident, he could conceal till 
the time came for use it. prudence demand that i should seize and 
disarm belleville before his suspicion became excited. prudence also 
demand that i should leave my sweetheart somewhere on the journey. 
but i could not bring myself to do the latter, her face so near to 
mine, her breath upon my lips. that is why i went to the laboratory, 
and why i took her with me. 




chapter xxix 

save by fire 


belleville's first act, after toss the arab's corpse upon the floor 
and bolt the laboratory door, was to rush over to the couch and 
remove therefrom the mummy of ptahmes. this he placed with careful 
haste upon a marble slab, and he command me, in arabic, meanwhile, to 
carry the lady to the couch. i obey him in silence. he then ordered 
me to take up the body of the englishman, pinsent, and bring it to the 
sarcophagus. this gave me an opportunity to examine the arab. i did 
so, and found him quite dead. belleville's dagger had twice pierce 
his heart. i then raise the corpse and carry it to the great lead 
coffin. "what next, master?" i ask in guttural arabic. 

belleville's voice answer from behind me. "lift the carrion up! that 
is well. now let it slip into the bath! gently, ptahmes, gently--or the 
stuff will splash. here--i will help you." 

"where?" i demanded. i was try to locate him. 

"wait," he replied--then "here!" his voice sound from across the 
sarcophagus. 

a second later his hand brush one of mine and passed. "i'll take 
the shoulders," he said. "you take the feet! be careful, man--gently, 
gently!" 

it was maddening to be so near and yet so far. but there was nothing 
for it except to follow his directions. i, therefore, grasp the 
corpse firm by the ankles, when the greater weight of it had 
been transferred, and then i watch the great blood clot upon its 
chest--the only visible sign of its existence--sink down, down to the 
liquid contents of the coffin. soon it rest there like a crimson 
lily on the surface of a pond. i let my finger loose their hold and 
the unseen limb of the corpse subside on the liquid with an oily 
swish. the whole corpse seem to be floating. belleville realise 
this as soon as i. "wait here!" he said to me--then add in english, 
speak to himself, "where the deuce did i put that glass rod? ah! i 
remember." then i heard the thud of his retreat steps, and a little 
later i saw wavering approach me from across the room, apparently 
of its own volition, a long, glass, solid bar, about four feet long and 
an inch thick. i was overjoyed at the sight, for my hand were free, 
belleville could not see me, and the glass rod informed me exactly of 
his whereabouts. quick as thought, i slip around the sarcophagus and 
making a little detour, got behind the murderer. he went straight to 
the coffin and plunge the rod within it. doubtless he was use it to 
submerge the corpse. i heard a hissing, bubble sound, and belleville 
saying, "watch me closely, ptahmes--for this is what you must do." 

i crept upon him until i could hear his breathing quite distinctly, 
although he was not greatly exert himself. then came the time to 
act. "my god!" he sudden exclaimed--"not pinsent--ptahmes--what's 
this?" 

the glass rod was still. it stood bolt upright in the sarcophagus, and 
so rigid motionless that i guess belleville's weight was leaning 
on it. i gave a swift glance into the coffin and almost shriek with 
surprise. the liquid had made the dead arab visible again, and his 
death-mask grin up at us with a fixed and blood-curdling stare. on 
instant i open my arms wide and threw them round my unseen enemy. 
he utter a howl of rage and terror and turn within my grasp to 
fight me, biting and claw like a savage beast. but very soon i 
master him. disregard his animal-like efforts, i seize him by 
the throat and beat his skull upon the edge of the sarcophagus until 
he had quite cease to struggle. then, anxious, of all things, to make 
sure of him by seeing him, i heave him up and allow him to slide 
headforemost down into the bath beside the arab he had murder in 
mistake for me. i reasoned that since the liquid there had made the 
arab visible, it should produce a like effect on belleville. but i 
was utterly unprepared for the result. the stuff must have been an 
acid of tremendous power. it awaken the senseless wretch to almost 
instant torture consciousness. a series of dreadful shriek fill 
the room with strange detonate echoes. belleville was no soon in 
the coffin than out of it and visible in part. his face and hand were 
plainly to be seen. they came out white and dripping wet, but a few 
seconds' contact with the air turn them red as blood. i seize the 
glass rod to defend myself, expect an attack. but there was no need 
to use it. the shriek wretch stagger down the room to the first 
dispense cabinet. he tore the door open and clutch at a big phial, 
the contents of which he pour upon his hand and splash upon his 
face, wail all the while like a lost soul in the depths of hell. 
happily he did not keep this up for long. the drug that he applied to 
his hurts, whatever it was, must have salve them, for in a moment or 
two his heart-rending outcry subside to a deep, low sobbing. even 
that, however, was more than i could stand. i want belleville dead, 
but i could not endure the sight and sound of his agony--agony that i, 
unwittingly, had caused. 

"belleville," i call out, "can i help you?" 

he gasp and caught his breath, turning his face towards me. to my 
surprise it was no long scarlet. it had caught the hue of leather, 
and the eyes were mantle purple at the whites. 

"i did not know the stuff was acid," i continued. "if there is 
anything i can do to soothe your suffering, i shall and gladly." 

"you dog!" said he. "you've ruin me and now you are gloat over 
your handiwork." 

with that, he put his hand in his bosom and began to steal in my 
direction. i remember his conceal dagger and call out, "be 
warned, belleville--i can see you. your dagger will not help you." 

"oh! oh! oh!" he groaned, and stop short. 

"hugh pinsent's voice--oh, heaven!" cry miss ottley--behind me. she 
had awaken from her swoon. 

i swung on heel and watch her rise. "hugh!" she sighed. "hugh--where 
are you, dear?" then she saw belleville, and the hideous apparition 
he presented, a black pain-tortured face hover in mid-air, with 
two dark, ghostly hand outstretched before it, froze her blood. 
mercifully, she swoon again and fell back senseless on the lounge. 
belleville recommence his moaning, and began walking up and down 
wring his hands. i stood silent, lost in thought and wonder what 
i ought to do. belleville told me. he stop on a sudden and call my 
name twice, "pinsent, pinsent." 

[illustration: _the_ living mummy 

a black pain-tortured face hover in mid-air 

_face page 296_] 

"here!" said i. 

"i am at your mercy now," he muttered, in a broken voice. "i'm blind." 

"what!" i cried. 

"ay," said he, "and my facial extremities are die fast--pah! my nose 
is already dead; look." he put up one hand to his face and before my 
eyes broke off his nose and toss it on the floor. it snap like a 
piece of tinder, leave a black, ugly stump. 

next he pluck the dagger from his breast--or rather, from where his 
bosom seem to be--and cast it on the floor. i was speechless with 
horror and surprise. 

"now that you have naught to fear from me," he groaned, "if you have a 
heart in your breast you will help to end my pain." 

"anything, anything--only tell me how!" i cried, advance towards him 
as i spoke. but hearing me approaching, he shout out for me to stop. 
"don't come near me!" he wailed. "don't touch me--or i shall try to 
murder you--i'll not be able to prevent myself--and i want to undo some 
of the ill i've done before i die." 

i halted. "but what then shall i do?" i asked. 

"light the asbestos fire. you'll find match in the table drawer. i am 
perishing of cold, that is the only thing that will soothe the anguish 
i am go through. oh! be quick, be quick!" 

i flew to obey him, and in a moment i had set the stove ablaze. 
belleville found his way to it as if by instinct, and stoop down, 
he pressed his awful-looking face against the bars, groan in a 
way that made my very flesh creep. "yes--yes, i'm blind," he kept 
muttering, between his moans. "and very soon i shall be dead. i must 
atone. i must atone." 

"belleville," i said at last--i forced myself to say it, for his face 
had grown ink-black, "are you not waste precious time? is there not 
something i can get to counteract the acid? it appear to----" 

"hush!" he interrupted. "there is nothing. it is eat into my brain. 
besides, i am blind and do not wish to live. but let me think. this 
pain--i cannot use my wits--it daze me! ah! now! i must. i must. how 
can i die with all--pinsent! pinsent!" 

his voice was a piercing scream. 

"yes--yes," i answered. i was shake like a reed. 

"is there not a big jar of yellow spirit near the coffin somewhere?" 

"yes." 

"then, for god's sake, lead me to it." 

i caught him by the hand and guide him forthwith to the jar. 

"take out the stopper," he entreated. i did so and thereupon he plunge 
his hand into the vessel and began to lave his neck and face, sob 
raucous the while. the odour of the stuff, however, was so nauseous 
to me that i step back in order to escape it. 

belleville seem to know at once. "pinsent!" he cried, "where are you?" 

"here," said i. 

"go and wake her, my wife!" he mutter suddenly. "i have something to 
tell you both before i go. i am die fast." 

i hasten to do his bidding, but before i reach miss ottley's side 
i was arrest by a loud thud crash. turning swiftly, i saw that 
belleville had overturn the jar. its contents had already flood the 
floor. he hover over with a light vesta in one of his black hands. 

"what are you doing?" i demanded. 

he stoop floorward with the match and instantly a mighty flame shot 
up that lick the very roof. "revenge!" he shrieked. "revenge! i've 
fool you, pinsent, fool you. now we all shall die together. look!" 
with that, he steep both hand in the burning fluid and, flit 
like a salamander through the flames, he made for the sarcophagus. 
i could not have stay him had i wished, for there was a sea of 
fire between us. but in good truth i was too daze for the while, at 
least, to move a muscle. reach the great lead tomb, the dreadful 
flaming object that had once been belleville thrust his lambent hand 
into the coffin. there follow an explosion of appalling fury. a 
mass of brilliant, white, combustible shot up with a mighty roar from 
the sarcophagus to the ceiling. it pierce the pad lining like a 
thunderbolt and flash into the room above. but on its impact with 
the ceiling it also splash a rain of fire about the great laboratory. 
in two seconds the whole place ran with flames. by a miracle i was not 
touched. but it was not so with miss ottley. her skirt was ablaze. 
i rush forward and tore the thing off in strip before it burnt 
her--then seize her in my arms, i made like a madman to the door. a 
hideous burning object lay before it shriek sulphurous curses. it 
was belleville. but he had come to the end of his strength and he could 
not stay me. the catch yield to my hand and i dashed into the passage 
half blind with fire and smoke, but safe. i did not rest until i 
had reach the staircase. miss ottley was then awake. she struggle 
in my arms, so i set her down and face her. but she did not see me. 
her dress was smoulder in places. she seem utterly bewildered. 
a woman ran up to her and began to put out the burning patch with 
her hands. the house was in an uproar. servants--they were all either 
arab or nubians--ran hither and thither shouting and scream in a 
panic. the woman, evidently a nurse, who attend to miss ottley, was 
the only white person to be seen. she was evidently terrified, but 
she did not lose her head. she kept ask miss ottley in france to 
explain what had happened. nobody seem aware that the house was on 
fire. they had all been merely alarm by the noise they had heard. 
miss ottley in the middle of it all began to weep. she was thorough 
upset and ill, and i perceive at once that she was on the verge of a 
mental and physical collapse. in the circumstances, i judge it best to 
remain a silent onlooker of event and not to take any action unless 
there arose a real necessity. it was plain that i was still invisible. 
and as for the house being on fire, i deem it utterly desirable that 
it should burn down to the last shaving and thus fitting entomb 
in its destruction the ghastly tragedy of the laboratory. the issue 
tally largely with my wishes. the fire was seen first from the 
street. there follow a veritable pandemonium. the coloured servant 
flee like coward for their lives, and in an incredible short space 
of time the house was in the hand of firemen and police. miss ottley 
was taken by the nurse out into the street and there question by a 
sergeant. but she was quite unable to answer his insistent query 
satisfactorily. all she could say was that she had been a long time 
ill. she had faint in her room that afternoon, and dr. belleville 
or someone had carry her to the laboratory. when she woke up she 
had heard a frightful noise. she supposed it was one of the doctor's 
experiments. she thought she had faint again, but she remember 
nothing more until she found herself with her dress on fire at the foot 
of the staircase. she could not explain how she got there. the sergeant 
was civil enough to her, but the fool, in his fussy officiousness, 
overlook her weak condition, and the girl broke down and utterly 
collapse before he realise his quite unnecessary cruelty. the worst 
of it was that the france nurse had disappear during the colloquy. 
there was, therefore, no woman at hand to attend to my poor sweetheart. 
fortunately, however, a physician appear opportune on the scene, 
and at his direction she was immediately convey to a hospital. after 
she had gone, i did not tarry very long. choose a place where the 
cordon crowd was thinnest, i slip back through the park railings, 
over which i climb and drop into the park, feeling the weight 
of my invisible acutely. from this vantage point i watch the 
conflagration for a while. the house was manifest doomed. indeed, 
the effort of the firemen were entire direct to save adjoin 
buildings. a hundred jet of water play upon the wall of these in 
thin continuous streams. men about me were talk the matter over as 
if it personally appeal to them. they mostly view it with a sort of 
half-secret satisfaction. the misfortune of millionaire do not excite 
much sympathy in the heart of the mob. 

one man glib quoted, "lay not up unto yourself treasure in this 
world!" on the occasion of a grimy fireman bring out a magnificent 
but half-destroyed silver-framed canvas of velasquez. but the crowd 
cheer the fireman for his pluck all the same. at length i realise 
that i was very tired, and hungry, too, so i slunk off and made my way 
to dixon hubbard's rooms. they were locked, of course, and i had not 
the key. i had left it with the porter of the building. but i could not 
go to him and ask him to give it up to an apparently fleshless voice. 
wonder what to do, i crept into the passage, sat down in a corner 
underneath the stairs and wait for an inspiration. wait there, i 
fell asleep. 




chapter xxx 

the last 


i awoke in the grey light of dawn, stiff with cold and ache in every 
limb. arising, i left my hiding-place and went into the vestibule. the 
night porter sat on a stool in his little office toast his toe 
before the stove and reading one of the morning papers. i step 
up to the door at once. hearing my footsteps, he look around. 
"good-morning, michael," i said, as well as my chatter teeth would 
let me. "do you want all that fire?" i had forgotten that i was 
completely invisible. the fellow sprang to his feet with a start and 
stare at me aghast. "what's the matter with you?" i demanded, testily. 

"'ere--you keep off. i've done nothing to 'arm you!" he whined, and 
he back before my advance against the wall of the office, the very 
picture of abject terror. his appearance recall me to my senses. but 
it was too late to cry over spilt milk. i thought it better to make a 
confidant of the man if he would let me. 

"don't be frightened, michael; there is no need. i'm not a ghost, feel 
my hands!" i said. 

but panic seize the fellow. he utter a wild shriek and flee for 
his life into the passage. i could hardly help laughing, but i saw a 
chance in the contretemps to end my immediate difficulty--so i went 
straight to the desk, and fortunately found it open. in hubbard's 
pigeon-hole was the key i wanted. i took it out, caught up a _times_ 
and hurried up the stairs. in another moment i was safe in hubbard's 
room with the door lock against intrusion. my first care was to set 
the asbestos ablaze and warm myself. then i open the paper and found 
at once the news i sought under great cross headline in the main 
sheet. miss ottley's house had been completely gut by fire. some of 
the wall still stood, but with the exception of a few pictures, the 
whole of the valuable art furniture and the late sir robert ottley's 
splendid collection of egypt coins, manuscript and curio had 
been destroyed. it was supposed that dr. belleville had perish in 
the flames, but no sign of his remains had been discovered. the fire, 
as far as it was possible to ascertain, had arisen from an accident 
due to the unsuccessful conduct of a chemical experiment. it was well 
known in scientific circles, said the journal, that the doctor had been 
engaged in a series of experiments, the object of which had been kept 
a close secret, but a city firm of manufacture chemist had recently 
supply him with large quantity of a certain highly inflammable 
liquid compound possess radio activity which had been prepared at 
enormous cost, under his directions. the manager of the firm, on being 
interviewed, state that in his opinion, this compound was principally 
responsible for the tragic disaster. there was always a danger in 
handle it of spontaneous combustion, it appeared, and if it once took 
fire, by no means could it be extinguish except by the shut off 
of all supplies of oxygen. failing this, it would burn to the last with 
the most explosive energy. according to miss ottley's statement, when 
first interrogate by an officer from scotland yard, she had been in 
the laboratory with dr. belleville at the time of the catastrophe. she 
had lately been very ill and it seem she had fainted. it was extremely 
probable that the doctor, in his anxiety to revive her, had neglect 
his usual caution and had done some careless thing which had led to 
his destruction. probably he had been kill outright by the first 
explosion. it was, however, a matter of general relief that miss ottley 
had manage to escape, and that there had been no further sacrifice of 
life. everyone would sympathise with the unfortunate young lady in her 
sad position. only a few week ago the gallant young officer to whom 
she had been engaged to be married, had come to an untimely end in a 
railway accident on the very eve of his wedding day. then, a little 
later, the dark angel had deprived her of a loving and beloved father, 
the great millionaire archæologist, whose recent operation on 'change 
had startle the world, and made of him the richest man in the united 
kingdom. and now, she had lost by death the kind and learned guardian 
to whom her late father had entrust her future and the management 
of her enormous fortune. nobody would be surprise to learn that 
this great accumulation of calamity had reduce the fate-stricken 
young lady to a state of utter physical prostration. she had been 
taken yesterday evening, after her rescue from the burning mansion, 
to the albert hospital, but she had subsequent been remove to the 
walsingham hotel, where the management had placed a suite of rooms 
at her disposal. she was there being treat under the care of drs. 
fiaschi and mason, the well-known heart and nerve specialists. these 
gentlemen express themselves hopeful of her ultimate recovery, but they 
do not conceal the fact that she is at present in a very low condition, 
and it is significant that the road in front of the hotel was, in the 
small hour of the morning, thick overspread with tan. 

this last paragraph, as may easily be conceived, fill me with 
anxiety. i resolve to go at once to the walsingham hotel and find out 
exactly how she was for myself. but, fortunately, in moving towards the 
door to put my purpose into execution, i had to pass the mirror-backed 
door of a clothes press. i did not pass it then. i stopped, spellbound. 
i was no long invisible. that is to say, my face and hand were 
not--although my body was. the mirror show me a head floating 
apparently in mid-air and a pair of hand hanging mysterious from 
nothing. my eyes were curious goggle with a thin, gelatinous-like 
film, with a glassy surface that was bound about my head. this i 
tore off forthwith and curious examined. it was actually compose 
of gelatine. toss it aside, i ran my finger over my clothing and 
discovered, from the sense of touch, that i was clad to the neck in one 
unbroken combination suit of rubber overalls, which included footgear. 
i soon made out the secret of its fastening, and tear it open, i 
step forth into the light of day and perfect visibility, to find 
that i still had on all the clothes i had worn when dr. belleville 
trap me, except my boots. the overalls, however, remain visible, 
or rather partially so, for their inner surface view from the opening 
was discernible. i put them careful aside for future investigate 
and proceed to make a toilet. my first care was a hot bath. the hall 
porter, whom i had frightened so desperate a little while before, 
answer my ring. he was astound to see me, but i did not choose to 
make him any explanations, and he was too overcome to ask me for any. 
a little later i was luxuriate in a steam bath, which remove the 
last vestige of my parisian disguise. most of the paint, however, had 
worn off before, so it was the easy to become myself again. but not 
quite my old, familiar self. my experience had permanent age me. 
there were lines upon my face that i was stranger to, and with which i 
made reluctant acquaintance. and my hair was liberally streak with 
grey. i had put on ten years, at least. i felt old, too, that was the 
worst of it--old, ill and thick-blooded and infinite world-weary. 
i felt a hunger for the desert and big open spaces; a need to hasten 
from the grinding, selfish life of cities, with their secret crime 
and gilded vice and dull-herded grope after sordid happiness. but 
i did not wish to go alone. at a little after eight o'clock i enter 
the walsingham and demand to see miss ottley's head nurse. she was 
at breakfast, but the waiter told me that miss ottley had spent a good 
night and was still asleep, so i was content to wait. afterwards, i had 
to lie to the nurse in order to be permit to see the invalid. i told 
her that i was miss ottley's nearest living relative, and i suppress 
the fact of my medical qualifications. the woman, otherwise, would 
have refer me to the physicians, who had employ her, and i should 
have been put off for hours. as it was, it require all my powers of 
persuasion to induce her to admit me to the sick room. but i prevail 
on her at last, with a show of stern authority, and a curt intimate 
that her position depend on my complaisance. the falsehood is not 
one that i feel any shame at, for i knew what an effect my appearance 
would make in the patient, and i was determined, at all costs, to be 
with her at the moment of her waking. i shall pass over the preliminary 
period that i spent beside her bed. it is too full of sorrow to recall 
with anything but misery. the poor girl was as frail and wan as any 
spirit. they had cut off all her glorious hair, and the hand i kissed, 
which lay so weak on the coverlid, was white than a snowflake, and 
almost as destitute of vigour. she slept as gently as a weary babe, and 
it was hard at first to believe thorough she lived. but at length she 
sigh and her great eyes slow open and look up questioning 
into mine. she thought that she was dead and that my ghost had sought 
her out. "hugh!" she whispered, and a soft smile light her face and 
made it infinite lovely, though so wan. "i knew that i should find 
you, dear," she sighed. "and so i could not help but pray to die. will 
god punish us for that?" 

but i kiss her on the lips--the first long kiss of love that i had 
known--or she--and she came back warm with quicken hope and will to 
live within my arms. and all was well with us. 

there is little more to tell. as soon as she was strong again we 
married quietly, and now we live in a place where crowded city are 
unknown--far from old england's shores. i never again saw belleville's 
arab servant, who so marvellous resemble the old high priest of 
amen-ra; nor his companion, the nubian, uromi. they disappear 
after the fire, and not all the effort of the police could trace 
their hiding-place. the invisible suit of overalls is still in my 
possession--but it had lost its old mysterious properties, and although 
i expend month of patient labour to explore its secret, it was all 
in vain. to this day i cannot tell who release me from the chair in 
which belleville had bound me in the murderer's laboratory. and i 
am still unable to explain the many other little mystery that so 
involved us in the period of our contention with the wretch, the fatal 
termination of whose wicked scheme i have set forth in these pages. 
the greater part of sir robert ottley's fortune has been given to the 
poor. the rest we settled on my wife's sole living blood relation, 
the old bed-ridden aunt, whom she has never seen. we both felt that 
we should be do well to dispose of riches that--to an extent, at 
least--must have been acquire by arts of sinister significance. still, 
we have never wanted, and we are not likely to. my profession yield 
us a comfortable living in these grand but sparse settled wilds. 
and, although we sometimes think regretful upon the delight we once 
experienced in searching out the lettered past of long-dead centuries, 
we have other interests now to fill our lives and banish vain regrets. 
we have our grow children to attend to and provide for. we are 
of real service to the people who surround us, for my wife is the 
schoolmistress of the district, and i am the only surgeon in a radius 
of one hundred miles. then, we have our books and our long evenings 
together in the splendid twilight of the endless plains. we have given 
up the past for the future. and we are happy in our labour and our love. 


the end 





end of the project gutenberg ebook of the living mummy, by ambrose pratt 

*** end of this project gutenberg ebook the living mummy *** 

***** this file should be name 58944-8.txt or 58944-8.zip ***** 
this and all associate file of various format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/5/8/9/4/58944/ 

produce by mary glenn krause, martin pettit and the online 
distribute proofread team at http://www.pgdp.net (this 
file was produce from image generous made available 
by the internet archive/american libraries.) 


update edition will replace the previous one--the old edition 
will be renamed. 

create the works from public domain print edition means that no 
one own a united states copyright in these works, so the foundation 
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united states without 
permission and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the general terms of use part of this license, apply to 
copy and distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a register trademark, and may not be use if you 
charge for the ebooks, unless you receive specific permission. if you 
do not charge anything for copy of this ebook, comply with the 
rule is very easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose 
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performance and 
research. they may be modify and print and given away--you may do 
practically anything with public domain ebooks. redistribute is 
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial 
redistribution. 



*** start: full license *** 

the full project gutenberg license 
please read this before you distribute or use this work 

to protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promote the free 
distribution of electronic works, by use or distribute this work 
(or any other work associate in any way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full project 
gutenberg-tm license (available with this file or online at 
http://gutenberg.org/license). 


section 1. general terms of use and redistribute project gutenberg-tm 
electronic works 

1.a. by reading or use any part of this project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to 
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all 
the terms of this agreement, you must cease use and return or destroy 
all copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession. 
if you paid a fee for obtain a copy of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the 
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a register trademark. it may only be 
use on or associate in any way with an electronic work by people who 
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few 
things that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electronic works 
even without comply with the full terms of this agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement 
and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compilation copyright in the collection of project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works. nearly all the individual works in the 
collection are in the public domain in the united states. if an 
individual work is in the public domain in the united states and you are 
located in the united states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or create derivative 
works base on the work as long as all reference to project gutenberg 
are removed. of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promote free access to electronic works by 
freely share project gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of 
this agreement for keeping the project gutenberg-tm name associate with 
the work. you can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by 
keeping this work in the same format with its attach full project 
gutenberg-tm license when you share it without charge with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are located also govern 
what you can do with this work. copyright law in most country are in 
a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states, check 
the law of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement 
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribute or 
create derivative works base on this work or any other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundation make no representations concerning 
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the united 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remove all reference to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm license must appear prominent 
whenever any copy of a project gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copy or distributed: 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license 

1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is derive 
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicate that it is 
post with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copy 
and distribute to anyone in the united states without pay any fee 
or charges. if you are redistribute or providing access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associate with or appear on the 
work, you must comply either with the requirement of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is post 
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution 
must comply with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any additional 
terms impose by the copyright holder. additional terms will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm license for all works post with the 
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work. 

1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg-tm 
license terms from this work, or any file contain a part of this 
work or any other work associate with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this 
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without 
prominent display the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, 
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provide access to or 
distribute copy of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the official version 
post on the official project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org), 
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a 
copy, a means of export a copy, or a means of obtain a copy upon 
request, of the work in its original "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. any alternate format must include the full project gutenberg-tm 
license as specify in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copy or distribute any project gutenberg-tm works 
unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charge a reasonable fee for copy of or providing 
access to or distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works provided 
that 

- you pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profit you derive from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm works calculate use the method 
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
has agree to donate royalty under this paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payment 
must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you 
prepare (or are legal require to prepare) your periodic tax 
returns. royalty payment should be clearly marked as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation at the 
address specify in section 4, "information about donation to 
the project gutenberg literary archive foundation." 

- you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notify 
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he 
do not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must require such a user to return or 
destroy all copy of the works possessed in a physical medium 
and discontinue all use of and all access to other copy of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of any 
money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the 
electronic work is discover and report to you within 90 days 
of receipt of the work. 

- you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free 
distribution of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set 
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from 
both the project gutenberg literary archive foundation and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundation as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteer and employee expend considerable 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread 
public domain works in create the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or 
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual 
property infringement, a defective or damage disk or other medium, a 
computer virus, or computer code that damage or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the "right 
of replacement or refund" describe in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distribute a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all 
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal 
fees. you agree that you have no remedy for negligence, strict 
liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those 
provided in paragraph 1.f.3. you agree that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be 
liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or 
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a 
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can 
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you 
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you with 
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a 
refund. if you received the work electronically, the person or entity 
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to 
receive the work electronic in lieu of a refund. if the second copy 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further 
opportunity to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you 'as-is' with no other 
warranty of any kind, express or implied, including but not limited to 
warranty of merchant or fitness for any purpose. 

1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimer of certain imply 
warranty or the exclusion or limitation of certain type of damages. 
if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violate the 
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permit by 
the applicable state law. the invalid or unenforceable of any 
provision of this agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone 
providing copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance 
with this agreement, and any volunteer associate with the production, 
promotion and distribution of project gutenberg-tm electronic works, 
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees, 
that arise directly or indirect from any of the following which you do 
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addition or deletion to any 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any defect you cause. 


section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of 
electronic works in format readable by the widest variety of computer 
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it exist 
because of the effort of hundred of volunteer and donation from 
people in all walk of life. 

volunteer and financial support to provide volunteer with the 
assistance they need, are critical to reach project gutenberg-tm's 
goal and ensure that the project gutenberg-tm collection will 
remain freely available for generation to come. in 2001, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation was create to provide a secure 
and permanent future for project gutenberg-tm and future generations. 
to learn more about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation 
and how your effort and donation can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org. 


section 3. information about the project gutenberg literary archive 
foundation 

the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt status by the internal 
revenue service. the foundation's ein or federal tax identification 
number is 64-6221541. its 501(c)(3) letter is post at 
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contribution to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. federal law and your state's laws. 

the foundation's principal office is located at 4557 melan dr. s. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but its volunteer and employee are scattered 
throughout numerous locations. its business office is located at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact links and up to date contact 
information can be found at the foundation's web site and official 
page at http://pglaf.org 

for additional contact information: 
dr. gregory b. newby 
chief executive and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 


section 4. information about donation to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot survive without wide 
spread public support and donation to carry out its mission of 
increase the number of public domain and licensed works that can be 
freely distribute in machine readable form accessible by the widest 
array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donation 
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintain tax exempt 
status with the irs. 

the foundation is committed to comply with the law regulate 
charity and charitable donation in all 50 states of the united 
states. compliance requirement are not uniform and it take a 
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. we do not solicit donation in location 
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to 
send donation or determine the status of compliance for any 
particular state visit http://pglaf.org 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribution from states where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibition 
against accept unsolicited donation from donor in such states who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

international donation are grateful accepted, but we cannot make 
any statement concerning tax treatment of donation received from 
outside the united states. u.s. law alone swamp our small staff. 

please check the project gutenberg web page for current donation 
method and addresses. donation are accept in a number of other 
ways including checks, online payment and credit card donations. 
to donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate 


section 5. general information about project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. 

professor michael s. hart is the originate of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely share 
with anyone. for thirty years, he produce and distribute project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with only a loose network of volunteer support. 


project gutenberg-tm ebook are often create from several print 
editions, all of which are confirmed as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notice is included. thus, we do not necessarily 
keep ebook in compliance with any particular paper edition. 


most people start at our web site which has the main pg search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.org 

this web site include information about project gutenberg-tm, 
including how to make donation to the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to 
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks. 
