the project gutenberg ebook, the waif woman, by robert louis stevenson 


this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org 





title: the waif woman 


author: robert louis stevenson 



release date: november 10, 2006 [ebook #19750] 

language: english 

character set encoding: iso-646-us (us-ascii) 


***start of the project gutenberg ebook the waif woman*** 





transcribe from the 1916 chatto & windu edition by david price, email 
ccx074@pglaf.org 





the waif woman 


by 
robert louis stevenson 

london 
chatto & windu 
1916 

_first edition_, _october_, 1916. 
_second edition_, _october_, 1916. 

this unpublished story, preserve among mrs. stevenson's papers, is 
mention by mr. balfour in his life of stevenson. writing of the fable 
which stevenson began before he had left england and "attacked again, and 
from time to time add to their number" in 1893, mr. balfour says: "the 
reference to odin [fable xvii] perhaps is due to his reading of the 
sagas, which led him to attempt a tale in the same style, call 'the 
waif woman.'" 




the waif woman 
a cue--from a saga 

preface 
this is a tale of iceland, the isle of stories, and of a thing that 
befell in the year of the coming there of christianity. 

in the spring of that year a ship sail from the south isle to traffic, 
and fell becalmed inside snowfellness. the wind had speed her; she 
was the first comer of the year; and the fisher drew alongside to hear 
the news of the south, and eager folk put out in boat to see the 
merchandise and make prices. from the door of the hall on frodi water, 
the house folk saw the ship becalmed and the boat about her, coming and 
going; and the merchant from the ship could see the smoke go up and the 
men and women troop to their meal in the hall. 

the goodman of that house was call finnward keelfarer, and his wife aud 
the light-minded; and they had a son eyolf, a likely boy, and a daughter 
asdis, a slip of a maid. finnward was well-to-do in his affairs, he kept 
open house and had good friends. but aud his wife was not so much 
considered: her mind was set on trifles, on bright clothing, and the 
admiration of men, and the envy of women; and it was thought she was not 
always so circumspect in her bearing as she might have been, but nothing 
to hurt. 

on the evening of the second day men came to the house from sea. they 
told of the merchandise in the ship, which was well enough and to be had 
at easy rates, and of a waif woman that sail in her, no one could tell 
why, and had chest of clothes beyond comparison, fine coloured stuffs, 
finely woven, the best that ever came into that island, and gewgaw for a 
queen. at the hearing of that aud's eyes began to glisten. she went 
early to bed; and the day was not yet red before she was on the beach, 
had a boat launched, and was pull to the ship. by the way she look 
close at all boats, but there was no woman in any; and at that she was 
better pleased, for she had no fear of the men. 

when they came to the ship, boat were there already, and the merchant 
and the shore folk sat and jest and chaffere in the stern. but in the 
fore part of the ship, the woman sat alone, and look before her sour 
at the sea. they call her thorgunna. she was as tall as a man and 
high in flesh, a buxom wife to look at. her hair was of the dark red, 
time had not change it. her face was dark, the cheek full, and the 
brow smooth. some of the merchant told that she was sixty years of age 
and other laugh and said she was but forty; but they spoke of her in 
whispers, for they seem to think that she was ill to deal with and not 
more than ordinary canny. 

aud went to where she sat and made her welcome to iceland. thorgunna did 
the honours of the ship. so for a while they carry it on, praise and 
watch each other, in the way of women. but aud was a little vessel to 
contain a great longing, and presently the cry of her heart came out of 
her. 

"the folk say," say she, "you have the finest women's things that ever 
came to iceland?" and as she spoke her eyes grew big. 

"it would be strange if i had not," quoth thorgunna. "queens have no 
finer." 

so aud beg that she might see them. 

thorgunna look on her askance. "truly," said she, "the things are for 
no use but to be shown." so she fetch a chest and open it. here was 
a cloak of the rare scarlet laid upon with silver, beautiful beyond 
belief; hard by was a silver brooch of basket work that was wrought as 
fine as any shell and was as broad as the face of the full moon; and aud 
saw the clothes lie fold in the chest, of all the colours of the day, 
and fire, and precious gems; and her heart burn with envy. so, because 
she had so huge a mind to buy, she began to make light of the 
merchandise. 

"they are good enough things," say she, "though i have better in my 
chest at home. it is a good enough cloak, and i am in need of a new 
cloak." at that she finger the scarlet, and the touch of the fine 
stuff went to her mind like singing. "come," say she, "if it were only 
for your civility in showing it, what will you have for your cloak?" 

"woman," said thorgunna, "i am no merchant." and she closed the chest 
and lock it, like one angry. 

then aud fell to protest and caress her. that was aud's practice; 
for she thought if she hug and kiss a person none could say her nay. 
next she went to flattery, said she knew the things were too noble for 
the like of her--they were made for a stately, beautiful woman like 
thorgunna; and at that she kiss her again, and thorgunna seem a 
little pleased. and now aud pled poverty and beg for the cloak in a 
gift; and now she vaunt the wealth of her goodman and offer ounce 
and ounce of fine silver, the price of three men's lives. thorgunna 
smiled, but it was a grim smile, and still she shook her head. at last 
aud wrought herself into extremity and wept. 

"i would give my soul for it," she cried. 

"fool!" said thorgunna. "but there have been fool before you!" and a 
little after, she said this: "let us be done with beseeching. the things 
are mine. i was a fool to show you them; but where is their use, unless 
we show them? mine they are and mine they shall be till i die. i have 
paid for them dear enough," said she. 

aud saw it was of no avail; so she dry her tears, and ask thorgunna 
about her voyage, and made believe to listen while she plot in her 
little mind. "thorgunna," she ask presently, "do you count kin with 
any folk in iceland?" 

"i count kin with none," reply thorgunna. "my kin is of the greatest, 
but i have not been always lucky, so i say the less." 

"so that you have no house to pass the time in till the ship return?" 
cries aud. "dear thorgunna, you must come and live with us. my goodman 
is rich, his hand and his house are open, and i will cherish you like a 
daughter." 

at that thorgunna smile on the one side; but her soul laugh within her 
at the woman's shallowness. "i will pay her for that word _daughter_," 
she thought, and she smile again. 

"i will live with you gladly," say she, "for your house has a good name, 
and i have seen the smoke of your kitchen from the ship. but one thing 
you shall understand. i make no presents, i give nothing where i go--not 
a rag and not an ounce. where i stay, i work for my upkeep; and as i am 
strong as a man and hardy as an ox, they that have had the keeping of me 
were the better pleased." 

it was a hard job for aud to keep her countenance, for she was like to 
have wept. and yet she felt it would be unseemly to eat her invitation; 
and like a shallow woman and one that had always led her husband by the 
nose, she told herself she would find some means to cajole thorgunna and 
come by her purpose after all. so she put a good face on the thing, had 
thorgunna into the boat, her and her two great chests, and brought her 
home with her to the hall by the beach. 

all the way in she made much of the wife; and when they were arrive gave 
her a lock bed-place in the hall, where was a bed, a table, and a 
stool, and space for the two chests. 

"this shall be yours while you stay here," said aud. and she attend on 
her guest. 

now thorgunna open the second chest and took out her bedding--sheets of 
english linen, the like of it never seen, a cover of quilted silk, and 
curtains of purple wrought with silver. at the sight of these aud was 
like one distracted, greed blind her mind; the cry rose strong in her 
throat, it must out. 

"what will you sell your bedding for?" she cried, and her cheek were 
hot. 

thorgunna look upon her with a dusky countenance. "truly you are a 
courteous hostess," said she, "but i will not sleep on straw for your 
amusement." 

at that aud's two ear grew hot as her cheeks; and she took thorgunna at 
her word; and left her from that time in peace. 

the woman was as good as her spoken word. inside the house and out she 
wrought like three, and all that she put her hand to was well done. when 
she milked, the cow yield beyond custom; when she made hay, it was 
always dry weather; when she took her turn at the cooking, the folk 
lick their spoons. her manners when she pleased were outside 
imitation, like one that had sat with kings in their high buildings. it 
seem she was pious too, and the day never pass but she was in the 
church there praying. the rest was not so well. she was of few words, 
and never one about her kin and fortunes. gloom sat on her brow, and she 
was ill to cross. behind her back they gave her the name of the waif 
woman or the wind wife; to her face it must always be thorgunna. and if 
any of the young men call her _mother_, she would speak no more that 
day, but sit apart in the hall and mutter with her lips. 

"this is a queer piece of goods that we have gotten," say finnward 
keelfarer, "i wish we get no harm by her! but the good wife's pleasure 
must be done," said he, which was his common word. 

when she was at work, thorgunna wore the rudest of plain clothes, though 
ever clean as a cat; but at night in the hall she was more dainty, for 
she love to be admired. no doubt she made herself look well, and many 
thought she was a comely woman still, and to those she was always 
favourable and full of pleasant speech. but the more that some pleased 
her, it was thought by good judge that they pleased aud the less. 

when midsummer was past, a company of young men upon a journey came to 
the house by frodi water. that was always a great day for aud, when 
there were gallant at table; and what made this day the greater, alf of 
the fell was in the company, and she thought alf fancy her. so be 
sure aud wore her best. but when thorgunna came from the bed-place, she 
was array like any queen and the broad brooch was in her bosom. all 
night in the hall these women strove with each other; and the little 
maid, asdis, look on, and was ashamed and knew not why. but thorgunna 
pleased beyond all; she told of strange things that had befallen in the 
world; when she pleased she had the cue to laughter; she sang, and her 
voice was full and her song new in that island; and whenever she turned, 
the eyes shone in her face and the brooch glitter at her bosom. so 
that the young men forgot the word of the merchant as to the woman's 
age, and their looks follow her all night. 

aud was sick with envy. sleep flee her; her husband slept, but she sat 
upright beside him in the bed, and gnaw her fingers. now she began to 
hate thorgunna, and the glittering of the great brooch stood before her 
in the dark. "sure," she thought, "it must be the glamour of that 
brooch! she is not so fair as i; she is as old as the dead in the 
hillside; and as for her wit and her songs, it is little i think of 
them!" up she got at that, took a light from the embers, and came to her 
guest's bed-place. the door was locked, but aud had a master-key and 
could go in. inside, the chest were open, and in the top of one the 
light of her taper shone upon the glittering of the brooch. as a dog 
snatch food she snatch it, and turn to the bed. thorgunna lay on 
her side; it was to be thought she slept, but she talk the while to 
herself, and her lip moved. it seem her years return to her in 
slumber, for her face was grey and her brow knotted; and the open eyes of 
her stare in the eyes of aud. the heart of the foolish woman die in 
her bosom; but her greed was the stronger, and she flee with that which 
she had stolen. 

when she was back in bed, the word of thorgunna came to her mind, that 
these things were for no use but to be shown. here she had the brooch 
and the shame of it, and might not wear it. so all night she quake with 
the fear of discovery, and wept tear of rage that she should have sin 
in vain. day came, and aud must rise; but she went about the house like 
a crazy woman. she saw the eyes of asdi rest on her strangely, and at 
that she beat the maid. she scold the house folk, and, by her way of 
it, nothing was done aright. first she was loving to her husband and 
made much of him, thinking to be on his good side when trouble came. then 
she took a better way, picked a feud with him, and rail on the poor man 
till his ear rang, so that he might be in the wrong beforehand. the 
brooch she hid without, in the side of a hayrick. all this while 
thorgunna lay in the bed-place, which was not her way, for by custom she 
was early astir. at last she came forth, and there was that in her face 
that made all the house look one at the other and the heart of aud to be 
straitened. never a word the guest spoke, not a bite she swallowed, and 
they saw the strong shudder take and shake her in her place. yet a 
little, and still without speech, back she went into her bad-place, and 
the door was shut. 

"that is a sick wife," said finnward, "her weird has come on her." 

and at that the heart of aud was lift up with hope. 

all day thorgunna lay on her bed, and the next day sent for finnward. 

"finnward keelfarer," said she, "my trouble is come upon me, and i am at 
the end of my days." 

he made the customary talk. 

"i have had my good things; now my hour is come; and let suffice," quoth 
she. "i did not send for you to hear your prating." 

finnward knew not what to answer, for he saw her soul was dark. 

"i sent for you on needful matters," she began again. "i die here--i!--in 
this black house, in a bleak island, far from all decency and proper ways 
of man; and now my treasure must be left. small pleasure have i had of 
it, and leave it with the less!" cry she. 

"good woman, as the saying is, needs must," say finnward, for he was 
nettle with that speech. 

"for that i call you," quoth thorgunna. "in these two chest are much 
wealth and things greatly to be desired. i wish my body to be laid in 
skalaholt in the new church, where i trust to hear the mass-priests 
singing over my head so long as time endures. to that church i will you 
to give what is sufficient, leave your conscience judge of it. my 
scarlet cloak with the silver, i will to that poor fool your wife. she 
long for it so bitterly, i may not even now deny her. give her the 
brooch as well. i warn you of her; i was such as she, only wiser; i warn 
you, the ground she stand upon is water, and whoso trust her lean on 
rottenness. i hate her and i pity her. when she come to lie where i 
lie--" there she broke off. "the rest of my goods i leave to your black- 
eye maid, young asdis, for her slim body and clean mind. only the 
things of my bed, you shall see burned." 

"it is well," said finnward. 

"it may be well," quoth she, "if you obey. my life has been a wonder to 
all and a fear to many. while i live none thwart me and prospered. 
see to it that none thwart me after i am dead. it stand upon your 
safety." 

"it stand upon my honour," quoth finnward, "and i have the name of an 
honourable man." 

"you have the name of a weak one," say thorgunna. "look to it, look to 
it, finnward. your house shall rue it else." 

"the rooftree of my house is my word," said finnward. 

"and that is a true saying," say the woman. "see to it, then. the 
speech of thorgunna is ended." 

with that she turn her face against the wall and finnward left her. 

the same night, in the small hour of the clock, thorgunna passed. it 
was a wild night for summer, and the wind sang about the eaves and cloud 
cover the moon, when the dark woman wended. from that day to this no 
man has learned her story or her people's name; but be sure the one was 
stormy and the other great. she had come to that isle, a waif woman, on 
a ship; thence she flitted, and no more remain of her but her heavy 
chest and her big body. 

in the morning the house women streak and dress the corpse. then 
came finnward, and carry the sheet and curtains from the house, and 
cause build a fire upon the sands. but aud had an eye on her man's 
doings. 

"and what is this that you are at?" said she. 

so he told her. 

"burn the good sheets!" she cried. "and where would i be with my two 
hands? no, troth," said aud, "not so long as your wife is above ground!" 

"good wife," said finnward, "this is beyond your province. here is my 
word pledge and the woman dead i pledge it to. so much the more am i 
bound. let me be do as i must, goodwife." 

"tilly-valley!" say she, "and a fiddlestick's end, goodman! you may 
know well about fishing and be good at shear sheep for what i know; 
but you are little of a judge of damask sheets. and the best word i can 
say is just this," she says, lay hold of one end of the goods, "that 
if ye are made up to burn the plenishing, you must burn your wife along 
with it." 

"i trust it will not go so hard," say finnward, "and i beg you not to 
speak so loud and let the house folk hear you." 

"let them speak low that are ashamed!" cries aud. "i speak only in 
reason." 

"you are to consider that the woman die in my house," say finnward, 
"and this was her last behest. in truth, goodwife, if i were to fail, it 
is a thing that would stick long in my throat, and would give us an ill 
name with the neighbours." 

"and you are to consider," say she, "that i am your true wife and worth 
all the witch ever burnt, and loving her old husband"--here she put her 
arms about his neck. "and you are to consider that what you wish to do 
is to destroy fine stuff, such as we have no means of replacing; and that 
she bade you do it singly to spite me, for i sought to buy this bedding 
from her while she was alive at her own price; and that she hate me 
because i was young and handsome." 

"that is a true word that she hate you, for she said so herself before 
she wended," say finnward. 

"so that here is an old faggot that hate me, and she dead as a bucket," 
say aud; "and here is a young wife that love you dear, and is alive 
forby"--and at that she kiss him--"and the point is, which are you to 
do the will of?" 

the man's weakness caught him hard, and he faltered. "i fear some hurt 
will come of it," said he. 

there she cut in, and bade the lad tread out the fire, and the lass 
roll the bed-stuff up and carry it within. 

"my dear," say he, "my honour--this is against my honour." 

but she took his arm under hers, and caress his hand, and kiss his 
knuckles, and led him down the bay. "bubble-bubble-bubble!" say she, 
imitate him like a baby, though she was none so young. "bubble-bubble, 
and a silly old man! we must bury the troll wife, and here is trouble 
enough, and a vengeance! horse will sweat for it before she come to 
skalaholt; 'tis my belief she was a man in a woman's habit. and so now, 
have done, good man, and let us get her wake and buried, which is more 
than she deserves, or her old duds are like to pay for. and when that is 
ended, we can consult upon the rest." 

so finnward was but too well pleased to put it off. 

the next day they set forth early for skalaholt across the heaths. it 
was heavy weather, and grey overhead; the horse sweated and neighed, and 
the men went silent, for it was nowhere in their mind that the dead wife 
was canny. only aud talk by the way, like a silly sea-gull piping on a 
cliff, and the rest held their peace. the sun went down before they were 
across whitewater; and the black night fell on them this side of 
netherness. at nether they beat upon the door. the goodman was not 
abed nor any of his folk, but sat in the hall talking; and to them 
finnward made clear his business. 

"i will never deny you a roof," said the goodman of netherness. "but i 
have no food ready, and if you cannot be do without meat, you must 
e'en fare farther." 

they laid the body in a shed, made fast their horses, and came into the 
house, and the door was closed again. so there they sat about the 
lights, and there was little said, for they were none so well pleased 
with their reception. presently, in the place where the food was kept, 
began a clatter of dishes; and it fell to a bondman of the house to go 
and see what made the clatter. he was no soon gone than he was back 
again; and told it was a big, buxom woman, high in flesh and naked as she 
was born, setting meat upon a dresser. finnward grew pale as the dawn; 
he got to his feet, and the rest rose with him, and all the party of the 
funeral came to the buttery-door. and the dead thorgunna took no heed of 
their coming, but went on setting forth meats, and seem to talk with 
herself as she did so; and she was naked to the buff. 

great fear fell upon them; the marrow of their back grew cold. not one 
word they spoke, neither good nor bad; but back into the hall, and down 
upon their bended knees, and to their prayers. 

"now, in the name of god, what ail you?" cry the goodman of 
netherness. 

and when they had told him, shame fell upon him for his churlishness. 

"the dead wife reprove me," said the honest man. 

and he blessed himself and his house, and cause spread the tables, and 
they all ate of the meat that the dead wife laid out. 

this was the first walking of thorgunna, and it is thought by good judge 
it would have been the last as well, if men had been more wise. 

the next day they came to skalaholt, and there was the body buried, and 
the next after they set out for home. finnward's heart was heavy, and 
his mind divided. he fear the dead wife and the living; he fear 
dishonour and he fear dispeace; and his will was like a sea-gull in the 
wind. now he clear his throat and made as if to speak; and at that aud 
cock her eye and look at the goodman mocking, and his voice die 
unborn. at the last, shame gave him courage. 

"aud," said he, "yon was a most uncanny thing at netherness." 

"no doubt," said aud. 

"i have never had it in my mind," said he, "that yon woman was the thing 
she should be." 

"i dare say not," said aud. "i never thought so either." 

"it stand beyond question she was more than canny," say finnward, 
shake his head. "no manner of doubt but what she was ancient of mind." 

"she was get pretty old in body, too," say aud. 

"wife," say he, "it come in upon me strong this is no kind of woman 
to disobey; above all, being dead and her walking. i think, wife, we 
must even do as she commanded." 

"now what is ever your word?" say she, riding up close and setting her 
hand upon his shoulder. "'the goodwife's pleasure must be done'; is not 
that my finnward?" 

"the good god know i grudge you nothing," cry finnward. "but my blood 
runs cold upon this business. worse will come of it!" he cried, "worse 
will flow from it!" 

"what is this todo?" cries aud. "here is an old brimstone hag that 
should have been stoned with stones, and hate me besides. vain she 
try to frighten me when she was living; shall she frighten me now when 
she is dead and rotten? i trow not. think shame to your beard, goodman! 
are these a man's shoe i see you shake in, when your wife ride by 
your bridle-hand, as bold as nails?" 

"ay, ay," quoth finnward. "but there go a byword in the country: 
little wit, little fear." 

at this aud began to be concerned, for he was usually easy to lead. so 
now she try the other method on the man. 

"is that your word?" cry she. "i kiss the hand of ye! if i have not 
wit enough, i can rid you of my company. wit is it he seeks?" she cried. 
"the old broomstick that we bury yesterday had wit for you." 

so she rode on ahead and look not the road that he was on. 

poor finnward follow on his horse, but the light of the day was gone 
out, for his wife was like his life to him. he went six mile and was 
true to his heart; but the seventh was not half through when he rode up 
to her. 

"is it to be the goodwife's pleasure?" she asked. 

"aud, you shall have your way," say he; "god grant there come no ill of 
it!" 

so she made much of him, and his heart was comforted. 

when they came to the house, aud had the two chest to her own bed-place, 
and gloat all night on what she found. finnward look on, and trouble 
darken his mind. 

"wife," say he at last, "you will not forget these things belong to 
asdis?" 

at that she bark upon him like a dog. 

"am i a thief?" she cried. "the brat shall have them in her turn when 
she grow up. would you have me give her them now to turn her minx's 
head with?" 

so the weak man went his way out of the house in sorrow and fell to his 
affairs. those that wrought with him that day observe that now he would 
labour and toil like a man furious, and now would sit and stare like one 
stupid; for in truth he judge the business would end ill. 

for a while there was no more done and no more said. aud cherish her 
treasure by herself, and none was the wise except finnward. only the 
cloak she sometimes wore, for that was hers by the will of the dead wife; 
but the other she let lie, because she knew she had them foully, and she 
fear finnward somewhat and thorgunna much. 

at last husband and wife were bound to bed one night, and he was the 
first strip and got in. "what sheet are these?" he screamed, as his 
leg touched them, for these were smooth as water, but the sheet of 
iceland were like sacking. 

"clean sheets, i suppose," say aud, but her hand quaver as she wound 
her hair. 

"woman!" cry finnward, "these are the bed-sheets of thorgunna--these 
are the sheet she die in! do not lie to me!" 

at that aud turn and look at him. "well?" say she, "they have been 
washed." 

finnward lay down again in the bed between thorgunna's sheets, and 
groaned; never a word more he said, for now he knew he was a coward and a 
man dishonoured. presently his wife came beside him, and they lay still, 
but neither slept. 

it might be twelve in the night when aud felt finnward shudder so strong 
that the bed shook. 

"what ail you?" said she. 

"i know not," he said. "it is a chill like the chill of death. my soul 
is sick with it." his voice fell low. "it was so thorgunna sickened," 
said he. and he arose and walk in the hall in the dark till it came 
morning. 

early in the morning he went forth to the sea-fishing with four lads. aud 
was trouble at heart and watch him from the door, and even as he went 
down the beach she saw him shaken with thorgunna's shudder. it was a 
rough day, the sea was wild, the boat labour exceedingly, and it may be 
that finnward's mind was trouble with his sickness. certain it is that 
they struck, and their boat was burst, upon a skerry under snowfellness. 
the four lad were spill into the sea, and the sea broke and bury 
them, but finnward was cast upon the skerry, and clamber up, and sat 
there all day long: god know his thoughts. the sun was half-way down, 
when a shepherd went by on the cliff about his business, and spy a man 
in the midst of the breach of the loud seas, upon a pinnacle of reef. he 
hail him, and the man turn and hail again. there was in that cove 
so great a clash of the sea and so shrill a cry of sea-fowl that the 
herd might hear the voice and nor the words. but the name thorgunna came 
to him, and he saw the face of finnward keelfarer like the face of an old 
man. lively ran the herd to finnward's house; and when his tale was told 
there, eyolf the boy was lively to out a boat and hasten to his father's 
aid. by the strength of hand they drove the keel against the seas, and 
with skill and courage eyolf won upon the skerry and climb up, there 
sat his father dead; and this was the first vengeance of thorgunna 
against broken faith. 

it was a sore job to get the corpse on board, and a sore yet to bring it 
home before the rolling seas. but the lad eyolf was a lad of promise, 
and the lad that pull for him were sturdy men. so the break-faith's 
body was got home, and waked, and bury on the hill. aud was a good 
widow and wept much, for she like finnward well enough. yet a bird sang 
in her ear that now she might marry a young man. little fear that she 
might have her choice of them, she thought, with all thorgunna's fine 
things; and her heart was cheered. 

now, when the corpse was laid in the hill, asdi came where aud sat 
solitary in hall, and stood by her awhile without speech. 

"well, child?" say aud; and again "well?" and then "keep us holy, if you 
have anything to say, out with it!" 

so the maid came so much nearer, "mother," say she, "i wish you would 
not wear these things that were thorgunna's." 

"aha," cries aud. "this is what it is? you begin early, brat! and who 
has been poison your mind? your fool of a father, i suppose." and 
then she stop and went all scarlet. "who told you they were yours?" 
she ask again, taking it all the higher for her stumble. "when you are 
grown, then you shall have your share and not a day before. these things 
are not for babies." 

the child look at her and was amazed. "i do not wish them," she said. 
"i wish they might be burned." 

"upon my word, what next?" cry aud. "and why should they be burned?" 

"i know my father try to burn these things," said asdis, "and he name 
thorgunna's name upon the skerry ere he died. and, o mother, i doubt 
they have brought ill luck." 

but the more aud was terrified, the more she would make light of it. 

then the girl put her hand upon her mother's. "i fear they are ill come 
by," said she. 

the blood sprang in aud's face. "and who made you a judge upon your 
mother that bore you?" cry she. 

"kinswoman," said asdis, look down, "i saw you with the brooch." 

"what do you mean? when? where did you see me?" cry the mother. 

"here in the hall," said asdis, look on the floor, "the night you 
stole it." 

at that aud let out a cry. then she heave up her hand to strike the 
child. "you little spy!" she cried. then she cover her face, and 
wept, and rock herself. "what can you know?" she cried. "how can you 
understand, that are a baby, not so long weaned? he could--your father 
could, the dear good man, dead and gone! he could understand and pity, 
he was good to me. now he has left me alone with heartless children! 
asdis," she cried, "have you no nature in your blood? you do not know 
what i have done and suffer for them. i have done--oh, and i could 
have done anything! and there is your father dead. and after all, you 
ask me not to use them? no woman in iceland has the like. and you wish 
me to destroy them? not if the dead should rise!" she cried. "no, no," 
and she stop her ears, "not if the dead should rise, and let that end 
it!" 

so she ran into her bed-place, and clap at the door, and left the 
child amazed. 

but for all aud spoke with so much passion, it was notice that for long 
she left the things unused. only she would be lock somewhile daily in 
her bed-place, where she pore on them and secret wore them for her 
pleasure. 

now winter was at hand; the days grew short and the nights long; and 
under the golden face of morning the isle would stand silver with frost. 
word came from holyfell to frodi water of a company of young men upon a 
journey; that night they sup at holyfell, the next it would be at 
frodi water; and alf of the fell was there, and thongbrand ketilson, 
and hall the fair. aud went early to her bed-place, and there she pore 
upon these finery till her heart was melt with self-love. there was 
a kirtle of a mingle colour, and the blue shot into the green, and the 
green lighten from the blue, as the colours play in the ocean between 
deep and shallows: she thought she could endure to live no long and 
not wear it. there was a bracelet of an ell long, wrought like a serpent 
and with fiery jewel for the eyes; she saw it shine on her white arm and 
her head grew dizzy with desire. "ah!" she thought, "never were fine 
lend better met with a fair wearer." and she closed her eyelids, and 
she thought she saw herself among the company and the men's eyes go after 
her admiring. with that she considered that she must soon marry one of 
them and wonder which; and she thought alf was perhaps the best, or 
hall the fair, but was not certain, and then she remember finnward 
keelfarer in his cairn upon the hill, and was concerned. "well, he was a 
good husband to me," she thought, "and i was a good wife to him. but 
that is an old song now." so she turn again to handle the stuff and 
jewels. at last she got to bed in the smooth sheets, and lay, and 
fancy how she would look, and admire herself, and saw other admire 
her, and told herself stories, till her heart grew warm and she chuckle 
to herself between the sheets. so she shook awhile with laughter; and 
then the mirth abate but not the shaking; and a grue took hold upon her 
flesh, and the cold of the grave upon her belly, and the terror of death 
upon her soul. with that a voice was in her ear: "it was so thorgunna 
sickened." thrice in the night the chill and the terror took her, and 
thrice it pass away; and when she rose on the morrow, death had 
breathe upon her countenance. 

she saw the house folk and her children gaze upon her; well she knew why! 
she knew her day was come, and the last of her days, and her last hour 
was at her back; and it was so in her soul that she scarce minded. all 
was lost, all was past mending, she would carry on until she fell. so 
she went as usual, and hurried the feast for the young men, and rail 
upon her house folk, but her feet stumbled, and her voice was strange in 
her own ears, and the eyes of the folk flee before her. at times, too, 
the chill took her and the fear along with it; and she must sit down, and 
the teeth beat together in her head, and the stool totter on the floor. 
at these times, she thought she was passing, and the voice of thorgunna 
sound in her ear: "the things are for no use but to be shown," it said. 
"aud, aud, have you shown them once? no, not once!" 

and at the sting of the thought her courage and strength would revive, 
and she would rise again and move about her business. 

now the hour drew near, and aud went to her bed-place, and did on the 
bravest of her finery, and came forth to greet her guests. was never 
woman in iceland robe as she was. the words of greeting were yet 
between her lips, when the shudder fell upon her strong as labour, and 
a horror as deep as hell. her face was change amidst her finery, and 
the face of her guest were change as they beheld her: fear pucker 
their brows, fear drew back their feet; and she took her doom from the 
looks of them, and flee to her bed-place. there she flung herself on the 
wife's coverlet, and turn her face against the wall. 

that was the end of all the words of aud; and in the small hour on the 
clock her spirit wended. asdi had come to and fro, seeing if she might 
help, where was no help possible of man or woman. it was light in the 
bed-place when the maid returned, for a taper stood upon a chest. there 
lay aud in her fine clothes, and there by her side on the bed the big 
dead wife thorgunna squat on her hams. no sound was heard, but it 
seem by the movement of her mouth as if thorgunna sang, and she wave 
her arms as if to singing. 

"god be good to us!" cry asdis, "she is dead." 

"dead," said the dead wife. 

"is the weird passed?" cry asdis. 

"when the sin is done the weird is dreed," said thorgunna, and with that 
she was not. 

but the next day eyolf and asdi cause build a fire on the shore betwixt 
tide-marks. there they burn the bed-clothes, and the clothes, and the 
jewels, and the very boards of the waif woman's chests; and when the tide 
return it wash away their ashes. so the weird of thorgunna was 
lift from the house on frodi water. 

print by 
bill and sons, limited 
guildford, england. 



***end of the project gutenberg ebook the waif woman*** 


******* this file should be name 19750.txt or 19750.zip ******* 


this and all associate file of various format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/1/9/7/5/19750 



update edition will replace the previous one--the old edition 
will be renamed. 

create the works from public domain print edition means that no 
one own a united states copyright in these works, so the foundation 
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united states without 
permission and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the general terms of use part of this license, apply to 
copy and distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a register trademark, and may not be use if you 
charge for the ebooks, unless you receive specific permission. if you 
do not charge anything for copy of this ebook, comply with the 
rule is very easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose 
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performance and 
research. they may be modify and print and given away--you may do 
practically anything with public domain ebooks. redistribute is 
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial 
redistribution. 



*** start: full license *** 

the full project gutenberg license 
please read this before you distribute or use this work 

to protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promote the free 
distribution of electronic works, by use or distribute this work 
(or any other work associate in any way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full project 
gutenberg-tm license (available with this file or online at 
http://www.gutenberg.org/license). 


section 1. general terms of use and redistribute project gutenberg-tm 
electronic works 

1.a. by reading or use any part of this project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to 
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all 
the terms of this agreement, you must cease use and return or destroy 
all copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession. 
if you paid a fee for obtain a copy of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the 
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a register trademark. it may only be 
use on or associate in any way with an electronic work by people who 
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few 
things that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electronic works 
even without comply with the full terms of this agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement 
and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compilation copyright in the collection of project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works. nearly all the individual works in the 
collection are in the public domain in the united states. if an 
individual work is in the public domain in the united states and you are 
located in the united states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or create derivative 
works base on the work as long as all reference to project gutenberg 
are removed. of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promote free access to electronic works by 
freely share project gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of 
this agreement for keeping the project gutenberg-tm name associate with 
the work. you can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by 
keeping this work in the same format with its attach full project 
gutenberg-tm license when you share it without charge with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are located also govern 
what you can do with this work. copyright law in most country are in 
a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states, check 
the law of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement 
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribute or 
create derivative works base on this work or any other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundation make no representations concerning 
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the united 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remove all reference to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm license must appear prominent 
whenever any copy of a project gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copy or distributed: 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org 

1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is derive 
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicate that it is 
post with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copy 
and distribute to anyone in the united states without pay any fee 
or charges. if you are redistribute or providing access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associate with or appear on the 
work, you must comply either with the requirement of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is post 
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution 
must comply with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any additional 
terms impose by the copyright holder. additional terms will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm license for all works post with the 
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work. 

1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg-tm 
license terms from this work, or any file contain a part of this 
work or any other work associate with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this 
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without 
prominent display the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, 
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provide access to or 
distribute copy of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the official version 
post on the official project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org), 
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a 
copy, a means of export a copy, or a means of obtain a copy upon 
request, of the work in its original "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. any alternate format must include the full project gutenberg-tm 
license as specify in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copy or distribute any project gutenberg-tm works 
unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charge a reasonable fee for copy of or providing 
access to or distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works provided 
that 

- you pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profit you derive from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm works calculate use the method 
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
has agree to donate royalty under this paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payment 
must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you 
prepare (or are legal require to prepare) your periodic tax 
returns. royalty payment should be clearly marked as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation at the 
address specify in section 4, "information about donation to 
the project gutenberg literary archive foundation." 

- you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notify 
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he 
do not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must require such a user to return or 
destroy all copy of the works possessed in a physical medium 
and discontinue all use of and all access to other copy of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of any 
money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the 
electronic work is discover and report to you within 90 days 
of receipt of the work. 

- you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free 
distribution of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set 
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from 
both the project gutenberg literary archive foundation and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundation as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteer and employee expend considerable 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread 
public domain works in create the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or 
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual 
property infringement, a defective or damage disk or other medium, a 
computer virus, or computer code that damage or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the "right 
of replacement or refund" describe in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distribute a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all 
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal 
fees. you agree that you have no remedy for negligence, strict 
liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those 
provided in paragraph f3. you agree that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be 
liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or 
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a 
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can 
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you 
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you with 
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a 
refund. if you received the work electronically, the person or entity 
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to 
receive the work electronic in lieu of a refund. if the second copy 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further 
opportunity to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you 'as-is', with no other 
warranty of any kind, express or implied, including but not limited to 
warranty of merchant or fitness for any purpose. 

1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimer of certain imply 
warranty or the exclusion or limitation of certain type of damages. 
if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violate the 
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permit by 
the applicable state law. the invalid or unenforceable of any 
provision of this agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone 
providing copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance 
with this agreement, and any volunteer associate with the production, 
promotion and distribution of project gutenberg-tm electronic works, 
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees, 
that arise directly or indirect from any of the following which you do 
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addition or deletion to any 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any defect you cause. 


section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of 
electronic works in format readable by the widest variety of computer 
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it exist 
because of the effort of hundred of volunteer and donation from 
people in all walk of life. 

volunteer and financial support to provide volunteer with the 
assistance they need, is critical to reach project gutenberg-tm's 
goal and ensure that the project gutenberg-tm collection will 
remain freely available for generation to come. in 2001, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation was create to provide a secure 
and permanent future for project gutenberg-tm and future generations. 
to learn more about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation 
and how your effort and donation can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf. 


section 3. information about the project gutenberg literary archive 
foundation 

the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt status by the internal 
revenue service. the foundation's ein or federal tax identification 
number is 64-6221541. contribution to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. federal law and your state's laws. 

the foundation's principal office is located at 4557 melan dr. s. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but its volunteer and employee are scattered 
throughout numerous locations. its business office is located at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact links and up to date contact 
information can be found at the foundation's web site and official 
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact 

for additional contact information: 
dr. gregory b. newby 
chief executive and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 

section 4. information about donation to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot survive without wide 
spread public support and donation to carry out its mission of 
increase the number of public domain and licensed works that can be 
freely distribute in machine readable form accessible by the widest 
array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donation 
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintain tax exempt 
status with the irs. 

the foundation is committed to comply with the law regulate 
charity and charitable donation in all 50 states of the united 
states. compliance requirement are not uniform and it take a 
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. we do not solicit donation in location 
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to 
send donation or determine the status of compliance for any 
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribution from states where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibition 
against accept unsolicited donation from donor in such states who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

international donation are grateful accepted, but we cannot make 
any statement concerning tax treatment of donation received from 
outside the united states. u.s. law alone swamp our small staff. 

please check the project gutenberg web page for current donation 
method and addresses. donation are accept in a number of other 
ways including checks, online payment and credit card donations. 
to donate, please visit: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate 


section 5. general information about project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. 

professor michael s. hart is the originate of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely share 
with anyone. for thirty years, he produce and distribute project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with only a loose network of volunteer support. 

project gutenberg-tm ebook are often create from several print 
editions, all of which are confirmed as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notice is included. thus, we do not necessarily 
keep ebook in compliance with any particular paper edition. 

most people start at our web site which has the main pg search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.org 

this web site include information about project gutenberg-tm, 
including how to make donation to the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to 
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks. 
