the project gutenberg ebook of the medici boots, by pearl norton swet 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org 


title: the medici boots 

author: pearl norton swet 

release date: june 1, 2010 [ebook #32639] 

language: english 


*** start of this project gutenberg ebook the medici boots *** 




produce by sankar viswanathan, greg weeks, and the online 
distribute proofread team at http://www.pgdp.net 







transcriber's note: 

this etext was produce from weird tale august-september 1936. 
extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the u.s. 
copyright on this publication was renewed. 


the medici boots 


by pearl norton swet 


_the amethyst-covered boots had been worn by an evil wanton 
in medieval florence--but what malefic power did they carry 
over into our own time?_ 

* * * * * 



preface 
for fifty years they lay under glass in the dickerson museum and they 
were label "the medici boots." they were fashion of creamy 
leather, pliable as a young girl's hands. they were thread with 
silver, applique with sapphire silk and scarlet, and set on the tip 
of each was a pale and lovely amethyst. such were the medici boots. 

old sila dickerson, globe-trotter and collector, had brought the 
boots from a dusty shop in florence when he was a young man fill 
with the lust for travel and adventure. the years pass and sila 
dickerson was an old man, his hair white, his eyes dim, his veined 
hand tremble with the ague that precede death. 

when he was ninety and the years of his wanderings over, sila 
dickerson die one morning as he sat in a high-backed venetian chair 
in his private museum. the fourteenth century gold-leaf paintings, the 
japan processional banners, the stolen bone of a normandy 
saint--all the beloved trophy of his travels must have watch the 
dead man impassive for hour before his housekeeper found him. 

the old man sat with his head thrown back against the fade tapestry 
of the venetian chair, his eyes closed, his bony arms extend along 
the beautiful carve arms of the chair, and on his lap lay the 
medici boots. 

it was high noon when they found him, and the sun was stream 
through the stained-glass window above the chair and pick at the 
amethysts, so that the violet stone seem to eye marthe, the old 
housekeeper, with an impudent glitter. marthe mutter a prayer and 
cross herself, before she ran like a scared rabbit with the news of 
the master's death. 

[illustration: "she impart to me those terrible secret of the black 
arts which were deep in her soul."] 

sila dickerson's only survive relatives, the three young 
delameters, did not take too seriously the note which was found among 
the papers in the museum's desk. old sila had written the note. it 
was address to john delameter, for john was his uncle's favorite, 
but john's pretty wife, suzanne, and his twin brother, doctor eric, 
read it over his shoulder; and they all smile tolerantly. old 
dickerson had written of things incomprehensible to the young moderns: 

"the contents of my private museum are yours, john, to do with as you 
see fit. merely as a suggestion, i would say that the antiquarian 
society would snap up many of the things. a very few are of no 
particular value, except to me. one thing i want done, however. the 
medici boots of ivory leather must either be destroy or be put for 
ever under glass in a _public_ museum. i prefer that they be 
destroyed, for they are a dangerous possession. they have gone to the 
adulterous rendezvous celebrated in the scandalous verse of lorenzo 
the magnificent. they have shod the feet of a murderess. they were 
cursed by the church as trappings of the devil, incite the wear to 
foul deed and intrigue. 

"i shall not disturb you with all their hideous history, but i repeat, 
they are a dangerous possession. i have taken care to keep them under 
lock and key, behind plate glass, for more than fifty years. i have 
never taken them out. destroy the medici boots, before they destroy 
you!" 

"but he did take them out!" cry suzanne. "uncle was holding the 
boots when--when marthe found him there in the museum." 

john reread the note, and look thoughtful at his young wife. "yes. 
perhaps he was prepare to destroy them right then. of course, i 
think the poor old fellow took things a bit too seriously--he was very 
old, you know, and marthe say he practically live in this museum of 
his." 

"and why call a pair of old boots dangerous? of course, we all know 
the medici were plenty dangerous, but the medici boots--that's 
ridiculous, john. besides----" 

suzanne pause provocatively, her red lip pouting. she look down at 
her trim shod feet. "besides, i'd like to try on those medici 
boots--just once. they're lovely, i think." 

john was frown thoughtfully. he scarcely heard her suggestion. he 
spoke to eric, instead, and his voice seem a bit troubled. 

"i believe that uncle _was_ get ready to destroy those boots that 
very morning he died; else why should he have taken them from their 
case--after fifty years?" 

"yes, i believe you're right, john, because that note is dated fully a 
month before uncle's death. i think he brood over leave those 
boots to one he care for. poor old man!" 

"i wouldn't call him so, eric. he had his dream of adventure realize 
more fully than most men. i--i think i'll do as he says. i'll destroy 
the medici boots." 

"if you'd feel better about it," assent his brother. but suzanne did 
not speak. she was look at her shoe, purse her lip thoughtfully, 
seeing her feet encase in the gay embroidery of the medici boots. 

john seem relieved by his decision. "yes, i'd better do it. we'll be 
get back to town in a few days. old erskine, you know, uncle's 
lawyer, is coming down this afternoon. then soon we'll be on the wing, 
susie and i--vienna, paris, the alps--thanks to uncle." 

"maybe you think i'm not thankful for my chance at a bit more work at 
john hopkins," said eric, and they did not again speak of the medici 
boots. 

* * * * * 

the deaf old lawyer of the dickerson estate arrived, and suzanne, with 
the easy capability that was part of her charm, saw that he was made 
comfortable. 

at seven there was a perfect dinner serve on the awning terrace 
outside the soft lit living-room. the stars aid the two little 
rosy lamp on the table, and sway willow beside a stone-encircled 
pool swung the incense of the garden about them. 

as dinner ended, john took from the pocket of his coat a small, 
limp-leather book. he pushed back his dessert plate and laid the book 
on the table, tap it with a finger as he spoke. 

"this is the history of the medici boots. it was in the little 
wall-safe in the museum. after all uncle said of the medici boots, 
shall we read it?" and turning to the old lawyer, he told of sila 
dickerson's letter concerning the boots. 

erskine shook his head, smiling. "most collector get an exaggerate 
sense of the supernatural. read this, by all means--it should prove 
interesting." 

"yes, read it, john." suzanne and ere spoke almost together. 

so, in the circle of rosy light at their little table, john read the 
story of the medici boots. it was not a long story and it was told in 
the language of an anonymous translator, but as john read on, his 
listener were drawn together, as by a spell. they scarcely breathed, 
and the summer night that was so mildly beautiful seem to take on a 
sense of hover danger. 

"in the palace of giuliano de' medici i have live long. i am 
an old woman now, as the years are reckon in this infamous 
place, though i am but fifty and three. 

"separated from my betrothed, duped, sold into the marble 
labyrinth of this hateful palace, it was long before my 
spirit broke and i went forth, bejewele and attire in 
elegance, among the silk-clad florentines. i was label the 
most beautiful mistress of any of the medici. i was smirk 
at, fawn upon for my lord's favors, obscene jest about 
in the orgy that took place in the great banquet hall of 
the palace. 

"but in my heart always lay the remembrance of my lost love, 
and in my soul grew black hatred for the medici and all their 
kind. i, who had dream only of a modest home, a kind 
husband, black-haired, trust little children, was made a 
tool of the medici infamy. 

"in time, i almost felt myself in league with the devil. 
secretly, and with a grow sense of elation, i made 
frequent rendezvous with a foul hag whose very name was 
anathema to the church folk of florence. in her hole of a 
room in a certain noisome street, she impart to me those 
terrible secret of the black arts which were deep in her 
soul. it was amuse that she was paid in medici gold. 

"the corruption of the medici bred in them fear; in me a sort 
of reckless bravery. it was i who poison the wine of many a 
foe of the medici. it was i who put the point of a dagger in 
the heart of the old prince de vittorio, whose lands and 
power and palace were covet by my lord, giuliano. 

"after a time, bloodshed became an exhilarate to me; the 
death agony of those who drank the poison cup became more 
interesting than the flattery of the medici followers. even 
the ladies of the house of the medici did me the honor of 
their subtle barbed friendliness. 

"through this very friendliness, i conceive my plan of sweet 
revenge upon the monster who had ruin my life. with so 
great a hatred boil in my soul that my mind reeled, my 
senses throbbed, my heart rose in my throat like a spurt of 
flame, i cursed three things of exquisite beauty with all the 
fervor of my newly learned lesson in devilish lore. 

"these three beautiful object i present to three ladies of 
the house of medici--presented them with honeyed words of 
mock humility. a necklace of jeweled links--i pledge myself 
to the devil and will that the golden necklace would 
tighten on the soft throat of a lady of the medici while she 
slept, and strangle her into black death. a bracelet of 
filigree and sapphires--to pierce by its hidden silver needle 
the blue vein in a white medici wrist, so that her life's 
blood would spurt and she would know the terror that the 
house of the medici gave to others. 

"last, and most ingenious, a pair of creamy boots, pliable, 
embroider in silver and silks, encrust with amethysts--my 
betrothal jewels. in my hatred i cursed the boots, willing 
that the wearer, as long as a shred of the boots remained, 
should kill as i had killed, poison as i had poisoned, leave 
all thought of home and husband and live in wanton and 
evil. so i cursed the beautiful boots, forgetting, in my 
hate, that perhaps another than a medici might, in the years 
to come, wear them and become the devil's pawn, even as i am 
now. 

"in my life, the medici will have the boots, of that i feel 
sure; but after that--i can only hope that this bloody 
history of the boots may be found when i am no more, and may 
it be a warning. 

"i have live to see my gift received and worn, and i have 
laugh in my soul to see my curse bring death and terror 
and evil to three medici women. i know not what will become 
of the golden necklace, the bracelet, or the boots. the boots 
may be lost or stolen, or they may lie in a medici palace for 
age on age, but the curse will cling to them till they are 
destroyed. so i pray that no woman, save a medici, will ever 
wear them. 

"as i live and breathe and do the bidding of the lords of 
florence, the accursed medici--i have told the truth. when i 
am dead, perhaps they will find this book, and, in hell, i 
shall know and be glad. 

"maria modena di cavouri. 

"florence, 1476." 

* * * * * 

"whew!" said old erskine. 

john laughed. "i don't suppose this charming history would have been 
any more thrill if i had read it from the original book, in 
italian, of course. wonder where uncle got it! there was no mention of 
it being in the library--but there it was." 

"now, will you destroy those boots?" ask eric, and he was not 
entire in jest. 

but suzanne said, laughingly, "not before i find out if the medici 
lady had a small foot than i! are they still in the museum, john?" 

"never you mind, my dear. they're not for the likes of you." 

"oh, don't be silly, john. this is 1935, not the fifteenth century." 
and they laugh at suzanne's earnestness. 

the book that held the story of the medici boots lay on the white 
cloth, look like a book of lovely verse. 

suzanne, a small white blur against the summer dark, sat quiet while 
the men talk of sila dickerson, his life, his mania for collecting, 
his death that had so fitting come to him in his museum. it was 
nearly twelve when suzanne left the men on the terrace and with a 
quiet "good-night" enter the living-room and cross to the long, 
shining stairs. 

the men went on with their talk. once, john, look toward the 
jut wing that was the museum, exclaimed, "look at that, will you? 
why--i'd swear i saw a light in the museum." 

"you lock it, didn't you?" ask eric. 

"of course; the key's in my desk upstairs. h-m. i'm probably mistaken, 
but it did seem as though a light shone there just a moment ago." 

"reflection from the living-room window, i think. country life is 
making you jittery, john." and ere laugh at his brother. 

the men sat on, reluctant to leave the beauty of the night, and it was 
almost two o'clock when they finally went inside. 

john said, "i think i'll not disturb suzanne." and he went to sleep in 
a wide four-postered bed in a room next to his wife. ere and the old 
lawyer were in rooms across the hall. 

* * * * * 

the still summer night closed about the house of sila dickerson, and 
when the moon lay die against the bank of cloud, puffed across a sky 
by the little wind that came before dawn, young doctor ere delameter 
awoke, sudden and completely, to a feeling of clammy apprehension. 
he had not lock his door, and now, across the gray of the room, 
he saw it slow opening. 

a hand was closed around the edge of the door--a woman's hand, small 
and white and jeweled. ere sat straight and tense on the edge of his 
bed, peer across the room. a woman, young and slender, in a long, 
trail gown, came toward him smiling. it was suzanne. 

with a gasp, ere watch her approach till she stood directly before 
him. 

"suzanne! you are asleep? suzanne, shall i call john?" 

he thought that perhaps he should not waken her; there were things one 
must remember about sleep-walkers, but physician scarcely believe 
them. 

ere was puzzled, too, by her costume. it was not a night-robe she 
wore, but an elaborate, trail dress upon which embroidery in 
silver shone faintly. her short black curl were bound about three 
times with strand of pearly beads, her slim white arms were loaded 
with bracelets. the pointed toe of little shoe peep beneath her 
gown, little shoe of creamy leather. an amethyst gleam on each 
shoe. 

the sight of these amethystine tip affected ere strangely, much as 
though he had look at something hideous repulsive. he stood up and 
put out a hand to touch suzanne's arm. 

"suzanne," he said, gently. "let me take you to john. shall i?" 

suzanne look up at him, and her brown eyes, usually so merry, were 
deep slumberous, not with sleep, but with a look of utter abandon. 
she shook her pearl-bound head slowly, smilingly. 

"no, not john. i want you, eric." 

"mad! suzanne must be mad!" was eric's quick thought, but her caress 
was swift than his thought. both jewel-laden arms about his neck, 
suzanne kiss him, her red lip pout warm upon his. 

"suzanne! you don't know what you're doing." he grasp both her hand 
in his and with a haste that would have seem ludicrous to him had he 
view the scene in a picture-play, he hurried her out of his room and 
across the hall. 

ere open her door soft and with no gentle hand shove suzanne 
inside her room. she seem like a little animal in his grasp. she 
hiss at him; claw and scratch at his hand. but when he had shut 
the door, she did not open it again, and after a moment he went back 
to his own room. 

* * * * * 

his mouth set in a firm line, his heart beating fast, ere lock his 
door with a noiseless turn of the key. it was almost dawn, and the 
garden lay like a rare pastel outside his window; but ere saw none of 
it. he scarcely thought, though his lip moved, as if chaotic words 
were struggle for utterance. 

he look down at his hand, where two long red scratch ooze a 
trickle of blood. after he had wash his hand, he lay down on his bed 
and cover his eyes with his arm, against the picture of suzanne. 
above all else there stood out the gleam tip of her little shoes, 
as he had glimpse them through the dim light of his room when she 
came toward him. 

"she wore the medici boots! the medici boots! suzanne must have taken 
them from the museum!" over and over he said it--"the medici boots! 
the medici boots!" 

ere rather dread breakfast, but when he came down at eight, to the 
terrace where a rustic table was set invitingly, he found john and the 
lawyer await him. john greet his brother affectionately. 

"morning, old boy! hope you slept well. why so solemn? feeling seedy?" 

"no, no. i am perfectly all right," ere reply hastily, relieved 
that suzanne was not present. he add with a scarcely noticeable 
hesitation, "suzanne not coming down?" 

"no," reply john, easily. "she seem to want to sleep awhile. sent 
her regrets. she'll see us at lunch." 

john went on. "i certainly had a nightmare last night. thought a woman 
in a long, shining dress came into my room and try to stab me. this 
morning i found that a glass on my bed-table was overturn and 
broken, and, by george, i'd cut my wrist on it." 

he show a jagged cut on his wrist. "take a look, doctor eric." 

ere look at the cut, carefully. "not bad, but you might have bled 
to death, had it been a quarter of an inch to the left. if you like, 
i'll fix it up a bit for you after breakfast." 

eric's voice was calm enough, but his pulse was pounding, his heart 
sick. all morning he rode through the countryside adjoin the 
dickerson estate, but he let the mare go as she like and where she 
liked, for his mind was busy with the event of the hour before dawn. 
he knew that the slash on his brother's wrist was made by steel, not 
glass. yet when the ride was over, he could not bring himself to tell 
john of suzanne's visit. 

"she must have been sleep-walking, though i can't account for the way 
she was deck out. i've always thought suzanne extremely modest in 
her dress, certainly not inclined to load herself with jewelry. and 
those boots! john must get them today and destroy them, as he said. 
silly, perhaps, but----" his thought went on and on, always return 
to the medici boots, in spite of himself. 

* * * * * 

ere came back from his ride at eleven o'clock, with as trouble a 
mind as when he began it. he almost fear to see suzanne at lunch. 

when he did meet her with john and mr. erskine on the cool, shade 
porch where they lunched, he saw there was nothing to fear. the 
amorous, clinging woman of the hour before dawn was not there at all. 
there was only the suzanne whom ere knew and love as a sister. 

here, again, was their merry little suzanne, somewhat spoil by her 
husband, it is true, but a suzanne sweet feminine, almost childish 
in a crisp, white frock and little, low-heeled sandals. their talk was 
lazy pleasant--of tennis honors and horses, of the prize delphinium 
in the garden, of the tiny malta kitten which suzanne had brought up 
from the stable late that morning and install in a pink-bowed 
basket on the porch. she show the kitten to eric, handle its tiny 
paw gently, hush its plaintive mews with ridiculous pet names. 

"perhaps i'm a big fool than i know. perhaps it never happened, 
except in a dream," ere told himself, unhappily. "and yet----" 

he look at the red mark on his hand, mark made by a furious 
suzanne in that hour before the dawn. too, he remember the cut on 
john's wrist, the cut so near the vein. 

ere decline john's invitation to go through the museum with him that 
afternoon, but he said with a queer sense of diffidence, "while 
you're there, john, you'd better get rid of the medici boots. creepy 
things to have around, i think." 

"they'll be destroyed, all right. but suzanne is just bound to try 
them on. i'll get them, though, and do as uncle said." 

ere remain on the terrace, speculate somewhat on just what john 
and suzanne would do, now that the huge fortune of sila dickerson was 
theirs. ere was not envious of his brother's good luck, and he was 
thankful for his share in old silas' generosity. 

at five o'clock he enter the hall, just as suzanne hurried in from 
the kitchen. she spread our her hands, laughingly. 

"with my own fair hand i've made individual almond tortoni for 
dessert. cook think i'm a wonder! each masterpiece in a flute silver 
dish, silver candy sprinkle on the pink whip cream! o-oh!" 

she made big eyes in mock gluttony. ere forgot, for a moment, that 
there ever had been another suzanne. 

"you're nothing but a little girl, suzie. you with your rhapsody 
over pink whip cream! but it's sweet of you to go to such trouble 
on a warm afternoon. see you and the whatever-you-call-'ems at 
dinner!" 

"they're tortonis, eric, tortonis." 

suzanne ran lightly up the stairs. ere follow more slowly. he 
enter his room thinking that there were some things which must be 
explain in this house with the old museum. 

* * * * * 

twenty minutes before dinner ere and john were on the terrace wait 
for suzanne. john was talkative, which was just as well, as he might 
have wonder at his brother's silence. ere was torn between a desire 
to tell his brother his reluctant suspicion concerning the medici 
boots and suzanne and his inclination to leave things alone till the 
boots could be destroyed. 

he said, diffidently, "john, has suzanne those--those boots?" 

john chuckled. "why, yes. i saw them in her room. do you know she went 
down to the museum last night and took those boots? it _was_ a light i 
saw in the museum. it was her light. suzanne has ideas. wants to wear 
the boots just once, she says, to lay the ghost of this 
what's-her-name--maria modena. suzanne say she couldn't sleep much 
last night. got up early and try on those boots. well, i think i'll 
destroy 'em tomorrow. uncle's wish, so i'll do it." 

"tried them on, did she? well, if you should ask me, i'd say that 
history of the boots was a bit too exciting for suzanne. it _was_ a 
haunting story. uncle must have swallow it, hook, line, and sinker, 
eh?" 

"of course. his letter show that. but suzanne lives in the present, 
not the past, as uncle did. i suppose suzanne will wear those boots, 
or she won't feel satisfied. i don't exactly like the idea, i must 
confess." 

something like an electric shock pass through eric. he said, 
somewhat breathlessly, "i don't think suzanne ought to have the medici 
boots." 

john look at him curious and laughed. "i never knew you were 
superstitious, eric. but do you really think----" 

"i don't know what i think, john. but if she were my wife, i'd take 
those boots away from her. uncle may have known what he was talk 
about." 

"well, i think she's intend to wear them at dinner, so prepare to 
be dazzled. here she is, now. greetings, sweet-heart!" 

suzanne swept across the terrace, her gown gold shimmering, pearl 
bound about her head, as ere had seen her in the dim hour before 
dawn. again the row of bracelets were weighting her slim arms. and 
she wore the medici boots, the amethyst tip peep beneath her 
shining dress. 

john, ever ready for gay clowning, arose and bowed low. "hail, 
empress! a-ah, the dress you got in florence on our honeymoon, isn't 
it? and those darn medici boots!" 

suzanne unsmiling extend her hand for him to kiss. 

john arch an eyebrow, comically. "what's the matter, honey? go 
regal on me?" and retain her hand, he kiss each of her fingers. 

suzanne snatch away her hand, and the glance she gave her husband 
was one of venomous hauteur. to ere she turn a look that was an 
open caress, leaning toward him, putt a hand on his arm, as he 
stood beside his chair, stern-lipped, with eyes that would not look at 
john's hurt bewilderment. 

the three sat down then, in the low wicker chairs, and wait for 
dinner--three people with oddly different emotions. john was hurt, 
slightly impatient with his bride; ere was furious with suzanne, 
though there was in his heart the almost certain knowledge that the 
suzanne beside them on the terrace was not the suzanne they knew, but 
a cruel strange woman, the product of a sinister force, unknown and 
compelling. 

no one, look on suzanne's red-lipped and heavy-lidded beauty, could 
miss the knowledge that here was a woman dangerous subtle, carry 
a power more devastating than the dart lightning that now and then 
show itself over the tree-tops of the garden. ere began to feel 
something of this, and there shaped in his mind a wariness, a defense 
against this woman who was not suzanne. 

"no _al fresco_ dine tonight," said john, as the darken sky was 
veined by a sudden spray of blue-green light. "rain on the way. pretty 
good storm, i'd say." 

"i like it," reply suzanne, drawing in a deep breath of the sultry 
air. 

john laughed. "since when, sweet-heart? you usually shake and shiver 
through a thunderstorm." 

suzanne ignore him. she smile at ere and said in a low tone, "and 
if i should lose my bravery, you would take care of me, wouldn't you, 
eric?" 

before ere could reply, dinner was announced, and he felt a relief 
and also a dread. this dinner was go to be difficult. 

john offer his arm to his wife, smile at her, hope for a smile 
in return, but suzanne shrug and said in a caress voice, "eric?" 

* * * * * 

ere could only bow stiff and offer his arm, while john walk 
slow beside them, his face thoughtful, his gay spirits gone. during 
dinner, however, he try to revive the lagging conversation. suzanne 
spoke in a staccato voice and her choice of words seem strange to 
eric, almost as though she were translate her own thought from a 
foreign tongue. 

and finally suzanne's promise dessert came, cool and tempt in its 
silver dishes. ere saw a chance to make the talk more natural. he 
said, gayly, "johnny, your wife's a chef, a famous pastry chef. behold 
the work of her hands! what did you say it was, suzanne?" 

"this? oh--i do not know what it is called." 

"but this afternoon as you were leave the kitchen--didn't you say it 
was almond something or other?" 

she shook her head, smiling. "perhaps it is. i wouldn't know." 

the maid had placed the tray with the three silver dishes of dessert 
before suzanne, that she might put on them the final sprinkling of 
delicate silver candies. daintily, suzanne sift the shining bubble 
over the fluff of cream. eric, watch her, felt very little surprize 
when he saw suzanne, with almost legerdemain deftness, sift upon one 
dish a film of pinkish powder which could not be detect after it lay 
on the pink cream. 

waiting, he knew not for what moment, he watch suzanne pass the 
silver dishes herself, saw her offer the one with the powdered top to 
john. and it was then that their attention was attract by the 
entrance of the malta kitten. so tiny it was, so brave in its 
careen totter across the shiny floor, small tail hoist like a 
sail, that john and ere laugh aloud. 

suzanne merely glance down at the little creature and turn away. 
the kitten, however, came to her chair, put up a tiny paw and caught 
its curve claw in the fragile stuff of suzanne's gown. instantly, 
her face became distort with rage and she kick out at the kitten, 
savagely, and with set lips. it seem to ere that the amethyst on 
the medici boots wink wicked in the light of the big chandelier. 

the kitten was flung some ten feet away, and lay in a small, pant 
heap. 

john sprang up. "suzanne! how could you?" he took the kitten in his 
arms and soothe it. 

"why its heart's beating like a trip-hammer," he said. "i don't 
understand, suzanne----" 

as the kitten grew quiet, he took a large rose-leaf from the 
table-flowers and spread it with a heap spoonful of the pink cream 
from his dessert. then he put the kitten on the floor beside it. 

"here, little one. lick this up. it's fancy eating. suzanne's sorry. i 
know she is." 

the kitten, with the greed of its kind, devour the cream, covering 
its small nose and whiskers with a pinkish film. suzanne sat back in 
her chair, fingering her bracelets, her eyes on eric's face. john 
watch the kitten, and ere watched, too--watched tensely, for he 
sense what would happen to it. 

the kitten finished the cream, lick its paw and whiskers and turn 
to walk away. then it spun around in a frantic convulsion, and in a 
moment lay dead on its back, its tiny fed tongue protruding, its paw 
rigid. 

outside, the storm glowered, and in the chartreuse light of the forked 
lightning, the great chandelier was turn to a sickly radiance. 
thunder roll like muffle drums. 

sudden suzanne began to laugh, peal after peal of terrible laughter, 
and then, after a glare of lightning, the big chandelier wink out. 
the room was plunge into stormy darkness, and they could hear the 
rain lashing through the garden to hurl itself against the windows. 

"don't be frightened, suzanne." it was john's solicitous voice, and it 
was follow by a quick movement from suzanne's side of the table. 

a sheet of blue-green light illumine the room for an instant, and 
ere saw suzanne struggle in her husband's arms, one jeweled arm 
uplift and in her hand a shining dagger. 

* * * * * 

with a bound that was almost involuntary, ere reach them and struck 
at the knife in suzanne's hand. it clatter to the floor. and as 
though the fury of the storm and suzanne's madness both were spent, 
the slash rain and the lightning stop abruptly, and suzanne 
cease to struggle. 

"light the candles, eric--quickly--on the mantel to your right! 
suzanne is hurt!" 

in the candle-light, pale golden and swaying, ere saw suzanne 
slump limp in john's arms. the hem of her golden dress was red 
wet and one cream-colored little shoe was fast becoming soaked with 
blood from a slash across the instep. 

"let's get her over to the window-seat, eric. do something for 
her!--oh, sweet-heart, don't moan like that!" there was no question or 
reproach in john's voice, only compassion. 

ere took off his coat, roll up his sleeves. his mouth was grim 
set, his hand steady, his voice crisp professional. "take off those 
shoes, john. she'll--be herself, then. i mean that she'll be 
suzanne--not a murderess of the medicis. take them off, john! they're 
at the bottom of this." 

"you mean----" john's voice was breathless, his lip trembling. 

"i mean those hellish boots have change suzanne from a sweet and 
lovely girl to--well, do as i tell you. i'll be back with gauze and 
some things i need." 

when ere hurried back, there were three servant group at the 
dining-room door. he spoke to them brusk and they left, wide-eyed 
and whispering. ere closed the door. 

while the wet leaves tap against the window and stars struggle 
through the clouds, ere worked, silently, expertly, grimly, by the 
light of a flashlight held in john's unsteady hand and the light of 
the flicker candles. the house lights were all snuff out by the 
storm. 

"there," ere gave a satisfy grunt. the brother stood look at 
suzanne, who seem asleep. her golden dress glimmer in the 
candle-light and the pearl were slip from her dark hair. the 
medici boots lay in a limp and bloody heap in a corner, where ere had 
flung them. 

"when she awakes, i shouldn't tell her about any of this, if i were 
you, john." 

"there are things you haven't told me, eric, aren't there? things 
about--the medici boots?" 

ere look steady at his brother. "yes, old fellow; and after i've told 
you, those boots must be destroyed. we'll burn them before this night is 
over. we mustn't move her now. we'll go out on the terrace--it's wet 
there, but the air is fresh. did you smell--something peculiar?" 

for, as they pass the corner where the medici boots lay slash and 
bloody, ere could have sworn that there came to him a horrid odor, 
fetid, hotly offensive--the odor of iniquity and ancient bloody death. 

* * * * * 






end of the project gutenberg ebook of the medici boots, by pearl norton swet 

*** end of this project gutenberg ebook the medici boots *** 

***** this file should be name 32639.txt or 32639.zip ***** 
this and all associate file of various format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/3/2/6/3/32639/ 

produce by sankar viswanathan, greg weeks, and the online 
distribute proofread team at http://www.pgdp.net 


update edition will replace the previous one--the old edition 
will be renamed. 

create the works from public domain print edition means that no 
one own a united states copyright in these works, so the foundation 
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united states without 
permission and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the general terms of use part of this license, apply to 
copy and distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a register trademark, and may not be use if you 
charge for the ebooks, unless you receive specific permission. if you 
do not charge anything for copy of this ebook, comply with the 
rule is very easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose 
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performance and 
research. they may be modify and print and given away--you may do 
practically anything with public domain ebooks. redistribute is 
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial 
redistribution. 



*** start: full license *** 

the full project gutenberg license 
please read this before you distribute or use this work 

to protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promote the free 
distribution of electronic works, by use or distribute this work 
(or any other work associate in any way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full project 
gutenberg-tm license (available with this file or online at 
http://gutenberg.org/license). 


section 1. general terms of use and redistribute project gutenberg-tm 
electronic works 

1.a. by reading or use any part of this project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to 
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all 
the terms of this agreement, you must cease use and return or destroy 
all copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession. 
if you paid a fee for obtain a copy of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the 
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a register trademark. it may only be 
use on or associate in any way with an electronic work by people who 
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few 
things that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electronic works 
even without comply with the full terms of this agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement 
and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compilation copyright in the collection of project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works. nearly all the individual works in the 
collection are in the public domain in the united states. if an 
individual work is in the public domain in the united states and you are 
located in the united states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or create derivative 
works base on the work as long as all reference to project gutenberg 
are removed. of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promote free access to electronic works by 
freely share project gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of 
this agreement for keeping the project gutenberg-tm name associate with 
the work. you can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by 
keeping this work in the same format with its attach full project 
gutenberg-tm license when you share it without charge with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are located also govern 
what you can do with this work. copyright law in most country are in 
a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states, check 
the law of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement 
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribute or 
create derivative works base on this work or any other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundation make no representations concerning 
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the united 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remove all reference to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm license must appear prominent 
whenever any copy of a project gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copy or distributed: 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org 

1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is derive 
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicate that it is 
post with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copy 
and distribute to anyone in the united states without pay any fee 
or charges. if you are redistribute or providing access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associate with or appear on the 
work, you must comply either with the requirement of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is post 
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution 
must comply with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any additional 
terms impose by the copyright holder. additional terms will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm license for all works post with the 
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work. 

1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg-tm 
license terms from this work, or any file contain a part of this 
work or any other work associate with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this 
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without 
prominent display the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, 
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provide access to or 
distribute copy of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the official version 
post on the official project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org), 
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a 
copy, a means of export a copy, or a means of obtain a copy upon 
request, of the work in its original "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. any alternate format must include the full project gutenberg-tm 
license as specify in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copy or distribute any project gutenberg-tm works 
unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charge a reasonable fee for copy of or providing 
access to or distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works provided 
that 

- you pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profit you derive from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm works calculate use the method 
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
has agree to donate royalty under this paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payment 
must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you 
prepare (or are legal require to prepare) your periodic tax 
returns. royalty payment should be clearly marked as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation at the 
address specify in section 4, "information about donation to 
the project gutenberg literary archive foundation." 

- you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notify 
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he 
do not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must require such a user to return or 
destroy all copy of the works possessed in a physical medium 
and discontinue all use of and all access to other copy of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of any 
money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the 
electronic work is discover and report to you within 90 days 
of receipt of the work. 

- you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free 
distribution of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set 
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from 
both the project gutenberg literary archive foundation and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundation as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteer and employee expend considerable 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread 
public domain works in create the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or 
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual 
property infringement, a defective or damage disk or other medium, a 
computer virus, or computer code that damage or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the "right 
of replacement or refund" describe in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distribute a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all 
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal 
fees. you agree that you have no remedy for negligence, strict 
liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those 
provided in paragraph f3. you agree that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be 
liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or 
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a 
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can 
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you 
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you with 
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a 
refund. if you received the work electronically, the person or entity 
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to 
receive the work electronic in lieu of a refund. if the second copy 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further 
opportunity to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you 'as-is' with no other 
warranty of any kind, express or implied, including but not limited to 
warranty of merchant or fitness for any purpose. 

1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimer of certain imply 
warranty or the exclusion or limitation of certain type of damages. 
if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violate the 
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permit by 
the applicable state law. the invalid or unenforceable of any 
provision of this agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone 
providing copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance 
with this agreement, and any volunteer associate with the production, 
promotion and distribution of project gutenberg-tm electronic works, 
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees, 
that arise directly or indirect from any of the following which you do 
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addition or deletion to any 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any defect you cause. 


section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of 
electronic works in format readable by the widest variety of computer 
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it exist 
because of the effort of hundred of volunteer and donation from 
people in all walk of life. 

volunteer and financial support to provide volunteer with the 
assistance they need, are critical to reach project gutenberg-tm's 
goal and ensure that the project gutenberg-tm collection will 
remain freely available for generation to come. in 2001, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation was create to provide a secure 
and permanent future for project gutenberg-tm and future generations. 
to learn more about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation 
and how your effort and donation can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org. 


section 3. information about the project gutenberg literary archive 
foundation 

the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt status by the internal 
revenue service. the foundation's ein or federal tax identification 
number is 64-6221541. its 501(c)(3) letter is post at 
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contribution to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. federal law and your state's laws. 

the foundation's principal office is located at 4557 melan dr. s. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but its volunteer and employee are scattered 
throughout numerous locations. its business office is located at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact links and up to date contact 
information can be found at the foundation's web site and official 
page at http://pglaf.org 

for additional contact information: 
dr. gregory b. newby 
chief executive and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 


section 4. information about donation to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot survive without wide 
spread public support and donation to carry out its mission of 
increase the number of public domain and licensed works that can be 
freely distribute in machine readable form accessible by the widest 
array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donation 
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintain tax exempt 
status with the irs. 

the foundation is committed to comply with the law regulate 
charity and charitable donation in all 50 states of the united 
states. compliance requirement are not uniform and it take a 
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. we do not solicit donation in location 
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to 
send donation or determine the status of compliance for any 
particular state visit http://pglaf.org 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribution from states where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibition 
against accept unsolicited donation from donor in such states who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

international donation are grateful accepted, but we cannot make 
any statement concerning tax treatment of donation received from 
outside the united states. u.s. law alone swamp our small staff. 

please check the project gutenberg web page for current donation 
method and addresses. donation are accept in a number of other 
ways including checks, online payment and credit card donations. 
to donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate 


section 5. general information about project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. 

professor michael s. hart is the originate of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely share 
with anyone. for thirty years, he produce and distribute project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with only a loose network of volunteer support. 


project gutenberg-tm ebook are often create from several print 
editions, all of which are confirmed as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notice is included. thus, we do not necessarily 
keep ebook in compliance with any particular paper edition. 


most people start at our web site which has the main pg search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.org 

this web site include information about project gutenberg-tm, 
including how to make donation to the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to 
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks. 
