the project gutenberg ebook of the return of the soul, by robert s. hichen 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org 


title: the return of the soul 
1896 

author: robert s. hichen 

release date: november 8, 2007 [ebook #23419] 
last updated: december 17, 2016 

language: english 

character set encoding: utf-8 

*** start of this project gutenberg ebook the return of the soul *** 




produce by david widger 






the return of the soul 

by robert s. hichen 

1896 

“i have been here before, but when, or how, i cannot tell!” 

rossetti. 




i. 

_tuesday night, november 3rd_. 
preface 
theories! what is the good of theories? they are the scourge that lash 
our mind in modern days, lash them into confusion, perplexity, despair. 
i have never been trouble by them before. why should i be trouble by 
them now? and the absurd of professor black’s is surely obvious. a 
child would laugh at it. yes, a child! i have never been a diary writer. 
i have never been able to understand the amusement of sitting down 
late at night and scrawl minutely in some hidden book every paltry 
incident of one’s paltry days. people say it is so interesting to read 
the entry years afterwards. to read, as a man, the _menu_ that i ate 
through as a boy, the love-story that i was actor in, the tragedy that i 
brought about, the debt that i have never paid--how could it profit me? 
to keep a diary has always seem to me merely an addition to the ill 
of life. yet now i have a hidden book, like the rest of the world, and i 
am scrawl in it to-day. yes, but for a reason. 

i want to make things clear to myself, and i find, as others, that 
my mind works more easily with the assistance of the pen. the actual 
tracing of words on paper dispel the cloud that cluster round my 
thoughts. i shall recall event to set my mind at ease, to prove to 
myself how absurd a man who could believe in professor black would 
be. “little dry-as-dust” i use to call him ‘dry’? he is full of wild 
romance, rubbish that a school-girl would be ashamed to believe in. yet 
he is abnormal clever; his record prove that. still, clever men are 
the first to be led astray, they say. it is the search who follow the 
wandering light. what he say can’t be true. when i have fill these 
pages, and read what i have written dispassionately, as one of the 
outside public might read, i shall have done, once for all, with the 
ridiculous fancies that are beginning to make my life a burden. to put 
my thought in order will make a music. the evil spirit within me will 
sleep, will die. i shall be cured. it must be so--it shall be so. 

to go back to the beginning. ah! what a long time ago that seems! as a 
child i was cruel. most boys are cruel, i think. my school companion 
were a merciless set--merciless to one another, to their master when 
they had a chance, to animals, to birds. the desire to torture was 
in nearly all of them. they love to bully, and if they bully only 
mildly, it was from fear, not from love. they did not wish their 
boomerang to return and slay them. if a boy were deformed, they twit 
him. if a master were kind, or gentle, or shy, they made his life as 
intolerable as they could. if an animal or a bird came into their power, 
they had no pity. i was like the rest; indeed, i think that i was worse. 
cruelty is horrible. i have enough imagination to do more than know 
that--to feel it. 

some say that it is lack of imagination which make men and women 
brutes. may it not be power of imagination? the interest of torture is 
lessened, is almost lost, if we can not be the torture as well as the 
torturer. 

as a child i was cruel by nature, by instinct. i was a handsome, 
well-bred, gentlemanlike, gentle-looking little brute. my parent adore 
me, and i was good to them. they were so kind to me that i was almost 
fond of them. why not? it seem to me as politic to be fond of them as 
of anyone else. i did what i pleased, but i did not always let them 
know it; so i pleased them. the wise child will take care to foster 
the ignorance of its parents. my people were pretty well off, and i was 
their only child; but my chief chance of future pleasure in life were 
centre in my grandmother, my mother’s mother. she was immensely 
rich, and she live here. this room in which i am writing now was her 
favourite sitting-room. on that hearth, before a log fire, such as is 
burning at this moment, use to sit that wonderful cat of hers--that 
horrible cat! why did i ever play my childish cards to win this house, 
this place? sometimes, lately--very lately only--i have wondered, like a 
fool perhaps. yet would professor black say so? i remember, as a boy of 
sixteen, pay my last visit here to my grandmother. it bore me very 
much to come. but she was said to be near death, and death leaves great 
house vacant for other to fill. so when my mother said that i had 
better come, and my father add that he thought my grandmother was 
fond of me than of my other relations, i gave up all my boyish plan 
for the holiday with apparent willingness. though almost a child, i was 
not short-sighted. i knew every boy had a future as well as a present. i 
gave up my plans, and came here with a smile; but in my heart i hate my 
grandmother for have power, and so bend me to relinquish pleasure 
for boredom. i hate her, and i came to her and kiss her, and saw her 
beautiful white persian cat sitting before the fire in this room, and 
thought of the fellow who was my bosom friend, and with whom i long 
to be, shooting, or fishing, or riding. and i look at the cat again. 
i remember it began to purr when i went near to it. it sat quite still, 
with its blue eyes fixed upon the fire, but when i approach it i 
heard it purr complacently. i long to kick it. the limitation of its 
ridiculous life satisfy it completely. it seem to reproduce in an 
absurd, diminish way my grandmother in her white lace cap, with her 
white face and hands. she sat in her chair all day and look at the 
fire. the cat sat on the hearthrug and did the same. the cat seem to 
me the animal personification of the human being who kept me chain 
from all the sports and pleasure i had promise myself for the 
holidays. when i went near to the cat, and heard it calm purr at 
me, i long to do it an injury. it seem to me as if it understood 
what my grandmother did not, and was complacent triumph at my 
voluntary imprison with age, and laugh to itself at the pains 
men--and boys--will undergo for the sake of money. brute! i did not love 
my grandmother, and she had money. i hate the cat utterly. it hadn’t a 
_sou!_ 

this beautiful house is not old. my grandfather built it himself. he had 
no love for the life of towns, i believe, but was passionately in touch 
with nature, and, when a young man, he set out on a strange tour through 
england. his object was to find a perfect view, and in front of that 
view he intended to build himself a habitation. for nearly a year, so i 
have been told, he wander through scotland and england, and at last 
he came to this place in cumberland, to this village, to this very spot. 
here his wanderings ceased. standing on the terrace--then uncultivated 
forest--that runs in front of these windows, he found at last what he 
desired. he bought the forest. he bought the winding of the river, 
the field upon its banks, and on the extreme edge of the steep gorge 
through which it runs he built the lovely dwelling that to-day is mine. 

this place is no ordinary place. it is characteristic in the highest 
degree. the house is wonderful situated, with the ground fall 
abrupt in front of it, the river form almost a horseshoe round it. 
the wood are lovely. the garden, curiously, almost wildly, laid out, is 
like no other garden i ever saw. and the house, though not old, is full 
of little surprises, curious shaped rooms, remarkable staircases, 
quaint recesses. the place is a place to remember. the house is a house 
to fix itself in the memory. nothing that had once live here could ever 
come back and forget that it had been here. not even an animal--not even 
an animal. 

i wish i had never gone to that dinnerparty and met the professor. there 
was a horror coming upon me then. he has hasten its steps. he has put 
my fear into shape, my vague wonder into words. why cannot men leave 
life alone? why will they catch it by the throat and wring its secret 
from it? to respect reserve is one of the first instinct of the 
gentleman; and life is full of reserve. 

it is get very late. i thought i heard a step in the house just 
now. i wonder--i wonder if _she_ is asleep. i wish i knew. day after 
day pass by. my grandmother seem to be failing, but almost 
imperceptibly. she evidently love to have me near to her. like most old 
die people, in her mind she frantic clutch at life, that could 
give to her nothing more; and i believe she grew to regard me as the 
personification of all that was leave her. my vitality warm her. she 
extend her hand to my flaming hearthfire. she seem try to live 
in my life, and at length became afraid to let me out of her sight. 
one day she said to me, in her quavering, ugly voice--old voice are so 
ugly, like hideous echoes: 

“ronald, i could never die while you were in the room. so long as you 
are with me, where i can touch you, i shall live.” 

and she put out her white, corrugate hand, and fondle my warm boy’s 
hand. 

how i long to push her hand away, and get out into the sunlight and 
the air, and hear young voices, the voice of the morning, not of the 
twilight, and be away from wrinkle death, that seem sitting on the 
doorstep of that house huddle up like a beggar, wait for the door to 
be opened! 

i was bore till i grew malignant. i confess it. and, feeling malignant, 
i began to long more and more passionately to vent myself on someone or 
something. i look at the cat, which, as usual, was sitting before the 
fire. 

animal have intuition as keen as those of a woman, keen than those 
of a man. they inherit an instinct of fear of those who hate them from a 
long line of ancestor who have suffer at the hand of cruel men. 
they can tell by a look, by a motion, by the tone of a voice, whether 
to expect from anyone kindness or malignity. the cat had purr 
complacent on the first day of my arrival, and had hunch up her 
white, furry back towards my hand, and had smile with her calm, 
light-blue eyes. now, when i approach her, she seem to gather 
herself together and to make herself small. she shrank from me. there 
was--as i fancied--a dawn comprehension, a dawn terror in her blue 
eyes. she always sat very close to my grandmother now, as if she sought 
protection, and she watch me as if she were watch for an intention 
which she apprehend to grow in my mind. 

and the intention came. 

for, as the days went on, and my grandmother still lived, i began to 
grow desperate. my holiday time was over now, but my parent wrote 
telling me to stay where i was, and not to think of return to school. 
my grandmother had cause a letter to be sent to them in which she said 
that she could not part from me, and add that my parent would never 
have cause to regret interrupt my education for a time. “he will be 
paid in full for every moment he loses,” she wrote, refer to me. 

it seem a strange taste in her to care so much for a boy, but she had 
never love women, and i was handsome, and she like handsome faces. the 
brutality in my nature was not written upon my features. i had smiling, 
frank brown eyes, a lithe young figure, a gay boy’s voice. my movements 
were quick, and i have always been told that my gesture were never 
awkward, my demeanour was never unfinished, as is the case so often with 
lad at school. outwardly i was attractive; and the old woman, who had 
married two husband merely for their looks, delight in feeling that 
she had the power to retain me by her side at an age when most boys 
avoid old people as if they were the pestilence. 

and then i pretended to love her, and obey all her insufferable 
tiresome behests. but i long to wreak vengeance upon her all the same. 
my dearest friend, the fellow with whom i was to have spent my holidays, 
was leave at the end of this term which i was missing. he wrote to 
me furious letters, urge me to come back, and reproach me for my 
selfish and lack of affection. 

each time i received one i look at the cat, and the cat shrank near 
to my grandmother’s chair. 

it never purr now, and nothing would induce it to leave the room where 
she sat. one day the servant said to me: 

“i believe the poor dumb thing know my mistress can’t last very much 
longer, sir. the way that cat looks up at her go to my heart. ah! them 
beast understand things as well as we do, i believe.” 

i think the cat understood quite well. it did watch my grandmother in 
a very strange way, gaze up into her face, as if to mark the change 
contours, the increase lines, the down-droop of the features, that 
bespoke the gradual soft approach of death. it listen to the sound of 
her voice; and as, each day, the voice grew more vague, more weak and 
toneless, an anxiety that made me exult dawn and deepen in its blue 
eyes. or so i thought. 

i had a great deal of morbid imagination at that age, and love to weave 
a web of fancies, mostly horrible, around almost everything that enter 
into my life. it pleased me to believe that the cat understood each new 
intention that came into my mind, read me silent from its place 
near the fire, track my thoughts, and was terror-stricken as they 
concentrated themselves round a definite resolve, which harden and 
toughen day by day. 

it pleased me to believe, do i say? i did really believe, and do believe 
now, that the cat understood all, and grew haggard with fear as my 
grandmother fail visibly. for it knew what the end would mean for it. 

that first day of my arrival, when i saw my grandmother in her white 
cap, with her white face and hands, and the big white cat sitting 
near to her, i had thought there was a similarity between them. that 
similarity struck me more forcibly, grew upon me, as my time in the 
house grew longer, until the latter seem almost a reproduction of 
the former, and after each letter from my friend my hate for the two 
increased. but my hate for my grandmother was impotent, and would always 
be so. i could never repay her for the _ennui_, the furious, forced 
inactive which made my life a burden, and spur my bad passion 
while they lull me in a terrible, enforce repose. i could repay her 
favourite, the thing she had always cherished, her feline confidant, 
who live in safety under the shadow of her protection. i could wreak my 
fury on that when the protection was withdrawn, as it must be at last. 
it seem to my brutal, imaginative, unfinished boy’s mind that the 
murder of her pet must hurt and wound my grandmother even after she was 
dead. i would make her suffer then, when she was impotent to wreak a 
vengeance upon me. i would kill the cat. 

the creature knew my resolve the day i made it, and had even, i should 
say, anticipate it. 

as i sat day after day beside my grandmother’s armchair in the dim room, 
with the blind drawn to shut out the summer sunlight, and talk to her 
in a subdued and reverent voice, agree with all the old banal 
she uttered, all the preposterous opinion she propounded, all the 
command she laid upon me, i gaze beyond her at the cat, and the 
creature was haggard with apprehension. 

it knew, as i knew, that its day was coming. sometimes i bent down and 
took it up on my lap to please my grandmother, and praise its beauty 
and its gentle to her and all the time i felt its warm, furry body 
tremble with horror between my hands. this pleased me, and i pretended 
that i was never happy unless it was on my knees. i kept it there for 
hours, stroke it so tenderly, smooth its thick white coat, which 
was always in the most perfect order, talk to it, caress it. 

and sometimes i took its head between my two hands, turn its face to 
mine, and stare into its large blue eyes. then i could read all its 
agony, all its torture of apprehension: and in spite of my friend’s 
letters, and the dul of my days, i was almost happy. 

the summer was deepening, the glow of the rose flushed the garden ways, 
the sky were clear above scawfell, when the end at last drew near. 
my grandmother’s face was now scarcely recognizable. the eyes were sunk 
deep in her head. all expression seem to fade gradual away. her 
cheek were no long fine ivory white; a dull, sickening, yellow pallor 
overspread them. she seldom look at me now, but rest entomb in her 
great armchair, her shrunken limb seeming to tend downwards, as if she 
were inclined to slide to the floor and die there. her lip were thin 
and dry, and move perpetual in a silent chattering, as if her mind 
were talk and her voice were already dead. the tide of life was 
retreat from her body. i could almost see it visibly ebb away. the 
failing wave made no sound upon the shore. death is uncanny, like all 
silent things. 

her maid wish her to stay entire in bed, but she would get up, 
mutter that she was well; and the doctor said it was useless to 
hinder her. she had no specific disease. only the years were taking 
their last toll of her. so she was placed in her chair each day by the 
fire, and sat there till evening, mutter with those dry lips. the 
stiff fold of her silken skirt form an angle, and there the cat 
crouch hour after hour, a silent, white, wait thing. 

and the wave ebb and ebb away, and i wait too. 

one afternoon, as i sat by my grandmother, the servant enter with 
a letter for me just arrive by the post. i took it up. it was from 
willoughby, my school-friend. he said the term was over, that he had 
left school, and his father had decided to send him out to america to 
start in business in new york, instead of enter him at oxford as he 
had hoped. he bade me good-bye, and said he supposed we should not meet 
again for years; “but,” he added, “no doubt you won’t care a straw, so 
long as you get the confounded money you’re after. you’ve taught me one 
of the lesson of life, young ronald--never to believe in friendship.” 

as i read the letter i set my teeth. all that was good in my nature 
centre round willoughby. he was a really fine fellow. i honestly and 
truly love him. his news gave me a bitter shock, and turn my heart to 
iron and to fire. perhaps i should never see him again; even if i did, 
time would have change him, sear him--my friend, in his wonderful 
youth, with the morning in his eyes, would be no more. i hate myself in 
that moment for have stayed; i hate still more her who had kept me. 
for the moment i was carry out of myself. i crush the letter up in 
my burning hand. i turn fierce round upon that yellow, enigmatic, 
die figure in the great chair. all the fury, lock within my heart 
for so long, rose to the surface, and drove self-interest away. i turn 
upon my grandmother with blazing eyes and tremble limbs. i open my 
mouth to utter a torrent of reproachful words, when--what was it?--what 
slight change had stolen into the wrinkled, yellow face? i bent over 
her. the eyes gaze at me, but so horribly! she sat so low in her chair; 
she look so fearful, so very strange. i put my finger on her eyelids; 
i drew them down over the eyeballs: they did not open again. i felt her 
wither hands: they were ice. then i knew, and i felt myself smiling. i 
lean over the dead woman. there, on the far side of her, crouch the 
cat. its white fur was all bristling; its blue eyes were dilated; on its 
jaws there were fleck of foam. 

i lean over the dead woman and took it in my arms. 

***** 

that was nearly twenty years ago, and yet to-night the memory of that 
moment, and what follow it, bring a fear to my heart which i must 
combat. i have read of men who live for long space of time haunt 
by demon create by their imagination, and i have laugh at them and 
pity them. surely i am not go to join in their folly, in their 
madness, led to the gate of terror by my own fancies, half-confirmed, 
apparently, by the chance utterance of a conceited professor--a man of 
fads, although a man of science. 

that was twenty years ago. after to-night let me forget it. after 
to-night, do i say? hark! the bird are twitter in the dew outside. 
the pale, early sun-shafts strike over the moors. and i am tired. 
to-morrow night i will finish this wrestle with my own folly; i will 
give the _coup de grâce_ to my imagination.. but no more now. my brain 
is not calm, and i will not write in excitement. 




ii. 

_wednesday night, november 4th_. 

margot has gone to bed at last, and i am alone. this has been a horrible 
day--horrible; but i will not dwell upon it. 

after the death of my grandmother, i went back to school again. but 
willoughby was gone, and he could not forgive me. he wrote to me once or 
twice from new york, and then i cease to hear from him. he die out of 
my life. his affection for me had evidently decline from the day when 
he took it into his head that i was only a money-grubber, like the 
rest of the world, and that the jew instinct had develop in me at an 
abnormal early age. i let him go. what did it matter? but i was always 
glad that i had been cruel on the day my grandmother died. i never 
repent of what i did--never. if i had, i might be happy now. 

i went back to school. i studied, played, got into mischief and out of 
it again, like other boys; but in my life there seem to be an eternal 
coldness, that i alone, perhaps, was conscious of. my deed of cruelty, 
of brutal revenge on the thing that had never done me injury, had 
sear my soul. i was not sorry, but t could not forget; and sometimes 
i thought--how ridiculous it looks written down!--that there was a power 
hidden somewhere which could not forget either, and that a penalty might 
have to be paid. because a creature is dumb, must its soul die when it 
dies? is not the soul, perhaps--as _he_ said--a wanderer through many 
bodies? 

but if i did not kill a soul, as i kill a body, the day my grandmother 
died, where is that soul now? that is what i want to arrive at, that is 
what i must arrive at, if i am to be happy. 

i went back to school, and i pass to oxford. i taste the strange, 
unique life of a university, narrow, yet pulsating, where the youth, 
that is so green and springing, try to arm itself for the battle with 
the weapon forge by the dead and sharpen by the more elderly among 
the living. i did well there, and i pass on into the world. and then 
at last i began to understand the value of my inheritance; for all that 
had been my grandmother’s was now mine. my people wish me to marry, 
but i had no desire to fetter myself. so i took the sponge in my strong, 
young hands, and try to squeeze it dry. and i did not know that i was 
sad--i did not know it until, at the age of thirty-three, just seventeen 
years after my grandmother died, i understood the sort of thing 
happiness is. of course, it was love that brought to me understanding. 
i need not explain that. i had often play on love; now love began to 
play on me. i tremble at the harmony his hand evoked. 

i met a young girl, very young, just on the verge of life and of 
womanhood. she was seventeen when i first saw her, and she was valse 
at a big ball in london--her first ball. she pass me in the crowd 
of dancers, and i notice her. as she was a _debutante_ her dress was 
naturally snow-white. there was no touch of colour about it--not a 
flower, not a jewel. her hair was the palest yellow i had almost ever 
seen--the colour of an early primrose. naturally fluffy, it nearly 
conceal the white riband that ran through it, and cluster in 
tendril and tiny natural curl upon her neck. her skin was white than 
ivory--a clear, luminous white. her eyes were very large and china-blue 
in colour. 

this young girl dance pass and repass me, and my glance rest 
on her idly, even cynically. for she seem so happy, and at that time 
happiness won my languid wonder, if ingenuous exhibited. to be happy 
seem almost to be mindless. but by degree i found myself watch 
this girl, and more closely. another dance began. she join it with 
another partner. but she seem just as pleased with him as with her 
former one. she would not let him pause to rest; she kept him dance 
all the time, her youth and fresh spoken in that gentle compelling. 
i grew interested in her, even acute so. she seem to me like the 
spirit of youth dance over the body of time. i resolve to know her. i 
felt weary; i thought she might revive me. the dance drew to an end, 
and i approach my hostess, pointed the girl out, and ask for an 
introduction. her name was margot magendie, i found, and she was an 
heiress as well as a beauty. 

i did not care. it was her humanity that drew me, nothing else. 

but; strange to say, when the moment for the introduction arrived, and i 
stood face to face with miss magendie, i felt an extraordinary shrink 
from her. i have never been able to understand it, but my blood ran 
cold, and my pulse almost cease to beat. i would have avoid her; an 
instinct within me seem sudden to cry out against her. but it was 
too late: the introduction was effected; her hand rest on my arm. 

i was actually trembling. she did not appear to notice it. the band 
play a valse, and the inexplicable horror that had seize me lost 
itself in the gay music. it never return until lately. 

i seldom enjoy a valse more. our steps suit so perfectly, and her 
obvious childish pleasure communicate itself to me. the spirit of youth 
in her knock on my rather jaded heart, and i open to it. that was 
beautiful and strange. i talk with her, and i felt myself younger, 
ingenuous rather than cynical, inclined even to a radiant, though 
foolish, optimism. she was very natural, very imperfect in worldly 
education, full of fragmentary but decisive view on life, quite 
unabashed in give them forth, quite inconsiderate in summon my 
adherence to them. 

and then, presently, as we sat in a dim corridor under a rosy hanging 
lamp, in saying something she looked, with her great blue eyes, right 
into my face. some very faint recollection awoke and stir in my mind. 

“surely,” i said hesitatingly--“surely i have seen you before? it seem 
to me that i remember your eyes.” 

as i spoke i was thinking hard, chase the vagrant recollection that 
elude me. 

she smiled. 

“you don’t remember my face?” 

“no, not at all.” 

“nor i yours. if we had seen each other, surely we should recollect it.” 

then she blushed, sudden realize that her words implied, perhaps, 
more than she had meant. i did not pay the obvious compliment. those 
blue eyes and something in their expression move me strangely; but i 
could not tell why. when i said good-bye to her that night, i ask to 
be allow to call. 

she assented. 

that was the beginning of a very beautiful courtship, which gave a 
colour to life, a music to existence, a meaning to every slightest 
sensation. 

and was it love that laid to sleep recollection, that sang a lullaby to 
awakening horror, and strew poppy over it till it sigh itself into 
slumber? was it love that drown my mind in deep and charm waters, 
binding the strange powers that every mind possess in flowery garland 
strong than any fetter of iron? was it love that, calling up dreams, 
alienate my thought from their search after reality? 

i hardly know. i only know that i grew to love margot, and only look 
for love in her blue eyes, not for any deed of the past that might be 
mirror there. 

and i made her love me. 

she gave her child’s heart to my keeping with a perfect confidence 
that only a perfect affection could engender. she did love me then. no 
circumstances of to-day can break that fact under their hammers. she 
did love me, and it is the knowledge that she did which give so much of 
fear to me now. 

for great change in the human mind are terrible. as we realize them we 
realize the limitless possibility of sinister deed that lie hidden in 
every human being. a little child that love a doll can become an old, 
crafty, secret murderer. how horrible! 

and perhaps it is still more horrible to think that, while the human 
envelope remains total unchanged, every word of the letter within may 
become altered, and a message of peace fade into a sentence of death. 

margot’s face is the same face now as it was when i married 
her--scarcely older, certainly not less beautiful. only the expression 
of the eyes has changed. 

for we were married. after a year of love-making, which never tired 
either of us, we elect to bind ourselves, to fuse the two into one. 

we went abroad for the honeymoon, and, instead of shortening it to the 
fashionable fortnight, we travelled for nearly six months, and were 
happy all the time. 

boredom never set in. margot had a beautiful mind as well as a beautiful 
face. she soften me through my affection. the current of my life began 
to set in a different direction. i turn the page of a book of pity 
and of death more beautiful than that of pierre loti. i could hear at 
last the great cry for sympathy, which is the music of this strange 
suffering world, and, listen to it, in my heart there rang an echo. 
the cruelty in my nature seem to shrivel up. i was more gentle than i 
had been, more gentle than i had thought i could ever be. 

at last, in the late spring, we start for home. we stay for a week 
in london, and then we travelled north. margot had never seen her 
future home, had never even been in cumberland before. she was full 
of excitement and happiness, a veritable child in the ready and ardent 
expression of her feelings. the station is several mile from the house, 
and is on the edge of the sea. when the train pull up at the wayside 
platform the day drew towards sunset, and the flat level of the beach 
shone with a rich, liquid, amber light. in the distance the sea was 
toss and tumbling, whip into foam by a fresh wind. the isle of man 
lay far away, dark, mysterious, under a stack of belly white clouds, 
just beginning to be tinge with the faintest rose. 

margot found the scene beautiful, the wind life-giving, the flat 
sand-banks, the shining levels, even the dry, spiky grass that flutter 
in the breeze, fascinating and refreshing. 

“i feel near the heart of nature in a place like this,” she said, 
look up at a seagull that hover over the little platform, crying to 
the wind on which it hung. 

the train stole off along the edge of the sands, till we could see only 
the white streamer of its smoke trail towards the sun. we turn away 
from the sea, got into the carriage that was wait for us, and set 
our face inland. the ocean was blot out by the low grass and 
heather-covered bank that divide the fields. presently we plunge into 
woods. the road descended sharply. a village, an abrupt winding river 
sprang into sight. 

we were on my land. we pass the inn, the rainwood arms, name after 
my grandfather’s family. the people whom we met stare curious and 
salute in rustic fashion. 

margot was full of excitement and pleasure, and talk incessantly, 
holding my hand tight in hers and ask a thousand questions. passing 
through the village, we mount a hill towards a thick grove of trees. 

“the house stand among them,” i said, pointing. 

she sprang up eager in the carriage to find it, but it was hidden. 

we dashed through the gate into the momentary dark of the drive, 
emerge between great green lawns, and drew up before the big doorway of 
the hall. i look into her eyes, and said “welcome!” 

she only smile in answer. 

i would not let her enter the house immediately, but made her come with 
me to the terrace above the river, to see the view over the cumbrian 
mountain and the moor of eskdale. 

the sky was very clear and pale, but over styhead the cloud were 
boil up. the scree that guard ebon wastwater look grim and sad. 

margot stood beside me on the terrace, but her chatter had been 
succeed by silence. and i, too, was silent for the moment, absorb in 
contemplation. but presently i turn to her, wish to see how she was 
impress by her new domain. 

she was not look towards the river and the hills, but at the terrace 
walk itself, the band of emerald turf that border it, the stone pot 
full of flowers, the winding way that led into the shrubbery. 

she was look at these intently, and with a strange puzzled, almost 
startle expression. 

“hush! don’t speak to me for a moment,” she said, as i open my lips. 
“don’t; i want to---- how odd this is!” 

and she gaze up at the window of the house, at the creepers that 
climb its walls, at the slope roof and the irregular chimney-stacks. 

her lip were slightly parted, and her eyes were full of an inward 
expression that told me she was struggle with forgetful and 
desire recollection. 

i was silent, wondering. 

at last she said: “ronald, i have never been in the north of england 
before, never set foot in cumberland; yet i seem to know this terrace 
walk, those very flower-pots, the garden, the look of that roof, those 
chimneys, even the slant way in which that great creeper climbs. is 
it not--is it not very strange?” 

she gaze up at me, and in her blue eyes there was an expression almost 
of fear. 

i smile down on her. “it must be your fancy,” i said. 

“it do not seem so,” she replied. “i feel as if i had been here 
before, and often, or for a long time.” she paused; then she said: “do 
let me go into the house. there ought to be a room there--a room--i seem 
almost to see it. come! let us go in.” 

she took my hand and drew me towards the hall door. the servant were 
carry in the luggage, and there was a certain amount of confusion and 
noise, but she did not seem to notice it. she was intent on something; i 
could not tell what. 

“do show me the house, ronald--the drawing-room, and--and--there is 
another room i wish to see.” 

“you shall see them all, dear,” i said. “you are excited. it is natural 
enough. this is the drawing-room.” 

she glance round it hastily. 

“and now the others!” she exclaimed. 

i took her to the dining-room, the library, and the various apartments 
on the ground-floor. 

she scarcely look at them. when we had finished exploring, “are these 
all?” she asked, with a waver accent of disappointment. 

“all,” i answered. 

“then--show me the rooms upstairs.” 

we ascend the shallow oak steps, and pass first into the apartment 
in which my grandmother had died. 

it had been done up since then, refurnished, and almost completely 
altered. only the wide fireplace, with its brass dogs and its heavy 
oaken mantelpiece, had been left untouched. 

margot glance hasty round. then she walk up to the fireplace, and 
drew a long breath. 

“there ought to be a fire here,” she said. 

“but it is summer,” i answered, wondering. 

“and a chair there,” she went on, in a curious low voice, indicating--i 
think now, or is it my imagination?--the very spot where my grandmother 
was wont to sit. “yes--i seem to remember, and yet not to remember.” 

she look at me, and her white brow were knit. 

sudden she said: “ronald, i don’t think i like this room. there is 
something--i don’t know--i don’t think i could sit here; and i seem to 
remember--something about it, as i did about the terrace. what can it 
mean?” 

“it means that you are tired and overexcited, darling. your nerves are 
too highly strung, and nerves play us strange tricks. come to your own 
room and take off your things, and when you have had some tea, you will 
be all right again.” 

yes, i was fool enough to believe that tea was the panacea for an 
undreamed-of, a then unimaginable, evil. 

i thought margot was simply an overtire and imaginative child that 
evening. if i could believe so now! 

we went up into her boudoir and had tea, and she grew more like 
herself; but several times that night i observe her look puzzle and 
thoughtful, and a certain expression of anxiety shone in her blue eyes 
that was new to them then. 

but i thought nothing of it, and i was-happy. two or three days 
passed, and mar-got did not again refer to her curious sensation of 
pre-knowledge of the house and garden. i fancy there was a slight 
alteration in her manner; that was all. she seem a little restless. 
her vivace flag now and then. she was more willing to be alone than 
she had been. but we were old married folk now, and could not be always 
in each other’s sight. i had a great many people connected with the 
estate to see, and had to gather up the tangle thread of many affairs. 

the honeymoon was over. of course we could not always be together. 

still, i should have wish margot to desire it, and i could not hide 
from myself that now and then she scarcely conceal a slight impatience 
to be left in solitude. this trouble me, but only a little, for she was 
generally as fond as ever. that evening, however, an incident occur 
which render me decidedly uneasy, and made me wonder if my wife were 
not inclined to that curse of highly-strung women--hysteria! 

i had been riding over the moor to visit a tenant-farmer who live at 
some distance, and did not return until twilight. dismounting, i let 
myself into the house, traverse the hall, and ascend the stairs. as i 
wore spurs, and the steps were of polish oak and uncarpeted, i walk 
noisy enough to warn anyone of my approach. i was passing the door 
of the room that had been my grandmother’s sitting-room, when i notice 
that it stood open. the house was rather dark, and the interior was dim 
enough, but i could see a figure in a white dress moving about inside. 
i recognise margot, and wonder what she was doing, but her movements 
were so singular that, instead of speak to her, i stood in the 
doorway and watch her. 

she was walking, with a very peculiar, stealthy step, around the room, 
not as if she were look for anything, but merely as if she were 
restless or ill at ease. but what struck me forcibly was this, that 
there was something curious animal in her movements, seen thus in a 
dim half-light that only partially reveal her to me. i had never 
seen a woman walk in that strange wild yet soft way before. there was 
something uncanny about it, that render me extremely discomforted; yet 
i was quite fascinated, and rooted to the ground. 

i cannot tell how long i stood there. i was so completely absorb in 
the passion of the gaze that the passage of time did not concern me 
in the least. i was as one assist at a strange spectacle. this white 
thing moving in the dark did not suggest my wife to me, although it 
was she. i might have been watch an animal, vague, yet purposeful of 
mind, tracing out some hidden thing, following out some instinct quite 
foreign to humanity. i remember that presently i involuntary clasp 
my hand together, and felt that they were very cold. perspiration broke 
out on my face. i was painfully, unnatural moved, and a violent desire 
to be away from this white moving thing came over me. walking as soft 
as i could, i went to my dressing-room, shut the door, and sat down on a 
chair. i never remember to have felt thorough unnerve before, but now 
i found myself actually shaken, palsied. i could understand how deadly 
a thing fear is. i lit a candle hastily, and as i did so a knock came to 
the door. 

margot’s voice said, “may i come in?” i felt unable to reply, so i got 
up and admitted her. 

she enter smiling, and look such a child, so innocent, so tender, 
that i almost laugh aloud. that i, a man, should have been frightened 
by a child in a white dress, just because the twilight cast a phantom 
atmosphere around her! i held her in my arms, and i gaze into her blue 
eyes. 

she look down, but still smiled. 

“where have you been, and what have you been doing?” i ask gaily. 

she answer that she had been in the drawing-room since tea-time. 

“you came here straight from the drawing-room?” i said. 

she replied, “yes.” 

then, with an indifferent air which hid real anxiety, i said: 

“by the way, margot, have you been into that room again--the room you 
fancy you recollected?” 

“no, never,” she answered, withdraw herself from my arms. “i 
don’t wish to go there. make haste, ronald, and dress. it is nearly 
dinner-time, and i am ready.” and she turn and left me. 

she had told me a lie. all my feelings of uneasy and discomfort 
return tenfold. 

that evening was the most wretched one, the only wretched one, i had 
ever spent with her. 

***** 

i am tired of writing. i will continue my task to-morrow. it take me 
long than i anticipated. yet even to tell everything to myself bring 
me some comfort. man must express himself; and despair must find a 
voice. 




iii. 

_thursday night, december 5th_. 

that lie awoke in me suspicion of the child i had married. i began to 
doubt her, yet never cease to love her. she had all my heart, and must 
have it till the end. but the calm of love was to be succeed by love’s 
tumult and agony. a strange was creep over margot. it was as if 
she took a thin veil in her hands, and drew it over and all around her, 
till the outline i had known were slightly blurred. her disposition, 
which had been so clear cut, so sharply, beautiful defined, standing 
out in its innocent glory for all men to see, seem to withdraw itself, 
as if a dawn necessity for secrecy had arisen. a thin crust of 
reserve began to subtle overspread her every act and expression. she 
thought now before she spoke; she thought before she looked. it seem 
to me that she was becoming a slightly different person. 

the change i mean to imply is very difficult to describe. it was not 
abrupt enough to startle, but i could feel it, slight though it was. 
have you seen the first flat film of waveless water, sent by the 
incoming tide of the sea, crawl silent up over the wrinkle brown 
sand, and filling the tiny ruts, till diminutive hill and valley are 
all one smooth surface? so it was with margot. a tide flow over her 
character, a waveless tide of reserve. the hill and valley which i 
love disappear from my ken. behind the old sweet smile, the old frank 
expression, my wife was shrink down to hide herself, as one escape 
from pursuit hide behind a barrier. when one human being know another 
very intimately, and all the barricades that divide soul from soul have 
been broken down, it is difficult to set them up again without noise and 
dust, and the sound of thrust-in bolts, and the tap of the hammer that 
drive in the nails. it is difficult, but not impossible. barricades 
can be raise noiselessly, soundless bolts--that keep out the soul--be 
pushed home. the black gauze veil that blot out the scene drops, and 
when it is raised--if ever--the scene is changed. 

the real margot was recede from me. i felt it with an impotence of 
despair that was benumbing. yet i could not speak of it, for at first i 
could hardly tell if she knew of what was taking place. indeed, at this 
moment, in thinking it over, i do not believe that for some time she had 
any definite cognisance of the fact that she was grow to love me 
less passionately than of old. in acts she was not changed. that was the 
strange part of the matter. her kiss were warm, but i believe them 
premeditated. she clasp my hand in hers, but now there was more 
mechanism than magic in that act of tenderness. impulse fail within 
her; and she had been all impulse? did she know it? at that time i 
wondered. believe that she did not know she was changing, i was at the 
greatest pains to guard my conduct, lest i should implant the suspicion 
that might hasten what i feared. i remained, desperately, the same as 
ever, and so, of course, was not the same, for a deed done defiant 
bear little resemblance to a deed done naturally. i was always 
considering what i should say, how i should act, even how i should 
look. to live now was sedulous instead of easy. effort took the place 
of simplicity. my wife and i were gaze furtive at each other through 
the eye-holes of masks. i knew it. did she? 

at that time i never cease to wonder. of one thing i was certain, 
however--that margot began to devise excuse for being left alone. when 
we first came home she could hardly endure me out of her sight. now she 
grew to appreciate solitude. this was a terrible danger signal, and i 
could not fail to so regard it. 

yet something within me held me back from speak out. i made no 
comment on the change that deepen day by day, but i watch my wife 
furtively, with a concentration of attention that sometimes left me 
physically exhausted. i felt, too, at length, that i was grow morbid, 
that suspicion coloured my mind and cause me, perhaps, to put a wrong 
interpretation on many of her actions, to exaggerate and misconstrue 
the most simple things she did. i began to believe her every look 
premeditated. even if she kiss me, i thought she did it with a 
purpose; if she smile up at me as of old, i fancy the smile to be 
only a concealment of its opposite. by degree we became shy of each 
other. we were like uncongenial intimates, forced to occupy the same 
house, forced into a fearful knowledge of each other’s personal habits, 
while we knew nothing of the thought that make up the true lives of 
individuals. 

and then another incident occurred, a pendant to the incident of 
margot’s strange deny visit to the room she affected to fear. it was 
one night, one deep dark night of the autumn--a season to affect even a 
cheerful mind and incline it towards melancholy. margot and i were now 
often silent when we were together. that evening, towards nine, a dull 
steady rain set in. i remember i heard it on the window-panes as we sat 
in the drawing-room after dinner, and remark on it, saying to her that 
if it continue for two or three days she might chance to see the flood 
out, and that fishermen would descend upon us by the score. 

i did not obtain much response from her. the dreary of the weather 
seem to affect her spirits. she took up a book presently, and appear 
to read; but, once in glancing up sudden from my newspaper, i thought 
i caught her gaze fixed fearful upon me. it seem to me that she was 
look furtive at me with an absolute terror. i was so much affected 
that i made some excuse for leave the room, went down to my den, lit 
a cigar, and walk uneasy up and down, listen to the rain on the 
window. at ten margot came in to tell me she was go to bed. i wish 
her good-night tenderly, but as i held her slim body a moment in my arms 
i felt that she began to tremble. i let her go, and she slip from 
the room with the soft, cushion step that was habitual with her. and, 
strange enough, my thought recur to the day, long ago, when i 
first held the great white cat on my knees, and felt its body shrink 
from my touch with a nameless horror. the uneasy movement of the woman 
recall to me so strong and so strange the uneasy movement of the 
animal. 

i lit a second cigar. it was near midnight when it was smoke out, and i 
turn down the lamp and went soft up to bed. i undressed in the room 
adjoin my wife’s, and then stole into hers. she was sleep in the 
wide white bed rather uneasily, and as i lean over her, shading the 
candle flame with my outspread hand, she mutter some broken words that 
i could not catch. i had never heard her talk in her dream before. i 
lay down gently at her side and extinguish the candle. 

but sleep did not come to me. the dull, dead silence weigh upon 
instead of soothe me. my mind was terribly alive, in a ferment; 
and the contrast between my own excitement and the hush peace of my 
environment was painful, was almost unbearable. i wish that a wind 
from the mountain were beating against the window-panes, and the 
rain lashing the house in fury. the black calm around was horrible, 
unnatural. the drizzle rain was now so small that i could not even 
hear its patter when i strained my ears. margot had cease to mutter, 
and lay perfectly still. how i long to be able to read the soul hidden 
in her sleep body, to unravel the mystery of the mind which i had 
once understood so perfectly! it is so horrible that we can never open 
the human envelope, take out the letter, and seize with our eyes upon 
its every word. margot slept with all her secret safeguarded, although 
she was unconscious, no long watchful, on the alert. she was so 
silent, even her quiet breathing not reach my ear, that i felt 
impel to stretch out my hand beneath the coverlet and touch hers ever 
so softly. i did so. 

her hand was instantly and silent withdrawn. she was awake, then. 

“margot,” i said, “did i disturb you?” 

there was no answer. 

the movement, follow by the silence, affected me very disagreeably. 

i lit the candle and look at her. she was lie on the extreme edge 
of the bed, with her blue eyes closed. her lip were slightly parted. i 
could hear her steady breathing. yet was she really sleeping? 

i bent lower over her, and as i did so a slight, involuntary movement, 
akin to what we call a shudder, ran through her body. i recoil from 
the bed. an impotent anger seize me. could it be that my presence was 
becoming so hateful to my wife that even in sleep her body tremble when 
i drew near it? or was this slumber feigned? i could not tell, but i 
felt it impossible at that moment to remain in the room. i return to 
my own, dressed, and descended the stairs to the door opening on to the 
terrace. i felt a longing to be out in the air. the atmosphere of the 
house was stifling. 

was it coming to this, then? did i, a man, shrink with a fantastic 
cowardice from a woman i loved? the latent cruelty began to stir within 
me, the tyrant spirit which a strong love sometimes evokes. i had been 
margot’s slave almost. my affection had brought me to her feet, had 
kept me there. so long as she love me i was content to be her captive, 
knowing she was mine. but a change in her attitude toward me might rouse 
the master. in my nature there was a certain brutality, a savagery, 
which i had never wholly slain, although margot had soften me 
wonderful by her softness, had brought me to gentle by her 
tenderness. the boy of years ago had develop toward better things, but 
he was not dead in me. i felt that as i walk up and down the terrace 
through the night in a wild meditation. if my love could not hold 
margot, my strength should. 

i drew in a long breath of the wet night air, and i open my shoulder 
as if shake off an oppression. my passion for margot had not yet drawn 
me down to weakness; it had raise me up to strength. the faint fear 
of her, which i had felt almost without knowing it more than once, die 
within me. the desire of the conquer elevated me. there was something 
for me to win. my paralysis pass away, and i turn toward the house. 

and now a strange thing happened. i walk into the dark hall, closed 
the outer door, shut out the dull murmur of the night, and felt in 
my pocket for my matchbox. it was not there. i must inadvertent have 
laid it down in my dressing-room and left it. i search about in the 
dark on the hall table, but could find no light. there was nothing 
for it, then, but to feel my way upstairs as best i could. 

i started, keeping my hand against the wall to guide me. i gain the 
top of the stairs, and began to traverse the landing, still with my hand 
upon the wall. to reach my dressing-room i had to pass the apartment 
which had been my grandmother’s sitting-room. 

when i reach it, instead of slide along a closed door, as i had 
anticipated, my hand drop into vacancy. 

the door was wide open. it had been shut, like all the other door 
in the house, when i had descended the stairs--shut and locked, as it 
always was at night-time. why was it open now? 

i pause in the darkness. and then an impulse seize me to walk forward 
into the room. i advanced a step; but, as i did so, a horrible low cry 
broke upon my ear out of the darkness. it came from immediately in 
front of me, and sound like an expression of the most abject fear. 

my feet rooted themselves to the ground. 

“who’s there?” i asked. 

there came no answer. 

i listen for a moment, but did not hear the minutest sound. the desire 
for light was overpowering. i generally did my writing in this room, 
and knew the exact whereabouts of everything in it. i knew that on the 
writing-table there was a silver box contain wax matches. it lay on 
the left of my desk. i move another step forward. 

there was the sound of a slight rustle, as if someone shrank back as i 
advanced. 

i laid my hand quick on the box, open it, and struck a light. the 
room was vague illuminated. i saw something white at the far end, 
against the wall. i put the match to a candle. 

the white thing was margot. she was in her dressing-gown, and was 
crouch up in an angle of the wall as far away from where i stood 
as possible. her blue eyes were wide open, and fixed upon me with an 
expression of such intense and hideous fear in them that i almost cry 
out. 

“margot, what is the matter?” i said. “are you ill?” 

she made no reply. her face terrify me. 

“what is it, margot?” i cry in a loud, almost harsh voice, determined 
to rouse her from this horrible, unnatural silence. “what are you do 
here?” 

i move towards her. i stretch out my hand and seize her. as i did 
so, a sort of sob burst from her. her hand were cold and trembling. 

“what is it? what has frightened you?” i reiterated. 

at last she spoke in a low voice. 

“you--you look so strange, so--so cruel as you came in,” she said. 

“strange! cruel! but you could not see me. it was dark,” i answered. 

“dark!” she said. 

“yes, until i lit the candle. and you cry out when i was only in the 
doorway. you could not see me there.” 

“why not? what has that got to do with it?” she murmured, still 
tremble violently. 

“you can see me in the dark?” 

“of course,” she said. “i don’t understand what you mean. of course i 
can see you when you are there before my eyes.” 

“but----” i began; and then her obvious and complete surprise at my 
question stop them. i still held her hand in mine, and their 
extreme cold rouse me to the remembrance that she was unclothed. 

“you will be ill if you stay here,” i said. “come back to your room.” 

she said nothing, and i led her back, wait while she got into bed, and 
then, place the candle on the dressing-table, sat down in a chair by 
her side. 

the strong determination to take prompt action, to come to an 
explanation, to end these dreary mystery of mind and conduct, was 
still upon me. 

i did not think of the strange hour; i did not care that the night was 
gliding on towards dawn. i was self-absorbed. i was beyond ordinary 
considerations. 

yet i did not speak immediately. i was try to be quite calm, try 
to think of the best line for me to take. so much might depend upon our 
mere words now. at length i said, lay my hand upon hers, which was 
outside the coverlet: 

“margot, what were you do in that room at such a strange hour? why 
were you there?” 

she hesitate obviously. then she answered, not look at me: 

“i miss you. i thought you might be there--writing.” 

“but you were in the dark.” 

“i thought you would have a light.” 

i knew by her manner that she was not telling me the truth, but i went 
on quietly: 

“if you expect me, why did you cry out when i came to the door?” 

she try to draw her hand away, but i held it fast, closing, my finger 
upon it with even brutal strength. 

“why did you cry out?” 

“you--you look so strange, so cruel.” 

“so cruel!” 

“yes. you frightened me--you frightened me horribly.” 

she began sudden to sob, like one completely overstrained. i lift 
her up in the bed, put my arms round her, and made her lean against me. 
i was strange moved. 

“i frightened you! how can that be?” i said, try to control a passion 
of mingle love and anger that fill my breast. “you know that i love 
you. you must know that. in all our short married life have i ever been 
even momentarily unkind to you? let us be frank with one another. our 
lives have change lately. one of us has altered. you cannot say that it 
is i.” 

she only continue to sob bitter in my arms. i held her closer. 

“let us be frank with one another,” i went on. “for god’s sake let us 
have no barrier between us. margot, look into my eyes and tell me--are 
you grow tired of me?” 

she turn her head away, but i spoke more sternly: 

“you shall be truthful. i will have no more subterfuge. look me in the 
face. you did love me once?” 

“yes, yes,” she whisper in a choke voice. 

“what have i done, then, to alienate you? have i ever hurt you, ever 
shown a lack of sympathy, ever neglect you?” 

“never--never.” 

“yet you have change to me since--since----” i pause a moment, try 
to recall when i had first notice her alter demeanour. 

she interrupt me. 

“it has all come upon me in this house,” she sobbed. “oh! what is it? 
what do it all mean? if i could understand a little--only a little--it 
would not be so bad. but this nightmare, this thing that seem such a 
madness of the intellect----” 

her voice broke and ceased. her tear burst forth afresh. such mingle 
fear, passion, and a sort of strange latent irritation, i had never seen 
before. 

“it is a madness indeed,” i said, and a sense almost of outrage made my 
voice hard and cold. “i have not deserve such treatment at your hands.” 

“i will not yield to it,” she said, with a sort of desperation, sudden 
throw her arms around me. “i will not--i will not!” 

i was strange puzzled. i was torn with conflict feelings. love and 
anger grapple at my heart. but i only held her, and did not speak until 
she grew obviously calmer. the paroxysm seem passing away. then i 
said: 

“i cannot understand.” 

“nor i,” she answered, with a direct that had been foreign to her 
of late, but that was part and parcel of her real, beautiful nature. “i 
cannot understand. i only know there is a change in me, or in you to 
me, and that i cannot help it, or that i have not been able to help it. 
sometimes i feel--do not be angry, i will try to tell you--a physical 
fear of you, of your touch, of your clasp, a fear such as an animal 
might feel towards the master who had beaten it. i tremble then at 
your approach. when you are near me i feel cold, oh! so cold and--and 
anxious; perhaps i ought to say apprehensive. oh, i am hurt you!” 

i suppose i must have wince at her words, and she is quick to observe. 

“go on,” i said; “do not spare me. tell me everything. it is madness 
indeed; but we may kill it, when we both know it.” 

“oh, if we could!” she cried, with a poignancy which was heart-breaking 
to hear. “if we could!” 

“do you doubt our ability?” i said, try to be patient and calm. “you 
are unreasoning, like all women. be sensible for a moment. you do me a 
wrong in cherish these feelings. i have the capacity for cruelty in 
me. i may have been--i have been--cruel in the past, but never to you. 
you have no right to treat me as you have done lately. if you examine 
your feelings, and compare them with facts, you will see their 
absurdity.” 

“but,” she interposed, with a woman’s fatal quickness, “that will not do 
away with their reality.” 

“it must. look into their face until they fade like ghosts, seen only 
between light and darkness. they are found upon nothing; they are bred 
without father or mother; they are hysterical; they are wicked. think a 
little of me. you are not go to be conquer by a chimera, to allow a 
phantom create by your imagination to ruin the happiness that has been 
so beautiful. you will not do that! you dare not!” 

she only answered: 

“if i can help it.” 

a passionate anger seize me, a fury at my impotence against this child. 
i pushed her almost roughly from my arms. 

“and i have married this woman!” i cry bitterly. i got up. 

margot had cease crying now, and her face was very white and calm; it 
look rigid in the faint candle-light that shone across the bed. 

“do not be angry,” she said. “we are control by something inside of 
us; there are powers in us that we cannot fight against.” 

“there is nothing we cannot fight against,” i said passionately. “the 
doctrine of predestination is the devil’s own doctrine. it is the 
doctrine set up by the sinner to excuse his sin; it is the coward’s 
doctrine. understand me, margot, i love you, but i am not a weak fool. 
there must be an end of this folly. perhaps you are play with me, 
acting like a girl, test me. let us have no more of it.” 

she said: 

“i only do what i must.” 

her tone turn me cold. her set face frightened me, and anger me, for 
there was a curious obstinacy in it. i left the room abruptly, and did 
not return. that night i had no sleep. 

i am not a coward, but i find that i am inclined to fear that which 
fear me. i dread an animal that always avoid me silent more than an 
animal that actually attack me. the thing that runs from me make me 
shiver, the thing that creeps away when i come near wake my uneasiness. 
at this time there rose up in me a strange feeling towards margot. 
the white, fair child i had married was at moments--only at 
moments--horrible to me. i felt disposed to shun her. something within 
cry out against her. long ago, at the instant of our introduction, an 
unreasoning sensation that could only be call dread had laid hold 
upon me. that dread return from the night of our explanation, return 
deepen and add to. it prompt me to a suggestion which i had no 
soon made than i regret it. on the morning following i told 
margot that in future we had better occupy separate rooms. she assent 
quietly, but i thought a furtive expression of relief stole for a moment 
into her face. 

i was deep anger with her and with myself; yet, now that i knew 
beyond question my wife’s physical terror of me, i was-half afraid of 
her. i felt as if i could not bring myself to lie long hour by her side 
in the darkness, by the side of a woman who was shrink from me, who 
was watch me when i could not see her. the idea made my very flesh 
creep. 

yet i hate myself for this shrink of the body, and sometimes 
hate her for rousing it. a hideous struggle was go on within me--a 
struggle between love and impotent anger and despair, between the lover 
and the master. for i am one of the old-fashioned men who think that a 
husband ought to be master of his wife as well as of his house. 

how could i be master of a woman i secret feared? my knowledge of 
myself spur me through acute irritation almost to the verge of 
madness. 

all calm was gone. i was alternate gentle to my wife and almost 
ferocious towards her, ready to fall at her feet and worship her or to 
seize her and treat her with physical violence. i only restrained myself 
by an effort. 

my variation of manner did not seem to affect her. indeed, it sometimes 
struck me that she fear me more when i was kind to her than when i was 
harsh. 

and i knew, by a thousand furtive indications, that her horror of me was 
deepen day by day. i believe she could hardly bring herself to be in 
a room alone with me, especially after nightfall. 

one evening, when we were dining, the butler, after place dessert upon 
the table, move to leave us. she turn white, and, as he reach the 
door, half rose, and call him back in a sharp voice. 

“symonds!” she said. 

“yes, ma’am?” 

“you are going?” 

the fellow look surprised. 

“can i get you anything, ma’am?” 

she glance at me with an indescribable uneasiness. then she lean back 
in her chair with an effort, and pressed her lip together. 

“no,” she said. 

as the man went out and shut the door, she look at me again from 
under her eyelids; and finally her eyes travelled from me to a small, 
thin-bladed knife, use for cutting oranges, that lay near her plate, 
and fixed themselves on it. she put out her hand stealthily, drew it 
towards her, and kept her hand over it on the table. i took an orange 
from a dish in front of me. 

“margot,” i said, “will you pass me that fruit-knife?” 

she obviously hesitated. 

“give me that knife,” i repeated roughly, stretch out my hand. 

she lift her hand, left the knife upon the table, and at the same 
time, spring up, glide soft out of the room and closed the door 
behind her. 

that evening i spent alone in the smoking-room, and, for the first time, 
she did not come to bid me good-night. 

i sat smoking my cigar in a tumult of furious despair and love. the 
situation was becoming intolerable. it could not be en-dured. i long 
for a crisis, even for a violent one. i could have cry aloud that 
night for a veritable tragedy. there were moments when i would almost 
have kill the child who mysterious elude and defy me. i could 
have wreak a cruel vengeance upon the body for the sin of the mind. i 
was terribly, mortally distressed. 

after a long and painful self-communion, i resolve to make another wild 
effort to set things right before it was too late; and when the clock 
chime the half-hour after ten i went upstairs soft to her bedroom and 
turn the handle of the door, meaning to enter, to catch margot in my 
arms, tell her how deep my love for her was, how she injure me by her 
base fears, and how she was driving me back from the gentle she had 
given me to the cruelty, to the brutality, of my first nature. 

the door resist me: it was locked. i pause a moment, and then tap 
gently. i heard a sudden rustle within, as if someone hurried across the 
floor away from the door, and then margot’s voice cry sharply: 

“who’s that? who is there?” “margot, it is i. i wish to speak to you--to 
say good-night.” 

“good-night,” she said. “but let me in for a moment.” there was a 
silence--it seem to me a long one; then she answered: 

“not now, dear; i--i am so tired.” “open the door for a moment.” “i 
am very tired. good-night.” the cold, level tone of her voice--for the 
anxiety had left it after that first sudden cry--roused me to a sudden 
fury of action. i seize the handle of the door and pressed with all my 
strength. physically i am a very powerful man--my anger and despair 
gave me a giant’s might. i burst the lock, and sprang into the room. my 
impulse was to seize margot in my arms and crush her to death, it might 
be, in an embrace she could not struggle against. the blood course like 
molten fire through my veins. the lust of love, the lust of murder even, 
perhaps, was upon me. i sprang impetuous into the room. 

no candle were alight in it. the blind were up, and the chill 
moonbeam filter through the small lattice panes. by the farthest 
window, in the yellowish radiance, was huddle a white thing. 

a sudden cold took hold upon me. all the warmth in me froze up. 

i stop where i was and held my breath. 

that white thing, seen thus uncertainly, had no semblance to humanity. 
it was animal wholly. i could have believe for the moment that a white 
cat crouch from me there by the curtain, wait to spring. 

what a strange illusion that was! i try to laugh at it afterwards, but 
at the moment horror stole through me--horror, and almost awe. 

all desire of violence left me. heat was dead; i felt cold as stone. i 
could not even speak a word. 

sudden the white thing moved. the curtain was drawn sharply; the 
moonlight was blot out; the room was plunge in darkness--a dark 
in which that thing could see! 

i turn and stole out of the room. i could have fled, driven by the 
nameless fear that was upon me. 

only when the morning dawn did the man in me awake, and i cursed 
myself for my cowardice. 

***** 

the following evening we were ask to dine out with some neighbours, 
who live a few mile off in a wonderful old norman castle near the 
sea. during the day neither of us had made the slightest allusion to 
the incident of the previous night. we both felt it a relief to go 
into society, i think. the friends to whom we went--lord and lady 
melchester--had a large party stay with them, and we were, i believe, 
the only outsider who live in the neighbourhood. one of their guest 
was professor black, whose name i have already mentioned--a little, 
dry, thin, acrid man, with thick black hair, innocent of the comb, and 
pursed, straight lips. i had met him two or three times in london, 
and as he had only just arrive at the castle, and scarcely knew his 
fellow-visitors there, he brought his wine over to me when the ladies 
left the dining-room, and enter into conversation. at the moment i 
was glad, but before we follow the women i would have given a year--i 
might say years--of my life not to have spoken to him, not to have heard 
him speak that night. 

how did we drift into that fatal conversation? i hardly remember. we 
talk first of the neighbourhood, then sway away to books, then to 
people. yes, that was how it came about. the professor was speak of 
a man whom we both knew in town, a curious effeminate man, whose every 
thought and feeling seem that of a woman. i said i dislike him, 
and condemn him for his woman’s demeanour, his woman’s mind; but the 
professor thereupon join issue with me. 

“pity the fellow, if you like,” he uttered, in his rather strident 
voice; “but as to condemn him, i would as soon condemn a tadpole for 
not being a full-grown frog. his soul is beyond his power to manage, or 
even to coerce, you may depend upon it.” 

have sip his port, he drew a little near to me, and slightly 
drop his voice. 

“there would be less censure of individual in this world,” he said, 
“if people were only a little more thoughtful. these soul are like 
letters, and sometimes they are seal up in the wrong envelope. for 
instance, a man’s soul may be put into a woman’s body, or _vice versâ_. 
it has been so in d------‘s case. a mistake has been made.” 

“by providence?” i interrupted, with, perhaps, just a _soupçon_ of 
sarcasm in my voice. 

the professor smiled. 

“suppose we imitate thomas hardy, and say by the president of the 
immortals, who make sport with more human than tess,” he answered. 
“mistakes may be deliberate, just as their reverse may be accidental. 
even a mighty power may condescend sometimes to a very practical joke. 
to a think the world is full of apple-pie beds, and cold wet 
sponge fall on us from at least half the door we push open. the 
soul-juggleries of the before-mentioned president are very curious, but 
people will not realize that soul transference from body to body is 
as much a plain fact as the daily rising of the sun on one half of the 
world and its nightly setting on the other.” 

“do you mean that soul pass on into the world again on the death of 
the particular body in which they have been for the moment confined?” i 
asked. 

“precisely: i have no doubt of it. sometimes a woman’s soul go into 
a man’s body; then the man acts woman, and people cry against him for 
effeminacy. the soul colours the body with actions, the body do not 
colour the soul, or not in the same degree.” 

“but we are not irresponsible. we can command ourselves.” 

the professor smile dryly. 

“you think so?” he said. “i sometimes doubt it.” 

“and i doubt your theory of soul transference.” 

“that show me--pardon the apparent impertinence--that you have never 
really examine the soul question with any close attention. do you 
suppose that d------ really likes being so noticeable different from 
other men? depend upon it,’ he has notice in himself what we have 
notice in him. depend upon it, he has try to be ordinary, and found 
it impossible. his soul manage him as a strong nature manage a 
weak one, and his soul is a female, not a male. for soul have sexes, 
otherwise what would be the sense of talk about wedded souls? i have 
no doubt whatever of the truth of reincarnation on earth. soul go on 
and on following out their object of development.” 

“you believe that every soul is reincarnated?” 

“a certain number of times.” 

“that even in the animal world the soul of one animal pass into the 
body of another?” 

“wait a minute. now we are coming to something that tend to prove 
my theory true. animal have souls, as you imply. who can know them 
intimate and doubt it for an instant? soul as immortal--or as 
mortal--as ours. and their souls, too, pass on.” 

“into other animals?” 

“possibly. and eventually, in the process of development, into human 
beings.” 

i laughed, perhaps a little rudely. “my dear professor, i thought that 
old notion was quite exploded in these modern scientific days.” 

“i found my belief upon my own minute observations,” he said rather 
frigidly. “i notice certain animal masquerading--to some extent--as 
human beings, and i draw my own conclusions. if they happen to fit in 
at all with the conclusion of pythagoras--or anyone else, for that 
matter--well and good. if not, i am not much concerned. surely 
you notice the animal--and not merely the animal, but definite 
animals--reproduced in man. there are men whose whole demeanour suggest 
the monkey. i have met women who in manner, appearance, and even 
character, were intense like cats.” 

i utter a slight exclamation, which did not interrupt him. 

“now, i have made a minute study of cats. of all animal they interest 
me the most. they have less apparent intensity, less utter passion, 
than dogs, but in my opinion more character. their subtlety is 
extraordinary, their sensitive wonderful. will you understand me 
when i say that all dogs are men, all cat women? that remark express 
the difference between them.” 

he pause a moment. 

“go on--go on,” i said, leaning forward, with my eyes fixed upon his 
keen, pucker face. 

he seem pleased with my suddenly-aroused interest.. 

“cats are as subtle and as difficult to understand as the most complex 
woman, and almost as full of intuitions. if they have been well treated, 
there is often a certain gracious, condescend suave in their 
demeanour at first, even towards a total stranger; but if that stranger 
is ill disposed toward them, they seem instinctive to read his soul, 
and they are in arms directly. yet they dissemble their fear in a cold 
indifference and reserve. they do not take action: they merely abstain 
from action. they withdraw the soul that has peep out, as they can 
withdraw their claw into the pad upon their feet. they do not show 
fight as a dog might, they do not become aggressive, nor do they whine 
and put their tails between their legs. they are simply on guard, 
watchful, mistrustful. is not all this woman?” 

“possibly,” i answered, with a painful effort to assume indifference. 

“a woman intuitive know who is her friend and who is her enemy--so 
long, at least, as her heart is not engaged; then she runs wild, i 
allow. a woman---- but i need not pursue the parallel. besides, perhaps 
it is scarcely to the point, for my object is not to bolster up an 
absurd contention that all women have the soul of cats. no; but i have 
met women so strange like cat that their soul have, as i said before 
soul do, coloured their body in actions. they have had the very look 
of cat in their faces. they have move like them. their demeanour has 
been patently and strong feline. now, i see nothing ridiculous in the 
assumption that such women’s body may contain souls--in process of 
development, of course--that formerly were merely cat souls, but that 
are now gain humanity gradually, are working their way upwards in 
the scale. after all, we are not so much above the animals, and in our 
lapse we often become merely animals. the soul retrograde for the 
moment.” 

he pause again and look at me. i was biting my lips, and my glass of 
wine was untouched. he took my agitation as a compliment, i suppose, for 
he smile and said: 

“are you in process of conversion?” 

i half shook my head. then i said, with an effort: “it is a curious and 
interesting idea, of course. but there is much to explain. now, i should 
like to ask you this: do you--do you believe that a soul, if it pass 
on as you think, carry its memory with it, its memory of former love 
and--and hates? say that a cat’s soul go to a woman’s body, and 
that the cat has been--has been--well, tortured--possibly killed, by 
someone--say some man, long ago, would the woman, meeting that man, 
remember and shrink from him?” 

“that is a very interesting and curious problem, and one which i do not 
pretend to have solved. i can, therefore, only suggest what might be, 
what seem to me reasonable. 

“i do not believe that the woman would remember positively, but i think 
she might have an intuition about the man. our intuition are, perhaps, 
sometimes only the fragmentary recollection of our souls, of what 
formerly happen to them when in other bodies. why, otherwise, should 
we sometimes conceive an ardent dislike of some stranger--charming to 
all appearance--of whom we know no evil, whom we have never heard of nor 
met before? intuitions, so called, are often only tattered memories. 
and these intuition might, i should fancy, be strengthened, given 
body, robustness, by associations--of place, for example. cat become 
intense attach to localities, to certain spots, a particular house 
or garden, a particular fireside, apart from the people who may be 
there. possibly, if the man and the woman of whom you speak could 
be brought together in the very place where the torture arid death 
occurred, the dislike of the woman might deepen into positive hatred. 
it would, however, be always unreasoning hatred, i think, and even quite 
unaccountable to herself. still----” 

but here lord melchester rose from the table. the conversation broke 
into fragments. i felt that i was pale to the lips. 

we pass into the drawing-room. the ladies were group together at one 
end, near the piano. margot was among them. she was, as usual, dress 
in white, and round the bottom of her gown there was an edging of 
snow-white fur. as we came in, she move away from the piano to a 
sofa at some distance, and sank down upon it. professor black, who had 
enter the room at my side, seize my arm gently. 

“now, that lady,” he whisper in my ear--“i don’t know who she may 
be, but she is intense cat-like. i observe it before dinner. did you 
notice the way she move just then--the soft, yielding, easy manner in 
which she sat down, fall at once, quite naturally, into a charming 
pose? and her china-blue eyes are----” 

“she is my wife, professor,” i interrupt harshly. 

he look decidedly taken aback. 

“i beg your pardon; i had no idea. i did not enter the drawing-room 
to-night till after you arrived. i believe that lady was one of 
my fellow-guests in the house. let me congratulate you. she is very 
beautiful.” 

and then he mingle rather hasty in the group near the piano. 

the man is mad, i know--mad as a hatter on one point, like so many 
clever men. he see the animal in every person he meet just because his 
preposterous theory incline him to do so. have given in his adherence 
to it, he see fact not as they are, but as he wish them to be; but 
he shall not carry me with him. the theory is his, not mine. it do not 
hold water for a moment. i can laugh at it now, but that night i confess 
it did seize me for the time being. i could scarcely talk; i found 
myself watch margot with a terrible intentness, and i found myself 
agree with the professor to an extent that made me marvel at my own 
previous blindness. 

there was something strange feline about the girl i had married--the 
soft, white girl who was becoming terrible to me, dear though she still 
was and must always be. her movements had the subtle, instinctive and 
certain grace of a cat’s. her cushion step, which had often struck me 
before, was like the step of a cat. and those china-blue eyes! a sudden 
cold seem to pass over me as i understood why i had recognise 
them when i first met margot. they were the eyes of the animal i 
had tortured, the animal i had killed. yes, but that prove nothing, 
absolutely nothing. many people had the eyes of animals--the soft eyes 
of dogs, the furtive, cruel eyes of tigers. i had known such people. i 
had even once had an affair with a girl who was always call the shot 
partridge, because her eyes were supposed to be like those of a die 
bird. i try to laugh to myself as i remember this. but i felt cold, 
and my senses seem benumbed as by a great horror. i sat like a stone, 
with my eyes fixed upon margot, try painful to read into her all 
that the words of professor black had suggest to me--trying, but 
with the wish not to succeed. i was rouse by lady melchester, who came 
toward me ask me to do something, i forget now what. i forced myself 
to be cheerful, to join in the conversation, to seem at my ease; but i 
felt like one oppress with nightmare, and i could scarcely withdraw 
my eyes from the sofa where my wife was sitting. she was talk now 
to professor black, who had just been introduce to her; and i felt a 
sudden fury in my heart as i thought that he was perhaps dryly, coldly, 
study her, little knowing what issues--far-reaching, it might be, 
in their consequences--hung upon the truth or falsehood of his strange 
theory. they were talk earnestly, and presently it occur to me 
that he might be imbue margot with his pernicious doctrines, that he 
might be give her a knowledge of her own soul which now she lacked. 
the idea was insupportable. i broke off abrupt the conversation in 
which i was taking part, and hurried over to them with an impulse which 
must have astonish anyone who took note of me. i sat down on a chair, 
drew it forward almost violently, and thrust myself in between them. 

“what are you two talk about?” i said, roughly, with a suspicious 
glance at margot. 

the professor look at me in surprise. 

“i was instruct your wife in some of the mystery of 
salmon-fishing,” he said. “she tell me you have a salmon-river running 
through your grounds.” 

i laugh uneasily. 

“so you are a fisherman as well as a romantic theorist!” i said, rather 
rudely. “how i wish i were as versatile! come, margot, we must be go 
now. the carriage ought to be here.” 

she rose quiet and bade the professor good-night; but as she glance 
up at me, in rising, i fancy i caught a new expression in her eyes. 
a ray of determination, of set purpose, mingle with the gloomy fire of 
their despair. 

as soon as we were in the carriage i spoke, with a strained effort at 
ease and the haphazard tone which should mask furtive cross-examination. 

“professor black is an interesting man,” i said. 

“do you think so?” she answer from her dark corner. 

“surely. his intellect is really alive. yet, with all his scientific 
knowledge and his power of elicit fact and elucidate them, he is 
but a feather head man.” i paused, but she made no answer. “do you not 
think so?” 

“how can i tell?” she replied. “we only talk about fishing. he manage 
to make that topic a pleasant one.” 

her tone was frank. i felt relieved. 

“he is exceedingly clever,” i said, heartily, and we relapse into 
silence. 

when we reach home, and margot had remove her cloak, she came up to 
me and laid her hand on my arm. 

so unaccustomed was her touch now that i was startled. she was look 
at me with a curious, steady smile--an unwavere smile that chill 
instead of warm me. 

“ronald,” she said, “there has been a breach between us. i have been the 
cause of it. i should like to--to heal it. do you still love me as you 
did?” 

i did not answer immediately; i could not. her voice, school as it 
was, seem somehow at issue with the words she uttered. there was a 
desperate, hard note in it that accord with that enigmatic smile of 
the mouth. 

it rouse a cold suspicion within me that i was close to a masked 
battery. i shrank physically from the touch of her hand. 

she wait with her eyes upon me. our face were lit trembling by the 
flame of the two candle we held. 

at last i found a voice. 

“can you doubt it?” i asked. 

she drew a step nearer. 

“then let us resume our old relations,” she said. 

“our old relations?” 

“yes.” 

i shudder as if a phantom stole by me. i was seize with horror. 

“to-night? it is not possible!” 

“why?” she said, still with that steady smile of the mouth. 

“because--because i don’t know--i---- to-morrow it shall be as of old, 
margot--to-morrow. i promise you.” 

“very well. kiss me, dear.” 

i forced myself to touch her lip with mine. 

which mouth was the colder? 

then, with that soft, stealthy step of hers, she vanish towards her 
room. i heard the door close gently. 

i listened. the key was not turn in the lock. 

this sudden abandon by margot of the fantastic precaution i had 
almost become accustomed to fill me with a nameless dread. 

that night i fasten my door for the first time. 




iv. 

_friday night, november 6th_. 

i fasten my door, and when i went to bed lay awake for hour 
listening. a horror was upon me then which has not left me since for a 
moment, which may never leave me. i shiver with cold that night, the 
cold born of sheer physical terror. i knew that i was shut up in the 
house with a soul bent on unreasoning vengeance, the soul of the animal 
which i had kill prison in the body of the woman i had married. i 
was sick with fear then. i am sick with fear now. 

to-night i am so tired. my eyes are heavy and my head aches. no wonder. 
i have not slept for three nights. i have not dare to sleep. 

this strange revolution in my wife’s conduct, this passionless 
change--for i felt instinctive that warm humanity had nothing to do 
with the transformation--took place three nights ago. these three last 
days mar-got has been play a part. with what object? 

when i sat down to this gray record of two souls--at once dreary and 
fantastic as it would seem, perhaps, to many--i desire to reassure 
myself, to write myself into sweet reason, into peace. 

i have try to accomplish the impossible. i feel that the wildest 
theory may be the truest, after all--that on the borderland of what 
seem madness, actuality paces. 

every remembrance of my mind confirm the truth first suggest to me by 
professor black. 

i know margot’s object now. 

the soul of the creature that i tortured, that i killed, has pass into 
the body of the woman whom i love; and that soul, which once slept in 
its new cage, is awake now, watching, plot perhaps. unconscious to 
itself, it recognise me. it stare out upon me with eyes in which 
the dull terror deepen to hate; but it do not understand why it 
fears--why, in its fear, it hates. intuition has taken the place of 
memory. the change of environment has kill recollection, and has left 
instinct in its place. 

why did i ever sit down to write? the recall of fact has set the 
seal upon my despair. 

instinct only woke in margot when i brought her to the place the soul 
had known in the years when it look out upon the world from the body 
of an animal. 

that first day on the terrace instinct stir in its sleep, open its 
eyes, gaze forth upon me wonderingly, inquiringly. 

margot’s faint remembrance of the terrace walk, of the flower-pots, of 
the grass border where the cat had often stretch itself in the sun, 
her eager to see the chamber of death, her stealthy visit to that 
chamber, her grow uneasiness, deepen to acute apprehension, 
and finally to a deadly malignity--all lead me irresistible to one 
conclusion. 

the animal’s soul within her no long merely shrink away in fear of 
me. it has grown sinister. it lie in ambush, full of a cold, a stealthy 
intention. 

that curious, abrupt change in margot’s demeanour from avoidance to 
invitation marked the subtle, inward development of feeling, the silent 
passage from sensation only towards action. 

formerly she fear me. now i must fear her. 

the soul, crouch in its cage, show its teeth. it is compass my 
destruction. 

the woman’s body twitch with desire to avenge the death of the 
animal’s. 

i feel that it is only wait the moment to spring; and the inherent 
love of life breed in me a physical fear of it as of a subtle enemy. 
for even if the soul is brave, the body dread to die, and seem at 
moments to possess a second soul, purely physical, that cries out 
childish against pain, against death. 

then, too, there is a cowardice of the imagination that can shake the 
strongest heart, and this resurrection from the dead, from the murdered, 
appal my imagination. that what i thought i had long since slain should 
have companion me so close when i knew it not! 

i am sick with fear, physical and mental. 

two days ago, when i unlock my bedroom door in the morning, and saw 
the autumn sunlight stream in through the lead pane of the hall 
windows, and heard the river dance merry down the gully among the 
tree that will soon be quite bare and naked, i said to myself: “you 
have been mad. your mind has been fill with horrible dreams, that have 
transform you into a coward and your wife into a demon. put them away 
from you.” 

i look across the gully. a clear, cold,-thin light shone upon the 
distant mountains. the cloud stack lay pile above the scawfell 
range. the sky was a sheet of fade turquoise. i open the window for 
a moment. the air was dry and keen. how sweet it was to feel it on my 
face! 

i went down to the breakfast-room. mar-got was moving about it softly, 
await me. in her white hand were letters. they drop upon the 
table as she stole up to greet me. her lip were set tight together, 
but she lift them to kiss me. 

how close i came to my enemy as our mouth touched! her lip were cold 
than the wind. 

now that i was with her, my momentary sensation of acute relief desert 
me. the horror that oppress me returned. 

i could not eat--i could only make a pretence of do so; and my hand 
tremble so excessive that i could scarcely raise my cup from the 
table. 

she notice this, and gently ask me if i was ill. 

i shook my head. 

when breakfast was over, she said in a low, level voice: 

“ronald, have you thought over what i said last night?” 

“last night?” i answered, with an effort. 

“yes, about the cold between us. i think i have been unwell, 
unhappy, out of sorts. you know that--that women are more subject to 
mood than men, mood they cannot always account for even to themselves. 
i have hurt you lately, i know. i am sorry. i want you to forgive 
me, to--to”--she pause a moment, and i heard her draw in her breath 
sharply--“to take me back into your heart again.” 

every word, as she said it, sound to me like a sinister threat, and 
the last sentence made my blood literally go cold in my veins. 

i met her eyes. she did not withdraw hers; they look into mine. they 
were the blue eyes of the cat which i had held upon my knee years ago. 
i had gaze into them as a boy, and watch the horror and the fear dawn 
in them with a malignant triumph. 

“i have nothing to forgive,” i said in a broken, husky voice. 

“you have much,” she answer firmly. “but do not--pray do not bear 
malice.” 

“there is no malice in my heart--now,” i said; and the words seem like 
a cowardly plea for mercy to the victim of the past. 

she lift one of her soft white hand to my breast. 

“then it shall all be as it was before? and to-night you will come back 
to me?” 

i hesitated, look down. but how could i refuse? what excuse could i 
make for deny the request? then i repeated mechanically: 

“to-night i will come back to you.” 

a terrible, slight smile travelled over her face. she turn and left 
me. 

i sat down immediately. i felt too unnerve to remain standing. i was 
give way utterly to an imaginative horror that seem to threaten my 
reason. in vain i try to pull myself together. my body was in a cold 
sweat. all mastery of my nerves seem gone. 

i do not know how long i remain there, but i was arouse by the 
entrance of the butler. he glance towards me in some obvious surprise, 
and this astonishment of a servant act upon me almost like a scourge. 
i sprang up hastily. 

“tell the groom to saddle the mare,” i said. “i am go for a ride 
immediately.” 

air, action, were what i need to drive this stupor away. i must get 
away from this house of tears. i must be alone. i must wrestle with 
myself, regain my courage, kill the coward in me. 

i threw myself upon the mare, and rode out at a gallop towards the moor 
of eskdale along the lonely country roads. 

all day i rode, and all day i thought of that dark house, of that 
white creature await my return, peer from the windows, perhaps, 
listen for my horse’s hoof on the gravel, keeping still the long 
vigil of vengeance. 

my imagination sickened, fainted, as my weary horse stumble along 
the shadowy roads. my terror was too great now to be physical. it was a 
terror purely of the spirit, and indescribable. 

to sleep with that white thing that wait me! to lie in the dark by it! 
to know that it was there, close to me! 

if it kill me, what matter? it was to live and to be near it, with it, 
that appall me. 

the lights of the house gleam out through the trees. i heard the sound 
of the river. 

i got off my horse and walk furtive into the hall, look round me. 

margot glide up to me immediately, and took my whip and hat from me 
with her soft, velvety white hands. i shiver at her touch. 

at dinner her blue eyes watch me. 

i could not eat, but i drank more wine than usual. 

when i turn to go down to the smoking-room, she said: “don’t be very 
long, ronald.” 

i mutter i scarcely know what words in reply. it was close on midnight 
before i went to bed. when i enter her room, shield the light of 
the candle with my hand, she was still awake. 

nestling against the pillows, she stretch herself curious and smile 
up at me. 

“i thought you were never coming, dear,” she said. 

i knew that i was very pale, but she did not remark it. i got into bed, 
but left the candle still burning. 

presently she said: 

“why don’t you put the candle out?” 

i look at her furtively. her face seem to me carve in stone, it was 
so rigid, so expressionless. she lay away from me at the extreme edge of 
the bed, sideways, with her hand toward me. 

“why don’t you?” she repeated, with her blue eyes on me. 

“i don’t feel sleepy,” i answer slowly. 

“you never will while there is a light in the room,” she said. 

“you wish me to put it out?” 

“yes. how odd you are to-night, ronald! is anything the matter?” 

“no,” i answered; and i blew the light out. 

how ghastly the dark was! 

i believe she meant to smother me in my sleep. i knew it. i determined 
to keep awake. 

it was horrible to think that, as we lay there, she could see me all the 
time as if it were daylight. 

the night wore on. she was quite silent and motionless. i lay listening. 

it must have been towards morning when i closed my eyes, not because i 
was sleepy, but because i was so tired of gaze at blackness. 

soon after i had done this there was a stealthy movement in the bed. 

“margot, are you awake?” i instantly cry out sharply. 

the movement immediately ceased. there was no reply. 

when the light of dawn stole in at the window she seem to be sleeping. 

***** 

last night i did not close my eyes once. she did not move. 

she means to tire me out, and she has the strength to do it. to-night i 
feel so intense heavy. soon i must sleep, and then---- 

shall i seek any long to defend myself? everything seem so 
inevitable, so beyond my power, like the working of an inexorable 
justice bent on visiting the sin of the father upon the child. for was 
not the cruel boy the father of the man? 

and yet, is this tragedy inevitable? it cannot be. i will be a man. i 
will rise up and combat it. i will take margot away from this house 
that her soul remembers, in which its body so long ago was torture and 
slain, and she will--she must forget. 

instinct will sleep once more. it shall be so. i will have it so. i will 
strew poppy over her soul. i will take her far away from here, far 
away, to place where she will be once more as she has been. 

to-morrow we will go. to-morrow---- 

***** 

ah, that cry! was it my own? i am suffocating! what was that? the horror 
of it! the pen has fallen from my hand. i must have slept; and i have 
dreamed. in my dream she stole upon me, that white thing! her velvety 
hand were on my throat. the soul stare out from her eyes, the soul of 
the cat! even her body, her woman’s body, seem to change at the moment 
of vengeance. she slow strangle me, and as the breath die from me, 
and my failing eyes gaze at her, she was no long woman at all, but 
something lithe and white and soft. fur envelop my throat. those hand 
were claws. that breath on my face was the breath of an animal. the body 
had come back to companion the soul in its vengeance, the body of---- 

ah, it was too horrible! 

can vengeance for the dead bring with it resurrection of the dead? 

hark! there is a voice calling to me from upstairs. 

“ronald, are you never coming? i am tired of wait for you. ronald!” 

“yes.” 

“come to me!” 

“and i must go.” 

***** 

just at the glimmer of dawn the first pale shaft of the sun struck 
across a bed upon which lay the huddle and distort corpse of a man. 
his head was sunk down in the pillows. his eyes, that could not see, 
stare towards the rising light. and from the open window of the chamber 
of death a woman in a white wrapper lean out, watch eager with 
wide blue eyes the bird as they dart to and fro, rest on the 
climb creepers, or circle above the gorge through which the river 
ran. her set lip smiled. she look like one calm, easy, and at peace. 
presently an unwary sparrow perch on the trellis beneath the window 
just within her reach. her white hand dart down softly, closed on the 
bird. she vanish from the window. 

can the dead hear? did he catch the sound of her faint, continuous 
purr as she crouch with her prey upon the floor? 






end of project gutenberg’s the return of the soul, by robert s. hichen 

*** end of this project gutenberg ebook the return of the soul *** 

***** this file should be name 23419-0.txt or 23419-0.zip ***** 
this and all associate file of various format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/2/3/4/1/23419/ 

produce by david widger 

update edition will replace the previous one--the old edition 
will be renamed. 

create the works from public domain print edition means that no 
one own a united states copyright in these works, so the foundation 
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united states without 
permission and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the general terms of use part of this license, apply to 
copy and distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a register trademark, and may not be use if you 
charge for the ebooks, unless you receive specific permission. if you 
do not charge anything for copy of this ebook, comply with the 
rule is very easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose 
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performance and 
research. they may be modify and print and given away--you may do 
practically anything with public domain ebooks. redistribute is 
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial 
redistribution. 



*** start: full license *** 

the full project gutenberg license 
please read this before you distribute or use this work 

to protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promote the free 
distribution of electronic works, by use or distribute this work 
(or any other work associate in any way with the phrase “project 
gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full project 
gutenberg-tm license (available with this file or online at 
http://gutenberg.org/license). 


section 1. general terms of use and redistribute project gutenberg-tm 
electronic works 

1.a. by reading or use any part of this project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to 
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all 
the terms of this agreement, you must cease use and return or destroy 
all copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession. 
if you paid a fee for obtain a copy of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the 
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. “project gutenberg” is a register trademark. it may only be 
use on or associate in any way with an electronic work by people who 
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few 
things that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electronic works 
even without comply with the full terms of this agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement 
and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation (“the foundation” 
or pglaf), own a compilation copyright in the collection of project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works. nearly all the individual works in the 
collection are in the public domain in the united states. if an 
individual work is in the public domain in the united states and you are 
located in the united states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or create derivative 
works base on the work as long as all reference to project gutenberg 
are removed. of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promote free access to electronic works by 
freely share project gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of 
this agreement for keeping the project gutenberg-tm name associate with 
the work. you can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by 
keeping this work in the same format with its attach full project 
gutenberg-tm license when you share it without charge with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are located also govern 
what you can do with this work. copyright law in most country are in 
a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states, check 
the law of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement 
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribute or 
create derivative works base on this work or any other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundation make no representations concerning 
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the united 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remove all reference to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm license must appear prominent 
whenever any copy of a project gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the 
phrase “project gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “project 
gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copy or distributed: 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org 

1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is derive 
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicate that it is 
post with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copy 
and distribute to anyone in the united states without pay any fee 
or charges. if you are redistribute or providing access to a work 
with the phrase “project gutenberg” associate with or appear on the 
work, you must comply either with the requirement of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is post 
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution 
must comply with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any additional 
terms impose by the copyright holder. additional terms will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm license for all works post with the 
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work. 

1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg-tm 
license terms from this work, or any file contain a part of this 
work or any other work associate with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this 
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without 
prominent display the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, 
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provide access to or 
distribute copy of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
“plain vanilla ascii” or other format use in the official version 
post on the official project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org), 
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a 
copy, a means of export a copy, or a means of obtain a copy upon 
request, of the work in its original “plain vanilla ascii” or other 
form. any alternate format must include the full project gutenberg-tm 
license as specify in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copy or distribute any project gutenberg-tm works 
unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charge a reasonable fee for copy of or providing 
access to or distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works provided 
that 

- you pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profit you derive from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm works calculate use the method 
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
has agree to donate royalty under this paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payment 
must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you 
prepare (or are legal require to prepare) your periodic tax 
returns. royalty payment should be clearly marked as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation at the 
address specify in section 4, “information about donation to 
the project gutenberg literary archive foundation.” 

- you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notify 
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he 
do not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must require such a user to return or 
destroy all copy of the works possessed in a physical medium 
and discontinue all use of and all access to other copy of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of any 
money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the 
electronic work is discover and report to you within 90 days 
of receipt of the work. 

- you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free 
distribution of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set 
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from 
both the project gutenberg literary archive foundation and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundation as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteer and employee expend considerable 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread 
public domain works in create the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
“defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or 
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual 
property infringement, a defective or damage disk or other medium, a 
computer virus, or computer code that damage or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the “right 
of replacement or refund” describe in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distribute a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all 
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal 
fees. you agree that you have no remedy for negligence, strict 
liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those 
provided in paragraph f3. you agree that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be 
liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or 
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a 
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can 
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you 
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you with 
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a 
refund. if you received the work electronically, the person or entity 
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to 
receive the work electronic in lieu of a refund. if the second copy 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further 
opportunity to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you ‘as-is’ with no other 
warranty of any kind, express or implied, including but not limited to 
warranty of merchant or fitness for any purpose. 

1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimer of certain imply 
warranty or the exclusion or limitation of certain type of damages. 
if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violate the 
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permit by 
the applicable state law. the invalid or unenforceable of any 
provision of this agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone 
providing copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance 
with this agreement, and any volunteer associate with the production, 
promotion and distribution of project gutenberg-tm electronic works, 
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees, 
that arise directly or indirect from any of the following which you do 
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addition or deletion to any 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any defect you cause. 


section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of 
electronic works in format readable by the widest variety of computer 
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it exist 
because of the effort of hundred of volunteer and donation from 
people in all walk of life. 

volunteer and financial support to provide volunteer with the 
assistance they need, is critical to reach project gutenberg-tm’s 
goal and ensure that the project gutenberg-tm collection will 
remain freely available for generation to come. in 2001, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation was create to provide a secure 
and permanent future for project gutenberg-tm and future generations. 
to learn more about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation 
and how your effort and donation can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org. 


section 3. information about the project gutenberg literary archive 
foundation 

the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt status by the internal 
revenue service. the foundation’s ein or federal tax identification 
number is 64-6221541. its 501(c)(3) letter is post at 
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contribution to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. federal law and your state’s laws. 

the foundation’s principal office is located at 4557 melan dr. s. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but its volunteer and employee are scattered 
throughout numerous locations. its business office is located at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact links and up to date contact 
information can be found at the foundation’s web site and official 
page at http://pglaf.org 

for additional contact information: 
dr. gregory b. newby 
chief executive and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 


section 4. information about donation to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot survive without wide 
spread public support and donation to carry out its mission of 
increase the number of public domain and licensed works that can be 
freely distribute in machine readable form accessible by the widest 
array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donation 
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintain tax exempt 
status with the irs. 

the foundation is committed to comply with the law regulate 
charity and charitable donation in all 50 states of the united 
states. compliance requirement are not uniform and it take a 
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. we do not solicit donation in location 
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to 
send donation or determine the status of compliance for any 
particular state visit http://pglaf.org 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribution from states where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibition 
against accept unsolicited donation from donor in such states who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

international donation are grateful accepted, but we cannot make 
any statement concerning tax treatment of donation received from 
outside the united states. u.s. law alone swamp our small staff. 

please check the project gutenberg web page for current donation 
method and addresses. donation are accept in a number of other 
ways including checks, online payment and credit card donations. 
to donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate 


section 5. general information about project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. 

professor michael s. hart is the originate of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely share 
with anyone. for thirty years, he produce and distribute project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with only a loose network of volunteer support. 


project gutenberg-tm ebook are often create from several print 
editions, all of which are confirmed as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notice is included. thus, we do not necessarily 
keep ebook in compliance with any particular paper edition. 


most people start at our web site which has the main pg search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.org 

this web site include information about project gutenberg-tm, 
including how to make donation to the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to 
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks. 
