the project gutenberg ebook of twenty-five ghost stories, by w. bob dutch 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license 


title: twenty-five ghost story 

author: w. bob dutch 

release date: october 31, 2016 [ebook #53419] 

language: english 

character set encoding: utf-8 

*** start of this project gutenberg ebook twenty-five ghost story *** 




produce by david edwards, chuck greif and the online 
distribute proofread team at http://www.pgdp.net (this 
book was produce from scan image of public domain 
material from the google books project.) 










twenty-five ghost stories. 

compile and edit 

by 

w. bob holland. 

“there are more things in heaven and earth, horatio, 
than are dreamt of in your philosophy.” 
--_hamlet._ 

copyright, 1904, by 
j. s. ogilvie publishing company. 

new york: 

j. s. ogilvie publishing company, 
57 rose street. 




contents. 


page 

preface 5 

the black cat 7 

the flay hand 28 

the vengeance of a tree 37 

the parlor-car ghost 44 

ghost of buckstown inn 51 

the burglar’s ghost 59 

a phantom toe 76 

mrs. davenport’s ghost 81 

the phantom woman 90 

the phantom hag 100 

from the tomb 105 

sandy’s ghost 114 

the ghost of red creek 123 

the spectre bride 128 

how he caught the ghost 134 

grand-dame’s ghost story 144 

a fight with a ghost 153 

colonel halifax’s ghost story 168 

the ghost of the count 190 

the old mansion 202 

a misfit ghost 210 

an unbidden guest 215 

the dead woman’s photograph 220 

the ghost of a live man 228 

the ghost of washington 236 




preface 


this collection of ghost story owe its publication to an interest 
that i have long felt in the supernatural and in works of the 
imagination. as a child i was deep concerned in tale of spooks, 
haunt houses, wraith and specter and story of weird experiences, 
clank chains, ghostly sight and gruesome sound always held me 
spellbound and breathless. 

experience in editorial offices taught me that i was not alone in 
liking story of mystery. the desire to know something of that 
existence that is veiled by death is equally potent in old age and in 
youth, and men, women and children like to be thrill and to have a 
“creepy” feeling along the spinal column as the result of reading of a 
visitor from beyond the grave. 

this volume contain the most famous of the weird story of edgar allan 
poe, that master of this form of literature. “the black cat” contain 
all the need element of mystery and supernatural, and yet the feline 
acts in a natural manner all of the time, and the story is quite 
possibly true. it is only in the manner of its telling that the tale 
become one that fitting find its place in this collection. 

guy de maupassant, the clever frenchman, is also represent by two 
effective bit of work, and other less widely known writer have also 
contribute story that are worth reading, and when once read will be 
remembered. there is not a story among the twenty-five that is not 
worthy of close reading. 

there has recently been a revival in interest in ghost stories. many of 
the high-class magazine have within a few month print story with 
supernatural incidents, and writer whose name are known to all who 
read have turn their attention to this form of literature. 

whether or not the reader believe in ghosts, he cannot fail to be 
interested in this little book. without venture to express a positive 
opinion either way, i will only say with hamlet: “there are more things 
in heaven and earth, horatio, than are dreamt of in your philosophy.” 

w. bob holland. 




twenty-five ghost story 




the black cat. 

by edgar allan poe. 


for the most wild, yet most homely narrative which i am about to pen, i 
neither expect nor solicit belief. mad indeed would i be to expect it, 
in a case where my very senses reject their own evidence. yet, mad am i 
not--and very surely do i not dream. but to-morrow i die, and to-day i 
would unburden my soul. my immediate purpose is to place before the 
world, plainly, succinct and without comment a series of mere 
household events. in their consequences, these event have 
terrified--have tortured--have destroy me. yet i will not attempt to 
expound them. to me they have present little but horror, to many they 
will seem less terrible than baroques. hereafter, perhaps, some 
intellect may be found which will reduce my phantasm to the 
commonplace--some intellect more calm, more logical, and far less 
excitable than my own, which will perceive in the circumstances i detail 
with awe nothing more than an ordinary succession of very natural cause 
and effects. 

from my infancy i was noted for the docile and humanity of my 
disposition. my tender of heart was even so conspicuous as to make 
me the jest of my companions. i was especially fond of animals, and was 
indulge by my parent with a great variety of pets. with these i spent 
most of my time, and never was so happy as when feed and caress 
them. this peculiarity of character grew with my growth, and in my 
manhood i derive from it one of my principal source of pleasure. to 
those who have cherish an affection for a faithful and sagacious dog, 
i need hardly be at the trouble of explain the nature or the 
intensity of the gratification thus derivable. there is something in the 
unselfish and self-sacrificing love of a brute, which go directly to 
the heart of him who has had frequent occasion to test the paltry 
friendship and gossamer fidelity of mere man. 

i married early, and was happy to find in my wife a disposition not 
uncongenial with my own. observing my partiality for domestic pet she 
lost no opportunity of procure those of the most agreeable kind. we 
had birds, goldfish, a fine dog, rabbits, a small monkey and a cat. 

this latter was a remarkably large and beautiful animal, entire black, 
and sagacious to an astonish degree. in speak of his intelligence, 
my wife, who at heart was not a little tincture with superstition, made 
frequent allusion to the ancient popular notion, which regard all 
black cat as witch in disguise. not that she was ever serious upon 
this point--and i mention the matter at all for no better reason than 
that it happens, just now, to be remembered. 

pluto--this was the cat’s name--was my favorite pet and playmate. i 
alone fed him, and he attend me wherever i went about the house. it 
was even with difficulty that i could prevent him from following me 
through the streets. 

our friendship lasted, in this manner, for several years, during which 
my general temperament and character--through the instrumentality of the 
fiend intemperance--had (i blush to confess it) experienced a radical 
alteration for the worse. i grew, day by day, more moody, more 
irritable, more regardless of the feelings of others. i suffer myself 
to use intemperate language to my wife. at length i even offer her 
personal violence. my pets, of course, were made to feel the change in 
my disposition. i not only neglect them, but ill-used them. for pluto, 
however, i still retain sufficient regard to restrain me from 
maltreat him, as i made no scruple of maltreat the rabbits, the 
monkey or even the dog, when by accident or through affection they came 
in my way. but my disease grew upon me--for what disease is like 
alcohol! and at length even pluto, who was now becoming old, and 
consequently somewhat peevish--even pluto began to experience the 
effects of my ill-temper. 

one night, return home much intoxicate from one of my haunt about 
town, i fancy that the cat avoid my presence. i seize him, when, in 
his fright at my violence, he inflict a slight wound upon my hand with 
his teeth. the fury of a demon instantly possessed me. i knew myself no 
longer. my original soul seemed, at once, to take its flight from my 
body; and a more than fiendish malevolence, gin-nurtured, thrill every 
fiber of my frame. i took from my waistcoat pocket a penknife, open 
it, grasp the poor beast by the throat, and deliberate cut one of 
its eyes from the socket! i blush, i burn, i shudder while i pen the 
damnable atrocity. 

when reason return with the morning--when i had slept off the fumes of 
the night’s debauch--i experienced a sentiment half of horror, half of 
remorse, for the crime of which i had been guilty; but it was, at best, 
a feeble and equivocal feeling, and the soul remain untouched. i again 
plunge into excess, and soon drown in wine all memory of the deed. 

in the meantime the cat slow recovered. 

[illustration: “_one night, return home much intoxicated._”] 

the socket of the lost eye presented, it is true, a frightful 
appearance, but he no long appear to suffer any pain. he went about 
the house as usual, but, as might be expected, flee in extreme terror at 
my approach. i had so much of my old heart left as to be at first 
grieve by this evident dislike on the part of a creature which had once 
so love me. but this feeling soon gave place to irritation. and then 
came, as if to my final and irrevocable overthrow, the spirit of 
perverseness. of this spirit philosophy take no account. yet i am not 
more sure that my soul lives than i am that perverse is one of the 
primitive impulse of the human heart--one of the indivisible primary 
faculty or sentiment which give direction to the character of man. 
who has not, hundred of times, found himself commit a vile or silly 
action, for no other reason than because he know he should not? have we 
not a perpetual inclination, in the teeth of our best judgment, to 
violate that which is law, merely because we understand it to be such? 
this spirit of perverseness, i say, came to my final overthrow. it was 
this unfathomable longing of the soul to vex itself--to offer violence 
to its own nature--to do wrong for the wrong’s sake only--that urge me 
to continue and finally to consummate the injury i had inflict upon 
the unoffend brute. one morning, in cold blood, i slip a noose 
about its neck, and hung it to the limb of a tree; hung it with the 
tear stream from my eyes and the bitterest remorse at my heart; hung 
it because i knew that it had love me, and because i felt it had given 
me no offense; hung it because i knew that in so do i was commit 
a sin--a deadly sin that would so jeopardize my immortal soul as to 
place it, if such a thing were possible--even beyond the reach of the 
infinite mercy of the most merciful and most terrible god. 

on the night of the day on which this cruel deed was done, i was arouse 
from sleep by the cry of “fire!” the curtains of my bed were in flames. 
the whole house was blazing. it was with great difficulty that my wife, 
a servant and myself made our escape from the conflagration. the 
destruction was complete. my entire worldly wealth was swallow up, and 
i resigned myself thenceforward to despair. 

i am above the weakness of seek to establish a sequence of cause and 
effect between the disaster and the atrocity. but i am detail a chain 
of facts, and wish not to leave even a possible link imperfect. on the 
day succeed the fire i visit the ruins. the walls, with one 
exception, had fallen in. this exception was found in a compartment 
wall, not very thick, which stood about the middle of the house, and 
against which had rest the head of my bed. the plastering had here, in 
great measure, resist the action of the fire--a fact which i 
attribute to its have been recently spread. about this wall a dense 
crowd were collected, and many person seem to be examine a 
particular portion of it with very minute and eager attention. the words 
“strange!” “singular!” and other similar expression excited my 
curiosity. i approach and saw, as if graven in bas-relief upon the 
white surface, the figure of a gigantic cat. the impression was given 
with an accuracy truly marvelous. there was a rope about the animal’s 
neck. 

when i first beheld this apparition--for i could scarcely regard it as 
less--my wonder and my terror were extreme. but at length reflection 
came to my aid. the cat, i remembered, had been hung in a garden 
adjacent to the house. upon the alarm of fire this garden had been 
immediately fill by the crowd--by some one of whom the animal must 
have been cut from the tree and thrown through an open window into my 
chamber. this had probably been done with the view of arouse me from 
sleep. the fall of other wall had compress the victim of my 
cruelty into the substance of the freshly spread plaster, the lime of 
which with the flames, and the ammonia from the carcass, had then 
accomplished the portraiture as i saw it. 

although i thus readily account to my reason, if not altogether to my 
conscience, for the 

[illustration: “_because i knew that it had love me._”] 

startle fact just detailed, it did not the less fail to make a deep 
impression upon my fancy. for month i could not rid myself of the 
phantasm of the cat; and, during this period, there came back into my 
spirit a half sentiment that seemed, but was not, remorse. i went so far 
as to regret the loss of the animal, and to look about me, among the 
vile haunt which i now habitual frequented, for another pet of the 
same species and of somewhat similar appearance, with which to supply 
its place. 

one night as i sat, half stupefied, in a den of more than infamy, my 
attention was sudden drawn to some black object, repose upon the 
head of one of the immense hogshead of gin, or of rum, which 
constitute the chief furniture of the apartment. i had been look 
steady at the top of this hogshead for some minutes, and what now 
cause me surprise was the fact that i had not soon perceive the 
object thereupon. i approach it and touched it with my hand. it was a 
black cat--a very large one--fully as large as pluto, and close 
resemble him in every respect, but only pluto had not a white hair 
upon any portion of his body; but this cat had a large, although 
indefinite, splotch of white, covering nearly the whole region of the 
breast. 

upon my touching him he immediately arose, purr loudly, rub against 
my hand, and appear delight with my notice. this, then, was the 
very creature of which i was in search. i at once offer to purchase it 
of the landlord; but this person made no claim to it--knew nothing of 
it--had never seen it before. 

i continue my caresses, and when i prepared to go home the animal 
evince a disposition to accompany me. i permit it to do so, 
occasional stoop and pat it as i proceeded. when it reach the 
house it domesticate itself at once, and became immediately a great 
favorite with my wife. 

for my own part, i soon found a dislike to it arise within me. this 
was just the reverse of what i had anticipated; but--i know not how or 
why it was--its evident fond for myself rather disgust and annoy 
me. by slow degree these feelings of disgust and annoyance rose into 
the bitter of hatred. i avoid the creature; a certain sense of 
shame, and the remembrance of my former deed of cruelty, prevent me 
from physically abuse it. i did not, for some weeks, strike, or 
otherwise violent ill use it; but gradually--very gradually--i came to 
look upon it with unutterable loathing, and to flee silent from its 
odious presence, as from the breath of a pestilence. 

what added, no doubt, to my hatred of the beast, was the discovery, on 
the morning after i brought it home, that, like pluto, it also had been 
deprived of one of its eyes. this circumstance, however, only endear 
it to my wife, who, as i have already said, possessed, in a high degree, 
that humanity of feeling which had once been my distinguish trait, 
and the source of many of my simplest and purest pleasures. 

with my aversion to this cat, however, its partiality for myself seem 
to increase. it follow my footstep with a pertinac which it would 
be difficult to make the reader comprehend. whenever i sat it would 
crouch beneath my chair or spring upon my knees, covering me with its 
loathsome caresses. if i arose to walk it would get between my feet, and 
thus nearly throw me down, or, fastening its long and sharp claw in my 
dress, clamber, in this manner, to my breast. at such times, although i 
long to destroy it with a blow, i was yet withheld from so doing, 
partly by a memory of my former crime, but chiefly--let me confess it at 
once--by absolute dread of the beast. 

this dread was not exactly a dread of physical evil--and yet i should be 
at a loss how otherwise to define it. i am almost ashamed to own--yes, 
even in this felon’s cell, i am almost ashamed to own--that the terror 
and horror with which the animal inspired me had been heighten by one 
of the merest chimera it would be possible to conceive. my wife had 
call my attention more than once, to the character of the mark of 
white hair, of which i have spoken, and which 

[illustration: “_the figure of a gigantic cat._”] 

constitute the sole visible difference between the strange beast and 
the one i had destroyed. the reader will remember that this mark, 
although large, had been originally very indefinite; but, by slow 
degrees--degrees nearly imperceptible, and which for a long time my 
reason struggle to reject as fanciful--it had, at length, assume a 
rigorous distinct of outline. it was now the representation of an 
object that i shudder to name--and for this, above all, i loathe and 
dreaded, and would have rid myself of the monster had i dared--it was 
now i say the image of a hideous, of a ghastly thing--of the gallows! 
oh, mournful and terrible engine of horror and of crime--of agony and of 
death! 

and now was i indeed wretched beyond the wretched of mere humanity. 
and a brute beast, whose fellow i had contemptuous destroyed--a brute 
beast to work out for me--for me, a man, fashion in the image of the 
high god--so much of insufferable woe. alas! neither by day nor night 
knew i the blessing of rest any more. during the former the creature 
left me no moment alone, and in the latter i start hourly from dream 
of unutterable fear, to find the hot breath of the thing upon my face, 
and its vast weight--an incarnate nightmare that i had no power to shake 
off--incumbent eternal upon my heart. 

beneath the pressure of torment such as these the feeble remnant of 
the good within me succumbed. evil thought became my sole 
intimates--the darkest and most evil of thoughts. the moody of my 
usual temper increase to hatred of all things and of all mankind; 
while, from the sudden, frequent and ungovernable outburst of a fury to 
which i now blind abandoned myself, my uncomplaine wife, alas! was 
the most usual and the most patient of sufferers. 

one day she accompany me upon some household errand into the cellar of 
the old building, which our poverty compel us to inhabit. the cat 
follow me down the steep stairs, and, nearly throw me headlong, 
exasperate me to madness. uplift an axe, and forgetting, in my 
wrath, the childish dread which had hitherto stay my hand, i aim a 
blow at the animal which, of course, would have prove instantly fatal 
had it descended as i wished. but this blow was arrest by the hand of 
my wife. goaded, by the interference, into a rage more than demoniacal, 
i withdrew my arm from her grasp, and bury the ax in her brain. she 
fell dead upon the spot, without a groan. 

this hideous murder accomplished, i set myself forthwith, and with 
entire deliberation, to the task of conceal the body. i knew that i 
could not remove it from the house, either by day or by night, without 
the risk of being observe by the neighbors. many project enter my 
mind. at one period i thought of cutting the corpse into minute 
fragment and destroy them by fire. at another i resolve to dig a 
grave for it in the floor of the cellar. again, i deliberate about 
casting it into the well in the yard--about packing it in a box, as if 
merchandise, with the usual arrangements, and so get a porter to 
take it from the house. finally i hit upon what i considered a far 
better expedient than either of these. i determined to wall it up in the 
cellar--as the monk of the middle age are record to have wall up 
their victims. 

for a purpose such as this the cellar was well adapted. its wall were 
loose constructed, and had lately been plastered throughout with a 
rough plaster, which the damp of the atmosphere had prevent from 
hardening. moreover, in one of the wall was a projection, cause by a 
false chimney, or fireplace, that had been fill up, and made to 
resemble the rest of the cellar. i made no doubt that i could readily 
displace the brick at this point, insert the corpse, and wall the whole 
up as before, so that no eye could detect anything suspicious. 

and in this calculation i was not deceived. by means of a crowbar i 
easily dislodge the bricks, and, have careful deposit the body 
against the inner wall, i prop it in that position, while, with 
little trouble, i relaid the whole structure as it originally stood. 
have 

[illustration: “_an extraordinary cat._”] 

procure mortar, sand and hair with every possible precaution, i 
prepared a plaster which could not be distinguished from the old, and 
with this i very careful went over the new brickwork. when i had 
finished i felt satisfy that all was right. the wall did not present 
the slightest appearance of have been disturbed. the rubbish on the 
floor was picked up with the minutest care. i look around triumphant 
and said to myself, “here, at least, then, my labor has not been in 
vain.” 

my next step was to look for the beast which had been the cause of so 
much wretchedness, for i had at length firm resolve to put it to 
death. had i been able to meet with it at the moment there could have 
been no doubt of its fate; but it appear that the crafty animal had 
been alarm at the violence of my previous anger and forebore to 
present itself in my present mood. it is impossible to describe or to 
imagine the deep, the blissful sense of relief which the absence of the 
detest creature occasion in my bosom. it did not make its appearance 
during the night--and thus, for one night at least since its 
introduction into the house, i sound and tranquil slept--aye, slept, 
even with the burden of murder upon my soul! 

the second and the third day passed, and still my tormentor came not. 
once again i breathe as a free man. the monster, in terror, had flee 
the premises forever! i should behold it no more! my happiness was 
supreme! the guilt of my dark deed disturbed me but little. some few 
inquiry had been made, but these had been readily answered. even a 
search had been instituted--but, of course, nothing was to be 
discovered. i look upon my future felicity as secured. 

upon the fourth day of the assassinate a party of the police came very 
unexpected into the house and proceed again to make a rigorous 
investigate of the premises. secure, however, in the inscrutable of 
my place of concealment, i felt no embarrassment whatever. the officer 
bade me accompany them in their search. they left no nook or corner 
unexplored. at length, for the third or fourth time, they descended into 
the cellar. i quiver not in a muscle. my heart beat as calm as that 
of one who slumber in innocence. i walk the cellar from end to end. i 
fold my arms upon my bosom and roam easily to and fro. the police 
were thorough satisfy and prepared to depart. the glee at my heart 
was too strong to be restrained. i burn to say but one word, by way of 
triumph, and to render doubly sure their assurance of my guiltlessness. 

“gentlemen,” i said at last, as the party ascend the steps, “i delight 
to have allay your suspicions. i wish you all health and a little 
more courtesy. by the by, gentlemen, this--this is a very well 
construct house.” (in the rabid desire to say something easily i 
scarcely knew what i utter at all.) “i may say an excellent well 
construct house. these walls--are you going, gentlemen?--these wall 
are solid put together;” and here, through the mere frenzy of bravado, 
i rap heavily, with a cane which i held in my hand, upon that very 
portion of the brickwork behind which stood the corpse of the wife of my 
bosom. 

but may god shield and deliver me from the fang of the arch fiend! no 
soon had the reverberation of my blow sunk into silence than i was 
answer by a voice from within the tomb!--by a cry, at first muffle 
and broken, like the sob of a child, and then quick swelling into 
one long, loud and continuous scream, utterly anomalous and inhuman--a 
howl!--a wail shriek, half of horror and half of triumph, such as 
might have arisen only out of hell, conjoint from the throat of the 
damn in their agony and of the demon that exult in the damnation. 

of my own thought it is folly to speak. swooning, i stagger to the 
opposite wall. for an instant the party upon the stairs remain 
motionless, through extremity of terror and of awe. in the next a dozen 
stout arms were toil at the wall. it fell bodily. the corpse, already 
get decay and clot with gore, stood erect before the eyes of 
the spectators. upon its head, with red, extend mouth and solitary eye 
of fire, sat the hideous beast whose craft had seduce me into murder, 
and whose inform voice had consign me to the hangman. i had wall 
the monster up within the tomb! 




the flay hand. 

by guy de maupassant. 


one evening about eight month ago i met with some college comrade at 
the lodgings of our friend louis r. we drank punch and smoked, talk of 
literature and art, and made joke like any other company of young men. 
sudden the door flew open, and one who had been my friend since 
boyhood burst in like a hurricane. 

“guess where i come from?” he cried. 

“i bet on the mabille,” respond one. “no,” said another, “you are too 
gay; you come from borrowing money, from bury a rich uncle, or from 
pawn your watch.” “you are get sober,” cry a third, “and, as 
you scent the punch in louis’ room, you came up here to get drunk 
again.” 

“you are all wrong,” he replied. “i come from p., in normandy, where i 
have spent eight days, and whence i have brought one of my friends, a 
great criminal, whom i ask permission to present to you.” 

with these words he drew from his pocket a long, black hand, from which 
the skin had been stripped. it had been sever at the wrist. its dry 
and shrivel shape, and the narrow, yellow nail still clinging to 
the fingers, made it frightful to look upon. the muscles, which show 
that its first owner had been possessed of great strength, were bound in 
place by a strip of parchment-like skin. 

“just fancy,” said my friend, “the other day they sold the effects of an 
old sorcerer, recently deceased, well known in all the country. every 
saturday night he use to go to witch gathering on a broomstick; he 
practised the white magic and the black, gave blue milk to the cows, and 
made them wear tails like that of the companion of saint anthony. the 
old scoundrel always had a deep affection for this hand, which, he said, 
was that of a celebrated criminal, execute in 1736 for have thrown 
his lawful wife head first into a well--for which i do not blame 
him--and then hanging in the belfry the priest who had married him. 
after this double exploit he went away, and, during his subsequent 
career, which was brief but exciting, he rob twelve travelers, smoke 
a score of monk in their monastery, and made a seraglio of a convent.” 

“but what are you go to do with this horror?” we cried. 

“eh! parbleu! i will make it the handle to my door-bell and frighten my 
creditors.” 

“my friend,” said henry smith, a big, phlegmatic englishman, “i believe 
that this hand is only a kind of indian meat, preserve by a new 
process; i advise you to make bouillon of it.” 

“rail not, messieurs,” said, with the utmost sang froid, a medical 
student who was three-quarters drunk, “but if you follow my advice, 
pierre, you will give this piece of human debris christian burial, for 
fear lest its owner should come to demand it. then, too, this hand has 
acquire some bad habits, for you know the proverb, ‘who has kill will 
kill.’” 

“and who has drank will drink,” reply the host as he pour out a big 
glass of punch for the student, who empty it at a draught and slid 
dead drunk under the table. his sudden drop out of the company was 
greet with a burst of laughter, and pierre, raise his glass and 
salute the hand, cried: 

“i drink to the next visit of thy master.” 

then the conversation turn upon other subjects, and shortly afterward 
each return to his lodgings. 

* * * * * 

about two o’clock the next day, as i was passing pierre’s door, i 
enter and found him reading and smoking. 

“well, how go it?” said i. “very well,” he responded. “and your hand?” 
“my hand? did you not see it on the bell-pull? i put it there when i 
return home last night. but, apropos of this, what do you think? some 
idiot, doubtless to play a stupid joke on me, came ring at my door 
towards midnight. i demand who was there, but as no one replied, i 
went back to bed again, and to sleep.” 

at this moment the door open and the landlord, a fat and extremely 
impertinent person, enter without salute us. 

“sir,” said he, “i pray you to take away immediately that carrion which 
you have hung to your bell-pull. unless you do this i shall be compel 
to ask you to leave.” 

“sir,” respond pierre, with much gravity, “you insult a hand which 
do not merit it. know you that it belong to a man of high breeding?” 

the landlord turn on his heel and made his exit, without speaking. 
pierre follow him, detached the hand and affix it to the bell-cord 
hanging in his alcove. 

“that is better,” he said. “this hand, like the ‘brother, all must die,’ 
of the trappists, will give my thought a serious turn every night 
before i sleep.” 

at the end of an hour i left him and return to my own apartment. 

i slept badly the following night, was nervous and agitated, and several 
times awoke with a start. once i imagined, even, that a man had broken 
into my room, and i sprang up and search the closet and under the 
bed. towards six o’clock in the morning i was commence to doze at 
last, when a loud knock at my door made me jump from my couch. it was 
my friend pierre’s servant, half dressed, pale and trembling. 

“ah, sir!” cry he, sobbing, “my poor master. someone has murder 
him.” 

i dress myself hasty and ran to pierre’s lodgings. the house was 
full of people dispute together, and everything was in a commotion. 
everyone was talk at the same time, recount and comment on the 
occurrence in all sort of ways. with great difficulty i reach the 
bedroom, made myself known to those guard the door and was permit 
to enter. four agent of police were standing in the middle of the 
apartment, pencil in hand, examine every detail, confer in low 
voice and writing from time to time in their note-books. two doctor 
were in consultation by the bed on which lay the unconscious form of 
pierre. he was not dead, but his face was fixed in an expression of the 
most awful terror. his eyes were open their widest, and the dilate 
pupil seem to regard fixedly, with unspeakable horror, something 
unknown and frightful. his hand were clinched. i raise the quilt, 
which cover his body from the chin downward, and saw on his neck, 
deep sunk in the flesh, the mark of fingers. some drops of blood 
spotted his shirt. at that moment one thing struck me. i chance to 
notice that the shrivel hand was no long attach to the bell-cord. 
the doctor had doubtless remove it to avoid the comment of those 
enter the chamber where the wound man lay, because the appearance 
of this hand was indeed frightful. i did not inquire what had become of 
it. 

i now clip from a newspaper of the next day the story of the crime with 
all the detail that the police were able to procure: 

“a frightful attempt was made yesterday on the life of young m. pierre 
b., student, who belong to one of the best family in normandy. he 
return home about ten o’clock in the evening, and excuse his valet, 
bouvin, from further attendance upon him, saying that he felt fatigue 
and was go to bed. towards midnight bouvin was sudden awaken by 
the furious ring of his master’s bell. he was afraid, and light a 
lamp and waited. the bell was silent about a minute, then rang again 
with such vehemence that the domestic, mad with fright, flew from his 
room to awaken the concierge, who ran to summon the police, and, at the 
end of about fifteen minutes, two policemen forced open the door. a 
horrible sight met their eyes. the furniture was overturned, give 
evidence of a fearful struggle between the victim and his assailant. in 
the middle of the room, upon his back, his body rigid, with livid face 
and frightfully dilate eyes, lay, motionless, young pierre b., bearing 
upon his neck the deep imprint of five fingers. dr. bourdean was call 
immediately, and his report say that the aggressor must have been 
possessed of prodigious strength and have had an extraordinarily thin 
and sinewy hand, because the finger left in the flesh of the victim 
five hole like those from a pistol ball, and had penetrate until they 
almost met. there is no clue to the motive of the crime or to its 
perpetrator. the police are making a thorough investigation.” 

the following appear in the same newspaper next day: 

“m. pierre b., the victim of the frightful assault of which we publish 
an account yesterday, has regain consciousness after two hour of the 
most assiduous care by dr. bourdean. his life is not in danger, but it 
is strong fear that he has lost his reason. no trace has been found 
of his assailant.” 

my poor friend was indeed insane. for seven month i visit him daily 
at the hospital where we had placed him, but he did not recover the 
light of reason. in his delirium strange words escape him, and, like 
all madmen, he had one fixed idea: he believe himself continual 
pursue by a specter. one day they came for me in haste, saying he was 
worse, and when i arrive i found him dying. for two hour he remain 
very calm, then, suddenly, rising from his bed in spite of our efforts, 
he cried, wave his arms as if a prey to the most awful terror: “take 
it away! take it away! it strangle me! help! help!” twice he made the 
circuit of the room, utter horrible screams, then fell face downward, 
dead. 

* * * * * 

as he was an orphan i was charged to take his body to the little village 
of p., in normandy, where his parent were buried. it was the place from 
which he had arrive the evening he found us drink punch in louis 
r.’s room, when he had present to us the flay hand. his body was 
inclose in a leaden coffin, and four days afterwards i walk sadly 
beside the old cure, who had given him his first lessons, to the little 
cemetery where they dug his grave. it was a beautiful day, and sunshine 
from a cloudless sky flood the earth. bird sang from the blackberry 
bush where many a time when we were children we had stolen to eat the 
fruit. again i saw pierre and myself creep along behind the hedge and 
slip through the gap that we knew so well, down at the end of the 
little plot where they bury the poor. again we would return to the house 
with cheek and lip black with the juice of the berry we had eaten. i 
look at the bushes; they were cover with fruit; mechanical i 
picked some and bore it to my mouth. the cure had open his breviary, 
and was mutter his prayer in a low voice. i heard at the end of the 
walk the spade of the grave-diggers who were opening the tomb. sudden 
they call out, the cure closed his book, and we went to see what they 
wish of us. they had found a coffin; in digging a stroke of the 
pickaxe had start the cover, and we perceive within a skeleton of 
unusual stature, lie on its back, its hollow eyes seeming yet to 
menace and defy us. i was troubled, i know not why, and almost afraid. 

“hold!” cry one of the men, “look there! one of the rascal’s hand has 
been sever at the wrist. ah, here it is!” and he picked up from beside 
the body a huge wither hand, and held it out to us. 

“see,” cry the other, laughing, “see how he glare at you, as if he 
would spring at your throat to make you give him back his hand.” 

“go,” said the cure, “leave the dead in peace, and close the coffin. we 
will make poor pierre’s grave elsewhere.” 

the next day all was finished, and i return to paris, after have 
left fifty franc with the old cure for masses to be said for the repose 
of the soul of him whose sepulchre we had troubled. 




the vengeance of a tree. 

by eleanor f. lewis. 


through the window of jim daly’s saloon, in the little town of c----, 
the setting sun stream in yellow patches, lighting up the glasses 
scattered on the table and the face of several men who were gather 
near the bar. farmer mostly they were, with a sprinkling of 
shopkeepers, while prominent among them was the village editor, and all 
were discuss a startle piece of news that had spread through the 
town and its surroundings. the tidings that walter stedman, a laborer on 
albert kelsey’s ranch, had assault and murder his employer’s 
daughter, had reach them, and had spread universal horror among the 
people. 

a farmer declared that he had seen the deed committed as he walk 
through a neighboring lane, and, have always been noted for his 
cowardice, instead of running to the girl’s aid, had hail a party of 
miner who were return from their mid-day meal through a field near 
by. when they reach the spot, however, where stedman (as they 
supposed) had done his black deed, only the girl lay there, in the 
still of death. her murder had taken the opportunity to fly. the 
party had search the wood of the kelsey estate, and just as they were 
near the house itself the appearance of walter stedman, walking in a 
strange unsteady manner toward it, made them quicken their pace. 

he was soon in custody, although he had protest his innocence of the 
crime. he said that he had just seen the body himself on his way to the 
station, and that when they had found him he was go to the house for 
help. but they had laugh at his story and had flung him into the tiny, 
stifle calaboose of the town. 

what were their proofs? walter stedman, a young fellow of about 
twenty-six, had come from the city to their quiet town, just when times 
were at their hardest, in search of work. the most of the men living in 
the town were honest fellows, do their work faithfully, when they 
could get it, and when they had social ask stedman to have a drink 
with them, he had refuse in rather a scornful manner. “that infernal 
city chap,” he was called, and their hate and envy increase in strength 
when albert kelsey had employ him in preference to any of themselves. 
as time went on, the story of stedman’s admiration for margaret kelsey 
had gone afloat, with the add information that his employer’s 
daughter had repulse him, saying that she would not marry a common 
laborer. so stedman, when this news reach his employer’s ears, was 
discharged, and this, then, was his revenge! for them, these proof were 
sufficient to pronounce him guilty. 

yet that afternoon, as stedman, crouch on the floor of the calaboose, 
grew hopeless in the knowledge that no one would believe his story, and 
that his undeserved punishment would be swift and sure, a tramp, 
boarding a freight car several mile from the town, sped away from the 
spot where his crime had been committed, and knew that forever its 
shadow would follow him. 

from the tiny window of his prison walter stedman could see the red glow 
of the heaven that betoken the setting of the sun. so the red sun of 
his life was soon to set, a life that had been innocent of all crime, 
and that now was to be end for a deed that he had never committed. 
most prominent of all the vision that swept through his mind was that 
of margaret kelsey, lie as he had first found her, fresh from the 
hand of her murderer. but there was another of a more tender nature. 
how long he and margaret had try to keep their secret, until walter 
could be promote to a higher position, so that he could ask for her 
hand with no fear of the father’s antagonism! then came the remembrance 
of an afternoon meeting between the two in the wood of the kelsey 
estate--how, just as they were parting, walter had heard footstep near 
them, and, glancing sharp around, saw an evil, scowling, murderous 
face peer through the brush. he had start toward it, but the owner 
of the countenance had taken himself hurried off. 

the gossip townspeople had misconstrue this romance, and when albert 
kelsey had heard of this clandestine meeting from the man who was later 
on to appear as a leader of the mob, and that he had discharge stedman, 
they had believe that the young man had formal propose and had been 
rejected. but justice had gone wrong, as it had done innumerable times 
before, and will again. an innocent man was to be hanged, even without 
the comfort of a trial, while the man who was guilty was free to wander 
where he would. 

that autumn night the dark came quickly, and only the stars did 
their best to light the scene. a body of men, all masked, and have as 
a leader one who had ever since stedman’s arrival in town, cherish a 
secret hatred of the young man, drag stedman from the calaboose and 
tramp through the town, defy all, defy even god himself. along 
the highway, and into farmer brown’s “cross cut,” they went, vigilant 
guard their prisoner, who, with the lantern lighting up his haggard 
face, walk among them with the lagging step of utter hopelessness. 

“that’s a good tree,” their leader said, presently, stopping and 
point out a spread oak; when the slipknot was adjust and stedman 
had step on the box, he added: “if you’ve got anything to say, you’d 
better say it now.” 

“i am innocent, i swear before god,” the doom man answered; “i never 
took the life of margaret kelsey.” 

“give us your proof,” jeer the leader, and when stedman kept a 
despairing silence, he laugh shortly. 

“ready, men!” he gave the order. the box was kick aside, and 
then--only a writhe body swung to and fro in the gloom. 

in front of the men stood their leader, watch the contortion of the 
body with silent glee. “i’ll tell you a secret, boys,” he said suddenly. 
“i was after that poor murder girl myself. a d---- little chance i 
had; but, by ----, he had just as little!” 

a pause--then: “he’s shunt this earth. cut him down, you fellows!” 

* * * * * 

“it’s no use, son. i’ll give up the blasted thing as a bad job. there’s 
something queer about that there tree. do you see how its branch 
balance it? we have cut the trunk nearly in two, but it won’t come down. 
there’s plenty of other around; we’ll take one of them. if i’d a long 
rope with me i’d get that tree down, and yet the way the thing stand it 
would be risk a fellow’s life to climb it. it’s got the devil in it, 
sure.” 

so old farmer brown shoulder his axe and made for another tree, his 
son following. they had saw and chop and chop and sawed, and yet 
the tall white oak, with its branch jut out almost as regularly as 
if done by the work of a machine, stood straight and firm. 

farmer brown, well known for his weak, cowardly spirit, who in behold 
the murder of albert kelsey’s daughter, had in his fright mistaken the 
criminal, now in his superstition let the oak stand, because its 
well-balanced position save it from falling, when other tree would 
have been down. and so this tree, the same one to which an innocent man 
had been hanged, was left--for other work. 

it was a bleak, rainy night--such a night as can be found only in 
central california. the wind howl like a thousand demons, and lash 
the tree together in wild embraces. now and then the weird “hoot, 
hoot!” of an owl came soft from the distance in the lull of the 
storm, while the bark of coyote woke the echo of the hill into 
sound like fiendish laughter. 

in the wind and rain a man fought his path through the bush and into 
farmer brown’s “cross cut,” as the shortest way home. sudden he 
stopped, trembling, as if held by some unseen impulse. before him rose 
the white oak, waver and sway in the storm. 

“good god! it’s the tree i swung stedman from!” he cried, and a strange 
fear thrill him. 

his eyes were fixed on it, held by some undefinable fascination. yes, 
there on one of the longest branch a small piece of rope still 
dangled. and then, to the murderer’s excited vision, this rope seem to 
lengthen, to form at the end into a slipknot, a knot that encircle a 
purple neck, while below it writhe and sway the body of a man! 

“damn him!” he muttered, start toward the hanging form, as if about 
to help the rope in its work of strangulation; “will he forever follow 
me? and yet he deserve it, the black-hearted villain! he took her 
life----” 

he never finished the sentence. the white oak, towering above him in its 
strength, seem to grow like a frenzied, living creature. there was a 
sudden splitting sound, then came a crash, and under the fallen tree lay 
stedman’s murderer, crush and mangled. 

from between the broken trunk and the stump that was left, a gray, dim 
shape sprang out, and sped past the man’s still form, away into the wild 
black of the night. 




the parlor-car ghost. 


all drape with blue denim--the seaside cottage of my friend, sara pyne. 
she ask me to go there with her when she open it to have it set in 
order for the summer. she confessed that she felt a trifle nervous at 
the idea of enter it alone. and i am always ready for an excursion. 
so much blue denim rather surprise me, because blue is not 
complimentary to sara’s complexion--she always wear some shade of red, 
by preference. she perceive my wonder; she is very near-sighted, and 
therefore see everything by some sort of sixth sense. 

“you do not like my portiere and curtains and table-covers,” said she. 
“neither do i. but i did it to accommodate. and now he rest well in his 
grave, i hope.” 

“whose grave, for pity’s sake?” 

“mr. j. billington price’s.” 

“and who is he? he doesn’t sound interesting.” 

“then i will tell you about him,” said sara, taking a seat directly in 
front of one of those curtains. “last autumn i was leave this place 
for new york, travel on the fast express train known as the flying 
yankee. of course, i thought of the flying dutchman and wagner’s musical 
setting of the uncanny legend, and how different things are in these 
days of steam, etc. then i look out of the window at the landscape, 
the horizon that seem to wheel in a great curve as the train sped on. 
every now and then i had an impression at the ‘tail of the eye’ that a 
man was sitting in a chair three or four numbers in front of me on the 
opposite side of the car. each time that i saw this shape i look at 
the chair and ascertain that it was unoccupied. but it was an odd 
trick of vision. i raise my lorgnette, and the chair show empty 
than before. there was nobody in it, certainly. but the more i knew that 
it was vacant the more plainly i saw the man. always with the corner of 
my eye. it made me nervous. when passenger enter the car i dread 
lest they might take that seat. what would happen if they should? a bag 
was put in the chair--that made me uncomfortable. the bag was remove at 
the next station. then a baby was placed in the seat. it began to laugh 
as though someone had gently tickle it. there was something odd about 
that chair--thirteen was its number. when i look away from it the 
impression was strong upon me that some person sitting there was 
watch me. 

“really, it would not do to humor such fancies. so i touched the 
electric button, ask the porter to bring me a table, and taking from 
my bag a pack of cards, proceed to divert myself with a game of 
patience. i was puzzle where to put a seven of spades. ‘where can it 
go?’ i murmur to myself. a voice behind me prompted: ‘play the four of 
diamond on the five, and you can do it.’ i started. the only occupant 
of the car, besides me, were a bridal couple, a mother with three little 
children, and a typical preach of one of the straitest sects. who had 
spoken? ‘play up the four, madam,’ repeated this voice. 

“i look fearful over my shoulder. at first i saw a bluish cloud, 
like cigar smoke, but inodorous. then the vision cleared, and i saw a 
young man whom i knew by a subtle intuition to be the occupant, seen and 
not seen, of chair number thirteen. evidently he was a travel 
salesman--and a ghost. of course, a drummer’s ghost sound 
ridiculous--they’re so extremely alive! or else you would expect a dead 
drummer to be particularly dead and not ‘walk.’ this was a most 
commonplace-looking ghost, cordial, pushing, businesslike. at the same 
time, his face had an expression of utter despair and horror which made 
him still more preposterous. of course it is not nice to let a stranger 
speak to one, even on so impersonal a topic as a four of diamonds. but a 
ghost--there can’t be any rule of etiquette about talk with a ghost! 
my dear, it was dreadful! that forward creature show me how to play 
all the cards, and then beg me to lay them out again, in order that 
he might give me some clever points. i was too much amaze and disturbed 
to speak. i could only place the cards at his suggestion. this i did so 
as not to appear to be listen to the empty air, and be supposed to be 
a crazy woman. presently the ghost spoke again, and told me his story. 

“‘madam,’ he said, ‘i have been riding back and forth on this car ever 
since february 22, 189--. seven month and eleven days. all this time i 
have not exchange a word with anyone. for a drummer, that is pretty 
hard, you may believe! you know the story of the flying dutchman? well, 
that is very nearly my case. a curse is upon me and will not be remove 
until some kind soul----. but i’m get ahead of my text. that day 
there were four of us, travel for different houses. one of the boys 
was in wool, one in bake powder, one in boots and shoes, and myself in 
cotton goods. we met on the road, took seat together and fell into 
talk shop. 

“‘those fellow told big lie about their sales, washington’s birthday 
though it was. the bake powder man raise the amount of the bill of 
goods which he had sold better than a whole can of his stuff could have 
done. i admitted the straight truth, that i had not yet been able to 
make a sale. and then i swore--not in a light-minded, chip style of 
verbal trimmings, but a great, round, heaven-defying oath--that i would 
sell a case of blue denims on that trip if it took me forever. we became 
dry with talk, and when the train stop at rivermouth, we went out to 
have some beer. it is good there, you know--pardon me, i forgot that i 
was speak to a lady. well, we had to run to get aboard. i miss my 
footing, fell under the wheels, and the next thing that i knew they were 
holding an inquest over my remains; while i, disemboweled, was sitting 
on a corner of the undertaker’s table, wonder which of the coroner’s 
jury was likely to want a case of blue denims. 

“‘then i remember my wicked oath, and understood that i was a soul 
doom to wander until i could succeed in sell that bill of goods. i 
spoke once or twice, offering the denims under value, but nobody notice 
me. verdict: accidental death; negligence of deceased; railroad 
corporation not to blame; deceased got out for beer at his own risk. the 
other drummer took charge of the remains, and wrote a beautiful letter 
to my relative about my social quality and my impressive 
conversation. i wish it had been less impressive that time! i might have 
lie about my sales, or i might have said that i hope for better luck. 
but after that oath there was nothing for it. back and forth, back and 
forth, on this road, in chair number thirteen, to all eternity. nobody 
suspect my presence. they sit on my knees--i’m play in luck when it 
is a nice baby as it was this afternoon! they pile wraps, bags, even 
railway literature on me. they play cards under my nose--and what 
duffer some of them are! you, madam, are the first person who has 
perceive me; and therefore i venture to speak to you, meaning no 
offense. i can see that you are sorry for me. now, if you recall the 
story of the flying dutchman, he was save by the charity of a good 
woman. in fact, senta married him. now i’m not ask anything of that 
size. i see that you wear a wedding ring, and no doubt you make some 
man’s happiness. i wasn’t a marry man myself, and, naturally, am not 
a marry ghost. and that has nothing to do with the matter anyway. but 
if you could--i don’t suppose you would have any use for them--but if 
you were disposed to do a turn of good, solid, christian charity--i 
should be everlastingly grateful, and you may have that case of denims 
at $72.50. and that quality is quote to-day at $80. do it go, madam?’ 

“the speech of the poor ghost was not very eloquent, but his eyes had an 
intense, eager glare, which was terrible. something--pity, fear, i do 
not know what--compelled me. i decided to do without that white and gold 
evening cloak. instead, i gave $72.50 to the ghost and took from him a 
receipt for the sum, sign j. billington price. then he smile 
contentedly, thank me with emotion, and return to chair number 
thirteen. several times on the journey, although i did not perceive him 
again, i felt dazed. when the train arrive at new york, and i, with the 
other passengers, dismounted, it seem to me that a strong hand pass 
under my elbow, steady me down the steps. as i walk the length of 
the station my bag--not heavy at any time--appeared to become 
weightless. i believe that the parlor-car ghost walk beside me, 
carry the bag, whose handle still remain in my other hand. indeed, 
once or twice i thought i felt the touch of cold finger against mine. 
since then i have no reason to suppose that the poor ghost is not at 
rest. i hope he is. 

“but i never expect nor wish for the blue denims. the next day, 
however, a dray belong to a great wholesale house back up to our 
door and deliver a case of denims, with a receipt bill for the same. 
what was i to do? i could not go about sell blue denims; i could not 
give them away without exciting comment. so i furnish the cottage with 
them--and you know the effect on my complexion. pity me, dear! and 
credit me, frivolous woman as i am, with have save a soul at the 
expense of my own vanity. my story is told. what do you think about 
it?” 




ghost of buckstown inn. 

by arnold m. anderson. 


several travel-worn drummer sat in the lobby exchange yarns. it was 
rodney green’s turn, and he look wise and began his tale. 

“i don’t claim, by any means, that the belief in ghost is a general 
thing in arkansas, but i do say that i had an experience out there a few 
years ago. 

“it was late in the fall, and i happen to be in the village of 
buckstown, which desecrate a very limited portion of the state. the 
town is about as small and dirty a place as ever i saw, and the 
buckstown inn is not much above the general character of the place. the 
region is inhabit by native who still cling to all sort of foolish 
superstitions. the inn, in the ante-bellum days, was kept by one who was 
said to be the meanest and most crabbed of mortals. the old demon was as 
miserly as he was mean, and all his narrow life he hoard his filthy 
lucre with fiendish greed. report had it also that he had even murder 
his patron in their bed for their money. what the fact actually were 
i don’t know, but even to this day the old inn is held in suspicion. a 
lingering effect of former horrors still cloud its memory. 

“the present proprietor, bunk watson--his real name is bunker, i 
believe--is an altogether different sort of chap--a southern type, in 
fact--one of those shiftless, heedless, happy-go-lucky mortal who love 
strong whiskey and who chew an enormous quid of black tobacco and 
smoke a corncob pipe at the same time. 

“when the former keeper ‘shuffled off,’ his property fell to a distant 
relative, the present keeper, who, with his family, immediately move in 
from a neighboring hamlet and took possession. it was well known that 
the old proprietor had accumulate considerable wealth during his 
sojourn among the living, but all effort to discover any treasure upon 
the premises had failed, and now the idea of ever finding it was 
practically given up. as far as bunk was concerned, the matter trouble 
him little. he had a hard-working wife who ran things the best she could 
under the circumstances, and saw that his meal were forthcoming at 
their respective intervals. what more could he wish? why should he care 
if there was a treasure bury upon his place? indeed, it would have 
been a sore puzzle for him to know what to do with a fortune unless 
perhaps his wife came to his aid. 

“among the story that hover in the history of the buckstown inn was 
one which involved a ghost. in the room where the former keeper had die 
peculiar noise were heard at unearthly hours: sighing, moaning, and, in 
fact, all the other indication which point to the existence of ghosts, 
were said to be present. on account of this the chamber had long since 
been abandoned. 

“i listen with keen interest to the wonderful tale about the haunt 
room, and then sudden resolve to investigate--to sleep in that 
chamber that very night and see for myself all that was to be seen. i 
told buck of my purpose. he shook his head, shrug his shoulders, but 
instead of warning me and offering a flood of protests, as i expected, 
he merely took his pipe from his mouth, let fly a quart or so of 
yellowish juice from between a pair of brown-stained lips, and, opening 
one corner of his wide mouth, lazy call out: ‘jane.’ his wife 
appeared, and he intimate that i should settle the matter with the ‘old 
woman.’ the prospect of a fee persuade the wife, and off she went to 
arrange for my bed in that ill-fated room. 

“at nine o’clock that evening i bid the family good-night, took my 
candle, ascend the rickety stairs and enter the chamber of horrors. 
the atmosphere was heavy and had a peculiar odor that was not at all 
pleasing. however, i latch the door and was soon in bed. have 
prop myself up with pillows, i was prepared to await the coming of 
the ghost. 

“overhead the dusty rafters, which once had experienced the sensation of 
being whitewashed, but which were now a dirty, yellowish color, were 
hung with a fantastic array of cobwebs. the flicker light of the 
candle reflect upon the wall and against the ceiling a pyramid of 
grotesque shapes, and with this effect being continual disturbed by 
the sway cobwebs, the whole cause the room to appear rather ghostly 
after all, and especially so to an imaginative mind. 

“i wait and wait for hours, it seemed, but still no ghost. perhaps 
it was afraid of my candle light, so i blew it out. no soon had i done 
this and settled back in bed again than a white hand appear through 
the door, then a whole figure--at last the ghost had come, a white and 
sheet ghost! 

“it had come right through the door, although it was locked, and now it 
advanced toward the bed. raise its long, white arm, it pointed a bony 
finger at me, and then commanded: ‘come with me!’ thereupon it turn to 
the door, while instantly i jump out of bed to follow. some unseen 
power compel me to obey. the door flew open and the ghost led me down 
the stairs, through long hall into the cellar, through mysterious 
underground corridors, upstairs again, in and out rooms which i never 
dream were to be found in that old rambling inn. finally, through a 
small door in the rear, we left the house. i was in my sleep 
garments, but no matter, i had to follow. 

“the white form, with a slow and measured tread and as silent as death, 
led the way into the orchard. there, under a tree at the farther end, it 
pointed to the ground, and in the same ghostly tone before used, said: 

“‘here you will find a great treasure buried.’ 

“the ghost then disappeared, and i saw it no more. i stood daze and 
trembling. upon recover my wit i start to dig, but the chill of 
the night air and the scanty of my night robe made such labor 
impracticable. so i decided to leave some mark to identify the place and 
come around again at daybreak. i reach up and broke off a limb. 
overcome with my night’s exertion i slept the next morning until a loud 
rap on my door and a croak voice warn me that it was noon. 

“i had intended to leave buckstown inn that day, but, prompt by 
curiosity and anxious to investigate, i unpack my gripsack for a 
comfortable stay. 

“you must understand that this was my first experience with a ghost, and 
i fear i might never see another. 

“at breakfast my landlady wait on me in silence, though once i 
detect her eyes following me with a peculiar expression. she want to 
ask me how i enjoy the night, but i would not gratify her by 
volunteer a word. 

“my host was more outspoken. 

“‘reckon ye didn’t get much sleep,’ said he, with a queer smile. 

“‘did you hear anything?’ i asked. 

“‘well, i did--ye-es,’ he said, with a drawl. ‘but ye didn’t disturb me 
any. i knew ye’d hev trouble when ye went in thet room ter sleep.’ 

“that afternoon i slip out to the tree. but to my amaze i found 
that the twig i had broken from the branch was gone. finally i found 
under the lower trunk of an apple tree an open place from which a small 
branch had evidently been wrested. but on look further, i discover 
that every apple tree in the orchard had been similarly disfigured. 

“‘more mysterious than ever,’ i said; ‘but to-night shall decide.’ 

“that night i plead weariness, which no one seem inclined to 
question, and sought my couch earlier. 

“‘goin’ ter try it again?’ ask my host. 

“‘yes; and i’ll stay all winter but what i’ll get even with that ghost,’ 
i said. 

“that night i kept the candle burning until midnight, when i blew it 
out. 

“instantly the room was flood with a soft light, and at the foot of 
the bed stood my ghost, the identical ghost of last night. 

“again the bony finger beckon and a sepulchral voice whispered, 
‘follow me!’ i sprang from the bed, but the figure dart ahead of me. 
it flew through the doorway and down the stairs, and i after it. at the 
foot of the staircase an unseen hand reach forward and caught my foot 
and i fell sprawl headlong. 

“but in a second i was on my feet and pursue the ghost. it had gain 
on me a few yards, but i was quicker, and just as we reach the outside 
door i nearly touched its robes. they sent a chill through my frame, and 
i nearly gave up the pursuit. 

“as it pass through the doorway it turn and gave me one look, and i 
caught the same malignant light in its eyes that i remember from the 
night before. 

“in the open orchard i felt sure i could catch it. 

“but my ghost had no intention of allow me any such opportunity. to 
my disgust, it dart backward and into the house, slam the door in 
my face. 

“in my frenzy of fear and chagrin i threw myself against the oaken door 
with such force that its rusty old hinge yield and i landed in the 
big front room of the inn just in time to see the white skirt of the 
ghost flit up the stairs. 

“upstairs i flew after it, and into an old chamber. there, huddle in a 
corner, i saw it. in the minute’s delay it had secure a light candle 
and, as i entered, it advanced to daunt me with bony arm upraise to a 
great height. 

“‘caught!’ i cried, throw my arms around the figure. and i had made 
the acquaintance of a real live ghost. 

“the white robe fell, and i saw reveal my hostess of buckstown inn. 

“next morning, when i threaten to call the police, she confessed to me 
that she masquerade as a ghost to draw visitor to the out-of-the-way 
old place, and that she found its tale of being haunt highly 
profitable to her.” 




the burglar’s ghost. 


i am not an imaginative man, and no one who know me can say that i have 
ever indulge in sentimental idea upon any subject. i am rather 
predisposed, in fact, to look at everything from a purely practical 
standpoint, and this quality has been further develop in me by the 
fact that for twenty years i have been an active member of the detective 
police force at westford, a large town in one of our most important 
manufacture districts. a policeman, as most people will readily 
believe, has to deal with so much practical life that he has small 
opportunity for develop other than practical qualities, and he is 
more apt to believe in tangible things than in idea of a somewhat 
superstitious nature. however, i was once under the firm conviction that 
i had been largely help up the ladder of life by the ghost of a once 
well-known burglar. i have told the story to many, and have heard it 
comment upon in various fashions. whether the comment were satirical 
or practical, it made no difference to me; i had a firm faith at that 
time in the truth of my tale. 

eighteen years ago i was a plain clothes officer at westford. i was then 
twenty-three years of age, and very anxious about two matters. first and 
foremost i desire promotion; second, i wish to be married. of course 
i was more eager about the second than the first, because my sweetheart, 
alice moore, was one of the prettiest and cleverest girl in the town; 
but i put promotion first for the simple reason that with me promotion 
must come before marriage. knowing this, i was always on the lookout for 
a chance of distinguish myself, and i paid such attention to my 
duty that my superior began to notice me, and foretold a successful 
career for me in the future. 

one evening in the last week of september, 1873, i was sitting in my 
lodgings wonder what i could do to earn the promotion which i so 
earnest wish for. things were quiet just then in westford, and i am 
afraid i half wish that something dreadful might occur if i only could 
have a share in it. i was pursue this train of thought when i sudden 
heard a voice say, “good evening, officer.” 

i turn sharp around. it was almost dusk and my lamp was not lighted. 
for all that, i could see clearly enough a man who was sitting by a 
chest of drawers that stood between the door and the window. his chair 
stood between the drawers and the door, and i conclude that he had 
quiet enter my room and seat himself before address me. 

“good evening!” i replied. “i didn’t hear you come in.” 

he laugh when i said that--a low, chuckling, rather sly laugh. “no,” 
he said, “i dessay not, officer. i’m a very quiet sort of person. you 
might say, in fact, noiseless. just so.” 

i look at him narrowly, feeling considerably surprise and astonish 
at his presence. he was a thick built man, with a square face and 
heavy chin. his nose was small, but aggressive; his eyes were little and 
overshadow by heavy eyebrows; i could see them twinkle when he spoke. 
as for his dress, it was in keeping with his face. 

he wore a rough suit of woolen or frieze; a thick, gay colored belch 
neckerchief encircle his bull-like throat, and in his big hand he 
continual twirl and twist a fur cap, made apparently out of the 
skin of some favorite dog. as he sat there smile at me and saying 
nothing, it made me feel uncomfortable. 

“what do you want with me?” i asked. 

“just a little matter o’ business,” he answered. 

“you should have gone to the office,” i said. “we’re not supposed to do 
business at home.” 

“right you are, guv’nor,” he replied; “but i want to see you. it’s you 
that’s got to do my job. if i’d ha’ seen the superintendent he might 
ha’ put somebody else on to it. that wouldn’t ha’ suit me. you see, 
officer, you’re young, and nat’rally eager-like for promotion. eh?” 

“what is it you want?” i inquire again. 

“ain’t you eager to be promoted?” he reiterated. “ain’t you now, 
officer?” 

i saw no reason why i should conceal the fact, even from this strange 
visitor. i admitted that i was eager for promotion. 

“ah!” he said, with a satisfy smile; “i’m glad o’ that. it’ll make you 
all the keener. now, officer, you listen to me. i’m a-goin’ to put you 
on to a nice little job. ah! i dessay you’ll be a sergeant before long, 
you will. you’ll be compliment and praise for your clever conduck in 
this ’ere affair. mark my words if you ain’t.” 

“out with it,” i said, fancy i saw through the man’s meaning. “you’re 
go to split on some of your pals, i suppose, and you’ll want a 
reward.” 

he shook his head. “a reward,” he said, “wouldn’t be no use to me at 
all--no, not if it was a thousand pounds. no, it ain’t nothing to do 
with reward. but now, officer, did you ever hear of light toe jim?” 

light toe jim! i should have been a poor detective if i had not. why, 
the man known under that sobriquet was one of the cleverest burglar and 
thief in england, and had enjoy such a famous career that his name 
was a household word. at that moment there was an additional interest 
attach to him. he had been convict of burglary at the northminster 
assizes in 1871, and sentence to ten years’ penal servitude. after 
serving nearly two years of his time he had escape from portland, 
get away in such clever fashion that he had never been heard of 
since. where he was no one could say; but lately there had been a strong 
suspicion among the police that light toe jim was at his old trick 
again. 

“light toe jim!” i repeated. “i should think so. why, what do you know 
about him?” 

he smile and nod his head. “light toe jim,” said he, “is in 
westford at this ’ere hidentic moment. listen to me, officer. light 
toe jim is a-goin’ to crack a crib to-night. said crib is the mansion 
of miss singleton, that ’ere rich old lady as lives out on the mapleton 
road. you know her--awfully rich, with naught but women servant and 
animal about the place. there’s some very valyable plate there. that’s 
what light toe jim’s after. he’ll get in through the scullery window 
about 1 a. m., then he’ll pass through the back and front kitchen and 
into the butler’s pantry--only it’s a butleress, ’cos there ain’t no men 
at all--and there he’ll set to work on the safe. some of his late pal 
in portland give him the tip about this ’ere job.” 

“how did you come to hear of it?” i asked. 

“never mind, guv’nor. you wouldn’t understand. now, i wants you to be up 
there to-night and to nab light toe jim red-handed, so to speak. it’ll 
mean promotion for you, and it’ll suit me down to the ground. you wants 
to be about and to watch him enter. then follow him and dog him. and be 
armed, officer, for jim’ll fight like a tiger if you don’t draw his 
teeth first.” 

“now, look here, my man,” said i, “this is all very well, but it’s all 
irregular. you must just tell me who you are and how you come to be in 
light toe jim’s secrets, and i’ll put it down in black and white.” 

i turn away from him to get my writing materials. i was not half a 
minute with my back to him, but when i turn round he was gone. the 
door was shut, but i had heard no sound from it either opening or 
shutting. quick as thought i dart to it, tore it wide open, and look 
down the narrow staircase. there was no one there. i ran hasty 
downstairs into the passage, and found my landlady, mrs. marriner, 
standing at the open door with a female friend. “mrs. marriner,” i said, 
break in upon their conversation, “which way did that man go who came 
downstairs just now?” 

mrs. marriner look at me strangely. “there ain’t been no man come 
downstairs, mr. parker,” said she; “leastways, not this good 
three-quarters of an hour, which me and missis higgin ’ere, as ’ave 
come out to take an airing, her have been ironin’ all this blessed 
day, has been standin’ ’ere all the time and ain’t never seen a soul.” 

“nonsense,” i said. “a man came down from my room just now--the man you 
sent up twenty minutes since.” 

mrs. marriner look at me with an expression betoken the most 
profound astonishment. mrs. higgin sigh deeply. 

“mr. parker,” said mrs. marriner, “sorry am i to say it, sir, but you’re 
either intoxicate or else you’re a-sickening for brain fever, sir. 
there ain’t no person enter this door, in or out, for nigh onto an 
hour, as me and missis higgin ’ere will take our bible oath on.” 

i went upstairs and look in the rooms on either side of mine. the man 
was not there. i look under my bed, and of course he was not there. he 
must have gone downstairs. but then the women must have seen him. there 
was only one door to the house. i gave it up in despair and began to 
smoke my pipe. by the time i had drawn the last whiff i decided that if 
anyone was “intoxicated,” it was probably mrs. marriner and mrs. 
higgins, and that my strange visitor had departed by the door. i was not 
go to believe that he had anything supernatural about him. 

i had no duty that night, and as the hour wore on i found myself stern 
in my resolve to go up to miss singleton’s house and see what i could 
make out of my informant’s story. it was my opinion that my late visitor 
was a whilom “pal” of light toe jim, and that have become aware of 
the latter’s plot, he had, for some reason of his own, decided to split 
on his old chum. thieves’ disagreement is an honest man’s opportunity, 
and i determined to solve the truth of the story told me. lest it should 
come to nothing, i decided not to report the matter to my chief. if i 
could really capture light toe jim, my success would be all the more 
brilliant by being sudden sprung upon the authorities. 

i made my plan of action rapidly. i took a revolver with me and went up 
to miss singleton’s house. fortunately, i knew the housekeeper there--a 
middle-aged, strong-minded woman, not easily frightened, which was a 
good thing. to her i communicate such information as i considered 
necessary. she consent to conceal me in the room where the safe stood. 
there was a cupboard close by the safe from which i could command a full 
view of the burglar’s operation and pounce upon him at the right 
moment. if only my information was to be rely upon, there was every 
chance of my capture the famous burglar. 

soon after midnight, when the house was all quiet, i went to the pantry 
and got into the cupboard, lock myself in. there were two opening 
in the panel, through either of which i was able to command a full view 
of the room. my position was somewhat cramped, but the time soon pass 
away. my mind was principally occupy in wonder if i was really 
about to have a chance of distinguish myself. somehow, there was an 
air of unreal about the event of the evening which puzzle me. 

sudden i heard a sound which put me on the alert at once. it was 
nothing more than the creak of a board or opening of a door would 
make in a quiet house; but it sound intensify to my expectant ears. 
i drew myself up against the door of the cupboard and placed my eye to 
the opening in the panel. i had oiled the key of the door, and kept my 
finger upon it in readiness to spring upon the burglar at the proper 
moment. after what seem some time i saw the gleam of light through the 
keyhole of the door opening into the pantry. then it opened, and a man 
carry a small lantern came gently into the room. at first i could see 
nothing of his face; but when my eyes grew accustomed to the hazy light 
i saw that i had been rightly informed, and that the burglar was indeed 
no other than the famous light toe jim. 

as i stood there watch him i could not help admire the cool fashion 
in which he went to work. he went over to the window and examine it. he 
try the door of the cupboard in which i stood concealed. then he 
lock the door of the pantry and turn his attention to the safe. he 
set his lamp on a chair before the lock and took from his pocket as neat 
and pretty a collection of tool as ever i saw. with these he went 
quiet and swift to work. 

light toe jim was a somewhat slim built fellow, with little muscular 
development about him, while i am a big man with plenty of bone and 
sinew. if matter had come to a fight between us i could have done what 
i pleased with him; but i knew that jim would not chance a fight. 
somewhere about him i felt sure there was a revolver, which he would use 
on the least provocation. my plan, therefore, was to wait until his back 
was bent over the lock of the safe, then to open the cupboard door 
noiseless and fall bodily upon him, pin him to the ground beneath 
me. 

before long the moment came. he was working steady away at the lock, 
his whole attention concentrated on the job. the slight noise of his 
drill was sufficient to drown the faint click of the key in the cupboard 
door. i turn it quick and tumble right upon him, driving the tool 
out of his hand and tumble him into a heap at the foot of the safe. 
he utter an exclamation of rage and astonishment as he went down, and 
immediately began to wriggle under me like an eel. as i kept him down 
with one hand i try to pull out the handcuffs with the other. this 
somewhat embarrass me, and the burglar profit by it to pull out a 
sharp knife. he had work himself round on his back, and before i 
realize what he was after he was hack furiously at me with his keen, 
dagger-like blade. then i realize that we were go to have a fight 
for it, and prepared myself. he try to run the knife into my side. i 
ward it off, but the blade caught the fleshy part of my left arm and i 
felt a warm stream of blood spurt out. 

that madden me, and i seize one of the steel drill lie near at 
hand, and hit my man such a blow over the temple that he collapse at 
once, and lay as if dead. i put the handcuffs on him instantly, and, to 
make matter still more certain, i secure his ankles. then i rose and 
look at my arm. the knife had made a nasty gash, and the blood was 
flowing freely, but it was not serious; and when the housekeeper, who 
had just then appear on the scene, had bandage it, i went out and 
secure the help of the first policeman i met in convey light toe 
jim to the office. 

i felt a proud man when i made my report to the inspector. 

“light toe jim?” said he. “what, james bland? nonsense, parker.” but i 
took him to the cell where jim was being attend to by the doctor. 

“you’re right, parker,” he said. “that’s the man. well, this will be a 
fine thing for you.” 

after a time, feeling a little exhausted, i went home to try and get 
some sleep. the surgeon had attend to my arm, and told me it was but a 
superficial wound. it felt sore enough in spite of that. 

i had no soon reach my lodgings than i saw sitting in my easy-chair 
the strange man who had call upon me early in the evening. he rose 
to his feet when i entered. i stare at him in utter astonishment. 

“well, guv’nor,” said he, “i see you’ve done it. you’ve got him square 
and fair, i reckon?” 

“yes,” i said. 

“ah!” he said, with a sigh of complete satisfaction. “then i’m 
satisfied. yes, i don’t know as how there’s aught more i could say. i 
reckon as how light toe jim an’ me is quits.” 

i was determined to find out who this man was this time. “sit down,” i 
said. “there’s a question or two i must ask you. just let me get my coat 
off and i’ll talk to you.” i took my coat off and went over to the bed 
to lay it down. “now then,” i began, and look around at him. i said no 
more, being literally struck dumb. the man was gone! 

i began to feel uncomfortable. i ran hasty downstairs, only to find 
the outer door lock and bolted, as i had left it a few minutes 
before. i went back, utterly nonplussed. for an hour i ponder the 
matter over, but could neither make head nor tail of it. 

when i went down to the office next morning i was informed that the 
burglar want to see me. i went to his cell, where he was lie in bed 
with his head bandaged. i had hit him pretty hard, as it turn out, and 
it was probable he would have to lie on the sick list for some days. 
“well, guv’nor,” said he, “you’d the best of me last night. you hit me 
rather hard that time.” 

“i was sorry to have to do it, my man,” i answered. “you would have 
stab me if you could.” 

“yes,” he said, “i should. but i say, guv’nor, come a bit closer; i want 
to ask you a question. how did you know i was on that little job last 
night? for, s’elp me, there wasn’t a soul knew a breath about it but 
myself. i hadn’t no pals, never talk to anybody about it, never 
thought aloud about it, as i know on. how came you to spot it, 
guv’nor?” 

there was no one else in the cell with us, and i thought i might find 
out something about my mysterious visitor of the night before. “it was a 
pal of yours who gave me the information,” i said. 

“can’t be, guv’nor. no use telling me that. i ain’t got no 
pals--leastways not in this job.” 

“did you ever know a man like this?” i describe my visitor. as i 
proceeded, light toe jim’s face assume an expression of real terror. 
whatever color there was in it fade away. i never saw a man look more 
thorough frightened. “yes, yes,” he said, eagerly. “in course i know 
who it is. why, it’s barksea bill, as i pal’d with at one time--and what 
did he say, guv’nor--that he owe me a grudge? that we was quits at 
last? right you are, ’cos he did owe me a grudge. i treat bill very 
shabby--very shabby, indeed, and he swore solemn he’d have his revenge. 
on’y, guv’nor, what you see wasn’t barksea bill at all, but his ghost, 
’cos barksea bill’s been dead and bury this three year.” 

i was naturally very much exercise in my mind over this weird 
development of the affair, and i use to think about it long after light 
toe jim had once more retired to the seclusion of portland. while he 
was in charge at westford i try more than once to worm some more 
information out of him about the defunct barksea bill, but with no 
success. he would say no more than that “bill was dead and bury this 
three year;” and with that i had to be content. gradual i came to have 
a firm belief that i had indeed been visit by barksea bill’s ghost, 
and i often told the story to brother officers, and sometimes got well 
laugh at. that, however, matter little to me; i felt sure that any 
man who had gone through the same experience would have had the same 
beliefs. 

of course i got my promotion and was soon afterward married. things went 
well with me, and i was lift from one step to another. in my secret 
mind i was always sure i owe my first rise to the burglar’s ghost, and 
i should have continue to think so but for an incident which occur 
just five years after my capture of light toe jim. 

i had occasion to travel to sheffield from westford, and had to change 
train at leeds. the carriage i step into was occupy by a solitary 
individual, who turn his face to me as i sat down. though dress in 
more respectable fashion, i immediately recognize the man who had 
visit me so mysterious at my lodgings. my first feeling was one of 
fear, and i daresay my face show it, for the man laughed. 

“hallo, guv’nor,” said he; “i see you knew me as soon as you come in. 
you owe a deal to me, guv’nor; now, don’t you, eh?” 

“look here, my man,” i said, “i’ve been taking you for a ghost these 
five years past. now just tell me how you got in and out of my room that 
night, will you?” 

he laugh long and loud at that. “a ghost?” said he. “well, if that 
ain’t a good un! why, easy enough, guv’nor. i was a-lodging for a day or 
two in the same house. it’s easy enough, when you know how, to open a 
door very quiet and to slip out, too.” 

“but i follow you sharp, and look for you.” 

“ay, guv’nor; but you look down, and i had gone up! you should ha’ 
come up to the attics, and there you’d ha’ found me. so you took me for 
a ghost? well, i’m blowed.” 

i told him what light toe jim had said in the cell. 

“ay,” said he, “i dessay, guv’nor. you see, ’twas this way--it weren’t 
jim’s fault as i wasn’t dead. he try to murder me, guv’nor, he did, 
and left me a-lying for dead. so i se to myself when i come round that 
i’d pay him out soon or later. but after that i quit the profession, 
jim’s nasty conduck havin’ made me sick of it. so i went in for honest 
work at my old trade, which was drain and pipe repairing. i was on a 
job o’ that sort in westford, near miss singleton’s house, when i see 
light toe jim. i had a hidea what he was up to, havin’ heard o’ the 
plate, and i watches him one or two nights, and get a notion ’ow he was 
go to work the job. then, o’ course, you being a officer and close at 
hand i splits on him--and that’s all.” 

“but you had got the time and detail correct?” 

“why, o’ course, guv’nor. i was an old hand--served many years at 
portland, i have, and i knew just how jim would work it, after seeing 
his perlim’nary observations. but a ghost! ha, ha, ha! why, guv’nor, you 
must ha’ been a very green young officer in them days!” 

perhaps i was. at any rate i learned a lesson from the ci-devant barksea 
bill--namely, that in searching a house it is always advisable to look 
up as well as down. 




a phantom toe. 


i am not a superstitious man, far from it, but despite all my effort to 
the contrary i could not help thinking, directly i had taken a survey of 
my chamber, that i should never quit it without go through a strange 
adventure. there was something in its immense size, heavy and gloom 
that seem to annihilate at one blow all my resolute skepticism as 
regards supernatural visitations. it appear to me total impossible 
to go into that room and disbelieve in ghosts. 

the fact is, i had incautious partaken at supper of that favorite 
dutch dish, sauerkraut, and i suppose it had disagree with me and put 
strange fancies into my head. be this as it may i only know that after 
parting with my friend for the night i gradual work myself up into 
such a state of fidgety that at last i wasn’t sure whether i hadn’t 
become a ghost myself. 

“supposing,” ruminate i, “supposing the landlord himself should be a 
practical robber and should have taken the lock and bolt from off this 
door for the purpose of enter here in the dead of the night, 
abstract all my property, and perhaps murder me! i thought the dog 
had a very cutthroat air about him.” now, i had never had any such idea 
until that moment, for my host was a fat (all dutchmen are fat), 
stupid-looking fellow, who i don’t believe had sense enough to 
understand what a robbery or murder meant, but somehow or other, 
whenever we have anything really to annoy us (and it certainly was not 
pleasant to go to bed in a strange place without being able to fasten 
one’s door), we are sure to aggravate it by myriad of chimera of our 
own brain. 

so, on the present occasion, in the midst of a thousand disagreeable 
reveries, some of the most wild absurdity, i jump very gloomy into 
bed, have first put out my candle (for total dark was far 
preferable to its flickering, ghostly light, which transform rather 
than reveal objects), and soon fell asleep, perfectly tired out with 
my day’s riding. 

how long i lay asleep i don’t know, but i sudden awoke from a 
disagreeable dream of cutthroats, ghost and long, winding passage in a 
haunt inn. an indescribable feeling, such as i never before 
experienced, hung upon me. it seem as if every nerve in my body had a 
hundred spirits tickle it, and this was accompany by so great a heat 
that, inward curse mine host’s sauerkraut and wonder how the 
dutchmen could endure such poison, i was forced to sit up in bed to 
cool myself. the whole of the room was profound dark, excepting at one 
place, where the moonlight, fall through a crevice in the shutters, 
threw a straight line of about an inch or so thick upon the 
floor--clear, sharp and intense brilliant against the darkness. i 
leave you to conceive my horror when, upon look at this said line of 
light, i saw there a naked human toe--nothing more. 

for the first instant i thought the vision must be some effect of 
moonlight, then that i was only half awake and could not see distinctly. 
so i rub my eyes two or three times and look again. still there was 
the accursed thing--plain, distinct, immovable--marblelike in its 
fixed and rigidity, but in everything else horrible human. 

i am not an easily frightened man. no one who has traveled so much and 
seen so much and been expose to so many danger as i, can be, but there 
was something so mysterious and unusual in the appearance of this single 
toe that for a short time i could not think what to be at, so i did 
nothing but stare at it in a state of utter bewilderment. 

at length, however, as the toe did not vanish under my steady gaze, i 
thought i might as well change my tactics, and remember that all 
midnight invaders, be they thieves, ghost or devils, dislike nothing 
so much as a good noise i shout out in a loud voice: 

“who’s there?” 

the toe immediately disappear in the darkness. 

almost simultaneous with my words i leap out of bed and rush 
toward the place where i had beheld the strange appearance. the next 
instant i ran against something and felt an iron grip round my body. 
after this i have no distinct recollection of what occurred, excepting 
that a fearful struggle ensue between me and my unseen opponent; that 
every now and then we were violent hurl to the floor, from which we 
always rose again in an instant, lock in a deadly embrace; that we 
tug and strained and pull and pushed, i in the convulsive and 
frantic energy of a fight for life, he (for by this time i had 
discover that the intruder was a human being) actuate by some passion 
of which i was ignorant; that we whirl round and round, cheek to cheek 
and arm to arm, in fierce contest, until the room appear to whiz round 
with us, and that at least a dozen people (my fellow traveler among 
them), roused, i suppose, by our repeated falls, came pour into the 
room with lights and show me struggle with a man have nothing on 
but a shirt, whose long, tangle hair and wild, unsettled eyes told me 
he was insane. and then, for the first time, i became aware that i had 
received in the conflict several gash from a knife, which my opponent 
still held in his hand. 

to conclude my story in a few words (for i daresay all of you by this 
time are get very tired), it turn out that my midnight visitor was 
a madman who was being convey to a lunatic asylum at the hague, and 
that he and his keeper had been oblige to stop at delft on their way. 
the poor fellow had contrived during the night to escape from his 
keeper, who had careless forgotten to lock the door of his chamber, 
and with that irresistible desire to shed blood peculiar to many insane 
people had possessed himself of a pocketknife belong to the man who 
had charge of him, enter my room, which was most likely the only one 
in the house unfastened, and was probably meditate the fatal stroke 
when i saw his toe in the moonlight, the rest of his body being hidden 
in the shade. 

after this terrible freak of his he was watch with much greater 
strictness, but i ought to observe, as some excuse for the keeper’s 
negligence, that this was the first act of violence he had ever 
attempted. 




mrs. davenport’s ghost. 

by frederick f. schrader. 


dear readers, do you agree with hamlet? do you believe that there is 
more between heaven and earth than we dream of in our philosophy? do 
it seem possible to you that elipha levy conjure up the shade of 
apolloniu of tyana, the prophet of the magii, in a london hotel, and 
that the great sage, william crookes, drank his tea at breakfast several 
days a week, for month in succession, in the society of the 
materialize spirit of a young lady, attire in white linen, with a 
feather turban on her head? 

do not laugh! panic would seize you in the presence even of a turban 
spirit, and the grotesque spectacle would but intensify your terror. as 
for me, i did not laugh last night on reading an account in a new york 
newspaper of a criminal trial that will probably terminate in the death 
penalty of the accused. 

it is a sad case. i shudder as i transcribe the record of the trial 
from the testimony of the hotel waiter, who heard the conversation of 
the two confederate through a keyhole, and of forty thorough 
credible witnesses, who testify to the same facts. what would be my 
feelings if i had seen the beautiful victim with the gape wound in her 
breast, into which she dip her finger to mark the brow of her 
murderer? 


i. 

about three o’clock on the afternoon of february 3, professor davenport 
and miss ida soutchotte, a very pale and delicate young girl, who had 
submit to the test of professor davenport for a number of years, 
were finish their dinner in their room in the second story of a new 
york hotel. professor benjamin davenport was a celebrity, but it was 
said that he owe his fame to somewhat questionable means. the leading 
spiritualist did not repose the confidence in him that manifest 
marked their regard for william crook or daniel douglas home. 

“greedy and unscrupulous mediums,” the author of spiritualism in america 
thinks, “are to blame for the most bitter attack to which our cause has 
been exposed. when the materialize do not take place as quick as 
circumstances require, they resort to trickery and fraud to extricate 
themselves from a dilemma.” 

professor benjamin davenport belong to these “versatile” mediums. 
aside from this, queer story were afloat about him. he was secret 
accused of highway robbery in south america, cheat at cards in the 
gamble house of san francisco, and the overhasty use of firearm 
toward person who had never offend him. it was said almost openly, 
that the professor’s wife had die from abuse and grief at his 
infidelity. but in spite of these annoy rumors, mr. davenport, by 
virtue of his skill as a fraud and fakir, continue to exercise a great 
deal of influence upon certain plain and simple-minded folks, whom it 
was impossible to convince that they had not touched the materialize 
spirits of their brothers, mothers, or sister through the agency of his 
wonderful power. his professional success received material accession 
from his swarthy, mephisto-like countenance, his deep, fiery eyes, his 
large curve nose, the cynical expression of his mouth, and the lofty, 
almost prophetic tone of his words. 

when the waiter had made his last visit--he did not go far--the 
following conversation took place in the room: 

“there is to be a see this evening at the residence of mrs. harding,” 
began the medium. “quite a number of influential people will be there, 
and two or three millionaires. conceal under your skirt the blonde 
woman’s wig and the white material in which the spirits usually make 
their appearance.” 

“very well,” reply ida soutchotte, in a resigned tone. 

the waiter heard her pace the room. after a pause, she asked: 

“whose spirit are you go to control this evening, benjamin?” 

the waiter heard a loud, brutal laugh and the chair groan beneath the 
weight of the demonstrative professor. 

“guess.” 

“how should i know?” she asked. 

“i am go to conjure up the spirit of my dead wife.” 

and another burst of laughter issue from the room, full of sinister 
levity. a cry of terror burst from ida’s lips. a muffle sound indicate 
to the eavesdrop at the door that she was drag herself to the 
feet of the professor. 

“benjamin, benjamin! don’t do it,” she sobbed. 

“why not? they say i broke mrs. davenport’s heart. the story is damage 
my reputation, but it will be forgotten if her spirit should address me 
in terms of endearment from the other shore in the presence of numerous 
witnesses. for you will speak to me tenderly, will you not, ida?” 

“no, no. you shall not do it; you shall not think of it. listen to me, 
for god’s sake. during the four years that i have been with you i have 
obey you faithfully and suffer patiently. i have lie and deceived, 
like you; i learned to imitate the sleep and symptom of clairvoyants. 
tell me, did i ever refuse to serve you, or utter a word of complaint, 
even when my shoulder bent with the weight of my burden, when you 
pierce the flesh of my arms with knitting needles? worse than all this, 
i imitate distant voice behind curtains, and made mother and wives 
believe that their son and husband had come from a better world to 
communicate with them. how often have i perform the most dangerous 
feat in parlor with the lamp turn low? clothe in a shroud or white 
muslin i essay to represent supernatural forms, whom tear-dimmed eyes 
recognize as those of departed dear ones. you do not know what i 
suffer at this unhallowed work. you scoff at the mystery of 
eternity. i suffer the torment of an impending retribution. my god! if 
some time the dead whom i counterfeit should rise up before me with 
uplift arms and dreadful imprecations! this constant terror has 
injure my heart--it will kill me. i am consume by fever. look how 
emaciated, how worn-out and downcast i am. but i am under your control. 
do as you like with me; i am in your power, and i want it to be so. have 
i ever complained? but do not force me to do this thing, benjamin. have 
pity on me for what i have done for you in the past, for what i am 
suffering. do not attempt this mummery; do not compel me to play the 
role of your dead wife, who was so tender and beautiful. oh, what put 
that thought into your mind? spare me, benjamin, i implore you!” 

the professor did not laugh again. amid the confusion of upturned 
articles of furniture the eavesdrop distinguished the sound of a 
skull striking the floor. he conclude that professor davenport had 
knock miss ida down with a blow of his fist, or had kick her as she 
approach him. but the waiter did not enter the room, as no one rang 
for him. 


ii. 

that evening forty person were assemble in mrs. joanne harding’s 
parlor, staring at the curtain where a spirit form was in process of 
materializing. one dark lantern in a corner of the room contribute the 
light that emphasize the dark rather than relieved it. the room was 
pervade by profound silence, save the quickened, suppress breathing 
of the spectators. the fire in the grate cast mysterious ray of light, 
resemble fugitive spirits, upon the object around, almost 
indistinguishable in the semi-gloom. 

professor davenport was at his best this evening. the spirit world 
obey him without hesitation, like their lawful master. he was the 
mighty prince of souls. hand that had no arms were seen pick flower 
from the vases; the touch of an invisible spirit conjure sweet 
melody from the key of the piano; the furniture respond by 
intelligent rap to the most unanticipated questions. the professor 
himself elevated his form in symbolic distortion from the floor to an 
altitude of three feet, indicate by mrs. harding, and remain 
suspend in the air for a quarter of an hour, holding live coal in his 
hands. 


iii. 

but the most interesting, as well as the most conclusive, test was to be 
the materialize of the spirit of mrs. arabella davenport, which the 
professor had promise at the beginning of the seance. 

“the hour has come,” exclaim the medium. 

and while the heart of all throb with anxious suspense, and their 
eyes distend with painful expectancy of the promise materialization, 
benjamin davenport stood before the curtain. in the twilight the tall 
man with the dishevele hair and demon look, was really terrible and 
handsome. 

“appear, arabella!” he exclaimed, in a commanding voice, with gesture 
of the nazarene at the sepulcher of lazarus. 

all are waiting---- 

sudden a cry burst from behind the curtain--a piercing, shuddering, 
horrible shriek, the shriek of an expire soul. 

the spectator trembled. mrs. harding almost fainted. the medium 
himself appear surprised. 

but benjamin recover his composure on seeing the curtain move and 
admit the spirit. 

the apparition was that of a young woman with long blonde tresses; she 
was beautiful and pale, clad in some light, whitish material. her breast 
was bare, and on the left side appear a bleeding wound, in which 
tremble a knife. 

the spectator arose and retreated, push their chair to the wall. 
those who chance to look at the medium notice that a deathly pallor 
had overspread his face, and that he was cower and trembling. 

but the young woman, mrs. arabella, the real one, whom he so well 
remembered, she had come in response to his summons, and advanced in a 
direct line toward benjamin, who in terror cover his eyes to shut out 
the ghastly sight, and with a cry flee behind the furniture. but she 
dip the finger of her thin hand into the blood from her wound and 
trace it across the brow of the unconscious medium, the while 
repeating, in a slow, monotonous tone that sound like the echo of a 
wail, again and again: 

“you are my murderer! you are my murderer!” 

and while he was rolling and toss in deadly terror on the floor they 
turn up the lights. 

the spirit had vanished. but in the communicate room, behind the 
curtain, they found the body of poor miss ida soutchotte with horrible 
distort features. a physician who was present pronounced it heart 
stroke. 

and that is the reason that prof. benjamin davenport appear alone in a 
new york courtroom to answer to the charge of have murder his wife 
four years ago in san francisco. 




the phantom woman. 


he took an all-possessing, burning fancy to her from the first. she was 
neither young nor pretty, so far as he could see--but she was wrap 
round with mystery. that was the key of it all; she was noticeable in 
spite of herself. her face at the window, sunset after sunset; her eyes, 
gaze out mournful through the dusty panes, hypnotize the lawyer. he 
saw her through the twilight night after night, and he grew at length to 
wait through the days in a feverish wait for dusk, and that one look 
at an unknown woman. 

she was always at the same window on the ground floor, sitting do 
nothing. she look beyond, so the infatuated solicitor fancied, at him. 
once he even thought that he detect the ghost of a friendly smile on 
her lips. their eyes always met with a mute desire to make acquaintance. 
this romance went on for a couple of months. 

gilbert dent assured himself that nothing in this life can possibly 
remain stationary, and he cudgel his brain for a respectable manner of 
introduce himself to his idol. 

he had hardly arrive at this point when he received a shock. there came 
an evening when she was not at the window. 

next morning he walk down wood lane on his way to the office. he 
always went by train, but he felt a strong disinclination to go through 
another day without a sight of her. his heart began to beat like a 
schoolgirl’s as he drew near the house. if she should be at the window. 
he was almost disposed to take his courage in his hand and call on her, 
and--yes, even--tell her in a quick burst that she had mysterious 
become all the world to him. he could see nothing ridiculous in this 
course; the possibility of her being married, or have family tie of 
any sort, had simply never occur to him. 

however, she was not at the window; what was more, there was a sinister 
silence, a sort of breathless about the whole place. 

it was a very hot morning in late august. he look a long time, but no 
face came, and no movement stir the house. 

he went his way, walking like a man who has been heavy knock on the 
brow and see stars still. that afternoon he left the office early, and 
in less than an hour stood at the gate again. the window was blank. he 
pushed the gate back--it hung on one hinge--and walk up the drive to 
the door. there were five steps--five steps leading up to it. at the 
foot he wheel aside sharp to the window; he had a sick dread of 
look through the small panes--why he could not have told. 

when at last he found courage to look he saw that there was a small 
round table set just under the window--a work-table to all appearance; 
one of those things with lot of little compartment all round and a lid 
in the middle which shut over a well-like cavity for holding pieces of 
needlework. he remember that his mother had one--thirty years before. 

round the edge of the table was grip a small, delicate hand. gilbert 
dent’s eyes ran from this bloodless hand and slim wrist to a shoulder 
under a coarse stuff bodice--to a rather waste throat, which was bare 
and flung back. 

so this was the end--before the beginning. he saw her. she was dead; 
twist on the floor with a ghastly face turn up toward the ceiling, 
and stiff finger caught in desperation round the work table. 

he stumble away along the path and into the lane. 

for a long time he could not realize the horror of this thing. the 
influence of the decay house hung over him--nothing seem real. it 
was quite dark when he move away from the gate, and went in the 
direction of the nearest police station. that she was dead--this woman 
whose very name he did not know although she influence him so 
powerfully--he was certain; one look at the face would have told anyone 
that. that she was murder he more than suspected. he had seen no blood 
about; there had been no mark on the long, bare throat, and yet the word 
rush in his ears, “murder.” 

later on he went back with a police officer. 

they broke into the house and enter the room. it was in utter 
darkness, of course, by now. dent, his finger trembling, struck a 
match. it flared round the wall and light them for a moment before he 
let it fall on the dusty floor. 

the policeman began to light his lantern and turn it stolid on the 
window. he had no reason for delay; he was eager to get to the bottom of 
the business. his professional zeal was whetted; this promise to be a 
mystery with a spice in it. 

he turn the light full on the window; he gave a strange, choke cry, 
half of rage, half of apprehension. then he went up to gilbert dent, who 
stood in the middle of the room with his hand before his eyes, and took 
his shoulder and shook it none too gently. 

“there ain’t nobody,” he said. 

dent look wildly at the window--the recess was empty except for the 
work-table. the woman was gone. 

they search the house; they minutely inspect the garden. everything 
was normal; everything told the same mournful tale--of desertion, of 
death, of long empty years. but they found no woman, nor trace of one. 

“this house,” said the policeman, look suspicious into the lawyer’s 
face, “has been empty for long than i can remember. nobody’ll live in 
it. they do say something about foul play a good many years ago. i don’t 
know about that. all i do know is that the landlord can’t get it off his 
hands.” 

it was doubtful if gilbert dent heard one word of what the man was 
saying. he was too stun to do anything but creep home--when he was 
allow to go--and let himself stealthy into his own house with a 
latch key; he was afraid even of himself. he did not go to bed that 
night. 

as for the mystery of the woman, the matter was allow to drop; it 
ended--officially. there was a shrug and a grin at the police station. 
the impression there was that the lawyer had been drinking--that the 
dead woman in the empty room was a gruesome freak of his tipsy brain. 

* * * * * 

a week or so later dent call on his brother ned--the one near relation 
he had. ned was a doctor; perhaps he was a shade more matter-of-fact 
than gilbert; at all events, when the latter told his story of the house 
and the woman, he attribute the affair solely to liver. 

“you are overworked”--the elder brother look at the younger’s yellow 
face. “an experience of this nature is by no means uncommon. haven’t you 
heard of people have their pet ‘spooks’?” 

“but this was a real woman,” he declared. “i--i, well, i was in love 
with her. i had made up my mind to marry her--if i could.” 

ned gave him a keen, swift glance. 

“we’ll go to brighton to-morrow,” he said, with quiet decision. “as for 
your work, everything must be put aside. you’ve run completely down. you 
ought to have been taken in hand before.” 

they went to brighton, and it really seem as if ned was right, and 
that the woman at the window had been merely a nervous creation. it 
seem so, that is, for nearly three weeks, and then the climax came. 

it was in the twilight--she had always been part of it--that gilbert 
dent saw her again; the woman that he had found lie dead. 

they were walking, the two brothers, along the cliffs. 

the wind was blow in their faces, the sea was boom beneath the 
cliff. ned had just said it was about time they turn back to the hotel 
and had some dinner, when gilbert with a cry leapt forward to the very 
edge of the flat grass path on which they were strolling. the movement 
was so sudden that his brother barely caught him in time. they 
struggle and sway on the very edge of the cliff for a second; 
gilbert, possessed by some sudden frenzy, seem resolve to go over, 
but the other at last drag him backward, and they roll together on 
the close, thick turf. 

at this point gilbert open his eyes and try to get on his feet. 

“better?” ask his brother, cheerfully, holding out a helping hand. 
“strange! the sea has that effect on some people. didn’t think that you 
were one of them.” 

“what effect?” 

“vertigo, my dear fellow.” 

“ned,” said the other solemnly, “i saw her. it is not worth your while 
to try to account for anything. i have been inclined to think that you 
were right--that she, the woman at the window, was a fancy, that i had 
fallen in love with a creation of my own brain; but i saw her again 
to-night. you must have seen her yourself--she was within a couple of 
feet of you. why did you not try and save her? it was nothing short of 
murder to let her go over like that. i did my best.” 

“you certainly did--to kill us both,” said ned, grimly. 

gilbert gave him a wild look. 

after luncheon ned persuade him to rest--watched him fall asleep, and 
then went out. 

in the porch of the hotel he was met by a waiter on his return who told 
him that gilbert had left about a quarter of an hour after he had 
himself gone out. 

directly he heard this he fear the worst; having, as is usual in such 
cases, a very hazy idea of what the worst might be. of course he must 
follow without a moment’s delay; but a reference to the time-table told 
him that there was not another train for an hour, and that was slow. 

it was already get dusk when he arrive there. he felt certain that 
gilbert would go there. he got to the end of the lane and walk up it 
slowly, examine every house. there would be no difficulty in 
recognize the one he wanted; gilbert had describe it in detail more 
than once. 

he stood outside the loose hanging gate at last, and stare through 
the dark at the shabby stucco front and rank garden. 

he went down a flight of steps to the back door, and finding it 
unfastened, step into a stone passage. it was one of the problem of 
the place that he should have avoid the main entrance door with a 
half-admitted dread, and that, only half admit still, he was afraid 
to mount the long flight of stone stairs leading from the servants’ 
quarters. however, he pull himself together and went up to the room. 

it was quite dark inside. he heard something scuttle across the floor; 
he felt the grit and dust of years under his feet. he struck a 
match--just as gilbert had done--and look first at the recess in which 
the window was built. the match flared round the room for a moment and 
gave him a flash picture of his surroundings. he saw the stripe of 
gaudy paper moving almost imperceptibly, like tentacle of some sea 
monster, from the wall; he saw a creature--it look like a rat--scurry 
across the floor from the window to the great mantelpiece of hard white 
marble. 

if he had seen nothing more than this. 

he saw in detail all that the first match had flash at him. he saw his 
brother lie on the floor; a ghastly coincidence, his hand was caught 
round the edge of the work-table as hers had been. the other hand was 
clench across his breast; there was a look of great agony on his face. 

a dead face, of course. this was the end of the affair. he was lie 
dead by the window where the woman had sat every night at dusk and 
smile at him. 

the second match went out; the brother of the dead man struck a third. 
he look again and closely. then he stagger to his feet and gave a 
cry. it rang through the empty rooms and echo without weary down 
the long, stone passage in the basement. 

gilbert’s head was thrown back; his chin peaked to the ceiling. on his 
throat were livid marks. the doctor saw them distinctly; he saw the grip 
of small fingers; the distinct impression of a woman’s little hand. 

* * * * * 

the curious thing about the whole story--the most curious thing, 
perhaps--is that no other eye ever saw those murderous marks. so there 
was no scandal, no chase after the murderer, no undiscovered crime. they 
faded; when the doctor saw his brother again in the full light and in 
the presence of other his throat was clear. and the post mortem prove 
that death was due to natural causes. 

so the matter stands, and will. 

but where the house and its overgrown garden stood runs a new road with 
neat red and white villas. 

whatever secret it knew--if any--it kept discreetly. 

ned dent is morbid enough to go down the smart new road in the twilight 
sometimes and wonder. 




the phantom hag. 


the other evening in an old castle the conversation turn upon 
apparitions, each one of the party telling a story. as the account grew 
more horrible the young ladies drew close together. 

“have you ever had an adventure with a ghost?” said they to me. “do you 
not know a story to make us shiver? come, tell us something.” 

“i am quite willing to do so,” i replied. “i will tell you of an 
incident that happen to myself.” 

toward the close of the autumn of 1858 i visit one of my friends, 
sub-prefect of a little city in the center of france. albert was an old 
companion of my youth, and i had been present at his wedding. his 
charming wife was full of goodness and grace. my friend wish to show 
me his happy home, and to introduce me to his two pretty little 
daughters. i was fete and taken great care of. three days after my 
arrival i knew the entire city, curiosities, old castles, ruins, etc. 
every day about four o’clock albert would order the phaeton, and we 
would take a long ride, return home in the evening. one evening my 
friend said to me: 

“to-morrow we will go further than usual. i want to take you to the 
black rocks. they are curious old druid stones, on a wild and 
desolate plain. they will interest you. my wife has not seen them yet, 
so we will take her.” 

the following day we drove out at the usual hour. albert’s wife sat by 
his side. i occupy the back seat alone. the weather was gray and 
somber that afternoon, and the journey was not very pleasant. when we 
arrive at the black rocks the sun was setting. we got out of the 
phaeton, and albert took care of the horses. 

we walk some little distance through the field before reach the 
giant remains of the old druid religion. albert’s wife wish to climb 
to the summit of the altar, and i assist her. i can still see her 
graceful figure as she stood drape in a red shawl, her veil floating 
around her. 

“how beautiful it is! but do it not make you feel a little 
melancholy?” said she, extend her hand toward the dark horizon, which 
was light a little by the last ray of the sun. 

the afternoon wind blew violently, and sigh through the stunt tree 
that grew around the stone cromlechs; not a dwelling nor a human being 
was in sight. we hasten to get down, and silent retrace our steps 
to the carriage. 

“we must hurry,” said albert; “the sky is threatening, and we shall have 
scarcely time to reach home before night.” 

we careful wrap the robe around his wife. she tie the veil around 
her face, and the horse start into a rapid trot. it was grow dark; 
the scenery around us was bare and desolate; clump of fir tree here 
and there and furze bush form the only vegetation. we began to feel 
the cold, for the wind blew with fury; the only sound we heard was the 
steady trot of the horse and the sharp clear tinkle of their bells. 

sudden i felt the heavy grasp of a hand upon my shoulder. i turn my 
head quickly. a horrible apparition present itself before my eyes. in 
the empty place at my side sat a hideous woman. i try to cry out; the 
phantom placed her finger upon her lip to impose silence upon me. i 
could not utter a sound. the woman was clothe in white linen; her head 
was cowled; her face was overspread with a corpse-like pallor, and in 
place of eyes were ghastly black cavities. 

i sat motionless, overcome by terror. 

the ghost sudden stood up and lean over the young wife. she 
encircle her with her arms, and lower her hideous head as if to kiss 
her forehead. 

“what a wind!” cry madame albert, turning precipitate toward me. “my 
veil is torn.” 

as she turn i felt the same infernal pressure on my shoulder, and the 
place occupy by the phantom was empty. i look out to the right and 
left--the road was deserted, not an object in sight. 

“what a dreadful gale!” said madame albert. “did you feel it? i cannot 
explain the terror that seize me; my veil was torn by the wind as if by 
an invisible hand; i am tremble still.” 

“never mind,” said albert, smiling; “wrap yourself up, my dear; we will 
soon be warm ourselves by a good fire at home. i am starving.” 

a cold perspiration cover my forehead; a shiver ran through me; my 
tongue clove to the roof of my mouth, and i could not articulate a 
sound; a sharp pain in my shoulder was the only sensible evidence that i 
was not the victim of an hallucination. putt my hand upon my ache 
shoulder, i felt a rent in the cloak that was wrap around me. i 
look at it; five perfectly distinct holes--visible trace of the grip 
of the horrible phantom. i thought for a moment that i should die or 
that my reason should leave me; it was, i think, the most dreadful 
moment of my life. 

finally i became more calm; this nameless agony had last for some 
minutes; i do not think it is possible for a human being to suffer more 
than i did during that time. as soon as i had recover my senses, i 
thought at first i would tell my friends all that had passed, but 
hesitated, and finally did not, fear that my story would frighten 
madame albert, and feeling sure my friend would not believe me. the 
lights of the little city revive me, and gradual the oppression of 
terror that overwhelm me became lighter. 

so soon as we reach home, madame albert untie her veil; it was 
literally in shreds. i hope to find my clothes whole and prove to 
myself that it was all imagination. but no, the cloth was torn in five 
places, just where the finger had seize my shoulder. there was no 
mark, however, upon my flesh, only a dull pain. 

i return to paris the next day, where i endeavor to forget the 
strange adventure; or at least when i thought of it, i would force 
myself to think it an hallucination. 

the day after my return i received a letter from my friend albert. it 
was edge with black. i open it with a vague fear. 

his wife had die the day of my return. 




from the tomb. 

translate from the france of de maupassant by e. c. waggener. 


the guest file slow into the hotel’s great dining-hall and took 
their places, the waiter began to serve them leisurely, to give the 
tardy one time to arrive and to save themselves the bother of bring 
back the courses; and the old bathers, the yearly habitues, with whom 
the season was far advanced, kept a close watch on the door each time it 
opened, hope for the coming of new faces. 

new faces! the single distraction of all pleasure resorts. we go to 
dinner chiefly to canvass the daily arrivals, to wonder who they are, 
what they do and what they think. a restless desire seem to have taken 
possession of us, a longing for pleasant adventures, for friendly 
acquaintances, perhaps, for possible lovers. in this elbow-to-elbow life 
our unknown neighbor become of paramount importance. curiosity is 
piqued, sympathy on the alert and the social instinct doubly active. 

we have hatred for a week, friendship for a month, and view all men 
with the special eyes of watering-place intimacy. sometimes during an 
hour’s chat after dinner, under the tree of the park, where ripple a 
heal spring, we discover men of superior intellect and surprising 
merit, and a month later have wholly forgotten these new friends, so 
charming at first sight. 

there, too, more specially than elsewhere, serious and lasting tie are 
formed. we see each other every day, we learn to know each other very 
soon, and in the affection that spring up so rapid between us there 
is mingle much of the sweet abandon of old and try intimates. and 
later on, how tender are the memory cherish of the first hour of 
this friendship, of the first communion in which the soul came to light, 
of the first glance that question and respond to the secret 
thought and interrogatory the lip have not dare yet to utter, of 
the first cordial confidence and delicious sensation of opening one’s 
heart to someone who has seem to lay bare to you his own! the very 
dull of the hours, as it were, the monotony of days all alike, but 
render more complete the rapid budding and blooming of friendship’s 
flower. 

that evening, then, as on every evening, we await the appearance of 
unfamiliar faces. 

there came only two, but very peculiar ones, those of a man and a 
woman--father and daughter. they seem to have step from the page 
of some weird legend; and yet there was an attraction about them, albeit 
an unpleasant one, that made me set them down at once as the victim of 
some fatality. 

the father was tall, spare, a little bent, with hair blanch white; too 
white for his still young countenance, and in his manner and about his 
person the sedate austerity of carriage that bespeak the puritan. the 
daughter was, possibly, some twenty-four or twenty-five years of age. 
she was very slight, emaciated, her exceedingly pale countenance bearing 
a languid, spiritless expression; one of those people whom we sometimes 
encounter, apparently too weak for the care and task of life, too 
feeble to move or do the things that we must do every day. nevertheless 
the girl was pretty, with the ethereal beauty of an apparition. it was 
she, undoubtedly, who came for the benefit of the waters. 

they chance to be placed at table immediately opposite to me; and i was 
not long in notice that the father, too, had a strange affection, 
something wrong about the nerves it seemed. whenever he was go to 
reach for anything, his hand, with a jerky twitch, describe a sort of 
flutter zig-zag, before he was able to grasp what he was after. soon, 
the motion disturbed me so much, i kept my head turn in order not to 
see it. but not before i had also observe that the young girl kept her 
glove on her left hand while she ate. 

dinner ended, i went out as usual for a turn in the grounds belong to 
the establishment. a sort of park, i might say, stretch clear to the 
little station of auvergne, chatel-guyon, nestling in a gorge at the 
foot of the high mountain, from which flow the sparkling, bubble 
springs, hot from the furnace of an ancient volcano. beyond us there, 
the domes, small extinct craters--of which chatel-guyon is the start 
point--raised their serrated head above the long chain; while beyond 
the dome came two distinct regions, one of them, needle-like peaks, the 
other of bold, precipitous mountains. 

it was very warm that evening, and i contented myself with pace to and 
fro under the rustling trees, gaze at the mountain and listen to 
the strain of the band, pour from the casino, situated on a knoll 
that overlook the grounds. 

presently, i perceive the father and daughter coming toward me with 
slow steps. i bowed to them in that pleasant continental fashion with 
which one always salute his hotel companions. the gentleman halt at 
once. 

“pardon me, sir,” said he, “but may i ask if you can direct us to a 
short walk, easy and pretty, if possible?” 

“certainly,” i answered, and offer to lead them myself to the valley 
through which the swift river flows--a deep, narrow cleft between two 
great declivities, rocky and wooded. 

they accepted, and as we walked, we naturally discuss the virtue of 
the mineral waters. they had, as i had surmised, come there on his 
daughter’s account. 

“she has a strange malady,” said he, “the seat of which her physician 
cannot determine. she suffer from the most inexplicable nervous 
symptoms. sometimes they declare her ill of a heart disease; sometimes 
of a liver complaint; again of a spinal trouble. at present they 
attribute it to the stomach--that great motor and regulator of the 
body--this protean disease of a thousand forms, a thousand mode of 
attack. it is why we are here. i, myself, think it is her nerves. in any 
case it is sad.” 

this remind me of his own jerk hand. 

“it may be hereditary,” said i, “your own nerves are a little disturbed, 
are they not?” 

“mine?” he answered, tranquilly. “not at all, i have always possessed 
the calmest nerves.” then, suddenly, as if bethink himself: 

“for this,” touching his hand, “is not nerves, but the result of a 
shock, a terrible shock that i suffer once. fancy it, sir, this child 
of mine has been bury alive!” 

i could find nothing to say, i was dumb with surprise. 

“yes,” he continued, “buried alive; but hear the story, it is not long. 
for some time past juliette had seem affected with a disorder action 
of the heart. we were finally certain that the trouble was organic and 
fear the worst. one day it came, she was brought in lifeless--dead. 
she had fallen dead while walking in the garden. physician came in 
haste, but nothing could be done. she was gone. for two days and nights 
i watch beside her myself, and with my own hand placed her in her 
coffin, which i follow to the cemetery and saw placed in the family 
vault. this was in the country, in the province of lorraine. 

“it had been my wish, too, that she should be bury in her jewels, 
bracelets, necklace and rings, all presents that i had given her, and in 
her first ball dress. you can imagine, sir, the state of my heart in 
return home. she was all that i had left, my wife had been dead for 
many years. i returned, in truth, half mad, shut myself alone in my room 
and fell into my chair dazed, unable to move, merely a miserable, 
breathing wreck. 

“soon my old valet, prosper, who had help me place juliette in her 
coffin and lay her away for her last sleep, came in noiseless to see 
if he could not induce me to eat. i shook my head, answer nothing. he 
persisted: 

“‘monsieur is wrong; this will make him ill. will monsieur allow me, 
then, to put him to bed?’ 

“‘no, no,’ i answered. ‘let me alone.’ 

“he yield and withdrew. 

“how many hour pass i do not know. what a night! what a night! it was 
very cold; my fire of log had long since burn out in the great 
fireplace; and the wind, a wintry blast, charged with an icy frost, 
howl and scream about the house and strained at my window with a 
curious sinister sound. 

“long hours, i say, roll by. i sat still where i had fallen, 
prostrated, overwhelmed; my eyes wide open, but my body strengthless, 
dead; my soul drown in despair. sudden the great bell gave a loud 
peal. 

“i gave such a leap that my chair cracked under me. the slow, solemn 
sound rang through the empty house. i look at the clock. 

“it was two in the morning. who could be coming at such an hour? 

“twice again the bell pull sharply. the servant would never answer, 
perhaps never hear it. i took up a candle and made my way to the door. i 
was about to demand: 

“‘who is there?’ but, ashamed of the weakness, nerve myself and drew 
back the bolts. my heart throbbed, my pulse beat, i threw back the panel 
brusque and there, in the darkness, saw a shape like a phantom, 
dress in white. 

“i recoiled, speechless with anguish, stammering: 

“‘who--who are you?’ 

“a voice answered: 

“‘it is i, father.’ 

“it was my child, juliette. 

“truly, i thought myself mad. i shuddered, shrink backward before the 
specter as it advanced, gesticulate with my hand to ward off the 
apparition. it is that gesture which has never left me. 

“again the phantom spoke: 

“‘father, father! see, i am not dead. someone came to rob me of my 
jewels--they cut off my finger--the--the flowing blood revive me.’ 

“and i saw then that she was cover with blood. i fell to my knee 
panting, sobbing, laughing, all in one. as soon as i regain my senses, 
but still so bewilder i scarcely comprehend the happiness that had 
come to me, i took her in my arms, carry her to her room, and rang 
frantic for prosper to rekindle the fire, bring a warm drink for 
her, and go for the doctor. 

“he came running, entered, gaze a moment at my daughter in the 
chair--gave a gasp of fright and horror and fell back--dead. 

“it was he who had open the vault, who had wound and rob my 
child, and then abandoned her; for he could not efface all trace of his 
deed; and he had not even taken the trouble to return the coffin to its 
niche; sure, besides, of not being suspect by me, who trust him so 
fully. we are truly very unfortunate people, monsieur.” 

he was silent. 

meanwhile the night had come on, envelop in the gloom the still and 
solitary little valley; a sort of mysterious dread seem to fall upon 
me in presence of these strange beings--this corpse come to life, and 
this father with his painful gestures. 

“let us return,” said i, “the night has grown chill.” 

and still in silence, we retrace our steps back to the hotel, and i 
shortly afterward return to the city. i lost all further knowledge of 
the two peculiar visitor to my favorite summer resort. 




sandy’s ghost. 


“‘commerdations fer the night, stranger? waal, yes; i reckon we can fix 
a place fer you. hev a cheer an’ set you down.” 

“thank you. don’t you find this rather a lonely place--no neighbors, no 
nothing, that i can see? how came you to settle here, so far remove 
from other habitations?” 

“waal, perhaps it’s best not ter ask too many question ter once.” 

“beg your pardon. no offense was intended, i assure you. simply idle 
curiosity.” 

“don’t say ’nuther word, stranger, but come in an’ we’ll hev a snack fer 
supper. polly, bring on the victu’ls. yer jes’ in time.” 

polly at once obeyed. she was a typical western girl--tall, lithe, 
graceful and limpid-eyed. she was clear-skinned and high-spirited, too, 
and in this case ignorant through no fault of her own. john barr’s eyes 
scan her intently, and a flush came to her cheeks. for the first time 
in her life she was unpleasant conscious of her bare feet. it may have 
been this that made her stumble and spill some of the contents of an 
earthen bowl over the guest’s knee as she placed it on the table. 

her eyes flash and a tear of anger twinkle on the lashes. she 
stopped, half meaning to apologize, but an oath from her father cause 
her to set the bowl down heavy and to hurry from the cabin. a moment 
later barr saw a flutter of pink calico from behind a pile of rocks. old 
kit robinson saw it, too. 

“don’t wonder at yer sayin’ ’tain’t right. she’s a sma’t gal, and a good 
looker, too, as should hev been sent away frum here ter school ter be 
eddicated. but she won’t leave her no ’count dad. i orter be shot fer 
cussin’ her. but i ain’t what i use ter be. settin’ here an’ keepin’ 
guard make me narvous.” 

barr’s eyes ask the question his lip refuse to speak. supper eaten, 
the men went outside and sat with their chair tilt back against the 
cabin. something in the younger man’s frank face had soften old kit 
into a reminiscent mood and made him strange inclined to gratify an 
idle curiosity. 

the soft evening wind sigh through the branch of the tall spruce 
pines, and the decline ray of the setting sun cause the shadow of 
the rude home to stretch out long across the greensward. from its 
shelter where he sat john barr look out on the grand range of the 
rocky and wonder where in their vastness he would find the man he 
sought--the finding of whom had brought him out into this wild and 
almost forsaken mining camp. 

“stranger, i’ve took a likin’ ter you. ye’ve a sumthin’ about you thet 
remind me of sum one i know, an’ you look like an honest chap. say, do 
you b’lieve in ghosts?” 

he put the question very suddenly, and a look of disappointment cross 
his face when barr told him that he did not believe in spooks. 

“waal, i’ve seen ’em!” 

a thought connect the pink calico with something in the past came to 
barr’s mind. 

“can’t you tell me about it?” he asked. 

“i’d like ter if you’ll sw’ar, on yer derringer, never ter blab. will 
you sw’ar?” 

the solitary guest start to smile, but the smile fade at the thought 
of unshed tear in polly’s eyes. it might make it easy for her if he 
humor the old man. 

“i’ll swear,” he said. and he did. 

“do you see yan old spruce at the turn of the trail an’ the cliff jes’ 
above? waal, thet’s the spot i’m watchin’ an’ guardin’ till the owner 
cum ter claim it. i’m quick ter burn powder an’ a pretty sure shot. i 
know a man when i see him, an’ i ain’t easy fooled. waal, ter begin 
with, i had a pardner once, an’ he wuz a man, sure ’nough. he wuz frum 
the state of new york. i never axed him as ter how so fine a gent cum 
ter be diggin’ an’ shov’lin’ in the rockies, though ter myself i said 
thar wuz sum good reason. he had light hair, an’ we call him sandy, 
fer short, an’ he wuz jes’ erbout as gritty as sand. we wuz as unlike as 
any two fell you ever saw. he wuz quietlike an’ steady, an’ i wuz 
sort wild an’ reckless an’ like mount dew mos’ too well. waal, 
when we had a little dust scrape together, we would divvy, an’ i tuk my 
share way down ter the station on the other side of the cliff an’ sent 
it off ter the bank in helena. but i all left sum hid whar the gal 
would find it. old sandy hed a bank of his own thet no one knew erbout, 
’cepting hisself, an’ ev’ry time we divide he’d carry part of it ter 
his hidin’ place, an’ then give the rest ter me ter send ter his boy, 
thet he said wuz bein’ eddicate in sum college way up in boston. he 
seem ter think a heap of thet boy. art awhile my old woman give out, 
an’ soon we laid her away on the hillside. it wuz hard, stranger.” 

old kit’s voice fail him for a moment, but he quick regain his 
composure and continued: 

“but when old sandy, my good old pard, give up i didn’t keer fer 
nothin’. we bury him in style. all the boys frum round the diggin’s 
wuz thar, an’ many an eye wuz wet. we didn’t hev nary a preacher, but 
the gal she pray at the grave. fer the life of me i don’t know where 
she larnt it. reckon the old woman must hev told her. next mornin’ the 
gal show me a letter thet sandy give her jes’ afore he died. it wuz 
ter his boy, an’ she wuz ter give it ter him if he ever cum out this 
way, an’ she’s got it yet. 

“thet same evenin’ after supper, feelin’ kind glumish an’ like thar 
wuz sumthin’ in my throat i couldn’t swaller, i tuk a stroll up the 
gulch. i went on out ter the top of the edge of the big rock an’ got ter 
studyin’ whar i’d find another pard like sandy. all ter once i felt a 
hand touch my shoulder kind light once or twice. i jump up, half 
expectin’ it wuz sandy, but it wuz only the gal. waal, i wuz all tuk 
back at fust, an’ then i got mad. 

“‘what air you doin’ up here?’ i axed, kind rough. she hed tear in 
her eyes as she look at me, an’ said: 

“‘pap, don’t git mad. i wuz lonesum. i seed you cumin’ up this way, an’ 
i follere you, ’cause i want ter tell you thet sandy said ter give 
his boy his pile when he cums.’ 

“‘waal,’ say i, ‘you might hev wait till i cum back ter the house.’ 
an’ then i sent her back. 

“arter she wuz gone i sot ter studyin’ whar in the world sandy’s pile 
wuz. i try ter think whar could he hev hid it. but it warn’t no use. 
all ter once i notice it wuz plum dark, an’ as these mount ain’t a 
he’lthy place fer a man ter roam in art nightfall, especially if he 
ain’t got his shootin’ irons on, i cut a pretty swift gait fer the 
shack. 

“jes’ as i cum round the bend thar at the pine i happen ter look up 
terward the clift, an’ thar sot sandy. yes, sir. it wuz him sure as yer 
born. my feet felt heavy as lead, an’ i couldn’t move frum the spot. i 
try ter holler, but it warn’t no go. finally i gave a sudden jerk an’ 
made a step terward him, an’ as i did so he disappeared. then i made 
track fer home. but i kept mum, ’cause i know the boys would say thet 
mount dew wuz lickin’ up my brains, an’ i would be seein’ snake an’ 
sich things afore long. 

“the next night sumhow er ’nuther i thought ter go an’ see if he wuz 
thar ag’in, an’ sure ’nough, thar he sot, lookin’ kind sad an’ making 
mark on the rocks with his fingers. i hed my hand on my gun this time, 
so i got a little closter than afore. but, by hookey, he got away from 
me ag’in, nor did he cum back. 

“i could hardly wait fer the next night ter cum round. at the same time 
i wuz on hand good an’ early, jes’ as it begun ter git dark, an’ the 
tree look like long spook a-stretchin’ out their arms. i look 
terward the clift, an’ thar he sot a-markin’ an’ a-scratchin’ on the 
rock with his finger an’ still look sad. now, this bein’ the third 
time, i kind got bold, an’ i went a little closter, an’ says: 

“‘sandy, wha-what’s the ma-mat-matter with you? didn’t the boys do the 
plantin’ right fer you?’ 

“then as luck would hev it i thought of sumthin’ else right quick, an’ i 
said: 

“‘or is it the dust you hev hid whar yer sittin’?’ 

“waal, he look up then, an’ the happiest smile cum ter his face, an’ 
all ter once he disappear ag’in. an’ since then i hev sot here an’ 
guarded the place till the right one cum along ter claim it. 

“let’s see. what did you say yer name wuz?” 

“pardon me. i thought i had told you. my name is john willett barr.” 

“polly, oh, polly! cum hyar, gal. what wuz sandy’s full name? i plum 
fergot.” 

“what you want ter know fer?” she asked. “i ain’t a-goin’ ter tell you 
now. thet’s my own secret.” 

“cum, cum, gal. tell me ter once, or it won’t be he’lthy fer you.” 

“waal, then,” she answer stubbornly, “it’s john willett barr.” 

at her reply the younger man’s face grew deathly pale, and he start up 
from his chair, but kit thrust him back into his seat, saying: 

“bring me the letter, polly.” 

“what are you goin’ ter do with it, pa?” she inquired, cautiously. 

“i promise old sandy on my oath ter keep it till the right one cum 
erlong ter claim it, an’ i mean ter keep my word. the right one is here, 
gal. thar he sits. so trot thet letter out, an’ don’t parley long with 
me if you know when yer well off.” 

polly stare at the younger man in utter bewilder for a moment. 
then, turning slowly, she step quiet into the cabin after the 
precious document; an unusual gleam of joy light up her face and a 
suppress excitement shone in her eyes. under her breath she said: 
“sumhow er ruther i felt he wuz the right one.” 

too truly, john barr realize in that painful moment that he whom he 
sought was now dead to him; that the father from whom he had been part 
so many years was sleep that long, dreamless sleep in the clay mound 
on the hillside, which marked his last rest place. as he turn to 
look at the face of old, honest kit, who had been his father’s friend 
during those long years of forced exile, a happy smile lit up the old 
miner’s rugged features as he pointed with his finger to the rock cliff 
near the old spruce vine, and said, in an exultant, tremble voice: 

“thar he be, stranger--jes’ as i hev seen him many a night--yer dad--my 
pard--pore old sandy!” 

with an eager voice john barr sprang forward, and the mountain echo 
and re-echoed the plaintive cry of “father! father!” but his 
outstretched arms clasp only empty and the darken shadow of 
the rapid approach night. 




the ghost of red creek. 

by s. t. 


to the northward of mississippi city and its neighbor, handsboro, there 
extend a tract of pine forest for mile with but few habitation 
scattered through it. black and red creeks, with their numerous 
branches, drain this region into the pascagoula river to the eastward. 
with the swamp of pascagoula as a refuge, and the luxuriant and 
unfrequented bottom of red and black creek to browse upon, there are 
few choice spot for deer. knowing this fact, a small party of 
gentlemen on the day before a crisp, cold christmas, start from 
handsboro in a large four-wheeled wagon for a thirty-mile drive into 
this wilderness of pine and a week’s sport after the deer. the guide was 
jim caruthers, a true woodsman, and the driver and general factotum, a 
jolly negro name jack lyons, than whom no one could make a better 
hoe-cake and cook a venison steak. his laugh could be heard a quarter of 
a mile, and his good nature was as expansive as the range of the 
laughter. 

the usual experience of a hunting camp were heartily enjoy during 
the first days of this life out of doors; but its cream did not rise 
until about the fifth night, when, from familiar intercourse, jack lyon 
became loquacious, and after the day’s twenty or twenty-five-mile walk, 
would spin yarn in front of the camp fire, which brought forgetful 
of fatigue. 

the night before new year’s was intense cold. the cold north wind of 
the afternoon had subside at sunset, and only a gust now and again 
touched the musical leaves of the pines, making them vibrant with that 
mournful score of nature’s opera which even maestro have fail to 
catch. 

in front of two new and white tent two sportsmen recline at length 
within reach of the warmth of the fire, while opposite them rest at 
ease the guide and the worthy jack lyons. 

weary with the day’s chase four stanch hounds--ringwood, rose, jet and 
boxer--were dream of future quarry. 

the firelight brought out in bright relief the trunks of the tall pine 
like cathedral columns, and sparkle through the leafy dome overhead 
the scintillate stars glisten with a diamond brightness. a silence 
which add its influence to the scene rest about the border of the 
creek below, and gave more effect to the story of the veteran teamster 
than perhaps it otherwise would have had. 

“if de deer run down de creek,” said old jack, smack his lip over a 
careful prepared brew of the real campbellton punch, “wese boun’ to 
see fun to-morrer, for dey’ll take us down thar by de old gibbet’s 
place. in daylight dere’s no place like it, but after nightfall, you bet 
you wouldn’t catch dis nigger thar.” 

old jack was naturally ask why he didn’t care about visiting the 
gibbet’s place at night. ask to be excuse until he fill his pipe, 
the silence was unbroken until his return. he pile on more pine knot 
and commenced: 

“you kno’, gemmen, dat when de gunboat was in de sound we folks had to 
travel way back hyar on dese road outun de range of deir big guns. i 
was ’gaged by mr. harrison in haul salt from de factory at 
mississippi city, on de beach ober to mobile, an’ i had been making a 
trip ebery week or so. dis back country road was neber thought ob by de 
federals, an’ we had good times long de way, no shell and no shootin’. 

“de nite, gemmen, i’se speakin’ of was a friday, dat yous all know is 
unlucky. well, you see, i hitch up betsie an’ rose in de lead, an’ ole 
fox an’ blossom at de pole, an’ take in de biggest load of salt dat 
team eber carried. i start out an’ cross de biloxi rib at han’sboro 
jes’ as de moon was goin’ down. yes, boss, dese road weren’t no better 
den now, an’ de rain had made ’em mighty rough when yer come to de 
holes. 

“i sat in de seat whistlin’ ‘de cow is in de pea patch,’ and a-thinkin’ 
of sarah jamison, what was afterwards my wife, when i felt de off fore 
wheel go ‘kersush’ in a hole up to de hub. i’d made seventeen mile out 
ob han’sboro. i did some cussin’, an’ den went to de fence, about twenty 
yard off, an’ took out a rail to prize up de wheel. den i saw i was at 
mister gibbet’s place. i sez to myself, i’ll go up to de house an’ get 
old mr. gibbet to give me a turn. i had done gone by dar two week afore 
an’ seed de old man. 

“now, gemmen, yer listen to me, for what i’se tellin’ yer is as sure as 
jinny’ll blow de horn on de las’ day. i walk up to de house an’ dar i 
saw a bright light inside. it show out froo de windows, an’ i saw 
shad of miss gibbet and mrs. gibbet on de window curtain--shore, 
honeys, shore. de front do’ was shet, an’ i steps up on ter de gallery 
an’ knock wid de butt end of my whip. i didn’t knock loud, needer. god 
bless us all, gemmen, de lights went out like dat, an’ i hear set up a 
laugh, ha-ha-ha-ha. how dat set my knee a-shakin’. i open de do’, an’ 
dere was no sign of anybody. i struck a match an’ all de furniture was 
move out, an’ de old red curtain dat i fought i seed was in rags. de 
whole family was gone, for shore. i didn’t kno’ ’zactly what to think 
’bout dem strange voices, but i start back to de wagon, when it 
lightened, an’ bress god, dar in de front yard was six grave jes’ made. 
somefin’ wrong here, sed i; an’ i build a fire by de wagon an’ digs de 
wheel out. jes’ den old squire pasture kem along de road from mobile, 
an’ he tell me de news. ole man gibbet cut de froat of his wife and 
fore chillern an’ shoot hisself in de head outun jealousy of his wife. 
dey was all bury in de front yard, an’ de house was desert ten days 
befo’. 

“gemmen, when i hear dat, dem mule make de quickest time to mobile eber 
seed; an’ youse can tell me dar’s no ghosts, but yo’ don’ catch me roun’ 
dat log house of gibbet’s ’ceptin’ sun’s an hour high.” 

jack look suspicious over his shoulder into the dark and crawl 
into his blanket, muttering: 

“it scare dis nigger eben now to tell ’bout dat night.” 

sleep soon fell upon the camp, but the impression of old jack’s story 
survive the night, and the next day he still assert its truth. 




the spectre bride. 


the winter nights up at sault ste. marie are as white and luminous as 
the milky way. the silence that rest upon the solitude appear to be 
white also. nature has included sound in her arrestment. save the still 
white frost, all things are obliterated. the stars are there, but they 
seem to belong to heaven and not to earth. they are at an immeasurable 
height, and so black is the night that the opaque ether rolls between 
them and the observer in great liquid billows. 

in such a place it is difficult to believe that the world is people to 
any great extent. one fancies that cain has just kill abel, and that 
there is need for the greatest economy in the matter of human life. 

the night ralph hagadorn start out for echo bay he felt as if he were 
the only man in the world, so complete was the solitude through which he 
was passing. he was go over to attend the wedding of his best friend, 
and was, in fact, to act as the groomsman. business had delay him, and 
he was compel to make his journey at night. but he hadn’t gone far 
before he began to feel the exhilarate of the skater. his skate were 
keen, his leg fit for a long journey than the one he had undertaken, 
and the tang of the frost was to him what a spur is to a spirited horse. 

he cut through the air as a sharp stone cleave the water. he could feel 
the tumult of the air as he cleft it. as he went on he began to have 
fancies. it seem to him that he was enormously tall--a great viking of 
the northland, hasten over icy fiord to his love. that remind him 
that he had a love--though, indeed, that thought was always present with 
him as a background for other thoughts. to be sure, he had not told her 
she was his love, because he had only seen her a few times and the 
opportunity had not present itself. she live at echo bay, too, and 
was to be the maid of honor to his friend’s bride--which was another 
reason why he skate on almost as swift as the wind, and why, now and 
then, he let out a shout of exhilaration. 

the one drawback in the matter was that marie beaujeu’s father had 
money, and that marie live in a fine house and wore otter skin about 
her throat and little satin-lined mink boots on her feet when she went 
sledding, and that the jacket in which she kept a bit of her dead 
mother’s hair had a black pearl in it as big as a pea. these things 
made it difficult--nay, impossible--for ralph hagadorn to say anything 
more than “i love you.” but that much he meant to have the satisfaction 
of saying, no matter what came of it. 

with this determination grow upon him he swept along the ice which 
gleam under the starlight. indeed, venus made a glowing path toward 
the west and seem to reassure him. he was sorry he could not skim down 
that avenue of light from the love star, but he was forced to turn his 
back upon it and face toward the northeast. 

it came to him with a shock that he was not alone. his eyelash were a 
good deal frost and his eyeball blur with the cold, and at first 
he thought it an illusion. but he rub his eyes hard and at length 
made sure that not very far in front of him was a long white skate in 
flutter garment who sped over the snow fast as ever werewolf went. 
he call aloud, but there was no answer, and then he gave chase, 
setting his teeth hard and putt a tension on his firm young muscles. 
but however fast he might go the white skate went faster. after a time 
he became convinced, as he chance to glance for a second at the north 
star, that the white skate was leading him out of his direct path. for 
a moment he hesitated, wonder if he should not keep to his road, but 
the strange companion seem to draw him on irresistibly, and so he 
followed. 

of course it came to him more than once that this might be no earthly 
guide. up in those latitudes men see strange things when the hoar frost 
is on the earth. hagadorn’s father, who live up there with the lake 
superior indian and work in the copper mines, had once welcome a 
woman at his hut on a bitter night who was gone by morning, and who left 
wolf track in the snow--yes, it was so, and john fontanelle, the 
half-breed, could tell you about it any day--if he were alive. (alack, 
the snow where the wolf track were is melt now!) 

well, hagadorn follow the white skate all the night, and when the ice 
flushed red at dawn and arrow of lovely light shot up into the cold 
heavens, she was gone, and hagadorn was at his destination. then, as he 
took off his skate while the sun climb arrogant up to his place 
above all other things, hagadorn chance to glance lakeward, and he saw 
there was a great wind-rift in the ice and that the wave show blue as 
sapphire beside the gleam ice. had he swept along his intended path, 
watch the stars to guide him, his glance turn upward, all his body 
at magnificent momentum, he must certainly have gone into that cold 
grave. the white skate had been his guardian angel! 

much impressed, he went up to his friend’s house, expect to find 
there the pleasant wedding furore. but someone met him quiet at the 
door, and his friend came downstairs to greet him with a solemn 
demeanor. 

“is this your wedding face?” cry hagadorn. “why, really, if this is 
the way you are affected, the soon i take warning the better.” 

“there’s no wedding to-day,” said his friend. 

“no wedding? why, you’re not----” 

“marie beaujeu die last night----” 

“marie----” 

“died last night. she had been skate in the afternoon, and she came 
home chill and wandering in her mind, as if the frost had got in it 
somehow. she got worse and worse and talk all the time of you.” 

“of me?” 

“we wonder what it all meant. we didn’t know you were lovers.” 

“i didn’t know it myself; more’s the pity.” 

“she said you were on the ice. she said you didn’t know about the big 
break up, and she cry to us that the wind was off shore. then she 
cry that you could come in by the old france creek if you only 
knew----?” 

“i came in that way,” interrupt hagadorn. 

“how did you come to do that? it’s out of your way.” 

so hagadorn told him how it came to pass. 

and that day they watch beside the maiden, who had taper at her head 
and feet, and over in the little church the bride who might have been at 
her wedding said prayer for her friend. then they bury her in her 
bridesmaid’s white, and hagadorn was there before the altar with her, as 
he intended from the first. at midnight the day of the burial her 
friends were married in the gloom of the cold church, and they walk 
together through the snow to lay their bridal wreath on her grave. 

three nights later hagadorn start back again to his home. they want 
him to go by sunlight, but he had his way and went when venus made her 
bright path on the ice. he hope for the companionship of the white 
skater. but he did not have it. his only companion was the wind. the 
only voice he heard was the bay of a wolf on the north shore. the 
world was as white as if it had just been create and the sun had not 
yet colored nor man defile it. 




how he caught the ghost. 


“yes, the house is a good one,” said the agent; “it’s in a good 
neighborhood, and you’re get it at almost nothing; but i think it 
right to tell you all about it. you are orphans, you say, and with a 
mother dependent on you? that make it all the more necessary that you 
should know. the fact is, the house is said to be haunted----” 

the agent could not help smile as he said it, and he was relieved to 
see an answer smile on the two face before him. 

“ah, you don’t believe in ghosts,” he went on; “nor do i, for that 
matter; but, somehow, the reputation of the house keeps me from have a 
tenant long at a time. the place ought to rent for twice as much as it 
does.” 

“if we succeed in driving out the ghost, you will not raise the rent?” 
ask the boy, with a merry twinkle in his eyes. 

“well, no--not this year, at any rate,” laugh the agent. and so the 
house was rented; and the slip of a girl and the tall lad, her brother, 
went their way. 

within a week the family had move into the house, and were delight 
with it. it was large and cool, with wide hall and fine stairways, and 
with more room than they needed. but that did not matter in the least, 
for they had always been cramped in small houses, suffering many 
discomforts; and they never could have afford such a place as this if 
it had not been “haunted.” 

“blessings on the ghost!” cry margaret, gaily, as she ran about as 
merry as a child. “who would be without a ghost in the house, when it 
bring one like this?” 

“and it is so near your school,” said the mother; “and i use to worry 
so over the long walk; and david can come home to lunch now, and you 
don’t know what a pleasure that will be.” 

“it seem to me,” david grave explained, “that if i should meet the 
ghost i would treat him with the greatest polite and encourage him 
to stay. we shall not miss the room he takes, shall we? i think it would 
be well to set aside that room over yours, maggie, for his ghostship’s 
own, for we shall not need that, you know. besides, the door doesn’t 
shut, and he can go in and out without break the lock.” 

and then they all laugh and had a great deal of fun over the ghost, 
which was a great joke to them. 

they were very tired that night and slept sound all night long. when 
they met the next morning there was more laughter about the ghost which 
was shy about meeting strangers, probably, and had made no effort to 
introduce himself. for the next three days they were all hard at work, 
try to bring chaos into something like order; and then it was time 
for the school to open, and margaret was to begin teaching, and david 
insert an advertisement in the city papers for a maid-of-all-work, who 
might help their mother in their absence. 

for one whole day prospective colored servant present themselves and 
announced: 

“is dis de house whar dey wants a worklady? no, ma’am, i ain’ gwine to 
work in dis house. ketch me workin’ in no ha’nted house.” 

after which they each and all departed, and other came in their stead. 
one was secure after a while, but no soon had she talk across the 
fence with a neighbor’s servant than she, too, departed. 

“never mind, children,” said mrs. craig, wearily, “i would much rather 
do the work than be trouble in this way.” 

so the maid-of-all-work was dismiss and the craig family lock the 
door and went to their rooms, worn out with the day’s anxieties. 

they had been in the house four days, and there had been neither sight 
nor sound of the ghost. the very mention of it was enough to start them 
all to laughing, for they were thorough practical people, with a 
fond for inquiring into anything that seem mysterious to them and 
for understanding it thorough before they let it go. 

david was soon sleep the sound sleep of healthy boyhood, and all was 
silent in the house, when margaret stole soft into his room and laid 
her hand on his arm. he was not easy to waken, and several minutes had 
pass before he sat up in bed with an articulate murmur of surprise. 

“hush!” said margaret, in a whisper, with her hand on his lips. “i want 
you to come into my room and listen to a sound that i have been hearing 
for some time.” 

“doors creaking,” suggest david, as he began to dress. 

“nothing of the kind,” was all she said. 

they walk up the stairway, and along the upper hall to the door of the 
unused room. something was wrong with the lock and the door would not 
stay fastened, as i have said. 

something that was not fear thrill their heart as they pushed the 
door further ajar, and stood where they could see every foot of the 
vacant floor. one of their own box stood in the middle of the room, 
but aside from that, nothing was to be seen, and they look at one 
another in silence. 

“hold the lamp a minute, maggie,” david said, at last, and then he went 
all over the room, and look more particularly at its emptiness, and 
even felt the walls. 

“secret panels, you know,” he said, with a smile, but it was a very 
puzzle smile indeed. 

“i can’t see what it could have been,” margaret said, as they went down 
the stairs. 

“no, i can’t see, either, but i’m go to see,” said david. “that was a 
chain, and chain don’t drag around by themselves, you know. a ghost 
could not drag a chain, if he were to try.” 

“the conventional ghost very often drag chains,” said margaret, as she 
closed the door of her room. 

and then she lay awake all night and listen for the conventional ghost 
that drag a chain, but it seem that the weight of the chain must 
have weary him, for he was not heard again. 

the mother had slept through it all, and next morning they gave her a 
vivid account of the night’s adventure. 

“perhaps it was someone in the house,” she said, in alarm. there were no 
ghost within the bounds of possibility, so far as she was concerned, 
but burglar were very possible, indeed. 

then margaret and david both laugh more than ever. 

“what fun it would be,” said david, “for a burglar to get into this 
house and try to find something worth carry away!” 

so they went on to the next night, all three fully determined to spend 
the night in listen for the ghost, and running him to earth if 
possible. 

but it was margaret that heard the ghost, after all. she had been 
sleep and was sudden startle wide awake, and there, overhead, was 
the sound of the chain dragging; and just as she was on the point of 
spring out of bed to call her brother, the chain seem to go out of 
the upper room. she lay still and listened, and in a moment she heard it 
again. 

it was coming down the stairs. 

there was no carpet on the stairs, and she could hear the chain drop 
from step to step, until it had come the whole way down. there it was, 
almost at the door of her room, and something that was strange like 
fear kept her lie still, listen in horrify silence. 

then it went along the hall, drag close to the door; and then 
further away; and back and forth for awhile; and then it began drag 
back up the stairs again. step by step she could hear it drawn over the 
edge of every step--and by the time it had reach the top she 
remember herself and call david. 

again did the brother and sister make a tour of the upper room, with the 
lamp. not only that, but they look into every nook and corner of the 
upper part of the house, and at last came back, baffled. they had seen 
nothing extraordinary, and they had not heard a sound. 

“i’m go to see that ghost to-night,” david said to his sister the 
next evening. 

“how?” 

“i’m go to sit up all night at the head of the stairs. don’t say 
anything about it to mother; it might make her uneasy.” 

so, after the household were all quiet, david slip into his place at 
the head of the stairs, and sat down to his vigil. he had placed a 
screen at the head of the stairway so that it hid him from view--as if a 
ghost care for a screen--and he establish himself behind it, and 
prepared to be as patient as he could. 

it seem to him that hour so long had never been devise as those the 
town clock toll off that night. he bore it until midnight moderately 
well, because, he argue with himself, if there were any ghost about 
they would surely walk then; but they were not in a humor for walking; 
and still the hour roll on without any developments. he took the 
fidgets, and had nervous twitch all over him, and at last he could 
endure it no longer, and had lean his head back against the wall and 
was go blissful to sleep when---- 

he heard a chain drag just beyond the open door of that unused room. 

in spite of himself a shiver ran down his back. there was no mistake 
it; it was a real chain, if he had ever heard one. more than that, it 
had left the room, and was coming straight towards the stairs. the hall 
was dark, and it was impossible for him to see anything, although he 
strained his eyes in the direction of the sound. and even while he 
look it had pass behind the screen, and was go down the stairs, 
drop from step to step with a clank. 

half way down a narrow strip of moonlight from a stair-window lay 
directly across the steps. whatever the thing was, it must pass through 
that patch of light, and david lean forward and watched. 

down it went from step to step, and presently it had slip through the 
light, and was down; and a little later it came back again, through the 
light, and up the stairs, and back into that unused room. 

and then david slap his knee jubilantly, and ran down to his room, 
and slept all the rest of the night. 

next morning he was very mysterious about his discovery of the night 
before. 

“oh, yes, i saw the ghost,” he said to maggie. “there; don’t ask so many 
questions; i’ll tell you more about it to-morrow, maybe.” 

and that was all the information she could get from him. it was very 
provoking. 

that day david made a purchase down town and brought home a bulky 
bundle, which he hid in his own room and would not let his sister even 
peep at. 

“i’m go to try to catch a ghost to-night,” he said, “and you know how 
it is; if i brag too much beforehand, i shall be sure to fail.” 

he was working with something in the hall after the other had retired; 
but he did not sit up this time. he went to bed, and margaret listen 
at his door and found that he was soon asleep. 

but away in the night they were all awaken by a squeal that brought 
them all into the hall in a great hurry; and there, at the head of the 
stairs, they found the huge rat-trap that david had set a few hour 
before, and in the midst of the toils was a rat. 

“why, david,” exclaim the mother, “i didn’t know that there was a rat 
in the house.” 

and then, all at once, she saw that there was a long chain hanging from 
a little iron collar around the creature’s neck, and she and margaret 
cry together. 

“and this was the ghost!” 

such a funny ghost when they came to think of it--this poor rat, with a 
nest in some hole of the broken chimney. he had been someone’s pet, 
once, perhaps; and now, the household he had broken up, the nights he 
had disturbed, the wild sensation he had created--it made his captor 
laugh to think that this innocent creature had been the cause of the 
whole trouble. 

“i’ll get a cage for him, and take care of him for the rest of his 
life,” said david. “we owe him so much that we can’t afford to be 
ungrateful.” 

the next morning he took the ghost-in-a-cage and show it to the agent, 
and gave him a vivid account of the capture. 

“so, you have a good house for about half price, all on account of that 
rat,” exclaim the agent, grimly. “young man--but never mind, you 
deserve it. what are you working for now? six dollar a week? if you 
ever want to change your place--suppose you come around here. i think 
you need a business that will give you a chance to grow.” 

and the agent and david shook hand warm over the cage of the 
“ghost.” 




grand-dame’s ghost story. 

by c. d. 


i don’t know whether you ever tell your children ghost story or not; 
some mother don’t, but our mother, though of germany descent, was 
strong-minded on the ghost subject, and early taught all of her children 
to be fearless mental as well as physically, and, though dearly fond 
of hearing ghost stories, especially if they were real true ghosts, we 
were sadly skeptical as to their being anything of the kind that could 
harm. we were quite learned in ghostly lore, knew all about 
“doppeigangers,” “will o’ the wisp,” “blue lights,” etc., and we could 
not have a greater treat for good behavior than for our mother to draw 
on her store of supernatural tale for our entertainment. the story i am 
about to relate she told us one stormy night, when, gather round her 
chair in her own cozy sanctum, before a cheerful fire, we ate nuts and 
apples, and listen while she recite “an o’er true tale,” told her by 
her grandmother, who herself witness the vision: 

it was a fearful night, the wind sob and wail round the house like 
lost spirits mourning their doom; the rain beat upon the casements, and 
the trees, writhe in the torture of the fierce blast, groan and 
sway until their tops almost swept the earth; bright flash of 
lightning pierce even through the closed shutter and heavy curtains, 
and the thunder had a sullen, threaten roar that made your blood 
creep. it was a night to make one seek to shut out all sound, draw the 
curtains close, stir the fire and nestle deep in the arm-chair before 
it, with feet upon the fender, and have something cheerful to think or 
talk about. but i was all alone; none in the house with me but the 
servants, and the servants’ wing was detached from the main part of the 
building, for i do not care to have menial near me, and i had no love 
one near. 

it was just such a night that nance black died. “what a fearful night 
for the soul to leave its earthly home and go out into the vast, unknown 
future!” i spoke aloud, as, rousing from a train of thought, i drew my 
heavy mantle close round me, wheel my arm-chair near the fire, and 
cuddle down in it, bury my feet in the foot-cushion to warm them, 
for i felt strange cold. i was in the library; it was my usual 
sitting-room, for i seldom use the parlors. what was the use? my books 
were my friends, and i love best to be with them. my children dead, or 
married and away, the cold, grand parlor always seem gloomy and sad; 
the ghost of departed pleasure haunt them, and i care not to enter 
them. 

it was a long, wide room across the hall from the parlors, running the 
whole length of the house, and was line with shelves from floor to 
ceiling. my husband’s father had been a bibliomaniac, and my husband had 
had a leaning that way also, and the shelves held many an old rare work 
that was worth its weight in gold. the fire, though burning brightly, 
did not illume one-half the room of which, sitting in the chimney 
corner, i command a full view, and had been look at the shadow 
play on the furniture and shelves, as the flame shot up, and after 
flicker a moment, would die out, leave a gloom which would break 
away into fantastic shadow as the firelight would again shoot up. 

while watch the gleam of light and darkl shades, unconscious 
the wail of the storm outside attract my attention, there seem to 
be odd noise of tap on the windows, and sob and sighs, as though 
someone was entreat entrance from the fierce tumult; and as i sat 
there, again i thought of nance black, the old schoolgirl friend who had 
love me so dearly, and the night when she went forth to meet the doom 
appoint her; rest my head upon my hand, i sat gaze in the fire, 
thinking over her strange life, and still stranger death, and wonder 
what could have become of the money and jewel that i knew she had once 
possessed. 

while sitting thus, a queer sensation crept over me; it was not fear, 
but a feeling as though if i’d look up i’d see something frightful; a 
shiver, not like that of cold, ran from my head to my feet, and a 
sensation as though someone was breathing icy cold breath upon my 
forehead, the same feeling you would cause by holding a piece of ice to 
your cheek; it flutter over my face and finally settled round my lips, 
as though the unseen one was caress me, thrill me with horror. but 
i am not fearful, nervous nor imaginative, and resolute throw off 
the dread that fell upon me, i turn round and look up, and there, so 
close by my side that my hand, involuntary thrown out, pass through 
her seeming form, stood nance black. it was nance black, and yet not 
nance black; her whole body had a semi-transparent appearance, just as 
your hand looks when you hold it between yourself and a strong light; 
her clothing, apparently the same as worn in life, had a wavy, seething, 
flicker look, like flame have, and yet did not seem to burn. 

“in the name of god, nance black, what brought you here, and whence came 
you?” i exclaimed. 

a hollow whisper followed: 

“thank you, my old friend, for speak to me, and, oh, how deep i 
thank you for thinking of me to-night--i shall have rest.” 

rest! i heard echoed, and a jeer laugh rang through the room that 
made her quiver at its sound. 

“i have been near you often; but always fail to find you in a 
condition when you would be en rapport before to-night. what i came for 
i will tell you; whence i come, you need not know; suffice it to say, 
that were i happy i would not be here on such an errand, nor on such a 
night--it is only when the elements are in a tumult, and the wind wail 
and moan, that we come forth. when you hear these sound it is soul of 
the lost you hear mourning their doom--’tis then they wander up and 
down, to and fro, their only release from their fearful home of torture 
and undying pain. 

“i have come to tell you that you must go over to the old house, and in 
the back room i always kept locked, have the carpet taken up from toward 
the fireplace. you will see a plank with a knot-hole in it. remove that, 
and you will find what cause me to lose my soul--have prayer said for 
me, for ’tis well to pray for the dead. the money and jewel give in 
charity; bury in holy ground the other you find, and pray for them and 
me. ah! jeannette, you thought your old friend, though strange and odd, 
pure and innocent. it is a bitter part of my punishment that i must 
change your thought of me. farewell! do not fail me, and i shall trouble 
you no more. but whenever you hear that wind howl and sweep round the 
house as it do to-night, know that the lost are near. it is their 
swift flight through space--fleeing before the scourge of memory and 
conscience--that cause that sound. 

“that to-morrow you may not think you are dreaming, here is a token,” 
and she touched the palm of my hand with her finger-tips, and as you 
see, my child, to this day, there are three crimson spot in the palm of 
my hand that nothing will eradicate. 

“do not fail me, and pray for us, jeannette, pray,” and with a longing, 
wistful gaze, and a deep, sob sigh, nance black fade from my sight. 

“am i dreaming?” i exclaimed, as i rose from my chair and rang the bell. 
when the servant entered, i bade him attend to the fire and light the 
lamps, and i went through the room to see if any unusual arrangement of 
the furniture could have cause the appearance, but nothing was 
apparent, and i bade him send my maid to attend me in my chamber, for i 
could not help feeling unwill to remain in the library any long 
that evening. 

while making my toilet for the night my maid said: 

“have you burn your hand, madam?” 

glancing hasty down, i saw three dark crimson spot upon the palm of 
my left hand. they had an odd look, sear as though touched by a 
red-hot iron, yet the flesh was soft, not burn and not painful. making 
some excuse for it, i did not allude to it again, and dismiss her 
speedily, that i might reflect undisturbed over the singular occurrence. 
there were the mark upon my hand; i could not remove them, and they did 
not fade. in fact, their deep red made the rest of the palm lose its 
pinkish hue and look pale from the strong contrast. could i have been 
asleep and dream it all, and by any means have done this to myself? i 
thought, but finally conclude that on the morrow i’d go over to nance 
black’s old residence and settle the question; and with that conclusion 
had to content myself until the morrow came. 

nance black was an old friend from my girlhood, who had own large 
property in the town, and live all alone in a spacious stone house 
directly opposite my home, and who, when dying, had left me the sole 
legatee of her property. 

when morning came i took the keys, and, with my maid, went over to 
nancy’s house. it had never been disturbed since her death, which was 
sudden and somewhat singular, and the furniture remain just as she 
left it when taken to her last rest place. we went to the room nance 
had directed. i bade sarah take up the carpet, and, sure enough, there 
was a plank with a knot-hole in it; so i sent her from the room, and 
lift the plank myself, and there, between the two joints, rest a 
long box, the lid not fastened. opening it, i was horrify to see two 
skeletons--those of an infant and of a woman, small in stature and 
delicate frame. in a moment it flash before me that i saw all that 
remain of nance black’s young sister, a girl of seventeen, who had 
left home somewhat mysterious years ago, and had die while absent--at 
least, that was the version nance had given of her absence, and no one 
had dream of doubt it, her tale was so naturally told. 

left orphan when lucy was only two years and nance eighteen, she had 
devoted her life to the care of this young girl, and when she found her 
sister had fallen, she, in her pride of name and position, had destroy 
mother and child, that her shame might not be known, and had live all 
those dreary years in that house with her fearful secret. 

round the box, heap up on every side, were money and jewels, and a 
parchment scroll among them had written on it: “lucy’s share of our 
father’s estate.” i carry out nancy’s wish to the letter, for i now 
firm believe that she had come to me herself that night. to avoid 
scandal rest on the dead, i took our clergyman into my confidence, 
and with his assistance had the remains bury quiet in consecrate 
ground. the money and jewel were given to the poor, and the old 
building i turn into a home for destitute females; and morning and 
night, as i kneel in prayer, i pray forgiveness to rest upon nance black 
and peace to her trouble soul. 




a fight with a ghost. 

by q. e. d. 


“no, i never believe much in ghosts,” said the doctor. “but i was 
always rather afraid of them.” 

“have you ever seen one?” ask one of the other men. 

the doctor took his cigar out of his mouth and contemplate the ash for 
a moment or two before replying. “i have had some rather startle 
experiences,” he said, after a pause, during which the rest of us 
exchange glances, for the doctor has seen many things and is not averse 
to talk about them in congenial company. “would you care about 
hearing one of them? it give me the cold shivers now to speak of it.” 
we nodded, and the doctor, taking a sip as an antidote to the shivers, 
began: 

“you remember george carson, who play for the ‘varsity some years ago; 
big chap, with a light mustache? well, i saw a good deal of him before 
he married, while he was reading for the bar in town. it was just after 
he became engaged to miss stonor, who is now mrs. carson, that he ask 
me to go down to a place which his people had taken in the country. miss 
stone was to be there and he want me to meet her. i could not go down 
for christmas day, as i had promise to be with my people. but as i had 
been working a bit too hard, and want a few days’ rest, i decided to 
run down for a few days about the new year. 

“woodcote was a pleasant enough place to look at. there were two pack 
of hound within easy distance, and it was not far enough from a station 
to cut you off completely from the morning papers. the carson had been 
lucky, i thought, in coming across such a good house at such a moderate 
figure. for, as george told me, the owner had been oblige to go abroad 
for his health, and was anxious not to leave the place empty all the 
winter. it was an old house, with big gable and preposterous corner 
all over the place, and you couldn’t walk ten pace along any of the 
passage without tumble up or down stairs. but it had been patch 
from time to time and, among other improvements, a big billiard-room had 
been built out at the back. a country house in the winter without a 
billiard-room, when the frost stop hunting, is just--well, not even a 
gilded prison. the party was a small one; besides george and his father 
and mother, there were only a couple of miss carson, who, being 
somewhere in the early teens, didn’t count, and miss stonor, who, of 
course, count a good deal, and, lastly, myself. 

“miss stone ought to have been happy, for george carson, besides being 
an excellent fellow all around, was by no means a bad match, being an 
only son with considerable expectations. but, somehow or other, she did 
not strike me as look either very well or very happy. she gave me the 
impression of have something on her mind, which made her alternate 
nervous and listless. george, i fancied, notice it, and was puzzle by 
it, for i caught him several times watch her with an anxious and 
inquiring look, but, as i was not there as a doctor, of course it was no 
business of mine, though i discover the reason before i left woodcote. 

“the second night after my arrival--we had been playing, i remember, a 
family pool; the rest had gone upstairs to bed--george and i adjourn 
to a sort of study, which he had arrange upstairs, for a final smoke 
and a chat before turning in. the study was next to his bedroom, and 
part off from it by curtains. as we were settle down i miss my 
pipe, and remember that i had laid it down in the billiard-room. on 
principle i never smoke another man’s pipe, so i lit a candle, the house 
being in darkness, and start away in search of my own. the house 
look awfully weird by the flicker light of a solitary candle, and 
the stairs creak in a particularly gruesome way behind me, just for 
all the world as though someone were following at my heels. i found my 
pipe where i had expect in the billiard-room, and came back in perhaps 
a little more hurry than was absolutely necessary. which, perhaps, 
explain why i stumble in the uncertain light over a couple of 
unforeseen stairs, and drop my candle. of course it went out, but 
after a little grope i found it. have no match with me i was 
oblige to feel my way along the banisters, for it was so dark that i 
could not see my hand in front of me. and as i slow advanced, slide 
my hand along the broad balustrade at my side, it sudden slid over 
something cold and clammy, which was not balustrade at all; for, 
stopping dead, and close my finger round it for an instant, i felt 
that i was holding another hand, a skinny, bony hand, which writhe 
itself slow from my grasp. and though i could hear nothing and see 
nothing, i was yet conscious that something was brush past me and 
go up the stairs. 

“‘hi--what’s that? who are you?’ i called. 

“there was no answer. 

“i admit that i was in a regular funk. i must have shown it in my face. 

“‘what’s the matter?’ ask george, as i blunder into his study. 

“‘oh, nothing,’ i answered; ‘dropped my candle and lost the way.’ 

“‘but who were you talk to?’ 

“‘i was only swear at the candle,’ i replied. 

“‘oh! i thought perhaps you had seen--somebody,’ reply george. 

“somehow i did not like to tell him the truth, for fear he would laugh 
at my nervousness. but i determined to keep an eye on my liver, and take 
a couple of weeks’ complete rest. that night i woke up several times 
with the feeling of that confounded hand under my own--a clammy hand 
which writhe as my finger closed upon it. 

“the next morning after breakfast i was in the billiard-room practice 
stroke while carson was over at the stables. presently the door opened, 
and miss stone look in. 

“‘come in,’ i said; ‘george will be back from the stable in a few 
minutes. meanwhile we can have fifty up.’ 

“‘i want to speak to you,’ she said. 

“she was look very tired and ill, and i began to think i should not 
have an uninterrupted holiday after all. 

“‘do you believe in ghosts?’ she asked, have closed the door and come 
up to the table, where she stood leaning with both her hand upon it. 

“‘no,’ i replied, missing an easy carrom as i remember my experience 
of last night, ‘but i believe in fancy.’ 

“‘and, supposing then that a person fancy he saw things, is there any 
remedy?’ 

“‘what do you mean, miss stonor?’ i replied, look at her in some 
surprise. ‘do you mean that you fancy----’ 

“i stopped, for miss stone turn away, sat down on one of the 
easy-chairs by the wall, and burst into tears. 

“‘oh! please help me’ she sobbed; ‘i believe i am go mad.’ 

“i laid down my cue and went over to her. 

“‘look here, miss stonor,’ i said, taking her hand, which was hot and 
feverish, ‘i am a doctor, and a friend of george. now tell me all about 
it, and i’ll do my best to set it right.’ 

“she was in a more or less hysterical condition, and her words were 
freely punctuate by sobs. but gradual i manage to elicit from her 
that nearly every night since she came to woodcote she had been awaken 
in some mysterious way, and had seen a horrible face look at her from 
over the top of a screen which stood by the door of her bedroom. as soon 
as she move the face disappeared, which convinced her that the 
apparition exist only in her imagination. that seem to distress her 
even more than if she had believe it to be a genuine ghost, for she 
thought her brain was give way. 

“i told her that she was only suffering from a very common symptom of 
nervous disorder, as indeed it was, and promise to send a groom into 
the village to get a prescription made up for her. and, have made me 
promise to breathe no word to anyone on the subject, more especially to 
george, she went away relieved. nevertheless, i was not quite certain 
that i had made a correct diagnosis of the case. you see i had been 
rather upset myself not many hour before. george was long than i 
expect at the stable, and i was just go to find him when at the 
door i met mrs. carson. 

“‘can you spare me one moment?’ she said, as i held open the door for 
her. ‘i want to find you alone.’ 

“‘certainly, mrs. carson, with pleasure; an hour, if you wish,’ i 
replied. 

“‘it is so convenient, you know, to have a doctor in the house,’ she 
said, with a nervous laugh. ‘now i want you to prescribe me a sleep 
draught. my nerves are rather out of order, and--i don’t sleep as i 
should.’ 

“‘ah,’ i said, ‘do you see faces--and such like things when you wake?’ 

“‘how do you know?’ she ask quickly. 

“‘oh, i infer from the other symptoms. we doctor have to observe all 
kind of little things.’ 

“‘well, of course, i know it is only fancy; but it is just as bad as if 
it were real. i assure you it is making me quite ill; and i didn’t like 
to mention it to mr. carson or to george. they would think i was lose 
my head.’ 

“i gave mrs. carson the same prescription as i had written for miss 
stonor, though by that time the conviction had grown upon me that there 
was something wrong which could not be cure by medicine. however, i 
decided to say nothing to george about the matter at present. for i 
could hardly utilize the confidence which had been placed in me by miss 
stone and mrs. carson. and my own experience of the night before would 
scarcely have appear convincing to him. but i determined that on the 
next day--which was sunday--i would invent an excuse for stay at home 
from church and make some exploration in the house. there was obviously 
some mystery at work which want clearing up. 

“we all sat up rather late that night. there seem to be a general 
disinclination to go to bed. we stay all together in the billiard-room 
until nearly midnight, and then loiter about in the hall, talk in 
an aimless sort of fashion. but at last mrs. carson said good-night, 
with a confidential nod to me, and miss stone murmured, ‘so many 
thanks; i’ve got it,’ and they both went upstairs. george and i part 
in the corridor above. our rooms were opposite each other. 

“i did not begin undress at once, but sat down and try to piece 
together some theory to account for the uncanny of things. but the 
more i thought, the more perplex it became. there was no doubt 
whatever that i had put my hand on something extremely alive and 
extremely unpleasant the night before. the bare recollection of it made 
me shudder. what living thing could possibly be creep about the house 
in the dark? it was a man’s hand. of that i was certain from the size of 
it. george carson was out of the question, for he was in his room all 
the time. nor was it likely that mr. carson, senior, would steal about 
his own house in his sock and refuse to answer when spoken to. the only 
other man in the house was an eminently respectable-looking butler; and 
his hand, as i had noted particularly when he pour out my wine at 
dinner, was plump and soft, whereas the mysterious hand on the 
balustrade was thin and bony. and then, what was the real explanation of 
the face which had appear to the two ladies? indigestion might have 
explain either singly. extraordinary coincidence do sometimes occur, 
but it seem too extraordinary that a couple of ladies--one old and one 
young--should suffer from the same indigestion in the same house, at the 
same time, and with the same symptoms. on the whole, i did not feel at 
all comfortable, and look careful in all the cupboard and recesses, 
as well as under the bed, before start to undress. then i went to the 
door, intend to lock it. just as my hand was upon the key, i heard a 
soft step in the corridor outside, accompany by a sound which was 
something between a sigh and a groan. very faint, but quite 
unmistakable, and, under the circumstances, discomposing. it might, of 
course, be george. anyhow, i decided to look and see. i turn the 
handle gently and open the door. there was nothing to be seen in the 
corridor. but on the opposite side i could see a door open, and george’s 
head peep round the corner. 

“‘hullo!’ he said. 

“‘hullo!’ i replied. 

“‘was that you walking up the passage?’ he asked. 

“‘no,’ i answered, ‘i thought it might be you.’ 

“‘then who the devil was it?’ he said. ‘i’ll swear i heard someone.’ 

“there was silence for a few moments. i was wonder whether i had 
better tell him of the fright i had already had, when he spoke again: 

“‘i say, just come here for a bit, old fellow; i want to speak to you.’ 

“i step across the passage, and we went together into the little 
study which adjoin his bedroom. 

“‘look here,’ he said, poke up the fire, which was burning low, 
‘doesn’t it strike you that there is something very odd about this 
house?’ 

“‘you mean----’ 

“‘well, i wouldn’t say anything about it to the master or miss stone 
for fear of frighten them. all the same, scarcely a night pass but 
i hear curious footstep on the stairs. you’ve heard them yourself, 
haven’t you?’ 

“‘now you mention it,’ i said, ‘i confess i have.’ 

“‘and, what is more,’ he continued, ‘i was sitting here two nights ago 
half asleep, and--it seem ridiculous, i know, but it’s a fact--i 
sudden saw a horrible face glaring at me from between those curtains 
behind you. it was gone in a moment, but i saw it as plainly as i see 
you.’ 

“i move my seat uneasily. 

“‘did you look in your bedroom or in the passage?’ i asked. 

“‘yes--at once,’ he replied. ‘there was nothing to be seen; but twice 
again that night i heard footstep passing--good god!’ 

“he start up in his chair, staring straight over my shoulder. i turn 
quick and saw the curtains which part off the bedroom swing 
together. 

“‘what is it?’ i asked, breathlessly. 

“‘i saw it again--the same face--between the curtains.’ 

“i tore the hangings aside, and rush into the next room. it was empty. 
the lamp was burning upon a side table, and the door was open, just as 
george had left it. in the passage outside all was quiet. i came back 
into the study and found george running his finger through his hair in 
perplexity. 

“‘there is clearly one person too many in the house,’ i said. ‘i think 
we ought to draw the place and find out who it is.’ 

“‘all right,’ said he, pick up the poker from the fireplace; ‘if it’s 
anything made of flesh and blood this will be useful, and if not----’ 

“he stop short, for at that instant the most awful shriek of horror 
rang through the house--a shriek of wild, uncontrollable terror, such as 
i had never heard before and i never hope to hear again. one moment we 
stood staring at each other, dumbfounded. the next george carson had 
dashed out of the room and down the corridor to the stairs. i follow 
close behind him. for we both knew that none but a woman in mortal fear 
would shriek like that, and that that woman was miss stonor. 

“down the stairs we tumble pell-mell in the darkness. but before i 
reach the landing below, where miss stonor’s room was, i felt, as i 
had felt the evening before, something brush swift past me. as i ran i 
turn and caught at it in the dark. but my hand grip only empty air. 
i was just about to turn back and follow it, when a cry from george 
arrest me, and, look down, i saw him standing over the prostrate 
form of miss stonor. the door of her room was open, and by the moonlight 
which stream into the room i could see her lie in her white 
nightdress across the threshold. what follow in the next few minutes 
i can scarcely recall with accuracy. the whole house was arouse by the 
poor girl’s awful shriek. she was quite unconscious when we came upon 
her, but she revive more or less as soon as mrs. carson and one of the 
terrify servant had lift her into bed again. nothing intelligible 
could be gather from her, however, as to the cause of her fright; she 
only repeated, hysterically, again and again: 

“‘oh, the face; the face!’ 

“when i saw i could do her no further good for the present, i took 
george by the arm and led him out of the room. 

“‘look here, george,’ i said, ‘we must find out the reason of this at 
once. i am certain i felt something go by me as i came downstairs. now 
do that staircase lead anywhere but to our rooms?’ 

“george considered for a moment. 

“‘yes,’ he replied; ‘there is a door at the end of the passage which 
leads up into a sort of lumber room.’ 

“‘then we’ll explore it,’ i said. ‘for my part i can’t go to sleep until 
i’ve got to the bottom of this. get the man to bring a lantern along.’ 

“the butler look as though he didn’t half like the enterprise, and, to 
tell the truth, no more did i. it was the uncanniest job i ever 
undertook. however, we started, the three of us. first of all we 
search the rooms on the floor above, where george and i slept. 
everything was just as we had left it. then i pushed open the door at 
the end of the corridor. a crazy-looking staircase led up into darkness. 
we went cautious up, i first with a candle, then george, and last of 
all the butler with a lantern. at the top we step into a big, rather 
low room, with beam across the ceiling, and a rough, uneven floor. our 
lights threw strange shadow into the corners, and more than once i 
start at what look like a crouch human figure. we search every 
corner. there was nothing to be seen but a few old boxes, a roll or two 
of matting, and some broken chairs. but in the far corner george pointed 
out to me a rickety ladder which end at a closed trap-door. just then 
i distinct heard the curious, half groaning, half sigh sound which 
had already puzzle me in the corridor below. we stood still and look 
at one another. we all heard the sound. 

“‘whatever it is, it’s up there,’ i said. ‘the question is, who is go 
up?’ 

“george put his candle down upon the floor and step upon the ladder. 
it cracked beneath his weight. he stopped. 

“‘come down; it won’t bear you,’ i said. ‘i shall have to go.’ 

“i don’t know that i was ever in such a queer funk as i was while i 
slow mount that ladder, and pushed open the trap-door. i had form 
no clear idea of what i expect to find there. certainly i was not 
prepared for what happened. for no soon was the trap-door fully open 
than there fell--literally fell--upon me from the dark above a thing 
in human shape, which kick and spat and tore at me as i stood clinging 
to the ladder. it last but a moment or so, but in that moment i live 
a lifetime of terror. the ladder sway and cracked beneath me, and i 
fell to the floor with the thing gripping my throat like a vise. the 
next instant george had stun it with a blow from the poker and 
drag it off me. it lay upon its back on the floor--a ragged, hideous, 
loathsome shape. and the mystery was solved.” 

“but you haven’t told us what it really was,” said one of the listeners. 

the doctor smiled. 

“it was the owner of the house,” he replied. “he had not gone abroad. he 
had gone to a private lunatic asylum with homicidal mania upon him. 
about a fortnight before this he had manage to escape; and, have made 
his way to his former home, had conceal himself, with a cunning often 
shown by lunatics, in the loft. i suppose he had found enough to eat in 
his nightly ramble about the house. the only wonder is that he didn’t 
kill someone before he was caught.” 




colonel halifax’s ghost story. 


i had just come back to england, after have been some years in india, 
and was look forward to meet my friends, among whom there was none i 
was more anxious to see than sir francis lynton. we had been to eton 
together, and for the short time i had been at oxford, before enter 
the army, we had been at the same college. then we had parted. he came 
into the title and estate of the family in yorkshire on the death of 
his grandfather--his father had predeceased--and i had been over a good 
part of the world. one visit, indeed, i had made him in his yorkshire 
home, before leave for india, of but a few days. 

it will be easily imagine how pleasant it was, two or three days after 
my arrival in london, to receive a letter from lynton, saying that he 
had just seen in the papers that i had arrived, and, beg me to come 
down at once to byfield, his place in yorkshire. 

“you are not to tell me,” he said, “that you cannot come. in fact, you 
are to come on monday. i have a couple of horse which will just suit 
you; the carriage shall meet you at packham, and all you have got to do 
is to put yourself in the train which leaves kings cross at twelve 
o’clock.” 

accordingly, on the day appointed, i started, in due time reach 
packham, lose much time on a detest branch line, and there found 
the dog-cart of sir francis await me. i drove at once to byfield. 

the house i remembered. it was a low gable structure of no great size, 
with old-fashioned lattice windows, separate from the park, where were 
deer, by a charming terrace garden. 

no soon did the wheels crunch the gravel by the principal entrance, 
than, almost before the bell was rung, the porch-door opened, and there 
stood lynton himself, whom i had not seen for so many years, hardly 
altered, and with all the joy of welcome beam in his face. taking me 
by both hands, he drew me into the house, got rid of my hat and wraps, 
look me all over, and then, in a breath, began to say how glad he was 
to see me, what a real delight it was to have got me at last under his 
roof, and what a good time we would have together, like the old days 
over again. 

he had sent my luggage up to my room, which was ready for me, and he 
bade me make haste and dress for dinner. 

so saying he took me through a panel hall, up an old oak staircase, 
and show me my room, which, hurried as i was, i observe was hung 
with tapestry, and had a large four-post bed, with velvet curtains, 
opposite the window. 

they had gone in to dinner when i came down, despite all the haste i 
made in dressing; but a place had been kept for me next lady lynton. 

besides my hosts, there were their two daughters, colonel lynton, a 
brother of sir francis, the chaplain, and some others, whom i do not 
remember distinctly. 

after dinner there was some music in the hall, and a game of whist in 
the drawing-room, and after the ladies had gone upstairs, lynton and i 
retired to the smoking-room, where we sat up talk the better part of 
the night. i think it must have been near three when i retired. once in 
bed i slept so sound that my servant’s entrance the next morning 
fail to arouse me, and it was past nine when i awoke. 

after breakfast and the disposal of the newspapers, lynton retired to 
his letters, and i ask lady lynton if one of her daughter might show 
me the house. elizabeth, the eldest, was summoned, and seem in no way 
to dislike the task. 

the house was, as already intimated, by no means large; it occupy 
three side of a square, the entrance and one end of the stable making 
the fourth side. the interior was full of interest--passages, rooms, 
galleries, as well as hall, were panel in dark wood and hung with 
pictures. i was shown everything on the ground 

[illustration: “_losing much time on a detest branch line._”] 

floor, and then on the first floor. then my guide propose that we 
should ascend a narrow, twist staircase that led to a gallery. we did 
as proposed, and enter a handsome long room or passage leading to a 
small chamber at one end, in which my guide told me her father kept 
books and papers. 

i ask if anyone slept in this gallery, as i notice a bed and 
fireplace, and rod by means of which curtains might be drawn, enclose 
one portion where were bed and fireplace, so as to convert it into a 
very cosy chamber. 

she answer “no;” the place was not really used, except as a playroom; 
though, sometimes, if the house happen to be very full--in her 
great-grandfather’s time--she had heard that it had been occupied. 

by the time we had been over the house, and i had also been shown the 
garden and the stables, and introduce to the dogs, it was nearly one 
o’clock. we were to have an early luncheon, and to drive afterwards to 
see the ruins of one of the grand old yorkshire abbeys. 

this was a pleasant expedition, and we got back just in time for tea, 
after which there was some reading aloud. the evening pass much in the 
same way as the preceding one, except that lynton, who had some 
business, did not go down into the smoking-room, and i took the 
opportunity of retiring early in order to write a letter for the indian 
mail, something have been said as to the prospect of hunting the next 
day. 

i had finished my letter, which was a long one, together with two or 
three others, and had just got into bed, when i heard a step overhead, 
as of someone walking along the gallery, which i now knew ran 
immediately above my room. it was a slow, heavy, measured tread which i 
could hear get gradual loud and nearer, and then as gradual 
fade away, as it retreat into the distance. 

i was startle for a moment, have been told that the gallery was 
unused; but the next instant it occur to me that i had been told it 
communicate with a chamber where sir francis kept books and papers. i 
knew he had some writing to do, and i thought no more on the matter. 

i was down the next morning at breakfast in good time. “how late you 
were last night,” i said to lynton, in the middle of breakfast. “i heard 
you overhead after one o’clock.” 

lynton reply rather shortly: “indeed you did not, for i was in bed 
last night before twelve.” 

“there was someone certainly moving overhead last night,” i answered, 
“for i heard his steps as distinct as i ever heard anything in my life 
go down the gallery.” 

upon which colonel lynton remark that he had often fancy he had 
heard steps on the staircase, when he knew that no one was about. he was 
apparently disposed to say more, when his brother interrupt him 
somewhat curtly, as i fancied, and ask me if i should feel inclined 
after breakfast to have a horse and go out and look for the hounds. they 
met a considerable way off, but if they did not find in the covert they 
would first draw, a thing not improbable, they would come our way, and 
we might fall in with them about one o’clock and have a run. i said 
there was nothing i should like better. lynton mount me on a very nice 
chestnut, and the rest of the party have gone out shooting, and the 
young ladies being otherwise engaged, he and i start about eleven 
o’clock for our ride. 

it was a beautiful day, soft, with a bright sun, one of those beautiful 
days which so frequent occur in the early part of november. 

on reach the hilltop where lynton had expect to meet the hounds, no 
trace of them was to be discovered. they must have found at once, and 
run in a different direction. at three o’clock, after we had eaten our 
sandwiches, lynton reluctantly abandoned all hope of fall in with 
the hounds, and said we would return home by a slightly different route. 

we had not descended the hill before we came on an old chalk quarry and 
the remains of a disused kiln. 

i recollect the spot at once. i had been here with sir francis on my 
former visit, many years ago. “why, bless me!” said i; “do you remember, 
lynton, what happen here when i was with you before? there had been 
men engaged remove chalk, and they came on a skeleton under some depth 
of rubble. we went together to see it removed, and you said you would 
have it preserve till it could be examine by some ethnologist or 
anthropologist, any one of those dry-as-dusts, to decide whether the 
remains were dolichocephalous or brachycephalous--whether british, 
danish, or--modern. what was the result?” 

sir francis hesitate a moment, and then answered, “it is true, i had 
the remains removed.” 

“was there an inquest?” 

“no. i had been opening some of the tumuli on the wolds. i had sent a 
crouch skeleton and some skull to the scarsborough museum. this, i 
was doubtful about--whether it was a prehistoric interment--in fact, to 
what date it belonged. no one thought of an inquest.” 

on reach the house, one of the groom who took the horses, in answer 
to a question from lynton, said that colonel and mrs. hampshire had 
arrive about an hour ago, and that, one of the horse being lame, the 
carriage in which they had driven over from castle frampton was to put 
up for the night. in the drawing-room we found lady lynton pour out 
tea for her husband’s sister and her husband, who, as we came in, 
exclaimed: “we have come to beg a night’s lodging.” 

it appear that they had been on a visit in the neighborhood, and had 
been oblige to leave at a moment’s notice in consequence of a sudden 
death in the house where they were staying, and that, in the 
impossible of get a fly, their host had sent them over to 
byfield. 

“we thought,” mrs. hampshire went on to say, “that as we were coming 
here the end of next week, you would not mind have us a little sooner; 
or that, if the house were quite full, you would be willing to put us up 
anywhere till monday, and let us come back later.” 

lady lynton interpose with the remark that it was all settled; and 
then, turning to her husband, added: “but i want to speak to you for a 
moment.” 

they both left the room together. 

lynton came back almost immediately, and, making an excuse to show me, 
on a map in the hall, the point to which we had ridden, said, as soon as 
we were alone, with a look of considerable annoyance: “i am afraid we 
must ask you to change your room. shall you mind very much? i think we 
can make you quite comfortable upstairs in the gallery, which is the 
only room available. lady lynton has had a good fire lit; the place is 
really not cold, and it will be only for a night or two. your servant 
has been told to put your things together, but lady lynton did not like 
to give orders to have them actually move before my speak to you.” 

i assured him that i did not mind in the very least; that i should be 
quite as comfortable upstairs; but that i did mind very much their 
making such a fuss about a matter of that sort with an old friend like 
myself. 

certainly nothing could look more comfortable than my new lodging when i 
went upstairs to dress. there was a bright fire in the large grate, an 
arm-chair had been drawn up beside it, and all my books and writing 
things had been put in, with a reading-lamp in the central position, and 
the heavy tapestry curtains were drawn, convert this part of the 
gallery into a room to itself. indeed, i felt somewhat inclined to 
congratulate myself on the change. the spiral staircase had been one 
reason against this place have been given to the hampshires. no lady’s 
long dress trunk could have mount it. 

sir francis was necessarily a good deal occupy in the evening with his 
sister and her husband, whom he had not seen for some time. colonel 
hampshire had also just heard that he was likely to be ordered to egypt, 
and when lynton and he retired to the smoking-room, instead of go 
there i went upstairs to my own room to finish a book in which i was 
interested. i did not, however, sit up long, and very soon went to bed. 

before do so, i drew back the curtains on the rods, partly because i 
like plenty of air where i sleep, and partly also because i thought i 
might like to see the play of the moonlight on the floor in the portion 
of the gallery beyond where i lay, and where the blind had not been 
drawn. 

i must have been asleep for some time, for the fire, which i had left in 
full blaze, was gone to a few sparks wandering among the ashes, when i 
sudden awoke with the impression of have heard a latch click at the 
further extremity of the gallery, where was the chamber contain books 
and papers. 

i had always been a light sleeper, but on the present occasion i woke at 
once to complete and acute consciousness, and with a sense of stretch 
attention which seem to intensify all my faculties. the wind had 
risen, and was blow in fitful gust round the house. 

a minute or two passed, and i began almost to fancy i must have been 
mistaken, when i distinct heard the creak of the door, and then the 
click of the latch fall back into place. then i heard a sound on the 
boards as of one moving in the gallery. i sat up to listen, and as i did 
so i distinct heard steps coming down the gallery. 

[illustration: “_who are you?_”] 

i heard them approach and pass my bed; i could see nothing, all was 
dark; but i heard the tread proceeding toward where were the uncurtained 
and unshuttered windows, two in number; but the moon shone through only 
one of these, the nearest--the other was dark, shadow by the chapel or 
some other building at right angles. the tread seem to me to pause now 
and again, and then continue as before. 

i now fixed my eyes intent on the one illumine window, and it 
appear to me as if some dark body pass across it; but what? i 
listen intently, and heard the step proceed to the end of the gallery, 
and then return. 

i again watch the light window, and immediately that the sound 
reach that portion of the long passage it cease momentarily, and i 
saw, as distinct as i ever saw anything in my life, by moonlight, a 
figure of a man with marked features, in what appear to be a fur cap 
drawn over the brows. 

it stood in the embrasure of the window, and the outline of the face was 
in silhouette; then it move on, and as it move i again heard the 
tread. 

i was as certain as i could be that the thing, whatever it was, or the 
person, whoever he was, was approach my bed. 

i threw myself back in the bed, and as i did see a mass of char wood 
on the hearth fell down and sent up a flash of--i fancy sparks, that 
gave out a glare into the darkness, and by that--red as blood--i saw a 
face near me. 

with a cry, over which i had as little control as the scream utter by 
a sleeper in the agony of a nightmare, i called, “who are you?” 

there was an instant during which my hair bristle on my head, as in the 
horror of the dark i prepared to grapple with the being at my side; 
when a board creak as if someone had moved, and i heard the footstep 
retreat, and again the click of the latch. 

the next instant there was a rush on the stairs and lynton burst into 
the room, just as he had sprung out of bed, crying: “for god’s sake, 
what is the matter? are you ill?” 

i could not answer. lynton struck a light and lean over the bed. then 
i seize him by the arm, and said, without moving: “there has been 
something in this room--gone in thither.” 

the words were hardly out of my mouth when lynton, following the 
direction of my eyes, had sprung to the end of the corridor and thrown 
open the door there. 

he went into the room beyond, look round it, returned, and said: “you 
must have been dreaming.” 

by this time i was out of bed. 

“look for yourself,” said he, and he led me into the little room. it was 
bare, with cupboard and boxes, a sort of lumber place. “there is 
nothing beyond this,” said he, “no door, no staircase. it is a blind 
way.” then he added: “now pull on your dressing-gown and come downstairs 
to my sanctum.” 

i follow him, and after he had spoken to lady lynton, who was standing 
with the door of her room ajar in a state of great agitation, he turn 
to me, and said: “no one can have been in your room. you see, my and my 
wife’s apartments are close below, and no one could come up the spiral 
staircase without passing my door. you must have had a nightmare. 
directly you scream i rush up the steps, and met no one descending; 
and there is no place of concealment in the lumber-room at the end of 
the gallery.” 

then he took me into his private snuggery, blew up the fire, light a 
lamp, and said: “i shall be really grateful if you will say nothing 
about this. there are some in the house and neighborhood who are silly 
enough as it is. you stay here, and if you do not feel inclined to go to 
bed, read--here are books. i must go to lady lynton, who is a good deal 
frightened, and do not like to be left alone.” 

he then went to his bedroom. 

sleep, as far as i was concerned, was out of the question, nor do i 
think sir francis and his wife slept much, either. 

i made up the fire, and after a time took up a book, and try to read, 
but it was useless. 

i sat absorb in thought and questioning till i heard the servant 
stirring in the morning. i went to my own room, left the candle burning, 
and got into bed. i had just fallen asleep when my servant brought me a 
cup of tea at eight o’clock. 

at breakfast colonel hampshire and his wife ask if anything had 
happen in the night, as they had been much disturbed by noise 
overhead, to which lynton reply that i had not been very well, and had 
an attack of cramp, and that he had been upstairs to look after me. from 
his manner i could see that he wish me to be silent, and i said 
nothing accordingly. 

in the afternoon, when everyone had gone out, sir francis took me into 
his snuggery, and said: “halifax, i am very sorry about that matter last 
night. it is quite true, what my brother said, that steps have been 
heard about this house, but i never gave heed to such things, putt 
all noise down to rats. but after your experience i feel that it is 
due to you to tell you something, and also to make to you an 
explanation. there is--there was--no one in the room at the end of the 
corridor, except the skeleton that was discover in the chalk-pit when 
you were here many years ago. i confess i had not paid much heed to it. 
my archæological fancies passed; i had no visit from anthropologists; 
the bone and skull were never shown to experts, but remain packed in a 
chest in that lumber-room. i confess i ought to have bury them, have 
no more scientific use for them, but i did not--on my word, i forgot all 
about them, or, at least, gave no heed to them. however, what you have 
gone through, and have describe to me, has made me uneasy, and has also 
given me a suspicion that i can account for that body in a manner that 
had never occur to me before.” 

after a pause, he added: “what i am go to tell you is known to no one 
else, and must not be mention by you--anyhow, in my lifetime. you know 
now that, owe to the death of my father when quite young, i and my 
brother and sister were brought up here with our grandfather, sir 
richard. he was an old, imperious, hot-tempered man. i will tell you 
what i have made out of a matter that was a mystery for long, and i will 
tell you afterwards how i came to unravel it. my grandfather was in the 
habit of go out at night with a young under-keeper, of whom he was 
very fond, to look after the game and see if any poachers, whom he 
regard as his natural enemies, were about. 

“one night, as i suppose, my grandfather had been out with the young man 
in question, and, return by the plantations, where the hill is 
steepest, and not far from the chalk-pit you 

[illustration: “_he and the keeper bury the body._”] 

remark on yesterday, they came upon a man who, though not actually 
belong to the country, was well known in it as a sort of travel 
tinker of indifferent character and a notorious poacher. mind this, i am 
not sure it was at the place i mention; i only now surmise it. on the 
particular night in question, my grandfather and the keeper must have 
caught this man setting snares; there must have been a tussle, in the 
course of which, as subsequent circumstances have led me to imagine, the 
man show fight, and was knock down by one or the other of the 
two--my grandfather or the keeper. i believe that after have made 
various attempt to restore him, they found that the man was actually 
dead. 

“they were both in great alarm and concern--my grandfather especially. 
he had been prominent in putt down some factory riots, and had given 
orders to the military to fire, whereby several lives had been lost. 
there was a vast outcry against him, and a certain politics party had 
denounce him as an assassin. no man was more vituperated; yet now, in 
my conscience, i believe he act with both discretion and pluck, and 
arrest a mischievous movement that might have led to much bloodshed. 
be that as it may, my impression is that he lost his head over this 
fatal affair with the tinker, and that he and the keeper together bury 
the body secretly, not far from the place where he was killed. i now 
think it was in the chalk-pit, and that the skeleton found years after 
there belong to this man.” 

“good heavens!” i exclaimed, as at once my mind rush back to the 
figure with the fur cap that i had seen against the window. 

sir francis went on: “the sudden disappearance of the tramp, in view of 
his well-known habit and wandering mode of life, did not for some time 
excite surprise; but, later on, one or two circumstances have led to 
suspicion, an inquiry was set on foot, and among others, my 
grandfather’s keeper were examine before the magistrates. it was 
remember afterwards that the under-keeper in question was absent at 
the time of the inquiry, my grandfather have sent him with some dogs 
to a brother-in-law of his who live upon the moors; but whether anyone 
notice the fact, or if they did, prefer to be silent, no 
observations were made. nothing came of the investigation, and the whole 
subject would have been drop if it had not been that two years later, 
for some reason i do not understand, but at the instigation of a 
magistrate recently import into the division, whom my grandfather 
greatly disliked, and who was oppose to him in politics, a fresh 
inquiry was instituted. in the course of that inquiry it transpire 
that, owe to some unguarded words drop by the under-keeper, a 
warrant was about to be issue for his arrest. my grandfather, who had a 
fit of the gout, was away from home at the time, but on hearing the news 
he came home at once. the evening he return he had a long interview 
with the young man, who left the house after he had sup in the 
servants’ hall. it was observe that he look much depressed. the 
warrant was issue the next day, but in the meantime the keeper had 
disappeared. my grandfather gave orders to his people to do everything 
in their power to assist the authority in the search that was at once 
set on foot, but was unable himself to take any share in it. 

“no trace of the keeper was found, although at a subsequent period 
rumor circulate that he had been heard of in america. but the man 
have been unmarried, he gradual drop out of remembrance, and as 
my grandfather never allow the subject to be mention in his 
presence, i should probably never have known anything about it but for 
the vague tradition which always attach to such events, and for this 
fact, that after my grandfather’s death, a letter came address to him 
from somewhere in the united states from some one--the name different 
from that of the keeper--but allude to the past, and imply the 
presence of a common secret, and, of course, with it came a request for 
money. i replied, mention the death of sir richard, and ask for 
an explanation. i did get an answer, and it is from that that i am able 
to fill in so much of the story. but i never learned where the man had 
been kill and buried, and my next letter to the fellow was return 
with ‘deceased’ written across it. somehow, it never occur to me till 
i heard your story that possibly the skeleton in the chalk-pit might be 
that of the poach tinker. i will now most assured have it bury in 
the churchyard.” 

“that certainly ought to be done,” said i. 

“and,” said sir francis, after a pause, “i give you my word--after the 
burial of the bones, and you are gone, i will sleep for a week in the 
bed in the gallery, and report to you if i see or hear anything. if all 
be quiet, then--well, you form your own conclusions.” 

i left a day after. before long i got a letter from my friend, brief, 
but to the point: “all quiet, old boy; come again.” 




the ghost of the count. 


not far from the alameda, in the city of mexico, there is a great old 
stone building, in which once live a very wealthy and wicked spain 
count. the house has about four floors, and ninety rooms, more or less. 
the entire fourth floor is rent and occupy by a big america firm, 
and their bookkeeper, an america girl, has given us the following true 
account of the ghost that for years haunt the building. the second 
floor is unoccupied, as no one care to live there for obvious reasons. 
and the bottom floor is also unoccupied, save for lumber rooms, empty 
box and crate and barrels. and last of all is the great patio with 
its tile floor, where secret in the night a duel was fought to the 
death by the wicked count and a famous austria prince, who was one of 
maximilian’s men. the count was killed. 

no one know why the duel was fought; some say it was because of a 
beautiful spain woman; some say that it was because of treasure that 
the two joint “conveyed,” and which the count refuse to divide with 
his princely “socio,” and more people--mexicans--shrug their shoulder 
if you ask about it, and say, “quien sabe?” 

“i saw a ghost here last night, miss james,” announce our cashier with 
much eclat and evident pride. 

so great is the shock that i gasp, and my pen drops, spatter red ink 
on my nice fresh cuffs, and (worse luck!) on the ledger page that i had 
just tot up. it is ruined, and i will have to erase it, 
or--something! wretched man! 

“i wish to goodness it had taken you off,” i cry, wrathfully, as i look 
at the bespattered work. “now will you just look here and see what you 
have done? i wish you and your ghost were in----” 

“gehenna?” he inquires, sweetly; “i’ll fix that--it won’t take half a 
minute. and don’t look so stern, else i won’t tell you about the 
‘espanto.’ and you will be sorry if you don’t hear about it--it would 
make such a good story.” (insinuatingly.) 

“then go ahead with it.” (ungraciously.) 

“well, last night i was wait for west. he was to meet me here, after 
which it was our intention to hit the--that is, i mean we were go out 
together. (i nod scornfully.) and it seem that while i was patient 
wait here, in my usual sweet-tempered way, the blank idiot had his 
supper and then lay down to rest himself for a while. you know how 
delicate he is? (another contemptuous nod.) unfortunately he forgot the 
engagement, and slept on. he say he never awoke until three o’clock, 
and so didn’t come, thinking i wouldn’t be there. meantime i also went 
to sleep, and might have snooze on until three, likewise, but for the 
fact that the ghost woke me----” 

“well? do go on,” i urge. 

“the ghost woke me, as i said,” proceeds the simpleton, slowly. “it was 
passing its cold finger over my face and groaning. really, it was most 
extraordinary. at first i didn’t know what it was; then, as i felt the 
icy finger stroke my face and heard blood-curdling groan issue 
from the darkness, i knew what it was. and i remember the story of the 
prince and his little duel down in the patio, and knew it was the ghost 
of the prince’s victim. by the way, you don’t know what a funny 
sensation it is to have a ghost pat your face, miss james----” 

“pat nothing,” i retort, indignantly. “i wonder you are not ashamed to 
tell me such fibs. such a ta-ra-diddle! and as for the man that the 
prince kill downstairs, you know as well as i do that he was taken 
home to spain and bury there. why, then, should he come back here, 
into our offices, and pat your face?” 

“ah, that i can’t say,” with a supercilious drawl. “i can only account 
for it by thinking that the ghost has good taste--better than that of 
some people i know,” meaningly. “but honestly, i swear that i am telling 
you the truth--cross my heart and hope to die if i am not! and you 
don’t know how brave i was--i never screamed; in fact, i never made a 
sound; oh, i was brave!” 

“then what did you do?” sternly. 

“i ran. por dios, how i ran! you remember with what alacrity we got down 
the stairs during the november earthquake? (i remember only too 
distinctly.) well, last night’s run wasn’t a run, in comparison--it was 
a disappearance, a flight, a sprint! i went down the four flight of 
stairs like a streak of blue lightning, and the ghost flew with me. i 
heard the patter of its steps and its groan clean down to the patio 
door, and i assure you i quite thought i had made such an impression 
that it was actually go on home with me. and the thought made me feel 
so weak that i felt perforce oblige to take a--have a--that is, 
strengthen myself with a cocktail. after which i felt strong and went 
home quite peacefully. but it was an uncanny experience, wasn’t it?” 

“was it before or after taking that cocktail?” i ask, incredulously. 
“and did you take one only or eleven?” 

i am hard on the man, but he really deserve it. ghosts! spirits, 
perhaps, but not ghosts. whereat his feelings are quite “hurted”--so 
much so that he vow he will never tell me anything again; i had better 
read about doubt thomas; he never has seen such an unbelieving woman 
in all his life, and if i were only a man he would be tempt to pray 
that i might see the ghost; it would serve me right. then, wrathful 
departs, to notice me no more that day. 

not believe the least bit in ghost i gave the matter no more thought. 
in fact, when you fall heir to a set of books that haven’t been post 
for nineteen days, and you have to do it all, and get up your trial 
balance, too, or else give up your christmas holidays, you haven’t much 
time to think about ghosts, or anything else, except entries. and though 
i had been working fourteen hour per day, the 24th of december, noon 
hour, found me with a difference of $13.89. the which i, of course, must 
locate and straighten out before depart next morning on my week’s 
holiday. por supuesto, it meant night work. nothing else would do; and 
besides, our plan had all been made to leave on the eight o’clock train 
next morning. so i would just sit up all night, if need be, and find the 
wretched balance and be done with it. 

behold me settled for work that night at seven o’clock in my own office, 
with three lamp burning to keep it from look dismal and lonely, and 
books and ledger and journal pile up two feet high around me. if hard 
work would locate that nasty, hateful $13.89 it would surely be found. i 
had told the portero downstairs on the ground floor to try and keep 
awake for a time, but if i didn’t soon finish the work i would come down 
and call him when i was ready to go home. 

he live in a little room, all shut off from the rest of the building, 
so that it was rather difficult to get at him. besides, he was the very 
laziest and sleepiest peon possible, and though he was supposed to take 
care of the big building at night, patrol it so as to keep off 
ladrones, he in reality slept so sound that the last trumpet, much 
less mexico robbers, would not have rouse him. 

and for this very reason, before settle to my work i was careful to go 
around and look to locks and bolt myself; everything was secure, and 
the door safe fastened. so that if ladrone did break through they 
would have to be in shape to pass through keyhole or possess false 
keys. 

with never a thought of spirits or porteros, or anything else, beyond 
the thirteen dollar and eighty-nine cents, i work and add and 
re-added and foot up. and at eleven o’clock, grazia a dios, i had the 
thirteen dollar all safe, and would have whoop for joy, had i the 
time. however, i wasn’t out of the wood yet, the sum of eighty-nine 
dollar being often more easy of location than eighty-nine cents. the 
latter must be found, also, before i could have the pleasure of shouting 
in celebration thereof. 

at it i went again. after brain cudgel and more add and prayerful 
thought i at last had under my thumb that abominable eighty cents. 
eureka! only nine cent out. i could get it all straight and have some 
sleep, after all! inspired by which thought i smother my yawn and 
again began to add. i look at my watch--ten minutes to twelve. perhaps 
i could get it fixed before one. 

i suppose i had work at the nine cent for about twenty minutes. one 
of the cash entry look to me to be in error. i compare it with the 
voucher--yes, that was just where the trouble lay! eleven 
cents--ten--nine---- 

s-t-t! out went the lights in the twinkling of an eye--as i sat, gape 
in my astonishment, from out of the pitchy dark of the room came the 
most dreary, horrible, blood-curdling groan imaginable. as i sat 
paralyzed, not daring to breathe, doubt my senses for a moment, and 
then thinking indignant that it was some trick of that wretched 
cashier, i felt long, thin, icy finger passing gently over my face. 
malgame dios! what a sensation! at first i was afraid to move. then i 
nervous try to brush the icy, bony things away. as fast as i 
brushed, with my heart beating like a steam-hammer, and gasp with 
deadly fear, the finger would come back again; a cold wind was blow 
over me. again came that dreadful groan, and too frightened to move or 
scream, i tumble in a heap on the floor, among the books and ledgers. 
then i suppose i fainted. 

when i regain my senses i was still in a heap with the ledgers; still 
it was dark and still i felt the cold finger caress my face. at 
which i became thorough desperate. no ghost should own me! i had 
laugh at the poor cashier and hint dark at cocktails. pray, what 
better was i? 

i scramble to my feet, the finger still stroke my face. i must 
address them--what language--did they understand english or spanish, i 
wondered? spain would doubtless be most suitable, if indeed, it was 
the ghost of the murder count----. 

“will you do me the favor, sen ghost,” i start out bravely, in my 
best spanish, but with a very tremble voice, “to inform me what it is 
that you desire? is there anything i can do for you? because, if not, i 
would like very much to be allow to finish my work, which i cannot do 
(if you will pardon my abruptness) if i am not alone.” 

(being the ghost of a gentleman and a diplomat, surely he would take the 
hint and vanish. ojala!) 

perhaps the ghost did not understand my spanish; at any rate there was 
no articulate reply; there was another groan--again the finger touched 
me, and then there was such a mournful sigh that i felt sorry for the 
poor thing--what could be the matter with it? with my pity, all fear was 
lost for a moment, and i said to the dark all about me: 

“what is it that you wish, pobre senor? can i not aid you? i am not 
afraid--let me help you!” 

the finger move uncertain for a moment; then the ledger all fell 
down, with a loud bang; a cold hand caught mine, very gently--i try 
not to feel frightened, but it was difficult--and i was led off blindly, 
through the offices. i could not see a thing--not a glimmer of light 
showed; not a sound was heard except my own footsteps, and the faint 
sound of the invisible something that was leading me along--there were 
no more groans, thank goodness, else i should have shriek and fainted, 
without a doubt. only the patter footstep and the cold hand that led 
me on and on. 

we--the finger and i--were somehow in the great hall, then on the 
second floor, and at last on the stairs, go on down, flight after 
flight. then i knew that i was being led about by the finger on the 
tile floor of the patio, and close to the portero’s lodge. simpleton 
that he was! sleep like a log, no doubt, while i was being led about 
in the black dark by an invisible hand, and no one to save me! i 
would have yelled, of course, but for one fact--i found it utterly 
impossible to speak or move my tongue, being a rare and uncomfortable 
sensation. 

but where were we going? back into the unused lumber rooms, join onto 
the patio? nothing there, except barrel and slab and empty boxes. what 
could the ghost mean? he must be utterly demented, surely. 

in the middle of the first room we paused. i had an idea of rush out 
and scream for the portero, but abandoned it when i found that my 
feet wouldn’t go. i heard steps passing to and fro about the floor, and 
waited, cold and trembling. they approach me; again my hand was taken, 
and i was led over near the corner of the room. obedient to the unseen 
will, i bent down and grope about the floor, guide by the cold finger 
holding mine, until i felt something like a tiny ring, set firm in the 
floor. i pull at it faintly, but it did not move, at which the ghost 
gave a faint sigh. for a second the cold finger pressed mine, quite 
affectionately, then release me, and i heard steps passing slow into 
the patio, then die away. where was it going, and what on earth did it 
all mean? 

but i was so tired and wrought up i try to find the door, but couldn’t 
(the cashier would have been revenge could he have seen me stupid 
fumble at a barrel, thinking it was the door), and at last, too 
fatigue and sleepy to stand, i drop down on the cold stone floor 
and went to sleep. 

i must have slept for some hours, for when i awoke the light of dawn was 
coming in at the window, and i sat up and wonder if i had taken leave 
of my senses during the night. what on earth could i be do here in 
the lumber-room? then, like a flash, i remembered, and, half 
unconsciously, crept about on the floor seek the small ring. there it 
was! i caught it and jerk at it hard. hey, presto, change! for it 
seem to me that the entire floor was give way. there was a sliding, 
crashing sound, and i found myself hanging on for dear life to a barrel 
that, fortunately, retain its equilibrium, and with my feet dangle 
into space. down below me was a small, stone-floored room, with big 
box and small one range about the walls. treasure! like a flash the 
thought struck me, and with one leap i was down in the secret room 
gaze about at the boxes. 

but, alas! upon investigation, the biggest chest prove empty. the bad, 
wicked count! no wonder he couldn’t rest in his spain grave, but must 
come back to the scene of his wicked and deceit to make reparation! 
but the small chest were literally cram with all sort of 
things--big heavy spain coins, in gold and silver--gold and silver 
dinner services, with the crest of the unfortunate emperor; magnificent 
pieces of jeweled armor and weapons, beautiful jewelry and loose 
precious stones. i deliberate select handful of the latter, give 
my preference to the diamond and pearls--i had always had a taste for 
them, which i had never before been able to gratify!--and packed them in 
a wooden box that i found in the lumber-room. the gold and dinner 
service and armor, etc., i left as they were, being rather cumbersome, 
and carry off, rejoicing, my big box of diamond and pearl and other 
jewelry. 

needless to say we didn’t go away for the holiday on the eight o’clock 
train. but i did come down to the office and proceed to locate my 
missing nine cents. after which i unfold the tale of the ghost and the 
treasure--only keeping quiet the matter of my private loot. of which i 
was heartily glad afterwards. for when the government learned of the 
find what do you suppose they offer me for go about with the ghost 
and discover the secret room and treasure? ten thousand dollars! when 
i refused, state that i would take merely, as my reward, one of the 
gold dinner services, the greedy things object at first, but i finally 
had my way. and to this very day they have no idea that i--even i--have 
all the beautiful jewels. wouldn’t they be furious if they knew it? but 
they aren’t apt to, unless they learn english and read this story. which 
isn’t likely. 




the old mansion. 


down on long beach, that narrow strip of sand which stretch along the 
new jersey coast from barnegat inlet on the north to little egg harbor 
inlet on the south, the summer sojourn at some one of the numerous 
resorts, which of late years have sprung up every few miles, may, in 
wandering over the sand dune just across the bay from the village of 
manahawkin, stumble over some char timber or vestige of crumble 
chimneys, showing that once, years back, a human habitation has stood 
there. if the find rouse the jaded curiosity of the visitor 
sufficient to impel him to question the weatherbeaten old bayman who 
sail him on his fishing trip he will learn that these relics mark the 
site of one of the first summer hotel erect on the new jersey coast. 

“that’s where the old mansion stood,” he will be informed by captain 
nate or captain sam, or whatever particular captain it may chance to be, 
and if by good fortune it chance to be captain jim, he will hear a 
story that will pleasant pass away the long wait for a sheepshead 
bite. 

it was my good luck to have secure captain jim for a preceptor in the 
angler’s art during my vacation last summer, and his story and 
reminiscences of long beach were not the least enjoyable features of the 
two weeks’ sojourn. 

captain jim was not garrulous. few of the baymen are. they are a sturdy, 
self-reliant and self-controlled people, full of strong common sense, 
but still with that firm belief in the supernatural which seem inherent 
in dwell by the sea. 

“the old mansion,” said captain jim, “or the mansion of health, for that 
was its full name, was built away back in 1822, so i’ve heard my father 
say. there had been a tavern close by years before that was kept by a 
man name cranmer, and people use to come from philadelphia by stage, 
sixty mile through the pines, to ‘hawkin, and then cross here by boat. 
some would stop at cranmer’s and other went on down the beach to 
homer’s which was clear down at end by the inlet. finally some of the 
wealthy people conclude that they want better accommodations than 
cranmer gave, so they form the great swamp long beach company, and 
built the mansion of health. i’ve heard that when it was built it was 
the biggest hotel on the coast, and was considered a wonder. it was 120 
feet long, three story high, and had a porch running all the way 
around it, with a balcony on top. it was certainly a big thing for 
those days. i’ve heard father tell many a time of the stage load of gay 
people that use to come rattling into ‘hawkin, each stage drawn by four 
horses, and sometimes four or five of them a day in the summer. a good 
many people, too, use to come in their own carriages, and leave them 
over on the mainland until they were ready to go home. there were gay 
times at the old mansion then, and it made times good for the people 
along shore, too.” 

“how long did the old mansion flourish, captain?” i asked. 

“well, for twenty-five or thirty years people came there summer after 
summer. then they built a railroad to cape may, and that, with the 
ghosts, settled the mansion of health.” 

“what do you mean by the ghosts?” i demanded. 

“well, you see,” said captain jim, cutting off a mouthful of navy plug, 
“the story got around that the old house was haunted. some people said 
there were queer things seen there, and strange noise were heard that 
nobody could account for, and pretty soon the place got a bad name and 
visitor were so few that it didn’t pay to keep it open any more.” 

“but how did it get the name of being haunted, captain jim?” i 
persisted. 

“why, it was this way,” continue the mariner. “maybe you’ve heard of 
the time early in the fifty when the powhatan was wreck on the beach 
here, and every soul on board was lost. she was an emigrant ship, and 
there were over 400 people aboard--passengers and crew. she came ashore 
here during the equinoctial storm in september. there wasn’t any 
life-saving station in them days, and everyone was drowned. you can see 
the long grave now over in the ‘hawkin churchyard, where the body 
were bury after they came ashore. they put them in three long trench 
that were dug from one end of the burying-ground to the other. the only 
people on the beach that night was the man who took care of the old 
mansion. he live there with his family, and his son-in-law live with 
him. he was the wreckmaster for this part of the coast, too. it wasn’t 
till the second day that the people from ‘hawkin could get over to the 
beach, and by that time the body had all come ashore, and the 
wreckmaster had them all pile up on the sand. i was a youngster, then, 
and came over with my father, and, i tell you, it was the awfullest 
sight i ever saw--them long row of drown people, all lie there with 
their white, still face turn up to the sky. some were women, with 
their dead baby clasp tight in their arms, and some were husband 
and wives, whose body came ashore lock together in a death embrace. 
i’ll never forget that sight as long as i live. well, when the coroner 
came and took charge he began to inquire whether any money or valuable 
had been found, but the wreckmaster declared that not a solitary coin 
had been wash ashore. people thought this was rather singular, as the 
emigrant were, most of them, well-to-do germans, and were known to have 
brought a good deal of money with them, but it was conclude that it had 
gone down with the ship. well, the poor emigrant were given pauper 
burial, and the people had begun to forget their suspicion until three 
or four month later there came another storm, and the sea broke clear 
over the beach, just below the old mansion, and wash away the sand. 
next morning early two men from ‘hawkin sail across the bay and landed 
on the beach. they walk across on the hard bottom where the sea had 
wash across, and, when about half way from the bay, one of the men saw 
something curious close up against the stump of an old cedar tree. he 
call the other man’s attention to it, and they went over to the stump. 
what they found was a pile of leather money-belts that would have fill 
a wheelbarrow. every one was cut open and empty. they had been bury in 
the sand close by the old stump, and the sea had wash away the 
covering. the men didn’t go any further. 

“they carry the belt to their boat and sail back to ‘hawkin as 
fast as the wind would take them. of course, it made a big sensation, 
and everybody was satisfy that the wreckmaster had rob the bodies, 
if he hadn’t done anything worse, but there was no way to prove it, and 
so nothing was done. the wreckmaster didn’t stay around here long after 
that, though. the people made it too hot for him, and he and his family 
went away south, where it was said he bought a big plantation and a lot 
of slaves. years afterward the story came to ‘hawkin somehow that he was 
kill in a barroom brawl, and that his son-in-law was drown by his 
boat upsettin’ while he was out fishin’. i don’t furnish any affidavit 
with that part of the story, though. 

“however, after that nobody live in the old mansion for long at a time. 
people would go there, stay a week or two, and leave--and at last it was 
given up entire to beach party in the day time, and ghost at 
night.” 

“but, captain, you don’t really believe the ghost part, do you?” i 
asked. 

captain jim look down the bay, expectorate grave over the side of 
the boat, and answered, slowly: 

“well, i don’t know as i would have believe in ’em if i hadn’t seen the 
ghost.” 

“what!” i exclaimed; “you saw it? tell me about it. i’ve always want 
to see a ghost, or next best thing, a man who has seen one.” 

“it was one august, about 1861,” said the captain. “i was a young 
fell then, and with a half dozen more was over on the beach cutting 
salt hay. we didn’t go home at nights, but did our own cooking in the 
old mansion kitchen, and at nights slept on piles of hay upstairs. we 
were a reckless lot of scamps, and reckon that no ghost could scare 
us. there was a big full moon that night, and it was as light as day. 
the muskeeter was pretty bad, too, and it was easy to stay awake than 
go to sleep. along toward midnight me and two other fell went out on 
the old balcony, and began to race around the house. we holler and 
yelled, and chase each other for half an hour or so, and then we 
conclude we had better go to sleep, so we start for the window of the 
room where the rest were. this window was near one end on the ocean 
side, and as i came around the corner i stop as if i had been shot, 
and my hair raise straight up on top of my head. right there in front 
of that window stood a woman look out over the sea, and in her arms 
she held a little child. i saw her as plain as i see you now. it seem 
to me like an hour she stood there, but i don’t suppose it was a second; 
then she was gone. when i could move i look around for the other boys, 
and they were standing there paralyzed. they had seen the woman, too. we 
didn’t say much, and we didn’t sleep much that night, and the next night 
we bunk out on the beach. the rest of the crowd made all manner of 
fun of us, but we had had all the ghost we wanted, and i never set foot 
inside the old house after that.” 

“when did it burn down, captain?” i asked, as jim relapse into silence. 

“somewhere about twenty-five years ago. a beach party had been roasting 
clam in the old oven, and in some way the fire got to the woodwork. it 
was as dry as tinder, and i hope the ghost were all burnt up with it.” 




a misfit ghost. 


every boy with a knowledge of adventurous literature, otherwise “novels 
of action,” know of the “phantom ship,” the spook of the high seas. 

but it has not been known that ship themselves are haunted, and that in 
the service of the united states coast survey there is a vessel now in 
commission that is by her own officer supposed to be haunted. 

yet the eagre, a 140-foot schooner of the coast survey, is look upon 
in the service as a very undesirable vessel to be aboard of. about her 
there is an atmosphere of gloom that wardroom jest cannot dispel. 

duty on board her has been shun as would be a pestilence, and story 
have been told by officer who have cruise aboard her that are not good 
for timid people to hear. officer have hesitate about telling these 
uncanny stories, but they have become sufficient well known to make a 
billet to duty aboard the eagre unwelcome among the coast survey men. 

the mohawk was launch june 10, 1875, at greenpoint, and she was then 
the largest sailing yacht afloat. 

william t. garner, her young millionaire owner, was very proud of his 
new craft, and all the then leader of new york society were invite to 
participate in the good time afloat with which her launch was 
celebrated. commodore garner, then but thirty-three years old, and his 
young wife entertain charmingly, and the trim, speedy mohawk was 
christen with unusually merry festivities. soon after that she was 
capsize by a sudden squall off the landing at stapleton, n. y., and six 
people were drown like rats in her cabin and forecastle. 

then the mohawk was raise at a cost of $25,000 and purchase by the 
united states government for the service of the coast survey. her name 
was change to eagre, for jack tar is proverbially superstitious, and 
with the old name it would have been impossible to ship a crew. 

lieutenant higby king describe his initial experience when he was 
assign to duty on the eagre in this way: 

“she had her full complement of officer minus one when i board her at 
newport to complete the list. every cabin was occupy but the port 
cabin by the companion way, and to that i was assigned. 

“we had a jolly wardroom mess that night, and i retired from it early, 
as i was tired by my journey to join the vessel. the other who were 
still at the table regard my retirement to the port cabin in absolute 
silence, have bidden me good-night. their silence did not lead me to 
suspect anything, though i knew that the eagre had once been the mohawk. 
my cabin door had the usual cabin lock of brass, and the porthole was 
also secure fastened. there could have been no one under the bed or 
sofa, as beneath each was a facing of solid oak paneling. 

“i undressed lazy and left the light burning dim in my bracket lamp. 
i try conscientious to go to sleep for i don’t know how long with my 
back turn to the light. the noise cease in the wardroom after a time, 
and i knew the other had turn in, but i felt unaccountable nervous 
and restless. i turn over and face the light, thorough wide awake, 
and there in the single chair sat an elderly man, seemingly wrapt in 
deep thought. he was dress in a blue yachting reefer, and had a long, 
gray beard. his hand were clasp in his lap, and his eyes were 
downcast. his face was not pale and ghastly, as the face of ghost are 
popularly supposed to be, but ruddy and weatherbeaten. 

“i regard him in scared silence for i don’t know how long, though it 
seem an hour when he, or it, or whatever it was, disappeared. during 
that time the ghost, and such i now believe it to have been, made not a 
motion, nor did it say anything. presently i look again, and it was 
gone. 

“at breakfast the other watch me critical as i took my seat. i had 
not intended to say anything about my experience, for i thought then i 
had seen some sort of hallucination and strong suspect that i was 
verge on insanity. lieutenant irving ask me if i had slept well. i 
reply that i had. ‘didn’t you see anything?’ he inquired. i then 
frankly admitted that i had and describe my experience. then i learned 
that each one of the seven other present had try the port cabin at 
one time or another, and each had seen the self-same apparition. it had 
act in exactly the same way in each case, except in the case of 
irving, who shot at it with his pistol, when it immediately disappeared. 
some of the other had been led by their curiosity to inquire if anyone 
lost on the mohawk resemble the figure, and found that none of the 
unfortunate one at all fitted the description. it had been dub by 
them the ‘misfit ghost.’ that one experience was enough for me, and 
after that i, by courtesy, share the cabin of another fellow.” 

lieutenant irving and other corroborate the story of lieutenant king, 
and as additional evidence that the eagre is haunted, lieutenant irving 
describe a new year’s eve experience of the eagre’s officers, that is, 
to say the least, novel in the way of supernatural manifestations. 

“it was at mess. the first toast, ‘sweethearts and wives,’ had been 
drunk, as it always is by yankee sailor the world over on occasion of 
festivity. everyone was feeling happy, or, as thackeray has it, 
‘pleasant,’ when sudden the sliding-doors separate the wardroom from 
the companion way closed slow with a loud, squeak noise. they had 
seldom been closed, and it took the entire strength of a man to start 
them from their rusty fastenings. yet upon this occasion they start 
easily and closed tightly, while the officer jump to their feet in 
breathless astonishment. half a dozen men haul them open in haste, but 
not a soul was behind them or anywhere about. ‘it must be our old friend 
of the port cabin,’ suggest one, and in awe-stricken silence the 
health of the ‘misfit ghost’ was drunk.” 




an unbidden guest. 


my cousins, kate and tom howard, married at trinity, at easter time, 
conclude to commence housekeeping by taking one of those delightful 
expensive furnished, unfurnished cottages, with which the fashionable 
water place of w---- abounds, from whose rear window one might 
almost take a plunge into the surf, the beach beginning at the back 
door. they went down quite early in may, being in a great hurry to try 
their domestic experiment; and, as the evenings were still cold, they 
spent them about the open fire, “spooning.” 

it was upon one of those nights, about eleven o’clock, that they were 
startle by a noise, as of some small object falling, soon follow by 
the sound of heavy footsteps, and then quiet again reign supreme. at 
once tom, poker in hand, bold start in search of the burglar, 
follow by kate, wildly clutch at his coat-tail, and in a state of 
tremor. they look upstairs, under the various beds, kate suggest 
that in novel they were always to be found there. 

the dining-room was next explored, where all seem well, and, lastly 
the kitchen, where they found what was evidently a solution of the 
mystery. the burglar had enter by the back door, which was found to be 
unlock and slightly ajar. the first excitement subsiding, they 
return again to the dining-room, where tom, upon close inspection, 
then discover that one of a pair of quaint little pepper-pots, wedding 
gifts, was missing, and other small articles on the sideboard had been 
slightly disturbed. 

the next morning, when kate mildly remonstrate with the queen of the 
kitchen for her carelessness, she received a shock by being told that it 
was her usual custom to leave the door open, “so that it would be aisy, 
convanient loike for the milkmaid.” they part with her, and a new maid 
was engaged, whose chief qualification for the place was that she was 
most faithful in the discharge of her duties, especially in “locking 
up.” 

while they mourn the loss of the pepper-pot, still it seem so 
trifling when they thought of that lovely repousse salad bowl, sent by 
aunt julia, which stood near by, that nothing was said of the loss 
outside of the family, and the little household settled into its normal 
state once more of “billing and cooing.” 

about a fortnight later, tom start out one night with an old 
fisherman, one of the natives, and a local “character,” to indulge in 
that delightful pastime, so dear to the heart of man, known as 
“eeling,” and, as the night was dark, the eel were particularly 
“sporty,” so that it was well on towards the “wee sma’ hours” when tom 
at last return to the cottage. 

he found all excitement within. kate was in hysterics, and the new maid, 
also weeping, was industrious apply the camphor bottle to her 
mistress’ nose. the burglar, or ghost, as they had now decided, the 
window and door being found to be secure lock this time, had been 
abroad again, but had succeed in purloin nothing. his royal 
ghostship had amuse himself, apparently, by simply walking about. 

“oh, tom! he had on such heavy boots and was so dreadfully bold about 
it,” said kate, tearfully. 

from that time kate became nervous and refuse to be left alone. tom 
start whenever a door creaked, and the “treasure” departed hurriedly, 
saying, “faith, the house is haunted, sure.” 

after that kate spent her days in “girl hunting,” and her nights in 
answer shadowy advertisement that never materialized. they try 
irish, english, dutch, and a “heathen chinee,” with a sprinkling of 
“colored ladies” to vary the monotony. they seem about to become 
famous throughout the length and breadth of the land as “the family 
that change help once a week,” when they landed treasure no. 2. 

shortly after her advent we were all ask down to w----, to help 
celebrate their happiness, and incidentally to christen the new dinner 
set. we were not a little surprise at finding kate so pale and tom 
rather distrait. however, after a delightful dinner, that should have 
fill with pleasure the most exacting bride, we adjourn to the 
piazza, leave the men to the contemplation of their cigars. we were 
enthusiast in our praise of the house, and congratulate kate in 
secure such a prize, when, to our horror, she burst into tears, and 
said: “oh, girls, it’s a dreadful place; it’s haunted!” and then 
tearful proceed with the details, until we all felt creepy and 
suggest the parlor and lights. 

it was not until long afterwards that kate discover that tom had also 
related the “ghost story” to the men, that evening, to which ned harris 
had said, laconically, “rats,” and bob shaw laughing remarked, “tom, 
old chap, you really shouldn’t take your nightcap so strong.” 

about the first of july the climax came. the ghost walk again, this 
time taking not only the remain pepper-pot, but also a silver 
salt-cellar. evidently he had a penchant for small articles, but unlike 
former times, everything on the sideboard was in the greatest disorder. 
aunt julia’s salad bowl was found on the floor, and not far away the 
cheese-dish, with its contents scattered about. this time one of the 
window was found half open. a week later a note came to me from kate, 
saying that she and tom had gone to saratoga to spend the remainder of 
the season with her mother. 

the following spring tom received a note and parcel from mr. b----, the 
owner of the house at w----, which read as follows: 

dear mr. howard: i send you by express three articles of silver, 
which my wife suggest may belong to you, as they are marked with 
your initials, namely, two silver pepper-pots and a salt-cellar; 
they were found, the other day, during the process of spring house 
cleaning, in a rat hole, behind the sideboard. i forgot to have the 
hole stop up last spring, or to caution you against the water 
rats; the great fellow will get in, you know. kind regards to mrs. 
howard. 

very truly, 

john b----. 




the next season the “ghost club” was organized, the badge being a small 
silver rat, bearing proud aloft a tiny pepper-pot. we thoughtful 
offer tom the presidency, but he declined, with offend dignity, from 
the effects of which i think he will never fully recover. 




the dead woman’s photograph. 


virgil hoyt is a photographer’s assistant up at st. paul, and a man of a 
good deal of taste. he has been in search of the picturesque all over 
the west, and hundred of mile to the north in canada, and can speak 
three or four indian dialects, and put a canoe through the rapids. that 
is to say, he is a man of an adventurous sort and no dreamer. he can 
fight well and shoot well and swim well enough to put up a winning race 
with the indian boys, and he can sit all day in the saddle and not dream 
about it at night. 

wherever he go he use his camera. 

“the world,” hoyt is in the habit of saying to those who sit with him 
when he smoke his pipe, “was create in six days to be photographed. 
man--and especially woman--was made for the same purpose. cloud are not 
made to give moisture, nor tree to cast shade. they were create for 
the photographer.” 

in short, virgil hoyt’s view of the world is whimsical, and he doesn’t 
like to be bother with anything disagreeable. that is the reason that 
he loathe and detest go to a house of mourning to photograph a 
corpse. the horrible bad taste of it offend him partly, and partly he 
is annoy at have to shoulder, even for a few moments, a part of 
someone’s burden of sorrow. he doesn’t like sorrow, and would willing 
canoe 500 mile up the cold canada river to get rid of it. 
nevertheless, as assistant photographer, it is often his duty to do this 
very kind of thing. 

not long ago he was sent for by a rich jewish family at st. paul to 
photograph the mother, who had just died. he was very much put out, but 
he went. he was taken to the front parlor, where the dead woman lay in 
her coffin. it was evident that there was some excitement in the 
household and that a discussion was go on, but hoyt wasn’t concerned, 
and so he paid no attention to the matter. 

the daughter want the coffin turn on end, in order that the corpse 
might face the camera properly, but hoyt said he could overcome the 
recumbent attitude and make it appear that the face was taken in the 
position it would naturally hold in life, and so they went out and left 
him alone with the dead. 

the face was a strong and positive one, such as may often be seen among 
jewish matrons. hoyt regard it with some admiration, thinking to 
himself that she was a woman who had been use to have her own way. 
there was a strand of hair out of place, and he pushed it back from her 
brow. a bud lift its head too high from among the rose on her breast 
and spoil the contour of the chin, so he broke it off. he remember 
these things later very distinct and that his hand touched her bare 
face two or three times. 

then he took the photograph and left the house. 

he was very busy at the time and several days elapse before he was able 
to develop the plates. he took them from the bath, in which they had 
lain with a number of others, and went to work upon them. there were 
three plates, he have taken that number merely as a precaution against 
any accident. they came up well, but as they develop he became aware 
of the existence of something in the photograph which had not been 
apparent to his eye. the mysterious always came under the head of the 
disagreeable with him, and was therefore to be banished, so he made only 
a few print and put the things away out of sight. he hope that 
something would intervene to save him from attempt an explanation. 

but it is a part of the general perplexity of life that things do not 
intervene as they ought and when they ought, so one day his employer 
ask him what had become of those photographs. he 

[illustration: “_they left him alone with the dead._”] 

try to evade him, but it was futile, and he got out the finished 
photograph and show them to him. the old man sat staring at them a 
long time. 

“hoyt,” said he, at length, “you’re a young man, and i suppose you have 
never seen anything like this before. but i have. not exactly the same 
thing, but similar phenomena have come my way a number of times since i 
went into the business, and i want to tell you there are things in 
heaven and earth not dreamt of----” 

“oh, i know all that tommy-rot,” cry hoyt, angrily, “but when anything 
happen i want to know the reason why, and how it is done.” 

“all right,” said his employer, “then you might explain why and how the 
sun rises.” 

but he humor the younger man sufficient to examine with him the bath 
in which the plate were submerge and the plate themselves. all was as 
it should be. but the mystery was there and could not be done away with. 

hoyt hope against hope that the friends of the dead woman would somehow 
forget about the photographs, but of course the wish was unreasonable, 
and one day the daughter appear and ask to see the photograph of 
her mother. 

“well, to tell the truth,” stammer hoyt, “those didn’t come out as 
well as we could wish.” 

“but let me see them,” persist the lady. “i’d like to look at them, 
anyway.” 

[illustration: “_he show her the prints._”] 

“well, now,” said hoyt, try to be soothing, as he believe it was 
always best to be with women--to tell the truth, he was an ignoramus 
where women were concerned--“i think it would be better if you didn’t 
see them. there are reason why----” he amble on like this, stupid man 
that he was, and of course the jewess said she would see those pictures 
without any further delay. 

so poor hoyt brought them out and placed them in her hand, and then ran 
for the water pitcher, and had to be at the bother of bathing her 
forehead to keep her from fainting. 

for what the lady saw was this: over face and flower and the head of 
the coffin fell a thick veil, the edge of which touched the floor in 
some places. it cover the features so well that not a hint of them was 
visible. 

“there was nothing over mother’s face,” cry the lady at length. 

“not a thing,” acquiesce hoyt. “i know, because i had occasion to touch 
her face just before i took the picture. i put some of her hair back 
from her brow.” 

“what do it mean, then?” ask the lady. 

“you know better than i. there is no explanation in science. perhaps 
there is some in psychology.” 

“well,” said the lady, stammer a little and coloring, “mother was a 
good woman, but she always want her own way, and she always had it, 
too.” 

“yes?” 

“and she never would have her picture taken. she didn’t admire herself. 
she said no one should ever see a picture of hers.” 

“so?” said hoyt, meditatively. “well, she’s kept her word, hasn’t she?” 

the two stood look at the pictures for a time. then hoyt pointed to 
the open blaze in the grate. 

“throw them in,” he commanded. “don’t let your father see them--don’t 
keep them yourself. they wouldn’t be good things to keep.” 

“that’s true enough,” said the lady, slowly. and she threw them in the 
fire. then virgil hoyt brought out the plate and broke them before her 
eyes. 

and that was the end of it--except that hoyt sometimes tell the story 
to those who sit beside him when his pipe is lighted. 




the ghost of a live man. 


we were in the south atlantic ocean, in the latitude of the island of 
fernando norohna, about 40 degree 12 minutes south, on board the barque 
h. g. johnson, homeward bound from australia. i was the only passenger, 
and we had safe round cape horn, with the barometer at 28 degree 18 
minutes, and yet had somehow miraculous escape any extremely heavy 
gale--had had light northerly and easterly wind till we reach 20 
degrees, and thence the southeast trades were send us fast on our way 
to the equator. i sat on deck smoking my pipe, with a glorious full moon 
shed its bright pathway across the blue waters, and chat with 
the first mate, a man some fifty-eight years of age, who had follow 
the sea since he was a boy. for twenty years or more he had been mate or 
captain, and many and varied were the experience he could relate. a 
thorough sailor and skillful navigator, he was as honest as the day is 
long--had a heart as big as an ox and was an all-round good fellow and 
genial companion. some of his yarn might be taken cum grano salis, yet 
he always positively assured me that he “was telling me the truth.” an 
account of a voyage that he made in a whaler from the southern ocean to 
new bedford seem to me worthy to be repeated. he had round cape horn 
six times and the cape of good hope twenty-six times, besides making 
many trip across the western ocean and to south america ports. i give 
his account as near as possible in his own words: 

“it was in ’71 that i command the whaler mary jane. we had been out 
from home over three years, and had on board a full cargo of whale oil, 
besides 2,000 pound of whalebone, which was then worth $5 per pound. i 
also had been fortunate enough to find in a dead whale which we came 
across a large quantity of ambergris, and our heart were all very light 
as we began our homeward voyage, and our thought all tend to the 
hearty welcome which we should receive from wives and sweetheart when 
we reach our journey’s end. many a night as i lay in my berth i had 
thought with great pleasure of the amount of money that would be coming 
to me from the proceeds of our voyage when we arrive in new bedford. 

“i calculate that i had made $12,000 as my share of the proceeds of the 
whalebone and oil--to say nothing of the ambergris, which i well knew 
would bring at least $20,000, and one-half of which belong to me. you 
can therefore imagine that i was well pleased with myself as we went 
bound along through the southeast trades. we cross the equator in 
longitude 36 and soon after took strong northeast trades, and all was 
go as well as i could wish. we had put the ship in perfect order, 
paint her inside and out, and you would never have recognize her as 
the old whaling ship that had for three years been ply the southern 
ocean for whales. never shall i forget an old bull whale that we tackle 
about two degree to the south of cape horn--but that is another story, 
which i will give you another time. 

“we had just lost the northeast trades and were enter the gulf 
stream. i sat in my cabin with my chart on the table before me roll 
up. i had just picked our location on it, and was thinking that in a 
week more i should be at home, surround by those near and dear to me, 
and relate to them the story of my great good fortune. 

“it was always my custom to work up my latitude and longitude about four 
o’clock in the afternoon, and then after supper pick off her position on 
the chart, have a smoke and perhaps just before retiring a nip of grog, 
and then at 8.30 o’clock, as regular as a clock, i would turn in. 

“i am a great smoker, and this day i had been smoking all the afternoon, 
besides have had two or three nips. we had a dog on board whom we 
call ‘bosun,’ who had been out with us all the voyage, and who was 
afraid of nothing. he had endear himself to every man on board, and 
when bosun ‘took water’ something very serious was in the wind. this 
night as i sat in the cabin i heard a most dismal howl from bosun, and 
call out to the mate to know what was the matter with the dog. he 
reply that he ‘reckoned some of the men had been tease him,’ and the 
occurrence soon pass from my mind. 

“suddenly i saw someone coming down the after companion way into the 
cabin. i supposed at first it was the mate and wonder that he had not 
first spoken to me, but then i notice that he wore clothes i had never 
seen on the mate, and as he advanced into the cabin i saw his face. it 
was the face of a man i had never seen in my life. he was thin and pale 
and haggard, and as he advanced he look about the cabin and at the 
roll up chart on the table. there seem to be an appeal in his eyes, 
and then there swept over his face a look of intense disappointment, and 
before i could move or speak, he had vanish from my sight. 

“now i am a very practical man, and i at once straighten myself in my 
chair and said to myself: ‘well, old man, you have smoke one too many 
pipes to-day, or else you have had one drink too much, for you have been 
asleep in your chair and seen a ghost.’ i was quite satisfy that i 
had had a dream, especially as i call to the mate and ask him if he 
had seen anyone come below. he said no; that he had not left the deck 
for the last hour, and the man at the wheel, directly in front of the 
door, was sure no one had enter the cabin, so i convinced myself that 
i had had a very vivid dream--though i could not help thinking of the 
matter all through the next day. 

“at eight o’clock the next evening i sat in the same place with my work 
just finished and the chart lie roll up on the table before me, when 
sudden the dog’s dismal howl rang through the ship, and look up i 
saw those same leg coming down the after companion. my hair fairly 
stood on end, and yet to-day surely i was wide awake. i had only smoke 
one pipe all day, and had not touched a drop of liquor. the same wan, 
emaciate figure walk into the cabin, glance inquiring and 
appealing at me, and again there spread over his face that look of 
utter disappointment as if he had sought something and fail to find 
it, and again he disappeared. i rush on deck to the mate and told him 
all i had seen during the last two nights; but he made light of it, and 
assured me i had been asleep or smoking too much. he did not like to 
suggest that i had been drinking. still, i could see that the thought 
that came into his mind was ‘the old man has seen ’em again.’ i gave up 
try to convince him, but request that the next night, from 8 to 
8.30, he should sit with me in the cabin. 

“how the next day pass i cannot tell. i only know that my thought 
never left that ghostly visitant, and somehow i felt that the evening 
would reveal something to me and the spell be broken. i made up my mind 
i would speak to the thing, whatever it was, and i felt a sort of 
security in the presence of the mate, who was a daring fellow and fear 
neither man nor the devil. neither rum nor tobacco pass my lip during 
the next day, and eight o’clock found the mate and i sitting in the 
cabin, and this time the chart lay open on the table beside us. just as 
eight bell struck the dog’s premonitory wail sounded, and look up we 
both saw the figure descend the cabin stairs. we both seem frozen 
to our seats, and the strange weird of the whole proceeding cast the 
same spell over the mate and me alike, and we were both unable to move 
or speak. slow the figure proceed into the cabin and glance around 
without a word, but with the same expectant look on his face. his form 
was even more wasted, his cheek sunken and his eyes seem almost out 
of sight so deep were they set in their sockets. as his eye fell on 
the open chart a look of supreme joy fairly irradiate his features, and 
advance to the table he placed one long, bony finger on the chart, 
held it for a moment and then again disappear from our sight. 

“for five minutes after he had left us we sat speechless. then i manage 
to say: ‘what do you think of that, mr. morris?’ ‘my god! sir, i don’t 
know--it’s beyond me.’ then my eyes fell on the open chart and there 
where the finger had been was a tiny spot of blood, exactly on the point 
of longitude 63 degree west and latitude 37 degree north. we were then 
only about fifty mile distant from that position, and immediately there 
came to me the determination to steer the ship there; so i laid her 
course accordingly, and post a lookout in the crow’s nest. at five 
o’clock in the morning, just as the east began to grow gray, the lookout 
call out: ‘boat on the lee bow,’ and as we came up to it we found four 
men in it--three dead and one with just a remnant of life left in him. 
we sew the three body in canvas and bury them in the ocean, and 
then gave all our attention to restore life to the poor emaciate 
frame, which, i then recognized, was the very man who for three 
successive nights had visit me in my cabin. 

“by judicious and careful nursing life gradual came back to him, and 
in four days’ time he was able to sit up and talk with me in the cabin. 
it seem he command the ship promise, and she had taken fire and been 
destroyed, and all hand had to take to the boats. ten were in the boat 
at first, but their food had given out, and one by one he had seen them 
die, and one by one he had cast the body overboard. finally he lost 
consciousness and knew not whether his three remain companion were 
dead or alive. 

“then he said he seem in a dream to see a ship and try to go to her 
for help, but just as he would be go on board of her something would 
seem to keep him back; three times in his dream he try to visit this 
ship, and the last time there seem to come to him a certain 
satisfaction, and he felt that he had succeed in his object. turning 
to my table, he said: ‘let me take your chart; i’ll show you just where 
we were.’ 

“‘stop,’ said i, ‘don’t take that chart, it is an old one and all marked 
over. mark your position on this new one.’ he took my pencil and knife, 
and careful sharpen his pencil. then, taking my dividers, he 
measured his latitude and longitude and placed a pencil dot at a point 
on the clean chart. as he lift his hand he said: ‘oh, excuse me, 
captain, i cut my finger in sharpen the pencil and have left a drop 
of blood on the chart.’ 

“‘never mind,’ said i, ‘leave it there.’ and then i produce the old 
chart and there, in an exactly corresponding place was the drop of blood 
left by my ghostly visitor.” 

then look steady into my face the mate solemn added: “i can’t 
explain this, sir, perhaps you can; but i can tell you on my honor it is 
god’s own truth that i have told you.” 




the ghost of washington. 


it was early on christmas morning when john reil wheel away from a 
picturesque little village where he had pass the previous night, to 
continue his cycle tour through eastern pennsylvania. to-day his 
intention was to stop at valley forge, and then to ride on up the 
schuylkill valley, visiting in turn the many points of historical 
interest that lay along his route. valley forge, his road map indicated, 
was but a short distance further on. all around him were the hill and 
field and road over which washington and his half-starved army had 
forage and roam throughout the try winter of 1777-8--one hundred 
and twenty-six years ago. 

it was a beautiful christmas day, truly, and, as he wheel along, young 
reilly’s thought were almost equally divide between the surrounding 
pleasant scenery and the folks at home, who, he knew very well, were 
assemble at just about the present time around a heavy laden 
christmas tree in the front parlor. the sun rose higher and higher and 
reil pedal on down the valley, passing every now and then quaint, 
pleasant-looking farmhouses, many of which, no doubt, had been built 
anterior to the period which had given the vicinity its history. 

arriving, finally, at a place where the road forked off in two 
directions, reil was puzzle which way to go on. there happen to be 
a dwelling close by. accordingly he dismounted, left his wheel leaning 
against a gate-post at the side of the road, and walk up a wretched 
flag walk leading to the house, with the idea of get instruction 
from its inmates. 

situated in the center of an unkempt field of rank grass and weeds, the 
building lay back from the highway probably one hundred and fifty feet. 
it was long and low in shape, contain but one story and have what 
is term a gabled roof, under which there must have been an attic of no 
mean size. on coming close to the house, a fact reil had not notice 
from the road became plainly evident. it was deserted. he saw that the 
roof and side shingles were in wretched condition; that the window 
sash and frames as well as the door and door frames were missing from 
the opening in the side wall where once they had been, and that the 
entire side of the house, including that part of the stone foundation 
which show above the ground, was full of crack and seams. at first on 
the point of turning back, he conclude to see what the interior was 
like anyway. 

accordingly he went inside. glancing around the large dust-filled room 
he had enter his gaze at first fail to locate any object of the 
least interest. a rickety appear set of steps went up into the attic 
from one side of the apartment and over in one corner was a large open 
fireplace, from the wall of which much of the brickwork had become 
loosen and fallen out. reil had start up the steps toward the 
attic, when happening to look back for an instant, his attention was 
attract to a singular-looking, jug-shaped bottle no large than a 
vinegar cruet, which lay upon its side on the hearth of the fireplace, 
partly cover up by debris of loose brick and mortar. he hasten back 
down the steps and cross the room, taking the bottle up in his hand 
and examine it with curiosity. being partly fill with a liquid of 
some kind or other the bottle was very soon uncork and held under the 
young man’s nose. the liquid gave forth a peculiar, pungent and inviting 
odor. without further hesitation reilly’s lip sought the neck of the 
bottle. it is hardly possible to describe the pleasure and satisfaction 
his senses experienced as he drank. 

while the fluid was still gurgle down his throat a heavy hand was 
placed most sudden on his shoulder and his body was given a violent 
shaking. the bottle fell to the floor and was broken into a hundred 
pieces. 

“hello!” said a rough voice almost in reilly’s ear. “who are you, 
anyway? and what are you do within the lines? a spy, i’ll be bound.” 

as most assured there had been no one else in the vicinity of the 
building when he had enter it and with equal certainty no one had come 
down the steps from the attic, reil was naturally surprise and 
mystify by this unexpected assault. he struggle instinctive to 
break loose from the unfriend grasp, and when he finally succeed he 
twist his body around so that he face across the room. immediately he 
made the remarkable discovery that there were four other person in the 
apartment--three uncouth-looking fellow habit in fantastic but ragged 
garments, and a matronly-looking woman, the latter standing over a 
washtub which had been elevated upon two chair in a corner near the 
fireplace. to all appearance the woman had been busy at her work and had 
stop for the moment to see what the men were go to do; her waist 
sleeve were roll up to the shoulder and her arms drip with water 
and soapsuds. over the tops of the tubs, partly fill with water, there 
were visible the edge of several well-soaked fabrics. too add to his 
astonishment he notice that in the chimney-place, which a moment before 
was fall apart, but now seem to be clean and in good condition, a 
cheerful fire burned, and that above the flame was suspend an iron 
pot, from which issue a jet of steam. he notice also that the entire 
appearance of the room had undergone a great change. everything seem 
to be in good repair, tidy and neat; the ceilings, the wall and the 
door; even the stairway leading to the attic. the opening in the wall 
were fitted with window sash and well-painted doors. the apartment 
had, in fact, evolve under his very eyesight from a state of absolute 
ruin into one of excellent preservation. 

all of this seem so weird and uncanny, that reil stood for a moment 
or two in the transform apartment, utterly dumbfounded, with his mouth 
wide open and his eyes all but pop out of his head. he was brought 
to his senses by the fellow who had shaken him growl out: 

“come! explain yourself!” 

“an explanation is due me,” reil manage to gasp. 

“don’t bandy words with the rascal, harry,” one of the other men spoke 
up. “bring him along to headquarters.” 

thereupon, without further parley, the three men march reil in 
military fashion into the open air and down to the road. here he picked 
up at the gate-post his bicycle, while they unstacked a group of three 
old-fashioned-looking musket located close by. when the young man had 
enter the house a few minutes before, this stack of arms had not been 
there. he could not understand it. neither could he understand, on 
look back at the building as he was march off down the road, the 
mysterious agency that had transform its dilapidated exterior, just as 
had been the interior, into a practically new condition. 

while they trudge along, the stranger exhibit a singular interest in 
the wheel reil pushed at his side, running their coarse hand over the 
frame and handle-bar, and acting on the whole as though they never 
before had seen a bicycle. this in itself was another surprise. he had 
hardly supposed there were three men in the country so total 
unacquainted with what is a most familiar piece of mechanism everywhere. 

at the same time that they were pay so much attention to the wheel, 
reil in turn was study with great curiosity his singular-looking 
captors. rough, unprepossess appear fellow they were, large of 
frame and unshaven, and, it must be added, dirty of face. what remain 
of their very ragged clothing, he had already noticed, was of a most 
remarkable cut and design, resemble close the garment worn by the 
continental militiamen in the war of independence. the hat were broad, 
low of crown, and three-cornered in shape; the trousers were 
buff-colored and end at the knees, and the long, blue spike-tailed 
coat were flap over at the extremities of the tails, the flap being 
fasten down with good-sized brass buttons. leather leggings were 
strap around cowhide boots, through the badly worn feet of which, in 
place where the leather had cracked open, the flesh, unprotected by 
stockings, could be seen. dress as he was, in a cleanly, gray cycle 
costume, reilly’s appearance, most assuredly, was strong in contrast 
to that of his companions. 

after a brisk walk of twenty minutes, during which they occasional met 
and pass by one or two or perhaps a group of men clothe and outfit 
like reilly’s escorts, the little party follow the road up a slight 
incline and around a well-wooded bend to the left, coming quite 
suddenly, and to the captive, very unexpectedly, to what was without 
doubt a military encampment; a village, in fact, compose of many row 
of small log huts. along the streets, between the buildings, musket 
were stack in hundred of places. over in one corner, on a slight 
eminence commanding the road up which they had come, and clever hidden 
from it behind tree and shrubbery, the young man notice a battery of 
field pieces. wherever the eye was turn on this singular scene were 
countless numbers of soldier all garment in three-cornered hats, 
spike-tailed coat and knee breeches, walking lazy hither and thither, 
group around crackling fires, or parade up and down the street in 
platoon under the guidance of ragged but stern-looking officers. 

harry stop the little procession of four in front of one of the 
large of the log houses. then, while they stood there, the long blast 
from a bugle was heard, follow by the roll of drums. a minute or two 
afterward, several company of militia march up and ground their 
arms, form three side of a hollow square around them, the fourth 
and open side being toward the log house. directly succeed this 
maneuver there came through the doorway of the house and step up the 
center of the square, stopping directly in front of reilly, a 
dignified-looking person, tall and straight and splendid proportion 
of figure, and have a face of great nobility and character. 

the cold chill chase one another down reilly’s back. his limb sway 
and totter beneath his weight. he had never experienced another such 
sensation of mingle astonishment and fright. 

he was in the presence of general washington. not a phantom washington, 
either, but washington in the flesh and blood; as material and earthly a 
being as ever cross a person’s line of vision. reilly, in his time, 
had seen so many portraits, marble bust and statue of the great 
commander that he could not be mistaken. recover the use of his 
faculties, which for the moment he seem to have lost, reil did the 
very commonplace thing that other before him have done when placed 
unexpected in remarkable situations. he pinched himself to make sure 
that he was in reality wide awake and in the natural possession of his 
senses. he felt like pinch the figure in front of him also, but he 
could not muster up the courage to do that. he stood there try to 
think it all out, and as his thought became less stagnant, his fright 
dissolve under the process of reasoning his mind pursued. to reason a 
thing out, even though an explanation can only be obtain by leave 
much of the subject unaccounted for, tend to make one bold and less 
shaky in the knees. 

the series of strange incident which he was experience had been 
inaugurate in the old-fashioned dwelling he had visit after 
information concerning the roads. and everything had been go along in 
a perfectly normal way up to, the very moment when he had taken a drink 
from the bottle found in the fireplace. but from that precise time 
everything had gone wrongly. hence the inference that the drink of 
the peculiar liquid was accountable in some way or other for his 
troubles. there was a supernatural agency in the whole thing. that much 
must be admitted. and whatever that agency was, and however it might be 
account for, it had taken reil back into a period of time more than 
a hundred years ago, and landed him, body and soul, within the lines of 
the patriot forces winter at valley forge. he might have stood there, 
turning over and over in his mind, pinch himself and muttering, all 
the morning, had not the newcomer cease a silent but curious inspection 
of his person, and asked: “who are you, sir?” 

“john reilly, at your pleasure,” the young man replied, add a 
question on his own account: “and who are you, sir?” 

immediately he received a heavy thump on his back from harry’s hard 
fist. 

“it is not for you to question the general,” the ragged administrator of 
the blow exclaimed. 

“and it is not for you to be so gay,” reil returned, angrily, give 
the blow back with add force. 

“here, here!” broke in the first questioner. “fisticuffs under my very 
nose! no more of this, i command you both.” to harry he add an extra 
caution: “your zeal in my behalf will be better appreciate by being 
less demonstrative. blow should be struck only on the battlefield.” to 
reil he said, with a slight smile hover over his face, “my name is 
washington. perhaps you may have heard of me?” 

to this reil replied: “i have, indeed, and heard you very well spoken 
of, too.” embolden by the other’s smile, he venture another question: 
“i think my reckoning of the day and year is badly at fault. an hour ago 
i thought the day was christmas day. how far out of the way did my 
calculation take me, sir?” 

“the day is indeed christmas day, and the year is, as you must know, the 
year of our lord one thousand seven hundred and seventy-seven.” 

reil again pinched himself. 

“why do you bring this man to me?” washington now inquired, turning to 
harry and his companions. 

“he is a spy, sir,” said harry. 

“that is a lie!” reil indignant interpolated. “i have done nothing 
to warrant any such charge.” 

“we found him in the widow robin’s house, pour strong liquor down his 
throat.” 

“i had gone inside after information concerning the roads----” 

“which he was get from a bottle, sir.” 

“if drink from a bottle of necessity constitute being a spy, i fear 
our camp is already a hotbed,” washington somewhat sage remarked, 
casting his eye around sly at his officer and men. “tell me,” he went 
on, with sudden sternness, look reil through and through, as though 
to read his very thoughts, “is the charge true? do you come from howe?” 

“the charge is not true, sir. i come from no one. i simply am making a 
tour of pleasure through this part of the country on my bicycle.” 

“with the country swarm with the men from two hostile armies, any 
kind of a tour, save one of absolute necessity, seem ill-timed.” 

“when i set out i knew nothing about any armies. the fact is, sir----” 
reil start to make an explanation, but he checked himself on 
realize that the telling of any such improbable yarn would only 
increase the hazardous of his position. 

“well?” washington questioned, in a tone of grow suspicion. 

“i certainly did not know that your army or any other army was 
quarter in this vicinity.” reil hesitate for lack of something 
further to say. “you see,” he finally added, prompt by a happy idea, 
“i rode my wheel from new york.” 

“you may have come from new york, though it is hard to believe you came 
on that singular-looking machine so great a distance. where is the horse 
which drew the vehicle?” 

reil touched his bicycle. “this is the horse, sir, just as it is; the 
vehicle,” he said. 

“the man is crazy!” harry exclaimed. washington only look the 
incredulity he felt, and this time ask a double question. 

“how can the thing be balanced without it be held upright by a pair of 
shaft from a horse’s back, and how is the motive power acquired?” 

for an answer reil jump upon the wheel, and at a considerable speed 
and in a haphazard way pedal around the space within the hollow square 
of soldiers. hither and thither he went, at one second nearly wheeling 
over the toe of the line of astonished, if not frightened, militiamen; 
at the next, bearing sudden down on harry and his companion and 
making them dance and jump about most alert to avoid a collision. even 
the dignified washington was once or twice put to the necessity of 
dodge hurried aside when his equilibrium was threatened. reil 
eventually dismounted, do so with assume clumsy by stopping the 
wheel at harry’s back and fall over heavy against the soldier. 
harry tumble to the ground, but reil dexterous landed on his feet. 
at once he began offering a profusion of apologies. 

“you did that by design!” harry shouted, jump to his feet. his face 
was red with anger and he shook his fist threatening at the bicyclist. 

washington command the man to hold his peace. then to reil he 
express a great surprise at his performance and a desire to know more 
about the bicycle. the young man thereupon describe the machine 
minutely, lift it into the air and spin the wheels to illustrate 
how smooth they rotated. 

“i can see it is possible to ride the contrivance with rapidity. it has 
been put together with wonderful ingenuity,” washington said, when 
reil had replace the wheel on the ground. 

“and you, sir, it is but a toy,” an officer spoke up. “put our friend on 
his bundle of tin and race him against one of our horsemen and he would 
make a sorry showing.” 

reil smiled. “i bear the gentleman no ill-will for his opinion,” he 
said. “still, i should like to show him by a practical test of the 
subject that his ignorance of it is most profound.” 

“you would test the speed of the machine against that of a horse?” 
washington said, in amazement. 

“i would, sir. you have a good road yonder. with your permission and a 
worthy opponent i would make the test at once.” 

“but, sir, the man is a spy,” harry broke in. “would it not be better to 
throw a rope around his neck and give him his deserts?” 

“the charge is by no means proven,” washington replied. “nor can it be 
until a court martial convene this afternoon. and i see no reason why 
we may not in the meantime enjoy the unique contest which has been 
suggested. it will make a pleasant break in the routine of camp life.” 

a murmur of approval went up from the masses of men by whom they were 
surrounded. while they had been talk it seem as though everybody in 
the camp not already on the scene had gather together behind the 
square of infantry. 

“then, sir,” harry said, with some eagerness, “i would like to be the 
man to ride the horse. there is no better animal than mine anywhere. and 
i understand his trick and humor quite well enough to put him to his 
best pace.” 

“i confess i have heard you well spoken of as a horseman,” washington 
said. “be away with you! saddle and bridle your horse at once.” 

it was the chain of singular circumstances narrate above which brought 
john reil into the most remarkable contest of his life. he had enter 
many bicycle races at one time or other, always with credit to himself 
and to the club whose colors he wore. and he had every expectation of 
making a good showing to-day. yet a reflection of the weird conditions 
which had brought about the present contest took away some of his 
self-possession when a few minutes later he was march over to the 
turnpike and left to his own thoughts, while the officer were pace 
out a one mile straightaway course down the road. 

after the measurement had been taken, two unbroken lines of soldier 
were form along the entire mile; a most evident precaution against 
reil leave the race course at any point to escape across the fields. 
washington came up to him again, when the preparation were completed, 
to shake his hand and whisper a word or two of encouragement in his ear. 
have perform these kindly acts he left to take up a position near 
the point of finish. 

the beginning of the course was located close to the battery of half 
conceal field pieces. reil was now conduct to this place. shortly 
afterward harry appear on his horse. he leer at the bicyclist 
contemptuous and said something of a sarcastic nature partly under his 
breath when the two line up, side by side, for the start. to these 
slight reil paid no heed; he had a strong belief that when the race 
was over there would be left in the mutton-like head of his opponent 
very little of his present inclination toward the humorous. the 
soldier’s mount was a handsome black mare, fourteen and a half hand 
high; strong of limb and at the flanks, and animate by a spirit that 
kept her prance around with continuous action. it must be admitted 
that the man rode very well. he guide the animal with ease and 
nonchalance when she rear and plunged, and kept her movements confine 
to an incredible small piece of ground, considering her abundance of 
action. 

“keep to your own side of the road throughout the race. i don’t want to 
be collide with by your big beast,” reil cautioned, while they were 
await two signal from the starter. 

to this harry reply in some derision, “i’ll give you a good share of 
the road at the start, and all of it and my dust, too, afterward.” and 
then the officer who held the pistol fire the first shot. 

reil was well satisfy with the conditions under which the race was 
to be made. the road was wide and level, smooth, hard and straight, and 
a strong breeze which had sprung up, blew square against his back. his 
wheel was gear up to eighty-four inches; the breeze promise to be a 
valuable adjunct in push it along. await the second and last 
signal, reil glance down the two blue ranks of soldiers, which 
stretch away into hazy lines in the distance and converge at the 
termination of the course where a flag had been stuck into the ground. 
the soldier were at parade rest. their uncease movements as they 
chat to one another, turning their body this way and that and 
crane their head forward to look toward the start point, and then 
jerk them back, made the lines seem like long, squirm snakes. at 
the end of the course a thick bunch of militiamen clog the road and 
overspread into the fields. 

crack! the signal to be off. reil shove aside the fellow who had been 
holding his wheel upright while astride of it, and pushed down on the 
pedals. the mare’s hoof dug the earth; her great muscular leg 
straighten out; she sprang forward with a snort of apparent pleasure, 
taking the lead at the very start. reil heard the shout of excitement 
run along the two ranks of soldiers. he saw them wave their arms and 
hat as he went by. and on ahead through the cloud of dust there was 
visible the shadow-like outline of the snorting, galloping horse, whose 
hoof beat sound clear and sharp above the din which came from the 
side of the highway. the mare crept farther and farther ahead. very 
soon a hundred feet or more of the road lay between her and the 
bicyclist. harry turn in his saddle and call out another sarcasm. 

“i shall pass you very soon. keep to your own side of the road!” reil 
shouted, not a bit daunt by the way the race had commenced. his head 
was well down over the handle-bars, his back had the shape of the upper 
portion of an immense egg. up and down his leg moved; fast and 
fast and fast yet. he went by the soldier so rapid that they only 
appear to be two streak of blurry color. their sharp rasp shout 
sound like the crack of musketry. the cloud of dust blew against 
the bicyclist’s head and into his mouth and throat. when he glance 
ahead again he saw with satisfaction that the mare was no long 
increase her lead. it soon became evident even that he was slow 
cutting down the advantage she had secured. 

harry again turn his head shortly afterward, doubtless expect to 
find his opponent hopeless distance by this time. instead of this 
reil was alarming close upon him. the man ejaculate a sudden oath 
and lash his animal furiously. strain every nerve and sinew the 
mare for the moment pushed further ahead. then her pace slacken a bit 
and reil again crept up to her. close and close to her than before, 
until his head was abreast of her outstretched tail. harry was lashing 
the mare and swear at her unceasing now. but she had spurt once 
and appear to be incapable of again increase her speed. in this way 
they went on for some little distance, harry use his whip brutally, 
the mare desperate struggle to attain a greater pace, reil hanging 
on with tenacity to her hind flank and give up not an inch of ground. 

a mile is indeed a very short distance when traverse at such a pace. 
the finish flag was already but a few hundred feet further on. 
reil realize that it was time now to go to the front. he grit his 
teeth together with determination and bent his head down even further 
toward his front wheel. then his feet began to move so quick that 
there was only visible an indistinct blur at the side of his crank 
shaft. at this very second, with a face marked with rage and hatred, 
harry brought his horse sudden across the road to thet part of it 
which he had been warn to avoid. 

it is hard to tell what kept reil from being run into and trample 
under foot. an attempt at back pedaling, a sudden twist of the 
handle-bar, a lurch to one side that almost threw him from his seat. 
then, in the fraction of a second he was over on the other side of the 
road, push ahead of the mare almost as though she were standing 
still. the outburst of alarm from the throat of the soldier change 
when they saw that reil had not been injured; first into a shout of 
indignation at the dastard attempt which had been made to run him 
down, and then into a roar of delight when the bicyclist breast the 
flag a winner of the race by twenty feet. 

as he cross the line reil caught a glimpse of washington. he stood 
close to the flag and was wave his hat in the air with the enthusiasm 
of a schoolboy. reil went on down the road slacken his speed as 
effectively as he could. but before it was possible to entire stop 
his wheel’s momentum the noisy acclamation in his rear cease with 
startle suddenness. he turn in his saddle and look back. as sure 
as st. peter he had the road entire to himself. there wasn’t a soldier 
or the ghost of a soldier in sight. 

as soon as he could he turn his bicycle about and rode slow back 
along the highway, now so singularly deserted, look hither and 
thither in vain for some trace of the vanish army. even the flag which 
had been stuck into the ground at the end of the one-mile race course 
was gone. the breeze had die out again and the air was tranquil and 
warm. in the branch of a nearby tree two sparrow chirp and 
twitter peacefully. reil went back to the place where the camp had 
been. he found there only open field on one side of the road and a 
clump of woodland on the other. he continue on down the little hill up 
which harry and his companion had brought him a few hour previous 
and follow the road on further, coming finally to the fork in it near 
which was located the old farmhouse wherein he had been taken captive. 
the house was, as it had been when he had previous enter it, fall 
apart from age and neglect. when he went inside he found lie on the 
brick hearth in front of the fireplace a number of pieces of broken 
glass. 

the end. 

* * * * * 

true ghost story 

by hereward carrington 

[illustration] 

the author of this book is well known in both america and europe as a 
prominent scientific writer on psychic and occult subjects. he has 
been a member of both the english and america society for psychic 
research for more than fifteen years, has written over a dozen books on 
the subject, a number of which have been translate into foreign 
language including the japan and arabic, and he has lecture in 
london, paris, rome, venice, milan, geneva, turin, etc., before 
scientific organizations. his writings are well known and have earn 
him a high place in psychic circles. 

in this book he presents a number of startle case which he has 
discover in his unrivalled investigate of psychic mysteries. they 
are not the ordinary “ghost stories,” base on pure fiction and have 
no foundation in reality, but are a collection of incident all 
thorough investigate and vouch for, the testimony being obtain 
first hand and corroborate by others. 

the first chapter deal with the interesting question =what is a ghost?= 
and attempt to answer this question in the light of the latest 
scientific theory which have been advanced to explain these 
supernatural happening and visitants. 

other chapter are: 

=phantasms of the dead.= 
=more phantasms.= 
=haunted houses.= 
=ghost story of a more dramatic order.= 
=historical ghosts.= 
=the phantom army seen in france.= 
=bibliography.= 

=true ghost stories= is a book of absorbing interest and cannot fail to 
grip and hold the attention of every reader, whether he be a student of 
these questions, or merely in search of hair-raising anecdote and 
stories, he will find them here a-plenty. 

the book contain 250 page print on antique woven book paper, 
attractive bound in cloth, with illustrate jacket in colors. =price, 
75 cent by mail, postpaid.= 

j. s. ogilvie publishing company 

p. o. box 767. 57 rose street, new york 









end of project gutenberg's twenty-five ghost stories, by w. bob dutch 

*** end of this project gutenberg ebook twenty-five ghost story *** 

***** this file should be name 53419-0.txt or 53419-0.zip ***** 
this and all associate file of various format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/5/3/4/1/53419/ 

produce by david edwards, chuck greif and the online 
distribute proofread team at http://www.pgdp.net (this 
book was produce from scan image of public domain 
material from the google books project.) 


update edition will replace the previous one--the old edition 
will be renamed. 

create the works from public domain print edition means that no 
one own a united states copyright in these works, so the foundation 
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united states without 
permission and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the general terms of use part of this license, apply to 
copy and distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a register trademark, and may not be use if you 
charge for the ebooks, unless you receive specific permission. if you 
do not charge anything for copy of this ebook, comply with the 
rule is very easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose 
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performance and 
research. they may be modify and print and given away--you may do 
practically anything with public domain ebooks. redistribute is 
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial 
redistribution. 



*** start: full license *** 

the full project gutenberg license 
please read this before you distribute or use this work 

to protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promote the free 
distribution of electronic works, by use or distribute this work 
(or any other work associate in any way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full project 
gutenberg-tm license (available with this file or online at 
http://gutenberg.org/license). 


section 1. general terms of use and redistribute project gutenberg-tm 
electronic works 

1.a. by reading or use any part of this project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to 
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all 
the terms of this agreement, you must cease use and return or destroy 
all copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession. 
if you paid a fee for obtain a copy of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the 
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a register trademark. it may only be 
use on or associate in any way with an electronic work by people who 
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few 
things that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electronic works 
even without comply with the full terms of this agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement 
and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compilation copyright in the collection of project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works. nearly all the individual works in the 
collection are in the public domain in the united states. if an 
individual work is in the public domain in the united states and you are 
located in the united states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or create derivative 
works base on the work as long as all reference to project gutenberg 
are removed. of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promote free access to electronic works by 
freely share project gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of 
this agreement for keeping the project gutenberg-tm name associate with 
the work. you can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by 
keeping this work in the same format with its attach full project 
gutenberg-tm license when you share it without charge with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are located also govern 
what you can do with this work. copyright law in most country are in 
a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states, check 
the law of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement 
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribute or 
create derivative works base on this work or any other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundation make no representations concerning 
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the united 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remove all reference to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm license must appear prominent 
whenever any copy of a project gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copy or distributed: 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license 

1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is derive 
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicate that it is 
post with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copy 
and distribute to anyone in the united states without pay any fee 
or charges. if you are redistribute or providing access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associate with or appear on the 
work, you must comply either with the requirement of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is post 
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution 
must comply with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any additional 
terms impose by the copyright holder. additional terms will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm license for all works post with the 
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work. 

1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg-tm 
license terms from this work, or any file contain a part of this 
work or any other work associate with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this 
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without 
prominent display the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, 
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provide access to or 
distribute copy of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the official version 
post on the official project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org), 
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a 
copy, a means of export a copy, or a means of obtain a copy upon 
request, of the work in its original "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. any alternate format must include the full project gutenberg-tm 
license as specify in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copy or distribute any project gutenberg-tm works 
unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charge a reasonable fee for copy of or providing 
access to or distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works provided 
that 

- you pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profit you derive from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm works calculate use the method 
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
has agree to donate royalty under this paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payment 
must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you 
prepare (or are legal require to prepare) your periodic tax 
returns. royalty payment should be clearly marked as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation at the 
address specify in section 4, "information about donation to 
the project gutenberg literary archive foundation." 

- you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notify 
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he 
do not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must require such a user to return or 
destroy all copy of the works possessed in a physical medium 
and discontinue all use of and all access to other copy of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of any 
money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the 
electronic work is discover and report to you within 90 days 
of receipt of the work. 

- you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free 
distribution of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set 
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from 
both the project gutenberg literary archive foundation and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundation as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteer and employee expend considerable 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread 
public domain works in create the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or 
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual 
property infringement, a defective or damage disk or other medium, a 
computer virus, or computer code that damage or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the "right 
of replacement or refund" describe in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distribute a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all 
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal 
fees. you agree that you have no remedy for negligence, strict 
liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those 
provided in paragraph 1.f.3. you agree that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be 
liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or 
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a 
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can 
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you 
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you with 
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a 
refund. if you received the work electronically, the person or entity 
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to 
receive the work electronic in lieu of a refund. if the second copy 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further 
opportunity to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you 'as-is' with no other 
warranty of any kind, express or implied, including but not limited to 
warranty of merchant or fitness for any purpose. 

1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimer of certain imply 
warranty or the exclusion or limitation of certain type of damages. 
if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violate the 
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permit by 
the applicable state law. the invalid or unenforceable of any 
provision of this agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone 
providing copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance 
with this agreement, and any volunteer associate with the production, 
promotion and distribution of project gutenberg-tm electronic works, 
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees, 
that arise directly or indirect from any of the following which you do 
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addition or deletion to any 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any defect you cause. 


section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of 
electronic works in format readable by the widest variety of computer 
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it exist 
because of the effort of hundred of volunteer and donation from 
people in all walk of life. 

volunteer and financial support to provide volunteer with the 
assistance they need, are critical to reach project gutenberg-tm's 
goal and ensure that the project gutenberg-tm collection will 
remain freely available for generation to come. in 2001, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation was create to provide a secure 
and permanent future for project gutenberg-tm and future generations. 
to learn more about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation 
and how your effort and donation can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org. 


section 3. information about the project gutenberg literary archive 
foundation 

the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt status by the internal 
revenue service. the foundation's ein or federal tax identification 
number is 64-6221541. its 501(c)(3) letter is post at 
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contribution to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. federal law and your state's laws. 

the foundation's principal office is located at 4557 melan dr. s. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but its volunteer and employee are scattered 
throughout numerous locations. its business office is located at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact links and up to date contact 
information can be found at the foundation's web site and official 
page at http://pglaf.org 

for additional contact information: 
dr. gregory b. newby 
chief executive and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 


section 4. information about donation to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot survive without wide 
spread public support and donation to carry out its mission of 
increase the number of public domain and licensed works that can be 
freely distribute in machine readable form accessible by the widest 
array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donation 
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintain tax exempt 
status with the irs. 

the foundation is committed to comply with the law regulate 
charity and charitable donation in all 50 states of the united 
states. compliance requirement are not uniform and it take a 
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. we do not solicit donation in location 
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to 
send donation or determine the status of compliance for any 
particular state visit http://pglaf.org 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribution from states where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibition 
against accept unsolicited donation from donor in such states who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

international donation are grateful accepted, but we cannot make 
any statement concerning tax treatment of donation received from 
outside the united states. u.s. law alone swamp our small staff. 

please check the project gutenberg web page for current donation 
method and addresses. donation are accept in a number of other 
ways including checks, online payment and credit card donations. 
to donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate 


section 5. general information about project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. 

professor michael s. hart is the originate of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely share 
with anyone. for thirty years, he produce and distribute project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with only a loose network of volunteer support. 


project gutenberg-tm ebook are often create from several print 
editions, all of which are confirmed as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notice is included. thus, we do not necessarily 
keep ebook in compliance with any particular paper edition. 


most people start at our web site which has the main pg search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.org 

this web site include information about project gutenberg-tm, 
including how to make donation to the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to 
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks. 
