the project gutenberg ebook of arthur mervyn, by charl brockden brown 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.org 


title: arthur mervyn 
or, memoir of the year 1793 

author: charl brockden brown 

releas date: june 5, 2006 [ebook #18508] 

language: english 


*** start OF thi project gutenberg ebook arthur mervyn *** 




produc by graem mackreth and the onlin distribut 
proofread team at http://www.pgdp.net 






arthur mervyn; 

or, 

memoir OF the year 1793. 

BY 

charl brockden brown. 

"fielding, richardson, and scott occupi pedestals. In a nich wa 
deposit the bust of our countryman, the author of 'arthur mervyn.'" 

nathaniel hawthorne. 

philadelphia: david mckay, publisher, 

23 south ninth street. 1889. 




preface. 


the evil of pestil by which thi citi ha late been afflict 
will probabl form an era in it history. the scheme of reform and 
improv to which they will give birth, or, if no effort of human 
wisdom can avail to avert the period visit of thi calamity, 
the chang in manner and popul which they will produce, will be, 
in the highest degree, memorable. they have alreadi suppli new and 
copiou materi for reflect to the physician and the polit 
economist. they have not been less fertil of instruct to the moral 
observer, to whom they have furnish new display of the influenc of 
human passion and motives. 

amidst the medic and polit discuss which are now afloat in the 
commun rel to thi topic, the author of these remark ha 
ventur to method hi own reflections, and to weav into an humbl 
narr such incid as appear to him most instruct and 
remark among those which came within the sphere of hi own 
observation. It is everi one' duti to profit by all opportun of 
inculc on mankind the lesson of justic and humanity. the 
influenc of hope and fear, the trial of fortitud and constancy, 
which took place in thi citi in the autumn of 1793, have, perhaps, 
never been exceed in ani age. It is but just to snatch some of these 
from oblivion, and to deliv to poster a brief but faith sketch 
of the condit of thi metropoli dure that calamit period. men 
onli requir to be made acquaint with distress for their compass 
and their chariti to be awakened. He that depicts, in live colours, 
the evil of diseas and poverty, perform an emin servic to the 
sufferers, by call forth benevol in those who are abl to afford 
relief; and he who portray exampl of disinterested and 
intrepid confer on virtu the notorieti and homag that are due to 
it, and rous in the spectat the spirit of salutari emulation. 

In the follow tale a particular seri of adventur is brought to a 
close; but these are necessarili connect with the event which 
happen subsequ to the period here described. these event are not 
less memor than those which form the subject of the present volume, 
and may hereaft be published, either separ or in addit to 
this. 

c.b.b. 




arthur mervyn. 




chapter I. 


I wa resid in thi citi dure the year 1793. mani motiv 
contribut to detain me, though departur wa easi and commodious, and 
my friend were gener solicit for me to go. It is not my purpos 
to enumer these motives, or to dwell on my present concern and 
transactions, but mere to compos a narr of some incid with 
which my situat made me acquainted. 

return one evening, somewhat later than usual, to my own house, my 
attent wa attracted, just as I enter the porch, by the figur of a 
man reclin against the wall at a few pace distant. My sight wa 
imperfectli assist by a far-off lamp; but the postur in which he sat, 
the hour, and the place, immedi suggest the idea of one disabl 
by sickness. It wa obviou to conclud that hi diseas wa 
pestilential. thi did not deter me from approach and examin him 
more closely. 

He lean hi head against the wall; hi eye were shut, hi hand 
clasp in each other, and hi bodi seem to be sustain in an upright 
posit mere by the cellar-door against which he rest hi left 
shoulder. the lethargi into which he wa sunk seem scarc 
interrupt by my feel hi hand and hi forehead. hi throb 
templ and burn skin indic a fever, and hi form, alreadi 
emaciated, seem to prove that it had not been of short duration. 

there wa onli one circumst that hinder me from form an 
immedi determin in what manner thi person should be treated. 
My famili consist of my wife and a young child. our servant-maid had 
been seized, three day before, by the reign malady, and, at her own 
request, had been convey to the hospital. We ourselv enjoy good 
health, and were hope of escap with our lives. our measur for 
thi end had been cautious taken and care adher to. they did 
not consist in avoid the receptacl of infection, for my offic 
requir me to go daili into the midst of them; nor in fill the hous 
with the exhal of gunpowder, vinegar, or tar. they consist in 
cleanliness, reason exercise, and wholesom diet. custom had 
likewis blunt the edg of our apprehensions. To take thi person into 
my house, and bestow upon him the requisit attendance, wa the scheme 
that first occur to me. In this, however, the advic of my wife wa 
to govern me. 

I mention the incid to her. I point out the danger which wa to 
be dread from such an inmate. I desir her to decid with caution, 
and mention my resolut to conform myself implicitli to her 
decision. should we refus to harbour him, we must not forget that there 
wa a hospit to which he would, perhaps, consent to be carried, and 
where he would be accommod in the best manner the time would admit. 

"nay," said she, "talk not of hospitals. At least, let him have hi 
choice. I have no fear about me, for my part, in a case where the 
injunct of duti are so obvious. let us take the poor, unfortun 
wretch into our protect and care, and leav the consequ to 
heaven." 

I expect and wa pleas with thi proposal. I return to the sick 
man, and, on rous him from hi stupor, found him still in possess 
of hi reason. with a candl near, I had an opportun of view him 
more accurately. 

hi garb wa plain, careless, and denot rusticity. hi aspect wa 
simpl and ingenuous, and hi decay visag still retain trace of 
uncommon but manlik beauty. He had all the appear of mere youth, 
unspoil by luxuri and uninur to misfortune. I scarc ever beheld 
an object which laid so power and sudden a claim to my affect and 
succour. 

"you are sick," said I, in as cheer a tone as I could assume. "cold 
brick and night-air are comfortless attend for one in your 
condition. rise, I pray you, and come into the house. We will tri to 
suppli you with accommod a littl more suitable." 

At thi address he fix hi languid eye upon me. "what would you 
have?" said he. "I am veri well as I am. while I breathe, which will not 
be long, I shall breath with more freedom here than elsewhere. let me 
alone--i am veri well as I am." 

"nay," said I, "thi situat is unsuit to a sick man. I onli ask 
you to come into my house, and receiv all the kind that it is in 
our power to bestow. pluck up courage, and I will answer for your 
recovery, provid you submit to directions, and do as we would have 
you. rise, and come along with me. We will find you a physician and a 
nurse, and all we ask in return is good spirit and compliance." 

"do you not know," he replied, "what my diseas is? whi should you risk 
your safeti for the sake of one whom your kind cannot benefit, and 
who ha noth to give in return?" 

there wa someth in the style of thi remark, that heighten my 
prepossess in hi favour, and made me pursu my purpos with more 
zeal. "let us tri what we can do for you," I answered. "if we save your 
life, we shall have done you some service, and, as for recompense, we 
will look to that." 

It wa with consider difficulti that he wa persuad to accept our 
invitation. He wa conduct to a chamber, and, the critic of hi 
case requir unusu attention, I spent the night at hi bedside. 

My wife wa encumb with the care both of her infant and her family. 
the charm babe wa in perfect health, but her mother' constitut 
wa frail and delicate. We simplifi the household duti as much as 
possible, but still these duti were consider burdensom to one not 
use to the performance, and luxuri educated. the addit of a 
sick man wa like to be product of much fatigue. My engag 
would not allow me to be alway at home, and the state of my patient, 
and the remedi necessari to be prescribed, were attend with mani 
noxiou and disgust circumstances. My fortun would not allow me to 
hire assistance. My wife, with a feebl frame and a mind shrinking, on 
ordinari occasions, from such offices, with fastidi scrupulousness, 
wa to be hi onli or princip nurse. 

My neighbour were fervent in their well-meant zeal, and loud in their 
remonstr on the imprud and rash of my conduct. they call 
me presumptu and cruel in expos my wife and child, as well as 
myself, to such immin hazard, for the sake of one, too, who most 
probabl wa worthless, and whose diseas had doubtless been, by 
neglig or mistreatment, render incurable. 

I did not turn a deaf ear to these censurers. I wa awar of all the 
inconveni and peril to which I thu spontan expos myself. 
No one knew better the valu of that woman whom I call mine, or set a 
higher price upon her life, her health, and her ease. the virul and 
activ of thi contagion, the danger condit of my patient, and 
the dubious of hi character, were not forgotten by me; but still my 
conduct in thi affair receiv my own entir approbation. all 
object on the score of my friend were remov by her own 
willing and even solicitud to undertak the province. I had more 
confid than other in the vincibl of thi disease, and in the 
success of those measur which we had use for our defenc against it. 
but, whatev were the evil to accru to us, we were sure of one thing: 
namely, that the conscious of have neglect thi unfortun 
person would be a sourc of more unhappi than could possibl redound 
from the attend and care that he would claim. 

the more we saw of him, indeed, the more did we congratul ourselv 
on our proceeding. hi torment were acut and tedious; but, in the 
midst even of delirium, hi heart seem to overflow with gratitude, and 
to be actuat by no wish but to allevi our toil and our danger. He 
made prodigi exert to perform necessari offic for himself. He 
suppress hi feel and struggl to maintain a cheer tone and 
countenance, that he might prevent that anxieti which the sight of hi 
suffer produc in us. He wa perpetu furnish reason whi hi 
nurs should leav him alone, and betray dissatisfact whenev she 
enter hi apartment. 

In a few days, there were reason to conclud him out of danger; and, in 
a fortnight, noth but exercis and nourish were want to 
complet hi restoration. meanwhil noth wa obtain from him but 
gener information, that hi place of abod wa chester county, and 
that some moment engag induc him to hazard hi safeti by 
come to the citi in the height of the epidemic. 

He wa far from be talkative. hi silenc seem to be the joint 
result of modesti and unpleas remembrances. hi featur were 
character by pathet seriousness, and hi deport by a graviti 
veri unusu at hi age. accord to hi own representation, he wa no 
more than eighteen year old, but the depth of hi remark indic a 
much greater advance. hi name wa arthur mervyn. He describ himself 
as have pass hi life at the plough-tail and the threshing-floor; as 
be destitut of all scholast instruction; and as be long sinc 
bereft of the affection regard of parent and kinsmen. 

when question as to the cours of life which he meant to pursu upon 
hi recovery, he profess himself without ani precis object. He wa 
will to be guid by the advic of others, and by the light which 
experi should furnish. the countri wa open to him, and he suppos 
that there wa no part of it in which food could not be purchas by hi 
labour. He wa unqualified, by hi education, for ani liber 
profession. hi poverti wa likewis an insuper impediment. He could 
afford to spend no time in the acquisit of a trade. He must labour, 
not for futur emolument, but for immedi subsistence. the onli 
pursuit which hi present circumst would allow him to adopt wa 
that which, he wa inclin to believe, wa likewis the most eligible. 
without doubt hi experi wa slender, and it seem absurd to 
pronounc concern that of which he had no direct knowledge; but so it 
was, he could not outroot from hi mind the persuas that to plough, 
to sow, and to reap, were employ most befit a reason 
creature, and from which the truest pleasur and the least pollut 
would flow. He contempl no other scheme than to return, as soon as 
hi health should permit, into the country, seek employ where it wa 
to be had, and acquit himself in hi engag with fidel and 
diligence. 

I point out to him variou way in which the citi might furnish 
employ to one with hi qualifications. He had said that he wa 
somewhat accustom to the pen. there were station in which the 
possess of a legibl hand wa all that wa requisite. He might add to 
thi a knowledg of accounts, and therebi procur himself a post in some 
mercantil or public office. 

To thi he objected, that experi had shown him unfit for the life of 
a penman. thi had been hi chief occup for a littl while, and he 
found it wholli incompat with hi health. He must not sacrific the 
end for the means. starv wa a diseas prefer to consumption. 
besides, he labour mere for the sake of living, and he live mere 
for the sake of pleasure. If hi task should enabl him to live, but, 
at the same time, bereav him of all satisfaction, they inflict 
injury, and were to be shun as wors evil than death. 

I ask to what speci of pleasur he alluded, with which the busi 
of a clerk wa inconsistent. 

He answer that he scarc knew how to describ it. He read book when 
they came in hi way. He had light upon few, and, perhaps, the 
pleasur they afford him wa owe to their fewness; yet he confess 
that a mode of life which entir forbad him to read wa by no mean 
to hi taste. but thi wa trivial. He knew how to valu the thought of 
other people, but he could not part with the privileg of observ and 
think for himself. He want busi which would suffer at least 
nine-tenth of hi attent to go free. If it afford agreeabl 
employ to that part of hi attent which it appli to it own 
use, so much the better; but, if it did not, he should not repine. He 
should be content with a life whose pleasur were to it pain as nine 
are to one. He had tri the trade of a copyist, and in circumst 
more favour than it wa like he should ever again have an 
opportun of tri it, and he had found that it did not fulfil the 
requisit conditions. wherea the trade of ploughman wa friendli to 
health, liberty, and pleasure. 

the pestilence, if it may so be called, wa now declining. the health of 
my young friend allow him to breath the fresh air and to walk. A 
friend of mine, by name wortley, who had spent two month from the city, 
and to whom, in the cours of a familiar correspondence, I had mention 
the forego particulars, return from hi rural excursion. He wa 
posting, on the even of the day of hi arrival, with a friendli 
expedition, to my house, when he overtook mervyn go in the same 
direction. He wa surpris to find him go befor him into my dwelling, 
and to discover, which he speedili did, that thi wa the youth whom I 
had so frequent mention to him. I wa present at their meeting. 

there wa a strang mixtur in the counten of wortley when they were 
present to each other. hi satisfact wa mingl with surprise, and 
hi surpris with anger. mervyn, in hi turn, betray consider 
embarrassment. wortley' thought were too earnest on some topic to 
allow him to converse. He shortli made some excus for take leave, 
and, rising, address himself to the youth with a request that he would 
walk home with him. thi invitation, deliv in a tone which left it 
doubt whether a compliment or menac were meant, augment mervyn' 
confusion. He compli without speaking, and they went out together;--mi 
wife and I were left to comment upon the scene. 

It could not fail to excit uneasiness. they were evid no stranger 
to each other. the indign that flash from the eye of wortley, 
and the trembl conscious of mervyn, were unwelcom tokens. the 
former wa my dearest friend, and vener for hi discern and 
integrity. the latter appear to have drawn upon himself the anger and 
disdain of thi man. We alreadi anticip the shock which the 
discoveri of hi unworthi would produce. 

In a half-hour mervyn returned. hi embarrass had given place to 
dejection. He wa alway serious, but hi featur were now overcast by 
the deepest gloom. the anxieti which I felt would not allow me to 
hesit long. 

"arthur," said I, "someth is the matter with you. will you not 
disclos it to us? perhap you have brought yourself into some dilemma 
out of which we may help you to escape. ha ani thing of an unpleas 
natur pass between you and wortley?" 

the youth did not readili answer. He seem at a loss for a suitabl 
reply. At length he said that someth disagre had inde pass 
between him and wortley. He had had the misfortun to be connect with 
a man by whom wortley conceiv himself to be injured. He had born no 
part in inflict thi injury, but had nevertheless been threaten 
with ill treatment if he did not make disclosur which, indeed, it wa 
in hi power to make, but which he wa bound, by everi sanction, to 
withhold. thi disclosur would be of no benefit to wortley. It would 
rather oper injuri than otherwise; yet it wa endeavour to be 
wrest from him by the heaviest menaces. there he paused. 

We were natur inquisit as to the scope of these menaces; but 
mervyn entreat us to forbear ani further discuss of thi topic. He 
foresaw the difficulti to which hi silenc would subject him. one of 
it most fear consequ would be the loss of our good opinion. He 
knew not what he had to dread from the enmiti of wortley. mr. wortley' 
violenc wa not without excuse. It wa hi mishap to be expos to 
suspicion which could onli be obviat by break hi faith. but, 
indeed, he knew not whether ani degre of explicit would confut the 
charg that were made against him; whether, by trampl on hi sacr 
promise, he should not multipli hi peril instead of lessen their 
number. A difficult part had been assign to him; by much too 
difficult for one young, improvident, and inexperienc as he was. 

sincerity, perhaps, wa the best course. perhaps, after have had an 
opportun for deliberation, he should conclud to adopt it; meanwhil 
he entreat permiss to retir to hi chamber. He wa unabl to 
exclud from hi mind idea which yet could, with no propriety, at least 
at present, be made the theme of conversation. 

these word were accompani with simplic and pathos, and with token 
of unaffect distress. 

"arthur," said I, "you are master of your action and time in thi 
house. retir when you please; but you will natur suppos us anxiou 
to dispel thi mystery. whatev shall tend to obscur or malign your 
charact will of cours excit our solicitude. wortley is not 
short-sight or hasti to condemn. So great is my confid in hi 
integr that I will not promis my esteem to one who ha irrecover 
lost that of wortley. I am not acquaint with your motiv to 
concealment, or what it is you conceal; but take the word of one who 
possess that experi which you complain of wanting, that sincer 
is alway safest." 

As soon as he had retired, my curios prompt me to pay an immedi 
visit to wortley. I found him at home. He wa no less desir of an 
interview, and answer my inquiri with as much eager as they were 
made. 

"you know," said he, "mi disastr connect with thoma welbeck. you 
recollect hi sudden disappear last july, by which I wa reduc to 
the brink of ruin. nay, I am, even now, far from certain that I shall 
surviv that event. I spoke to you about the youth who live with him, 
and by what mean that youth wa discov to have cross the river in 
hi compani on the night of hi departure. thi is that veri youth. 

"thi will account for my emot at meet him at your house; I 
brought him out with me. hi confus suffici indic hi 
knowledg of transact between welbeck and me. I question him as to 
the fate of that man. To own the truth, I expect some well-digest 
lie; but he mere said that he had promis secreci on that subject, 
and must therefor be excus from give me ani information. I ask 
him if he knew that hi master, or accomplice, or whatev wa hi 
relat to him, abscond in my debt? He answer that he knew it well; 
but still plead a promis of inviol secreci as to hi 
hiding-place. thi conduct justli exasper me, and I treat him with 
the sever which he deserved. I am half asham to confess the 
excess of my passion; I even went so far as to strike him. He bore my 
insult with the utmost patience. No doubt the young villain is well 
instruct in hi lesson. He know that he may safe defi my power. 
from threat I descend to entreaties. I even endeavour to wind the 
truth from him by artifice. I promis him a part of the debt if he 
would enabl me to recov the whole. I offer him a consider 
reward if he would mere afford me a clue by which I might trace him to 
hi retreat; but all wa insufficient. He mere put on an air of 
perplex and shook hi head in token of non-compliance." 

such wa my friend' account of thi interview. hi suspicion were 
unquestion plausible; but I wa dispos to put a more favour 
construct on mervyn' behaviour. I recollect the desol and 
penniless condit in which I found him, and the uniform complac 
and rectitud of hi deport for the period dure which we had 
wit it. these idea had consider influenc on my judgment, and 
indispos me to follow the advic of my friend, which wa to turn him 
forth from my door that veri night. 

My wife' prepossess were still more power advoc of thi 
youth. she would vouch, she said, befor ani tribunal, for hi 
innocence; but she willingli concur with me in allow him the 
continu of our friendship on no other condit than that of a 
disclosur of the truth. To entitl ourselv to thi confid we were 
will to engage, in our turn, for the observ of secrecy, so far 
that no detriment should accru from thi disclosur to himself or hi 
friend. 

next morning, at breakfast, our guest appear with a counten less 
express of embarrass than on the last evening. hi attent wa 
chiefli engag by hi own thoughts, and littl wa said till the 
breakfast wa removed. I then remind him of the incid of the 
former day, and mention that the uneasi which thenc aros to us 
had rather been increas than diminish by time. 

"it is in your power, my young friend," continu I, "to add still more 
to thi uneasiness, or to take it entir away. I had no person 
acquaint with thoma welbeck. I have been inform by other that 
hi character, for a certain period, wa respectable, but that, at 
length, he contract larg debts, and, instead of pay them, 
absconded. you, it seems, live with him. On the night of hi departur 
you are known to have accompani him across the river, and this, it 
seems, is the first of your reappear on the stage. welbeck' conduct 
wa dishonest. He ought doubtless to be pursu to hi asylum and be 
compel to refund hi winnings. you confess yourself to know hi place 
of refuge, but urg a promis of secrecy. know you not that to assist or 
conniv at the escap of thi man wa wrong? To have promis to favour 
hi conceal and impun by silenc wa onli an aggrav of thi 
wrong. that, however, is past. your youth, and circumstances, hitherto 
unexplained, may apolog for that misconduct; but it is certainli your 
duti to repair it to the utmost of your power. think whether, by 
disclos what you know, you will not repair it." 

"I have spent most of last night," said the youth, "in reflect on 
thi subject. I had come to a resolution, befor you spoke, of confid 
to you my simpl tale. I perceiv in what circumst I am placed, and 
that I can keep my hold of your good opinion onli by a candid 
deportment. I have inde given a promis which it wa wrong, or rather 
absurd, in anoth to exact, and in me to give; yet none but 
consider of the highest import would persuad me to break my 
promise. No injuri will accru from my disclosur to welbeck. If there 
should, dishonest as he was, that would be a suffici reason for my 
silence. wortley will not, in ani degree, be benefit by ani 
commun that I can make. whether I grant or withhold information, 
my conduct will have influenc onli on my own happiness, and that 
influenc will justifi me in grant it. 

"I receiv your protect when I wa friendless and forlorn. you have 
a right to know whom it is that you protected. My own fate is connect 
with the fate of welbeck, and that connection, togeth with the 
interest you are pleas to take in my concerns, becaus they are mine, 
will render a tale worthi of attent which will not be recommend by 
varieti of fact or skill in the display of them. 

"wortley, though passionate, and, with regard to me, unjust, may yet be 
a good man; but I have no desir to make him one of my auditors. you, 
sir, may, if you think proper, relat to him afterward what particular 
concern welbeck it may be of import for him to know; but at 
present it will be well if your indulg shall support me to the end 
of a tediou but humbl tale." 

the eye of my eliza sparkl with delight at thi proposal. she 
regard thi youth with a sisterli affection, and consid hi 
candour, in thi respect, as an uner test of hi rectitude. she wa 
prepar to hear and to forgiv the error of inexperi and 
precipitation. I did not fulli particip in her satisfaction, but wa 
nevertheless most zealous dispos to listen to hi narrative. 

My engag oblig me to postpon thi rehears till late in the 
evening. collect then round a cheer hearth, exempt from all 
likelihood of interrupt from without, and our babe' unpractis 
sens shut up in the sweetest and profoundest sleep, mervyn, after a 
paus of recollection, began. 




chapter ii. 


My natal soil is chester county. My father had a small farm, on which he 
ha been able, by industry, to maintain himself and a numer family. 
He ha had mani children, but some defect in the constitut of our 
mother ha been fatal to all of them but me. they die success as 
they attain the age of nineteen or twenty, and, sinc I have not yet 
reach that age, I may reason look for the same prematur fate. In 
the spring of last year my mother follow her fifth child to the grave, 
and three month afterward die herself. 

My constitut ha alway been frail, and, till the death of my mother, 
I enjoy unlimit indulgence. I cheer sustain my portion of 
labour, for that necess prescribed; but the interv were alway at 
my own disposal, and, in whatev manner I thought proper to employ 
them, my plan were encourag and assisted. fond appellations, tone of 
mildness, solicit attend when I wa sick, defer to my 
opinions, and vener for my talents, compos the imag which I still 
retain of my mother. I had the thoughtless and presumpt of youth, 
and, now that she is gone, my compunct is awaken by a thousand 
recollect of my treatment of her. I wa inde guilti of no flagrant 
act of contempt or rebellion. perhap her deport wa inevit 
calcul to instil into me a froward and refractori spirit. My faults, 
however, were speedili follow by repentance, and, in the midst of 
impati and passion, a look of tender upbraid from her wa alway 
suffici to melt me into tear and make me ductil to her will. If 
sorrow for her loss be an aton for the offenc which I commit 
dure her life, ampl aton ha been made. 

My father is a man of slender capacity, but of a temper easi and 
flexible. He wa sober and industri by habit. He wa content to be 
guid by the superior intellig of hi wife. under thi guidanc he 
prospered; but, when that wa withdrawn, hi affair soon began to 
betray mark of unskil and negligence. My understanding, perhaps, 
qualifi me to counsel and assist my father, but I wa wholli 
unaccustom to the task of superintendence. besides, gentl and 
fortitud did not descend to me from my mother, and these were 
indispens attribut in a boy who desir to dictat to hi 
gray-head parent. time, perhaps, might have confer dexter on me, 
or prudenc on him, had not a most unexpect event given a differ 
direct to my views. 

betti lawrenc wa a wild girl from the pine-forest of new jersey. At 
the age of ten year she becam a bound servant in thi city, and, after 
the expir of her time, came into my father' neighbourhood in 
search of employment. she wa hire in our famili as milkmaid and 
market-woman. her featur were coarse, her frame robust, her mind 
total unlettered, and her moral defect in that point in which 
femal excel is suppos chiefli to consist. she possess 
super-abund health and good-humour, and wa quit a support 
companion in the hay-field or the barnyard. 

On the death of my mother, she wa exalt to a somewhat higher station. 
the same task fell to her lot; but the time and manner of perform 
them were, in some degree, submit to her own choice. the cow and the 
dairi were still her province; but in thi no one interf with her or 
pretend to prescrib her measures. for thi provinc she seem not 
unqualified, and, as long as my father wa pleas with her management, 
I had noth to object. 

thi state of thing continued, without materi variation, for sever 
months. there were appear in my father' deport to betty, which 
excit my reflections, but not my fears. the defer which wa 
occasion paid to the advic or the claim of thi girl wa account 
for by that feebl of mind which degrad my father, in whatev 
scene he should be placed, to be the tool of others. I had no concept 
that her claim extend beyond a temporari or superfici 
gratification. 

At length, however, a visibl chang took place in her manners. A 
scorn affect and awkward digniti began to be assumed. A greater 
attent wa paid to dress, which wa of gayer hue and more 
fashion texture. I ralli her on these token of a sweetheart, and 
amus myself with expati to her on the qualif of her 
lover. A clownish fellow wa frequent her visitant. hi attent did 
not appear to be discouraged. He therefor wa readili suppos to be 
the man. when point out as the favourite, great resent wa 
expressed, and obscur insinu were made that her aim wa not quit 
so low as that. these denial I suppos to be customari on such 
occasions, and consid the continu of hi visit as a suffici 
confut of them. 

I frequent spoke of betty, her newly-acquir dignity, and of the 
probabl caus of her chang of manners, to my father. when thi theme 
wa started, a certain cold and reserv overspread hi features. He 
dealt in monosyllables, and either labour to chang the subject or 
made some excus for leav me. thi behaviour, though it occas 
surprise, wa never veri deepli reflect on. My father wa old, and the 
mourn impress which were made upon him by the death of hi wife, 
the laps of almost half a year seem scarc to have weakened. betti 
had chosen her partner, and I wa in daili expect of receiv a 
summon to the wedding. 

one afternoon thi girl dress herself in the gayest manner and seem 
make prepar for some moment ceremony. My father had direct 
me to put the hors to the chaise. On my inquir whither he wa going, 
he answer me, in gener terms, that he had some busi at a few 
miles' distance. I offer to go in hi stead, but he said that wa 
impossible. I wa proceed to ascertain the possibl of thi when 
he left me to go to a field where hi workmen were busy, direct me to 
inform him when the chais wa ready, to suppli hi place, while 
absent, in overlook the workmen. 

thi offic wa performed; but befor I call him from the field I 
exchang a few word with the milkmaid, who sat on a bench, in all the 
prim of expectation, and deck with the most gaudi plumage. I rate 
her imaginari lover for hi tardiness, and vow etern hatr to them 
both for not make me a bride' attendant. she listen to me with an 
air in which embarrass wa mingl sometim with exult and 
sometim with malice. I left her at length, and return to the hous 
not till a late hour. As soon as I entered, my father present betti to 
me as hi wife, and desir she might receiv that treatment from me 
which wa due to a mother. 

It wa not till after repeat and solemn declar from both of them 
that I wa prevail upon to credit thi event. it effect upon my 
feel may be easili conceived. I knew the woman to be rude, ignorant, 
and licentious. had I suspect thi event, I might have fortifi my 
father' weak and enabl him to shun the gulf to which he wa 
tending; but my presumpt had been careless of the danger. To think 
that such a one should take the place of my rever mother wa 
intolerable. 

To treat her in ani way not squar with her real merits; to hinder 
anger and scorn from rise at the sight of her in her new condition, 
wa not in my power. To be degrad to the rank of her servant, to 
becom the sport of her malic and her artifices, wa not to be endured. 
I had no independ provision; but I wa the onli child of my father, 
and had reason hope to succeed to hi patrimony. On thi hope I had 
built a thousand agreeabl visions. I had medit innumer project 
which the possess of thi estat would enabl me to execute. I had no 
wish beyond the trade of agriculture, and beyond the opul which a 
hundr acr would give. 

these vision were now at an end. No doubt her own interest would be, to 
thi woman, the suprem law, and thi would be consid as 
irreconcil hostil to mine. My father would easili be mould to 
her purpose, and that act easili extort from him which should reduc 
me to beggary. she had a gross and pervers taste. she had a numer 
kindred, indig and hungry. On these hi substanc would speedili be 
lavished. Me she hated, becaus she wa consciou of have injur me, 
becaus she knew that I held her in contempt, and becaus I had detect 
her in an illicit intercours with the son of a neighbour. 

the hous in which I live wa no longer my own, nor even my father's. 
hitherto I had thought and act in it with the freedom of a master; but 
now I wa become, in my own conceptions, an alien and an enemi to the 
roof under which I wa born. everi tie which had bound me to it wa 
dissolv or convert into someth which repel me to a distanc 
from it. I wa a guest whose presenc wa born with anger and 
impatience. 

I wa fulli impress with the necess of removal, but I knew not 
whither to go, or what kind of subsist to seek. My father had been a 
scottish emigrant, and had no kindr on thi side of the ocean. My 
mother' famili live in new hampshire, and long separ had 
extinguish all the right of relationship in her offspring. till 
the earth wa my onli profession, and, to profit by my skill in it, it 
would be necessari to becom a day-labour in the servic of strangers; 
but thi wa a destini to which I, who had so long enjoy the pleasur 
of independ and command, could not suddenli reconcil myself. It 
occur to me that the citi might afford me an asylum. A short day' 
journey would transport me into it. I had been there twice or thrice in 
my life, but onli for a few hour each time. I knew not a human face, 
and wa a stranger to it mode and dangers. I wa qualifi for no 
employment, compat with a town life, but that of the pen. this, 
indeed, had ever been a favourit tool with me; and, though it may 
appear somewhat strange, it is no less true that I had had nearli as 
much practic at the quill as at the mattock. but the sum of my skill 
lay in trace distinct characters. I had use it mere to transcrib 
what other had written, or to give form to my own conceptions. whether 
the citi would afford me employment, as a mere copyist, suffici 
lucrative, wa a point on which I possess no mean of information. 

My determin wa hasten by the conduct of my new mother. My 
conjectur as to the cours she would pursu with regard to me had not 
been erroneous. My father' deportment, in a short time, grew sullen and 
austere. direct were given in a magisteri tone, and ani remiss 
in the execut of hi order wa rebuk with an air of authority. At 
length these rebuk were follow by certain intim that I wa now 
old enough to provid for myself; that it wa time to think of some 
employ by which I might secur a livelihood; that it wa a shame for 
me to spend my youth in idleness; that what he had gain wa by hi own 
labour; and I must be indebt for my live to the same source. 

these hint were easili understood. At first, they excit indign 
and grief. I knew the sourc whenc they sprung, and wa mere abl to 
suppress the utter of my feel in her presence. My looks, 
however, were abundantli significant, and my compani becam hourli more 
insupportable. abstract from these considerations, my father' 
remonstr were not destitut of weight. He gave me being, but 
susten ought sure to be my own gift. In the use of that for which 
he had been indebt to hi own exertions, he might reason consult 
hi own choice. He assum no control over me; he mere did what he 
would with hi own, and, so far from fetter my liberty, he exhort 
me to use it for my own benefit, and to make provis for myself. 

I now reflect that there were other manual occup besid that of 
the plough. among these none had fewer disadvantag than that of 
carpent or cabinet-maker. I had no knowledg of thi art; but neither 
custom, nor law, nor the impenetr of the mystery, requir me to 
serv a seven years' apprenticeship to it. A master in thi trade might 
possibl be persuad to take me under hi tuition; two or three year 
would suffic to give me the requisit skill. meanwhil my father would, 
perhaps, consent to bear the cost of my maintenance. nobodi could live 
upon less than I wa will to do. 

I mention these idea to my father; but he mere commend my 
intent without offer to assist me in the execut of them. He 
had full employment, he said, for all the profit of hi ground. No 
doubt, if I would bind myself to serv four or five years, my master 
would be at the expens of my subsistence. Be that as it would, I must 
look for noth from him. I had shown veri littl regard for hi 
happiness; I had refus all mark of respect to a woman who wa 
entitl to it from her relat to him. He did not see whi he should 
treat as a son one who refus what wa due to him as a father. He 
thought it right that I should henceforth maintain myself. He did not 
want my servic on the farm, and the sooner I quit hi hous the 
better. 

I retir from thi confer with a resolut to follow the advic 
that wa given. I saw that henceforth I must be my own protector, and 
wonder at the folli that detain me so long under hi roof. To leav 
it wa now becom indispensable, and there could be no reason for 
delay my departur for a singl hour. I determin to bend my cours 
to the city. the scheme foremost in my mind wa to apprentic myself to 
some mechan trade. I did not overlook the evil of constraint and 
the dubious as to the charact of the master I should choose. I wa 
not without hope that accid would suggest a differ expedient, and 
enabl me to procur an immedi subsist without forfeit my 
liberty. 

I determin to commenc my journey the next morning. No wonder the 
prospect of so consider a chang in my condit should depriv me 
of sleep. I spent the night rumin on the future, and in paint to 
my fanci the adventur which I should be like to meet. the foresight 
of man is in proport to hi knowledge. No wonder that, in my state of 
profound ignorance, not the faintest preconcept should be form of 
the event that realli befel me. My temper wa inquisitive, but there 
wa noth in the scene to which I wa go from which my curios 
expect to deriv gratification. discord and evil smells, unsavouri 
food, unwholesom labour, and irksom companions, were, in my opinion, 
the unavoid attend of a city. 

My best cloth were of the homeliest textur and shape. My whole stock 
of linen consist of three check shirts. part of my winter evenings' 
employment, sinc the death of my mother, consist in knit my own 
stockings. Of these I had three pair, one of which I put on, and the 
rest I formed, togeth with two shirts, into a bundle. three 
quarter-dollar piec compos my whole fortun in money. 




chapter iii. 


I rose at the dawn, and, without ask or bestow a blessing, salli 
forth into the highroad to the city, which pass near the house. I left 
noth behind, the loss of which I regretted. I had purchas most of 
my own book with the product of my own separ industry, and, their 
number being, of course, small, I had, by incess application, gotten 
the whole of them by rote. they had ceased, therefore, to be of ani 
further use. I left them, without reluctance, to the fate for which I 
knew them to be reserved, that of afford food and habit to mice. 

I trod thi unwont path with all the fearless of youth. In spite 
of the motiv to despond and apprehens incid to my state, my 
heel were light and my heart joyous. "now," said I, "I am mount into 
man. I must build a name and a fortun for myself. strang if thi 
intellect and these hand will not suppli me with an honest livelihood. 
I will tri the citi in the first place; but, if that should fail, 
resourc are still left to me. I will resum my post in the cornfield 
and threshing-floor, to which I shall alway have access, and where I 
shall alway be happy." 

I had proceed some mile on my journey, when I began to feel the 
inroad of hunger. I might have stop at ani farm-house, and have 
breakfast for nothing. It wa prudent to husband, with the utmost 
care, my slender stock; but I felt reluct to beg as long as I had 
the mean of buying, and I imagin that coars bread and a littl milk 
would cost littl even at a tavern, when ani farmer wa will to 
bestow them for nothing. My resolut wa further influenc by the 
appear of a signpost. what excus could I make for beg a 
breakfast with an inn at hand and silver in my pocket? 

I stopped, accordingly, and breakfasted. the landlord wa remark 
attent and obliging, but hi bread wa stale, hi milk sour, and hi 
chees the greenest imaginable. I disdain to animadvert on these 
defects, natur suppos that hi hous could furnish no better. 

have finish my meal, I put, without speaking, one of my piec into 
hi hand. thi deport I conceiv to be highli becoming, and to 
indic a liber and manli spirit. I alway regard with contempt a 
scrupul maker of bargains. He receiv the money with a complais 
obeisance. "right," said he. "_just_ the money, sir. you are on foot, 
sir. A pleasant way of travelling, sir. I wish you a good day, sir." So 
saying, he walk away. 

thi proceed wa wholli unexpected. I conceiv myself entitl to at 
least three-fourth of it in change. the first impuls wa to call him 
back, and contest the equiti of hi demand; but a moment' reflect 
show me the absurd of such conduct. I resum my journey with 
spirit somewhat depressed. I have heard of voyag and wander in 
deserts, who were will to give a casket of gem for a cup of cold 
water. I had not suppos my own condit to be, in ani respect, 
similar; yet I had just given one-third of my estat for a breakfast. 

I stop at noon at anoth inn. I count on purchas a dinner for 
the same price, sinc I meant to content myself with the same fare. A 
larg compani wa just sit down to a smoke banquet. the landlord 
invit me to join them. I took my place at the table, but wa furnish 
with bread and milk. be prepar to depart, I took him aside. "what 
is to pay?" said i.--"did you drink ani thing, sir?"--"certainly. I 
drank the milk which wa furnished."--"but ani liquors, sir?"---"no." 

He deliber a moment, and then, assum an air of disinterestedness, 
"'ti our custom to charg dinner and club; but, as you drank nothing, 
we'll let the club go. A mere dinner is half a dollar, sir." 

He had no leisur to attend to my fluctuations. after debat with 
myself on what wa to be done, I conclud that complianc wa best, 
and, leav the money at the bar, resum my way. 

I had not perform more than half my journey, yet my purs wa entir 
exhausted. thi wa a specimen of the cost incur by live at an inn. 
If I enter the city, a tavern must, at least for some time, be my 
abode; but I had not a farth remain to defray my charges. My 
father had formerli entertain a boarder for a dollar per week, and, in 
case of need, I wa will to subsist upon coarser fare and lie on a 
harder bed than those with which our guest had been supplied. these 
fact had been the foundat of my neglig on thi occasion. 

what wa now to be done? To return to my patern mansion wa 
impossible. To relinquish my design of enter the citi and to seek a 
temporari asylum, if not perman employment, at some one of the 
plantat within view, wa the most obviou expedient. these 
deliber did not slacken my pace. I wa almost unmind of my way, 
when I found I had pass schuylkil at the upper bridge. I wa now 
within the precinct of the city, and night wa hastening. It behoov 
me to come to a speedi decision. 

suddenli I recollect that I had not paid the customari toll at the 
bridge; neither had I money wherewith to pay it. A demand of payment 
would have suddenli arrest my progress; and so slight an incid 
would have preclud that wonder destini to which I wa reserved. the 
obstacl that would have hinder my advanc now prevent my return. 
scrupul honesti did not requir me to turn back and awaken the 
vigil of the toll-gatherer. I had noth to pay, and by return I 
should onli doubl my debt. "let it stand," said I, "where it does. all 
that honour enjoin is to pay when I am able." 

I adher to the crossways, till I reach market street. night had 
fallen, and a tripl row of lamp present a spectacl enchant and 
new. My person care were, for a time, lost in the tumultu 
sensat with which I wa now engrossed. I had never visit the citi 
at thi hour. when my last visit wa paid, I wa a mere child. the 
novelti which environ everi object was, therefore, nearli absolute. I 
proceed with more cautiou steps, but wa still absorb in attent 
to pass objects. I reach the market-house, and, enter it, 
indulg myself in new delight and new wonder. 

I need not remark that our idea of magnific and splendour are 
mere comparative; yet you may be prompt to smile when I tell you 
that, in walk through thi avenue, I, for a moment, conceiv myself 
transport to the hall "pendent with mani a row of starri lamp and 
blaze crescent fed by naphtha and asphaltos." that thi transit 
from my home and quiet retreat had been effect in so few hour wore 
the aspect of miracl or magic. 

I proceed from one of these build to another, till I reach their 
termin in front street. here my progress wa checked, and I sought 
repos to my weari limb by seat myself on a stall. No wonder some 
fatigu wa felt by me, accustom as I wa to strenuou exertions, 
since, exclus of the minut spent at breakfast and dinner, I had 
travel fifteen hour and forty-f miles. 

I began now to reflect, with some earnestness, on my condition. I wa a 
stranger, friendless and moneyless. I wa unabl to purchas food and 
shelter, and wa wholli unus to the busi of begging. hunger wa 
the onli seriou inconveni to which I wa immedi exposed. I had 
no object to spend the night in the spot where I then sat. I had no 
fear that my vision would be troubl by the offic of police. It wa 
no crime to be without a home; but how should I suppli my present 
crave and the crave of to-morrow? 

At length it occur to me that one of our countri neighbour wa 
probabl at thi time in the city. He kept a store as well as cultiv 
a farm. He wa a plain and well-mean man, and, should I be so 
fortun as to meet him, hi superior knowledg of the citi might be of 
essenti benefit to me in my present forlorn circumstances. hi 
generos might likewis induc him to lend me so much as would 
purchas one meal. I had form the resolut to leav the citi next 
day, and wa astonish at the folli that had led me into it; but, 
meanwhile, my physic want must be supplied. 

where should I look for thi man? In the cours of convers I 
recollect him to have refer to the place of hi temporari abode. It 
wa an inn; but the sign or the name of the keeper for some time 
withstood all my effort to recal them. 

At length I light on the last. It wa lesher' tavern. I immedi 
set out in search of it. after mani inquiries, I at last arriv at the 
door. I wa prepar to enter the hous when I perceiv that my bundl 
wa gone. I had left it on the stall where I had been sitting. peopl 
were perpetu pass to and fro. It wa scarc possibl not to 
have been noticed. No one that observ it would fail to make it hi 
prey. yet it wa of too much valu to me to allow me to be govern by a 
bare probability. I resolv to lose not a moment in returning. 

with some difficulti I retrac my steps, but the bundl had 
disappeared. the cloth were, in themselves, of small value, but they 
constitut the whole of my wardrobe; and I now reflect that they were 
capabl of be transmuted, by the pawn or sale of them, into food. 
there were other wretch as indig as I was, and I consol myself by 
think that my shirt and stock might furnish a season 
cover to their nakedness; but there wa a relic conceal within thi 
bundle, the loss of which could scarc be endur by me. It wa the 
portrait of a young man who die three year ago at my father' house, 
drawn by hi own hand. 

He wa discov one morn in the orchard with mani mark of insan 
upon him. hi air and dress bespok some elev of rank and fortune. 
My mother' compass wa excited, and, as hi singular were 
harmless, an asylum wa afford him, though he wa unabl to pay for 
it. He wa constantli declaiming, in an incoher manner, about some 
mistress who had prove faithless. hi speech seemed, however, like 
the rant of an actor, to be rehears by rote or for the sake of 
exercise. He wa total careless of hi person and health, and, by 
repeat neglig of thi kind, at last contract a fever of which 
he speedili died. the name which he assum wa clavering. 

He gave no distinct account of hi family, but stated, in loos terms, 
that they were resid in england, high-born and wealthy. that they 
had deni him the woman whom he love and banish him to america, 
under penalti of death if he should dare to return, and that they had 
refus him all mean of subsist in a foreign land. He predicted, in 
hi wild and declamatori way, hi own death. He wa veri skil at the 
pencil, and drew thi portrait a short time befor hi dissolution, 
present it to me, and charg me to preserv it in remembr of him. 
My mother love the youth becaus he wa amiabl and unfortunate, and 
chiefli becaus she fanci a veri power resembl between hi 
counten and mine. I wa too young to build affect on ani ration 
foundation. I love him, for whatev reason, with an ardour unusu at 
my age, and which thi portrait had contribut to prolong and to 
cherish. 

In thu final leav my home, I wa care not to leav thi pictur 
behind. I wrap it in paper in which a few elegiac stanza were 
inscrib in my own hand, and with my utmost eleg of penmanship. I 
then place it in a leathern case, which, for greater security, wa 
deposit in the centr of my bundle. It will occur to you, perhaps, 
that it would be safer in some fold or pocket of the cloth which I 
wore. I wa of a differ opinion, and wa now to endur the penalti of 
my error. 

It wa in vain to heap execr on my negligence, or to consum the 
littl strength left to me in regrets. I return onc more to the 
tavern and made inquiri for mr. capper, the person whom I have just 
mention as my father' neighbour. I wa inform that capper wa now 
in town; that he had lodged, on the last night, at thi house; that he 
had expect to do the same to-night, but a gentleman had call ten 
minut ago, whose invit to lodg with him to-night had been 
accepted. they had just gone out together. who, I asked, wa the 
gentleman? the landlord had no knowledg of him; he knew neither hi 
place of abod nor hi name. wa mr. capper expect to return hither in 
the morning? no; he had heard the stranger propos to mr. capper to go 
with him into the countri to-morrow, and mr. capper, he believed, had 
assented. 

thi disappoint wa peculiarli severe. I had lost, by my own 
negligence, the onli opportun that would offer of meet my friend. 
had even the recollect of my loss been postpon for three minutes, I 
should have enter the house, and a meet would have been secured. I 
could discov no other expedi to obviat the present evil. My heart 
began now, for the first time, to droop. I look back, with nameless 
emotions, on the day of my infancy. I call up the imag of my mother. 
I reflect on the infatu of my surviv parent, and the 
usurp of the detest betty, with horror. I view myself as the 
most calamit and desol of human beings. 

At thi time I wa sit in the common room. there were other in the 
same apartment, lounging, or whistling, or singing. I notic them not, 
but, lean my head upon my hand, I deliv myself up to pain and 
intens meditation. from thi I wa rous by some one place himself 
on the bench near me and address me thus:--"pray, sir, if you will 
excus me, who wa the person whom you were look for just now? 
perhap I can give you the inform you want. If I can, you will be 
veri welcom to it." I fix my eye with some eager on the person 
that spoke. He wa a young man, expens and fashion dressed, 
whose mien wa consider prepossessing, and whose counten bespok 
some portion of discernment. I describ to him the man whom I sought. 
"I am in search of the same man myself," said he, "but I expect to meet 
him here. He may lodg elsewhere, but he promis to meet me here at 
half after nine. I have no doubt he will fulfil hi promise, so that you 
will meet the gentleman." 

I wa highli gratifi by thi information, and thank my inform 
with some degre of warmth. My gratitud he did not notice, but 
continued: "in order to beguil expectation, I have order supper; 
will you do me the favour to partak with me, unless inde you have 
sup already?" I wa obliged, somewhat awkwardly, to declin hi 
invitation, consciou as I wa that the mean of payment were not in my 
power. He continued, however, to urg my complianc till at length it 
was, though reluctantly, yielded. My chief motiv wa the certainti of 
see capper. 

My new acquaint wa exceedingli conversible, but hi convers 
wa chiefli character by frank and good-humour. My reserv 
gradual diminished, and I ventur to inform him, in gener terms, of 
my former condit and present views. He listen to my detail with 
seem attention, and comment on them with some judiciousness. hi 
statements, however, tend to discourag me from remain in the city. 

meanwhil the hour pass and capper did not appear. I notic thi 
circumst to him with no littl solicitude. He said that possibl he 
might have forgotten or neglect hi engagement. hi affair wa not of 
the highest importance, and might be readili postpon to a futur 
opportunity. He perceiv that my vivac wa greatli damp by thi 
intelligence. He importun me to disclos the cause. He made himself 
veri merri with my distress, when it wa at length discovered. As to the 
expens of supper, I had partaken of it at hi invitation; he therefor 
should of cours be charg with it. As to lodging, he had a chamber and 
a bed, which he would insist upon my share with him. 

My faculti were thu kept upon the stretch of wonder. everi new act of 
kind in thi man surpass the fondest expect that I had 
formed. I saw no reason whi I should be treat with benevolence. I 
should have act in the same manner if place in the same 
circumstances; yet it appear incongru and inexplicable. I know 
whenc my idea of human natur were derived. they certainli were not 
the offspr of my own feelings. these would have taught me that 
interest and duti were blend in everi act of generosity. 

I did not come into the world without my scrupl and suspicions. I wa 
more apt to imput kind to sinist and hidden than to obviou and 
laudabl motives. 

I paus to reflect upon the possibl design of thi person. what end 
could be serv by thi behaviour? I wa no subject of violenc or 
fraud. I had neither trinket nor coin to stimul the treacheri of 
others. what wa offer wa mere lodg for the night. wa thi an 
act of such transcend disinterested as to be incredible? My garb 
wa meaner than that of my companion, but my intellectu 
accomplish were at least upon a level with his. whi should he be 
suppos to be insens to my claim upon hi kindness? I wa a youth 
destitut of experience, money, and friends; but I wa not devoid of all 
mental and person endowments. that my merit should be discovered, even 
on such slender intercourse, had sure noth in it that shock 
belief. 

while I wa thu deliberating, my new friend wa earnest in hi 
solicit for my company. He remark my hesitation, but ascrib it 
to a wrong cause. "come," said he, "I can guess your object and can 
obviat them. you are afraid of be usher into company; and peopl 
who have pass their live like you have a wonder antipathi to 
strang faces; but thi is bedtim with our family, so that we can defer 
your introduct to them till to-morrow. We may go to our chamber 
without be seen by ani but servants." 

I had not been awar of thi circumstance. My reluct flow from a 
differ cause, but, now that the inconveni of ceremoni were 
mentioned, they appear to me of consider weight. I wa well 
pleas that they should thu be avoided, and consent to go along with 
him. 

We pass sever street and turn sever corners. At last we turn 
into a kind of court which seem to be chiefli occupi by stables. "we 
will go," said he, "bi the back way into the house. We shall thu save 
ourselv the necess of enter the parlour, where some of the 
famili may still be." 

My companion wa as talk as ever, but said noth from which I 
could gather ani knowledg of the number, character, and condit of 
hi family. 




chapter iv. 


We arriv at a brick wall, through which we pass by a gate into an 
extens court or yard. the dark would allow me to see noth but 
outlines. compar with the pigmi dimens of my father' wooden 
hovel, the build befor me were of gigant loftiness. the hors 
were here far more magnific accommod than I had been. By a 
larg door we enter an elev hall. "stay here," said he, "just 
while I fetch a light." 

He returned, bear a candle, befor I had time to ponder on my present 
situation. 

We now ascend a staircase, cover with paint canvas. No one whose 
inexperi is less than mine can imagin to himself the impress 
made upon me by surround objects. the height to which thi stair 
ascended, it dimensions, and it ornaments, appear to me a 
combin of all that wa pompou and superb. 

We stop not till we had reach the third story. here my companion 
unlock and led the way into a chamber. "this," said he, "i my room; 
permit me to welcom you into it." 

I had no time to examin thi room before, by some accident, the candl 
wa extinguished. "curs upon my carelessness!" said he. "I must go down 
again and light the candle. I will return in a twinkling. meanwhil you 
may undress yourself and go to bed." He went out, and, as I afterward 
recollected, lock the door behind him. 

I wa not indispos to follow hi advice, but my curios would first 
be gratifi by a survey of the room. it height and spacious were 
imperfectli discern by starlight, and by gleam from a street-lamp. 
the floor wa cover with a carpet, the wall with brilliant hangings; 
the bed and window were shroud by curtain of a rich textur and 
glossi hues. hitherto I had mere read of these things. I knew them to 
be the decor of opulence; and yet, as I view them, and 
rememb where and what I wa on the same hour the preced day, I 
could scarc believ myself awake, or that my sens were not beguil 
by some spell. 

"where," said I, "will thi adventur terminate? I rise on the morrow 
with the dawn and speed into the country. when thi night is remembered, 
how like a vision will it appear! If I tell the tale by a kitchen-fire, 
my verac will be disputed. I shall be rank with the story-tel 
of shiraz and bagdad." 

though busi in these reflections, I wa not inattent to the 
progress of time. methought my companion wa remark dilatory. He 
went mere to relight hi candle, but certainli he might, dure thi 
time, have perform the oper ten time over. some unforeseen 
accid might occas hi delay. 

anoth interv passed, and no token of hi coming. I began now to 
grow uneasy. I wa unabl to account for hi detention. wa not some 
treacheri designed? I went to the door, and found that it wa locked. 
thi heighten my suspicions. I wa alone, a stranger, in an upper room 
of the house. should my conductor have disappeared, by design or by 
accident, and some one of the famili should find me here, what would be 
the consequence? should I not be arrest as a thief, and convey to 
prison? My transit from the street to thi chamber would not be more 
rapid than my passag henc to a jail. 

these idea struck me with panic. I revolv them anew, but they onli 
acquir greater plausibility. No doubt I had been the victim of 
malici artifice. inclination, however, conjur up opposit 
sentiments, and my fear began to subside. what motive, I asked, could 
induc a human be to inflict wanton injury? I could not account for 
hi delay; but how numberless were the conting that might occas 
it! 

I wa somewhat comfort by these reflections, but the consol they 
afford wa short-lived. I wa listen with the utmost eager to 
catch the sound of a foot, when a nois wa inde heard, but total 
unlik a step. It wa human breath struggling, as it were, for passage. 
On the first effort of attention, it appear like a groan. whenc it 
aros I could not tell. He that utter it wa near; perhap in the 
room. 

present the same nois wa again heard, and now I perceiv that it 
came from the bed. It wa accompani with a motion like some one 
chang hi posture. what I at first conceiv to be a groan appear 
now to be noth more than the expir of a sleep man. what 
should I infer from thi incident? My companion did not appriz me that 
the apart wa inhabited. wa hi impostur a jest or a wick 
one? 

there wa no need to deliberate. there were no mean of conceal or 
escape. the person would some time awaken and detect me. the interv 
would onli be fraught with agony, and it wa wise to shorten it. should 
I not withdraw the curtain, awak the person, and encount at onc all 
the consequ of my situation? I glide softli to the bed, when the 
thought occurred, may not the sleeper be a female? 

I cannot describ the mixtur of dread and of shame which glow in my 
veins. the light in which such a visit would be probabl regard by 
a woman' fears, the precipit alarm that might be given, the injuri 
which I might unknowingli inflict or undeservedli suffer, threw my 
thought into pain confusion. My presenc might pollut a spotless 
reputation, or furnish fuel to jealousy. 

still, though it were a female, would not less injuri be done by gentli 
interrupt her slumber? but the question of sex still remain to be 
decided. for thi end I onc more approach the bed, and drew asid the 
silk. the sleeper wa a babe. thi I discov by the glimmer of a 
street-lamp. 

part of my solicitud were now removed. It wa plain that thi chamber 
belong to a nurs or a mother. she had not yet come to bed. perhap it 
wa a marri pair, and their approach might be moment expected. I 
pictur to myself their entranc and my own detection. I could imagin 
no consequ that wa not disastr and horrible, and from which I 
would not at ani price escape. I again examin the door, and found that 
exit by thi avenu wa impossible. there were other door in thi room. 
ani practic expedi in thi extrem wa to be pursued. one of 
these wa bolted. I unfasten it and found a consider space within. 
should I immur myself in thi closet? I saw no benefit that would 
final result from it. I discov that there wa a bolt on the 
inside, which would somewhat contribut to security. thi be drawn, 
no one could enter without break the door. 

I had scarc paused, when the long-expect sound of footstep wa 
heard in the entry. wa it my companion, or a stranger? If it were the 
latter, I had not yet muster courag suffici to meet him. I cannot 
applaud the magnanim of my proceeding; but no one can expect intrepid 
or judici measur from one in my circumstances. I step into the 
closet, and close the door. some one immedi after unlock the 
chamber door. He wa unattend with a light. the footsteps, as they 
move along the carpet, could scarc be heard. 

I wait impati for some token by which I might be governed. I put 
my ear to the keyhole, and at length heard a voice, but not that of my 
companion, exclaim, somewhat abov a whisper, "smile cherub! safe and 
sound, I see. would to god my experi may succeed, and that thou 
mayest find a mother where I have found a wife!" there he stopped. He 
appear to kiss the babe, and, present retiring, lock the door 
after him. 

these word were capabl of no consist meaning. they served, at 
least, to assur me that I had been treacher dealt with. thi 
chamber, it wa manifest, did not belong to my companion. I put up 
prayer to my deiti that he would deliv me from these toils. what a 
condit wa mine! immers in palpabl darkness! shut up in thi 
unknown recess! lurk like a robber! 

My medit were disturb by new sounds. the door wa unlocked, 
more than one person enter the apartment, and light stream through 
the keyhole. I looked; but the apertur wa too small and the figur 
pass too quickli to permit me the sight of them. I bent my ear, and 
thi impart some more authent information. 

the man, as I judg by the voice, wa the same who had just departed. 
rustl of silk denot hi companion to be female. some word be 
utter by the man, in too low a key to be overheard, the ladi burst 
into a passion of tears. He strove to comfort her by sooth tone and 
tender appellations. "how can it be helped?" said he. "it is time to 
resum your courage. your duti to yourself and to me requir you to 
subdu thi unreason grief." 

He spoke frequent in thi strain, but all he said seem to have 
littl influenc in pacifi the lady. At length, however, her sob 
began to lessen in vehem and frequency. He exhort her to seek for 
some repose. appar she prepar to comply, and convers was, 
for a few minutes, intermitted. 

I could not but advert to the possibl that some occas to examin 
the closet, in which I wa immured, might occur. I knew not in what 
manner to demean myself if thi should take place. I had no option at 
present. By withdraw myself from view I had lost the privileg of an 
upright deportment. yet the thought of spend the night in thi spot 
wa not to be endured. 

gradual I began to view the project of burst from the closet, and 
trust to the energi of truth and of an artless tale, with more 
complacency. more than onc my hand wa place upon the bolt, but 
withdrawn by a sudden falter of resolution. when one attempt failed, 
I recur onc more to such reflect as were adapt to renew my 
purpose. 

I preconcert the address which I should use. I resolv to be 
perfectli explicit; to withhold no particular of my adventur from the 
moment of my arrival. My descript must necessarili suit some person 
within their knowledge. all I should want wa liberti to depart; but, if 
thi were not allowed, I might at least hope to escap ani ill 
treatment, and to be confront with my betrayer. In that case I did not 
fear to make him the attest of my innocence. 

influenc by these considerations, I onc more touch the lock. At 
that moment the ladi shrieked, and exclaimed, "good god! what is here?" 
An interest convers ensued. the object that excit her 
astonish wa the child. I collect from what pass that the 
discoveri wa wholli unexpect by her. her husband act as if equal 
unawar of thi event. He join in all her exclam of wonder and 
all her wild conjectures. when these were somewhat exhausted, he 
art insinu the proprieti of bestow care upon the littl 
foundling. I now found that her grief had been occas by the recent 
loss of her own offspring. she was, for some time, avers to her 
husband' proposal, but at length wa persuad to take the babe to her 
bosom and give it nourishment. 

thi incid had divert my mind from it favourit project, and 
fill me with specul on the natur of the scene. one explic 
wa obvious, that the husband wa the parent of thi child, and had use 
thi singular expedi to procur for it the matern protect of hi 
wife. It would soon claim from her all the fond which she 
entertain for her own progeny. No suspicion probabl had yet, or would 
hereafter, occur with regard to it true parent. If her charact be 
distinguish by the usual attribut of women, the knowledg of thi 
truth may convert her love into hatred. I reflect with amaz on 
the slight of that thread by which human passion are led from their 
true direction. with no less amaz did I remark the complex of 
incid by which I had been empow to commun to her thi 
truth. how baseless are the structur of falsehood, which we build in 
opposit to the system of etern nature! If I should escap 
undetect from thi recess, it will be true that I never saw the face 
of either of these persons, and yet I am acquaint with the most secret 
transact of their lives. 

My own situat wa now more critic than before. the light were 
extinguished, and the parti had sought repose. To issu from the 
closet now would be immin dangerous. My council were again at a 
stand and my design frustrated. meanwhil the person did not drop 
their discourse, and I thought myself justifi in listening. mani fact 
of the most secret and moment natur were allud to. some allus 
were unintelligible. To other I wa abl to affix a plausibl meaning, 
and some were palpabl enough. everi word that wa utter on that 
occas is indel imprint on my memory. perhap the singular of 
my circumstances, and my previou ignor of what wa pass in the 
world, contribut to render me a greedi listener. most that wa said I 
shall overlook; but one part of the convers it will be necessari to 
repeat. 

A larg compani had assembl that even at their house. they 
critic the charact and manner of several. At last the husband 
said, "what think you of the nabob? especi when he talk about 
riches? how art he encourag the notion of hi poverty! yet not a 
soul believ him. I cannot for my part account for that scheme of his. 
I half suspect that hi wealth flow from a bad source, sinc he is so 
studiou of conceal it." 

"perhaps, after all," said the lady, "you are mistaken as to hi 
wealth." 

"impossible," exclaim the other. "mark how he lives. have I not seen 
hi bank-account? hi deposits, sinc he ha been here, amount to no 
less than half a million." 

"heaven grant that it be so!" said the lady, with a sigh. "I shall think 
with less avers of your scheme. If poor tom' fortun be made, and he 
not the worse, or but littl the wors on that account, I shall think it 
on the whole best." 

"that," repli he, "i what reconcil me to the scheme. To him thirti 
thousand are nothing." 

"but will he not suspect you of some hand in it?" 

"how can he? will I not appear to lose as well as himself? tom is my 
brother, but who can be suppos to answer for a brother' integrity? 
but he cannot suspect either of us. noth less than a miracl can 
bring our plot to light. besides, thi man is not what he ought to be. 
He will, some time or other, come out to be a grand impostor. He make 
money by other art than bargain and sale. He ha found hi way, by some 
means, to the portugues treasury." 

here the convers took a new direction, and, after some time, the 
silenc of sleep ensued. 

who, thought I, is thi nabob who count hi dollar by half-millions, 
and on whom it seem as if some fraud wa intend to be practised? 
amidst their wari and subtlety, how littl are they awar that their 
convers ha been overheard! By mean as inscrut as those which 
conduct me hither, I may hereaft be enabl to profit by thi 
detect of a plot. but, meanwhile, what wa I to do? how wa I to 
effect my escap from thi peril asylum? 

after much reflection, it occur to me that to gain the street without 
excit their notic wa not utterli impossible. sleep doe not 
commonli end of itself, unless at a certain period. what impedi 
were there between me and liberti which I could not remove, and remov 
with so much caution as to escap notice? motion and sound inevit go 
together; but everi sound is not attend to. the door of the closet 
and the chamber did not creak upon their hinges. the latter might be 
locked. thi I wa abl to ascertain onli by experiment. If it were so, 
yet the key wa probabl in the lock, and might be use without much 
noise. 

I wait till their slow and hoarser inspir show them to be both 
asleep. just then, on chang my position, my head struck against some 
thing which depend from the ceil of the closet. they were 
implement of some kind which rattl against each other in consequ 
of thi unlucki blow. I wa fear lest thi nois should alarm, as the 
closet wa littl distant from the bed. the breath of one instantli 
ceased, and a motion wa made as if the head were lift from the 
pillow. thi motion, which wa made by the husband, awak hi 
companion, who exclaimed, "what is the matter?" 

"something, I believe," repli he, "in the closet. If I wa not 
dreaming, I heard the pistol strike against each other as if some one 
wa take them down." 

thi intim wa well suit to alarm the lady. she besought him to 
ascertain the matter. this, to my utter dismay, he at first consent to 
do, but present observ that probabl hi ear had misinform him. 
It wa hardli possibl that the sound proceed from them. It might be a 
rat, or hi own fanci might have fashion it. It is not easi to 
describ my trepid while thi confer wa holding. I saw how 
easili their slumber wa disturbed. the obstacl to my escap were less 
surmount than I had imagined. 

In a littl time all wa again still. I wait till the usual token of 
sleep were distinguishable. I onc more resum my attempt. the bolt wa 
withdrawn with all possibl slowness; but I could by no mean prevent 
all sound. My state wa full of inquietud and suspense; my attent 
be pain divid between the bolt and the condit of the 
sleepers. the difficulti lay in give that degre of forc which wa 
bare sufficient. perhap not less than fifteen minut were consum 
in thi operation. At last it wa happili effected, and the door wa 
cautious opened. 

emerg as I did from utter darkness, the light admit into three 
window produced, to my eyes, a consider illumination. object 
which, on my first entranc into thi apartment, were invisible, were 
now clearli discerned. the bed wa shroud by curtains, yet I shrunk 
back into my covert, fear of be seen. To facilit my escape, I 
put off my shoes. My mind wa so full of object of more urgent moment, 
that the proprieti of take them along with me never occurred. I left 
them in the closet. 

I now glide across the apart to the door. I wa not a littl 
discourag by observ that the key wa wanting. My whole hope 
depend on the omiss to lock it. In my hast to ascertain thi 
point, I made some nois which again rous one of the sleepers. He 
started, and cried, "who is there?" 

I now regard my case as desperate, and detect as inevitable. My 
apprehensions, rather than my caution, kept me mute. I shrunk to the 
wall, and wait in a kind of agoni for the moment that should decid my 
fate. 

the ladi wa again roused. In answer to her inquiries, her husband said 
that some one, he believed, wa at the door, but there wa no danger of 
their entering, for he had lock it, and the key wa in hi pocket. 

My courag wa complet annihil by thi piec of intelligence. My 
resourc were now at an end. I could onli remain in thi spot till the 
morn light, which could be at no great distance, should discov me. 
My inexperi disabl me from estim all the peril of my 
situation. perhap I had no more than temporari inconveni to dread. 
My intent wa innocent, and I had been betray into my present 
situation, not by my own wickedness, but the wicked of others. 

I wa deepli impress with the ambigu which would necessarili 
rest upon my motives, and the scrutini to which they would be subjected. 
I shudder at the bare possibl of be rank with thieves. these 
reflect again gave edg to my ingenu in search of the mean of 
escape. I had care attend to the circumst of their entrance. 
possibl the act of lock had been unnoticed; but wa it not likewis 
possibl that thi person had been mistaken? the key wa gone. would 
thi have been the case if the door were unlocked? 

My fears, rather than my hopes, impel me to make the experiment. I 
drew back the latch, and, to my unspeak joy, the door opened. 

I pass through and explor my way to the staircase. I descend till 
I reach the bottom. I could not recollect with accuraci the posit 
of the door lead into the court, but, by care feel along the 
wall with my hands, I at length discov it. It wa fasten by 
sever bolt and a lock. the bolt were easili withdrawn, but the key 
wa removed. I knew not where it wa deposited. I thought I had reach 
the threshold of liberty, but here wa an impedi that threaten to 
be insurmountable. 

but, if door could not be passed, window might be unbarred. I 
rememb that my companion had gone into a door on the left hand, in 
search of a light. I search for thi door. fortun it wa fasten 
onli by a bolt. It admit me into a room which I care explor 
till I reach a window. I will not dwell on my effort to unbar thi 
entrance. suffic it to say that, after much exert and frequent 
mistakes, I at length found my way into the yard, and thenc pass into 
the court. 




chapter V. 


now I wa onc more on public ground. By so mani anxiou effort had I 
disengag myself from the peril precinct of privat property. As 
mani stratagem as are usual made to enter a hous had been employ 
by me to get out of it. I wa urg to the use of them by my fears; yet, 
so far from carri off spoil, I had escap with the loss of an 
essenti part of my dress. 

I had now leisur to reflect. I seat myself on the ground and review 
the scene through which I had just passed. I began to think that my 
industri had been misemployed. suppos I had met the person on hi first 
entranc into hi chamber? wa the truth so utterli wild as not to have 
found credit? sinc the door wa locked, and there wa no other avenue, 
what other statement but the true one would account for my be found 
there? thi deport had been worthi of an honest purpose. My betray 
probabl expect that thi would be the issu of hi jest. My rustic 
simplicity, he might think, would suggest no more ambigu or elabor 
expedient. He might likewis have predetermin to interfer if my 
safeti had been realli endangered. 

On the morrow the two door of the chamber and the window below would be 
found unclosed. they will suspect a design to pillage, but their 
search will termin in noth but in the discoveri of a pair of 
clumsi and dusti shoe in the closet. now that I wa safe I could not 
help smile at the pictur which my fanci drew of their anxieti and 
wonder. these thoughts, however, gave place to more moment 
considerations. 

I could not imagin to myself a more perfect exampl of indig than I 
now exhibited. there wa no be in the citi on whose kind I had 
ani claim. money I had none, and what I then wore compris my whole 
stock of movables. I had just lost my shoes, and thi loss render my 
stock of no use. My digniti remonstr against a barefoot 
pilgrimage, but to this, necess now reconcil me. I threw my 
stock between the bar of a stable-window, belonging, as I thought, 
to the mansion I had just left. these, togeth with my shoes, I left to 
pay the cost of my entertainment. 

I saw that the citi wa no place for me. the end that I had had in view, 
of procur some mechan employment, could onli be obtain by the 
use of means, but what mean to pursu I knew not. thi night' peril 
and decept gave me a distast to a citi life, and my ancient 
occup rose to my view enhanc by a thousand imaginari charms, I 
resolv forthwith to strike into the country. 

the day began now to dawn. It wa sunday, and I wa desir of elud 
observation. I wa somewhat recruit by rest, though the languor of 
sleepless oppress me. I meant to throw myself on the first lap of 
verdur I should meet, and indulg in sleep that I so much wanted. I 
knew not the direct of the streets; but follow that which I first 
enter from the court, trust that, by adher steadili to one 
course, I should some time reach the fields. thi street, as I 
afterward found, tend to schuylkill, and soon extric me from 
houses. I could not cross thi river without payment of toll. It wa 
requisit to cross it in order to reach that part of the countri whither 
I wa desir of going; but how should I effect my passage? I knew of 
no ford, and the smallest expens exceed my capacity. ten thousand 
guinea and a farth were equal remot from nothing, and noth wa 
the portion allot to me. 

while my mind wa thu occupied, I turn up one of the street which 
tend northward. It was, for some length, uninhabit and unpaved. 
present I reach a pavement, and a paint fence, along which a row 
of poplar wa planted. It bound a garden into which a knot-hol 
permit me to pry. the enclosur wa a charm green, which I saw 
append to a hous of the loftiest and most state order. It seem 
like a recent erection, had all the gloss of novelty, and exhibited, to 
my unpractis eyes, the magnific of palaces. My father' dwell 
did not equal the height of one story, and might be easili compris in 
one-fourth of those build which here were design to accommod 
the menials. My heart dictat the comparison between my own condit 
and that of the proprietor of thi domain. how wide and how impass 
wa the gulf by which we were separated! thi fair inherit had 
fallen to one who, perhaps, would onli abus it to the purpos of 
luxury, while I, with intent worthi of the friend of mankind, wa 
doom to wield the flail and the mattock. 

I had been entir unaccustom to thi strain of reflection. My book 
had taught me the digniti and safeti of the middl path, and my darl 
writer abound with encomium on rural life. At a distanc from luxuri 
and pomp, I view them, perhaps, in a just light. A nearer scrutini 
confirm my earli prepossessions; but, at the distanc at which I now 
stood, the lofti edifices, the splendid furniture, and the copiou 
accommod of the rich excit my admir and my envy. 

I relinquish my station, and proceeded, in a heartless mood, along the 
fence. I now came to the mansion itself. the princip door wa enter 
by a staircas of marble. I had never seen the stone of carrara, and 
wildli suppos thi to have been dug from italian quarries. the beauti 
of the poplars, the cool exhal from the dew-bespr bricks, the 
commodi of the seat which these step afforded, and the 
uncertainti into which I wa plung respect my futur conduct, all 
combin to make me pause. I sat down on the lower step and began to 
meditate. 

By some transit it occur to me that the suppli of my most urgent 
want might be found in some inhabit of thi house. I need at 
present a few cents; and what were a few cent to the tenant of a 
mansion like this? I had an invinc avers to the call of a 
beggar, but I regard with still more antipathi the vocat of a 
thief; to thi alternative, however, I wa now reduced. I must either 
steal or beg; unless, indeed, assist could be procur under the 
notion of a loan. would a stranger refus to lend the pittanc that I 
wanted? sure not, when the urgenc of my want wa explained. 

I recollect other obstacles. To summon the master of the hous from 
hi bed, perhaps, for the sake of such an application, would be 
preposterous. I should be in more danger of provok hi anger than 
excit hi benevolence. thi request might, surely, with more 
proprieti be prefer to a passenger. I should, probably, meet sever 
befor I should arriv at schuylkill. 

A servant just then appear at the door, with bucket and brush. thi 
oblig me, much sooner than I intended, to decamp. with some reluct 
I rose and proceeded. thi hous occupi the corner of the street, and 
I now turn thi corner toward the country. A person, at some distanc 
befor me, wa approach in an opposit direction. 

"why," said I, "may I not make my demand of the first man I meet? thi 
person exhibit token of abil to lend. there is noth chill or 
auster in hi demeanour." 

the resolut to address thi passeng wa almost formed; but the 
nearer he advanc my resolv grew less firm. He notic me not till he 
came within a few paces. He seem busi in reflection; and, had not my 
figur caught hi eye, or had he mere bestow a pass glanc upon 
me, I should not have been suffici courag to have detain him. 
the event, however, wa wide different. 

He look at me and started. for an instant, as it were, and till he had 
time to dart at me a second glance, he check hi pace. thi behaviour 
decid mine, and he stop on perceiv token of a desir to address 
him. I spoke, but my accent and air suffici denot my 
embarrassments:-- 

"I am go to solicit a favour which my situat make of the highest 
import to me, and which I hope it will be easi for you, sir, to 
grant. It is not an alms, but a loan, that I seek; a loan that I will 
repay the moment I am abl to do it. I am go to the country, but 
have not wherewith to pay my passag over schuylkill, or to buy a morsel 
of bread. may I ventur to request of you, sir, the loan of sixpence? As 
I told you, it is my intent to repay it." 

I deliv thi address, not without some faltering, but with great 
earnestness. I laid particular stress upon my intent to refund the 
money. He listen with a most inquisit air. hi eye perus me from 
head to foot. 

after some pause, he said, in a veri emphat manner, "whi into the 
country? have you family? kindred? friends?" 

"no," answer I, "I have neither. I go in search of the mean of 
subsistence. I have pass my life upon a farm, and propos to die in 
the same condition." 

"whenc have you come?" 

"I came yesterday from the country, with a view to earn my bread in some 
way, but have chang my plan and propos now to return." 

"whi have you chang it? In what way are you capabl of earn your 
bread?" 

"I hardli know," said I. "I can, as yet, manag no tool, that can be 
manag in the city, but the pen. My habit have, in some small degree, 
qualifi me for a writer. I would willingli accept employ of that 
kind." 

He fix hi eye upon the earth, and wa silent for some minutes. At 
length, recov himself, he said, "follow me to my house. perhap 
someth may be done for you. If not, I will lend you sixpence." 

It may be suppos that I eagerli compli with the invitation. My 
companion said no more, hi air bespeak him to be absorb by hi own 
thoughts, till he reach hi house, which prove to be that at the door 
of which I had been seated. We enter a parlour together. 

unless you can assum my ignor and my simplicity, you will be unabl 
to conceiv the impress that were made by the size and ornament of 
thi apartment. I shall omit these impressions, which, indeed, no 
descript could adequ convey, and dwell on incid of greater 
moment. He ask me to give him a specimen of my penmanship. I told you 
that I had bestow veri great attent upon thi art. implement were 
brought, and I sat down to the task. By some inexplic connect a 
line in shakspear occur to me, and I wrote,-- 

"mi poverty, but not my will, consents." 

the sentiment convey in thi line power affect him, but in a 
way which I could not then comprehend. I collect from subsequ 
event that the infer wa not unfavour to my understand or my 
morals. He question me as to my history. I relat my origin and my 
induc to desert my father' house. with respect to last night' 
adventur I wa silent. I saw no use purpos that could be answer 
by disclosure, and I half suspect that my companion would refus 
credit to my tale. 

there were frequent interv of abstract and reflect between hi 
questions. My examin last not much less than an hour. At length 
he said, "I want an amanuensi or copyist. On what term will you live 
with me?" 

I answer that I knew not how to estim the valu of my services. I 
knew not whether these servic were agreeabl or healthful. My life had 
hitherto been active. My constitut wa predispos to diseas of the 
lungs, and the chang might be hurtful. I wa willing, however, to tri 
and to content myself for a month or a year, with so much as would 
furnish me with food, clothing, and lodging. 

"'ti well," said he. "you remain with me as long and no longer than 
both of us please. you shall lodg and eat in thi house. I will suppli 
you with clothing, and your task will be to write what I dictate. your 
person, I see, ha not share much of your attention. It is in my power 
to equip you instantli in the manner which becom a resid in thi 
house. come with me." 

He led the way into the court behind and thenc into a neat building, 
which contain larg wooden vessel and a pump: "there," said he, "you 
may wash yourself; and, when that is done, I will conduct you to your 
chamber and your wardrobe." 

thi wa speedili performed, and he accordingli led the way to the 
chamber. It wa an apart in the third story, finish and furnish 
in the same costli and superb style with the rest of the house. He 
open closet and drawer which overflow with cloth and linen of 
all and of the best kinds. "these are yours," said he, "a long as you 
stay with me. dress yourself as like you best. here is everi thing your 
naked requires. when dressed, you may descend to breakfast." with 
these word he left me. 

the cloth were all in the french style, as I afterwards, by compar 
my garb with that of others, discovered. they were fit to my shape 
with the nicest precision. I bedeck myself with all my care. I 
rememb the style of dress use by my belov clavering. My lock 
were of shine auburn, flow and smooth like his. have wrung the 
wet from them, and combed, I tie them carelessli in a black riband. 
thu equipped, I survey myself in a mirror. 

you may imagine, if you can, the sensat which thi instantan 
transform produced. appear are wonder influenc by 
dress. check shirt, button at the neck, an awkward fustian coat, check 
trowser and bare feet, were now supplant by linen and muslin, nankeen 
coat stripe with green, a white silk waistcoat elegantli 
needle-wrought, cassimer pantaloons, stock of varieg silk, and 
shoe that in their softness, pliancy, and polish surfac vie with 
satin. I could scarc forbear look back to see whether the imag in 
the glass, so well proportioned, so gallant, and so graceful, did not 
belong to another. I could scarc recognis ani lineament of my own. 
I walk to the window. "twenti minut ago," said I, "I wa travers 
that path a barefoot beggar; now I am thus." again I survey myself. 
"sure some insan ha fasten on my understanding. My sens are 
the sport of dreams. some magic that disdain the cumbrous of 
nature' progress ha wrought thi change." I wa rous from these 
doubt by a summon to breakfast, obsequi deliv by a black 
servant. 

I found welbeck (for I shall henceforth call him by hi true name) at 
the breakfast-table. A superb equipag of silver and china wa befor 
him. He wa startl at my entrance. the chang in my dress seem for a 
moment to have deceiv him. hi eye wa frequent fix upon me with 
unusu steadfastness. At these time there wa inquietud and wonder in 
hi features. 

I had now an opportun of examin my host. there wa niceti but no 
ornament in hi dress. hi form wa of the middl height, spare, but 
vigor and graceful. hi face wa cast, I thought, in a foreign mould. 
hi forehead reced beyond the usual degre in visag which I had 
seen. hi eye larg and prominent, but impart no mark of benign 
and habitu joy. the rest of hi face forcibl suggest the idea of a 
convex edge. hi whole figur impress me with emot of vener 
and awe. A graviti that almost amount to sad invari attend 
him when we were alon together. 

He whisper the servant that waited, who immedi retired. He then 
said, turn to me, "A ladi will enter presently, whom you are to treat 
with the respect due to my daughter. you must not notic ani emot she 
may betray at the sight of you, nor expect her to convers with you; for 
she doe not understand your language." He had scarc spoken when she 
entered. I wa seiz with certain misgiv and flutter which a 
clownish educ may account for. I so far conquer my timidity, 
however, as to snatch a look at her. I wa not born to execut her 
portrait. perhap the turban that wreath her head, the brilliant 
textur and inimit fold of her drapery, and nymphlik port, more 
than the essenti attribut of her person, gave splendour to the 
celesti vision. perhap it wa her snowi hues, and the cast rather 
than the posit of her features, that were so prolif of enchantment; 
or perhap the wonder origin onli in my own ignorance. 

she did not immedi notic me. when she did she almost shriek with 
surprise. she held up her hands, and, gaze upon me, utter variou 
exclam which I could not understand. I could onli remark that her 
accent were thrillingli musical. her perturb refus to be 
stilled. It wa with difficulti that she withdrew her regard from me. 
much convers pass between her and welbeck, but I could comprehend 
no part of it. I wa at liberti to animadvert on the visibl part of 
their intercourse. I divert some part of my attent from my own 
embarrassments, and fix it on their looks. 

In thi art, as in most others, I wa an unpractis simpleton. In the 
counten of welbeck, there wa somewhat els than sympathi with the 
astonish and distress of the lady; but I could not interpret these 
addit tokens. when her attent wa engross by welbeck, her eye 
were frequent vagrant or downcast; her cheek contract a deeper hue; 
and her breath wa almost prolong into a sigh. these were mark on 
which I made no comment at the time. My own situat wa calcul to 
breed confus in my thought and awkward in my gestures. breakfast 
be finished, the lady, appar at the request of welbeck, sat down 
to a piano-forte. 

here again I must be silent. I wa not wholli destitut of music 
practic and music taste. I had that degre of knowledg which enabl 
me to estim the transcend skill of thi performer. As if the 
patho of her touch were insufficient, I found after some time that the 
lawless jar of the key were chasten by her own more liquid 
notes. she play without a book, and, though her bass might be 
preconcerted, it wa plain that her right-hand note were momentari and 
spontan inspirations. meanwhil welbeck stood, lean hi arm on 
the back of a chair near her, with hi eye fix on her face. hi 
featur were fraught with a mean which I wa eager to interpret, but 
unable. 

I have read of transit effect by magic; I have read of palac and 
desert which were subject to the dominion of spells; poet may sport 
with their power, but I am certain that no transit wa ever conceiv 
more marvel and more beyond the reach of foresight than that which I 
had just experienced. heath vex by a midnight storm may be chang 
into a hall of choral nymph and regal banqueting; forest glade may 
give sudden place to colonnad and carnivals; but he whose sens are 
delud find himself still on hi natal earth. these miracl are 
contempt when compar with that which place me under thi roof and 
gave me to partak in thi audience. I know that my emot are in 
danger of be regard as ludicr by those who cannot figur to 
themselv the consequ of a limit and rustic education. 




chapter vi. 


In a short time the ladi retired. I natur expect that some 
comment would be made on her behaviour, and that the caus of her 
surpris and distress on see me would be explained; but welbeck said 
noth on that subject. when she had gone, he went to the window and 
stood for some time occupied, as it seemed, with hi own thoughts. then 
he turn to me, and, call me by my name, desir me to accompani him 
up-stairs. there wa neither cheer nor mild in hi address, 
but neither wa there ani thing domin or arrogant. 

We enter an apart on the same floor with my chamber, but separ 
from it by a spaciou entry. It wa suppli with bureaus, cabinets, and 
bookcases. "this," said he, "i your room and mine; but we must enter it 
and leav it together. I mean to act not as your master but your friend. 
My maim hand" (so saying, he show me hi right hand, the forefing 
of which wa wanting) "will not allow me to write accur or 
copiously. for thi reason I have requir your aid, in a work of some 
moment. much hast will not be requisite, and, as to the hour and 
durat of employment, these will be season and short. 

"your present situat is new to you, and we will therefor defer 
enter on our business. meanwhil you may amus yourself in what 
manner you please. consid thi hous as your home and make yourself 
familiar with it. stay within or go out, be busi or be idle, as your 
fanci shall prompt: onli you will conform to our domest system as to 
eat and sleep; the servant will inform you of this. next week we 
will enter on the task for which I design you. you may now withdraw." 

I obey thi mandat with some awkward and hesitation. I went into 
my own chamber not displeas with an opportun of loneliness. I threw 
myself on a chair and resign myself to those thought which would 
natur aris in thi situation. I specul on the charact and 
view of welbeck. I saw that he wa embosom in tranquil and 
grandeur. riches, therefore, were his; but in what did hi opul 
consist, and whenc did it arise? what were the limit by which it wa 
confined, and what it degre of permanence? I wa unhabitu to idea 
of float or transfer wealth. the rent of hous and land wa the 
onli speci of properti which was, as yet, perfectli intelligible. My 
previou idea led me to regard welbeck as the proprietor of thi 
dwell and of numer hous and farms. By the same caus I wa fain 
to suppos him enrich by inheritance, and that hi life had been 
uniform. 

I next advert to hi social condition. thi mansion appear to have 
but two inhabit besid servants. who wa the nymph who had hover 
for a moment in my sight? had he not call her hi daughter? the 
appar differ in their age would justifi thi relation; but her 
guise, her features, and her accents, were foreign. her languag I 
suspect strongli to be that of italy. how should he be the father of 
an italian? but were there not some foreign lineament in hi 
countenance? 

thi idea seem to open a new world to my view. I had gained, from my 
books, confus idea of european govern and manners. I knew that 
the present wa a period of revolut and hostility. might not these be 
illustri fugit from provenc or the milanese? their portabl 
wealth, which may reason be suppos to be great, they have 
transport hither. thu may be explain the sorrow that veil their 
countenance. the loss of estat and honours; the untim death of 
kindred, and perhap of hi wife, may furnish etern food for regrets. 
welbeck' utterance, though rapid and distinct, partook, as I conceived, 
in some veri slight degre of a foreign idiom. 

such wa the dream that haunt my undisciplin and unenlighten 
imagination. the more I revolv it, the more plausibl it seemed. On 
due supposit everi appear that I had wit wa easili 
solved,--unless it were their treatment of me. this, at first, wa a 
sourc of hopeless perplexity. gradually, however, a clue seem to be 
afforded. welbeck had betray astonish on my first appearance. the 
lady' wonder wa mingl with distress. perhap they discov a 
remark resembl between me and one who stood in the relat of 
son to welbeck, and of brother to the lady. thi youth might have 
perish on the scaffold or in war. these, no doubt, were hi clothes. 
thi chamber might have been reserv for him, but hi death left it to 
be appropri to another. 

I had hitherto been unabl to guess at the reason whi all thi kind 
had been lavish on me. will not thi conjectur suffici account 
for it? No wonder that thi resembl wa enhanc by assum hi 
dress. 

take all circumst into view, these idea were not, perhaps, 
destitut of probability. appear natur suggest them to me. 
they were, also, power enforc by inclination. they threw me into 
transport of wonder and hope. when I dwelt upon the incid of my 
past life, and trace the chain of events, from the death of my mother 
to the present moment, I almost acquiesc in the notion that some 
benefic and rule geniu had prepar my path for me. event which, 
when foreseen, would most ardent have been deprecated, and when they 
happen were account in the highest degre luckless, were now seen to 
be propitious. henc I infer the infatu of despair, and the 
folli of precipit conclusions. 

but what wa the fate reserv for me? perhap welbeck would adopt me 
for hi own son. wealth ha ever been caprici distributed. the mere 
physic relat of birth is all that entitl us to manor and 
thrones. ident itself frequent depend upon a casual like or an 
old nurse' imposture. nation have risen in arms, as in the case of the 
stuarts, in the caus of one the genuin of whose birth ha been 
deni and can never be proved. but if the caus be trivial and 
fallacious, the effect are moment and solid. It ascertain our 
portion of felic and usefulness, and fix our lot among peasant or 
princes. 

someth may depend upon my own deportment. will it not behoov me to 
cultiv all my virtu and erad all my defects? I see that the 
abil of thi man are venerable. perhap he will not lightli or 
hastili decid in my favour. He will be govern by the proof that I 
shall give of discern and integrity. I had alway been exempt from 
temptation, and wa therefor undepraved; but thi view of thing had a 
wonder tendenc to invigor my virtuou resolutions. all within me 
wa exhilar and joy. 

there wa but one thing want to exalt me to a dizzi height and give 
me place among the star of heaven. My resembl to her brother had 
forcibl affect thi lady; but I wa not her brother. I wa rais to 
a level with her and made a tenant of the same mansion. some intercours 
would take place between us. time would lay level impedi and 
establish familiarity, and thi intercours might foster love and 
termin in--_marriage_! 

these imag were of a natur too glow and expans to allow me to 
be longer inactive. I salli forth into the open air. thi tumult of 
delici thought in some time subsided, and gave way to imag 
rel to my present situation. My curios wa awake. As yet I had 
seen littl of the city, and thi opportun for observ wa not to 
be neglected. I therefor cours through sever streets, attent 
examin the object that success present themselves. 

At length, it occur to me to search out the hous in which I had 
late been immured. I wa not without hope that at some futur period 
I should be abl to comprehend the allus and brighten the 
obscur that hung about the dialogu of last night. 

the hous wa easili discovered. I reconnoitr the court and gate 
through which I had passed. the mansion wa of the first order in 
magnitud and decoration. thi wa not the bound of my present 
discovery, for I wa gift with that confid which would make me set 
on foot inquiri in the neighbourhood. I look around for a suitabl 
medium of intelligence. the opposit and adjoin hous were small, 
and appar occupi by person of an indig class. At one of these 
wa a sign denot it to be the resid of a tailor. seat on a 
bench at the door wa a young man, with coars uncomb locks, breech 
knee-unbuttoned, stock ungartered, shoe slipshod and unbuckled, and 
a face unwashed, gaze stupidli from hollow eyes. hi aspect wa 
embellish with good nature, though indic of ignorance. 

thi wa the onli person in sight. He might be abl to say someth 
concern hi opul neighbour. To him, therefore, I resolv to 
apply. I went up to him, and, point to the hous in question, ask 
him who live there. 

He answered, "mr. matthews." 

"what is hi profession,--hi way of life?" 

"A gentleman. He doe noth but walk about." 

"how long ha he been married?" 

"married! He is not marri as I know on. He never ha been married. He 
is a bachelor." 

thi intellig wa unexpected. It made me paus to reflect whether I 
had not mistaken the house. this, however, seem impossible. I renew 
my questions. 

"A bachelor, say you? are you not mistaken?" 

"no. It would be an odd thing if he wa married. An old fellow, with one 
foot in the grave--com enough for him to _git_ a _vife_!" 

"an old man? doe he live alone? what is hi family?" 

"no, he doe not live alone. He ha a niec that live with him. she is 
married, and her husband live there too." 

"what is hi name?" 

"I don't know. I never heard it as I know on." 

"what is hi trade?" 

"he' a merchant; he keep a store somewher or other; but I don't know 
where." 

"how long ha he been married?" 

"about two years. they lost a child lately. the young woman wa in a 
huge take about it. they say she wa quit crazi some day for the 
death of the child; and she is not quit out of _the dumps_ yet. 
to-be-sure, the child wa a sweet littl thing; but they need not make 
such a rout about it. i'll war'n' they'll have enough of them befor 
they die." 

"what is the charact of the young man? where wa he born and educated? 
ha he parent or brothers?" 

My companion wa incap of answer these questions, and I left him 
with littl essenti addit to the knowledg I alreadi possessed. 




chapter vii. 


after view variou part of the city, intrud into churches, and 
dive into alleys, I returned. the rest of the day I spent chiefli in 
my chamber, reflect on my new condition; survey my apartment, it 
press and closets; and conjectur the caus of appearances. 

At dinner and supper I wa alone. ventur to inquir of the servant 
where hi master and mistress were, I wa answer that they were 
engaged. I did not question him as to the natur of their engagement, 
though it wa a fertil sourc of curiosity. 

next morning, at breakfast, I again met welbeck and the lady. the 
incid were nearli those of the preced morning, if it were not 
that the ladi exhibit token of somewhat greater uneasiness. when she 
left us, welbeck sank into appar meditation. I wa at a loss whether 
to retir or remain where I was. At last, however, I wa on the point of 
leav the room, when he broke silenc and began a convers with 
me. 

He put question to me, the obviou scope of which wa to know my 
sentiment on moral topics. I had no motiv to conceal my opinions, and 
therefor deliv them with frankness. At length he introduc 
allus to my own history, and made more particular inquiri on that 
head. here I wa not equal frank; yet I did not feign ani thing, but 
mere dealt in generals. I had acquir notion of proprieti on thi 
head, perhap somewhat fastidious. minut details, respect our own 
concerns, are apt to weari all but the narrat himself. I said thu 
much, and the truth of my remark wa eagerli assent to. 

with some mark of hesit and after variou preliminaries, my 
companion hint that my own interest, as well as his, enjoin upon me 
silenc to all but himself, on the subject of my birth and earli 
adventures. It wa not like that, while in hi service, my circl of 
acquaint would be larg or my intercours with the world frequent; 
but in my commun with other he request me to speak rather of 
other than of myself. thi request, he said, might appear singular to 
me, but he had hi reason for make it, which it wa not necessary, at 
present, to disclose, though, when I should know them, I should readili 
acknowledg their validity. 

I scarc knew what answer to make. I wa will to oblig him. I wa 
far from expect that ani exig would occur, make disclosur my 
duty. the employ wa product of pain more than of pleasure, and 
the curios that would uselessli seek a knowledg of my past life wa 
no less impertin than the loquac that would uselessli commun 
that knowledge. I readili promised, therefore, to adher to hi advice. 

thi assur afford him evid satisfaction; yet it did not seem to 
amount to quit as much as he wished. He repeated, in stronger terms, 
the necess there wa for caution. He wa far from suspect me to 
possess an impertin and talk disposition, or that, in my 
eager to expati on my own concerns, I should overstep the limit 
of politeness. but thi wa not enough. I wa to govern myself by a 
persuas that the interest of my friend and myself would be 
materi affect by my conduct. 

perhap I ought to have allow these insinu to breed suspicion in 
my mind; but, consciou as I wa of the benefit which I had receiv 
from thi man; prone, from my inexperience, to reli upon profess and 
confid in appearances; and unawar that I could be place in ani 
condit in which mere silenc respect myself could be injuri or 
criminal, I made no scrupl to promis complianc with hi wishes. nay, 
I went further than this; I desir to be accur inform as to what 
it wa proper to conceal. He answer that my silenc might extend to 
everi thing anterior to my arriv in the citi and my be incorpor 
with hi family. here our convers ended, and I retir to rumin 
on what had passed. 

I deriv littl satisfact from my reflections. I began now to 
perceiv inconveni that might aris from thi precipit promise. 
whatev should happen in consequ of my be immur in the 
chamber, and of the loss of my cloth and of the portrait of my friend, 
I had bound myself to silence. these inquietudes, however, were 
transient. I trust that these event would oper auspiciously; but 
my curios wa now awaken as to the motiv which _welbeck_ could 
have for exact from me thi concealment. To act under the guidanc of 
another, and to wander in the dark, ignor whither my path tend and 
what effect might flow from my agency, wa a new and irksom situation. 

from these thought I wa recal by a messag from welbeck. He gave me 
a fold paper, which he request me to carri to no.--south fourth 
street. "inquire," said he, "for mrs. wentworth, in order mere to 
ascertain the house, for you need not ask to see her; mere give the 
letter to the servant and retire. excus me for impos thi servic 
upon you. It is of too great moment to be trust to a common messenger; 
I usual perform it myself, but am at present otherwis engaged." 

I took the letter and set out to deliv it. thi wa a trifl 
circumstance, yet my mind wa full of reflect on the consequ 
that might flow from it. I rememb the direct that were given, 
but constru them in a manner different, perhaps, from welbeck' 
expect or wishes. He had charg me to leav the billet with the 
servant who happen to answer my summons; but had he not said that the 
messag wa important, insomuch that it could not be intrust to common 
hands? He had permitted, rather than enjoined, me to dispens with 
see the lady; and thi permiss I conceiv to be dictat mere 
by regard to my convenience. It wa incumb on me, therefore, to take 
some pain to deliv the script into her own hands. 

I arriv at the hous and knocked. A femal servant appeared. "her 
mistress wa up-stairs; she would tell her if I wish to see her," and 
meanwhil invit me to enter the parlour; I did so; and the girl 
retir to inform her mistress that one wait for her. I ought to 
mention that my departur from the direct which I had receiv was, 
in some degree, owe to an inquisit temper; I wa eager after 
knowledge, and wa dispos to profit by everi opportun to survey the 
interior of dwell and convers with their inhabitants. 

I scan the walls, the furniture, the pictures. over the fireplac wa 
a portrait in oil of a female. she wa elderli and matron-like. perhap 
she wa the mistress of thi habitation, and the person to whom I should 
immedi be introduced. wa it a casual suggestion, or wa there an 
actual resembl between the stroke of the pencil which execut thi 
portrait and that of clavering? howev that be, the sight of thi 
pictur reviv the memori of my friend and call up a fugit 
suspicion that thi wa the product of hi skill. 

I wa busili revolv thi idea when the ladi herself entered. It wa 
the same whose portrait I had been examining. she fix scrutin and 
power eye upon me. she look at the superscript of the letter 
which I presented, and immedi resum her examin of me. I wa 
somewhat abash by the close of her observation, and gave token of 
thi state of mind which did not pass unobserved. they seem instantli 
to remind her that she behav with too littl regard to civility. she 
recov herself and began to perus the letter. have done this, her 
attent wa onc more fix upon me. she wa evid desir of 
enter into some conversation, but seem at a loss in what manner to 
begin. thi situat wa new to me and wa product of no small 
embarrassment. I wa prepar to take my leav when she spoke, though 
not without consider hesitation:-- 

"thi letter is from mr. welbeck--y are hi friend--i 
presume--perhaps--a relation?" 

I wa consciou that I had no claim to either of these titles, and that 
I wa no more than hi servant. My pride would not allow me to 
acknowledg this, and I mere said, "I live with him at present, 
madam." 

I imagin that thi answer did not perfectli satisfi her; yet she 
receiv it with a certain air of acquiescence. she wa silent for a few 
minutes, and then, rising, said, "excus me, sir, for a few minutes. I 
will write a few word to mr. welbeck." So saying, she withdrew. 

I return to the contempl of the picture. from this, however, my 
attent wa quickli divert by a paper that lay on the mantel. A 
singl glanc wa suffici to put my blood into motion. I start and 
laid my hand upon the well-known packet. It wa that which enclos the 
portrait of clavering! 

I unfold and examin it with eagerness. By what miracl came it 
hither? It wa found, togeth with my bundle, two night before. I had 
despair of ever see it again, and yet here wa the same portrait 
enclos in the selfsam paper! I have forborn to dwell upon the 
regret, amount to grief, with which I wa affect in consequ of 
the loss of thi preciou relic. My joy on thu speedili and 
unexpectedli regain it is not easili described. 

for a time I did not reflect that to hold it thu in my hand wa not 
suffici to entitl me to repossession. I must acquaint thi ladi with 
the histori of thi picture, and convinc her of my ownership. but how 
wa thi to be done? wa she connect in ani way, by friendship or by 
consanguinity, with that unfortun youth? If she were, some 
inform as to hi destini would be anxious sought. I did not, just 
then, perceiv ani improprieti in impart it. If it came into her 
hand by accident, still, it will be necessari to relat the mode in 
which it wa lost in order to prove my titl to it. 

I now heard her descend footsteps, and hastili replac the pictur 
on the mantel. she entered, and, present me a letter, desir me to 
deliv it to mr. welbeck. I had no pretext for defer my departure, 
but wa unwil to go without obtain possess of the portrait. An 
interv of silenc and irresolut succeeded. I cast signific 
glanc at the spot where it lay, and at length muster up my strength 
of mind, and, point to the paper,--"madam," said I, "_there_ is 
someth which I recognis to be mine: I know not how it came into your 
possession, but so late as the day befor yesterday it wa in mine. I 
lost it by a strang accident, and, as I deem it of inestim value, I 
hope you will have no object to restor it." 

dure thi speech the lady' counten exhibit mark of the utmost 
perturbation. "your picture!" she exclaimed; "you lost it! how? where? 
did you know that person? what ha becom of him?" 

"I knew him well," said I. "that pictur wa execut by himself. He 
gave it to me with hi own hands; and, till the moment I unfortun 
lost it, it wa my dear and perpetu companion." 

"good heaven!" she exclaimed, with increas vehemence; "where did you 
meet with him? what ha becom of him? Is he dead, or alive?" 

these appear suffici show me that claver and thi ladi 
were connect by some tie of tenderness. I answer that he wa dead; 
that my mother and myself were hi attend and nurses, and that thi 
portrait wa hi legaci to me. 

thi intellig melt her into tears, and it wa some time befor she 
recov strength enough to resum the conversation. she then inquired, 
"when and where wa it that he died? how did you lose thi portrait? It 
wa found wrap in some coars clothes, lie in a stall in the 
market-house, on saturday evening. two negro women, servant of one of 
my friends, stroll through the market, found it and brought it to 
their mistress, who, recognis the portrait, sent it to me. To whom 
did that bundl belong? wa it yours?" 

these question remind me of the pain predica in which I now 
stood. I had promis welbeck to conceal from everi one my former 
condition; but to explain in what manner thi bundl wa lost, and how 
my intercours with claver had taken place, wa to violat thi 
promise. It wa possible, perhaps, to escap the confess of the truth 
by equivocation. falsehood were easili invented, and might lead her far 
away from my true condition; but I wa wholli unus to equivocation. 
never yet had a lie pollut my lips. I wa not weak enough to be 
asham of my origin. thi ladi had an interest in the fate of 
clavering, and might justli claim all the inform which I wa abl 
to impart. yet to forget the compact which I had so late made, and an 
adher to which might possibl be in the highest degre benefici to 
me and to welbeck; I wa will to adher to it, provid falsehood 
could be avoided. 

these thought render me silent. the pain of my embarrass amount 
almost to agony. I felt the keenest regret at my own precipit in 
claim the picture. it valu to me wa altogeth imaginary. the 
affect which thi ladi had born the original, whatev wa the 
sourc of that affection, would prompt her to cherish the copy, and, 
howev preciou it wa in my eyes, I should cheer resign it to 
her. 

In the confus of my thought an expedi suggest itself 
suffici inartifici and bold. "it is true, madam, what I have 
said. I saw him breath hi last. thi is hi onli legacy. If you wish 
it I willingli resign it; but thi is all that I can now disclose. I am 
place in circumst which render it improp to say more." 

these word were utter not veri distinctly, and the lady' vehem 
hinder her from notic them. she again repeat her interrogations, 
to which I return the same answer. 

At first she express the utmost surpris at my conduct. from thi she 
descend to some degre of asperity. she made rapid allus to the 
histori of clavering. He wa the son of the gentleman who own the 
hous in which welbeck resided. He wa the object of immeasur 
fond and indulgence. He had sought permiss to travel, and, thi 
be refus by the absurd timid of hi parents, he had twice been 
frustrat in attempt to embark for europ clandestinely. they 
ascrib hi disappear to a third and success attempt of thi 
kind, and had exercis anxiou and unweari dilig in endeavour 
to trace hi footsteps. all their effort had failed. one motiv for 
their return to europ wa the hope of discov some trace of 
him, as they entertain no doubt of hi have cross the ocean. the 
vehem of mrs. wentworth' curios as to those particular of hi 
life and death may be easili conceived. My refus onli heighten thi 
passion. 

find me refractori to all her efforts, she at length dismiss me in 
anger. 




chapter viii. 


thi extraordinari interview wa now past. pleasur as well as pain 
attend my reflect on it. I adher to the promis I had 
improvid given to welbeck, but had excit displeasure, and perhap 
suspicion, in the lady. she would find it hard to account for my 
silence. she would probabl imput it to perverseness, or imagin it to 
flow from some incid connect with the death of clavering, 
calcul to give a new edg to her curiosity. 

It wa plain that some connect subsist between her and welbeck. 
would she drop the subject at the point which it had now attained? would 
she ceas to exert herself to extract from me the desir information, 
or would she not rather make welbeck a parti in the cause, and prejudic 
my new friend against me? thi wa an evil proper, by all law means, 
to avoid. I knew of no other expedi than to confess to him the truth 
with regard to clavering, and explain to him the dilemma in which my 
adher to my promis had involv me. 

I found him on my return home, and deliv him the letter with which I 
wa charged. At the sight of it, surprise, mingl with some uneasiness, 
appear in hi looks. "what!" said he, in a tone of disappointment, 
"you then saw the lady?" 

I now rememb hi direct to leav my messag at the door, and 
apolog for my neglect them by tell my reasons. hi chagrin 
vanished, but not without an appar effort, and he said that all wa 
well; the affair wa of no moment. 

after a paus of preparation, I entreat hi attent to someth 
which I had to relate. I then detail the histori of claver and of 
my late embarrassments. As I went on, hi counten betoken 
increas solicitude. hi emot wa particularli strong when I came 
to the interrogatori of mrs. wentworth in relat to clavering; but 
thi emot gave way to profound surpris when I relat the manner in 
which I had elud her inquiries. I conclud with observ that, when 
I promis forbear on the subject of my own adventures, I had not 
foreseen ani exig which would make an adher to my promis 
difficult or inconvenient; that, if hi interest wa promot by my 
silence, I wa still will to maintain it, and request hi 
direct how to conduct myself on thi occasion. 

He appear to ponder deepli and with much perplex on what I had 
said. when he spoke there wa hesit in hi manner and circuiti in 
hi expressions, that prove him to have someth in hi thought which 
he knew not how to communicate. He frequent paused; but my answer and 
remarks, occasion given, appear to deter him from the revel 
of hi purpose. our discours ended, for the present, by hi desir me 
to persist in my present plan; I should suffer no inconveni from 
it, sinc it would be my own fault if an interview again took place 
between the ladi and me; meanwhil he should see her and effectu 
silenc her inquiries. 

I rumin not superfici or briefli on thi dialogue. By what mean 
would he silenc her inquiries? He sure meant not to mislead her by 
fallaci representations. some inquietud now crept into my thoughts. 
I began to form conjectur as to the natur of the scheme to which my 
suppress of the truth wa to be thu made subservient. It seem as 
if I were walk in the dark and might rush into snare or drop into 
pit befor I wa awar of my danger. each moment accumul my doubts, 
and I cherish a secret forebod that the event would prove my new 
situat to be far less fortun than I had, at first, fondli 
believed. the question now occurred, with pain repetition, who and 
what wa welbeck? what wa hi relat to thi foreign lady? what wa 
the servic for which I wa to be employed? 

I could not be content without a solut of these mysteries. whi 
should I not lay my soul open befor my new friend? consid my 
situation, would he regard my fear and my surmis as criminal? I felt 
that they origin in laudabl habit and views. My peac of mind 
depend on the favour verdict which conscienc should pass on my 
proceedings. I saw the empti of fame and luxury, when put in the 
balanc against the recompens of virtue. never would I purchas the 
blandish of adul and the glare of opul at the price of my 
honesty. 

amidst these reflect the dinner-hour arrived. the ladi and welbeck 
were present. A new train of sentiment now occupi my mind. I regard 
them both with inquisit eyes. I cannot well account for the 
revolut which had taken place in my mind. perhap it wa a proof of 
the caprici of my temper, or it wa mere the fruit of my 
profound ignor of life and manners. whencesoev it arose, certain 
it is that I contempl the scene befor me with alter eyes. it 
order and pomp wa no longer the parent of tranquil and awe. My wild 
reveri of inherit thi splendour and appropri the affect 
of thi nymph, I now regard as lunat hope and childish folly. 
educ and natur had qualifi me for a differ scene. thi might 
be the mask of miseri and the structur of vice. 

My companion as well as myself were silent dure the meal. the ladi 
retir as soon as it wa finished. My inexplic melancholi 
increased. It did not pass unnot by welbeck, who inquired, with an 
air of kindness, into the caus of my visibl dejection. I am almost 
asham to relat to what extrem my folli transport me. instead of 
answer him, I wa weak enough to shed tears. 

thi excit afresh hi surpris and hi sympathy. He renew hi 
inquiries; my heart wa full, but how to disburden it I knew not. At 
length, with some difficulty, I express my wish to leav hi hous 
and return into the country. 

what, he asked, had occur to suggest thi new plan? what motiv could 
incit me to buri myself in rustic obscurity? how did I purpos to 
dispos of myself? had some new friend sprung up more abl or more 
will to benefit me than he had been? 

"no," I answered, "I have no relat who would own me, or friend who 
would protect. If I went into the countri it would be to the toilsom 
occup of a day-labourer; but even that wa better than my present 
situation." 

thi opinion, he observed, must be newli formed. what wa there irksom 
or offens in my present mode of life? 

that thi man condescend to expostul with me; to dissuad me from 
my new plan; and to enumer the benefit which he wa will to 
confer, penetr my heart with gratitude. I could not but acknowledg 
that leisur and literature, copiou and eleg accommodation, were 
valuabl for their own sake; that all the delight of sensat and 
refin of intellig were compris within my present sphere, and 
would be nearli want in that to which I wa going. I felt temporari 
compunct for my folly, and determin to adopt a differ 
deportment. I could not prevail upon myself to unfold the true caus of 
my dejection, and permit him therefor to ascrib it to a kind of 
homesickness; to inexperience; and to that ignor which, on be 
usher into a new scene, is oppress with a sensat of forlornness. 
He remark that these chimera would vanish befor the influenc of 
time, and company, and occupation. On the next week he would furnish me 
with employment; meanwhil he would introduc me into company, where 
intellig and vivac would combin to dispel my glooms. 

As soon as we separated, my disquietud returned. I contend with them 
in vain, and final resolv to abandon my present situation. when and 
how thi purpos wa to be effect I knew not. that wa to be the theme 
of futur deliberation. 

even have arrived, welbeck propos to me to accompani me on a 
visit to one of hi friends. I cheer accept the invitation, and 
went with him to your friend mr. wortley's. A numer parti wa 
assembled, chiefli of the femal sex. I wa introduc by welbeck by 
the titl of _a young friend of his_. notwithstand my embarrassment, 
I did not fail to attend to what pass on thi occasion. I remark 
that the utmost defer wa paid to my companion, on whom hi entranc 
into thi compani appear to oper like magic. hi eye sparkled; hi 
featur expand into a benign serenity; and hi wont reserv gave 
place to a torrent-lik and overflow elocution. 

I mark thi chang in hi deport with the utmost astonishment. So 
great wa it, that I could hardli persuad myself that it wa the same 
person. A mind thu suscept of new impress must be, I conceived, 
of a wonder texture. noth wa further from my expect than 
that thi vivac wa mere dissimul and would take it leav of 
him when he left the company; yet thi I found to be the case. the door 
wa no sooner close after him than hi accustom solemn returned. 
He spake little, and that littl wa deliv with emphat and 
monosyllab brevity. 

We return home at a late hour, and I immedi retir to my 
chamber, not so much from the desir of repos as in order to enjoy and 
pursu my own reflect without interruption. 

the condit of my mind wa consider remot from happiness. I wa 
place in a scene that furnish fuel to my curiosity. thi passion is a 
sourc of pleasure, provid it gratif be practicable. I had no 
reason, in my present circumstances, to despair of knowledge; yet 
suspicion and anxieti beset me. I thought upon the delay and toil which 
the remov of my ignor would cost, and reap onli pain and fear 
from the reflection. 

the air wa remark sultry. lift sash and lofti ceil were 
insuffici to attemp it. the perturb of my thought affect my 
body, and the heat which oppress me wa aggravated, by my 
restlessness, almost into fever. some hour were thu pain past, 
when I recollect that the bath, erect in the court below, contain 
a suffici antidot to the scorch influenc of the atmosphere. 

I rose, and descend the stair softly, that I might not alarm welbeck 
and the lady, who occupi the two room on the second floor. I 
proceed to the bath, and, fill the reservoir with water, speedili 
dissip the heat that incommod me. Of all speci of sensual 
gratification, that wa the most delicious; and I continu for a long 
time lave my limb and moisten my hair. In the midst of thi 
amusement, I notic the approach of day, and immedi saw the 
proprieti of return to my chamber. I return with the same caution 
which I had use in descending; my feet were bare, so that it wa easi 
to proceed unattend by the smallest signal of my progress. 

I had reach the carpet staircase, and wa slowli ascending, when I 
heard, within the chamber that wa occupi by the lady, a noise, as of 
some one moving. though not consciou of have act improperly, yet I 
felt reluct to be seen. there wa no reason to suppos that thi 
sound wa connect with the detect of me in thi situation; yet I 
act as if thi reason existed, and made hast to pass the door and 
gain the second flight of steps. 

I wa unabl to accomplish my design, when the chamber door slowli 
opened, and welbeck, with a light in hi hand, came out. I wa abash 
and disconcert at thi interview. He start at see me; but, 
discov in an instant who it was, hi face assum an express in 
which shame and anger were power blended. He seem on the point of 
open hi mouth to rebuk me; but, suddenli check himself, he said, 
in a tone of mildness, "how is this? whenc come you?" 

hi emot seem to commun itself, with an electr rapidity, 
to my heart. My tongu falter while I made some answer. I said, "I had 
been seek relief from the heat of the weather, in the bath." He heard 
my explan in silence; and, after a moment' pause, pass into hi 
own room, and shut himself in. I hasten to my chamber. 

A differ observ might have found in these circumst no food for 
hi suspicion or hi wonder. To me, however, they suggest vagu and 
tumultu ideas. 

As I strode across the room I repeated, "thi woman is hi daughter. 
what proof have I of that? He onc assert it; and ha frequent 
utter allus and hint from which no other infer could be 
drawn. the chamber from which he came, in an hour devot to sleep, wa 
hers. for what end could a visit like thi be paid? A parent may visit 
hi child at all seasons, without a crime. On see me, methought hi 
featur indic more than surprise. A keen interpret would be apt 
to suspect a conscious of wrong. what if thi woman be not hi 
child! how shall their relationship be ascertained?" 

I wa summon at the customari hour to breakfast. My mind wa full of 
idea connect with thi incident. I wa not endow with suffici 
firm to propos the cool and systemat observ of thi man' 
deportment. I felt as if the state of my mind could not but be evid 
to him; and experienc in myself all the confus which thi discoveri 
wa calcul to produc in him. I would have willingli excus myself 
from meet him; but that wa impossible. 

At breakfast, after the usual salutations, noth wa said. for a time 
I scarc lift my eye from the table. steal a glanc at welbeck, 
I discov in hi featur noth but hi wont gravity. He appear 
occupi with thought that had no relat to last night' adventure. 
thi encourag me; and I gradual recov my composure. their 
inattent to me allow me occasion to throw scrutin and 
compar glanc at the face of each. 

the relationship of parent and child is commonli discov in the 
visage; but the child may resembl either of it parents, yet have no 
featur in common with both. here outlines, surfaces, and hue were in 
absolut contrariety. that kindr subsist between them wa possible, 
notwithstand thi dissimilitude; but thi circumst contribut to 
envenom my suspicions. 

breakfast be finished, welbeck cast an eye of invit to the 
piano-forte. the ladi rose to compli with hi request. My eye chanc 
to be, at that moment, fix on her. In step to the instrument, some 
motion or appear awaken a thought in my mind which affect my 
feel like the shock of an earthquake. 

I have too slight acquaint with the histori of the passion to truli 
explain the emot which now throb in my veins. I had been a 
stranger to what is call love. from subsequ reflection, I have 
contract a suspicion that the sentiment with which I regard thi 
ladi wa not untinctur from thi source, and that henc aros the 
turbul of my feel on observ what I constru into mark of 
pregnancy. the evid afford me wa slight; yet it exercis an 
absolut sway over my belief. 

It wa well that thi suspicion had not been sooner excited. now 
civil did not requir my stay in the apartment, and noth but 
flight could conceal the state of my mind. I hastened, therefore, to a 
distance, and shroud myself in the friendli secreci of my own chamber. 

the constitut of my mind is doubtless singular and perverse; yet that 
opinion, perhaps, is the fruit of my ignorance. It may by no mean be 
uncommon for men to _fashion_ their conclus in opposit to 
evid and _probability_, and so as to feed their malic and subvert 
their happiness. thu it was, in an emin degree, in my case. the 
simpl fact wa connected, in my mind, with a train of the most hate 
consequences. the deprav of welbeck wa infer from it. the charm 
of thi angel woman were tarnish and withered. I had formerli 
survey her as a preciou and perfect monument, but now it wa a scene 
of ruin and blast. 

thi had been a sourc of suffici anguish; but thi wa not all. I 
recollect that the claim of a parent had been urged. will you believ 
that these claim were now admitted, and that they heighten the 
iniqu of welbeck into the blackest and most stupend of all crimes? 
these idea were necessarili transient. conclus more conform to 
appear succeeded. thi ladi might have been late reduc to 
widowhood. the recent loss of a belov companion would suffici 
account for her dejection, and make her present situat compat 
with duty. 

By thi new train of idea I wa somewhat comforted. I saw the folli of 
precipit infer and the injustic of my atroci imputations, 
and acquir some degre of patienc in my present state of uncertainty. 
My heart wa lighten of it wont burden, and I labour to invent 
some harmless explic of the scene that I had wit the 
preced night. 

At dinner welbeck appear as usual, but not the lady. I ascrib her 
absenc to some casual indisposition, and ventur to inquir into the 
state of her health. My companion said she wa well, but that she had 
left the citi for a month or two, find the heat of summer 
inconveni where she was. thi wa no unplaus reason for 
retirement. A candid mind would have acquiesc in thi representation, 
and found in it noth inconsist with a supposit respect the 
caus of appear favour to her character; but otherwis wa I 
affected. the uneasi which had flown for a moment returned, and I 
sunk into gloomi silence. 

from thi I wa rous by my patron, who request me to deliv a 
billet, which he put into my hand, at the counting-hous of mr. 
thetford, and to bring him an answer. thi messag wa speedili 
performed. I enter a larg build by the river-side. A spaciou 
apart present itself, well furnish with pipe and hogsheads. In 
one corner wa a smaller room, in which a gentleman wa busi at writing. 
I advanc to the door of the room, but wa there met by a young person, 
who receiv my paper and deliv it to him within. I stood still at 
the door; but wa near enough to overhear what would pass between them. 

the letter wa laid upon the desk, and present he that sat at it 
lift hi eye and glanc at the superscription. He scarc spoke 
abov a whisper; but hi words, nevertheless, were clearli 
distinguishable. I did not call to mind the sound of hi voice, but hi 
word call up a train of recollections. 

"lo!" said he, carelessly, "thi from the _nabob_!" 

An incid so slight as thi wa suffici to open a spaciou scene 
of meditation. thi littl word, half whisper in a thoughtless mood, 
wa a key to unlock an extens cabinet of secrets. thetford wa 
probabl indiffer whether hi exclam were overheard. littl did 
he think on the infer which would be built upon it. 

"the nabob!" By thi appel had some one been denot in the 
chamber dialogu of which I had been an unsuspect auditor. the man who 
pretend poverty, and yet gave proof of inordin wealth; whom it wa 
pardon to defraud of thirti thousand dollars; first, becaus the 
loss of that sum would be trivial to one opul as he; and, secondly, 
becaus he wa imagin to have acquir thi opul by other than 
honest methods. instead of forthwith return home, I wander into the 
fields, to indulg myself in the new thought which were produc by 
thi occurrence. 

I entertain no doubt that the person allud to wa my patron. No new 
light wa thrown upon hi character; unless someth were deduc 
from the charg vagu made, that hi wealth wa the fruit of illicit 
practices. He wa opulent, and the sourc of hi wealth were unknown, 
if not to the rest of the community, at least to thetford. but here had 
a plot been laid. the fortun of thetford' brother wa to rise from the 
success of artific of which the credul of welbeck wa to be the 
victim. To detect and to counterwork thi plot wa obvious my duty. My 
interfer might now inde be too late to be useful; but thi wa at 
least to be ascertain by experiment. 

how should my intent be effected? I had hitherto conceal from 
welbeck my adventur at thetford' house. these it wa now necessari to 
disclose, and to mention the recent occurrence. My deductions, in 
consequ of my ignorance, might be erroneous; but of their truth hi 
knowledg of hi own affair would enabl him to judge. It wa possibl 
that thetford and he whose chamber convers I had overheard were 
differ persons. I endeavour in vain to ascertain their ident by 
a comparison of their voices. the word late heard, my remembr 
did not enabl me certainli to pronounc to be utter by the same 
organs. 

thi uncertainti wa of littl moment. It suffic that welbeck wa 
design by thi appellation, and that therefor he wa prove to be 
the subject of some fraudul proceeding. the inform that I 
possess it wa my duti to commun as expediti as possible. I 
wa resolv to employ the first opportun that offer for thi end. 

My medit had been ardent pursued, and, when I recal my 
attention, I found myself bewild among field and fences. It wa 
late befor I extric myself from unknown paths, and reach home. 

I enter the parlour; but welbeck wa not there. A table, with 
tea-equipag for one person, wa set; from which I infer that welbeck 
wa engag abroad. thi belief wa confirm by the report of the 
servant. He could not inform me where hi master was, but mere that he 
should not take tea at home. thi incid wa a sourc of vexat and 
impatience. I knew not but that delay would be of the utmost moment to 
the safeti of my friend. wholli unacquaint as I wa with the natur of 
hi contract with thetford, I could not decid whether a singl hour 
would not avail to obviat the evil that threaten him. had I known 
whither to trace hi footsteps, I should certainli have sought an 
immedi interview; but, as it was, I wa oblig to wait, with what 
patienc I could collect, for hi return to hi own house. 

I wait hour after hour in vain. the sun declined, and the shade of 
even descended; but welbeck wa still at a distance. 




chapter ix. 


welbeck did not return, though hour succeed hour till the clock struck 
ten. I inquir of the servants, who inform me that their master wa 
not accustom to stay out so late. I seat myself at a table, in a 
parlour, on which there stood a light, and listen for the signal of 
hi coming, either by the sound of step on the pavement without or by a 
peal from the bell. the silenc wa uninterrupt and profound, and each 
minut ad to my sum of impati and anxiety. 

To reliev myself from the heat of the weather, which wa aggrav by 
the condit of my thoughts, as well as to beguil thi torment 
interval, it occur to me to betak myself to the bath. I left the 
candl where it stood, and imagin that even in the bath I should hear 
the sound of the bell which would be rung upon hi arriv at the door. 

No such signal occurred, and, after take thi refreshment, I prepar 
to return to my post. the parlour wa still unoccupied, but thi wa not 
all; the candl I had left upon the tabl wa gone. thi wa an 
inexplic circumstance. On my promis to wait for their master, the 
servant had retir to bed. No signal of ani one' entranc had been 
given. the street door wa locked, and the key hung at it customari 
place upon the wall. what wa I to think? It wa obviou to suppos that 
the candl had been remov by a domestic; but their footstep could not 
be traced, and I wa not suffici acquaint with the hous to find 
the way, especi immers in darkness, to their chamber. one measure, 
however, it wa evid proper to take, which wa to suppli myself, 
anew, with a light. thi wa instantli performed; but what wa next to 
be done? 

I wa weari of the perplex in which I wa embroiled. I saw no 
avenu to escap from them but that which led me to the bosom of natur 
and to my ancient occupations. for a moment I wa tempt to resum my 
rustic garb, and, on that veri hour, to desert thi habitation. one 
thing onli detain me; the desir to appriz my patron of the treacheri 
of thetford. for thi end I wa anxiou to obtain an interview; but now 
I reflect that thi inform could by other mean be imparted. wa 
it not suffici to write him briefli these particulars, and leav him 
to profit by the knowledge? thu I might, likewise, acquaint him with my 
motiv for thu abruptli and unseason desert hi service. 

To the execut of thi scheme pen and paper were necessary. the 
busi of write wa perform in the chamber on the third story. I 
had been hitherto deni access to thi room. In it wa a show of paper 
and books. here it wa that the task, for which I had been retained, wa 
to be performed; but I wa to enter it and leav it onli in compani with 
welbeck. for what reasons, I asked, wa thi procedur to be adopted? 

the influenc of prohibit and an appear of disguis in awaken 
curios is well known. My mind fasten upon the idea of thi room 
with an unusu degre of intenseness. I had seen it but for a moment. 
mani of welbeck' hour were spent in it. It wa not to be infer that 
they were consum in idleness: what then wa the natur of hi 
employ over which a veil of such impenetr secreci wa cast? 

will you wonder that the design of enter thi recess wa insens 
formed? possibl it wa locked, but it access wa likewis 
possible. I meant not the commiss of ani crime. My princip purpos 
wa to procur the implement of writing, which were elsewher not to be 
found. I should neither unseal paper nor open drawers. I would mere 
take a survey of the volum and attend to the object that 
spontan present themselv to my view. In thi there sure wa 
noth crimin or blameworthy. meanwhil I wa not unmind of the 
sudden disappear of the candle. thi incid fill my bosom with 
the inquietud of fear and the perturb of wonder. 

onc more I paus to catch ani sound that might aris from without. all 
wa still. I seiz the candl and prepar to mount the stairs. I had 
not reach the first land when I call to mind my midnight meet 
with welbeck at the door of hi daughter' chamber. the chamber wa now 
desolate; perhap it wa accessible; if so, no injuri wa done by 
enter it. My curios wa strong, but it pictur to itself no 
precis object. three step would bear me to the door. the trial, 
whether it wa fastened, might be made in a moment; and I readili 
imagin that someth might be found within to reward the troubl of 
examination. the door yield to my hand, and I entered. 

No remark object wa discoverable. the apart wa suppli with 
the usual furniture. I bent my step toward a tabl over which a mirror 
wa suspended. My glances, which rove with swift from one object to 
another, shortli light on a miniatur portrait that hung near. I 
scrutin it with eagerness. It wa imposs to overlook it 
resembl to my own visage. thi wa so great that for a moment I 
imagin myself to have been the origin from which it had been drawn. 
thi flatter concept yield place to a belief mere of 
similitud between me and the genuin original. 

the thought which thi opinion wa fit to produc were suspend by 
a new object. A small volume, that had, apparently, been much used, lay 
upon the toilet. I open it, and found it to contain some of the drama 
of apostolo zeno. I turn over the leaves; a written paper salut my 
sight. A singl glanc inform me that it wa english. for the present 
I wa insens to all motiv that would command me to forbear. I 
seiz the paper with an intent to perus it. 

At that moment a stun report wa heard. It wa loud enough to shake 
the wall of the apartment, and abrupt enough to throw me into tremors. 
I drop the book and yield for a moment to confus and surprise. 
from what quarter it came, I wa unabl accur to determine; but 
there could be no doubt, from it loudness, that it wa near, and even 
in the house. It wa no less manifest that the sound aros from the 
discharg of a pistol. some hand must have drawn the trigger. I 
recollect the disappear of the candl from the room below. 
instantli a supposit dart into my mind which made my hair rise and 
my teeth chatter. 

"this," I said, "i the deed of welbeck. He enter while I wa absent 
from the room; he hie to hi chamber; and, prompt by some unknown 
instigation, ha inflict on himself death!" thi idea had a tendenc 
to palsi my limb and my thoughts. some time pass in pain and 
tumultu fluctuation. My avers to thi catastrophe, rather than a 
belief of being, by that means, abl to prevent or repair the evil, 
induc me to attempt to enter hi chamber. It wa possibl that my 
conjectur were erroneous. 

the door of hi room wa locked. I knocked; I demand entranc in a low 
voice; I put my eye and my ear to the keyhol and the crevices; noth 
could be heard or seen. It wa unavoid to conclud that no one wa 
within; yet the effluvia of gunpowd wa perceptible. 

perhap the room abov had been the scene of thi catastrophe. I 
ascend the second flight of stairs. I approach the door. No sound 
could be caught by my most vigil attention. I put out the light that 
I carried, and wa then abl to perceiv that there wa light within the 
room. I scarc knew how to act. for some minut I paus at the door. 
I spoke, and request permiss to enter. My word were succeed by a 
death-lik stillness. At length I ventur softli to withdraw the bolt, 
to open and to advanc within the room. noth could exceed the horror 
of my expectation; yet I wa startl by the scene that I beheld. 

In a chair, whose back wa place against the front wall, sat welbeck. 
My entranc alarm him not, nor rous him from the stupor into which 
he wa plunged. He rest hi hand upon hi knees, and hi eye were 
rivet to someth that lay, at the distanc of a few feet befor 
him, on the floor. A second glanc wa suffici to inform me of what 
natur thi object was. It wa the bodi of a man, bleeding, ghastly, and 
still exhibit the mark of convuls and agony! 

I shall omit to describ the shock which a spectacl like thi 
commun to my unpractis senses. I wa nearli as panic-struck and 
powerless as welbeck himself. I gazed, without power of speech, at one 
time, at welbeck; then I fix terrifi eye on the distort featur 
of the dead. At length, welbeck, recov from hi reverie, look up, 
as if to see who it wa that had entered. No surprise, no alarm, wa 
betray by him on see me. He manifest no desir or intent to 
interrupt the fear silence. 

My thought wander in confus and terror. the first impuls wa to 
fli from the scene; but I could not be long insens to the exig 
of the moment. I saw that affair must not be suffer to remain in 
their present situation. the insens or despair of welbeck 
requir consol and succour. how to commun my thoughts, or 
offer my assistance, I knew not. what led to thi murder catastrophe; 
who it wa whose breathless corps wa befor me; what concern welbeck 
had in produc hi death; were as yet unknown. 

At length he rose from hi seat, and strode at first with faltering, and 
then with more steadfast steps, across the floor. thi motion seem to 
put him in possess of himself. He seem now, for the first time, to 
recognis my presence. He turn to me, and said, in a tone of 
severity,-- 

"how now? what bring you here?" 

thi rebuk wa unexpected. I stammer out, in reply, that the report 
of the pistol had alarm me, and that I came to discov the caus of 
it. 

He notic not my answer, but resum hi perturb steps, and hi 
anxiou but abstract looks. suddenli he check himself, and, glanc 
a furiou eye at the corpse, he muttered, "yes, the die is cast. thi 
worthless and miser scene shall last no longer. I will at onc get 
rid of life and all it humiliations." 

here succeed a new pause. the cours of hi thought seem now to 
becom onc more tranquil. sadness, rather than fury, overspread hi 
features; and hi accent, when he spoke to me, wa not faltering, but 
solemn. 

"mervyn," said he, "you comprehend not thi scene. your youth and 
inexperi make you a stranger to a deceit and flagiti world. 
you know me not. It is time that thi ignor should vanish. the 
knowledg of me and of my action may be of use to you. It may teach you 
to avoid the shoal on which my virtu and my peac have been wrecked; 
but to the rest of mankind it can be of no use. the ruin of my fame is, 
perhaps, irretrievable; but the height of my iniqu need not be known. 
I perceiv in you a rectitud and firm worthi to be trusted; promis 
me, therefore, that not a syllabl of what I tell you shall ever pass 
your lips." 

I had late experienc the inconveni of a promise; but I wa now 
confused, embarrassed, ardent inquisit as to the natur of thi 
scene, and unappr of the motiv that might afterward occur, 
persuad or compel me to disclosure. the promis which he exact 
wa given. He resumed:-- 

"I have detain you in my service, partli for your own benefit, but 
chiefli for mine. I intend to inflict upon you injuri and to do you 
good. neither of these end can I now accomplish, unless the lesson 
which my exampl may inculc shall inspir you with fortitud and arm 
you with caution. 

"what it wa that made me thus, I know not. I am not destitut of 
understanding. My thirst of knowledge, though irregular, is ardent. I 
can talk and can feel as virtu and justic prescribe; yet the tenor of 
my action ha been uniform. one tissu of iniqu and folli ha been 
my life; while my thought have been familiar with enlighten and 
disinterest principles. scorn and detest I have heap upon 
myself. yesterday is rememb with remorse. to-morrow is contempl 
with anguish and fear; yet everi day is product of the same crime 
and of the same follies. 

"I wa left, by the insolv of my father, (a trader of liverpool,) 
without ani mean of support but such as labour should afford me. 
whatev could gener pride, and the love of independence, wa my 
portion. whatev can incit to dilig wa the growth of my 
condition; yet my indol wa a cureless disease; and there were no 
art too sordid for me to practise. 

"I wa content to live on the bounti of a kinsman. hi famili wa 
numerous, and hi revenu small. He forbor to upbraid me, or even to 
insinu the proprieti of provid for myself; but he empow me to 
pursu ani liber or mechan profess which might suit my taste. I 
wa insens to everi gener motive. I labour to forget my 
depend and disgrac condition, becaus the remembr wa a 
sourc of anguish, without be abl to inspir me with a steadi 
resolut to chang it. 

"I contract an acquaint with a woman who wa unchaste, perverse, 
and malignant. me, however, she found it no difficult task to deceive. 
My uncl remonstr against the union. He took infinit pain to 
unveil my error, and to convinc me that wedlock wa improp for one 
destitute, as I was, of the mean of support, even if the object of my 
choic were person unexceptionable. 

"hi represent were listen to with anger. that he thwart my 
will in thi respect, even by affection expostulation, cancel all 
that debt of gratitud which I owe to him. I reward him for all hi 
kind by invect and disdain, and hasten to complet my 
ill-omen marriage. I had deceiv the woman' father by assert of 
possess secret resources. To gratifi my passion, I descend to 
dissimul and falsehood. He admit me into hi family, as the 
husband of hi child; but the charact of my wife and the fallaci of my 
assert were quickli discovered. He deni me accommod under hi 
roof, and I wa turn forth to the world to endur the penalti of my 
rash and my indolence. 

"temptat would have mould me into ani villan shape. My virtuou 
theori and comprehens erudit would not have save me from the 
basest of crimes. luckili for me, I was, for the present, exempt from 
temptation. I had form an acquaint with a young american captain. 
On be partial inform of my situation, he invit me to embark 
with him for hi own country. My passag wa gratuitous. I arrived, in a 
short time, at charleston, which wa the place of hi abode. 

"he introduc me to hi family, everi member of which was, like 
himself, imbu with affect and benevolence. I wa treat like their 
son and brother. I wa hospit entertain until I should be abl to 
select some path of lucr industry. such wa my incur depravity, 
that I made no hast to select my pursuit. An interv of inoccup 
succeeded, which I appli to the worst purposes. 

"mi friend had a sister, who wa married, but dure the absenc of her 
husband resid with her family. henc origin our acquaintance. the 
purest of human heart and the most vigor understand were hers. 
she idol her husband, who well deserv to be the object of her 
adoration. her affect for him, and her gener principles, appear 
to be confirm beyond the power to be shaken. I sought her intercours 
without illicit views; I delight in the effus of her candour and 
the flash of her intelligence; I conformed, by a kind of instinct 
hypocrisy, to her views; I spoke and felt from the influenc of 
immedi and momentari conviction. she imagin she had found in me a 
friend worthi to partak in all her sympathi and forward all her 
wishes. We were mutual deceived. she wa the victim of self-delusion; 
but I must charg myself with practis deceit both upon myself and 
her. 

"I reflect with astonish and horror on the step which led to her 
degrad and to my calamity. In the high career of passion all 
consequ were overlooked. she wa the dupe of the most audaci 
sophistri and the grossest delusion. I wa the slave of sensual impuls 
and voluntari blindness. the effect may be easili conceived. not till 
symptom of pregnanc began to appear were our eye open to the ruin 
which impend over us. 

"then I began to revolv the consequences, which the mist of passion had 
hitherto concealed. I wa torment by the pang of remorse, and pursu 
by the phantom of ingratitude. To complet my despair, thi unfortun 
ladi wa appriz of my marriag with anoth woman; a circumst 
which I had anxious conceal from her. she fled from her father' 
hous at a time when her husband and brother were hourli expected. what 
becam of her I knew not. she left behind her a letter to her father, in 
which the melancholi truth wa told. 

"shame and remors had no power over my life. To elud the storm of 
invect and upbraiding, to quiet the uproar of my mind, I did not 
betak myself to voluntari death. My pusillanim still clung to thi 
wretch existence. I abruptli retir from the scene, and, repair to 
the port, embark in the first vessel which appeared. the ship chanc 
to belong to wilmington, in delaware, and here I sought out an obscur 
and cheap abode. 

"I possess no mean of subsistence. I wa unknown to my neighbours, 
and desir to remain unknown. I wa unqualifi for manual labour by 
all the habit of my life; but there wa no choic between penuri and 
diligence,--between honest labour and crimin inactivity. I muse 
incessantli on the forlorn of my condition. hour after hour passed, 
and the horror of want began to encompass me. I sought with eager 
for an avenu by which I might escap from it. the pervers of my 
natur led me on from one guilti thought to another. I took refug in my 
customari sophistries, and reconcil myself at length to a scheme 
of--_forgery_!" 




chapter X. 


"have ascertain my purpose, it wa requisit to search out the mean 
by which I might effect it. these were not clearli or readili suggested. 
the more I contempl my project, the more numer and arduou it 
difficulti appeared. I had no associ in my undertaking. A due 
regard to my safety, and the unextinguish sens of honour, deter me 
from seek auxiliari and co-agents. the esteem of mankind wa the 
spring of all my activity, the parent of all my virtu and all my vice. 
To preserv this, it wa necessari that my guilti project should have 
neither wit nor partaker. 

"I quickli discov that to execut thi scheme demand time, 
application, and money, none of which my present situat would permit 
me to devot to it. At first it appear that an attain degre of 
skill and circumspect would enabl me to arrive, by mean of 
counterfeit bills, to the pinnacl of affluenc and honour. My error wa 
detect by a closer scrutiny, and I final saw noth in thi path 
but enorm peril and insurmount impediments. 

"yet what altern wa offer me? To maintain myself by the labour 
of my hands, to perform ani toilsom or prescrib task, wa 
incompat with my nature. My habit debar me from countri 
occupations. My pride regard as vile and ignomini drudgeri ani 
employ which the town could afford. meanwhile, my want were as 
urgent as ever, and my fund were exhausted. 

"there are few, perhaps, whose extern situat resembl mine, who 
would have found in it ani thing but incit to industri and 
invention. A thousand method of subsistence, honest but laborious, 
were at my command, but to these I entertain an irreconcil 
aversion. eas and the respect attend upon opul I wa will to 
purchas at the price of ever-wak suspicion and etern remorse; 
but, even at thi price, the purchas wa impossible. 

"the desper of my condit becam hourli more apparent. the 
further I extend my view, the darker grew the cloud which hung over 
futurity. anguish and infami appear to be the insepar condit 
of my existence. there wa one mode of evad the evil that impended. 
To free myself from self-upbraid and to shun the persecut of my 
fortun wa possibl onli by shake off life itself. 

"one evening, as I travers the bank of the creek, these dismal 
medit were uncommonli intense. they at length termin in a 
resolut to throw myself into the stream. the first impuls wa to 
rush instantli to my death; but the remembr of papers, lie at my 
lodgings, which might unfold more than I desir to the curios of 
survivors, induc me to postpon thi catastroph till the next 
morning. 

"mi purpos be formed, I found my heart lighten of it usual 
weight. By you it will be thought strange, but it is nevertheless true, 
that I deriv from thi new prospect not onli tranquil but 
cheerfulness. I hasten home. As soon as I entered, my landlord 
inform me that a person had been search for me in my absence. thi 
wa an unexampl incident, and forebod me no good. I wa strongli 
persuad that my visit had been led hither not by friendli but 
hostil purposes. thi persuas wa confirm by the descript of 
the stranger' guis and demeanour given by my landlord. My fear 
instantli recognis the imag of watson, the man by whom I had been so 
emin benefited, and whose kind I had compens by the ruin of 
hi sister and the confus of hi family. 

"an interview with thi man wa less to be endur than to look upon the 
face of an aveng deity. I wa determin to avoid thi interview, 
and, for thi end, to execut my fatal purpos within the hour. My 
paper were collect with a tremul hand, and consign to the 
flames. I then bade my landlord inform all visit that I should not 
return till the next day, and onc more hasten toward the river. 

"mi way led past the inn where one of the stage from baltimor wa 
accustom to stop. I wa not unawar that watson had possibl been 
brought in the coach which had recent arrived, and which now stood 
befor the door of the inn. the danger of my be descri or 
encount by him as I pass did not fail to occur. thi wa to be 
elud by deviat from the main street. 

"scarc had I turn a corner for thi purpos when I wa accost by 
a young man whom I knew to be an inhabit of the town, but with whom I 
had hitherto had no intercours but what consist in a transient 
salutation. He apolog for the liberti of address me, and, at the 
same time, inquir if I understood the french language. 

"be answer in the affirmative, he proceed to tell me that in the 
stage, just arrived, had come a passenger, a youth who appear to be 
french, who wa wholli unacquaint with our language, and who had been 
seiz with a violent disease. 

"mi inform had felt compass for the forlorn condit of the 
stranger, and had just been seek me at my lodgings, in hope that my 
knowledg of french would enabl me to convers with the sick man, and 
obtain from him a knowledg of hi situat and views. 

"the apprehens I had precipit form were thu removed, and I 
readili consent to perform thi service. the youth was, indeed, in a 
deplor condition. besid the pain of hi disease, he wa 
overpow by dejection. the innkeep wa extrem anxiou for the 
remov of hi guest. He wa by no mean will to sustain the troubl 
and expens of a sick or a die man, for which it wa scarc probabl 
that he should ever be reimbursed. the travel had no baggage, and hi 
dress betoken the pressur of mani wants. 

"mi compass for thi stranger wa power awakened. I wa in 
possess of a suitabl apartment, for which I had no power to pay the 
rent that wa accruing; but my inabl in thi respect wa unknown, 
and I might enjoy my lodg unmolest for some weeks. the fate of 
thi youth would be speedili decided, and I should be left at liberti to 
execut my first intent befor my embarrass should be visibl 
increased. 

"after a moment' pause, I conduct the stranger to my home, place him 
in my own bed, and becam hi nurse. hi maladi wa such as is known in 
the tropic island by the name of the yellow or malign fever, and 
the physician who wa call speedili pronounc hi case desperate. 

"it wa my duti to warn him of the death that wa hastening, and to 
promis the fulfil of ani of hi wish not inconsist with my 
present situation. He receiv my intellig with fortitude, and 
appear anxiou to commun some inform respect hi own 
state. hi pang and hi weak scarc allow him to be 
intelligible. from hi feebl effort and broken narr I collect 
thu much concern hi famili and fortune. 

"hi father' name wa vincentio lodi. from a merchant at leghorn, he 
had chang himself into a planter in the island of guadaloupe. hi son 
had been sent, at an earli age, for the benefit of education, to 
europe. the young vincentio was, at length, inform by hi father, 
that, be weari of hi present mode of existence, he had determin to 
sell hi properti and transport himself to the unit states. the son 
wa direct to hasten home, that he might embark, with hi father, on 
thi voyage. 

"the summon wa cheer obeyed. the youth, on hi arriv at the 
island, found prepar make for the funer of hi father. It 
appear that the elder lodi had flatter one of hi slave with the 
prospect of hi freedom, but had, nevertheless, includ thi slave in 
the sale that he had made of hi estate. actuat by revenge, the slave 
assassin lodi in the open street, and resign himself, without a 
struggle, to the punish which the law had provid for such a deed. 

"the properti had been recent transferred, and the price wa now 
present to young vincentio by the purchaser. He wa by no mean 
inclin to adopt hi father' project, and wa impati to return with 
hi inherit to france. befor thi could be done, the conduct of hi 
father had render a voyag to the contin indispensable. 

"lodi had a daughter, whom, a few week previou to hi death, he had 
intrust to an american captain for whom he had contract a 
friendship. the vessel wa bound to philadelphia; but the conduct she 
wa to pursue, and the abod she wa to select, on her arrival, were 
known onli to the father, whose untim death involv the son in 
consider uncertainti with regard to hi sister' fate. hi anxieti 
on thi account induc him to seiz the first convey that offered. 
In a short time he land at baltimore. 

"a soon as he recov from the fatigu of hi voyage, he prepar to 
go to philadelphia. thither hi baggag wa immedi sent under the 
protect of a passeng and countryman. hi money consist in 
portugues gold, which, in pursuanc of advice, he had chang into 
bank-notes. He besought me, in pathet terms, to search out hi sister, 
whose youth and poverty, and ignor of the languag and manner of 
the country, might expos her to innumer hardships. At the same 
time, he put a pocket-book and small volum into my hand, indicating, by 
hi counten and gestures, hi desir that I would deliv them to 
hi sister. 

"hi obsequi be decent performed, I had leisur to reflect upon 
the chang in my condit which thi incid had produced. In the 
pocket-book were found bill to the amount of twenti thousand dollars. 
the volum prove to be a manuscript, written by the elder lodi in 
italian, and contain memoir of the ducal hous of visconti, from whom 
the writer believ himself to have lineal descended. 

"thu had I arrived, by an avenu so much beyond my foresight, at the 
possess of wealth. the evil which impel me to the brink of 
suicide, and which wa the source, though not of all, yet of the larger 
portion, of my anguish, wa now removed. what claim to honour or to 
eas were consequ on rich were, by an extraordinari fortune, now 
confer upon me. 

"such, for a time, were my new-born but transitori raptures. I forgot 
that thi money wa not mine. that it had been received, under everi 
sanction of fidelity, for another' use. To retain it wa equival to 
robbery. the sister of the deceas wa the right claimant; it wa my 
duti to search her out, and perform my tacit but sacr obligations, by 
put the whole into her possession. 

"thi conclus wa too advers to my wish not to be strenuous 
combated. I ask what it wa that gave man the power of ascertain 
the successor to hi property. dure hi life, he might transfer the 
actual possession; but, if vacant at hi death, he into whose hand 
accid should cast it wa the genuin proprietor. It is true, that the 
law had sometim otherwis decreed, but in law there wa no valid 
further than it wa able, by investig and punishment, to enforc 
it decrees: but would the law extort thi money from me? 

"it wa rather by gestur than by word that the will of lodi wa 
imparted. It wa the topic of remot infer and vagu conjectur 
rather than of explicit and uner declarations. besides, if the ladi 
were found, would not prudenc dictat the reserv of her fortun to 
be administ by me, for her benefit? Of thi her age and educ 
had disqualifi herself. It wa suffici for the mainten of both. 
she would regard me as her benefactor and protector. By suppli all 
her want and watch over her safeti without appriz her of the 
mean by which I shall be enabl to do this, I shall lay irresist 
claim to her love and her gratitude. 

"such were the sophistri by which reason wa seduc and my integr 
annihilated. I hasten away from my present abode. I easili trace the 
baggag of the deceas to an inn, and gain possess of it. It 
contain noth but cloth and books. I then institut the most 
dilig search after the young lady. for a time, my exert were 
fruitless. 

"meanwhile, the possessor of thi hous thought proper to embark with 
hi famili for europe. the sum which he demand for hi furniture, 
though enormous, wa precipit paid by me. hi servant were 
continu in their former stations, and in the day at which he 
relinquish the mansion, I enter on possession. 

"there wa no difficulti in persuad the world that welbeck wa a 
personag of opul and rank. My birth and previou adventur it wa 
proper to conceal. the facil with which mankind are misl in their 
estim of characters, their prone to multipli infer and 
conjectures, will not be readili conceiv by one destitut of my 
experience. My sudden appear on the stage, my state reserve, my 
splendid habitation, and my circumspect deportment, were suffici to 
entitl me to homage. the artific that were use to unveil the truth, 
and the guess that were current respect me, were adapt to gratifi 
my rule passion. 

"I did not remit my dilig to discov the retreat of mademoisel 
lodi. I found her, at length, in the famili of a kinsman of the captain 
under whose care she had come to america. her situat wa irksom and 
perilous. she had alreadi experienc the evil of be protectorless 
and indigent, and my season interfer snatch her from impend 
and less support ills. 

"I could safe unfold all that I knew of her brother' history, except 
the legaci which he had left. I ascrib the dilig with which I had 
sought her to hi death-b injunctions, and prevail upon her to 
accept from me the treatment which she would have receiv from her 
brother if he had continu to live, and if hi power to benefit had 
been equal to my own. 

"though less can be said in prais of the understand than of the 
sensibl of thi woman, she is one whom no one could refrain from 
loving, though place in situat far less favour to the 
gener of that sentiment than mine. In habit of domest and 
incess intercourse, in the perpetu contempl of featur 
anim by boundless gratitud and ineff sympathies, it could not 
be expect that either she or I should escap enchantment. 

"the poison wa too sweet not to be swallow with avid by me. too 
late I rememb that I wa alreadi enslav by inextric 
obligations. It wa easi to have hidden thi impedi from the eye of 
my companion, but here my integr refus to yield. I can, indeed, lay 
claim to littl merit on account of thi forbearance. If there had been 
no altern between deceit and the frustrat of my hopes, I should 
doubtless have dissembl the truth with as littl scrupl on thi as on 
a differ occasion; but I could not be blind to the weak of her 
with whom I had to contend. 




chapter xi. 


"meanwhil larg deduct had been made from my stock of money, and 
the remnant would be speedili consum by my present mode of life. My 
expens far exceed my previou expectations. In no long time I should 
be reduc to my ancient poverty, which the luxuri exist that I 
now enjoyed, and the regard due to my belov and helpless companion, 
would render more irksom than ever. some scheme to rescu me from thi 
fate wa indispensable; but my avers to labour, to ani pursuit the 
end of which wa mere gain, and which would requir applic and 
attention, continu undiminished. 

"I wa plung anew into deject and perplexity. from thi I wa 
somewhat reliev by a plan suggest by mr. thetford. I thought I had 
experi of hi knowledg and integrity, and the scheme that he 
propos seem liabl to no possibl of miscarriage. A ship wa to 
be purchased, suppli with a suitabl cargo, and despatch to a port 
in the west indies. loss from storm and enemi wa to be preclud by 
insurance. everi hazard wa to be enumerated, and the ship and cargo 
valu at the highest rate. should the voyag be safe performed, the 
profit would be doubl the origin expense. should the ship be taken 
or wrecked, the insur would have bound themselv to make ample, 
speedy, and certain indemnification. thetford' brother, a wari and 
experienc trader, wa to be the supercargo. 

"all my money wa laid out upon thi scheme. scarc enough wa 
reserv to suppli domest and person wants. larg debt were 
likewis incurred. our caution had, as we conceived, annihil everi 
chanc of failure. too much could not be expend on a project so 
infallible; and the vessel, ampli fit and freighted, depart on her 
voyage. 

"an interval, not devoid of suspens and anxiety, succeeded. My 
mercantil inexperi made me distrust the clear of my own 
discernment, and I could not but rememb that my utter and 
irretriev destruct wa connect with the failur of my scheme. 
time ad to my distrust and apprehensions. the time at which tide 
of the ship were to be expect elaps without afford ani 
inform of her destiny. My anxieties, however, were to be care 
hidden from the world. I had taught mankind to believ that thi project 
had been adopt more for amus than gain; and the debt which I had 
contract seem to aris from willing to adher to establish 
maxims, more than from the pressur of necessity. 

"month succeed month, and intellig wa still withheld. the note 
which I had given for one-third of the cargo, and for the premium of 
insurance, would shortli becom due. for the payment of the former, and 
the cancel of the latter, I had reli upon the expediti return 
or the demonstr loss of the vessel. neither of these event had 
taken place. 

"mi care were augment from anoth quarter. My companion' situat 
now appear to be such as, if our intercours had been sanctifi by 
wedlock, would have been regard with delight. As it was, no symptom 
were equal to be deplored. consequences, as long as they were involv 
in uncertainty, were extenu or overlooked; but now, when they becam 
appar and inevitable, were fertil of distress and upbraiding. 

"indefin fears, and a desir to monopol all the medit and 
affect of thi being, had induc me to perpetu her ignor of 
ani but her nativ language, and debar her from all intercours with the 
world. My friend were of cours inquisit respect her character, 
adventures, and particularli her relat to me. the conscious how 
much the truth redound to my dishonour made me solicit to lead 
conjectur astray. for thi purpos I did not discounten the 
conclus that wa adopt by some,--that she wa my daughter. I 
reflect that all danger surmis would be effectu preclud by 
thi belief. 

"these precaut afford me some consol in my present 
difficulties. It wa requisit to conceal the lady' condit from the 
world. If thi should be ineffectual, it would not be difficult to 
divert suspicion from my person. the secreci that I had practis would 
be justified, in the apprehens of those to whom the person 
condit of clemenza should be disclosed, by the feel of a father. 

"meanwhile, it wa an obviou expedi to remov the unhappi ladi to a 
distanc from impertin observers. A rural retreat, lone and 
sequestered, wa easili procured, and hither she consent to repair. 
thi arrang be concerted, I had leisur to reflect upon the 
evil which everi hour brought nearer, and which threaten to 
extermin me. 

"mi inquietud forbad me to sleep, and I wa accustom to rise befor 
day and seek some respit in the fields. return from one of these 
unseason rambles, I chanc to meet you. your resembl to the 
deceas lodi, in person and visage, is remarkable. when you first met 
my eye, thi similitud startl me. your subsequ appeal to my 
compass wa cloth in such term as form a power contrast with 
your dress, and prepossess me greatli in favour of your educ and 
capacity. 

"in my present hopeless condition, everi incident, howev trivial, wa 
attent considered, with a view to extract from it some mean of 
escap from my difficulties. My love for the italian girl, in spite of 
all my effort to keep it alive, had begun to languish. marriag wa 
impossible; and had now, in some degree, ceas to be desirable. We are 
apt to judg of other by ourselves. the passion I now found myself 
dispos to ascrib chiefli to fortuit circumstances; to the impuls 
of gratitude, and the exclus of competitors; and believ that your 
resembl to her brother, your age and person accomplishments, 
might, after a certain time, and in consequ of suitabl 
contriv on my part, give a new direct to her feelings. To gain 
your concurrence, I reli upon your simplicity, your gratitude, and 
your suscept to the charm of thi bewitch creature. 

"I contemplated, likewise, anoth end. mrs. wentworth is rich. A youth 
who wa onc her favourite, and design to inherit her fortunes, ha 
disappeared, for some years, from the scene. hi death is most probable, 
but of that there is no satisfactori information. the life of thi 
person, whose name is clavering, is an obstacl to some design which 
had occur to me in relat to thi woman. My purpos were crude and 
scarc formed. I need not swell the catalogu of my error by 
expati upon them. suffic it to say that the peculiar circumst 
of your introduct to me led me to reflect on the use that might 
be made of your agency, in procur thi lady' acquiesc in my 
schemes. you were to be ultim persuad to confirm her in the 
belief that her nephew wa dead. To thi consumm it wa 
indispens to lead you by slow degre and circuit paths. 
meanwhile, a profound silence, with regard to your genuin history, wa 
to be observed; and to thi forbear your consent wa obtain with 
more readi than I expected. 

"there wa an addit motiv for the treatment you receiv from me. 
My person project and care had hitherto prevent me from read 
lodi' manuscript; a slight inspection, however, wa suffici to prove 
that the work wa profound and eloquent. My ambit ha panted, with 
equal avidity, after the reput of literatur and opulence. To claim 
the authorship of thi work wa too harmless and speciou a stratagem 
not to be readili suggested. I meant to translat it into english, and 
to enlarg it by enterpris incid of my own invention. My scrupl 
to assum the merit of the origin compos might thu be removed. for 
thi end, your assist as an amanuensi would be necessary. 

"you will perceiv that all these project depend on the season 
arriv of intellig from ----. the delay of anoth week would seal 
my destruction. the silenc might aris from the founder of the ship 
and the destruct of all on board. In thi case, the insur wa not 
forfeited, but payment could not be obtain within a year. meanwhile, 
the premium and other debt must be immedi discharged, and thi wa 
beyond my power. meanwhile, I wa to live in a manner that would not 
beli my pretensions; but my coffer were empty. 

"I cannot adequ paint the anxieti with which I have been haunted. 
each hour ha ad to the burden of my existence, till, in consequ 
of the event of thi day, it ha becom altogeth insupportable. some 
hour ago, I wa summon by thetford to hi house. the messeng 
inform me that tide had been receiv of my ship. In answer to my 
eager interrogations, he could give no other inform than that she 
had been captur by the british. He wa unabl to relat particulars. 

"new of her safe return would, indeed, have been far more acceptable; 
but even thi inform wa a sourc of infinit congratulation. It 
preclud the demand of my insurers. the payment of other debt might be 
postpon for a month, and my situat be the same as befor the 
adopt of thi successless scheme. hope and joy were reinstat in my 
bosom, and I hast to thetford' counting-house. 

"he receiv me with an air of gloomi dissatisfaction. I account for 
hi sad by suppos him avers to commun inform which wa 
less favour than our wish had dictated. He confirmed, with visibl 
reluctance, the news of her capture. He had just receiv letter from 
hi brother, acquaint him with all particulars, and contain the 
offici document of thi transaction. 

"thi had no tendenc to damp my satisfaction, and I proceed to perus 
with eager the paper which he put into my hand. I had not proceed 
far, when my joyou hope vanished. two french mulatto had, after much 
solicitation, and the most solemn promis to carri with them no 
articl which the law of war decre to be contraband, obtain a 
passag in the vessel. she wa speedili encount by a privateer, by 
whom everi receptacl wa ransacked. In a chest, belong to the 
frenchmen, and which they had affirm to contain noth but their 
clothes, were found two sabres, and other accoutr of an offic of 
cavalry. under thi pretence, the vessel wa captur and condemned, and 
thi wa a caus of forfeitur which had not been provid against in 
the contract of insurance. 

"bi thi untoward event my hope were irrepar blasted. the utmost 
effort were demand to conceal my thought from my companion. the 
anguish that prey upon my heart wa endeavour to be mask by look 
of indifference. I pretend to have been previous inform by the 
messeng not onli of the capture, but of the caus that led to it, and 
forbor to expati upon my loss, or to execr the author of my 
disappointment. My mind, however, wa the theatr of discord and agony, 
and I wait with impati for an opportun to leav him. 

"for want of other topics, I ask by whom thi inform had been 
brought. He answered, that the bearer wa captain amo watson, whose 
vessel had been forfeited, at the same time, under a differ pretence. 
He ad that, my name be mention accident to watson, the 
latter had betray mark of great surprise, and been veri earnest in 
hi inquiri respect my situation. have obtain what knowledg 
thetford wa abl to communicate, the captain had departed, avow a 
former acquaint with me, and declar hi intent of pay me a 
visit. 

"these word oper on my frame like lightning. all within me wa 
tumult and terror, and I rush precipit out of the house. I went 
forward with unequ steps, and at random. some instinct led me into the 
fields, and I wa not appriz of the direct of my steps, till, 
look up, I found myself upon the shore of schuylkill. 

"thu wa I, a second time, overborn by hopeless and incur evils. 
An interv of motley feelings, of speciou artific and contempt 
imposture, had elaps sinc my meet with the stranger at wilmington. 
then my forlorn state had led me to the brink of suicide. A brief and 
feverish respit had been afford me, but now wa I transport to the 
verg of the same abyss. 

"amo watson wa the brother of the angel whom I had degrad and 
destroyed. what but fieri indign and unappeas vengeanc could 
lead him into my presence? with what heart could I listen to hi 
invectives? how could I endur to look upon the face of one whom I had 
load with such atroci and intoler injuries? 

"I wa acquaint with hi lofti of mind; hi detest of 
injustice, and the whirlwind passion that ingratitud and villani like 
mine were qualifi to awaken in hi bosom. I dread not hi violence. 
the death that he might be prompt to inflict wa no object of 
aversion. It wa poverti and disgrace, the detect of my crimes, the 
look and voic of maledict and upbraiding, from which my cowardic 
shrunk. 

"whi should I live? I must vanish from that stage which I had late 
trodden. My flight must be instant and precipitate. To be a fugit 
from exasper creditors, and from the industri reveng of watson, 
wa an easi undertaking; but whither could I fly, where I should not be 
pursu by the phantom of remorse, by the dread of hourli detection, by 
the necess of hunger and thirst? In what scene should I be exempt 
from servitud and drudgery? wa my exist embellish with 
enjoy that would justifi my hold it, encumb with hardship 
and immers in obscurity? 

"there wa no room for hesitation. To rush into the stream befor me, 
and put an end at onc to my life and the miseri insepar link 
with it, wa the onli proceed which fate had left to my choice. My 
muscl were alreadi exert for thi end, when the helpless condit 
of clemenza wa remembered. what provis could I make against the 
evil that threaten her? should I leav her utterli forlorn and 
friendless? mrs. wentworth' temper wa forgiv and compassionate. 
advers had taught her to particip and her wealth enabl her to 
reliev distress. who wa there by whom such power claim to succour 
and protect could be urg as by thi desol girl? might I not 
state her situat in a letter to thi lady, and urg irresist 
plea for the extens of her kind to thi object? 

"these thought made me suspend my steps. I determin to seek my 
habit onc more, and, have written and deposit thi letter, to 
return to the execut of my fatal purpose. I had scarc reach my 
own door, when some one approach along the pavement. the form, at 
first, wa undistinguishable, but, by coming, at length, within the 
illumin of a lamp, it wa perfectli recognised. 

"to avoid thi detest interview wa now impossible. watson approach 
and accost me. In thi conflict of tumultu feel I wa still 
abl to maintain an air of intrepidity. hi demeanour wa that of a man 
who struggl with hi rage. hi accent were hurried, and scarc 
articulate. 'I have ten word to say to you,' said he; 'lead into the 
house, and to some privat room. My busi with you will be despatch 
in a breath.' 

"I made him no answer, but led the way into my house, and to my study. 
On enter thi room, I put the light upon the table, and, turn to 
my visitant, prepar silent to hear what he had to unfold. He struck 
hi clench hand against the tabl with violence. hi motion wa of 
that tempestu kind as to overwhelm the power of utterance, and found 
it easier to vent itself in gesticul than in words. At length he 
exclaimed,-- 

"'it is well. now ha the hour, so long and so impati demand by 
my vengeance, arrived. welbeck! would that my first word could strike 
thee dead! they will so, if thou hast ani titl to the name of man. 

"'mi sister is dead; dead of anguish and a broken heart. remot from her 
friends; in a hovel; the abod of indig and misery. 

"'her husband is no more. He return after a long absence, a tediou 
navigation, and vicissitud of hardships. He flew to the bosom of hi 
love; of hi wife. she wa gone; lost to him, and to virtue. In a fit of 
desperation, he retir to hi chamber and despatch himself. thi is 
the instrument with which the deed wa performed.' 

"say this, watson took a pistol from hi pocket, and held it to my 
head. I lift not my hand to turn asid the weapon. I did not shudder 
at the spectacle, or shrink from hi approach hand. with finger 
clasp together, and eye fix upon the floor, I wait till hi furi 
wa exhausted. He continued:-- 

"'all pass in a few hours. the elop of hi daughter,--th death 
of hi son. O my father! most love and most vener of men! To see 
thee chang into a maniac! haggard and wild! deter from outrag on 
thyself and those around thee by fetter and stripes! what wa it that 
save me from a like fate? To view thi hideou ruin, and to think by 
whom it wa occasioned! yet not to becom frantic like thee, my father; 
or not destroy myself like thee, my brother! My friend!-- 

"'no. for thi hour wa I reserved; to aveng your wrong and mine in 
the blood of thi ungrat villain.' 

"'there,' continu he, produc a second pistol, and tender it to 
me,--'ther is thi defence. take we opposit side of thi table, and 
fire at the same instant.' 

"dure thi address I wa motionless. He tender the pistol, but I 
unclasp not my hand to receiv it. 

"'whi do you hesitate?' resum he. 'let the chanc between us be equal, 
or fire you first.' 

"'no,' said I, 'I am readi to die by your hand. I wish it. It will 
preclud the necess of perform the offic for myself. I have 
injur you, and merit all that your vengeanc can inflict. I know your 
natur too well to believ that my death will be perfect expiation. when 
the gust of indign is past, the remembr of your deed will onli 
add to your sum of misery; yet I do not love you well enough to wish 
that you would forbear. I desir to die, and to die by another' hand 
rather than my own.' 

"'coward!' exclaim watson, with augment vehemence, 'you know me too 
well to believ me capabl of assassination. vile subterfuge! 
contempt plea! take the pistol and defend yourself. you want not the 
power or the will; but, know that I spurn at murder, you think your 
safeti will be found in passiveness. your refus will avail you little. 
your fame, if not your life, is at my mercy. If you falter now, I will 
allow you to live, but onli till I have stab your reputation.' 

"I now fix my eye steadfastli upon him, and spoke:--'how much a 
stranger are you to the feel of welbeck! how poor a judg of hi 
cowardice! I take your pistol, and consent to your conditions.' 

"we took opposit side of the table. 'are you ready?' he cried; 'fire!' 

"both trigger were drawn at the same instant. both pistol were 
discharged. mine wa neglig raised. such is the untoward chanc 
that presid over human affairs; such is the malign destini by which 
my step have ever been pursued. the bullet whistl harmlessli by 
me,--level by an eye that never befor failed, and with so small an 
interv between us. I escaped, but my blind and random shot took place 
in hi heart. 

"there is the fruit of thi disastr meeting. the catalogu of death 
is thu completed. thou sleepest, watson! thi sister is at rest, and so 
art thou. thi vow of vengeanc are at an end. It wa not reserv for 
thee to be thi own and thi sister' avenger. welbeck' measur of 
transgress is now full, and hi own hand must execut the justic 
that is due to him." 




chapter xii. 


such wa welbeck' tale, listen to by me with an eager in which 
everi faculti wa absorbed. how advers to my dream were the incid 
that had just been related! the curtain wa lifted, and a scene of guilt 
and ignomini disclos where my rash and inexperienc youth had 
suspect noth but lofti and magnanimity. 

for a while the wondrous of thi tale kept me from contempl the 
consequ that await us. My unfledg fanci had not hitherto soar 
to thi pitch. all wa astound by it novelty, or terrif by it 
horror. the veri scene of these offenc partook, to my rustic 
apprehension, of fairi splendour and magic abruptness. My 
understand wa bemazed, and my sens were taught to distrust their 
own testimony. 

from thi muse state I wa recal by my companion, who said to me, 
in solemn accents, "mervyn! I have but two request to make. assist me 
to buri these remains, and then accompani me across the river. I have no 
power to compel your silenc on the act that you have witnessed. I have 
medit to benefit as well as to injur you; but I do not desir that 
your demeanour should conform to ani other standard than justice. you 
have promised, and to that promis I trust. 

"if you choos to fli from thi scene, to withdraw yourself from what 
you may conceiv to be a theatr of guilt or peril, the avenu are 
open; retir unmolest and in silence. If you have a manlik spirit, if 
you are grate for the benefit bestow upon you, if your discern 
enabl you to see that complianc with my request will entangl you in 
no guilt and betray you into no danger, stay, and aid me in hide these 
remain from human scrutiny. 

"watson is beyond the reach of further injury. I never intend him 
harm, though I have torn from him hi sister and friend, and have 
brought hi life to an untim close. To provid him a grave is a duti 
that I owe to the dead and to the living. I shall quickli place myself 
beyond the reach of inquisitor and judges, but would willingli rescu 
from molest or suspicion those whom I shall leav behind." 

what would have been the fruit of deliberation, if I had had the time or 
power to deliberate, I know not. My thought flow with tumult and 
rapidity. To shut thi spectacl from my view wa the first impulse; but 
to desert thi man, in a time of so much need, appear a thankless and 
dastardli deportment. To remain where I was, to conform implicitli to 
hi direction, requir no effort. some fear wa connect with hi 
presence, and with that of the dead; but, in the tremul confus of 
my present thoughts, solitud would conjur up a thousand phantoms. 

I made no prepar to depart. I did not verbal assent to hi 
proposal. He interpret my silenc into acquiescence. He wrap the 
bodi in the carpet, and then, lift one end, cast at me a look which 
indic hi expect that I would aid him in lift thi ghastli 
burden. dure thi process, the silenc wa unbroken. 

I knew not whither he intend to convey the corpse. He had talk of 
burial, but no receptacl had been provided. how far safeti might depend 
upon hi conduct in thi particular, I wa unabl to estimate. I wa in 
too heartless a mood to utter my doubts. I follow hi exampl in 
rais the corps from the floor. 

He led the way into the passag and down-stairs. have reach the 
first floor, he unbolt a door which led into the cellar. the stair 
and passag were illumin by lamp that hung from the ceil and 
were accustom to burn dure the night. now, however, we were enter 
darksom and murki recesses. 

"return," said he, in a tone of command, "and fetch the light. I will 
wait for you." 

I obeyed. As I return with the light, a suspicion stole into my mind, 
that welbeck had taken thi opportun to fly; and that, on regain 
the foot of the stairs, I should find the spot desert by all but the 
dead. My blood wa chill by thi image. the momentari resolut it 
inspir wa to follow the exampl of the fugitive, and leav the 
person whom the ensu day might conven on thi spot, to form their 
own conjectur as to the caus of thi catastrophe. 

meanwhile, I cast anxiou eye forward. welbeck wa discov in the 
same place and postur in which he had been left. lift the corps and 
it shroud in hi arms, he direct me to follow him. the vault beneath 
were lofti and spacious. He pass from one to the other till we reach 
a small and remot cell. here he cast hi burden on the ground. In the 
fall, the face of watson chanc to be disengag from it covering. it 
close eye and sunken muscl were render in a tenfold degre ghastli 
and rueful by the feebl light which the candl shed upon it. 

thi object did not escap the attent of welbeck. He lean against 
the wall, and, fold hi arms, resign himself to reverie. He gaze 
upon the counten of watson, but hi look denot hi attent to 
be elsewher employed. 

As to me, my state will not be easili described. My eye rove fear 
from one object to another. By turn it wa fix upon the murder 
person and the murderer. the narrow cell in which we stood, it 
rudely-fashion wall and arches, destitut of commun with the 
extern air, and it palpabl dark scarc penetr by the ray of a 
solitari candle, ad to the silenc which wa deep and universal, 
produc an impress on my fanci which no time will obliterate. 

perhap my imagin wa distemp by terror. the incid which I 
am go to relat may appear to have exist onli in my fancy. Be that 
as it may, I experienc all the effect which the fullest belief is 
adapt to produce. glanc vagu at the counten of watson, my 
attent wa arrest by a convuls motion in the eyelids. thi 
motion increased, till at length the eye opened, and a glance, languid 
but wild, wa thrown around. instantli they closed, and the tremul 
appear vanished. 

I start from my place and wa on the point of utter some 
involuntari exclamation. At the same moment, welbeck seem to recov 
from hi reverie. 

"how is this?" said he. "whi do we linger here? everi moment is 
precious. We cannot dig for him a grave with our hands. wait here, while 
I go in search of a spade." 

say this, he snatch the candl from my hand, and hast away. My 
eye follow the light as it gleam shift their place upon the wall 
and ceilings, and, gradual vanishing, gave place to unrespit gloom. 
thi proceed wa so unexpect and abrupt, that I had no time to 
remonstr against it. befor I retriev the power of reflection, the 
light had disappear and the footstep were no longer to be heard. 

I wa not, on ordinari occasions, destitut of equanimity; but perhap 
the imagin of man is natur abhorr of death, until tutor 
into indiffer by habit. everi circumst combin to fill me with 
shudder and panic. for a while, I wa enabl to endur my situat 
by the exert of my reason. that the lifeless remain of a human 
be are powerless to injur or benefit, I wa thoroughli persuaded. I 
summon thi belief to my aid, and wa able, if not to subdue, yet to 
curb, my fears. I listen to catch the sound of the return footstep 
of welbeck, and hope that everi new moment would termin my solitude. 

No signal of hi come wa afforded. At length it occur to me that 
welbeck had gone with no intent to return; that hi malic had 
seduc me hither to encount the consequ of hi deed. He had fled 
and bar everi door behind him. thi suspicion may well be suppos to 
overpow my courage, and to call forth desper effort for my 
deliverance. 

I extend my hand and went forward. I had been too littl attent to 
the situat and direct of these vault and passages, to go forward 
with undevi accuracy. My fear likewis tend to confus my 
percept and bewild my steps. notwithstand the danger of 
encount obstructions, I rush toward the entranc with 
precipitation. 

My temer wa quickli punished. In a moment, I wa repel by a 
jut angl of the wall, with such forc that I stagger backward and 
fell. the blow wa stunning, and, when I recov my senses, I 
perceiv that a torrent of blood wa gush from my nostrils. My 
cloth were moisten with thi unwelcom effusion, and I could not but 
reflect on the hazard which I should incur by be detect in thi 
recess, cover by these accus stains. 

thi reflect onc more set me on my feet and incit my exertions. I 
now proceed with greater wari and caution. I had lost all distinct 
notion of my way. My motion were at random. all my labour wa to shun 
obstruct and to advanc whenev the vacuiti would permit. By thi 
means, the entranc wa at length found, and, after variou efforts, I 
arrived, beyond my hopes, at the foot of the staircase. 

I ascended, but quickli encount an insuper impediment. the door 
at the stair-head wa close and barred. My utmost strength wa exert 
in vain, to break the lock or the hinges. thu were my direst 
apprehens fulfilled. welbeck had left me to sustain the charg of 
murder; to obviat suspicion the most atroci and plausibl that the 
cours of human event is capabl of producing. 

here I must remain till the morrow; till some one can be made to 
overhear my call and come to my deliverance. what effect will my 
appear produc on the spectator? terrifi by phantom and stain 
with blood, shall I not exhibit the token of a maniac as well as an 
assassin? 

the corps of watson will quickli be discovered. if, previou to thi 
disclosure, I should chang my blood-stain garment and withdraw into 
the country, shall I not be pursu by the most vehement suspicions, 
and, perhaps, hunt to my obscurest retreat by the minist of 
justice? I am innocent; but my tale, howev circumstanti or true, 
will scarc suffic for my vindication. My flight will be constru 
into a proof of incontest guilt. 

while harass by these thoughts, my attent wa attract by a faint 
gleam cast upon the bottom of the staircase. It grew stronger, hover 
for a moment in my sight, and then disappeared. that it proceed from a 
lamp or candle, born by some one along the passages, wa no unten 
opinion, but wa far less probabl than that the effulg wa 
meteorous. I confid in the latter supposition, and fortifi myself 
anew against the dread of preternatur dangers. My thought revert to 
the contempl of the hazard and suspicion which flow from my 
continu in thi spot. 

In the midst of my perturb musing, my attent wa again recal by 
an illumin like the former. instead of hover and vanishing, it 
wa permanent. No ray could be more feeble; but the tangibl obscur 
to which it succeed render it conspicu as an electr flash. 
for a while I eye it without move from my place, and in momentari 
expect of it disappearance. 

remark it stability, the proprieti of scrutin it more nearly, 
and of ascertain the sourc whenc it flowed, wa at length 
suggested. hope, as well as curiosity, wa the parent of my conduct. 
though utterli at a loss to assign the caus of thi appearance, I wa 
will to believ some connect between that caus and the mean of 
my deliverance. 

I had scarc form the resolut of descend the stair, when my 
hope wa extinguish by the recollect that the cellar had narrow and 
grate windows, through which light from the street might possibl have 
found access. A second recollect supplant thi belief, for in my 
way to thi staircas my attent would have been solicited, and my 
steps, in some degree, been guided, by light come through these 
avenues. 

have return to the bottom of the stair, I perceiv everi part of 
the long-drawn passag illuminated. I threw a glanc forward to the 
quarter whenc the ray seem to proceed, and beheld, at a consider 
distance, welbeck in the cell which I had left, turn up the earth 
with a spade. 

after a paus of astonishment, the natur of the error which I had 
commit rush upon my apprehension. I now perceiv that the dark 
had misl me to a differ staircas from that which I had origin 
descended. It wa appar that welbeck intend me no evil, but had 
realli gone in search of the instrument which he had mentioned. 

thi discoveri overwhelm me with contrit and shame, though it freed 
me from the terror of imprison and accusation. To return to the 
cell which I had left, and where welbeck wa employ in hi disastr 
office, wa the expedi which regard to my own safeti unavoid 
suggested. 

welbeck paused, at my approach, and betray a momentari constern 
at the sight of my ensanguin visage. the blood, by some inexplic 
process of nature, perhap by the counteract influenc of fear, had 
quickli ceas to flow. whether the caus of my evasion, and of my flux 
of blood, wa guessed, or whether hi attent wa withdrawn, by more 
moment objects, from my condition, he proceed in hi task in 
silence. 

A shallow bed and a slight cover of clay were provid for the 
hapless watson. welbeck' movement were hurri and tremulous. hi 
counten betoken a mind engross by a singl purpose, in some 
degre foreign to the scene befor him. An intens and fixed of 
featur were conspicuous, that led me to suspect the subvers of hi 
reason. 

have finish the task, he threw asid hi implement. He then put into 
my hand a pocket-book, say it belong to watson, and might contain 
someth servic to the living. I might make what use of it I 
thought proper. He then remount the stairs, and, place the candl on 
a tabl in the hall, open the princip door and went forth. I wa 
driven, by a sort of mechan impulse, in hi footsteps. I follow 
him becaus it wa agreeabl to him and becaus I knew not whither els 
to direct my steps. 

the street were desol and silent. the watchman' call, remot and 
faintli heard, ad to the gener solemnity. I follow my companion 
in a state of mind not easili described. I had no spirit even to inquir 
whither he wa going. It wa not till we arriv at the water' edg 
that I persuad myself to break silence. I then began to reflect on the 
degre in which hi present scheme might endang welbeck or myself. I 
had act long enough a servil and mechan part; and been guid by 
blind and foreign impulses. It wa time to lay asid my fetters, and 
demand to know whither the path tend in which I wa importun to 
walk. 

meanwhil I found myself entangl among boat and shipping. I am unabl 
to describ the spot by ani indisput tokens. I know mere that it 
wa the termin of one of the princip streets. here welbeck 
select a boat and prepar to enter it. for a moment I hesit to 
compli with hi appar invitation. I stammer out an 
interrogation:--"whi is this? whi should we cross the river? what 
servic can I do for you? I ought to know the purpos of my voyag 
befor I enter it." 

He check himself and survey me for a minut in silence. "what do you 
fear?" said he. "have I not explain my wishes? mere cross the river 
with me, for I cannot navig a boat by myself. Is there ani thing 
arduou or mysteri in thi undertaking? we part on the jersey shore, 
and I shall leav you to your destiny. all I shall ask from you will be 
silence, and to hide from mankind what you know concern me." 

He now enter the boat and urg me to follow hi example. I 
reluctantli complied, I perceiv that the boat contain but one oar, 
and that wa a small one. He seem startl and thrown into great 
perplex by thi discovery. "it will be impossible," said he, in a 
tone of panic and vexation, "to procur anoth at thi hour: what is to 
be done?" 

thi impedi wa by no mean insuperable. I had sinewi arms, and knew 
well how to use an oar for the doubl purpos of oar and rudder. I took 
my station at the stern, and quickli extric the boat from it 
neighbour and from the wharves. I wa wholli unacquaint with the 
river. the bar by which it wa encumb I knew to exist, but in what 
direct and to what extent it existed, and how it might be avoid in 
the present state of the tide, I knew not. It wa probable, therefore, 
unknow as I wa of the proper track, that our boat would speedili 
have grounded. 

My attention, meanwhile, wa fix upon the oar. My companion sat at the 
prow, and wa in a consider degre unnoticed. I cast my eye 
occasion at the scene which I had left. it novelty, join with the 
incid of my condition, threw me into a state of suspens and wonder 
which frequent slacken my hand and left the vessel to be driven by 
the downward current. light were sparingli seen, and these were 
perpetu fluctuating, as masts, yards, and hull were interposed, and 
pass befor them. In proport as we reced from the shore, the 
clamour seem to multiply, and the suggest that the citi wa 
involv in confus and uproar did not easili give way to matur 
thoughts. _twelve_ wa the hour cried, and thi ascend at onc from 
all quarters, and wa mingl with the bay of dogs, so as to produc 
trepid and alarm. 

from thi state of magnific and aw feel I wa suddenli call 
by the conduct of welbeck. We had scarc move two hundr yard from 
the shore, when he plung into the water. the first concept wa that 
some implement or part of the boat had fallen over-board. I look back 
and perceiv that hi seat wa vacant. In my first astonish I 
loosen my hold of the oar, and it float away. the surfac wa smooth 
as glass, and the eddi occas by hi sink wa scarc visible. I 
had not time to determin whether thi wa design or accidental. it 
sudden depriv me of the power to exert myself for hi succour. I 
wildli gaze around me, in hope of see him rise. after some time my 
attent wa drawn, by the sound of agit in the water, to a 
consider distance. 

It wa too dark for ani thing to be distinctli seen. there wa no cri 
for help. the nois wa like that of one vigor struggl for a 
moment, and then sink to the bottom. I listen with pain 
eagerness, but wa unabl to distinguish a third signal. He sunk to rise 
no more. 

I wa for a time inattent to my own situation. the dread and 
unexpected of thi catastroph occupi me wholly. the quick motion 
of the light upon the shore show me that I wa born rapidli along 
with the tide. how to help myself, how to imped my cours or to regain 
either shore, sinc I had lost the oar, I wa unabl to tell. I wa no 
less at a loss to conjectur whither the current, if suffer to control 
my vehicle, would final transport me. 

the disappear of light and buildings, and the diminut of the 
noises, acquaint me that I had pass the town. It wa imposs 
longer to hesitate. the shore wa to be regain by one way only, which 
wa swimming. To ani exploit of thi kind, my strength and my skill were 
adequate. I threw away my loos gown; put the pocket-book of the 
unfortun watson in my mouth, to preserv it from be injur by 
moisture; and commit myself to the stream. 

I land in a spot incommod with mud and reeds. I sunk knee-deep into 
the former, and wa exhaust by the fatigu of extric myself. At 
length I recov firm ground, and threw myself on the turf to repair 
my wast strength, and to reflect on the measur which my futur 
welfar enjoin me to pursue. 

what condit wa ever parallel to mine? the transact of the last 
three day resembl the monstrou creation of delirium. they were 
paint with vivid hue on my memory; but so rapid and incongru were 
these transitions, that I almost deni belief to their reality. they 
exercis a bewild and stupefi influenc on my mind, from which 
the medit of an hour were scarc suffici to reliev me. 
gradual I recov the power of arrang my idea and form 
conclusions. 

welbeck wa dead. hi properti wa swallow up, and hi creditor left 
to wonder at hi disappearance. all that wa left wa the furnitur of 
hi house, to which mrs. wentworth would lay claim, in discharg of the 
unpaid rent. what now wa the destini that await the lost and 
friendless mademoisel lodi? where wa she concealed? welbeck had 
drop no intim by which I might be led to suspect the place of 
her abode. If my power, in other respects, could have contribut aught 
to her relief, my ignor of her asylum had utterli disabl me. 

but what of the murder person? He had suddenli vanish from the face 
of the earth. hi fate and the place of hi inter would probabl be 
suspect and ascertained. wa I sure to escap from the consequ of 
thi deed? watson had rel and friends. what influenc on their 
state and happi hi untim and mysteri fate would possess, it 
wa obviou to inquire. thi idea led me to the recollect of hi 
pocket-book. some paper might be there explanatori of hi situation. 

I resum my feet. I knew not where to direct my steps. I wa drop 
with wet, and shiver with the cold. I wa destitut of habit and 
friend. I had neither money nor ani valuabl thing in my possession. I 
move forward mechan and at random. where I land wa at no great 
distanc from the verg of the town. In a short time I discov the 
glimmer of a distant lamp. To thi I direct my steps, and here I 
paus to examin the content of the pocket-book. 

I found three bank-notes, each of fifti dollars, enclos in a piec of 
blank paper. besid these were three letters, appar written by hi 
wife, and date at baltimore. they were brief, but compos in a strain 
of great tenderness, and contain affect allus to their child. 
I could gather, from their date and tenor, that they were receiv 
dure hi absenc on hi recent voyage; that her condit wa 
consider necessitous, and surround by want which their prolong 
separ had increased. 

the fourth letter wa open, and seem to have been veri late written. 
It wa direct to mrs. mari watson. He inform her in it of hi 
arriv at philadelphia from st. domingo; of the loss of hi ship and 
cargo; and of hi intent to hasten home with all possibl expedition. 
He told her that all wa lost but one hundr and fifti dollars, the 
greater part of which he should bring with him, to reliev her more 
press wants. the letter wa signed, and folded, and superscribed, but 
unsealed. 

A littl consider show me in what manner it becam me, on thi 
occasion, to demean myself. I put the bank-not in the letter, and 
seal it with a wafer; a few of which were found in the pocket-book. I 
hesit some time whether I should add ani thing to the inform 
which the letter contained, by mean of a pencil which offer itself to 
my view; but I conclud to forbear. I could select no suitabl term in 
which to commun the mourn truth. I resolv to deposit thi 
letter at the post-office, where I knew letter could be left at all 
hours. 

My reflect at length revert to my own condition. what wa the fate 
reserv for me? how far my safeti might be affect by remain in the 
city, in consequ of the disappear of welbeck, and my known 
connect with the fugitive, it wa imposs to foresee. My fear 
readili suggest innumer embarrass and inconveni which 
would flow from thi source. besides, on what pretenc should I remain? 
To whom could I appli for protect or employment? all avenues, even to 
subsistence, were shut against me. the countri wa my sole asylum. here, 
in exchang for my labour, I could at least purchas food, safety, and 
repose. but, if my choic point to the country, there wa no reason 
for a moment' delay. It would be prudent to regain the fields, and be 
far from thi detest citi befor the rise of the sun. 

meanwhil I wa chill and chafe by the cloth that I wore. To chang 
them for other wa absolut necessari to my ease. the cloth which I 
wore were not my own, and were extrem unsuit to my new condition. 
My rustic and home garb wa deposit in my chamber at welbeck's. 
these thought suggest the design of return thither. I consid 
that, probably, the servant had not been alarmed. that the door wa 
unfastened, and the hous wa accessible. It would be easi to enter and 
retir without notice; and this, not without some waver and 
misgivings, I present determin to do. 

have deposit my letter at the office, I proceed to my late abode. 
I approached, and lift the latch with caution. there were no 
appear of ani one have been disturbed. I procur a light in the 
kitchen, and hie softli and with dubiou footstep to my chamber. there 
I disrobed, and resum my check shirt, and trowsers, and fustian coat. 
thi chang be accomplished, noth remain but that I should 
strike into the countri with the utmost expedition. 

In a momentari review which I took of the past, the design for which 
welbeck profess to have origin detain me in hi servic occur 
to my mind. I knew the danger of reason loos on the subject of 
property. To ani trinket or piec of furnitur in thi hous I did not 
allow myself to question the right of mrs. wentworth; a right accru 
to her in consequ of welbeck' failur in the payment of hi rent; 
but there wa one thing which I felt an irresist desire, and no 
scrupl which should forbid me, to possess, and that was, the 
manuscript to which welbeck had alluded, as have been written by the 
deceas lodi. 

I wa well instruct in latin, and knew the tuscan languag to be 
nearli akin to it. I despair not of be at some time abl to 
cultiv thi language, and believ that the possess of thi 
manuscript might essenti contribut to thi end, as well as to mani 
other equal beneficial. It wa easi to conjectur that the volum wa 
to be found among hi print books, and it wa scarc less easi to 
ascertain the truth of thi conjecture. I entered, not without tremul 
sensations, into the apart which had been the scene of the 
disastr interview between watson and welbeck. At everi step I almost 
dread to behold the spectr of the former rise befor me. 

numer and splendid volum were arrang on mahogani shelves, and 
screen by door of glass. I ran swiftli over their names, and wa at 
length so fortun as to light upon the book of which I wa in search. 
I immedi secur it, and, leav the candl extinguish on a 
tabl in the parlour, I onc more issu forth into the street. with 
light step and palpit heart I turn my face toward the country. 
My necessit condit I believ would justifi me in pass without 
payment the schuylkil bridge, and the eastern sky began to brighten 
with the dawn of morn not till I had gain the distanc of nine 
mile from the city. 

such is the tale which I propos to relat to you. such are the 
memor incid of five day of my life; from which I have gather 
more instruct than from the whole tissu of my previou existence. 
such are the particular of my knowledg respect the crime and 
misfortun of welbeck; which the insinu of wortley, and my desir 
to retain your good opinion, have induc me to unfold. 




chapter xiii. 


mervyn' paus allow hi auditor to reflect on the particular of hi 
narration, and to compar them with the fact with a knowledg of which 
their own observ had suppli them. My profess introduc me to 
the friendship of mrs. wentworth, by whom, after the disappear of 
welbeck, mani circumst respect him had been mentioned. she 
particularli dwelt upon the deport and appear of thi youth, at 
the singl interview which took place between them, and her 
represent were perfectli conform to those which mervyn had 
himself delivered. 

previous to thi interview, welbeck had insinu to her that a 
recent event had put him in possess of the truth respect the 
destini of clavering. A kinsman of hi had arriv from portugal, by 
whom thi intellig had been brought. He dexter elud her 
entreati to be furnish with minut information, or to introduc 
thi kinsman to her acquaintance. As soon as mervyn wa usher into her 
presence, she suspect him to be the person to whom welbeck had 
alluded, and thi suspicion hi convers had confirmed. she wa at a 
loss to comprehend the reason of the silenc which he so pertinaci 
maintained. 

her uneasiness, however, prompt her to renew her solicitations. On the 
day subsequ to the catastroph relat by mervyn, she sent a 
messeng to welbeck, with a request to see him. gabriel, the black 
servant, inform the messeng that hi master had gone into the 
countri for a week. At the end of the week, a messeng wa again 
despatch with the same errand. He call and knocked, but no one 
answer hi signals. He examin the entranc by the kitchen, but 
everi avenu wa closed. It appear that the hous wa wholli deserted. 

these appear natur gave birth to curios and suspicion. the 
hous wa repeatedli examined, but the solitud and silenc within 
continu the same. the creditor of welbeck were alarm by these 
appearances, and their claim to the properti remain in the hous 
were preclud by mrs. wentworth, who, as owner of the mansion, wa 
legal entitl to the furniture, in place of the rent which welbeck 
had suffer to accumulate. 

On examin the dwelling, all that wa valuabl and portable, 
particularli linen and plate, wa removed. the remaind wa distrained, 
but the tumult of pestil succeed and hinder it from be sold. 
thing were allow to continu in their former situation, and the hous 
wa care secured. We had no leisur to form conjectur on the 
caus of thi desertion. An explan wa afford us by the 
narr of thi youth. It is probabl that the servants, find their 
master' absenc continue, had pillag the hous and fled. 

meanwhile, though our curios with regard to welbeck wa appeased, it 
wa obviou to inquir by what seri of induc and event mervyn 
wa reconduct to the citi and led to the spot where I first met with 
him. We intim our wish in thi respect, and our young friend 
readili consent to take up the thread of hi stori and bring it down 
to the point that wa desired. for thi purpose, the ensu even wa 
selected. having, at an earli hour, shut ourselv up from all intrud 
and visitors, he continu as follows. 

* * * * * 

I have mention that, by sunrise, I had gain the distanc of mani 
mile from the city. My purpos wa to stop at the first farm-house, and 
seek employ as a day-labourer. the first person whom I observ wa 
a man of placid mien and plain garb. habitu benevol wa appar 
amidst the wrinkl of age. He wa travers hi buckwheat-field, and 
measuring, as it seemed, the harvest that wa now nearli ripe. 

I accost him with diffidence, and explain my wishes. He listen to 
my tale with complacency, inquir into my name and family, and into my 
qualif for the offic to which I aspired. My answer were candid 
and full. 

"why," said he, "I believ thou and I can make a bargain. We will, at 
least, tri each other for a week or two. If it doe not suit our mutual 
convenience, we can change. the morn is damp and cool, and thi plight 
doe not appear the most comfort that can be imagined. come to the 
hous and eat some breakfast." 

the behaviour of thi good man fill me with gratitud and joy. 
methought I could embrac him as a father, and entranc into hi hous 
appear like return to a long-lost and much-lov home. My desol and 
lone condit appear to be chang for patern regard and the 
tender of friendship. 

these emot were confirm and heighten by everi object that 
present itself under thi roof. the famili consist of mrs. hadwin, 
two simpl and affection girls, hi daughters, and servants. the 
manner of thi family, quiet, artless, and cordial, the occup 
allot me, the land by which the dwell wa surrounded, it pure 
airs, romant walks, and exhaustless fertility, constitut a power 
contrast to the scene which I had left behind, and were congeni with 
everi dictat of my understand and everi sentiment that glow in my 
heart. 

My youth, mental cultivation, and circumspect deportment, entitl me to 
defer and confidence. each hour confirm me in the good opinion of 
mr. hadwin, and in the affect of hi daughters. In the mind of my 
employer, the simplic of the husbandman and the devot of the 
quaker were blend with human and intelligence. the sisters, susan 
and eliza, were unacquaint with calam and vice through the medium 
of either observ or books. they were stranger to the benefit of 
an elabor education, but they were endow with curios and 
discernment, and had not suffer their slender mean of instruct to 
remain unimproved. 

the sedat of the elder form an amus contrast with the laugh 
eye and untam vivac of the younger; but they smile and they 
wept in unison. they thought and act in differ but not discord 
keys. On all moment occasions, they reason and felt alike. In 
ordinari cases, they separated, as it were, into differ tracks; but 
thi divers wa product not of jarring, but of harmony. 

A romant and untutor disposit like mine may be suppos liabl to 
strong impress from perpetu convers with person of their age and 
sex. the elder wa soon discov to have alreadi dispos of her 
affections. the younger wa free, and somewhat that is more easili 
conceiv than name stole insens upon my heart. the imag that 
haunt me at home and abroad, in her absenc and her presence, 
gradual coalesc into one shape, and gave birth to an incess train 
of latent palpit and indefin hopes. My day were littl els 
than uninterrupt reveries, and night onli call up phantom more 
vivid and equal enchanting. 

the memor incid which had late happen scarc counterpois 
my new sensat or divert my contempl from the present. My 
view were gradual led to rest upon futurity, and in that I quickli 
found caus of circumspect and dread. My present labour were light, 
and were suffici for my subsist in a singl state; but wedlock 
wa the parent of new want and of new cares. mr. hadwin' possess 
were adequ to hi own frugal maintenance, but, divid between hi 
children, would be too scanti for either. besides, thi divis could 
onli take place at hi death, and that wa an event whose speedi 
occurr wa neither desir nor probable. 

anoth obstacl wa now remembered. hadwin wa the conscienti member 
of a sect which forbad the marriag of it votari with those of a 
differ communion. I had been train in an opposit creed, and 
imagin it imposs that I should ever becom a proselyt to 
quakerism. It onli remain for me to feign conversion, or to root out 
the opinion of my friend and win her consent to a secret marriage. 
whether hypocrisi wa elig wa no subject of deliberation. If the 
possess of all that ambit can conceiv were ad to the 
transport of union with eliza hadwin, and offer as the price of 
dissimulation, it would have been instantli rejected. My extern good 
were not abund nor numerous, but the conscious of rectitud wa 
mine; and, in competit with this, the luxuri of the heart and of the 
senses, the gratif of boundless ambit and inexhaust 
wealth, were contempt and frivolous. 

the conquest of eliza' error wa easy; but to introduc discord and 
sorrow into thi famili wa an act of the utmost ingratitud and 
profligacy. It wa onli requisit for my understand clearli to 
discern, to be convinc of the insuper of thi obstacle. It wa 
manifest, therefore, that the point to which my wish tend wa place 
beyond my reach. 

To foster my passion wa to foster a diseas destruct either of my 
integr or my existence. It wa indispens to fix my thought upon 
a differ object, and to debar myself even from her intercourse. To 
ponder on theme foreign to my darl image, and to seclud myself from 
her society, at hour which had usual been spent with her, were 
difficult tasks. the latter wa the least practicable. I had to contend 
with eye which altern wonder at and upbraid me for my 
unkindness. she wa wholli unawar of the natur of her own feelings, 
and thi ignor made her less scrupul in the express of her 
sentiments. 

hitherto I had need not employ beyond myself and my companions. 
now my new motiv made me eager to discov some mean of control 
and beguil my thoughts. In thi state, the manuscript of lodi 
occur to me. In my way hither, I had resolv to make the studi of 
the languag of thi book, and the translat of it content into 
english, the busi and solac of my leisure. now thi resolut wa 
reviv with new force. 

My project wa perhap singular. the ancient languag of itali possess 
a strong affin with the modern. My knowledg of the former wa my 
onli mean of gain the latter. I had no grammar or vocabulari to 
explain how far the mean and inflect of tuscan word vari 
from the roman dialect. I wa to ponder on each sentenc and phrase; to 
select among differ conjectur the most plausible, and to ascertain 
the true by patient and repeat scrutiny. 

thi undertaking, fantast and impractic as it may seem, proved, 
upon experiment, to be within the compass of my powers. the detail of my 
progress would be curiou and instructive. what impediments, in the 
attain of a darl purpose, human ingenu and patienc are abl 
to surmount; how much may be done by strenuou and solitari efforts; how 
the mind, unassisted, may draw forth the principl of inflect and 
arrangement; may profit by remote, analogous, and latent similitudes, 
would be forcibl illustr by my example; but the theme, howev 
attractive, must, for the present, be omitted. 

My progress wa slow; but the percept of hourli improv afford 
me unspeak pleasure. have arriv near the last pages, I wa abl 
to pursue, with littl interruption, the thread of an eloqu 
narration. the triumph of a leader of outlaw over the popular 
enthusiasm of the milanes and the claim of neighbour potent wa 
about to be depicted. the _condottiero_ sforza had taken refug from hi 
enemi in a tomb, accident discov amidst the ruin of a roman 
fortress in the apennines. He had sought thi recess for the sake of 
concealment, but found in it a treasur by which he would be enabl to 
secur the waver and venal faith of that crew of ruffian that 
follow hi standard, provid he fell not into the hand of the 
enemi who were now in search of him. 

My tumultu curios wa suddenli check by the follow leav 
be glu togeth at the edges. To dissev them without injuri to 
the written space wa by no mean easy. I proceed to the task, not 
without precipitation. the edg were torn away, and the leav parted. 

It may be thought that I took up the thread where it had been broken; 
but no. the object that my eye encountered, and which the cement 
leav had so long concealed, wa beyond the power of the most 
caprici or lawless fanci to have prefigured; yet it bore a shadowi 
resembl to the imag with which my imagin wa previous 
occupied. I opened, and beheld--_a bank-note_! 

To the first transport of surprise, the conjectur succeeded, that the 
remain leaves, cement togeth in the same manner, might enclos 
similar bills. they were hastili separated, and the conjectur wa 
verified. My sensat at thi discoveri were of an inexplic kind. 
I gaze at the note in silence. I move my finger over them; held them 
in differ positions; read and reread the name of each sum, and the 
signature; ad them together, and repeat to myself--"_twenti 
thousand dollars!_ they are mine, and by such means!" 

thi sum would have redeem the fallen fortun of welbeck. the die 
lodi wa unabl to commun all the content of thi inestim 
volume. He had divid hi treasure, with a view to it greater safety, 
between thi volum and hi pocket-book. death hast upon him too 
suddenli to allow him to explain hi precautions. welbeck had place the 
book in hi collection, purpos some time to perus it; but, deter 
by anxieti which the perus would have dissipated, he rush to 
desper and suicide, from which some evanesc contingency, by 
unfold thi treasur to hi view, would have effectu rescu him. 

but wa thi event to be regretted? thi sum, like the former, would 
probabl have been expend in the same pernici prodigality. hi 
career would have continu some time longer; but hi inveter habit 
would have final conduct hi exist to the same crimin and 
ignomini close. 

but the destini of welbeck wa accomplished. the money wa placed, 
without guilt or artifice, in my possession. My fortun had been thu 
unexpectedli and wondrous propitious. how wa I to profit by her 
favour? would not thi sum enabl me to gather round me all the 
instrument of pleasure? equipage, and palace, and a multitud of 
servants; polish mirrors, splendid hangings, banquets, and flatterers, 
were equal abhorr to my tast and my principles. the accumul 
of knowledge, and the diffus of happiness, in which rich may be 
render emin instrumental, were the onli precept of duty, and the 
onli avenu to genuin felicity. 

"but what," said I, "i my titl to thi money? By retain it, shall I 
not be as culpabl as welbeck? It came into hi possession, as it came 
into mine, without a crime; but my knowledg of the true proprietor is 
equal certain, and the claim of the unfortun stranger are as valid 
as ever. indeed, if utility, and not law, be the measur of justice, her 
claim, desol and indig as she is, unfitted, by her past life, by 
the soft and the prejudic of her education, for contend with 
calamity, is incontestable. 

"a to me, health and dilig will give me, not onli the compet 
which I seek, but the power of enjoy it. If my present condit be 
unchangeable, I shall not be unhappy. My occup are salutari and 
meritorious; I am a stranger to the care as well as to the enjoy of 
riches; abund mean of knowledg are possess by me, as long as I 
have eye to gaze at man and at nature, as they are exhibit in their 
origin form or in books. the precept of my duti cannot be mistaken. 
the ladi must be sought and the money restor to her." 

certain obstacl exist to the immedi execut of thi scheme. how 
should I conduct my search? what apolog should I make for withdraw 
thu abruptly, and contrari to the term of an agreement into which I 
had late entered, from the famili and servic of my friend and 
benefactor hadwin? 

My thought were call away from pursu these inquiri by a rumour, 
which had gradual swell to formid dimensions; and which, at 
length, reach us in our quiet retreats. the city, we were told, wa 
involv in confus and panic, for a pestilenti diseas had begun 
it destruct progress. magistr and citizen were fli to the 
country. the number of the sick multipli beyond all example; even in 
the pest-affect citi of the levant. the maladi wa malign and 
unsparing. 

the usual occup and amus of life were at an end. terror had 
extermin all the sentiment of nature. wive were desert by 
husbands, and children by parents. some had shut themselv in their 
houses, and debar themselv from all commun with the rest of 
mankind. the constern of other had destroy their understanding, 
and their misguid step hurri them into the midst of the danger 
which they had previous labour to shun. men were seiz by thi 
diseas in the streets; passeng fled from them; entranc into their 
own dwell wa deni to them; they perish in the public ways. 

the chamber of diseas were deserted, and the sick left to die of 
negligence. none could be found to remov the lifeless bodies. their 
remains, suffer to decay by piecemeal, fill the air with deadli 
exhalations, and ad tenfold to the devastation. 

such wa the tale, distort and diversifi a thousand way by the 
credul and exagger of the tellers. At first I listen to the 
stori with indiffer or mirth. methought it wa confut by it own 
extravagance. the enorm and varieti of such an evil made it unworthi 
to be believed. I expect that everi new day would detect the absurd 
and fallaci of such representations. everi new day, however, ad to 
the number of wit and the consist of the tale, till, at 
length, it wa not possibl to withhold my faith. 




chapter xiv. 


thi rumour wa of a natur to absorb and suspend the whole soul. A 
certain sublim is connect with enorm danger that impart to our 
constern or our piti a tinctur of the pleasing. this, at least, 
may be experienc by those who are beyond the verg of peril. My own 
person wa expos to no hazard. I had leisur to conjur up terrif 
images, and to person the wit and suffer of thi calamity. 
thi employ wa not enjoin upon me by necessity, but wa ardent 
pursued, and must therefor have been recommend by some nameless 
charm. 

other were veri differ affected. As often as the tale wa 
embellish with new incid or enforc by new testimony, the hearer 
grew pale, hi breath wa stifl by inquietudes, hi blood wa chilled, 
and hi stomach wa bereav of it usual energies. A temporari 
indisposit wa produc in many. some were haunt by a melancholi 
border upon madness, and some, in consequ of sleepless panics, 
for which no caus could be assigned, and for which no opiat could be 
found, were attack by linger or mortal diseases. 

mr. hadwin wa superior to groundless apprehensions. hi daughters, 
however, partook in all the constern which surround them. the 
eldest had, indeed, abund reason for her terror. the youth to whom 
she wa betroth resid in the city. A year previou to this, he had 
left the hous of mr. hadwin, who wa hi uncle, and had remov to 
philadelphia in pursuit of fortune. 

He made himself clerk to a merchant, and, by some mercantil adventur 
in which he had success engaged, began to flatter himself with 
be able, in no long time, to support a family. meanwhile, a tender 
and constant correspond wa maintain between him and hi belov 
susan. thi girl wa a soft enthusiast, in whose bosom devot and love 
glow with an ardour that ha seldom been exceeded. 

the first tide of the _yellow fever_ wa heard by her with 
unspeak perturbation. wallac wa interrogated, by letter, 
respect it truth. for a time, he treat it as a vagu report. At 
length, a confess wa extort from him that there exist a 
pestilenti diseas in the city; but he ad that it wa hitherto 
confin to one quarter, distant from the place of hi abode. 

the most pathet entreati were urg by her that he would withdraw 
into the country. He declar hi resolut to compli when the street 
in which he live should becom infect and hi stay should be attend 
with real danger. He state how much hi interest depend upon the 
favour of hi present employer, who had use the most power argument 
to detain him, but declar that, when hi situat should become, in 
the least degree, perilous, he would slight everi consider of 
gratitud and interest, and fli to _malverton_. meanwhile, he promis 
to commun tide of hi safeti by everi opportunity. 

belding, mr. hadwin' next neighbour, though not uninfect by the 
gener panic, persist to visit the citi daili with hi _market-cart_. 
He set out by sunrise, and usual return by noon. By him a letter wa 
punctual receiv by susan. As the hour of belding' return 
approached, her impati and anxieti increased. the daili epistl wa 
receiv and read, in a transport of eagerness. for a while her emot 
subsided, but return with augment vehem at noon on the ensu 
day. 

these agit were too vehement for a feebl constitut like hers. 
she renew her supplic to wallac to quit the city. He repeat 
hi assert of being, hitherto, secure, and hi promis of come 
when the danger should be imminent. when beld returned, and, instead 
of be accompani by wallace, mere brought a letter from him, the 
unhappi susan would sink into fit of lament and weeping, and repel 
everi effort to consol her with an obstinaci that partook of madness. 
It was, at length, manifest that wallace' delay would be fatal 
injuri to the health of hi mistress. 

mr. hadwin had hitherto been passive. He conceiv that the entreati 
and remonstr of hi daughter were more like to influenc the 
conduct of wallac than ani represent which he could make. now, 
however, he wrote the contumaci wallac a letter, in which he laid 
hi command upon him to return in compani with belding, and declar 
that by a longer delay the youth would forfeit hi favour. 

the maladi had, at thi time, made consider progress. belding' 
interest at length yield to hi fears, and thi wa the last journey 
which he propos to make. henc our impati for the return of 
wallac wa augmented; since, if thi opportun were lost, no suitabl 
convey might again be offer him. 

beld set out, as usual, at the dawn of day. the customari interv 
between hi departur and return wa spent by susan in a tumult of hope 
and fears. As noon approached, her suspens aros to a pitch of wild 
and agony. she could scarc be restrain from run along the road, 
mani miles, toward the city; that she might, by meet beld 
half-way, the sooner ascertain the fate of her lover. she station 
herself at a window which overlook the road along which beld wa to 
pass. 

her sister and her father, though less impatient, marked, with pain 
eagerness, the first sound of the approach vehicle. they snatch a 
look at it as soon as it appear in sight. beld wa without a 
companion. 

thi confirm of her fear overwhelm the unhappi susan. she sunk 
into a fit, from which, for a long time, her recoveri wa hopeless. thi 
wa succeed by paroxysm of a furiou insanity, in which she 
attempt to snatch ani point implement which lay within her reach, 
with a view to destroy herself. these be care removed, or 
forcibl wrest from her, she resign herself to sob and 
exclamations. 

have interrog belding, he inform us that he occupi hi usual 
post in the market-place; that heretofor wallac had duli sought him 
out, and exchang letters; but that, on thi morning, the young man had 
not made hi appearance, though beld had been induced, by hi wish to 
see him, to prolong hi stay in the citi much beyond the usual period. 

that some other caus than sick had occas thi omiss wa 
bare possible. there wa scarc room for the most sanguin temper to 
indulg a hope. wallac wa without kindred, and probabl without 
friends, in the city. the merchant in whose servic he had place 
himself wa connect with him by no consider but that of 
interest. what then must be hi situat when seiz with a maladi 
which all believ to be contagious, and the fear of which wa abl to 
dissolv the strongest tie that bind human be together? 

I wa person a stranger to thi youth. I had seen hi letters, and 
they bespoke, not inde ani great refin or elev of 
intelligence, but a frank and gener spirit, to which I could not 
refus my esteem; but hi chief claim to my affect consist in hi 
consanguin to mr. hadwin, and hi place in the affect of susan. 
hi welfar wa essenti to the happi of those whose happi had 
becom essenti to mine. I wit the outrag of despair in the 
daughter, and the symptom of a deep but less violent grief in the 
sister and parent. wa it not possibl for me to allevi their pangs? 
could not the fate of wallac be ascertained? 

thi diseas assail men with differ degre of malignity. In it 
worst form perhap it wa incurable; but, in some of it modes, it wa 
doubtless conquer by the skill of physician and the fidel of 
nurses. In it least formid symptoms, neglig and solitud would 
render it fatal. 

wallac might, perhaps, experi thi pest in it most lenient 
degree; but the desert of all mankind, the want not onli of medicin 
but of food, would irrevoc seal hi doom. My imagin wa 
incessantli pursu by the imag of thi youth, perish alone, and in 
obscurity; call on the name of distant friends, or invoking, 
ineffectually, the succour of those who were near. 

hitherto distress had been contempl at a distance, and through the 
medium of a fanci delight to be startl by the wonderful, or 
transport by sublimity. now the calam had enter my own doors, 
imaginari evil were supplant by real, and my heart wa the seat of 
commiser and horror. 

I found myself unfit for recreat or employment. I shroud myself in 
the gloom of the neighbour forest, or lost myself in the maze of 
rock and dells. I endeavoured, in vain, to shut out the phantom of the 
die wallace, and to forget the spectacl of domest woes. At length 
it occur to me to ask, may not thi evil be obviated, and the 
felic of the hadwin re-established? wallac is friendless and 
succourless; but cannot I suppli to him the place of protector and 
nurse? whi not hasten to the city, search out hi abode, and ascertain 
whether he be live or dead? If he still retain life, may I not, by 
consol and attendance, contribut to the restor of hi health, 
and conduct him onc more to the bosom of hi family? 

with what transport will hi arriv be hailed! how ampli will their 
impati and their sorrow be compens by hi return! In the 
spectacl of their joys, how raptur and pure will be my delight! Do 
the benefit which I have receiv from the hadwin demand a less 
retribut than this? 

It is true that my own life will be endangered; but my danger will be 
proport to the durat of my stay in thi seat of infection. the 
death or the flight of wallac may absolv me from the necess of 
spend one night in the city. the rustic who daili frequent the 
market are, as experi proves, exempt from thi disease; in 
consequence, perhaps, of limit their continu in the citi to a few 
hours. may I not, in thi respect, conform to their example, and enjoy 
a similar exemption? 

My stay, however, may be longer than the day. I may be condemn to 
share in the common destiny. what then? life is depend on a thousand 
contingencies, not to be comput or foreseen. the seed of an earli and 
linger death are sown in my constitution. It is in vain to hope to 
escap the maladi by which my mother and my brother have died. We are a 
race whose exist some inher properti ha limit to the short 
space of twenti years. We are exposed, in common with the rest of 
mankind, to innumer casualties; but, if these be shunned, we are 
unalter fate to perish by _consumption_. whi then should I scrupl 
to lay down my life in the caus of virtu and humanity? It is better to 
die in the conscious of have offer an heroic sacrifice, to die 
by a speedi stroke, than by the pervers of nature, in ignomini 
inact and linger agonies. 

these consider determin me to hasten to the city. To mention my 
purpos to the hadwin would be useless or pernicious. It would onli 
augment the sum of their present anxieties. I should meet with a 
thousand obstacl in the tender and terror of eliza, and in the 
prudent affect of her father. their argument I should be condemn 
to hear, but should not be abl to confute; and should onli load myself 
with imput of pervers and temerity. 

but how els should I explain my absence? I had hitherto preserv my 
lip untaint by prevar or falsehood. perhap there wa no 
occas which would justifi an untruth; but here, at least, it wa 
superflu or hurtful. My disappearance, if effect without notic or 
warning, will give birth to specul and conjecture; but my true 
motiv will never be suspected, and therefor will excit no fears. My 
conduct will not be charg with guilt. It will mere be thought upon 
with some regret, which will be allevi by the opinion of my safety, 
and the daili expect of my return. 

but, sinc my purpos wa to search out wallace, I must be previous 
furnish with direct to the place of hi abode, and a descript 
of hi person. satisfact on thi head wa easili obtain from mr. 
hadwin; who wa prevent from suspect the motiv of my curiosity, 
by my question be put in a manner appar casual. He mention 
the street, and the number of the house. 

I listen with surprise. It wa a hous with which I wa alreadi 
familiar. He resided, it seems, with a merchant. wa it possibl for me 
to be mistaken? 

what, I asked, wa the merchant' name? 

_thetford._ 

thi wa a confirm of my first conjecture. I recollect the 
extraordinari mean by which I had gain access to the hous and 
bedchamb of thi gentleman. I recal the person and appear of 
the youth by whose artific I had been entangl in the snare. these 
artific impli some domest or confidenti connect between 
thetford and my guide. wallac wa a member of the family. could it be 
he by whom I wa betrayed? 

suitabl question easili obtain from hadwin a descript of the 
person and carriag of hi nephew. everi circumst evinc the 
ident of their persons. wallace, then, wa the engag and sprightli 
youth whom I had encount at lesher's; and who, for purpos not 
hitherto discoverable, had led me into a situat so romant and 
perilous. 

I wa far from suspect that these purpos were criminal. It wa easi 
to infer that hi conduct proceed from juvenil wanton and a love 
of sport. My resolut wa unalt by thi disclosure; and, have 
obtain all the inform which I needed, I secretli began my 
journey. 

My reflections, on the way, were suffici employ in trace the 
consequ of my project; in comput the inconveni and danger 
to which I wa prepar to subject myself; in fortifi my courag 
against the influenc of rueful sight and abrupt transitions; and in 
imagin the measur which it would be proper to pursu in everi 
emergency. 

connect as these view were with the famili and charact of 
thetford, I could not but sometim advert to those incid which 
formerli happened. the mercantil allianc between him and welbeck wa 
remembered; the allus which were made to the condit of the latter 
in the chamber-convers of which I wa an unsuspect auditor; and 
the relat which these allus might possess with subsequ 
occurrences. welbeck' properti wa forfeited. It had been confid to 
the care of thetford' brother. had the caus of thi forfeitur been 
truli or thoroughli explained? might not contraband articl have been 
admit through the manag or under the conniv of the brothers? 
and might not the younger thetford be furnish with the mean of 
purchas the captur vessel and her cargo,--which, as usual, would be 
sold by auction at a fifth or tenth of it real value? 

welbeck wa not aliv to profit by the detect of thi artifice, 
admit these conclus to be just. My knowledg will be useless to 
the world; for by what motiv can I be influenc to publish the truth? 
or by whom will my singl testimoni be believed, in opposit to that 
plausibl exterior, and, perhaps, to that gener integrity, which 
thetford ha maintained? To myself it will not be unprofitable. It is a 
lesson on the principl of human nature; on the delus of 
appearances; on the pervious of fraud; and on the power with which 
natur ha invest human be over the thought and action of each 
other. 

thetford and hi fraud were dismiss from my thoughts, to give place 
to consider rel to clemenza lodi, and the money which chanc 
had thrown into my possession. time had onli confirm my purpos to 
restor these bill to the right proprietor, and heighten my 
impati to discov her retreat. I reflected, that the mean of do 
thi were more like to suggest themselv at the place to which I wa 
go than elsewhere. I might, indeed, perish befor my views, in thi 
respect, could be accomplished. against these evil I had at present no 
power to provide. while I lived, I would bear perpetu about me the 
volum and it preciou contents. If I died, a superior power must 
direct the cours of thi as of all other events. 




chapter xv. 


these medit did not enfeebl my resolution, or slacken my pace. In 
proport as I drew near the city, the token of it calamit 
condit becam more apparent. everi farm-hous wa fill with 
supernumerari tenants, fugit from home, and haunt the skirt of 
the road, eager to detain everi passeng with inquiri after news. the 
passeng were numerous; for the tide of emigr wa by no mean 
exhausted. some were on foot, bear in their counten the token 
of their recent terror, and fill with mourn reflect on the 
forlorn of their state. few had secur to themselv an asylum; 
some were without the mean of pay for victual or lodg for the 
come night; others, who were not thu destitute, yet knew not whither 
to appli for entertainment, everi hous be alreadi overstock with 
inhabitants, or bar it inhospit door at their approach. 

famili of weep mother and dismay children, attend with a few 
piec of indispens furniture, were carri in vehicl of everi 
form. the parent or husband had perished; and the price of some movable, 
or the pittanc hand forth by public charity, had been expend to 
purchas the mean of retir from thi theatr of disasters, though 
uncertain and hopeless of accommod in the neighbour districts. 

between these and the fugit whom curios had led to the road, 
dialogu frequent took place, to which I wa suffer to listen. from 
everi mouth the tale of sorrow wa repeat with new aggravations. 
pictur of their own distress, or of that of their neighbours, were 
exhibit in all the hue which imagin can annex to pestil and 
poverty. 

My preconcept of the evil now appear to have fallen short of the 
truth. the danger into which I wa rush seem more numer and 
immin than I had previous imagined. I waver not in my purpose. A 
panic crept to my heart, which more vehement exert were necessari to 
subdu or control; but I harbour not a momentari doubt that the cours 
which I had taken wa prescrib by duty. there wa no difficulti or 
reluct in proceeding. all for which my effort were demand wa to 
walk in thi path without tumult or alarm. 

variou circumst had hinder me from set out upon thi journey 
as earli as wa proper. My frequent paus to listen to the narr 
of travel contribut likewis to procrastination. the sun had 
nearli set befor I reach the precinct of the city. I pursu the 
track which I had formerli taken, and enter high street after 
nightfall. instead of equipag and a throng of passengers, the voic of 
leviti and glee, which I had formerli observed, and which the mild 
of the season would, at other times, have produced, I found noth but 
a dreari solitude. 

the market-place, and each side of thi magnific avenue, were 
illuminated, as before, by lamps; but between the verg of schuylkil 
and the heart of the citi I met not more than a dozen figures; and these 
were ghost-like, wrap in cloaks, from behind which they cast upon me 
glanc of wonder and suspicion, and, as I approached, chang their 
course, to avoid touch me. their cloth were sprinkl with vinegar, 
and their nostril defend from contagion by some power perfume. 

I cast a look upon the houses, which I recollect to have formerli 
been, at thi hour, brilliant with lights, resound with live 
voices, and throng with busi faces. now they were closed, abov and 
below; dark, and without token of be inhabited. from the upper 
window of some, a gleam sometim fell upon the pavement I wa 
traversing, and show that their tenant had not fled, but were 
seclud or disabled. 

these token were new, and awaken all my panics. death seem to 
hover over thi scene, and I dread that the float pestil had 
alreadi light on my frame. I had scarc overcom these tremors, when 
I approach a hous the door of which wa opened, and befor which 
stood a vehicle, which I present recognis to be a _hearse_. 

the driver wa seat on it. I stood still to mark hi visage, and to 
observ the cours which he propos to take. present a coffin, born 
by two men, issu from the house. the driver wa a negro; but hi 
companion were white. their featur were mark by feroci 
indiffer to danger or pity. one of them, as he assist in thrust 
the coffin into the caviti provid for it, said, "i'll be damn if I 
think the poor dog wa quit dead. It wasn't the _fever_ that ail him, 
but the sight of the girl and her mother on the floor. I wonder how they 
all got into that room. what carri them there?" 

the other surlili muttered, "their legs, to-be-sure." 

"but what should they hug togeth in one room for?" 

"to save us trouble, to-be-sure." 

"and I thank them with all my heart; but, damn it, it wasn't right to 
put him in hi coffin befor the breath wa fairli gone. I thought the 
last look he gave me told me to stay a few minutes." 

"pshaw! He could not live. the sooner dead the better for him; as well 
as for us. did you mark how he eye us when we carri away hi wife and 
daughter? I never cri in my life, sinc I wa knee-high, but curs me 
if I ever felt in better tune for the busi than just then. hey!" 
continu he, look up, and observ me stand a few pace distant, 
and listen to their discourse; "what' wanted? anybodi dead?" 

I stay not to answer or parley, but hurri forward. My joint 
trembled, and cold drop stood on my forehead. I wa asham of my own 
infirmity; and, by vigor effort of my reason, regain some degre 
of composure. the even had now advanced, and it behoov me to 
procur accommod at some of the inns. 

these were easili distinguish by their _signs_, but mani were without 
inhabitants. At length I light upon one, the hall of which wa open 
and the window lifted. after knock for some time, a young girl 
appeared, with mani mark of distress. In answer to my question, she 
answer that both her parent were sick, and that they could receiv no 
one. I inquired, in vain, for ani other tavern at which stranger might 
be accommodated. she knew of none such, and left me, on someone' 
call to her from above, in the midst of my embarrassment. after a 
moment' pause, I returned, discomfit and perplexed, to the street. 


I proceeded, in a consider degree, at random. At length I reach a 
spaciou build in fourth street, which the signpost show me to be 
an inn. I knock loudli and often at the door. At length a femal 
open the window of the second story, and, in a tone of peevishness, 
demand what I wanted. I told her that I want lodging. 

"go hunt for it somewher else," said she; "you'll find none here." I 
began to expostulate; but she shut the window with quickness, and left 
me to my own reflections. 

I began now to feel some regret at the journey I had taken. never, in 
the depth of cavern or forests, wa I equal consciou of loneliness. 
I wa surround by the habit of men; but I wa destitut of 
associ or friend. I had money, but a horse-shelter, or a morsel of 
food, could not be purchased. I came for the purpos of reliev 
others, but stood in the utmost need myself. even in health my condit 
wa helpless and forlorn; but what would becom of me should thi fatal 
maladi be contracted? To hope that an asylum would be afford to a sick 
man, which wa deni to one in health, wa unreasonable. 

the first impuls which flow from these reflect wa to hasten back 
to _malverton_; which, with suffici diligence, I might hope to regain 
befor the morn light. I could not, methought, return upon my step 
with too much speed. I wa prompt to run, as if the pest wa rush 
upon me and could be elud onli by the most precipit flight. 

thi impuls wa quickli counteract by new ideas. I thought with 
indign and shame on the imbecil of my proceeding. I call up 
the imag of susan hadwin, and of wallace. I review the motiv which 
had led me to the undertak of thi journey. time had, by no means, 
diminish their force. I had, indeed, nearli arriv at the 
accomplish of what I had intended. A few step would carri me to 
thetford' habitation. thi might be the critic moment when succour 
wa most need and would be most efficacious. 

I had previous conclud to defer go thither till the ensu 
morning; but whi should I allow myself a moment' delay? I might at 
least gain an extern view of the house, and circumst might aris 
which would absolv me from the oblig of remain an hour longer 
in the city. all for which I came might be performed; the destini of 
wallac be ascertained; and I be onc more safe within the precinct of 
_malverton_ befor the return of day. 

I immedi direct my step toward the habit of thetford. 
carriag bear the dead were frequent discovered. A few passeng 
likewis occurred, whose hasti and perturb step denot their 
particip in the common distress. the hous of which I wa in quest 
quickli appeared. light from an upper window indic that it wa still 
inhabited. 

I paus a moment to reflect in what manner it becam me to proceed. To 
ascertain the exist and condit of wallac wa the purpos of my 
journey. He had inhabit thi house; and whether he remain in it wa 
now to be known. I felt repugn to enter, sinc my safeti might, by 
entering, be unawar and uselessli endangered. most of the neighbour 
hous were appar deserted. In some there were variou token of 
peopl be within. might I not inquire, at one of these, respect 
the condit of thetford' family? yet whi should I disturb them by 
inquiri so impertin at thi unseason hour? To knock at 
thetford' door, and put my question to him who should obey the signal, 
wa the obviou method. 

I knock dubious and lightly. No one came. I knock again, and more 
loudly; I likewis drew the bell. I distinctli heard it distant peals. 
If ani were within, my signal could not fail to be noticed. I paused, 
and listened, but neither voic nor footstep could be heard. the light, 
though obscur by window-curtains, which seem to be drawn close, wa 
still perceptible. 

I rumin on the caus that might hinder my summon from be 
obeyed. I figur to myself noth but the helpless of disease, or 
the insens of death. these imag onli urg me to persist in 
endeavour to obtain admission. without weigh the consequ of 
my act, I involuntarili lift the latch. the door yield to my hand, 
and I put my feet within the passage. 

onc more I paused. the passag wa of consider extent, and at the 
end of it I perceiv light as from a lamp or candle. thi impel me 
to go forward, till I reach the foot of a staircase. A candl stood 
upon the lowest step. 

thi wa a new proof that the hous wa not deserted. I struck my heel 
against the floor with some violence; but this, like my former signals, 
wa unnoticed. have proceed thu far, it would have been absurd to 
retir with my purpos uneffected. take the candl in my hand, I 
open a door that wa near. It led into a spaciou parlour, furnish 
with profus and splendour. I walk to and fro, gaze at the object 
which present themselves; and, involv in perplexity, I knock with 
my heel louder than ever; but no less ineffectually. 

notwithstand the light which I had seen, it wa possibl that the 
hous wa uninhabited. thi I wa resolv to ascertain, by proceed 
to the chamber which I had observed, from without, to be illuminated. 
thi chamber, as far as the comparison of circumst would permit me 
to decide, I believ to be the same in which I had pass the first 
night of my late abod in the city. now wa I, a second time, in almost 
equal ignor of my situation, and of the consequ which impended, 
explor my way to the same recess. 

I mount the stair. As I approach the door of which I wa in search, 
a vapour, infecti and deadly, assail my senses. It resembl 
noth of which I had ever befor been sensible. mani odour had been 
met with, even sinc my arriv in the city, less support than this. 
I seem not so much to smell as to tast the element that now 
encompass me. I felt as if I had inhal a poison and subtl fluid, 
whose power instantli bereft my stomach of all vigour. some fatal 
influenc appear to seiz upon my vitals, and the work of corros 
and decomposit to be busili begun. 

for a moment, I doubt whether imagin had not some share in 
produc my sensation; but I had not been previous panic-struck; and 
even now I attend to my own sensat without mental discomposure. 
that I had imbib thi diseas wa not to be questioned. So far the 
chanc in my favour were annihilated. the lot of sick wa drawn. 

whether my case would be lenient or malignant, whether I should recov 
or perish, wa to be left to the decis of the future. thi incident, 
instead of appal me, tend rather to invigor my courage. the 
danger which I fear had come. I might enter with indiffer on thi 
theatr of pestilence. I might execute, without faltering, the duti 
that my circumst might create. My state wa no longer hazardous; 
and my destini would be total uninfluenc by my futur conduct. 

the pang with which I wa first seized, and the momentari inclin to 
vomit, which it produced, present subsided. My wholesom feelings, 
indeed, did not revisit me, but strength to proceed wa restor to me. 
the effluvia becam more sensibl as I approach the door of the 
chamber. the door wa ajar; and the light within wa perceived. My 
belief that those within were dead wa present confut by sound, 
which I first suppos to be that of step move quickli and timor 
across the floor. thi ceased, and wa succeed by sound of differ 
but inexplic import. 

have enter the apartment, I saw a candl on the hearth. A tabl wa 
cover with vial and other apparatu of a sick-chamber. A bed stood on 
one side, the curtain of which wa drop at the foot, so as to conceal 
ani one within. I fix my eye upon thi object. there were suffici 
token that some one lay upon the bed. breath, drawn at long intervals; 
mutter scarc audible; and a tremul motion in the bedstead, 
were fear and intellig indications. 

If my heart faltered, it must not be suppos that my trepid aros 
from ani selfish considerations. wallac only, the object of my search, 
wa present to my fancy. pervad with remembr of the hadwins; of 
the agoni which they had alreadi endured; of the despair which would 
overwhelm the unhappi susan when the death of her lover should be 
ascertained; observ of the lone condit of thi house, whenc I 
could onli infer that the sick had been deni suitabl attendance; and 
reminded, by the symptom that appeared, that thi be wa struggl 
with the agoni of death; a sick of the heart, more insupport 
than that which I had just experienced, stole upon me. 

My fanci readili depict the progress and complet of thi tragedy. 
wallac wa the first of the famili on whom the pestil had seized. 
thetford had fled from hi habitation. perhap as a father and husband, 
to shun the danger attend hi stay wa the injunct of hi duty. It 
wa questionless the conduct which selfish regard would dictate. 
wallac wa left to perish alone; or, perhaps, (which, indeed, wa a 
supposit somewhat justifi by appearances,) he had been left to the 
tendanc of mercenari wretches; by whom, at thi desper moment, he 
had been abandoned. 

I wa not mindless of the possibl that these forebodings, speciou 
as they were, might be false. the die person might be some other than 
wallace. the whisper of my hope were, indeed, faint; but they, at 
least, prompt me to snatch a look at the expir man. for thi 
purpos I advanc and thrust my head within the curtain. 




chapter xvi. 


the featur of one whom I had seen so transient as wallac may be 
imagin to be not easili recognised, especi when those featur 
were tremul and deathful. here, however, the differ were too 
conspicu to mislead me. I beheld one in whom I could recollect none 
that bore resemblance. though ghastli and livid, the trace of 
intellig and beauti were undefaced. the life of wallac wa of more 
valu to a feebl individual; but sure the be that wa stretch 
befor me, and who wa hasten to hi last breath, wa preciou to 
thousands. 

wa he not one in whose place I would willingli have died? the offer 
wa too late. hi extrem were alreadi cold. A vapour, noisom and 
contagious, hover over him. the flutter of hi puls had ceased. 
hi exist wa about to close amidst convuls and pangs. 

I withdrew my gaze from thi object, and walk to a table. I wa nearli 
unconsci of my movements. My thought were occupi with 
contempl of the train of horror and disast that pursu the 
race of man. My muse were quickli interrupt by the sight of a small 
cabinet, the hing of which were broken and the lid half raised. In the 
present state of my thoughts, I wa prone to suspect the worst. here 
were trace of pillage. some casual or mercenari attend had not onli 
contribut to hasten the death of the patient, but had rifl hi 
properti and fled. 

thi suspicion would, perhaps, have yield to matur reflections, if I 
had been suffer to reflect. A moment scarc elapsed, when some 
appear in the mirror, which hung over the table, call my 
attention. It wa a human figure. noth could be briefer than the 
glanc that I fix upon thi apparition; yet there wa room enough for 
the vagu concept to suggest itself, that the die man had start 
from hi bed and wa approach me. thi belief was, at the same 
instant, confuted, by the survey of hi form and garb. one eye, a scar 
upon hi cheek, a tawni skin, a form grotesqu misproportioned, brawni 
as hercules, and habit in livery, composed, as it were, the part of 
one view. 

To perceive, to fear, and to confront thi apparit were blend into 
one sentiment. I turn toward him with the swift of lightning; but 
my speed wa useless to my safety. A blow upon my templ wa succeed 
by an utter oblivion of thought and of feeling. I sunk upon the floor 
prostrat and senseless. 

My insens might be mistaken by observ for death, yet some part 
of thi interv wa haunt by a fear dream. I conceiv myself 
lie on the brink of a pit, whose bottom the eye could not reach. My 
hand and leg were fettered, so as to disabl me from resist two 
grim and gigant figur who stoop to lift me from the earth. their 
purpose, methought, wa to cast me into thi abyss. My terror were 
unspeakable, and I struggl with such force, that my bond snap and 
I found myself at liberty. At thi moment my sens returned, and I 
open my eyes. 

the memori of recent event was, for a time, effac by my visionari 
horrors. I wa consciou of transit from one state of be to 
another; but my imagin wa still fill with imag of danger. the 
bottomless gulf and my gigant persecutor were still dreaded. I look 
up with eagerness. besid me I discov three figures, whose charact 
or offic wa explain by a coffin of pine board which lay upon the 
floor. one stood with hammer and nail in hi hand, as readi to replac 
and fasten the lid of the coffin as soon as it burden should be 
received. 

I attempt to rise from the floor, but my head wa dizzi and my sight 
confused. perceiv me revive, one of the men assist me to regain my 
feet. the mist and confus present vanished, so as to allow me to 
stand unsupport and to move. I onc more gaze at my attendants, and 
recognis the three men whom I had met in high street, and whose 
convers I have mention that I overheard. I look again upon the 
coffin. A waver recollect of the incid that led me hither, and 
of the stun blow which I had received, occur to me. I saw into 
what error appear had misl these men, and shudder to reflect by 
what hairbreadth mean I had escap be buri alive. 

befor the men had time to interrog me, or to comment upon my 
situation, one enter the apartment, whose habit and mien tend to 
encourag me. the stranger wa character by an aspect full of 
composur and benignity, a face in which the seriou line of age were 
blend with the ruddi and smooth of youth, and a garb that 
bespok that religi profess with whose benevol doctrin the 
exampl of hadwin had render me familiar. 

On observ me on my feet, he betray mark of surpris and 
satisfaction. He address me in a tone of mildness:-- 

"young man," said he, "what is thi condition? art thou sick? If thou 
art, thou must consent to receiv the best treatment which the time 
will afford. these men will convey thee to the hospit at bush hill." 

the mention of that contagi and abhor receptacl inspir me with 
some degre of energy. "no," said I, "I am not sick; a violent blow 
reduc me to thi situation. I shall present recov strength enough 
to leav thi spot without assistance." 

He look at me with an incredul but compassion air:--"i fear thou 
dost deceiv thyself or me. the necess of go to the hospit is 
much to be regretted, but, on the whole, it is best. perhaps, indeed, 
thou hast kindr or friend who will take care of thee?" 

"no," said I; "neither kindr nor friends. I am a stranger in the city. 
I do not even know a singl being." 

"alas!" return the stranger, with a sigh, "thi state is sorrowful. 
but how camest thou hither?" continu he, look around him; "and 
whenc comest thou?" 

"I came from the country. I reach the citi a few hour ago. I wa in 
search of a friend who live in thi house." 

"thi undertak wa strang hazard and rash; but who is the friend 
thou seekest? wa it he who die in that bed, and whose corps ha just 
been removed?" 

the men now betray some impatience; and inquir of the last comer, 
whom they call mr. estwick, what they were to do. He turn to me, and 
ask if I were will to be conduct to the hospital. 

I assur him that I wa free from disease, and stood in no need of 
assistance; adding, that my feebl wa owe to a stun blow 
receiv from a ruffian on my temple. the mark of thi blow were 
conspicuous, and after some hesit he dismiss the men; who, 
lift the empti coffin on their shoulders, disappeared. 

He now invit me to descend into the parlour; "for," said he, "the air 
of thi room is deadly. I feel alreadi as if I should have reason to 
repent of have enter it." 

He now inquir into the caus of those appear which he had 
witnessed. I explain my situat as clearli and succinctli as I wa 
able. 

after pondering, in silence, on my story,--"i see how it is," said he; 
"the person whom thou sawest in the agoni of death wa a stranger. He 
wa attend by hi servant and a hire nurse. hi master' death be 
certain, the nurs wa despatch by the servant to procur a coffin. He 
probabl chose that opportun to rifl hi master' trunk, that stood 
upon the table. thi unseason entranc interrupt him; and he 
designed, by the blow which he gave thee, to secur hi retreat befor 
the arriv of a hearse. I know the man, and the apparit thou hast so 
well describ wa his. thou sayest that a friend of thine live in thi 
house: thou hast come too late to be of service. the whole famili have 
perished. not one wa suffer to escape." 

thi intellig wa fatal to my hopes. It requir some effort to 
subdu my rise emotions. compass not onli for wallace, but for 
thetford, hi father, hi wife and hi child, caus a passion 
effus of tears. I wa asham of thi useless and childlik 
sensibility; and attempt to apolog to my companion. the sympathy, 
however, had prove contagious, and the stranger turn away hi face to 
hide hi own tears. 

"nay," said he, in answer to my excuses, "there is no need to be asham 
of thi emotion. mere to have known thi family, and to have wit 
their deplor fate, is suffici to melt the most obdur heart. I 
suspect that thou wast unit to some one of thi famili by tie of 
tender like those which led the unfortun _maravegli_ hither." 

thi suggest wa attended, in relat to myself, with some degre of 
obscurity; but my curios wa somewhat excit by the name that he had 
mentioned, I inquir into the charact and situat of thi person, 
and particularli respect hi connect with thi family. 

"maravegli," answer he, "wa the lover of the eldest daughter, and 
alreadi betroth to her. the whole family, consist of helpless 
females, had place themselv under hi peculiar guardianship. mari 
walpol and her children enjoy in him a husband and a father." 

the name of walpole, to which I wa a stranger, suggest doubt which I 
hasten to communicate. "I am in search," said I, "not of a femal 
friend, though not devoid of interest in the welfar of thetford and hi 
family. My princip concern is for a youth, by name wallace." 

He look at me with surprise. "thetford! thi is not hi abode. He 
chang hi habit some week previou to the _fever_. those who 
last dwelt under thi roof were an englishwoman and seven daughters." 

thi detect of my error somewhat consol me. It wa still possibl 
that wallac wa aliv and in safety. I eagerli inquir whither 
thetford had removed, and whether he had ani knowledg of hi present 
condition. 

they had remov to no.--, in market street. concern their state he 
knew nothing. hi acquaint with thetford wa imperfect. whether he 
had left the citi or had remained, he wa wholli uninformed. 

It becam me to ascertain the truth in these respects. I wa prepar 
to offer my part thank to the person by whom I had been so highli 
benefited; since, as he now inform me, it wa by hi interposit 
that I wa hinder from be enclos aliv in a coffin. He wa 
dubiou of my true condition, and peremptorili command the follow 
of the hears to desist. A delay of twenti minutes, and some medic 
application, would, he believed, determin whether my life wa 
extinguish or suspended. At the end of thi time, happily, my sens 
were recovered. 

see my intent to depart, he inquir why, and whither I wa going. 
have heard my answer,--"thi design," resum he, "i highli indiscreet 
and rash. noth will sooner gener thi fever than fatigu and 
anxiety. thou hast scarc recov from the blow so late received. 
instead of be use to others, thi precipit will onli disabl 
thyself. instead of roam the street and inhal thi unwholesom 
air, thou hadst better betak thyself to bed and tri to obtain some 
sleep. In the morning, thou wilt be better qualifi to ascertain the 
fate of thi friend, and afford him the relief which he shall want." 

I could not but admit the reason of these remonstrances; but 
where should a chamber and bed be sought? It wa not like that a new 
attempt to procur accommod at the inn would succeed better than 
the former. 

"thi state," repli he, "i sorrowful. I have no hous to which I can 
lead thee. I divid my chamber, and even my bed, with another, and my 
landladi could not be prevail upon to admit a stranger. what thou wilt 
do, I know not. thi hous ha no one to defend it. It wa purchas and 
furnish by the last possessor; but the whole family, includ 
mistress, children, and servants, were cut off in a singl week. 
perhap no one in america can claim the property. meanwhile, plunder 
are numer and active. A hous thu total deserted, and replenish 
with valuabl furniture, will, I fear, becom their prey. to-night 
noth can be done toward render it secure, but stay in it. art 
thou will to remain here till the morrow? 

"everi bed in the hous ha probabl sustain a dead person. It would 
not be proper, therefore, to lie in ani one of them. perhap thou mayest 
find some repos upon thi carpet. It is, at least, better than the 
harder pavement and the open air." 

thi proposal, after some hesitation, I embraced. He wa prepar to 
leav me, promising, if life were spare to him, to return earli in the 
morning. My curios respect the person whose die agoni I had 
wit prompt me to detain him a few minutes. 

"ah!" said he, "this, perhaps, is the onli one of mani victim to thi 
pestil whose loss the remotest gener may have reason to 
deplore. He wa the onli descend of an illustri hous of venice. 
He ha been devot from hi childhood to the acquisit of knowledg 
and the practic of virtue. He came hither as an enlighten observer; 
and, after travers the country, convers with all the men in it 
emin for their talent or their office, and collect a fund of 
observ whose solid and justic have seldom been paralleled, he 
embarked, three month ago, for europe. 

"previous to hi departure, he form a tender connect with the 
eldest daughter of thi family. the mother and her children had recent 
arriv from england. So mani faultless women, both mental and 
person considered, it wa not my fortun to meet with before. thi 
youth well deserv to be adopt into thi family. He propos to 
return with the utmost expedit to hi nativ country, and, after the 
settlement of hi affairs, to hasten back to america and ratifi hi 
contract with fanni walpole. 

"the ship in which he embark had scarc gone twenti leagu to sea, 
befor she wa disabl by a storm, and oblig to return to port. He 
post to new york, to gain a passag in a packet shortli to sail. 
meanwhil thi maladi prevail among us. mari walpol pole wa hinder 
by her ignor of the natur of that evil which assail us, and the 
counsel of injudici friends, from take the due precaut for her 
safety. she hesit to fli till flight wa render impracticable. her 
death ad to the helpless and distract of the family. they were 
success seiz and destroy by the same pest. 

"maravegli wa appriz of their danger. He allow the packet to depart 
without him, and hasten to rescu the walpol from the peril which 
encompass them. He arriv in thi citi time enough to wit the 
inter of the last survivor. In the same hour he wa seiz himself 
by thi disease: the catastroph is known to thee. 

"I will now leav thee to thi repose. sleep is no less need to myself 
than to thee; for thi is the second night which ha pass without it." 
say this, my companion took hi leave. 

I now enjoy leisur to review my situation. I experienc no 
inclin to sleep. I lay down for a moment, but my comfortless 
sensat and restless contempl would not permit me to rest. 
befor I enter thi house, I wa torment with hunger; but my crave 
had given place to inquietud and loathing. I paced, in thought and 
anxiou mood, across the floor of the apartment. 

I muse upon the incid relat by estwick, upon the extermin 
natur of thi pestilence, and on the horror of which it wa 
productive. I compar the experi of the last hour with those 
pictur which my imagin had drawn in the retir of 
_malverton_. I wonder at the contrarieti that exist between the 
scene of the citi and the country; and fostered, with more zeal than 
ever, the resolut to avoid those seat of deprav and danger. 

concern my own destiny, however, I entertain no doubt. My new 
sensat assur me that my stomach had receiv thi corros 
poison. whether I should die or live wa easili decided. the sick 
which assidu attend and power prescript might remov 
would, by neglig and solitude, be render fatal; but from whom 
could I expect medic or friendli treatment? 

I had inde a roof over my head. I should not perish in the public way; 
but what wa my ground for hope to continu under thi roof? My 
sick be suspected, I should be drag in a cart to the hospital; 
where I should, indeed, die, but not with the consol of loneli 
and silence. dy groan were the onli music, and livid corps were 
the onli spectacle, to which I should there be introduced. 

immur in these dreari meditations, the night pass away. the light 
glanc through the window awaken in my bosom a gleam of 
cheerfulness. contrari to my expectations, my feel were not more 
distempered, notwithstand my want of sleep, than on the last evening. 
thi wa a token that my state wa far from be so desper as I 
suspected. It wa possible, I thought, that thi wa the worst 
indisposit to which I wa liable. 

meanwhile, the come of estwick wa impati expected. the sun 
arose, and the morn advanced, but he came not. I rememb that he 
talk of have reason to repent hi visit to thi house. perhap he, 
likewise, wa sick, and thi wa the caus of hi delay. thi man' 
kind had even my love. If I had known the way to hi dwelling, I 
should have hasten thither, to inquir into hi condition, and to 
perform for him everi offic that human might enjoin; but he had not 
afford me ani inform on that head. 




chapter xvii. 


It wa now incumb on me to seek the habit of thetford. To leav 
thi hous access to everi passeng appear to be imprudent. I had 
no key by which I might lock the princip door. I therefor bolt it 
on the inside, and pass through a window, the shutter of which I 
closed, though I could not fasten after me. thi led me into a spaciou 
court, at the end of which wa a brick wall, over which I leap into 
the street. thi wa the mean by which I had formerli escap from the 
same precincts. 

the streets, as I passed, were desol and silent. the largest 
comput made the number of fugit two-third of the whole people; 
yet, judg by the univers desolation, it seem as if the solitud 
were nearli absolute. that so mani of the hous were closed, I wa 
oblig to ascrib to the cessat of traffic, which made the open 
of their window useless, and the terror of infection, which made the 
inhabit seclud themselv from the observ of each other. 

I proceed to search out the hous to which estwick had direct me as 
the abod of thetford. what wa my constern when I found it to be 
the same at the door of which the convers took place of which I had 
been an auditor on the last evening! 

I recal the scene of which a rude sketch had been given by the 
_hearse-men_. If such were the fate of the master of the family, 
abound with money and friends, what could be hope for the moneyless 
and friendless wallace? the hous appear to be vacant and silent; but 
these token might deceive. there wa littl room for hope; but 
certainti wa wanting, and might, perhaps, be obtain by enter the 
house. In some of the upper room a wretch be might be immured; by 
whom the information, so earnestli desired, might be imparted, and to 
whom my presenc might bring relief, not onli from pestilence, but 
famine. for a moment, I forgot my own necessit condition, and 
reflect not that abstin had alreadi undermin my strength. 

I proceed to knock at the door. that my signal wa unnot produc 
no surprise. the door wa unlocked, and I opened. At thi moment my 
attent wa attract by the open of anoth door near me. I 
looked, and perceiv a man issu forth from a hous at a small 
distance. 

It now occur to me, that the inform which I sought might 
possibl be gain from one of thetford' neighbours. thi person wa 
aged, but seem to have lost neither cheer nor vigour. He had an 
air of intrepid and calmness. It soon appear that I wa the object 
of hi curiosity. He had, probably, mark my deport through some 
window of hi dwelling, and had come forth to make inquiri into the 
motiv of my conduct. 

He courteous salut me. "you seem," said he, "to be in search of some 
one. If I can afford you the inform you want, you will be welcom 
to it." 

encourag by thi address, I mention the name of thetford; and ad 
my fear that he had not escap the gener calamity. 

"it is true," said he. "yesterday himself, hi wife, and hi child, were 
in a hopeless condition. I saw them in the evening, and expect not to 
find them aliv thi morning. As soon as it wa light, however, I 
visit the hous again; but found it empty. I suppos they must have 
died, and been remov in the night." 

though anxiou to ascertain the destini of wallace, I wa unwil to 
put direct questions. I shuddered, while I long to know the truth. 

"why," said I, falteringly, "did he not season withdraw from the 
city? sure he had the mean of purchas an asylum in the country." 

"I can scarc tell you," he answered. "some infatu appear to 
have seiz him. No one wa more timorous; but he seem to think 
himself safe as long as he avoid contact with infect persons. He wa 
likewise, I believe, detain by a regard to hi interest. hi flight 
would not have been more injuri to hi affair than it wa to those 
of others; but gain was, in hi eyes, the suprem good. He intend 
ultim to withdraw; but hi escap to-day, gave him new courag to 
encount the peril of to-morrow. He defer hi departur from day to 
day, till it ceas to be practicable." 

"hi family," said I, "wa numerous. It consist of more than hi wife 
and children. perhap these retir in suffici season." 

"yes," said he; "hi father left the hous at an earli period. one or 
two of the servant likewis forsook him. one girl, more faith and 
heroic than the rest, resist the remonstr of her parent and 
friends, and resolv to adher to him in everi fortune. she wa anxiou 
that the famili should fli from danger, and would willingli have fled in 
their company; but while they stayed, it wa her immov resolut 
not to abandon them. 

"alas, poor girl! she knew not of what stuff the heart of thetford wa 
made. unhappily, she wa the first to becom sick. I question much 
whether her diseas wa pestilential. It was, probably, a slight 
indisposition, which, in a few days, would have vanish of itself, or 
have readili yield to suitabl treatment. 

"thetford wa transfix with terror. instead of summon a physician, 
to ascertain the natur of her symptoms, he call a negro and hi cart 
from bush hill. In vain the neighbour interced for thi unhappi 
victim. In vain she implor hi clemency, and assert the light of 
her indisposition. she besought him to allow her to send to her mother, 
who resid a few mile in the country, who would hasten to her succour, 
and reliev him and hi famili from the danger and troubl of nurs 
her. 

"the man wa lunat with apprehension. He reject her entreaties, 
though urg in a manner that would have subdu a heart of flint. the 
girl wa innocent, and amiable, and courageous, but entertain an 
unconquer dread of the hospital. find entreati ineffectual, she 
exert all her strength in opposit to the man who lift her into 
the cart. 

"find that her struggl avail nothing, she resign herself to 
despair. In go to the hospital, she believ herself led to certain 
death, and to the suffer of everi evil which the known inhuman of 
it attend could inflict. thi state of mind, ad to exposur to a 
noonday sun, in an open vehicle, moving, for a mile, over a rug 
pavement, wa suffici to destroy her. I wa not surpris to hear 
that she die the next day. 

"thi proceed wa suffici iniquitous; yet it wa not the worst 
act of thi man. the rank and educ of the young woman might be some 
apolog for negligence; but hi clerk, a youth who seem to enjoy hi 
confidence, and to be treat by hi famili on the foot of a brother 
or son, fell sick on the next night, and wa treat in the same 
manner." 

these tide struck me to the heart. A burst of indign and sorrow 
fill my eyes. I could scarc stifl my emot suffici to ask, 
"of whom, sir, do you speak? wa the name of the youth--hi 
name--was----" 

"hi name wa wallace. I see that you have some interest in hi fate. He 
wa one whom I loved. I would have given half my fortun to procur him 
accommod under some hospit roof. hi attack wa violent; but, 
still, hi recovery, if he had been suitabl attended, wa possible. 
that he should surviv remov to the hospital, and the treatment he 
must receiv when there, wa not to be hoped. 

"the conduct of thetford wa as absurd as it wa wicked. To imagin the 
diseas to be contagi wa the height of folly; to suppos himself 
secure, mere by not permit a sick man to remain under hi roof, 
wa no less stupid; but thetford' fear had subvert hi 
understanding. He did not listen to argument or supplications. hi 
attent wa incap of stray from one object. To influenc him by 
word wa equival to reason with the deaf. 

"perhap the wretch wa more to be piti than hated. the victim of hi 
implac caution could scarc have endur agoni greater than 
those which hi pusillanim inflict on himself. whatev be the 
amount of hi guilt, the retribut ha been adequate. He wit the 
death of hi wife and child, and last night wa the close of hi own 
existence. their sole attend wa a black woman; whom, by frequent 
visits, I endeavoured, with littl success, to make dilig in the 
perform of her duty." 

such, then, wa the catastroph of wallace. the end for which I 
journey hither wa accomplished. hi destini wa ascertained; and all 
that remain wa to fulfil the gloomi predict of the love but 
unhappi susan. To tell them all the truth would be needlessli to 
exasper her sorrow. time, aid by the tender and sympathi of 
friendship, may banish her despair, and reliev her from all but the 
witcheri of melancholy. 

have disengag my mind from these reflections, I explain to my 
companion, in gener terms, my reason for visit the city, and my 
curios respecting. thetford. He inquir into the particular of my 
journey, and the time of my arrival. when inform that I had come in 
the preced evening, and had pass the subsequ hour without sleep 
or food, he express astonish and compassion. 

"your undertaking," said he, "ha certainli been hazardous. there is 
poison in everi breath which you draw, but thi hazard ha been greatli 
increas by abstain from food and sleep. My advic is to hasten back 
into the country; but you must first take some repos and some victuals. 
If you pass schuylkil befor nightfall, it will be sufficient." 

I mention the difficulti of procur accommod on the road. It 
would be most prudent to set out upon my journey so as to reach 
_malverton_ at night. As to food and sleep, they were not to be 
purchas in thi city. 

"true," answer my companion, with quickness, "they are not to be 
bought; but I will furnish you with as much as you desir of both, for 
nothing. that is my abode," continu he, point to the hous which he 
had late left. "I resid with a widow ladi and her daughter, who took 
my counsel, and fled in due season. I remain to moral upon the scene, 
with onli a faith black, who make my bed, prepar my coffee, and 
bake my loaf. If I am sick, all that a physician can do, I will do for 
myself, and all that a nurs can perform, I expect to be perform by 
_austin_. 

"come with me, drink some coffee, rest a while on my mattress, and then 
fly, with my benedict on your head." 

these word were accompani by featur disembarrass and benevolent. 
My temper is aliv to social impulses, and I accept hi invitation, 
not so much becaus I wish to eat or to sleep, but becaus I felt 
reluct to part so soon with a be who possess so much fortitud 
and virtue. 

He wa surround by neat and plenty. austin ad dexter to 
submissiveness. My companion, whose name I now found to be medlicote, 
wa prone to converse, and comment on the state of the citi like one 
whose read had been extens and experi large. He combat an 
opinion which I had casual form respect the origin of thi 
epidemic, and imput it, not to infect substanc import from the 
east or west, but to a morbid constitut of the atmosphere, owe 
wholli or in part to filthi streets, airless habitations, and squalid 
persons. 

As I talk with thi man, the sens of danger wa obliterated, I felt 
confid reviv in my heart, and energi revisit my stomach. though far 
from my wont health, my sensat grew less comfortless, and I found 
myself to stand in no need of repose. 

breakfast be finished, my friend plead hi daili engag as 
reason for leav me. He counsel me to strive for some repose, but 
I wa consciou of incapac to sleep. I wa desir of escaping, as 
soon as possible, from thi taint atmosphere, and reflect whether 
ani thing remain to be done respect wallace. 

It now occur to me that thi youth must have left some cloth and 
papers, and, perhaps, books. the properti of these wa now vest in the 
hadwins. I might deem myself, without presumption, their repres 
or agent. might I not take some measur for obtain possession, or at 
least for the security, of these articles? 

the hous and it furnitur were tenantless and unprotected. It wa 
liabl to be ransack and pillag by those desper ruffian of whom 
mani were said to be hunt for spoil even at a time like this. If 
these should overlook thi dwelling, thetford' unknown successor or 
heir might appropri the whole. numberless accid might happen to 
occas the destruct or embezzl of what belong to wallace, 
which might be prevent by the conduct which I should now pursue. 

immers in these perplexities, I remain bewild and motionless. I 
wa at length rous by some one knock at the door. austin obey the 
signal, and instantli returned, lead in--mr. hadwin! 

I know not whether thi unlooked-for interview excit on my part most 
grief or surprise. the motiv of hi come wa easili divined. hi 
journey wa on two account superfluous. He whom he sought wa dead. the 
duti of ascertain hi condit I had assign to myself. 

I now perceiv and deplor the error of which I had been guilty, in 
conceal my intend journey from my patron. ignor of the part I 
had acted, he had rush into the jaw of thi pest, and endang a 
life unspeak valuabl to hi children and friends. I should 
doubtless have obtain hi grate consent to the project which I had 
conceived; but my wretch polici had led me into thi clandestin path. 
secreci may seldom be a crime. A virtuou intent may produc it; but 
sure it is alway erron and pernicious. 

My friend' astonish at the sight of me wa not inferior to my own. 
the caus which led to thi unexpect interview were mutual 
explained. To sooth the agoni of hi child, he consent to approach 
the city, and endeavour to procur intellig of wallace. when he 
left hi house, he intend to stop in the environs, and hire some 
emissary, whom an ampl reward might tempt to enter the city, and 
procur the inform which wa needed. 

No one could be prevail upon to execut so danger a service. avers 
to return without perform hi commission, he conclud to examin for 
himself. thetford' remov to thi street wa known to him; but, be 
ignor of my purpose, he had not mention thi circumst to me, 
dure our last conversation. 

I wa sensibl of the danger which hadwin had incur by enter the 
city. perhap my knowledg of the inexpress import of hi life 
to the happi of hi daughter made me aggrav hi danger. I knew 
that the longer he linger in thi taint air, the hazard wa 
increased. A moment' delay wa unnecessary. neither wallac nor myself 
were capabl of be benefit by hi presence. 

I mention the death of hi nephew as a reason for hasten hi 
departure. I urg him in the most vehement term to remount hi hors 
and to fly; I endeavour to preclud all inquiri respect myself or 
wallace; promis to follow him immediately, and answer all hi 
question at _malverton_. My importun were enforc by hi own 
fears, and, after a moment' hesitation, he rode away. 

the emot produc by thi incid were, in the present critic 
state of my frame, emin hurtful. My morbid indic suddenli 
returned. I had reason to ascrib my condit to my visit to the 
chamber of maravegli; but thi and it consequ to myself, as well 
as the journey of hadwin, were the fruit of my unhappi secrecy. 

I had alway been accustom to perform my journey on foot. this, on 
ordinari occasions, wa the prefer method, but now I ought to have 
adopt the easiest and swiftest means. If hadwin had been acquaint 
with my purpos he would not onli have approved, but would have allow 
me, the use of a horse. these reflect were render less pungent by 
the recollect that my motiv were benevolent, and that I had 
endeavour the benefit of other by mean which appear to me most 
suitable. 

meanwhile, how wa I to proceed? what hinder me from pursu the 
footstep of hadwin with all the expedit which my uneasiness, of 
brain and stomach, would allow? I conceiv that to leav ani thing 
undone, with regard to wallace, would be absurd. hi properti might be 
put under the care of my new friend. but how wa it to be distinguish 
from the properti of others? It was, probably, contain in trunks, 
which were design by some label or mark. I wa unacquaint with hi 
chamber, but, by pass from one to the other, I might final discov 
it. some token, direct my footsteps, might occur, though at present 
unforeseen. 

actuat by these considerations, I onc more enter thetford' 
habitation. I regret that I had not procur the counsel or 
attend of my new friend; but some engagements, the natur of which 
he did not explain, occas him to leav me as soon as breakfast wa 
finished. 




chapter xviii. 


I wander over thi desert mansion, in a consider degree, at 
random. effluvia of a pestilenti natur assail me from everi corner. 
In the front room of the second story, I imagin that I discov 
vestig of that catastroph which the past night had produced. the bed 
appear as if some one had recent been drag from it. the sheet 
were ting with yellow, and with that substanc which is said to be 
characterist of thi disease, the gangren or black vomit. the floor 
exhibit similar stains. 

there are mani who will regard my conduct as the last refin of 
temerity, or of heroism. nothing, indeed, more perplex me than a 
review of my own conduct. not, indeed, that death is an object alway to 
be dreaded, or that my motiv did not justifi my actions; but of all 
dangers, those alli to pestilence, by be mysteri and unseen, are 
the most formidable. To disarm them of their terror requir the 
longest familiarity. nurs and physician soonest becom intrepid or 
indifferent; but the rest of mankind recoil from the scene with 
unconquer loathing. 

I wa sustained, not by confid of safety, and a belief of exempt 
from thi malady, or by the influenc of habit, which inur us to all 
that is detest or perilous, but by a belief that thi wa as 
elig an avenu to death as ani other; and that life is a trivial 
sacrific in the caus of duty. 

I pass from one room to the other. A portmanteau, mark with the 
initi of wallace' name, at length attract my notice. from thi 
circumst I infer that thi apart had been occupi by him. 
the room wa neatli arranged, and appear as if no one had late use 
it. there were trunk and drawers. that which I have mention wa the 
onli one that bore mark of wallace' ownership. thi I lift in my 
arm with a view to remov it to medlicote' house. 

At that moment, methought I heard a footstep slowli and lingeringli 
ascend the stair. I wa disconcert at thi incident. the footstep 
had in it a ghost-lik solemn and tardiness. thi phantom vanish in 
a moment, and yield place to more humbl conjectures. A human be 
approached, whose offic and commiss were inscrutable. that we were 
stranger to each other wa easili imagined; but how would my 
appearance, in thi remot chamber, and load with another' property, 
be interpreted? did he enter the hous after me, or wa he the tenant of 
some chamber hitherto unvisited; whom my entranc had awaken from hi 
tranc and call from hi couch? 

In the confus of my mind, I still held my burden uplifted. To have 
place it on the floor, and encount thi visitant, without thi 
equivoc token about me, wa the obviou proceeding. indeed, time onli 
could decid whether these footstep tend to this, or to some other, 
apartment. 

My doubt were quickli dispelled. the door opened, and a figur glide 
in. the portmanteau drop from my arms, and my heart' blood wa 
chilled. If an apparit of the dead were possible, (and that 
possibl I could not deny,) thi wa such an apparition. A hue, 
yellowish and livid; bones, uncov with flesh; eyes, ghastly, hollow, 
woe-begone, and fix in an agoni of wonder upon me; and locks, mat 
and negligent, constitut the imag which I now beheld. My belief of 
somewhat preternatur in thi appear wa confirm by recollect 
of resembl between these featur and those of one who wa dead. In 
thi shape and visage, shadowi and death-lik as they were, the 
lineament of wallace, of him who had misl my rustic simplic on my 
first visit to thi city, and whose death I had conceiv to be 
incontest ascertained, were forcibl recognised. 

thi recognition, which at first alarm my superstition, speedili led 
to more ration inferences. wallac had been drag to the hospital. 
noth wa less to be suspect than that he would return aliv from 
that hideou receptacle, but thi wa by no mean impossible. the figur 
that stood befor me had just risen from the bed of sickness, and from 
the brink of the grave. the crisi of hi maladi had passed, and he wa 
onc more entitl to be rank among the living. 

thi event, and the consequ which my imagin connect with it, 
fill me with the liveliest joy. I thought not of hi ignor of the 
caus of my satisfaction, of the doubt to which the circumst of 
our interview would give birth, respect the integr of my purpose. 
I forgot the artific by which I had formerli been betrayed, and the 
embarrass which a meet with the victim of hi artific would 
excit in him; I thought onli of the happi which hi recoveri would 
confer upon hi uncl and hi cousins. 

I advanc toward him with an air of congratulation, and offer him my 
hand. He shrunk back, and exclaimed, in a feebl voice, "who are you? 
what busi have you here?" 

"I am the friend of wallace, if he will allow me to be so. I am a 
messeng from your uncl and cousin at _malverton_. I came to know the 
caus of your silence, and to afford you ani assist in my power." 

He continu to regard me with an air of suspicion and doubt. these I 
endeavour to remov by explain the motiv that led me hither. It 
wa with difficulti that he seem to credit my representations. when 
thoroughli convinc of the truth of my assertions, he inquir with 
great anxieti and tender concern hi relations; and express hi 
hope that they were ignor of what had befallen him. 

I could not encourag hi hopes. I regret my own precipit in 
adopt the belief of hi death. thi belief had been utter with 
confidence, and without state my reason for embrac it, to mr. 
hadwin. these tide would be born to hi daughters, and their grief 
would be exasper to a deplor and perhap to a fatal degree. 

there wa but one method of repair or elud thi mischief. 
intellig ought to be convey to them of hi recovery. but where wa 
the messeng to be found? No one' attent could be found disengag 
from hi own concerns. those who were abl or will to leav the citi 
had suffici motiv for departure, in relat to themselves. If 
vehicl or hors were procur for money, ought it not to be secur 
for the use of wallac himself, whose health requir the easiest and 
speediest convey from thi theatr of death? 

My companion wa powerless in mind as in limbs. He seem unabl to 
consult upon the mean of escap from the inconveni by which he 
wa surrounded. As soon as suffici strength wa regained, he had left 
the hospital. To repair to _malverton_ wa the measur which prudenc 
obvious dictated; but he wa hopeless of effect it. the citi wa 
close at hand; thi wa hi usual home; and hither hi totter and 
almost involuntari step conduct him. 

He listen to my represent and counsels, and acknowledg their 
propriety. He put himself under my protect and guidance, and promis 
to conform implicitli to my directions. hi strength had suffic to 
bring him thu far, but wa now utterli exhausted. the task of search 
for a carriag and hors devolv upon me. 

In effect thi purpose, I wa oblig to reli upon my own ingenu 
and diligence. wallace, though so long a resid in the city, knew not 
to whom I could apply, or by whom carriag were let to hire. My own 
reflect taught me, that thi accommod wa most like to be 
furnish by innkeepers, or that some of those might at least inform me 
of the best measur to be taken. I resolv to set out immedi on 
thi search. meanwhile, wallac wa persuad to take refug in 
medlicote' apartments; and to make, by the assist of austin, the 
necessari prepar for hi journey. 

the morn had now advanced. the ray of a sultri sun had a sicken 
and enfeebl influenc beyond ani which I had ever experienced. the 
drought of unusu durat had bereft the air and the earth of everi 
particl of moisture. the element which I breath appear to have 
stagnat into noxious and putrefaction. I wa astonish at 
observ the enorm diminut of my strength. My brow were heavy, 
my intellect benumbed, my sinew enfeebled, and my sensat 
univers unquiet. 

these prognost were easili interpreted. what I chiefli dread was, 
that they would disabl me from execut the task which I had 
undertaken. I summon up all my resolution, and cherish a disdain of 
yield to thi ignobl destiny. I reflect that the sourc of all 
energy, and even of life, is seat in thought; that noth is arduou 
to human efforts; that the extern frame will seldom languish, while 
actuat by an unconquer soul. 

I fought against my dreari feelings, which pull me to the earth. I 
quicken my pace, rais my droop eyelids, and hum a cheer and 
favourit air. for all that I accomplish dure thi day, I believ 
myself indebt to the strenuous and ardour of my resolutions. 

I went from one tavern to another. one wa deserted; in anoth the 
peopl were sick, and their attend refus to hearken to my 
inquiri or offers; at a third, their hors were engaged. I wa 
determin to prosecut my search as long as an inn or a livery-st 
remain unexamined, and my strength would permit. 

To detail the event of thi expedition, the argument and supplic 
which I use to overcom the dictat of avaric and fear, the 
fluctuat of my hope and my incess disappointments, would be 
useless. have exhaust all my expedi ineffectually, I wa 
compel to turn my weari step onc more to medlicote' lodgings. 

My medit were deepli engag by the present circumst of my 
situation. sinc the mean which were first suggest were 
impracticable, I endeavour to investig others. wallace' debil 
made it imposs for him to perform thi journey on foot; but would 
not hi strength and hi resolut suffic to carri him beyond 
schuylkill? A carriag or horse, though not to be obtain in the city, 
could, without difficulty, be procur in the country. everi farmer had 
beast for burden and draught. one of these might be hired, at no 
immoder expense, for half a day. 

thi project appear so practic and so specious, that I deepli 
regret the time and the effort which had alreadi been so fruitlessli 
expended. If my project, however, had been mischievous, to review it 
with regret wa onli to prolong and to multipli it mischiefs. I trust 
that time and strength would not be want to the execut of thi new 
design. 

On enter medlicote' house, my looks, which, in spite of my languors, 
were sprightli and confident, flatter wallac with the belief that my 
exert had succeeded. when acquaint with their failure, he sunk as 
quickli into hopelessness. My new expedi wa heard by him with no 
mark of satisfaction. It wa impossible, he said, to move from thi 
spot by hi own strength. all hi power were exhaust by hi walk from 
bush hill. 

I endeavoured, by argument and railleries, to reviv hi courage. the 
pure air of the countri would exhilar him into new life. He might 
stop at everi fifti yards, and rest upon the green sod. If overtaken by 
the night, we would procur a lodging, by address and importunity; but, 
if everi door should be shut against us, we should at least enjoy the 
shelter of some barn, and might diet wholesom upon the new-laid egg 
that we should find there. the worst treatment we could meet with wa 
better than continu in the city. 

these remonstr had some influence, and he at length consent to 
put hi abil to the test. first, however, it wa necessari to 
invigor himself by a few hours' rest. To this, though with infinit 
reluctance, I consented. 

thi interv allow him to reflect upon the past, and to inquir into 
the fate of thetford and hi family. the intellig which medlicot 
had enabl me to afford him wa heard with more satisfact than 
regret. the ingratitud and cruelti with which he had been treat 
seem to have extinguish everi sentiment but hatr and vengeance. I 
wa will to profit by thi interv to know more of thetford than I 
alreadi possessed. I inquir whi wallac had so pervers neglect 
the advic of hi uncl and cousin, and persist to brave so mani 
danger when flight wa so easy. 

"I cannot justifi my conduct," answer he. "it wa in the highest 
degre thoughtless and perverse. I wa confid and unconcern as long 
as our neighbourhood wa free from disease, and as long as I forbor ani 
commun with the sick; yet I should have withdrawn to malverton, 
mere to gratifi my friends, if thetford had not use the most power 
argument to detain me. He labour to extenu the danger. 

"'whi not stay,' said he, 'a long as I and my famili stay? Do you think 
that we would linger here, if the danger were imminent? As soon as it 
becom so, we will fly. you know that we have a country-hous prepar 
for our reception. when we go, you shall accompani us. your servic at 
thi time are indispens to my affairs. If you will not desert me, 
your salari next year shall be double; and that will enabl you to marri 
your cousin immediately. noth is more improb than that ani of us 
should be sick; but, if thi should happen to you, I plight my honour 
that you shall be care and faith attended.' 

"these assur were solemn and generous. To make susan hadwin my wife 
wa the scope of all my wish and labours. By staying, I should hasten 
thi desir event, and incur littl hazard. By going, I should 
alien the affect of thetford; by whom, it is but justic to 
acknowledge, that I had hitherto been treat with unexampl generos 
and kindness; and blast all the scheme I had form for rise into 
wealth. 

"mi resolut wa by no mean steadfast. As often as a letter from 
_malverton_ arrived, I felt myself dispos to hasten away; but thi 
inclin wa combat by new argument and new entreati of 
thetford. 

"in thi state of suspense, the girl by whom mrs. thetford' infant wa 
nurs fell sick. she wa an excel creature, and merit better 
treatment than she received. like me, she resist the persuas of 
her friends, but her motiv for remain were disinterest and 
heroic. 

"no sooner did her indisposit appear, than she wa hurri to the 
hospital. I saw that no relianc could be place upon the assur of 
thetford. everi consider gave way to hi fear of death. after the 
girl' departure, though he knew that she wa led by hi mean to 
execution, yet he consol himself by repeat and believ her 
assertions, that her diseas wa not _the fever_. 

"I wa now greatli alarm for my own safety. I wa determin to 
encount hi anger and repel hi persuasions; and to depart with the 
market-man next morning. that night, however, I wa seiz with a 
violent fever. I knew in what manner patient were treat at the 
hospital, and remov thither wa to the last degre abhorred. 

"the morn arrived, and my situat wa discovered. At the first 
intimation, thetford rush out of the house, and refus to re-ent it 
till I wa removed. I knew not my fate, till three ruffian made their 
appear at my bedside, and commun their commission. 

"I call on the name of thetford and hi wife. I entreat a moment' 
delay, till I had seen these persons, and endeavour to procur a 
respit from my sentence. they were deaf to my entreaties, and prepar 
to execut their offic by force. I wa deliri with rage and terror. 
I heap the bitterest execr on my murderer; and by turns, invok 
the compass of, and pour a torrent of reproach on, the wretch 
whom he had select for hi ministers. My struggl and outcri were 
vain. 

"I have no perfect recollect of what pass till my arriv at the 
hospital. My passion combin with my diseas to make me frantic and 
wild. In a state like mine, the slightest motion could not be endur 
without agony. what then must I have felt, scorch and dazzl by the 
sun, sustain by hard boards, and born for mile over a rug 
pavement? 

"I cannot make you comprehend the anguish of my feelings. To be 
disjoint and torn piecem by the rack wa a torment inexpress 
inferior to this. noth excit my wonder but that I did not expir 
befor the cart had move three paces. 

"I knew not how, or by whom, I wa move from thi vehicle. 
insens came at length to my relief. after a time I open my 
eyes, and slowli gain some knowledg of my situation. I lay upon a 
mattress, whose condit prove that a half-decay corps had recent 
been drag from it. the room wa large, but it wa cover with bed 
like my own. between each, there wa scarc the interv of three 
feet. each sustain a wretch, whose groan and distort bespok the 
desper of hi condition. 

"the atmospher wa load by mortal stenches. A vapour, suffoc and 
malignant, scarc allow me to breathe. No suitabl receptacl wa 
provid for the evacu produc by medicin or disease. My nearest 
neighbour wa struggl with death, and my bed, casual extended, wa 
moist with the detest matter which had flow from hi stomach. 

"you will scarc believ that, in thi scene of horrors, the sound of 
laughter should be overheard. while the upper room of thi build are 
fill with the sick and the dying, the lower apart are the scene 
of carous and mirth. the wretch who are hired, at enorm wages, 
to tend the sick and convey away the dead, neglect their duty, and 
consum the cordial which are provid for the patients, in debaucheri 
and riot. 

"A femal visage, bloat with malign and drunkenness, occasion 
look in. dy eye were cast upon her, invok the boon, perhaps, of 
a drop of cold water, or her assist to chang a postur which 
compel him to behold the ghastli writh or death _smile_ of hi 
neighbour. 

"the visit had left the banquet for a moment, onli to see who wa 
dead. If she enter the room, blink eye and reel step show 
her to be total unqualifi for minist the aid that wa needed. 
present she disappeared, and other ascend the staircase, a coffin 
wa deposit at the door, the wretch, whose heart still quivered, wa 
seiz by rude hands, and drag along the floor into the passage. 

"oh! how poor are the concept which are formed, by the fortun 
few, of the suffer to which million of their fellow-b are 
condemned. thi miseri wa more frightful, becaus it wa seen to flow 
from the deprav of the attendants. My own eye onli would make me 
credit the exist of wicked so enormous. No wonder that to die in 
garrets, and cellars, and stables, unvisit and unknown, had, by so 
many, been prefer to be brought hither. 

"A physician cast an eye upon my state. He gave some direct to the 
person who attend him. I did not comprehend them, they were never 
execut by the nurses, and, if the attempt had been made, I should 
probabl have refus to receiv what wa offered. recoveri wa equal 
beyond my expect and my wishes. the scene which wa hourli 
display befor me, the entranc of the sick, most of whom perish in 
a few hours, and their departur to the grave prepar for them, 
remind me of the fate to which I, also, wa reserved. 

"three day pass away, in which everi hour wa expect to be the 
last. that, amidst an atmospher so contagi and deadly, amidst caus 
of destruct hourli accumulating, I should yet survive, appear to me 
noth less than miraculous. that of so mani conduct to thi hous 
the onli one who pass out of it aliv should be myself almost 
surpass my belief. 

"some inexplic principl render harmless those potent enemi of 
human life. My fever subsid and vanished. My strength wa revived, and 
the first use that I made of my limb wa to bear me far from the 
contempl and suffer of those evils." 




chapter xix. 


have gratifi my curios in thi respect, wallac proceed to 
remind me of the circumst of our first interview. He had 
entertain doubt whether I wa the person whom he had met at lesher's. 
I acknowledg myself to be the same, and inquired, in my turn, into the 
motiv of hi conduct on that occasion. 

"I confess," said he, with some hesitation, "I meant onli to sport with 
your simplic and ignorance. you must not imagine, however, that my 
stratagem wa deep-laid and deliber executed. My profess at the 
tavern were sincere. I meant not to injur but to serv you. It wa not 
till I reach the head of the staircas that the mischiev 
contriv occurred. I foresaw noth at the moment, but ludicr 
mistak and embarrassment. the scheme wa execut almost at the veri 
moment it occurred. 

"after I had return to the parlour, thetford charg me with the 
deliveri of a messag in a distant quarter of the city. It wa not till 
I had perform thi commission, and had set out on my return, that I 
fulli revolv the consequ like to flow from my project. 

"that thetford and hi wife would detect you in their bedchamb wa 
unquestionable. perhaps, weari of my long delay, you would have fairli 
undress and gone to bed. the marri coupl would have made 
prepar to follow you, and, when the curtain wa undrawn, would 
discov a robust youth, fast asleep, in their place. these images, 
which had just befor excit my laughter, now produc a veri differ 
emotion. I dread some fatal catastroph from the fieri passion of 
thetford. In the first transport of hi furi he might pistol you, or, 
at least, might command you to be drag to prison. 

"I now heartili repent of my jest, and hasten home, that I might 
prevent, as far as possible, the evil effect that might flow from it. 
the acknowledg of my own agenc in thi affair would, at least, 
transfer thetford' indign to myself, to whom it wa equit due. 

"the marri coupl had retir to their chamber, and no alarm or 
confus had followed. thi wa an inexplic circumstance. I wait 
with impati till the morn should furnish a solut of the 
difficulty. the morn arrived. A strang event had, indeed, taken 
place in their bedchamber. they found an infant asleep in their bed. 
thetford had been rous twice in the night, onc by a nois in the 
closet, and afterward by a nois at the door. 

"some connect between these sound and the foundl wa natur 
suspected. In the morn the closet wa examined, and a coars pair of 
shoe wa found on the floor. the chamber door, which thetford had 
lock in the evening, wa discov to be open, as likewis a window 
in the kitchen. 

"these appear were a sourc of wonder and doubt to others, but were 
perfectli intellig to me. I rejoic that my stratagem had no more 
danger consequence, and admir the ingenu and persever with 
which you had extric yourself from so critic a state." 

thi narr wa onli the verif of my own guesses. it fact 
were quickli supplant in my thought by the disastr pictur he had 
drawn of the state of the hospital. I wa confound and shock by the 
magnitud of thi evil. the caus of it wa obvious. the wretch whom 
money could purchas were, of course, licenti and unprincipled. 
superintend and controlled, they might be use instruments; but that 
superintend could not be bought. 

what qualiti were requisit in the governor of such an institution? He 
must have zeal, diligence, and perseverance. He must act from lofti and 
pure motives. He must be mild and firm, intrepid and compliant. one 
perfectli qualifi for the offic it is desirable, but not possible, 
to find. A dispassion and honest zeal in the caus of duti and 
human may be of emin utility. Am I not endow with thi zeal? 
cannot my feebl effort obviat some portion of thi evil? 

No one ha hitherto claim thi disgust and peril situation. My 
power and discern are small, but if they be honestli exert they 
cannot fail to be somewhat beneficial. 

the impuls produc by these reflect wa to hasten to the citi 
hall, and make known my wishes. thi impuls wa control by 
recollect of my own indisposition, and of the state of wallace. To 
deliv thi youth to hi friend wa the strongest obligation. when 
thi wa discharged, I might return to the city, and acquit myself of 
more comprehens duties. 

wallac had now enjoy a few hours' rest, and wa persuad to begin 
the journey. It wa now noonday, and the sun dart insupport rays. 
wallac wa more sensibl than I of their unwholesom influence. We had 
not reach the suburbs, when hi strength wa wholli exhausted, and, 
had I not support him, he would have sunk upon the pavement. 

My limb were scarc less weak, but my resolut were much more 
strenuou than his. I made light of hi indisposition, and endeavour 
to persuad him that hi vigour would return in proport to hi 
distanc from the city. the moment we should reach a shade, a short 
respit would restor us to health and cheerfulness. 

noth could reviv hi courag or induc him to go on. To return or to 
proceed wa equal impracticable. but, should he be abl to return, 
where should he find a retreat? the danger of relaps wa imminent; hi 
own chamber at thetford' wa unoccupied. If he could regain thi house, 
might I not procur him a physician and perform for him the part of 
nurse? 

hi present situat wa critic and mournful. To remain in the 
street, expos to the malign fervour of the sun, wa not to be 
endured. To carri him in my arm exceed my strength. should I not 
claim the assist of the first passeng that appeared? 

At that moment a hors and chais pass us. the vehicl proceed at a 
quick pace. He that rode in it might afford us the succour that we 
needed. He might be persuad to deviat from hi cours and convey the 
helpless wallac to the hous we had just left. 

thi thought instantli impel me forward. feebl as I was, I even ran 
with speed, in order to overtak the vehicle. My purpos wa effect 
with the utmost difficulty. It fortun happen that the carriag 
contain but one person, who stop at my request. hi counten and 
guis wa mild and encouraging. 

"good friend," I exclaimed, "here is a young man too indispos to walk. 
I want him carri to hi lodgings. will you, for money or for charity, 
allow him a place in your chaise, and set him down where I shall 
direct?" observ token of hesitation, I continued, "you need have no 
fear to perform thi office. He is not sick, but mere feeble. I will 
not ask twenti minutes, and you may ask what reward you think proper." 

still he hesit to comply. hi business, he said, had not led him 
into the city. He mere pass along the skirt of it, whenc he 
conceiv that no danger would arise. He wa desir of help the 
unfortunate; but he could not think of risk hi own life in the caus 
of a stranger, when he had a wife and children depend on hi 
exist and exert for bread. It gave him pain to refuse, but he 
thought hi duti to himself and to other requir that he should not 
hazard hi safeti by compliance. 

thi plea wa irresistible. the mild of hi manner show that he 
might have been overpow by persuas or tempt by reward. I would 
not take advantag of hi tractability; but should have declin hi 
assistance, even if it had been spontan offered. I turn away 
from him in silence, and prepar to return to the spot where I had left 
my friend. the man prepar to resum hi way. 

In thi perplexity, the thought occur to me that, sinc thi person 
wa go into the country, he might, possibly, consent to carri wallac 
along with him. I confid greatli in the salutari influenc of rural 
airs. I believ that debil constitut the whole of hi complaint; 
that continu in the citi might occas hi relapse, or, at least, 
procrastin hi restoration. 

I onc more address myself to the traveller, and inquir in what 
direct and how far he wa going. To my unspeak satisfaction, hi 
answer inform me that hi home lay beyond mr. hadwin's, and that thi 
road carri him directli past that gentleman' door. He wa will to 
receiv wallac into hi chaise, and to leav him at hi uncle's. 

thi joyou and auspici occurr surpass my fondest hopes. I 
hurri with the pleas tide to wallace, who eagerli consent to 
enter the carriage. I thought not at the moment of myself, or how far 
the same mean of escap from my danger might be used. the stranger 
could not be anxiou on my account; and wallace' deject and weak 
may apolog for hi not solicit my company, or express hi fear 
for my safety. He wa no sooner seated, than the travel hurri away. 
I gaze after them, motionless and mute, till the carriage, turn a 
corner, pass beyond my sight. 

I had now leisur to revert to my own condition, and to rumin on that 
seri of abrupt and diversifi event that had happen dure the few 
hour which had been pass in the city: the end of my come wa thu 
speedili and satisfactorili accomplished. My hope and fear had rapidli 
fluctuated; but, respect thi young man, had now subsid into calm 
and propiti certainty. befor the declin of the sun, he would enter 
hi patern roof, and diffus ineff joy throughout that peac 
and chast asylum. 

thi contemplation, though raptur and soothing, speedili gave way to 
reflect on the conduct which my duti required, and the safe 
departur of wallac afford me liberty, to pursue. To offer myself as 
a superintend of the hospit wa still my purpose. the languor of 
my frame might termin in sickness, but thi event it wa useless to 
anticipate. the lofti site and pure air of bush hill might tend to 
dissip my languor and restor me to health. At least while I had 
power, I wa bound to exert it to the wisest purposes. I resolv to 
seek the citi hall immediately, and, for that end, cross the 
intermedi field which separ sassafra from chestnut street. 

more urgent consider had divert my attent from the money 
which I bore about me, and from the imag of the desol ladi to whom 
it belonged. My intentions, with regard to her, were the same as ever; 
but now it occur to me, with new force, that my death might preclud 
an interview between us, and that it wa prudent to dispose, in some 
use way, of the money which would otherwis be left to the sport of 
chance. 

the evil which had befallen thi citi were obviou and enormous. hunger 
and neglig had exasper the malign and facilit the 
progress of the pestilence. could thi money be more use employ 
than in allevi these evils? dure my life, I had no power over it, 
but my death would justifi me in prescrib the cours which it should 
take. 

how wa thi cours to be point out? how might I place it, so that I 
should effect my intent without relinquish the possess dure 
my life? 

these thought were supersed by a tide of new sensations. the weight 
that incommod my brow and my stomach wa suddenli increased. My brain 
wa usurp by some benumb power, and my limb refus to support me. 
My pulsat were quickened, and the preval of fever could no 
longer be doubted. 

till now, I had entertain a faint hope that my indisposit would 
vanish of itself. thi hope wa at an end. the grave wa befor me, and 
my project of curios or benevol were to sink into oblivion. I 
wa not bereav of the power of reflection. the consequ of lie 
in the road, friendless and unprotected, were sure. the first passeng 
would notic me, and hasten to summon one of those carriag which are 
busi night and day in transport it victim to the hospital. 

thi fate was, beyond all others, abhorr to my imagination. To hide 
me under some roof, where my exist would be unknown and unsuspected, 
and where I might perish unmolest and in quiet, wa my present wish. 
thetford' or medlicote' might afford me such an asylum, if it were 
possibl to reach it. 

I made the most strenuou exertions; but they could not carri me forward 
more than a hundr paces. here I rest on steps, which, on look up, 
I perceiv to belong to welbeck' house. 

thi incid wa unexpected. It led my reflect into a new train. To 
go farther, in the present condit of my frame, wa impossible. I wa 
well acquaint with thi dwelling. all it avenu were closed. whether 
it had remain unoccupi sinc my flight from it, I could not decide. 
It wa evid that, at present, it wa without inhabitants. possibl it 
might have continu in the same condit in which welbeck had left it. 
bed or sofa might be found, on which a sick man might rest, and be 
fearless of intrusion. 

thi infer wa quickli overturn by the obviou supposit that 
everi avenu wa bolt and locked. this, however, might not be the 
condit of the bath-house, in which there wa noth that requir to 
be guard with unusu precautions. I wa suffoc by inward and 
scorch by extern heat; and the relief of bath and drink 
appear inestimable. 

the valu of thi prize, in addit to my desir to avoid the 
observ of passengers, made me exert all my remnant of strength. 
repeat effort at length enabl me to mount the wall; and place me, 
as I imagined, in security. I swallow larg draught of water as soon 
as I could reach the well. 

the effect was, for a time, salutari and delicious. My fervour were 
abated, and my faculti reliev from the weight which had late 
oppress them. My present condit wa unspeak more advantag 
than the former. I did not believ that it could be improved, till, 
cast my eye vagu over the building, I happen to observ the 
shutter of a lower window partli opened. 

whether thi wa occas by design or by accid there wa no mean 
of deciding. perhaps, in the precipit of the latest possessor, thi 
window had been overlooked. perhap it had been unclos by violence, 
and afford entranc to a robber. By what mean soever it had 
happened, it undoubtedli afford ingress to me. I felt no scrupl in 
profit by thi circumstance. My purpos were not dishonest. I should 
not injur or purloin ani thing. It wa laudabl to seek a refug from 
the well-meant persecut of those who govern the city. all I sought 
wa the privileg of die alone. 

have gotten in at the window, I could not but remark that the 
furnitur and it arrang had undergon no alter in my 
absence. I move softli from one apart to another, till at length I 
enter that which had formerli been welbeck' bedchamber. 

the bed wa nake of covering. the cabinet and closet exhibit their 
fasten broken. their content were gone. whether these appear 
had been produc by midnight robbers, or by the minist of law and 
the rage of the creditor of welbeck, wa a topic of fruitless 
conjecture. 

My design wa now effected. thi chamber should be the scene of my 
diseas and my refug from the charit cruelti of my neighbours. My 
new sensat conjur up the hope that my indisposit might prove a 
temporari evil. instead of pestilenti or malign fever, it might be 
a harmless intermittent. time would ascertain it true nature; 
meanwhile, I would turn the carpet into a coverlet, suppli my pitcher 
with water, and administ without sparing, and without fear, that 
remedi which wa place within my reach. 




chapter xx. 


I laid myself on the bed and wrap my limb in the fold of the 
carpet. My thought were restless and perturbed. I wa onc more busi in 
reflect on the conduct which I ought to pursu with regard to the 
bank-bills. I weighed, with scrupul attention, everi circumst 
that might influenc my decision. I could not conceiv ani more 
benefici applic of thi properti than to the servic of the 
indigent, at thi season of multipli distress; but I consid that, 
if my death were unknown, the hous would not be open or examin till 
the pestil had ceased, and the benefit of thi applic would 
thu be partli or wholli precluded. 

thi season of disease, however, would give place to a season of 
scarcity. the number and want of the poor, dure the ensu winter, 
would be deplor aggravated. what multitud might be rescu from 
famin and naked by the judici applic of thi sum! 

but how should I secur thi application? To enclos the bill in a 
letter, direct to some emin citizen or public officer, wa the 
obviou proceeding. both of these condit were fulfil in the 
person of the present chief-magistrate. To him, therefore, the packet 
wa to be sent. 

paper and the implement of write were necessari for thi end. would 
they be found, I asked, in the upper room? If that apartment, like the 
rest which I had seen, and it furniture, had remain untouched, my 
task would be practicable; but, if the mean of write were not to be 
immedi procured, my purpose, moment and dear as it was, must be 
relinquished. 

the truth, in thi respect, wa easili and ought immedi to be 
ascertained. I rose from the bed which I had late taken, and proceed 
to the _study_. the entri and staircas were illumin by a pretti 
strong twilight. the rooms, in consequ of everi ray be exclud 
by the close shutters, were nearli as dark as if it had been midnight. 
the room into which I had alreadi pass were locked, but it key wa 
in each lock. I flatter myself that the entranc into the _study_ 
would be found in the same condition. the door wa shut, but no key wa 
to be seen. My hope were consider damp by thi appearance, but I 
conceiv it to be still possibl to enter, since, by chanc or by 
design, the door might be unlocked. 

My finger touch the lock, when a sound wa heard as if a bolt, 
append to the door on the inside, had been drawn. I wa startl by 
thi incident. It betoken that the room wa alreadi occupi by some 
other, who desir to exclud a visitor. the unbar shutter below wa 
remembered, and associ itself with thi circumstance. that thi 
hous should be enter by the same avenue, at the same time, and thi 
room should be sought, by two persons, wa a mysteri concurrence. 

I began to question whether I had heard distinctly. numberless 
inexplic nois are apt to assail the ear in an empti dwelling. the 
veri echo of our step are unwont and new. this, perhaps, wa some 
such sound. resum courage, I onc more appli to the lock. the door, 
in spite of my repeat efforts, would not open. 

My design wa too moment to be readili relinquished. My curios and 
my fear likewis were awakened. the mark of violence, which I had seen 
on the closet and cabinet below, seem to indic the presenc of 
plunderers. here wa one who labour for seclus and concealment. 

the pillag wa not made upon my property. My weak would disabl me 
from encount or master a man of violence. To solicit admiss 
into thi room would be useless. To attempt to forc my way would be 
absurd. these reflect prompt me to withdraw from the door; but the 
uncertainti of the conclus I had drawn, and the import of 
gain access to thi apartment, combin to check my steps. 

perplex as to the mean I should employ, I onc more tri the lock. 
the attempt wa fruitless as the former. though hopeless of ani 
inform to be gain by that means, I put my eye to the keyhole. I 
discov a light differ from what wa usual met with at thi 
hour. It wa not the twilight which the sun, imperfectli excluded, 
produces, but gleams, as from a lamp; yet it gleam were fainter and 
obscur than a lamp gener imparts. 

wa thi a confirm of my first conjecture? lamplight at noonday, in 
a mansion thu deserted, and in a room which had been the scene of 
memor and disastr events, wa ominous. hitherto no direct proof 
had been given of the presenc of a human being. how to ascertain hi 
presence, or whether it were elig by ani mean to ascertain it, were 
point on which I had not deliberated. 

I had no power to deliberate. My curios impel me to call,--"i 
there ani one within? speak." 

these word were scarc uttered, when some one exclaimed, in a voic 
vehement but half-smothered, "good god!"-- 

A deep paus succeeded. I wait for an answer; for somewhat to which 
thi emphat invoc might be a prelude. whether the tone were 
express of surprise, or pain, or grief, was, for a moment, dubious. 
perhap the motiv which led me to thi hous suggest the suspicion 
which present succeed to my doubts,--that the person within wa 
disabl by sickness. the circumst of my own condit took away 
the improb from thi belief. whi might not anoth be induc 
like me to hide himself in thi desol retreat? might not a servant, 
left to take care of the house, a measur usual adopt by the opul 
at thi time, be seiz by the reign malady? incapacit for 
exertion, or fear to be drag to the hospital, he ha shut himself 
in thi apartment. the robber, it may be, who came to pillage, wa 
overtaken and detain by disease. In either case, detect or 
intrus would be hateful, and would be assidu eluded. 

these thought had no tendenc to weaken or divert my effort to obtain 
access to thi room. the person wa a brother in calamity, whom it wa 
my duti to succour and cherish to the utmost of my power. onc more I 
spoke:-- 

"who is within? I beseech you answer me. whatev you be, I desir to do 
you good and not injury. open the door and let me know your condition. I 
will tri to be of use to you." 

I wa answer by a deep groan, and by a sob counteract and devour 
as it were by a mighti effort. thi token of distress thrill to my 
heart. My terror wholli disappeared, and gave place to unlimit 
compassion. I again entreat to be admitted, promis all the succour 
or consol which my situat allow me to afford. 

answer were made in tone of anger and impatience, blend with those 
of grief:--"i want no succour; vex me not with your entreati and 
offers. fli from thi spot; linger not a moment, lest you particip my 
destini and rush upon your death." 

these I consid mere as the effus of delirium, or the dictat 
of despair. the style and articul denot the speaker to be 
superior to the class of servants. henc my anxieti to see and to aid 
him wa increased. My remonstr were sternli and pertinaci 
repelled. for a time, incoher and impass exclam flow 
from him. At length, I wa onli permit to hear strong aspir and 
sobs, more eloqu and more indic of grief than ani language. 

thi deport fill me with no less wonder than commiseration. By 
what view thi person wa led hither, by what motiv induc to deni 
himself to my entreaties, wa wholli incomprehensible. again, though 
hopeless of success, I repeat my request to be admitted. 

My persever seem now to have exhaust all hi patience, and he 
exclaimed, in a voic of thunder, "arthur mervyn! begone. linger but a 
moment, and my rage, tiger-like, will rush upon you and rend you limb 
from limb." 

thi address petrifi me. the voic that utter thi sanguinari menac 
wa strang to my ears. It suggest no suspicion of ever have heard 
it before. yet my accent had betray me to him. He wa familiar with 
my name. notwithstand the improb of my entranc into thi 
dwelling, I wa clearli recogn and unhesitatingli named! 

My curios and compass were in no wise diminished, but I found 
myself compel to give up my purpose. I withdrew reluctantli from the 
door, and onc more threw myself upon my bed. noth wa more 
necessary, in the present condit of my frame; than sleep; and sleep 
had, perhaps, been possible, if the scene around me had been less 
pregnant with caus of wonder and panic. 

onc more I task memori in order to discover, in the person with whom 
I had hitherto conversed, some resemblance, in voic or tones, to him 
whom I had just heard. thi process wa effectual. gradual my 
imagin call up an imag which, now that it wa clearli seen, I 
wa astonish had not instantli occurred. three year ago, a man, by 
name colvill, came on foot, and with a knapsack on hi back, into the 
district where my father resided. He had learn and genius, and 
readili obtain the station for which onli he deem himself qualified; 
that of a schoolmaster. 

hi demeanour wa gentl and modest; hi habits, as to sleep, food, and 
exercise, abstemi and regular. medit in the forest, or read 
in hi closet, seem to constitute, togeth with attent to hi 
scholars, hi sole amus and employment. He estrang himself from 
company, not becaus societi afford no pleasure, but becaus studiou 
seclus afford him chief satisfaction. 

No one wa more idol by hi unsuspect neighbours. hi scholar 
rever him as a father, and made under hi tuition a remark 
proficiency. hi charact seem open to boundless inspection, and hi 
conduct wa pronounc by all to be faultless. 

At the end of a year the scene wa changed. A daughter of one of hi 
patrons, young, artless, and beautiful, appear to have fallen a prey 
to the art of some detest seducer. the betray wa gradual 
detected, and success discoveri show that the same artific had 
been practised, with the same success, upon mani others. colvil wa the 
arch-villain. He retir from the storm of vengeanc that wa gather 
over him, and had not been heard of sinc that period. 

I saw him rarely, and for a short time, and I wa a mere boy. henc the 
failur to recollect hi voice, and to perceiv that the voic of him 
immur in the room abov wa the same with that of colvill. though I 
had slight reason for recognis hi featur or accents, I had 
abund caus to think of him with detestation, and pursu him with 
implac revenge, for the victim of hi acts, she whose ruin wa first 
detected, was--_mi sister_. 

thi unhappi girl escap from the upbraid of her parents, from the 
contum of the world, from the goad of remorse, and the anguish 
flow from the perfidi and desert of colvill, in a voluntari death. 
she wa innoc and lovely. previou to thi evil, my soul wa link 
with her by a thousand resembl and sympathies, as well as by 
perpetu intercours from infancy, and by the fratern relation. she 
wa my sister, my preceptress and friend; but she died--her end wa 
violent, untimely, and criminal! I cannot think of her without 
heart-burst grief; of her destroyer, without a rancour which I know 
to be wrong, but which I cannot subdue. 

when the imag of colvil rushed, upon thi occasion, on my thought, I 
almost start on my feet. To meet him, after so long a separation, 
here, and in these circumstances, wa so unlooked-for and abrupt an 
event, and reviv a tribe of such hate impuls and agon 
recollections, that a total revolut seem to have been effect in 
my frame. hi recognit of my person, hi avers to be seen, hi 
ejacul of terror and surpris on first hear my voice, all 
contribut to strengthen my belief. 

how wa I to act? My feebl frame could but ill second my veng 
purposes; but vengeance, though it sometim occupi my thoughts, wa 
hinder by my reason from lead me, in ani instance, to outrag or 
even to upbraiding. 

all my wish with regard to thi man were limit to expel hi 
imag from my memory, and to shun a meet with him. that he had 
not open the door at my bid wa now a topic of joy. To look upon 
some bottomless pit, into which I wa about to be cast headlong, and 
alive, wa less to be abhor than to look upon the face of colvill. 
had I known that he had taken refug in thi house, no power should have 
compel me to enter it. To be immers in the infect of the 
hospital, and to be hurried, yet breath and observant, to my grave, 
wa a more support fate. 

I dwell, with self-condemn and shame, upon thi part of my story. 
To feel extraordinari indign at vice, mere becaus we have 
partaken in an extraordinari degre of it mischiefs, is unjustifiable. 
To regard the wick with no emot but pity, to be activ in 
reclaim them, in control their malevolence, and prevent or 
repair the ill which they produce, is the onli provinc of duty. 
thi lesson, as well as a thousand others, I have yet to learn; but I 
despair of live long enough for that or ani benefici purpose. 

My emot with regard to colvil were erroneous, but omnipotent. I 
start from my bed, and prepar to rush into the street. I wa 
careless of the lot that should befal me, sinc no fate could be wors 
than that of abid under the same roof with a wretch spot with so 
mani crimes. 

I had not set my feet upon the floor befor my precipit wa check 
by a sound from above. the door of the studi wa cautious and slowli 
opened. thi incid admit onli of one construction, suppos all 
obstruct removed. colvil wa creep from hi hiding-place, and 
would probabl fli with speed from the house. My belief of hi sick 
wa now confuted. An illicit design wa congeni with hi charact 
and congruou with those appear alreadi observed. 

I had no power or wish to obstruct hi flight. I thought of it with 
transport, and onc more threw myself upon the bed, and wrap my 
avert face in the carpet. He would probabl pass thi door, 
unobserv of me, and my muffl face would save me from the agoni 
connect with the sight of him. 

the footstep abov were distinguishable, though it wa manifest that 
they move with lightsom and circumspection. they reach the stair 
and descended. the room in which I lay was, like the rest, obscur by 
the close shutters. thi obscur now gave way to a light, resembl 
that glimmer and pale reflect which I had notic in the study. My 
eyes, though avert from the door, were disengag from the fold which 
cover the rest of my head, and observ these token of colvill' 
approach, flit on the wall. 

My feverish perturb increas as he drew nearer. He reach the 
door, and stopped. the light rest for a moment. present he enter 
the apartment. My emot suddenli rose to a height that would not be 
controlled. I imagin that he approach the bed, and wa gaze upon 
me. At the same moment, by an involuntari impulse, I threw off my 
covering, and, turn my face, fix my eye upon my visitant. 

It wa as I suspected. the figure, lift in hi right hand a candle, 
and gaze at the bed, with lineament and attitud bespeak fear 
expect and torment doubts, wa now beheld. one glanc 
commun to my sens all the part of thi terrif vision. A 
sink at my heart, as if it had been penetr by a dagger, seiz 
me. thi wa not enough: I utter a shriek, too rueful and loud not to 
have startl the attent of the passengers, if ani had, at that 
moment, been pass the street. 

heaven seem to have decre that thi period should be fill with 
trial of my equanim and fortitude. the test of my courag wa onc 
more employ to cover me with humili and remorse. thi second 
time, my fanci conjur up a spectre, and I shudder as if the grave 
were forsaken and the unquiet dead haunt my pillow. 

the visag and the shape had inde preternatur attitudes, but they 
belonged, not to colvill, but to--welbeck. 




chapter xxi. 


He whom I had accompani to the midst of the river; whom I had imagin 
that I saw sink to rise no more, wa now befor me. though incap of 
preclud the groundless belief of preternatur visitations, I wa 
abl to banish the phantom almost at the same instant at which it 
appeared. welbeck had escap from the stream alive; or had, by some 
inconceiv means, been restor to life. 

the first wa the most plausibl conclusion. It instantli engend a 
suspicion, that hi plung into the water wa an artifice, intend to 
establish a belief of hi death. hi own tale had shown him to be vers 
in frauds, and flexibl to evil. but wa he not associ with colvill? 
and what, but a compact in iniquity, could bind togeth such men? 

while thu musing, welbeck' counten and gestur display emot 
too vehement for speech. the glanc that he fix upon me were 
unsteadfast and wild. He walk along the floor, stop at each 
moment, and dart look of eager upon me. A conflict of passion 
kept him mute. At length, advanc to the bed, on the side of which I 
wa now sitting, he address me:-- 

"what is this? are you here? In defianc of pestilence, are you actuat 
by some demon to haunt me, like the ghost of my offences, and cover me 
with shame? what have I to do with that dauntless yet guiltless front? 
with that foolishly-confid and obsequious, yet erect and 
unconquerable, spirit? Is there no mean of evad your pursuit? must I 
dip my hands, a second time, in blood; and dig for you a grave by the 
side of watson?" 

these word were listen to with calmness. I suspect and piti the 
man, but I did not fear him. hi word and hi look were indic 
less of cruelti than madness. I look at him with an air compassion 
and wistful. I spoke with mild and composure:-- 

"mr. welbeck, you are unfortun and criminal. would to god I could 
restor you to happi and virtue! but, though my desir be strong, I 
have no power to chang your habit or rescu you from misery. 

"I believ you to be dead. I rejoic to find myself mistaken. while you 
live, there is room to hope that your error will be cured; and the 
turmoil and inquietud that have hitherto beset your guilti progress 
will vanish by your revert into better paths. 

"from me you have noth to fear. If your welfar will be promot by 
my silenc on the subject of your history, my silenc shall be 
inviolate. I deem not lightli of my promises. they are given, and shall 
not be recalled. 

"thi meet wa casual. sinc I believ you to be dead, it could not 
be otherwise. you err, if you suppos that ani injuri will accru to you 
from my life; but you need not discard that error. sinc my death is 
coming, I am not avers to your adopt the belief that the event is 
fortun to you. 

"death is the inevit and univers lot. when or how it comes, is of 
littl moment. To stand, when so mani thousand are fall around me, 
is not to be expected. I have act an humbl and obscur part in the 
world, and my career ha been short; but I murmur not at the decre that 
make it so. 

"the pestil is now upon me. the chanc of recoveri are too slender 
to deserv my confidence. I came hither to die unmolested, and at peace. 
all I ask of you is to consult your own safeti by immedi flight; and 
not to disappoint my hope of concealment, by disclos my condit to 
the agent of the hospital." 

welbeck listen with the deepest attention. the wild of hi air 
disappeared, and gave place to perplex and apprehension. 

"you are sick," said he, in a tremul tone, in which terror wa 
mingl with affection. "you know this, and expect not to recover. No 
mother, nor sister, nor friend, will be near to administ food, or 
medicine, or comfort; yet you can talk calmly; can be thu consider 
of others--of me; whose guilt ha been so deep, and who ha merit so 
littl at your hands! 

"wretch coward! thu miser as I am and expect to be, I cling to 
life. To compli with your heroic counsel, and to fly; to leav you thu 
desol and helpless, is the strongest impulse. fain would I resist it, 
but cannot. 

"to desert you would be flagiti and dastardli beyond all former acts; 
yet to stay with you is to contract the disease, and to perish after 
you. 

"life, burden as it is with guilt and ignominy, is still dear--yet you 
exhort me to go; you dispens with my assistance. indeed, I could be of 
no use; I should injur myself and profit you nothing. I cannot go into 
the citi and procur a physician or attendant. I must never more appear 
in the street of thi city. I must leav you, then." He hurri to the 
door. again, he hesitated. I renew my entreati that he would leav 
me; and encourag hi belief that hi presenc might endang himself 
without confer the slightest benefit upon me. 

"whither should I fly? the wide world contain no asylum for me. I live 
but on one condition. I came hither to find what would save me from 
ruin,--from death. I find it not. It ha vanished. some audaci and 
fortun hand ha snatch it from it place, and now my ruin is 
complete. My last hope is extinct. 

"yes, mervyn! I will stay with you. I will hold your head. I will put 
water to your lips. I will watch night and day by your side. when you 
die, I will carri you by night to the neighbour field; will buri you, 
and water your grave with those tear that are due to your incompar 
worth and untim destiny. then I will lay myself in your bed, and wait 
for the same oblivion." 

welbeck seem now no longer to be fluctuat between opposit 
purposes. hi tempestu featur subsid into calm. He put the 
candle, still lighted, on the table, and pace the floor with less 
disord than at hi first entrance. 

hi resolut wa seen to be the dictat of despair. I hope that it 
would not prove invinc to my remonstrances. I wa consciou that hi 
attend might preclude, in some degree, my own exertions, and 
allevi the pang of death; but these consol might be purchas 
too dear. To receiv them at the hazard of hi life would be to make 
them odious. 

but, if he should remain, what conduct would hi companion pursue? whi 
did he continu in the studi when welbeck had departed? By what motiv 
were those men led hither? I address myself to welbeck:-- 

"your resolut to remain is hasti and rash. By persist in it, you 
will add to the miseri of my condition; you will take away the onli 
hope that I cherished. but, howev you may act, colvil or I must be 
banish from thi roof. what is the leagu between you? break it, I 
conjur you, befor hi fraud have involv you in inextric 
destruction." 

welbeck look at me with some express of doubt. 

"I mean," continu I, "the man whose voic I heard above. He is a 
villain and betrayer. I have manifold proof of hi guilt. whi doe he 
linger behind you? howev you may decide, it is fit that he should 
vanish." 

"alas!" said welbeck, "I have no companion, none to partak with me in 
good or evil. I came hither alone." 

"how?" exclaim I. "whom did I hear in the room above? some one 
answer my interrog and entreaties, whom I too certainli 
recognised. whi doe he remain?" 

"you heard no one but myself. the design that brought me hither wa to 
be accomplish without a witness. I desir to escap detection, and 
repel your solicit for admiss in a counterfeit voice. 

"that voic belong to one from whom I had late parted. what hi 
merit or demerit are, I know not. He found me wander in the forest 
of new jersey. He took me to hi home. when seiz by a linger 
malady, he nurs me with fidel and tenderness. when somewhat 
recovered, I speed hither; but our ignor of each other' charact 
and view wa mutual and profound. 

"I deem it use to assum a voic differ from my own. thi wa 
the last which I had heard, and thi arbitrari and casual circumst 
decid my choice." 

thi imit wa too perfect, and had influenc my fear too 
strongly, to be easili credited. I suspect welbeck of some new 
artific to baffl my conclus and mislead my judgment. thi 
suspicion, however, yield to hi earnest and repeat declarations. If 
colvil were not here, where had he made hi abode? how came friendship 
and intercours between welbeck and him? By what miracl escap the 
former from the river, into which I had imagin him forev sunk? 

"I will answer you," said he, with candour. "you know alreadi too much 
for me to have ani interest in conceal ani part of my life. you have 
discov my existence, and the caus that rescu me from destruct 
may be told without detriment to my person or fame. 

"when I leap into the river, I intend to perish. I harbour no 
previou doubt of my abil to execut my fatal purpose. In thi 
respect I wa deceived. suffoc would not come at my bidding. My 
muscl and limb rebel against my will. there wa a mechan 
repugn to the loss of life, which I could not vanquish. My struggl 
might thrust me below the surface, but my lip were spontan shut, 
and exclud the torrent from my lungs. when my breath wa exhausted, 
the effort that kept me at the bottom were involuntarili remitted, and 
I rose to the surface. 

"I curs my own pusillanimity. thrice I plung to the bottom, and as 
often rose again. My avers to life swiftli diminished, and at length 
I consent to make use of my skill in swimming, which ha seldom been 
exceeded, to prolong my existence. I land in a few minut on the 
jersey shore. 

"thi scheme be frustrated, I sunk into dreari and inactivity. I 
felt as if no depend could be place upon my courage, as if ani 
effort I should make for self-destruct would be fruitless; yet 
exist wa as void as ever of enjoy and embellishment. My mean 
of live were annihilated. I saw no path befor me. To shun the 
presenc of mankind wa my sovereign wish. sinc I could not die by my 
own hands, I must be content to crawl upon the surface, till a superior 
fate should permit me to perish. 

"I wander into the centr of the wood. I stretch myself on the mossi 
verg of a brook, and gaze at the star till they disappeared. the next 
day wa spent with littl variation. the crave of hunger were felt, 
and the sensat wa a joyou one, sinc it afford me the practic 
mean of death. To refrain from food wa easy, sinc some effort would 
be need to procur it, and these effort should not be made. thu wa 
the sweet oblivion for which I so earnestli pant place within my 
reach. 

"three day of abstinence, and reverie, and solitude, succeeded. On the 
even of the fourth, I wa seat on a rock, with my face buri in my 
hands. some one laid hi hand upon my shoulder. I start and look up. 
I beheld a face beam with compass and benignity. He endeavour to 
extort from me the caus of my solitud and sorrow. I disregard hi 
entreaties, and wa obstin silent. 

"find me invinc in thi respect, he invit me to hi cottage, 
which wa hard by. I repel him at first with impati and anger, 
but he wa not to be discourag or intimidated. To elud hi 
persuas I wa oblig to comply. My strength wa gone, and the vital 
fabric wa crumbl into pieces. A fever rage in my veins, and I wa 
consol by reflect that my life wa at onc assail by famin and 
disease. 

"meanwhile, my gloomi medit experienc no respite. I incessantli 
rumin on the event of my past life. the long seri of my crime 
aros daili and afresh to my imagination. the imag of lodi wa 
recalled, hi expir look and the direct which were mutual 
given respect hi sister' and hi property. 

"a I perpetu revolv these incidents, they assum new forms, and 
were link with new associations. the volum written by hi father, and 
transfer to me by token which were now rememb to be more 
emphat than the natur of the composit seem to justify, wa 
likewis remembered. It came attend by recollect respect a 
volum which I filled, when a youth, with extract from the roman and 
greek poets. besid thi literari purpose, I likewis use to preserv 
in it the bank-bil with the keep or carriag of which I chanc to 
be entrusted. thi imag led me back to the leather case contain 
lodi' property, which wa put into my hand at the same time with the 
volume. 

"these imag now gave birth to a third conception, which dart on my 
benight understand like an electr flash. wa it not possibl 
that part of lodi' properti might be enclos within the leav of thi 
volume? In hastili turn it over, I recollect to have notic leav 
whose edg by accid or design adher to each other. lodi, in 
speak of the sale of hi father' west-india property, mention that 
the sum obtain for it wa forti thousand dollars. half onli of thi 
sum had been discov by me. how had the remaind been appropriated? 
sure thi volum contain it. 

"the influenc of thi thought wa like the infus of a new soul into 
my frame. from torpid and desperate, from inflex avers to 
medicin and food, I wa chang in a moment into vivac and hope, 
into raven avid for whatev could contribut to my restor to 
health. 

"I wa not without pungent regret and rack fears. that thi volum 
would be ravish away by creditor or plunder wa possible. everi 
hour might be that which decid my fate. the first impuls wa to seek 
my dwell and search for thi preciou deposit. 

"meanwhile, my perturb and impati onli exasper my disease. 
while chain to my bed, the rumour of pestil wa spread abroad. 
thi event, however, gener calamitous, wa propiti to me, and wa 
hail with satisfaction. It multipli the chanc that my hous and 
it furnitur would be unmolested. 

"mi friend wa assidu and indefatig in hi kindness. My 
deportment, befor and subsequ to the reviv of my hopes, wa 
incomprehensible, and argu noth less than insanity. My thought 
were care conceal from him, and all that he wit wa 
contradictori and unintelligible. 

"at length, my strength wa suffici restored. I resist all my 
protector' importun to postpon my departur till the perfect 
confirm of my health. I design to enter the citi at midnight, 
that pri eye might be eluded; to bear with me a candl and the mean 
of light it, to explor my way to my ancient study, and to ascertain 
my futur claim to exist and felicity. 

"I cross the river thi morning. My impati would not suffer me to 
wait till evening. consid the desol of the city, I thought I 
might ventur to approach thu near, without hazard of detection. the 
house, at all it avenues, wa closed. I stole into the back court. A 
window-shutt prove to be unfastened. I entered, and discov 
closet and cabinet unfasten and empti of all their contents. At 
thi spectacl my heart sunk. My books, doubtless, had share the common 
destiny. My blood throb with pain vehem as I approach the 
studi and open the door. 

"mi hopes, that languish for a moment, were reviv by the sight of my 
shelves, furnish as formerly. I had light my candl below, for I 
desir not to awaken observ and suspicion by unclos the 
windows. My eye eagerli sought the spot where I rememb to have left 
the volume. it place wa empty. the object of all my hope had elud 
my grasp, and disappear forever. 

"to paint my confusion, to repeat my execr on the infatu 
which had rendered, dure so long a time that it wa in my possession, 
thi treasur useless to me, and my curs of the fatal interfer 
which had snatch away the prize, would be onli aggrav of my 
disappoint and my sorrow. you found me in thi state, and know what 
followed." 




chapter xxii. 


thi narr threw new light on the charact of welbeck. If accid 
had given him possess of thi treasure, it wa easi to predict on 
what scheme of luxuri and selfish it would have been expended. the 
same depend on the world' erron estimation, the same devot 
to imposture, and thoughtless of futurity, would have constitut 
the pictur of hi futur life, as had distinguish the past. 

thi money wa another's. To retain it for hi own use wa criminal. Of 
thi crime he appear to be as insens as ever. hi own 
gratif wa the suprem law of hi actions. To be subject to the 
necess of honest labour wa the heaviest of all evils, and one from 
which he wa will to escap by the commiss of suicide. 

the volum which he sought wa mine. It wa my duti to restor it to the 
right owner, or, if the legal claimant could not be found, to employ 
it in the promot of virtu and happiness. To give it to welbeck wa 
to consecr it to the purpos of selfish and misery. My right, 
legal considered, wa as valid as his. 

but, if I intend not to resign it to him, wa it proper to disclos 
the truth and explain by whom the volum wa purloin from the shelf? 
the first impuls wa to hide thi truth; but my understand had been 
taught, by recent occurrences, to question the justic and deni the 
use of secreci in ani case. My principl were true; my motiv 
were pure: whi should I scrupl to avow my principl and vindic my 
actions? 

welbeck had ceas to be dread or revered. that awe which wa onc 
creat by hi superior of age, refin of manners, and digniti 
of garb, had vanished. I wa a boy in years, an indig and uneduc 
rustic; but I wa abl to discern the illus of power and riches, and 
abjur everi claim to esteem that wa not found on integrity. there 
wa no tribun befor which I should falter in assert the truth, and 
no speci of martyrdom which I would not cheer embrac in it 
cause. 

after some pause, I said, "cannot you conjectur in what way thi volum 
ha disappeared?" 

"no," he answered, with a sigh. "why, of all hi volumes, thi onli 
should have vanished, wa an inexplic enigma." 

"perhaps," said I, "it is less import to know how it wa removed, 
than by whom it is now possessed." 

"unquestionably; and yet, unless that knowledg enabl me to regain the 
possession, it will be useless." 

"useless then it will be, for the present possessor will never return it 
to you." 

"indeed," repli he, in a tone of dejection, "your conjectur is most 
probable. such a prize is of too much valu to be given up." 

"what I have said flow not from conjecture, but from knowledge. I know 
that it will never be restor to you." 

At these words, welbeck look at me with anxieti and doubt:--"you 
_know_ that it will not! have you ani knowledg of the book? can you 
tell me what ha becom of it?" 

"yes. after our separ on the river, I return to thi house. I 
found thi volum and secur it. you rightli suspect it contents. 
the money wa there." 

welbeck start as if he had trodden on a mine of gold. hi first 
emot wa rapturous, but wa immedi chasten by some degre of 
doubt:--"what ha becom of it? have you got it? Is it entire? have you 
it with you?" 

"it is unimpaired. I have got it, and shall hold it as a sacr trust 
for the right proprietor." 

the tone with which thi declar wa accompani shook the new-born 
confid of welbeck. "the right proprietor! true, but I am he. To 
me onli it belongs, and to me you are, doubtless, will to restor 
it." 

"mr. welbeck! It is not my desir to give you perplex or anguish; to 
sport with your passions. On the supposit of your death, I deem it 
no infract of justic to take thi manuscript. accid unfold it 
contents. I could not hesit to choos my path. the natur and legal 
successor of vincentio lodi is hi sister. To her, therefore, thi 
properti belongs, and to her onli will I give it." 

"presumptu boy! and thi is your sage decision. I tell you that I am 
the owner, and to me you shall render it. who is thi girl? childish and 
ignorant! unabl to consult and to act for herself on the most trivial 
occasion. Am I not, by the appoint of her die brother, her 
protector and guardian? her age produc a legal incapac of property. 
Do you imagin that so obviou an expedi as that of procur my 
legal appoint as her guardian wa overlook by me? If it were 
neglected, still my titl to provid her subsist and enjoy is 
unquestionable. 

"did I not rescu her from poverty, and prostitution, and infamy? have I 
not suppli all her want with incess solicitude? whatev her 
condit requir ha been plenteous supplied. the dwell and it 
furnitur wa hers, as far a rigid jurisprud would permit. To 
prescrib her expens and govern her famili wa the provinc of her 
guardian. 

"you have heard the tale of my anguish and despair. whenc did they flow 
but from the frustrat of scheme project for her benefit, as they 
were execut with her money and by mean which the author of her 
guardian fulli justified? whi have I encount thi contagi 
atmosphere, and explor my way, like a thief, to thi recess, but with 
a view to rescu her from poverti and restor to her her own? 

"your scrupl are ridicul and criminal. I treat them with less 
severity, becaus your youth is raw and your concept crude. but if, 
after thi proof of the justic of my claim, you hesit to restor the 
money, I shall treat you as a robber, who ha plunder my cabinet and 
refus to refund hi spoil." 

these reason were power and new. I wa acquaint with the right 
of guardianship. welbeck had, in some respects, act as the friend of 
thi lady. To vest himself with thi offic wa the conduct which her 
youth and helpless prescrib to her friend. hi titl to thi 
money, as her guardian, could not be denied. 

but how wa thi statement compat with former representations? No 
mention had then been made of guardianship. By thu acting, he would 
have thwart all hi scheme for win the esteem of mankind and 
foster the belief which the world entertain of hi opul and 
independence. 

I wa thrown, by these thoughts, into consider perplexity. If hi 
statement were true, hi claim to thi money wa established; but I 
question it truth. To intim my doubt of hi verac would be to 
provok abhorr and outrage. 

hi last insinu wa peculiarli momentous. suppos him the 
fraudul possessor of thi money: shall I be justifi in take it 
away by violenc under pretenc of restor it to the genuin 
proprietor, who, for aught I know, may be dead, or with whom, at least, 
I may never procur a meeting? but will not my behaviour on thi 
occas be deem illicit? I enter welbeck' habit at midnight, 
proceed to hi closet, possess myself of portabl property, and 
retir unobserved. Is not guilt imput to an action like this? 

welbeck wait with impati for a conclus to my pause. My 
perplex and indecis did not abate, and my silenc continued. At 
length, he repeat hi demands, with new vehemence. I wa compel to 
answer. I told him, in few words, that hi reason had not convinc 
me of the equiti of hi claim, and that my determin wa unaltered. 

He had not expect thi inflex from one in my situation. the 
folli of opposition, when my feebl and loneli were contrast 
with hi activ and resources, appear to him monstrou and glaring; 
but hi contempt wa convert into rage and fear when he reflect 
that thi folli might final defeat hi hopes. He had probabl 
determin to obtain the money, let the purchas cost what it would, but 
wa will to exhaust pacif expedi befor he should resort to 
force. He might likewis question whether the money wa within hi 
reach. I had told him that I had it, but whether it wa now about me wa 
somewhat dubious; yet, though he use no direct inquiries, he chose to 
proceed on the supposit of it be at hand. hi angri tone were 
now chang into those of remonstr and persuasion:-- 

"your present behaviour, mervyn, doe not justifi the expect I had 
form of you. you have been guilti of a base theft. To thi you have 
ad the deeper crime of ingratitude, but your infatu and folli 
are, at least, as glare as your guilt. Do you think I can credit your 
assert that you keep thi money for another, when I recollect that 
six week have pass sinc you carri it off? whi have you not sought 
the owner and restor it to her? If your intent had been honest, 
would you have suffer so long a time to elaps without do this? It 
is plain that you design to keep it for your own use. 

"but, whether thi were your purpos or not, you have no longer power to 
restor it or retain it. you say that you came hither to die. If so, 
what is to be the fate of the money? In your present situat you 
cannot gain access to the lady. some other must inherit thi wealth. 
next to _signora lodi_, whose right can be put in competit with mine? 
but, if you will not give it to me on my own account, let it be given in 
trust for her. let me be the bearer of it to her own hands. I have 
alreadi shown you that my claim to it, as her guardian, is legal and 
incontrovertible, but thi claim I waive. I will mere be the executor 
of your will. I will bind myself to compli with your direct by ani 
oath, howev solemn and tremendous, which you shall prescribe." 

As long as my own heart acquit me, these imput of dishonesti 
affect me but little. they excit no anger, becaus they origin 
in ignorance, and were render plausibl to welbeck by such fact as 
were known to him. It wa needless to confut the charg by elabor 
and circumstanti details. 

It wa true that my recoveri was, in the highest degree, improbable, and 
that my death would put an end to my power over thi money; but had I 
not determin to secur it use applic in case of my death? 
thi project wa obstruct by the presenc of welbeck; but I hope that 
hi love of life would induc him to fly. He might wrest thi volum 
from me by violence, or he might wait till my death should give him 
peaceabl possession. but these, though probabl events, were not 
certain, and would, by no means, justifi the voluntari surrender. hi 
strength, if employ for thi end, could not be resisted; but then it 
would be a sacrifice, not a choice, but necessity. 

promis were easili given, but were sure not to be confid in. 
welbeck' own tale, in which it could not be imagin that he had 
aggrav hi defects, attest the frailti of hi virtue. To put into 
hi hand a sum like this, in expect of hi deliv it to 
another, when my death would cover the transact with impenetr 
secrecy, would be, indeed, a proof of that infatu which he thought 
proper to imput to me. 

these thought influenc my resolutions, but they were revolv in 
silence. To state them verbal wa useless. they would not justifi my 
conduct in hi eyes. they would onli exasper dispute, and impel him 
to those act of violenc which I wa desir of preventing. the sooner 
thi controversi should end, and I in ani measur be freed from the 
obstruct of hi company, the better. 

"mr. welbeck," said I, "mi regard to your safeti compel me to wish that 
thi interview should terminate. At a differ time, I should not be 
unwil to discuss thi matter. now it will be fruitless. My 
conscienc point out to me too clearli the path I should pursu for me 
to mistak it. As long as I have power over thi money, I shall keep it 
for the use of the unfortun ladi whom I have seen in thi house. I 
shall exert myself to find her; but, if that be impossible, I shall 
appropri it in a way in which you shall have no participation." 

I will not repeat the contest that succeed between my forbear and 
hi passions. I listen to the dictat of hi rage and hi avaric in 
silence. astonish at my inflex wa blend with hi anger. By 
turn he comment on the guilt and on the folli of my resolutions. 
sometim hi emot would mount into fury, and he would approach me 
in a menac attitude, and lift hi hand as if he would extermin me 
at a blow. My languid eyes, my cheek glow and my templ throb 
with fever, and my total passiveness, attract hi attent and 
arrest hi stroke. compass would take the place of rage, and the 
belief be reviv that remonstr and argument would answer hi 
purpose. 




chapter xxiii. 


thi scene last I know not how long. insens the passion and 
reason of welbeck assum a new form. A grief, mingl with 
perplexity, overspread hi countenance. He ceas to contend or to 
speak. hi regard were withdrawn from me, on whom they had hitherto 
been fixed; and, wander or vacant, testifi a conflict of mind 
terribl beyond ani that my young imagin had ever conceived. 

for a time he appear to be unconsci of my presence. He move to and 
fro with unequ steps, and with gesticul that possess a 
horribl but indistinct significance. occasion he struggl for 
breath, and hi effort were direct to remov some choke impediment. 

No test of my fortitud had hitherto occur equal to that to which it 
wa now subjected. the suspicion which thi deport suggest wa 
vagu and formless. the tempest which I wit wa the prelud of 
horror. these were throe which would termin in the birth of some 
gigant and sanguinari purpose. did he medit to offer a bloodi 
sacrifice? wa hi own death or wa mine to attest the magnitud of hi 
despair or the impetuos of hi vengeance? 

suicid wa familiar to hi thoughts. He had consent to live but on 
one condition; that of regain possess of thi money. should I be 
justifi in drive him, by my obstin refusal, to thi fatal 
consumm of hi crimes? yet my fear of thi catastroph wa 
groundless. hitherto he had argu and persuaded; but thi method wa 
pursu becaus it wa more elig than the employ of force, or 
than procrastination. 

no. these were token that point to me. some unknown instig wa 
at work within him, to tear away hi remnant of human and fit him for 
the offic of my murderer. I knew not how the accumul of guilt 
could contribut to hi gratif or security. hi action had been 
partial exhibit and vagu seen. what extenu or omiss had 
vitiat hi former or recent narrative; how far hi actual perform 
were congeni with the deed which wa now to be perpetrated, I knew 
not. 

these thought lent new rapid to my blood. I rais my head from the 
pillow, and watch the deport of thi man with deeper attention. 
the paroxysm which control him at length, in some degree, subsided. 
He muttered, "yes. It must come. My last humili must cover me. My 
last confess must be made. To die, and leav behind me thi train of 
enorm perils, must not be. 

"O clemenza! O mervyn! Ye have not merit that I should leav you a 
legaci of persecut and death. your safeti must be purchas at what 
price my malign destini will set upon it. the cord of the 
executioner, the note of everlast infamy, is better than to leav you 
beset by the consequ of my guilt. It must not be." 

say this, welbeck cast fear glanc at the window and door. He 
examin everi avenu and listened. thrice he repeat thi scrutiny. 
having, as it seemed, ascertain that no one lurk within audience, he 
approach the bed. He put hi mouth close to my face. He attempt to 
speak, but onc more examin the apart with suspici glances. 

He drew closer, and at length, in a tone scarc articulate, and 
suffoc with emotion, he spoke:--"excel but fatally-obstin 
youth! know at least the caus of my importunity. know at least the 
depth of my infatu and the enorm of my guilt. 

"the bills--surrend them to me, and save yourself from persecut and 
disgrace. save the woman whom you wish to benefit, from the blackest 
imputations; from hazard to her life and her fame; from languish in 
dungeons; from expir on the gallows! 

"the bills--oh, save me from the bitter of death! let the evil to 
which my miser life ha given birth termin here and in myself. 
surrend them to me, for----" 

there he stopped. hi utter wa choke by terror. rapid glanc were 
again dart at the window and door. the silenc wa uninterrupted, 
except by far-off sounds, produc by some move carriage. onc more he 
summon resolution, and spoke:-- 

"surrend them to me--for--_they are forged_! 

"formerli I told you, that a scheme of forgeri had been conceived. shame 
would not suffer me to add, that my scheme wa carri into execution. 
the bill were fashioned, but my fear contend against my necessities, 
and forbad me to attempt to exchang them. the interview with lodi 
save me from the danger experiment. I enclos them in that volume, 
as the mean of futur opulence, to be use when all other and less 
hazard resourc should fail. 

"in the agoni of my remors at the death of watson, they were 
forgotten. they afterward recur to recollection. My wish point 
to the grave; but the stroke that should deliv me from life wa 
suspend onli till I could hasten hither, get possess of these 
papers, and destroy them. 

"when I thought upon the chanc that should give them an owner; bring 
them into circulation; load the innoc with suspicion; and lead them 
to trial, and, perhaps, to death, my sensat were fraught with agony; 
earnestli as I pant for death, it wa necessarili defer till I had 
gain possess of and destroy these papers. 

"what now remains? you have found them. happili they have not been used. 
give them, therefore, to me, that I may crush at onc the brood of 
mischief which they could not but generate." 

thi disclosur wa strange. It wa accompani with everi token of 
sincerity. how had I totter on the brink of destruction! If I had made 
use of thi money, in what a labyrinth of miseri might I not have been 
involved! My innoc could never have been proved. An allianc with 
welbeck could not have fail to be inferred. My career would have found 
an ignomini close; or, if my punish had been transmut into 
slaveri and toil, would the testimoni of my conscienc have support 
me? 

I shudder at the view of those disast from which I wa rescu by 
the miracul chanc which led me to thi house. welbeck' request wa 
salutari to me and honour to himself. I could not hesit a moment 
in compliance. the note were enclos in paper, and deposit in a fold 
of my clothes. I put my hand upon them. 

My motion and attent were arrested, at the instant, by a nois which 
aros in the street. footstep were heard upon the pavement befor the 
door, and voices, as if busi in discourse. thi incid wa adapt to 
infus the deepest alarm into myself and my companion. the motiv of 
our trepid were, indeed, different, and were infinit more 
power in my case than in his. It portend to me noth less than 
the loss of my asylum, and condemn to an hospital. 

welbeck hurri to the door, to listen to the convers below. thi 
interv wa pregnant with thought. that impuls which led my 
reflect from welbeck to my own state pass away in a moment, and 
suffer me to medit anew upon the term of that confess which had 
just been made. 

horror at the fate which thi interview had enabl me to shun wa 
uppermost in my conceptions. I wa eager to surrend these fatal bills. 
I held them for that purpos in my hand, and wa impati for welbeck' 
return. He continu at the door; stooping, with hi face averted, and 
eagerli attent to the convers in the street. 

all the circumst of my present situat tend to arrest the 
progress of thought and chain my contempl to one image; but even 
now there wa room for foresight and deliberation. welbeck intend to 
destroy these bills. perhap he had not been sincere; or, if hi 
purpos had been honestli disclosed, thi purpos might chang when the 
bill were in hi possession. hi poverti and sanguin of temper 
might prompt him to use them. 

that thi conduct wa evil, and would onli multipli hi miseries, could 
not be questioned. whi should I subject hi frailti to thi temptation? 
the destruct of these bill wa the loudest injunct of my duty; 
wa demand by everi sanction which bound me to promot the welfar of 
mankind. 

the mean of destruct wa easy. A light candl stood on a table, at 
the distanc of a few yards. whi should I hesit a moment to 
annihil so power a caus of error and guilt? A pass instant wa 
sufficient. A momentari linger might chang the circumst that 
surround me, and frustrat my project. 

My languor were suspend by the urgenc of thi occasion. I start 
from my bed and glide to the table. seiz the note with my right 
hand, I held them in the flame of the candle, and then threw them, 
blazing, on the floor. 

the sudden illumin wa perceiv by welbeck. the caus of it 
appear to suggest itself as soon. He turned, and, mark the paper 
where it lay, leap to the spot, and extinguish the fire with hi 
foot. hi interposit wa too late. onli enough of them remain to 
inform him of the natur of the sacrifice. 

welbeck now stood, with limb trembling, featur aghast, and eye 
glare upon me. for a time he wa without speech. the storm wa 
gather in silence, and at length burst upon me. In a tone menac 
and loud, he exclaimed,-- 

"wretch! what have you done?" 

"I have done justly. these note were false. you desir to destroy 
them, that they might not betray the innocent. I applaud your purpose, 
and have save you from the danger of temptat by destroy them 
myself." 

"maniac! miscreant! To be fool by so gross an artifice! the note were 
genuine. the tale of their forgeri wa fals and meant onli to wrest 
them from you. execr and pervers idiot! your deed ha seal my 
perdition. It ha seal your own. you shall pay for it with your blood. 
I will slay you by inches. I will stretch you, as you have stretch me, 
on the rack." 

dure thi speech, all wa frenzi and storm in the counten and 
featur of welbeck. noth less could be expect than that the scene 
would termin in some bloodi catastrophe. I bitterli regret the 
facil with which I had been deceived, and the precipit of my 
sacrifice. the act, howev lamentable, could not be revoked. what 
remain but to encount or endur it consequ with unshrink 
firmness? 

the contest wa too unequal. It is possibl that the frenzi which 
actuat welbeck might have speedili subsided. It is more like that 
hi passion would have been satiat with noth but my death. thi 
event wa preclud by loud knock at the street door, and call by some 
one on the pavement without, of--"who is within? Is ani one within?" 

these nois gave a new direct to welbeck' thoughts. "they are 
coming," said he. "they will treat you as a sick man and a thief. I 
cannot desir you to suffer a wors evil than they will inflict. I leav 
you to your fate." So saying, he rush out of the room. 

though confound and stun by thi rapid success of events, I wa 
yet abl to pursu measur for elud these detest visitants. I 
first extinguish the light, and then, observ that the parley in the 
street continu and grew louder, I sought an asylum in the remotest 
corner of the house. dure my former abod here, I notic that a 
trap-door open in the ceil of the third story, to which you were 
conduct by a movabl stair or ladder. I consid that this, 
probably, wa an open into a narrow and darksom nook form by the 
angl of the roof. By ascending, draw after me the ladder, and 
close the door, I should escap the most vigil search. 

enfeebl as I wa by my disease, my resolut render me strenuous. I 
gain the uppermost room, and, mount the ladder, found myself at a 
suffici distanc from suspicion. the stair wa hastili drawn up, and 
the door closed. In a few minutes, however, my new retreat prove to be 
wors than ani for which it wa possibl to chang it. the air wa 
musty, stagnant, and scorchingli hot. My breath becam difficult, and 
I saw that to remain here ten minut would unavoid produc 
suffocation. 

My terror of intrud had render me blind to the consequ of 
immur myself in thi cheerless recess. It wa incumb on me to 
extric myself as speedili as possible. I attempt to lift the door. 
My first effort wa successless. everi inspir wa quicker and more 
difficult than the former. As my terror, so my strength and my exert 
increased. final my trembl hand light on a nail that wa 
imperfectli driven into the wood, and which, by afford me a firmer 
hold, enabl me at length to rais it, and to inhal the air from 
beneath. 

reliev from my new peril by thi situation, I bent an attent ear 
through the opening, with a view to ascertain if the hous had been 
enter or if the outer door wa still beset, but could hear nothing. 
henc I wa author to conclud that the peopl had departed, and 
that I might resum my former station without hazard. 

befor I descended, however, I cast a curiou eye over thi recess. It 
wa larg enough to accommod a human being. the mean by which it wa 
enter were easili concealed. though narrow and low, it wa long, and, 
were it possibl to contriv some inlet for the air, one studiou of 
conceal might reli on it protect with unbound confidence. 

My scrutini wa imperfect by reason of the faint light which found it 
way through the opening; yet it wa suffici to set me afloat on a sea 
of new wonder and subject my fortitud to a new test.-- 

here mervyn paus in hi narrative. A minut pass in silenc and 
seem indecision. hi perplex gradual disappeared, and he 
continued:-- 

* * * * * 

I have promis to relat the moment incid of my life, and have 
hitherto been faith in my enumeration. there is noth which I more 
detest than equivoc and mystery. perhaps, however, I shall now 
incur some imput of that kind. I would willingli escap the 
accusation, but confess that I am hopeless of escap it. 

I might, indeed, have preclud your guess and surmis by omit to 
relat what befel me from the time of my leav my chamber till I 
regain it. I might deceiv you by assert that noth remark 
occurred; but thi would be false, and everi sacrific is trivial which 
is made upon the altar of sincerity. besides, the time may come when no 
inconveni will aris from minut descript of the object which I 
now saw, and of the reason and infer which they suggest to my 
understanding. At present, it appear to be my duti to pass them over in 
silence; but it would be needless to conceal from you that the interval, 
though short, and the scrutiny, though hasty, furnish matter which my 
curios devour with unspeak eagerness, and from which 
consequ may hereaft flow, decid on my peac and my life. 

nothing, however, occur which could detain me long in thi spot. I 
onc more sought the lower stori and threw myself on the bed which I had 
left. My mind wa throng with the imag flow from my late 
adventure. My fever had gradual increased, and my thought were 
deform by inaccuraci and confusion. 

My heart did not sink when I revert to my own condition. that I should 
quickli be disabl from moving, wa readili perceived. the foresight of 
my destini wa steadfast and clear. To linger for day in thi 
comfortless solitude, to ask in vain, not for power restor or 
allevi cordials, but for water to moisten my burn lip and abat 
the torment of thirst; ultim to expir in torpor or frenzy, wa 
the fate to which I look forward; yet I wa not terrified. I seem to 
be sustain by a preternatur energy. I felt as if the opportun of 
combat such evil wa an enviabl privilege, and, though none would 
wit my victori magnanimity, yet to be consciou that prais wa 
my due wa all that my ambit required. 

these sentiment were doubtless token of delirium. the excruci 
agoni which now seiz upon my head, and the cord which seem to be 
drawn across my breast, and which, as my fanci imagined, wa tighten 
by some forcibl hand, with a view to strangl me, were incompat 
with sober and coher views. 

thirst wa the evil which chiefli oppress me. the mean of relief wa 
point out by natur and habit. I rose, and determin to replenish my 
pitcher at the well. It wa easier, however, to descend than to return. 
My limb refus to bear me, and I sat down upon the lower step of the 
staircase. sever hour had elaps sinc my entranc into thi 
dwelling, and it wa now night. 

My imagin now suggest a new expedient. medlicot wa a gener 
and fearless spirit. To put myself under hi protection, if I could walk 
as far as hi lodgings, wa the wisest proceed which I could adopt. 
from thi design, my incapac to walk thu far, and the consequ 
of be discov in the street, had hitherto deter me. these 
impedi were now, in the confus of my understanding, overlook 
or despised, and I forthwith set out upon thi hopeless expedition. 

the door commun with the court, and, through the court, with the 
street, were fasten by insid bolts. these were easili withdrawn, and 
I issu forth with alacr and confidence. My perturb sens and the 
dark hinder me from discern the right way. I wa consciou of 
thi difficulty, but wa not disheartened. I proceeded, as I have sinc 
discovered, in a direct differ from the true, but hesit not 
till my power were exhaust and I sunk upon the ground. I close my 
eyes, and dismiss all fear, and all foresight of futurity. In thi 
situat I remain some hours, and should probabl have expir on 
thi spot, had not I attract your notice, and been provided, under 
thi roof, with all that medic skill, that the tenderest human 
could suggest. 

In consequ of your care, I have been restor to life and to health. 
your conduct wa not influenc by the prospect of pecuniari recompense, 
of service, or of gratitude. It is onli in one way that I am abl to 
heighten the gratif which must flow from reflect on your 
conduct:--bi show that the be whose life you have prolonged, 
though uneducated, ignorant, and poor, is not proflig and worthless, 
and will not dedic that life which your bounti ha given, to 
mischiev or contempt purposes. 


end OF vol I. 




arthur mervyn; 

or, 

memoir OF the year 1793. 

vol. ii. 




arthur mervyn. 




chapter xxiv. 


here end the narr of mervyn. sure it incid were of no 
common kind. dure thi season of pestilence, my opportun of 
observ had been numerous, and I had not suffer them to pass 
unimproved. the occurr which fell within my own experi bore a 
gener resembl to those which had just been related, but they did 
not hinder the latter from strike on my mind with all the forc of 
novelty. they serv no end, but as voucher for the truth of the tale. 

sure the youth had display inimit and heroic qualities. hi 
courag wa the growth of benevol and reason, and not the child of 
insens and the nursl of habit. He had been qualifi for the 
encount of gigant danger by no labori education. He step 
forth upon the stage, unfurnished, by anticip or experience, with 
the mean of secur against fraud; and yet, by the aid of pure 
intentions, had frustrat the wile of an accomplish and veteran 
deceiver. 

I bless the chanc which place the youth under my protection. when I 
reflect on that tissu of nice conting which led him to my door, 
and enabl me to save from death a be of such rare endowments, my 
heart overflow with joy, not unmingl with regret and trepidation. 
how mani have been cut off by thi disease, in their career of virtu 
and their blossom-tim of genius! how mani deed of heroism and 
self-devot are ravish from existence, and consign to hopeless 
oblivion! 

I had save the life of thi youth. thi wa not the limit of my duti or 
my power. could I not render that life profit to himself and to 
mankind? the gain of my profess were slender; but these gain were 
suffici for hi mainten as well as my own. By resid with me, 
partak my instructions, and read my books, he would, in a few 
years, be fit for the practic of physic. A scienc whose truth are 
so conduc to the welfar of mankind, and which comprehend the whole 
system of nature, could not but gratifi a mind so benefic and 
strenuou as his. 

thi scheme occur to me as soon as the conclus of hi tale allow 
me to think. I did not immedi mention it, sinc the approb of 
my wife, of whose concurrence, however, I entertain no doubt, wa 
previous to be obtained. dismiss it, for the present, from my 
thoughts, I revert to the incid of hi tale. 

the ladi whom welbeck had betray and desert wa not unknown to me. I 
wa but too well acquaint with her fate. If she had been singl in 
calamity, her tale would have been listen to with insupport 
sympathy; but the frequenc of the spectacl of distress seem to lessen 
the compass with which it is reviewed. now that those scene are onli 
remembered, my anguish is greater than when they were witnessed. then 
everi new day wa onli a repetit of the disast of the foregoing. 
My sensibility, if not extinguished, wa blunted; and I gaze upon the 
complic ill of poverti and sick with a degre of unconcern on 
which I should onc have reflect with astonishment. 

the fate of clemenza lodi wa not, perhaps, more signal than mani which 
have occurred. It threw detest light upon the charact of welbeck, 
and show him to be more inhuman than the tale of mervyn had evinc 
him to be. that man, indeed, wa hitherto imperfectli seen. the time had 
not come which should fulli unfold the enorm of hi transgress 
and the complex of hi frauds. 

there live in a remot quarter of the citi a woman, by name villars, 
who pass for the widow of an english officer. her manner and mode of 
live were specious. she had three daughters, well train in the 
school of fashion, and eleg in person, manners, and dress. they had 
late arriv from europe, and, for a time, receiv from their 
neighbour that respect to which their educ and fortun appear to 
lay claim. 

the fallaci of their pretens slowli appeared. It began to be 
suspect that their subsist wa deriv not from pension or 
patrimony, but from the wage of pollution. their habit wa 
clandestin frequent by men who were unfaith to their secret; one 
of these wa alli to me by tie which author me in watch hi 
step and detect hi errors, with a view to hi reformation. from him 
I obtain a knowledg of the genuin charact of these women. 

A man like welbeck, who wa the slave of deprav appetites, could not 
fail of be quickli satiat with innoc and beauty. some accid 
introduc him to the knowledg of thi family, and the youngest 
daughter found him a proper subject on which to exercis her artifices. 
It wa to the frequent demand made upon hi purse, by thi woman, that 
part of the embarrass in which mervyn found him involv are to be 
ascribed. 

To thi circumst must likewis be imput hi anxieti to transfer to 
some other the possess of the unhappi stranger. whi he conceal from 
mervyn hi connect with luci villar may be easili imagined. hi 
silenc with regard to clemenza' asylum will not creat surprise, when 
it wa told that she wa place with mrs. villars. On what condit 
she wa receiv under thi roof, cannot be so readili conjectured. It 
is obvious, however, to suppos that advantag wa to be taken of her 
ignor and weakness, and that they hoped, in time, to make her an 
associ in their proflig schemes. 

the appear of pestilence, meanwhile, threw them into panic, and they 
hasten to remov from danger. mrs. villar appear to have been a 
woman of no ordinari views. she stoop to the vilest mean of amass 
money; but thi money wa employ to secur to herself and her 
daughter the benefit of independence. she purchas the hous which 
she occupi in the city, and a mansion in the environs, well built and 
splendidli furnished. To the latter, she and her family, of which the 
italian girl wa now a member, retir at the close of july. 

I have mention that the sourc of my intellig wa a kinsman, who 
had been drawn from the path of sobrieti and rectitud by the 
impetuos of youth passions. He had power to confess and deplore, 
but none to repair, hi errors. one of these women held him by a spell 
which he struggl in vain to dissolve, and by which, in spite of 
resolut and remorses, he wa drawn to her feet, and made to 
sacrific to her pleasur hi reput and hi fortune. 

My hous wa hi customari abod dure those interv in which he wa 
persuad to pursu hi profession. some time befor the infect began 
it progress, he had disappeared. No tide were receiv of him, till 
a messeng arrived, entreat my assistance. I wa conduct to the 
hous of mrs. villars, in which I found no one but my kinsman. here, it 
seems, he had immur himself from my inquiries, and, on be seiz by 
the reign malady, had been desert by the family, who, ere they 
departed, inform me by a messeng of hi condition. 

despond combin with hi diseas to destroy him. befor he died, he 
inform me fulli of the charact of hi betrayers. the late arrival, 
name, and person condit of clemenza lodi were related. welbeck wa 
not named, but wa describ in term which, combin with the narr 
of mervyn, enabl me to recognis the paramour of luci villar in the 
man whose crime had been the princip theme of our discourse. 

mervyn' curios wa greatli rous when I intim my acquaint 
with the fate of clemenza. In answer to hi eager interrogations, I 
relat what I knew. the tale plung him into reverie. recovering, at 
length, from hi thoughtfulness, he spoke:-- 

"her condit is perilous. the poverti of welbeck will drive him far 
from her abode. her proflig protector will entic her or abandon her 
to ruin. cannot she be saved?" 

"I know not," answer I, "bi what means." 

"the mean are obvious. let her remov to some other dwelling. let her 
be appriz of the vice of those who surround her. let her be entreat 
to fly. the will need onli be inspired, the danger need onli be shown, 
and she is safe, for she will remov beyond it reach." 

"thou art an adventur youth. who wilt thou find to undertak the 
office? who will be persuad to enter the hous of a stranger, seek 
without an introduct the presenc of thi girl, tell her that the 
hous she inhabit is a hous of prostitution, prevail on her to believ 
the tale, and persuad her to accompani him? who will open hi hous to 
the fugitive? whom will you convinc that her illicit intercours with 
welbeck, of which the opprobri token cannot be concealed, ha not 
fit her for the compani of prostitutes, and made her unworthi of 
protection? who will adopt into their famili a stranger whose conduct 
ha incur infamy, and whose present associ have, no doubt, made 
her worthi of the curse?" 

"true. these are difficulti which I did not foresee. must she then 
perish? shall not someth be done to rescu her from infami and 
guilt?" 

"it is neither in your power nor in mine to do ani thing." 

the late of the hour put an end to our convers and summon us 
to repose. I seiz the first opportun of impart to my wife the 
scheme which had occurred, rel to our guest; with which, as I 
expected, she readili concurred. In the morning, I mention it to 
mervyn. I dwelt upon the benefit that adher to the medic 
profession, the power which it confer of lighten the distress of 
our neighbours, the digniti which popular opinion annex to it, the 
avenu which it open to the acquisit of competence, the freedom from 
servil care which attend it, and the mean of intellectu 
gratif with which it suppli us. 

As I spoke, hi eye sparkl with joy. "yes," said he, with vehemence, 
"I willingli embrac your offer. I accept thi benefit, becaus I know 
that, if my pride should refus it, I should prove myself less worthi 
than you think, and give you pain, instead of that pleasur which I am 
bound to confer. I would enter on the duti and studi of my new 
profess immediately; but somewhat is due to mr. hadwin and hi 
daughters. I cannot vanquish my inquietud respect them, but by 
return to malverton and ascertain their state with my own eyes. 
you know in what circumst I part with wallac and mr. hadwin. I 
am not sure that either of them ever reach home, or that they did not 
carri the infect along with them. I now find myself suffici 
strong to perform the journey, and purpos to have acquaint you, at 
thi interview, with my intentions. An hour' delay is superfluous, and 
I hope you will consent to my set out immediately. rural exercis 
and air, for a week or fortnight, will greatli contribut to my health." 

No object could be made to thi scheme. hi narr had excit no 
common affect in our bosom for the hadwins. hi visit could not onli 
inform us of their true state, but would dispel that anxieti which they 
could not but entertain respect our guest. It wa a topic of some 
surpris that neither wallac nor hadwin had return to the city, with 
a view to obtain some tide of their friend. It wa more easi to 
suppos them to have been detain by some misfortune, than by 
insens or indolence. In a few minut mervyn bade us adieu, and 
set out upon hi journey, promis to acquaint us with the state of 
affair as soon as possibl after hi arrival. We part from him with 
reluctance, and found no consol but in the prospect of hi speedi 
return. 

dure hi absence, convers natur turn upon those topic 
which were suggest by the narr and deport of thi youth. 
differ conclus were form by hi two auditors. they had both 
contract a deep interest in hi welfare, and an ardent curios as to 
those particular which hi unfinish stori had left in obscurity. the 
true charact and actual condit of welbeck were theme of much 
speculation. whether he were dead or alive, near or distant from hi 
ancient abode, wa a point on which neither mervyn, nor ani of those 
with whom I had mean of intercourse, afford ani information. whether 
he had share the common fate, and had been carri by the collector of 
the dead from the highway or the hovel to the pit open alik for the 
rich and the poor, the known and the unknown; whether he had escap to 
a foreign shore, or were destin to reappear upon thi stage, were 
question involv in uncertainty. 

the disappear of watson would, at a differ time, have excit 
much inquiri and suspicion; but, as thi had taken place on the eve of 
the epidemic, hi kindr and friend would acquiesce, without scruple, 
in the belief that he had been involv in the gener calamity, and wa 
to be number among the earliest victims. those of hi profess 
usual resid in the street where the infect began, and where it 
ravag had been most destructive; and thi circumst would 
corrobor the conclus of hi friends. 

I did not perceiv ani immedi advantag to flow from impart the 
knowledg I had late gain to others. shortli after mervyn' 
departur to malverton, I wa visit by wortley. inquir for my 
guest, I told him that, have recov hi health, he had left my 
house. He repeat hi invect against the villani of welbeck, hi 
suspicion of mervyn, and hi wish for anoth interview with the 
youth. whi had I suffer him to depart, and whither had he gone? 

"he ha gone for a short time into the country. I expect him to return 
in less than a week, when you will meet with him here as often as you 
please, for I expect him to take up hi abod in thi house." 

much astonish and disapprob were express by my friend. I 
hint that the lad had made disclosur to me, which justifi my 
confid in hi integrity. these proof of hi honesti were not of a 
natur to be indiscrimin unfolded. mervyn had author me to 
commun so much of hi stori to wortley, as would serv to vindic 
him from the charg of be welbeck' co-partn in fraud; but thi end 
would onli be counteract by an imperfect tale, and the full recital, 
though it might exculp mervyn, might produc inconveni by which 
thi advantag would be outweighed. 

wortley, as might be natur expected, wa by no mean satisfi with 
thi statement. He suspect that mervyn wa a wili impostor; that he 
had been train in the art of fraud, under an accomplish teacher; 
that the tale which he had told to me wa a tissu of ingeni and 
plausibl lies; that the mere assertions, howev plausibl and solemn, 
of one like him, whose conduct had incur such strong suspicions, were 
unworthi of the least credit. 

"it cannot be denied," continu my friend, "that he live with welbeck 
at the time of hi elopement; that they disappear together; that they 
enter a boat, at pine street wharf, at midnight; that thi boat wa 
discov by the owner in the possess of a fisherman at redbank, who 
affirm that he had found it strand near hi door, the day succeed 
that on which they disappeared. Of all thi I can suppli you with 
incontest proof. if, after thi proof, you can give credit to hi 
story, I shall think you made of veri pervers and credul materials." 

"the proof you mention," said I, "will onli enhanc hi credibility. all 
the fact which you have state have been admit by him. they 
constitut an essenti portion of hi narrative." 

"what then is the inference? are not these evid of a compact 
between them? ha he not acknowledg thi compact in confess that he 
knew welbeck wa my debtor; that he wa appriz of hi flight, but that 
(what matchless effrontery!) he had promis secrecy, and would, by no 
means, betray him? you say he mean to return; but of that I doubt. you 
will never see hi face more. He is too wise to thrust himself again 
into the noose; but I do not utterli despair of light upon welbeck. 
old thetford, jamieson, and I, have sworn to hunt him through the world. 
I have strong hope that he ha not stray far. some intellig ha 
late been received, which ha enabl us to place our hound upon hi 
scent. He may doubl and skulk; but, if he doe not fall into our toil 
at last, he will have the agil and cunning, as well as the malignity, 
of devils." 

the veng disposit thu betray by wortley wa not without 
excuse. the vigour of hi day had been spent in acquir a slender 
capital; hi dilig and honesti had succeeded, and he had late 
thought hi situat such as to justifi marriag with an excel 
woman, to whom he had for year been betrothed, but from whom hi 
poverti had hitherto compel him to live separate. scarc had thi 
allianc taken place, and the full career of nuptial enjoy begun, 
when hi ill fate expos him to the fraud of welbeck, and brought him, 
in one evil hour, to the brink of insolvency. 

jamieson and thetford, however, were rich, and I had not till now been 
inform that they had reason for pursu welbeck with peculiar 
animosity. the latter wa the uncl of him whose fate had been relat 
by mervyn, and wa one of those who employ money, not as the medium of 
traffic, but as in itself a commodity. He had neither wine nor cloths, 
to transmut into silver. He thought it a tediou process to exchang 
to-day one hundr dollar for a cask or bale, and to-morrow exchang 
the bale or cask for one hundr _and ten_ dollars. It wa better to 
give the hundr for a piec of paper, which, carri forthwith to the 
money-changers, he could procur a hundr twenty-thre and 
three-fourths. In short, thi man' coffer were suppli by the despair 
of honest men and the stratagem of rogues. I did not immedi 
suspect how thi man' prudenc and indefatig attent to hi own 
interest should allow him to becom the dupe of welbeck. 

"what," said I, "i old thetford' claim upon welbeck?" 

"it is a claim," he replied, "that, if it ever be made good, will doom 
welbeck to imprison and wholesom labour for life." 

"how? sure it is noth more than debt." 

"have you not heard? but that is no wonder. happili you are a stranger 
to mercantil anxieti and revolutions. your fortun doe not rest on a 
basi which an untoward blast may sweep away, or four stroke of a pen 
may demolish. that hoari dealer in suspicion wa persuad to put hi 
hand to three note for eight hundr dollar each. the _eight_ wa then 
dexter prolong to eigh_teen_; they were duli deposit in time 
and place, and the next day welbeck wa credit for fifty-thre hundr 
and seventy-three, which, an hour after, were _told out_ to hi 
messenger. hard to say whether the old man' grief, shame, or rage, be 
uppermost. He disdain all comfort but revenge, and that he will procur 
at ani price. jamieson, who deal in the same _stuff_ with thetford, wa 
outwit in the same manner, to the same amount, and on the same day. 

"thi welbeck must have power abov the common rate of mortals. grown 
gray in studi the folli and the stratagem of men, these veteran 
were overreached. No one piti them. 'twere well if hi artific had 
been limit to such, and he had spare the honest and the poor. It is 
for hi injuri to men who have earn their scanti subsist without 
forfeit their probity, that I hate him, and shall exult to see him 
suffer all the rigour of the law." here wortley' engag compel 
him to take hi leave. 




chapter xxv. 


while muse upon these facts, I could not but reflect with astonish 
on the narrow escap which mervyn' virtu had experienced. I wa by no 
mean certain that hi fame or hi life wa exempt from all danger, or 
that the suspicion which had alreadi been form respect him could 
possibl be wipe away. noth but hi own narrative, repeat with 
that simpl but nervou eloqu which we had witnessed, could rescu 
him from the most heinou charges. wa there ani tribun that would not 
acquit him on mere hear hi defence? 

sure the youth wa honest. hi tale could not be the fruit of 
invention; and yet, what are the bound of fraud? natur ha set no 
limit to the combin of fancy. A smooth exterior, a show of 
virtue, and a speciou tale, are, a thousand times, exhibit in human 
intercours by craft and subtlety. motiv are endlessli varied, while 
action continu the same; and an acut penetr may not find it hard 
to select and arrang motives, suit to exempt from censur ani action 
that a human be can commit. 

had I heard mervyn' stori from another, or read it in a book, I might, 
perhaps, have found it possibl to suspect the truth; but, as long as 
the impress made by hi tones, gestures, and looks, remain in my 
memory, thi suspicion wa impossible. wicked may sometim be 
ambiguous, it mask may puzzl the observer; our judgment may be made to 
falter and fluctuate, but the face of mervyn is the index of an honest 
mind. calm or vehement, doubt or confident, it is full of benevol 
and candour. He that listen to hi word may question their truth, but 
he that look upon hi counten when speak cannot withhold hi 
faith. 

It wa possible, however, to find evid support or confut hi 
story. I chanc to be acquaint with a family, by name althorpe, who 
were nativ of that part of the countri where hi father resided. I 
paid them a visit, and, after a few preliminaries, mentioned, as if by 
accident, the name of mervyn. they immedi recognis thi name as 
belong to one of their ancient neighbours. the death of the wife and 
sons, and the seduct of the onli daughter by colvill, with mani 
pathet incid connect with the fate of thi daughter, were 
mentioned. 

thi intellig induc me to inquir of mrs. althorpe, a sensibl and 
candid woman, if she were acquaint with the recent or present 
situat of thi family. 

"I cannot say much," she answered, "of my own knowledge. sinc my 
marriage, I am use to spend a few week of summer at my father's, but 
am less inquisit than I onc wa into the concern of my old 
neighbours. I recollect, however, when there, last year, dure _the 
fever_, to have heard that sawni mervyn had taken a second wife; that 
hi onli son, a youth of eighteen, had thought proper to be highli 
offend with hi father' conduct, and treat the new mistress of the 
hous with insult and contempt. I should not much wonder at this, see 
children are so apt to deem themselv unjustli treat by a second 
marriag of their parent; but it wa hint that the boy' jealousi and 
discont were excit by no common cause. the new mother wa not much 
older than himself, had been a servant of the family, and a crimin 
intimaci had subsist between her, while in that condition, and the 
son. her marriag with hi father wa justli account by their 
neighbour a most proflig and odiou transaction. the son, perhaps, 
had, in such a case, a right to scold, but he ought not to have carri 
hi anger to such extrem as have been imput to him. He is said to 
have grin upon her with contempt, and even to have call her 
_strumpet_ in the presenc of hi father and of strangers. 

"it wa imposs for such a famili to keep together. arthur took leav 
one night to possess himself of all hi father' cash, mount the best 
hors in hi meadow, and elope. for a time, no one knew whither he had 
gone. At last, one wa said to have met with him in the street of thi 
city, metamorphos from a rustic lad into a fine gentleman. noth 
could be quicker than thi change, for he left the countri on a saturday 
morning, and wa seen in a french frock and silk stockings, go into 
christ' church the next day. I suppos he kept it up with a high hand, 
as long as hi money lasted. 

"mi lather paid us a visit last week, and, among other country-news, 
told us that sawni mervyn had sold hi place. hi wife had persuad him 
to tri hi fortun in the western country. the price of hi hundr 
acr here would purchas a thousand there, and the man, be veri 
gross and ignorant, and, withal, quit a simpleton, found no difficulti 
in perceiv that a thousand are ten time more than a hundred. He wa 
not awar that a rood of ground upon schuylkil is tenfold better than 
an acr on the tennessee. 

"the woman turn out to be an art profligate. have sold hi ground 
and gotten hi money, he place it in her keeping, and she, to enjoy it 
with the more security, ran away to the city; leav him to prosecut 
hi journey to kentucki moneyless and alone. some time after, mr. 
althorp and I were at the play, when he point out to me a group of 
femal in an upper box, one of whom wa no other than betti lawrence. 
It wa not easi to recognise, in her present gaudi trim, all flaunt 
with ribbon and shine with trinkets, the same betti who use to deal 
out peck of potato and superintend her basket of cantaloup in the 
jersey market, in pasteboard bonnet and linsey petticoat. her companion 
were of the infam class. If arthur were still in the city, there is 
no doubt that the mother and son might renew the ancient term of their 
acquaintance. 

"the old man, thu rob and betrayed, sought consol in the 
bottle, of which he had been at all time over-fond. He wander from 
one tavern to anoth till hi credit wa exhausted, and then wa sent 
to jail, where, I believe, he is like to continu till hi death. 
such, my friend, is the histori of the mervyns." 

"what proof," said I, "have you of the immor conduct of the son? Of 
hi mistreat of hi mother, and hi elop with hi father' 
hors and money?" 

"I have no proof but the unanim report of mervyn' neighbours. 
respect and honest men have affirmed, in my hearing, that they had 
been present when the boy treat hi mother in the way that I have 
described. I was, besides, onc in compani with the old man, and heard 
him bitterli inveigh against hi son, and charg him with the fact of 
steal hi hors and money. I well rememb that tear roll from hi 
eye while talk on the subject. As to hi be seen in the citi the 
next day after hi elopement, dress in a most costli and fashion 
manner, I can doubt that as littl as the rest, for he that saw him wa 
my father, and you, who know my father, know what credit is due to hi 
eye and hi word. He had seen arthur often enough not to be mistaken, 
and describ hi appear with great exactness. the boy is extrem 
handsome, give him hi due; ha dark hazel eyes, auburn hair, and veri 
eleg proportions. hi air and gait have noth of the clown in them. 
take away hi jacket and trousers, and you have as spruce a fellow as 
ever came from dancing-school or college. He is the exact pictur of hi 
mother, and the most perfect contrast to the sturdi legs, squat figure, 
and broad, unthinking, sheepish face of the father that can be imagined. 
you must confess that hi appear here is a pretti strong proof of 
the father' assertions. the money given for these cloth could not 
possibl have been honestli acquired. It is to be presum that they 
were bought or stolen, for how els should they have been gotten?" 

"what wa thi lad' person deport dure the life of hi mother, 
and befor hi father' second marriage?" 

"veri littl to the credit of hi heart or hi intellects. be the 
youngest son, the onli one who at length survived, and have a 
power resembl to herself, he becam the mother' favourite. hi 
constitut wa feeble, and he love to stroll in the wood more than 
to plough or sow. thi idl wa much against hi father' 
inclin and judgment; and, indeed, it wa the foundat of all hi 
vices. when he could be prevail upon to do ani thing it wa in a 
bungl manner, and so as to prove that hi thought were fix on ani 
thing except hi business. when hi assist wa want he wa never 
to be found at hand. they were compel to search for him among the 
rock and bushes, and he wa gener discov saunter along the 
bank of a river, or loll in the shade of a tree. thi disposit to 
inact and laziness, in so young a man, wa veri strange. person of 
hi age are rare fond of work, but then they are addict to company, 
and sports, and exercises. they ride, or shoot, or frolic; but thi 
be mope away hi time in solitude, never associ with other young 
people, never mount a hors but when he could not help it, and never 
fire a gun or angl for a fish in hi life. some peopl suppos him 
to be half an idiot, or, at least, not to be right in hi mind; and, 
indeed, hi conduct wa so veri pervers and singular, that I do not 
wonder at those who account for it in thi way." 

"but surely," said I, "he had some object of pursuit. perhap he wa 
addict to books." 

"far from it. On the contrary, hi avers to school wa as great as 
hi hatr of the plough. He never could get hi lesson or bear the 
least constraint. He wa so much indulg by hi mother at home, that 
task and disciplin of ani kind were intolerable. He wa a perpetu 
truant; till, the master one day attempt to strike him, he ran out of 
the room and never enter it more. the mother excus and countenanc 
hi frowardness, and the foolish father wa oblig to give way. I do 
not believ he had two months' school in hi life." 

"perhaps," said I, "he prefer studi by himself, and at liberty. I 
have known boy endow with great curios and aptitud to learning, 
who never could endur set tasks, and spurn at the pedagogu and hi 
rod." 

"I have known such likewise, but thi wa not one of them. I know not 
whenc he could deriv hi love of knowledg or the mean of acquir 
it. the famili were total illiterate. the father wa a scotch peasant, 
whose ignor wa so great that he could not sign hi name. hi wife, 
I believe, could read, and might sometim deciph the figur in an 
almanac; but that wa all. I am apt to think that the son' abil wa 
not much greater. you might as well look for silver platter or marbl 
tabl in hi house, as for a book or a pen. 

"I rememb call at their hous one even in the winter befor 
last. It wa intens cold; and my father, who rode with me, have 
busi with sawni mervyn, we stop a minut at hi gate; and, while 
the two old men were engag in conversation, I beg leav to warm 
myself by the kitchen fire. here, in the chimney-corner, seat on a 
block, I found arthur busili engag in _knit stockings_! I thought 
thi a whimsic employ for a young activ man. I told him so, for I 
want to put him to the blush; but he smile in my face, and answered, 
without the least discomposure, 'just as whimsic a busi for a 
young activ woman. pray, did you never knit a stocking?' 

"'yes; but that wa from necessity. were I of a differ sex, or did I 
possess the strength of a man, I should rather work in my field or studi 
my book.' 

"'rejoic that you are a woman, then, and are at liberti to pursu that 
which cost least labour and demand most skill. you see, though a man, 
I use your privilege, and prefer knit yarn to thresh my brain 
with a book or the barn-floor with a flail.' 

"'i wonder,' said I, contemptuously, 'you do not put on the petticoat as 
well as handl the needle.' 

"'do not wonder,' he replied; 'it is becaus I hate a petticoat 
encumbr as much as I love warm feet. look there,' (offer the 
stock to my inspection:) 'i it not well done?' 

"I did not touch it, but sneeringli said, 'excellent! I wonder you do 
not apprentic yourself to a tailor.' 

"he look at me with an air of ridicul simplicity, and said, 'how 
prone the woman is to _wonder_! you call the work excellent, and yet 
_wonder_ that I do not make myself a slave to improv my skill! did you 
learn needlework from seven years' squat on a tailor' board? had 
you come to me, I would have taught you in a day.' 

"'i wa taught at school.' 

"'and paid your instructor?' 

"'to-be-sure.' 

"''twa liberti and money thrown away. send your sister, if you have 
one, to me, and I will teach her without either rod or wages. will you?' 

"'you have an old and a violent antipathy, I believe, to ani thing like 
a school.' 

"'true. It wa earli and violent. had not you?' 

"'no. I went to school with pleasure; for I thought to read and write 
were accomplish of some value.' 

"'indeed? then I misunderstood you just now. I thought you said that, 
had you the strength of a man, you should prefer the plough and the book 
to the needle. whence, suppos you a female, I infer that you had a 
woman' love for the needl and a fool' hatr of books.' 

"mi father call me from without, I now made a motion to go. 'stay,' 
continu he, with great earnestness, throw asid hi 
knitting-apparatus, and begin in great hast to pull off hi 
stockings. 'draw these stock over your shoes. they will save your 
feet from the snow while walk to your horse.' 

"half angry, and half laughing, I declin the offer. He had drawn them 
off, however, and, hold them in hi hand, 'be persuaded,' said he; 
'onli lift your feet, and I will slip them on in a trice.' 

"find me posit in my refusal, he drop the stockings; and, 
without more ado, caught me up in hi arms, rush out of the room, and, 
run barefoot through the snow, set me fairli on my horse. all wa 
done in a moment, and befor I had time to reflect on hi intentions. He 
then seiz my hand, and, kiss it with great fervour, exclaimed, 'A 
thousand thank to you for not accept my stockings. you have therebi 
save yourself and me the time and toil of draw on and draw off. 
sinc you have taught me to wonder, let me practis the lesson in 
wonder at your folly, in wear worst shoe and silk stock at 
a season like this. take my counsel, and turn your silk to worst and 
your worst to leather. then may you hope for warm feet and dry. what! 
leav the gate without a bless on your counsellor?' 

"I spur my hors into a gallop, glad to escap from so strang a 
being. I could give you mani instanc of behaviour equal singular, 
and which betray a mixtur of shrewd and folly, of kind and 
impudence, which justified, perhaps, the common notion that hi 
intellect were unsound. noth wa more remark than hi 
impenetr to ridicul and censure. you might revil him for hours, 
and he would listen to you with invinc composure. To awaken anger or 
shame in him wa impossible. He would answer, but in such a way as to 
show him total unawar of your true meaning. He would afterward talk 
to you with all the smile affabl and freedom of an old friend. 
everi one despis him for hi idl and folly, no less conspicu 
in hi word than hi actions; but no one fear him, and few were angri 
with him, till after the detect of hi commerc with _betty_, and hi 
inhuman treatment of hi father." 

"have you good reason for suppos him to have been illicitli 
connect with that girl?" 

"yes. such as cannot be discredited. It would not be proper for me to 
state these proofs. nay, he never deni it. when reminded, on one 
occasion, of the infer which everi imparti person would draw from 
appearances, he acknowledged, with hi usual placid effrontery, that the 
infer wa unavoidable. He even mention other concur and 
contemporari incidents, which had elud the observ of hi 
censurer, and which ad still more forc to the conclusion. He wa 
studiou to palliat the vice of thi woman, as long as he wa her onli 
paramour; but, after her marriag with hi father, the tone wa changed. 
He confess that she wa tidy, notable, industrious; but, then, she 
wa a prostitute. when charg with be instrument in make her 
such, and when hi companion dwelt upon the deprav of revil her 
for vice which she owe to him, 'true,' he would say, 'there is 
deprav and folli in the conduct you describe. make me out, if you 
please, to be a villain. what then? I wa talking, not of myself, but of 
betty. still thi woman is a prostitute. If it were I that made her 
such, with more confid may I make the charge. but think not that I 
blame betty. place me in her situation, and I should have act just so. 
I should have form just such notion of my interest, and pursu it by 
the same means. still, say I, I would fain have a differ woman for my 
father' wife, and the mistress of hi family.'" 




chapter xxvi. 


thi convers wa interrupt by a messeng from my wife, who 
desir my return immediately. I had some hope of meet with mervyn, 
some day have now elaps sinc hi part from us, and not be 
consciou of ani extraordinari motiv for delay. It wa wortley, 
however, and not mervyn, to whom I wa called. 

My friend came to share with me hi suspicion and inquietud 
respect welbeck and mervyn. An accid had newli happen which had 
awaken these suspicion afresh. He desir a patient audienc while he 
explain them to me. these were hi words:-- 

"to-day a person present me a letter from a mercantil friend at 
baltimore. I easili discern the bearer to be a sea-captain. He wa a 
man of sensibl and pleas aspect, and wa recommend to my 
friendship and counsel in the letter which he brought. the letter 
stated, that a man, by name amo watson, by profess a mariner, and a 
resid at baltimore, had disappear in the summer of last year, in a 
mysteri and incomprehens manner. He wa known to have arriv in 
thi citi from jamaica, and to have intend an immedi journey to hi 
family, who live at baltimore; but he never arriv there, and no trace 
of hi exist ha sinc been discovered. the bearer had come to 
investigate, if possible, the secret of hi fate, and I wa earnestli 
entreat to afford him all the assist and advic in my power, in 
the prosecut of hi search. I express my willing to serv the 
stranger, whose name wa williams; and, after offer him entertain 
at my house, which wa thank accepted, he proceed to unfold to 
me the particular of thi affair. hi stori wa this. 

"'on the 20th of last june, I arrived,' said he, 'from the west indies, 
in compani with captain watson. I command the ship in which he came as 
a passenger, hi own ship be taken and confisc by the english. We 
had long live in habit of strict friendship, and I love him for hi 
own sake, as well as becaus he had marri my sister. We land in the 
morning, and went to dine with mr. keysler, sinc dead, but who then 
live in water street. He wa extrem anxiou to visit hi family, 
and, have a few commiss to perform in the city, which would not 
demand more than a coupl of hours, he determin to set out next 
morn in the stage. meanwhile, I had engag which requir me to 
repair with the utmost expedit to new york. I wa scarc less 
anxiou than my brother to reach baltimore, where my friend also 
reside; but there wa an absolut necess of go eastward. I 
expected, however, to return hither in three days, and then to follow 
watson home. shortli after dinner we parted; he to execut hi 
commissions, and I to embark in the mail-stage. 

"'in the time prefix I returned. I arriv earli in the morning, and 
prepar to depart again at noon. meanwhile, I call at keysler's. thi 
is an old acquaint of watson' and mine; and, in the cours of talk, 
he express some surpris that watson had so precipit desert hi 
house. I state the necess there wa for watson' immedi departur 
_southward_, and added, that no doubt my brother had explain thi 
necessity. 

"'why, (said keysler,) it is true, captain watson mention hi 
intent of leav town earli next day; but then he gave me reason to 
expect that he would sup and lodg with me that night, wherea he ha 
not made hi appear since. besides, hi trunk wa brought to my 
house. this, no doubt, he intend to carri home with him, but here it 
remain still. It is not like that in the hurri of departur hi 
baggag wa forgotten. hence, I infer that he wa still in town, and 
have been puzzl myself these three day with conjectur as to what 
is becom of him. what surpris me more is, that, on inquir among 
the few friend which he ha in thi city, I find them as ignor of 
hi motion as myself. I have not, indeed, been wholli without 
apprehens that some accid or other ha befallen him.' 

"'i wa not a littl alarm by thi intimation. I went myself, 
agreeabl to keysler' directions, to watson' friends, and made anxiou 
inquiries, but none of them had seen my brother sinc hi arrival. I 
endeavour to recollect the commiss which he design to execute, 
and, if possible, to trace him to the spot where he last appeared. He 
had sever packet to deliver, one of which wa address to walter 
thetford. him, after some inquiry, I found out, but unluckili he chanc 
to be in the country. I found, by question a clerk, who transact 
hi busi in hi absence, that a person, who answer the minut 
descript which I gave of watson, had been there on the day on which I 
part with him, and had left paper rel to the captur of one of 
thetford' vessel by the english. thi wa the sum of the inform 
he wa abl to afford me. 

"'i then appli to three merchant for whom my brother had letters. 
they all acknowledg the receipt of these letters, but they were 
deliv through the medium of the post-office. 

"'i wa extrem anxiou to reach home. urgent engag compel me 
to go on without delay. I had alreadi exhaust all the mean of inquiri 
within my reach, and wa oblig to acquiesc in the belief that watson 
had proceed homeward at the time appointed, and left, by forget 
or accident, hi trunk behind him. On examin the book kept at the 
stage-offices, hi name nowher appeared, and no convey by water had 
occur dure the last week. still, the onli conjectur I could form 
wa that he had gone homeward. 

"'arriv at baltimore, I found that watson had not yet made hi 
appearance. hi wife produc a letter, which, by the postmark, appear 
to have been put into the offic at philadelphia, on the morn after 
our arrival, and on which he had design to commenc hi journey. thi 
letter had been written by my brother, in my presence, but I had 
dissuad him from send it, sinc the same coach that should bear the 
letter wa likewis to carri himself. I had seen him put it unwaf in 
hi pocket-book, but thi letter, unalt in ani part, and contain 
money which he had at first intend to enclos in it, wa now convey 
to hi wife' hand. In thi letter he mention hi design of set 
out for baltimor on the _twenty-first_, yet on that day the letter 
itself had been put into the office. 

"'we hope that a short time would clear up thi mystery, and bring the 
fugit home; but, from that day till the present, no atom of 
intellig ha been receiv concern him. the yellow fever, which 
quickli followed, in thi city, and my own engagements, have hinder 
me, till now, from come hither and resum the search. 

"'mi brother wa one of the most excel of men. hi wife love him to 
distraction, and, togeth with hi children, depend for subsist 
upon hi efforts. you will not, therefore, be surpris that hi 
disappear excited, in us, the deepest constern and distress; 
but I have other and peculiar reason for wish to know hi fate. I 
gave him sever bill of exchang on merchant of baltimore, which I 
had receiv in payment of my cargo, in order that they might, as soon 
as possible, be present and accepted. these have disappear with the 
bearer. there is likewis anoth circumst that make hi exist 
of no small value. 

"'there is an english family, who formerli resid in jamaica, and 
possess an estat of great value, but who, for some years, have live 
in the neighbourhood of baltimore. the head of thi famili die a year 
ago, and left a widow and three daughters. the ladi thought it elig 
to sell her husband' properti in jamaica, the island becom hourli 
more expos to the chanc of war and revolution, and transfer it to 
the unit states, where she purpos henceforth to reside. watson had 
been her husband' friend, and, hi probiti and disinterested be 
well known, she intrust him with legal power to sell thi estate. 
thi commiss wa punctual performed, and the purchase-money wa 
received. In order to confer on it the utmost possibl security, he 
roll up four bill of exchange, drawn upon opulent, merchant of 
london, in a thin sheet of lead, and, deposit thi roll in a leathern 
girdle, fasten it round hi waist, and under hi clothes; a second set 
he gave to me, and a third he despatch to mr. keysler, by a vessel 
which sail a few day befor him. On our arriv in thi city, we 
found that keysler had receiv those transmit to him, and which he 
had been charg to keep till our arrival. they were now produced, and, 
togeth with those which I had carried, were deliv to watson. By 
him they were join to those in the girdle, which he still wore, 
conceiv thi method of convey to be safer than ani other, and, at 
the same time, imagin it needless, in so short a journey as remain 
to be performed, to resort to other expedients. 

"'the sum which he thu bore about him wa no less than ten thousand 
pound sterling. It constitut the whole patrimoni of a worthi and 
excel family, and the loss of it reduc them to beggary. It is gone 
with watson, and whither watson ha gone it is imposs even to guess. 

"'you may now easili conceive, sir, the dread disast which may be 
connect with thi man' fate, and with what immeasur anxieti hi 
famili and friend have regard hi disappearance. that he is aliv can 
scarc be believed; for in what situat could he be place in which 
he would not be abl and will to commun some tide of hi fate 
to hi family? 

"'our grief ha been unspeak aggrav by the suspicion which mrs. 
mauric and her friend have allow themselv to admit. they do not 
scrupl to insinu that watson, tempt by so great a prize, ha 
secretli embark for england, in order to obtain payment for these 
bill and retain the money for hi own use. 

"'no man wa more impati of poverti than watson, but no man' honesti 
wa more inflexible. He murmur at the destini that compel him to 
sacrific hi ease, and risk hi life upon the ocean in order to 
procur the mean of subsistence; and all the properti which he had 
spent the best part of hi life in collect had just been ravish 
away from him by the english; but, if he had yield to thi temptat 
at ani time, it would have been on receiv these bill at jamaica. 
instead of come hither, it would have been infinit more easi and 
conveni to have embark directli for london; but none who thoroughli 
knew him can, for a moment, harbour a suspicion of hi truth. 

"'if he be dead, and if the bill are not to be recovered, yet to 
ascertain thi will, at least, serv to vindic hi character. As long 
as hi fate is unknown, hi fame will be load with the most flagrant 
imputations, and, if these bill be ever paid in london, these 
imput will appear to be justified. If he ha been robbed, the 
robber will make hast to secur the payment, and the mauric may not 
unreason conclud that the robber wa watson himself.' mani other 
particular were ad by the stranger, to show the extent of the evil 
flow from the death of hi brother, and the loss of the paper which 
he carri with him. 

"I wa greatli at a loss," continu wortley, "what direct or advic 
to afford thi man. keysler, as you know, die earli of the pestilence; 
but keysler wa the onli resid in thi citi with whom william had 
ani acquaintance. On mention the proprieti of prevent the sale of 
these bill in america, by some public notice, he told me that thi 
caution had been earli taken; and I now rememb see the 
advertisement, in which the bill had been repres as have been 
lost or stolen in thi city, and a reward of a thousand dollar wa 
offer to ani one who should restor them. thi caution had been 
publish in september, in all the trading-town from portsmouth to 
savannah, but had produc no satisfaction. 

"I accompani william to the mayor' office, in hope of find in 
the record of hi proceedings, dure the last six months, some trace 
of watson; but neither these record nor the memori of the magistr 
afford us ani satisfaction. watson' friend had drawn up, likewise, 
a descript of the person and dress of the fugitive, an account of the 
incid attend hi disappearance, and of the paper which he had in 
hi possession, with the manner in which these paper had been secured. 
these had been alreadi publish in the southern newspapers, and have 
been just reprint in our own. As the former notic had avail 
nothing, thi second expedi wa thought necessari to be employed. 

"after some reflection, it occur to me that it might be proper to 
renew the attempt which william had made to trace the footstep of hi 
friend to the moment of hi final disappearance. He had pursu watson 
to thetford's; but thetford himself had not been seen, and he had been 
content with the vagu inform of hi clerk. thetford and hi 
family, includ hi clerk, had perished, and it seem as if thi 
sourc of inform wa dri up. It wa possible, however, that old 
thetford might have some knowledg of hi nephew' transactions, by 
which some light might chanc to be thrown upon thi obscurity. I 
therefor call on him, but found him utterli unabl to afford me the 
light that I wished. My mention of the packet which watson had brought 
to thetford, contain document respect the captur of a certain 
ship, remind him of the injuri which he had receiv from welbeck, 
and excit him to renew hi menac and imput on that wretch. 
have somewhat exhaust thi rhetoric, he proceed to tell me what 
connect there wa between the remembr of hi injuri and the 
captur of thi vessel. 

"thi vessel and it cargo were, in fact, the properti of welbeck. they 
had been sent to a good market, and had been secur by an adequ 
insurance. the valu of thi ship and cargo, and the valid of the 
policy, he had taken care to ascertain by mean of hi two nephews, one 
of whom had gone out supercargo. thi had form hi induc to lend 
hi three note to welbeck, in exchang for three other notes, the whole 
amount of which includ the _equit interest_ of _five per cent. per 
month_ on hi own loan. for the payment of these note he by no mean 
relied, as the world foolishli imagined, on the seem opul and 
secret fund of welbeck. these were illus too gross to have ani 
influenc on him. He wa too old a bird to be decoy into the net by 
_such_ chaff. no; hi nephew, the supercargo, would of cours receiv 
the produc of the voyage, and so much of thi produc as would pay hi 
debt he had procur the owner' author to intercept it passag from 
the pocket of hi nephew to that of welbeck. In case of loss, he had 
obtain a similar secur upon the policy. jamieson' proceed had 
been the same with hi own, and no affair in which he had ever engag 
had appear to be more free from hazard than this. their calculations, 
however, though plausible, were defeated. the ship wa taken and 
condemned, for a caus which render the insur ineffectual. 

"I bestow no time in reflect on thi tissu of extort and 
frauds, and on that cours of event which so often disconcert the 
stratagem of cunning. the name of welbeck and watson were thu 
associ together, and fill my thought with restless and 
suspicion. welbeck wa capabl of ani weakness. It wa possibl an 
interview had happen between these men, and that the fugit had been 
someway instrument in watson' fate. these thought were mention to 
williams, whom the name of welbeck threw into the utmost perturbation. 
On find that one of thi name had dwelt in thi city, and that he had 
prove a villain, he instantli admit the most dreari forebodings. 

"'i have heard,' said williams, 'the histori of thi welbeck a score of 
time from my brother. there formerli subsist a veri intim 
connect between them. My brother had conferred, upon one whom he 
thought honest, innumer benefits; but all hi benefit had been 
repaid by the blackest treachery. welbeck' charact and guilt had 
often been made the subject of talk between us, but, on these occasions, 
my brother' placid and patient temper forsook him. hi grief for the 
calam which had sprung from thi man, and hi desir of revenge, 
burst all bounds, and transport him to a pitch of temporari frenzy. I 
often inquir in what manner he intend to act if a meet should 
take place between them. He answered, that doubtless he should act like 
a maniac, in defianc of hi sober principles, and of the duti which he 
owe hi family. 

"'what! (said i,) would you stab or pistol him? 

"'no. I wa not born for an assassin. I would upbraid him in such term 
as the furiou moment might suggest, and then challeng him to a 
meeting, from which either he or I should not part with life. I would 
allow time for him to make hi peac with heaven, and for me to blast 
hi reput upon earth, and to make such provis for my possibl 
death as duti and discret would prescribe. 

"'now, noth is more probabl than that welbeck and my brother have 
met. thetford would of cours mention hi name and interest in the 
captur ship, and henc the resid of thi detest be in thi 
citi would be made known. their meet could not take place without 
some dread consequence. I am fear that to that meet we must 
imput the disappear of my brother.' 




chapter xxvii. 


"here wa new light thrown upon the charact of welbeck, and new food 
administ to my suspicions. No conclus could be more plausibl 
than that which william had drawn; but how should it be render 
certain? walter thetford, or some of hi family, had possibl been 
wit of something, which, ad to our previou knowledge, might 
strengthen or prolong that clue, one end of which seem now to be put 
into our hands; but thetford' father-in-law wa the onli one of hi 
family, who, by season flight from the city, had escap the 
pestilence. To him, who still resid in the country, I repair with 
all speed, accompani by williams. 

"the old man, be reminded, by a varieti of circumstances, of the 
incid of that event period, was, at length, enabl to relat 
that he had been present at the meet which took place between watson 
and hi son walter, when certain packet were deliv by the former, 
relative, as he quickli understood, to the condemn of a ship in 
which thoma thetford had gone supercargo. He had notic some emot 
of the stranger, occas by hi son' mention the concern which 
welbeck had in the vessel. He likewis rememb the stranger' 
declar hi intent of visit welbeck, and request walter to 
afford him direct to hi house. 

"'next morn at the breakfast-table,' continu the old man, 'I 
advert to yesterday' incidents, and ask my son how welbeck had 
born the news of the loss of hi ship. "he bore it," said walter, "a a 
man of hi wealth ought to bear so trivial a loss. but there wa 
someth veri strang in hi behaviour," say my son, "when I mention 
the name of the captain who brought the papers; and, when I mention 
the captain' design of pay him a visit, he stare upon me, for a 
moment, as if he were fright out of hi wits, and then, snatch up 
hi hat, ran furious out of the house." thi wa all my son said upon 
that occasion; but, as I have sinc heard, it wa on that veri night 
that welbeck abscond from hi creditors.' 

"I have thi moment return from thi interview with old thetford. I 
come to you, becaus I thought it possibl that mervyn, agreeabl to 
your expectations, had returned, and I want to see the lad onc more. 
My suspicion with regard to him have been confirmed, and a warrant wa 
thi day issu for apprehend him as welbeck' accomplice." 

I wa startl by thi news. "mi friend," said I, "be cautiou how you 
act, I beseech you. you know not in what evil you may involv the 
innocent. mervyn I know to be blameless; but welbeck is inde a 
villain. the latter I shall not be sorri to see brought to justice; but 
the former, instead of merit punishment, is entitl to rewards." 

"so you believe, on the mere assert of the boy, perhaps, hi 
plausibl lie might produc the same effect upon me; but I must stay 
till he think proper to exert hi skill. the suspicion to which he is 
expos will not easili be obviated; but, if he ha ani thing to say in 
hi defence, hi judici examin will afford him the suitabl 
opportunity. whi are you so much afraid to subject hi innoc to thi 
test? It wa not till you heard hi tale that your own suspicion were 
removed. allow me the same privileg of unbelief. 

"but you do me wrong, in deem me the caus of hi apprehension. It is 
jamieson and thetford' work, and they have not proceed on shadowi 
surmis and the impuls of mere revenge. fact have come to light of 
which you are wholli unaware, and which, when known to you, will conquer 
even your incredul as to the guilt of mervyn." 

"facts? let me know them, I beseech you. If mervyn ha deceiv me, 
there is an end to my confid in human nature. all limit to 
dissimulation, and all distinct between vice and virtue, will be 
effaced. No man' word, nor forc of collater evidence, shall weigh 
with me a hair." 

"it wa time," repli my friend, "that your confid in smooth 
featur and fluent accent should have end long ago. till I gain 
from my present profess some knowledg of the world, a knowledg 
which wa not gain in a moment, and ha not cost a trifle, I wa 
equal wise in my own conceit; and, in order to decid upon the truth 
of ani one' pretensions, need onli a clear view of hi face and a 
distinct hear of hi words. My folly, in that respect, wa onli to be 
cured, however, by my own experience, and I suppos your credul will 
yield to no other remedy. these are the facts:-- 

"mrs. wentworth, the proprietor of the hous in which welbeck lived, ha 
furnish some intellig respect mervyn, whose truth cannot be 
doubted, and which furnish the strongest evid of a conspiraci 
between thi lad and hi employer. It seem that, some year since, a 
nephew of thi ladi left hi father' famili clandestinely, and ha not 
been heard of since. thi nephew wa intend to inherit her fortunes, 
and her anxieti and inquiri respect him have been endless and 
incessant. these, however, have been fruitless. welbeck, know these 
circumstances, and be desir of substitut a girl whom he had 
mould for hi purpose, in place of the lost youth, in the affect 
of the ladi while living, and in her testament when dead, endeavour to 
persuad her that the youth had die in some foreign country. for thi 
end, mervyn wa to person a kinsman of welbeck who had just arriv 
from europe, and who had been a wit of her nephew' death. A stori 
was, no doubt, to be contrived, where truth should be copi with the 
most exquisit dexterity; and, the ladi be prevail upon to believ 
the story, the way wa clear for accomplish the remaind of the 
plot. 

"in due time, and after the lady' mind had been art prepar by 
welbeck, the pupil made hi appearance; and, in a convers full of 
studi ambiguities, assur the ladi that her nephew wa dead. for the 
present he declin relat the particular of hi death, and display 
a constanc and intrepid in resist her entreati that would have 
been admir in a better cause. befor she had time to fathom thi 
pain mystery, welbeck' fraud were in danger of detection, and he 
and hi pupil suddenli disappeared. 

"while the plot wa go forward, there occur an incid which the 
plotter had not foreseen or precluded, and which possibl might have 
creat some confus or impedi in their designs. A bundl wa 
found one night in the street, consist of some coars clothes, and 
containing, in the midst of it, the miniatur portrait of mrs. 
wentworth' nephew. It fell into the hand of one of that lady' 
friends, who immedi despatch the bundl to her. mervyn, in hi 
interview with thi lady, spi the portrait on the mantel-piece. led by 
some freak of fancy, or some web of artifice, he introduc the talk 
respect her nephew, by boldli claim it as his; but, when the mode 
in which it had been found wa mentioned, he wa disconcert and 
confounded, and precipit withdrew. 

"thi conduct, and the subsequ flight of the lad, afford ground 
enough to question the truth of hi intellig respect her nephew; 
but it ha sinc been confuted, in a letter just receiv from her 
brother in england. In thi letter, she is inform that her nephew had 
been seen by one who knew him well, in charleston; that some intercours 
took place between the youth and the bearer of the news, in the cours 
of which the latter had persuad the nephew to return to hi family, 
and that the youth had given some token of compliance. the 
letter-writer, who wa father to the fugitive, had written to certain 
friend at charleston, entreat them to use their influenc with the 
runaway to the same end, and, at ani rate, to cherish and protect him. 
thus, I hope you will admit that the duplic of mervyn is 
demonstrated." 

"the fact which you have mentioned," said I, after some pause, "partli 
correspond with mervyn' story; but the last particular is 
irreconcil repugn to it. now, for the first time, I begin to feel 
that my confid is shaken. I feel my mind bewild and distract 
by the multitud of new discoveri which have just taken place. I want 
time to revolv them slowly, to weigh them accurately, and to estim 
their consequ fully. I am afraid to speak; fear that, in the 
present troubl of my thoughts, I may say someth which I may 
afterward regret, I want a counsellor; but you, wortley, are unfit for 
the office. your judgment is unfurnish with the same materials; your 
suffer have sour your human and biass your candour. the onli 
one qualifi to divid with me these cares, and aid in select the 
best mode of action, is my wife. she is mistress of mervyn' history; an 
observ of hi conduct dure hi abod with us; and is hindered, by 
her educ and temper, from deviat into rigour and malevolence. 
will you pardon me, therefore, if I defer comment on your narr 
till I have had an opportun of review it and compar it with my 
knowledg of the lad, collect from himself and from my own 
observation?" 

wortley could not but admit the justic of my request, and, after some 
desultori conversation, we parted. I hasten to commun to my wife 
the variou intellig which I had late received. mrs. althorpe' 
portrait of the mervyn contain lineament which the summari detail of 
arthur did not enabl us fulli to comprehend. the treatment which the 
youth is said to have given to hi father; the illicit commerc that 
subsist between him and hi father' wife; the pillag of money and 
hi father' horse, but ill accord with the tale which we had heard, 
and disquiet our mind with doubts, though far from dictat our 
belief. 

what, however, more deepli absorb our attention, wa the testimoni of 
william and of mrs. wentworth. that which wa mysteri and 
inscrut to wortley and the friend of watson wa lumin to us. the 
coincid between the vagu hint labori collect by these 
inquirers, and the narr of mervyn, afford the most cogent 
attest of the truth of that narrative. 

watson had vanish from all eyes, but the spot where rest hi remain 
wa known to us. the girdl spoken of by william would not be suspect 
to exist by hi murderer. It wa unmolested, and wa doubtless buri 
with him. that which wa so earnestli sought, and which constitut the 
subsist of the maurices, would probabl be found adher to hi 
body. what conduct wa incumb upon me who possess thi knowledge? 

It wa just to restor these bill to their true owner; but how could 
thi be done without hazard process and tediou disclosures? To 
whom ought these disclosur to be made? By what author or agenc 
could these half-decay limb be dug up, and the lost treasur be taken 
from amidst the horribl corrupt in which it wa immersed? 

thi ought not to be the act of a singl individual. thi act would 
entangl him in a maze of peril and suspicions, of conceal and 
evasions, from which he could not hope to escap with hi reput 
inviolate. the proper method wa through the agenc of the law. It is to 
thi that mervyn must submit hi conduct. the stori which he told to me 
he must tell to the world. suspicion have fix themselv upon him, 
which allow him not the privileg of silenc and obscurity. while he 
continu unknown and unthought of, the public of hi stori would 
onli give unnecessari birth to dangers; but now danger are incur 
which it may probabl contribut to lessen, if not to remove. 

meanwhil the return of mervyn to the citi wa anxious expected. day 
after day passed, and no tide were received. I had busi of an 
urgent natur which requir my presenc in jersey, but which, in the 
daili expect of the return of my young friend, I postpon a week 
longer than rigid discret allowed. At length I wa oblig to compli 
with the exigence, and left the city, but made such arrang that I 
should be appriz by my wife of mervyn' return with all practic 
expedition. 

these arrang were superfluous, for my busi wa despatched, and 
my absenc at an end, befor the youth had given us ani token of hi 
approach. I now rememb the warn of wortley, and hi assert 
that mervyn had withdrawn himself forev from our view. the event had 
hitherto unwelcom coincid with these predictions, and a thousand 
doubt and misgiv were awakened. 

one evening, while prepar to shake off gloomi thought by a visit to 
a friend, some one knock at my door, and left a billet contain 
these words:-- 

"_dr. steven is request to come immedi to the debtors' 
apart in prune street._" 

thi billet wa without signature. the handwrit wa unknown, and the 
precipit departur of the bearer left me wholli at a loss with 
respect to the person of the writer, or the end for which my presenc 
wa required. thi uncertainti onli hasten my complianc with the 
summons. 

the even wa approaching,--a time when the prison-door are 
accustom to be shut and stranger to be excluded. thi furnish an 
addit reason for despatch. As I walk swiftli along, I revolv 
the possibl motiv that might have prompt thi message. A conjectur 
wa soon formed, which led to apprehens and inquietude. 

one of my friends, by name carlton, wa embarrass with debt which he 
wa unabl to discharge. He had late been menac with arrest by a 
creditor not accustom to remit ani of hi claims. I dread that thi 
catastroph had now happened, and call to mind the anguish with which 
thi untoward incid would overwhelm hi family. I knew hi incapac 
to take away the claim of hi creditor by payment, or to sooth him into 
clemenc by supplication. 

So prone is the human mind to creat for itself distress, that I wa not 
awar of the uncertainti of thi evil till I arriv at the prison. I 
check myself at the moment when I open my lip to utter the name of 
my friend, and wa admit without particular inquiries. I suppos 
that he by whom I had been summon hither would meet me in the common 
room. 

the apart wa fill with pale face and wither forms. the mark 
of neglig and poverti were visibl in all; but few betrayed, in 
their featur or gestures, ani symptom of concern on account of their 
condition. feroci gayety, or stupid indifference, seem to sit upon 
everi brow. the vapour from a heat stove, mingl with the fume of 
beer and tallow that were spill upon it, and with the taint breath 
of so promiscu a crowd, load the stagnant atmosphere. At my first 
transit from the cold and pure air without, to thi noxiou element, 
I found it difficult to breathe. A moment, however, reconcil me to my 
situation, and I look anxious round to discov some face which I 
knew. 

almost everi mouth wa furnish with a cigar, and everi hand with a 
glass of porter. conversation, carri on with much emphasi of tone and 
gesture, wa not wanting. sundri groups, in differ corners, were 
beguil the tediou hour at whist. others, unemployed, were stroll 
to and fro, and testifi their vacanc of thought and care by hum 
or whistl a tune. 

I foster the hope that my prognost had deceiv me. thi hope wa 
strengthen by reflect that the billet receiv wa written in a 
differ hand from that of my friend. meanwhil I continu my search. 
seat on a bench, silent and aloof from the crowd, hi eye fix upon 
the floor, and hi face half conceal by hi hand, a form wa at length 
discov which verifi all my conjectur and fears. carlton wa he. 

My heart droop and my tongu falter at thi sight. I survey him 
for some minut in silence. At length, approach the bench on which 
he sat, I touch hi hand and awaken him from hi reverie. He look 
up. A momentari gleam of joy and surpris wa succeed by a gloom 
deeper than before. 

It wa plain that my friend need consolation. He wa govern by an 
exquisit sensibl to disgrace. He wa impati of constraint. He 
shrunk, with fastidi abhorrence, from the contact of the vulgar and 
the profligate. hi constitut wa delic and feeble. impur airs, 
restraint from exercise, unusu aliment, unwholesom or incommodi 
accommodations, and perturb thoughts, were, at ani time, suffici to 
gener diseas and to depriv him of life. 

To these evil he wa now subjected. He had no money wherewith to 
purchas food. He had been drag hither in the morning. He had not 
tast a morsel sinc hi entrance. He had not provid a bed on which 
to lie; or inquir in what room, or with what companions, the night wa 
to be spent. 

fortitud wa not among my friend' qualities. He wa more prone to 
shrink from danger than encount it, and to yield to the flood rather 
than sustain it; but it is just to observ that hi anguish, on the 
present occasion, aros not wholli from selfish considerations. hi 
parent were dead, and two sister were depend on him for support. 
one of these wa nearli of hi own age. the other wa scarc emerg 
from childhood. there wa an intellectu as well as a person 
resembl between my friend and hi sisters. they possess hi 
physic infirmities, hi vehement passions, and refin of taste; 
and the miseri of hi condit wa tenfold increased, by reflect on 
the feel which would be awaken in them by the knowledg of hi 
state, and the hardship to which the loss of hi succour would expos 
them. 




chapter xxviii. 


It wa not in my power to releas my friend by the payment of hi debt; 
but, by contract with the keeper of the prison for hi board, I could 
save him from famine; and, by suitabl exertions, could procur him 
lodg as conveni as the time would admit. I could promis to 
consol and protect hi sisters, and, by cheer tone and frequent 
visits, dispel some part of the evil which encompass him. 

after the first surpris had subsided, he inquir by what accid thi 
meet had been produced. consciou of my incapac to do him ani 
essenti service, and unwil to make me a partak in hi miseries, 
he had forborn to inform me of hi condition. 

thi assur wa listen to with some wonder. I show him the 
billet. It had not been written by him. He wa a stranger to the 
penmanship. none but the attorney and offic were appriz of hi fate. 
It wa obviou to conclude, that thi wa the interposit of some 
friend, who, know my affect for carlton, had taken thi mysteri 
method of call me to hi succour. 

conjectur as to the author and motiv of thi inter posit were 
suspend by more urgent considerations. I request an interview with 
the keeper, and inquir how carlton could be best accommodated. 

He said that all hi room were full but one, which, in consequ of 
the dismiss of three person in the morning, had at present but one 
tenant. thi person had late arrived, wa sick, and had with him, at 
thi time, one of hi friends. carlton might divid the chamber with 
thi person. No doubt hi consent would be readili given; though thi 
arrangement, be the best, must take place whether he consent or 
not. 

thi consent I resolv immedi to seek, and, for that purpose, 
desir to be led to the chamber. the door of the apart wa shut. I 
knock for admission. It wa instantli opened, and I entered. the first 
person who met my view was--arthur mervyn. 

I start with astonishment. mervyn' counten betray noth but 
satisfact at the interview. the trace of fatigu and anxieti gave 
place to tender and joy. It readili occur to me that mervyn wa 
the writer of the note which I had late received. To meet him within 
these walls, and at thi time, wa the most remot and undesir of 
all contingencies. the same hour had thu made me acquaint with the 
kindr and unwelcom fate of two be whom I most loved. 

I had scarc time to return hi embrace, when, take my hand, he led 
me to a bed that stood in one corner. there wa stretch upon it one 
whom a second glanc enabl me to call by hi name, though I had never 
befor seen him. the vivid portrait which mervyn had drawn wa 
conspicu in the sunken and haggard visag befor me. thi face had, 
indeed, proport and line which could never be forgotten or 
mistaken. welbeck, when onc seen or described, wa easili distinguish 
from the rest of mankind. He had stronger motiv than other men for 
abstain from guilt, the difficulti of conceal or disguis be 
tenfold greater in him than in others, by reason of the indel and 
eye-attract mark which natur had set upon him. 

He wa pallid and emaciated. He did not open hi eye on my entrance. He 
seem to be asleep; but, befor I had time to exchang glanc with 
mervyn, or to inquir into the natur of the scene, he awoke. On see 
me he started, and cast a look of upbraid on my companion. the latter 
comprehend hi emotion, and endeavour to appeas him. 

"thi person," said he, "i my friend. He is likewis a physician; and, 
perceiv your state to requir medic assistance, I ventur to send 
for him." 

welbeck replied, in a contemptu and indign tone, "thou mistakest 
my condition, boy. My diseas lie deeper than hi scrutini will ever 
reach. I had hope thou wert gone. thi importun are well meant, but 
they aggrav my miseries." 

He now rose from the bed, and continued, in a firm and resolut tone, 
"you are intrud into thi apartment. It is mine, and I desir to be 
left alone." 

mervyn returned, at first, no answer to thi address. He wa immers in 
perplexity. At length, rais hi eye from the floor, he said, "mi 
intent are inde honest, and I am griev that I want the power of 
persuasion. to-morrow, perhaps, I may reason more cogent with your 
despair, or your present mood may be changed. To aid my own weak I 
will entreat the assist of thi friend." 

these word rous a new spirit in welbeck. hi confus and anger 
increased. hi tongu falter as he exclaimed, "good god! what mean 
you? headlong and rash as you are, you will not share with thi person 
your knowledg of me?" here he check himself, consciou that the word 
he had alreadi utter tend to the veri end which he dreaded. thi 
consciousness, ad to the terror of more ampl disclosures, which the 
simplic and rectitud of mervyn might prompt him to make, chain up 
hi tongue, and cover him with dismay. 

mervyn wa not long in answering:--"i comprehend your fear and your 
wishes. I am bound to tell you the truth. To thi person your stori ha 
alreadi been told. whatev I have wit under your roof, whatev I 
have heard from your lips, have been faith disclos to him." 

the counten of welbeck now betray a mixtur of incredul and 
horror. for a time hi utter wa stifl by hi complic 
feelings:-- 

"it cannot be. So enorm a deed is beyond thi power. thi qualiti are 
marvellous. everi new act of thine outstrip the last, and beli the 
newest calculations. but this--thi perfidi exceeds--thi outrag upon 
promises, thi violat of faith, thi blind to the future, is 
incredible." there he stopped; while hi look seem to call upon 
mervyn for a contradict of hi first assertion. 

"I know full well how inexpi stupid or wick my act will appear to 
you, but I will not prevar or lie. I repeat, that everi thing is 
known to him. your birth; your earli fortunes; the incid at 
charleston and wilmington; your treatment of the brother and sister; 
your interview with watson, and the fatal issu of that interview--i 
have told him all, just as it wa told to me." 

here the shock that wa felt by welbeck overpow hi caution and hi 
strength. He sunk upon the side of the bed. hi air wa still 
incredulous, and he continu to gaze upon mervyn. He spoke in a tone 
less vehement:-- 

"and hast thou then betray me? hast thou shut everi avenu to my 
return to honour? Am I known to be a seduc and assassin? To have 
medit all crimes, and to have perpetr the worst? 

"infami and death are my portion. I know they are reserv for me; but I 
did not think to receiv them at thi hands, that under that innoc 
guis there lurk a heart treacher and cruel. but go; leav me to 
myself. thi stroke ha extermin my remnant of hope. leav me to 
prepar my neck for the halter, and my lip for thi last and bitterest 
cup." 

mervyn struggl with hi tears, and replied, "all thi wa foreseen, 
and all thi I wa prepar to endure. My friend and I will withdraw, as 
you wish; but to-morrow I return; not to vindic my faith or my 
humanity; not to make you recant your charges, or forgiv the fault 
which I seem to have committed, but to extric you from your present 
evil, or to arm you with fortitude." 

So saying, he led the way out of the room. I follow him in silence. 
the strang and abrupt of thi scene left me no power to assum 
a part in it. I look on with new and indescrib sensations. I 
reach the street befor my recollect wa perfectli recovered. I 
then reflect on the purpos that had led me to welbeck' chamber. thi 
purpos wa yet unaccomplished. I desir mervyn to linger a moment 
while I return into the house. I onc more inquir for the keeper, 
and told him I should leav to him the provinc of acquaint welbeck 
with the necess of share hi apart with a stranger. I speedili 
rejoin mervyn in the street. 

I lost no time in requir an explan of the scene that I had 
witnessed. "how becam you onc more the companion of welbeck? whi did 
you not inform me by letter of your arriv at malverton, and of what 
occur dure your absence? what is the fate of mr. hadwin and of 
wallace?" 

"alas!" said he, "I perceiv that, though I have written, you have never 
receiv my letters. the tale of what ha occur sinc we part is 
long and various. I am not onli will but eager to commun the 
story; but thi is no suitabl place. have patienc till we reach your 
house. I have involv myself in peril and embarrass from which I 
depend upon your counsel and aid to releas me." 

I had scarc reach my own door, when I wa overtaken by a servant, 
whom I knew to belong to the famili in which carlton and hi sister 
resided. her message, therefore, wa readili guessed. she came, as I 
expected, to inquir for my friend, who had left hi home in the morn 
with a stranger, and had not yet returned. hi absenc had occas 
some inquietude, and hi sister had sent thi messag to me, to procur 
what inform respect the caus of hi detent I wa abl to 
give. 

My perplex hinder me, for some time, from answering. I wa will 
to commun the pain truth with my own mouth. I saw the necess 
of put an end to her suspense, and of prevent the news from 
reach her with fallaci aggrav or at an unseason time. 

I told the messeng that I had just part with mr. carlton, that he 
wa well, and that I would speedili come and acquaint hi sister with 
the caus of hi absence. 

though burn with curios respect mervyn and welbeck, I readili 
postpon it gratif till my visit to miss carlton wa performed. 
I had rare seen thi lady; my friendship for her brother, though 
ardent, have been late formed, and chiefli matur by interview at 
my house. I had design to introduc her to my wife, but variou 
accid had hinder the execut of my purpose. now consol and 
counsel were more need than ever, and delay or reluct in bestow 
it would have been, in a high degree, unpardonable. 

I therefor part with mervyn, request him to await my return, and 
promis to perform the engag which compel me to leav him, 
with the utmost despatch. On enter miss carlton' apartment, I 
assum an air of as much tranquil as possible. I found the ladi 
seat at a desk, with pen in hand and parchment befor her. she greet 
me with affection dignity, and caught from my counten that 
cheer of which on my entranc she wa destitute. 

"you come," said she, "to inform me what ha made my brother a truant 
to-day. till your messag wa receiv I wa somewhat anxious. thi day 
he usual spend in rambl through the fields; but so bleak and 
stormi an atmosphere, I suppose, would prevent hi excursion. I pray, 
sir, what is it detain him?" 

To conquer my embarrassment, and introduc the subject by indirect and 
cautiou means, I elud her question, and, cast an eye at the 
parchment,--"how now?" said I; "thi is strang employ for a lady. I 
knew that my friend pursu thi trade, and live by bind fast the 
bargain which other made; but I knew not that the pen wa ever usurp 
by hi sister." 

"the usurp wa prompt by necessity. My brother' impati temper 
and delic frame unfit him for the trade. He pursu it with no 
less reluct than diligence, devot to the task three night in the 
week, and the whole of each day. It would long ago have kill him, had 
I not bethought myself of share hi tasks. the pen wa irksom and 
toilsom at first, but use ha made it easy, and far more elig than 
the needle, which wa formerli my onli tool. 

"thi arrang afford my brother opportun of exercis and 
recreation, without diminish our profits; and my time, though not 
less constantly, is more agreeably, as well as more lucratively, 
employ than formerly." 

"I admir your reasoning. By thi mean provis is made against 
untoward accidents. If sick should disabl him, you are qualifi to 
pursu the same mean of support." 

At these word the lady' counten changed. she put her hand on my 
arm, and said, in a flutter and hurri accent, "i my brother sick?" 

"no. He is in perfect health. My observ wa a harmless one. I am 
sorri to observ your readi to draw alarm inferences. If I were 
to say that your scheme is use to suppli deficiencies, not onli when 
your brother is disabl by sickness, but when thrown, by some inhuman 
creditor, into jail, no doubt you would pervers and hastili infer 
that he is now in prison." 

I had scarc end the sentence, when the pierc eye of the ladi 
were anxious fix upon mine. after a moment' pause, she exclaimed, 
"the inference, indeed, is too plain. I know hi fate. It ha long been 
foreseen and expected, and I have summon up my equanim to meet it. 
would to heaven he may find the calam as light as I should find it! 
but I fear hi too irrit spirit." 

when her fear were confirmed, she start out into no vehem of 
exclamation. she quickli suppress a few tear which would not be 
withheld, and listen to my narr of what had late occurred, with 
token of gratitude. 

formal consol wa superfluous. her mind wa inde more fertil 
than my own in those topic which take away it keenest edg from 
affliction. she observ that it wa far from be the heaviest 
calam which might have happened. the creditor wa perhap vincibl by 
argument and supplications. If these should succeed, the disast would 
not onli be removed, but that secur from futur molest be 
gained, to which they had for a long time been strangers. 

should he be obdurate, their state wa far from be hopeless. 
carlton' situat allow him to pursu hi profession. hi gain 
would be equal, and hi expens would not be augmented. By their mutual 
industri they might hope to amass suffici to discharg the debt at no 
veri remot period. 

what she chiefli dread wa the pernici influenc of deject and 
sedentari labour on her brother' health. yet thi wa not to be 
consid as inevitable. fortitud might be inspir by exhort and 
example, and no condit preclud us from everi speci of bodili 
exertion. the less inclin he should prove to cultiv the mean of 
deliver and happi within hi reach, the more necessari it becam 
for her to stimul and fortifi hi resolution. 

If I were captiv by the charm of thi lady' person and carriage, 
my rever wa excit by these proof of wisdom and energy. I 
zealous promis to concur with her in everi scheme she should adopt 
for her own or her brother' advantage; and, after spend some hour 
with her, took my leave. 

I now regret the ignor in which I had hitherto remain 
respect thi lady. that she was, in an emin degree, feminin and 
lovely, wa easili discovered; but intellectu weak had been rashli 
infer from extern frailty. she wa accustom to shrink from 
observation, and reserv wa mistaken for timidity. I call on carlton 
onli when numer engag would allow, and when, by some accident, 
hi customari visit had been intermitted. On those occasions, my stay 
wa short, and my attent chiefli confin to her brother. I now 
resolv to aton for my ancient negligence, not onli by my own 
assiduities, but by those of my wife. 

On my return home, I found mervyn and my wife in earnest discourse. I 
anticip the shock which the sensibl of the latter would receiv 
from the tide which I had to commun respect carlton. I wa 
unwilling, and yet perceiv the necess of disclos the truth. I 
desir to bring these women, as soon as possible, to the knowledg of 
each other, but the necessari prelud to thi wa an acquaint with 
the disast that had happened. 

scarc had I enter the room, when mervyn turn to me, and said, 
with an air of anxieti and impatience, "pray, my friend, have you ani 
knowledg of franci carlton?" 

the mention of thi name by mervyn produc some surprise. I 
acknowledg my acquaint with him. 

"do you know in what situat he now is?" 

In answer to thi question, I state by what singular mean hi 
situat had been made known to me, and the purpos from the 
accomplish of which I had just returned. I inquir in my turn, 
"whenc origin thi question?" 

He had overheard the name of carlton in the prison. two person were 
commun in a corner, and accid enabl him to catch thi name, 
though utter by them in a half whisper, and to discov that the 
person talk about had late been convey thither. 

thi name wa not now heard for the first time. It wa connect with 
remembr that made him anxiou for the fate of him to whom it 
belonged. In discours with my wife, thi name chanc to be again 
mentioned, and hi curios wa rous afresh. I wa will to 
commun all that I knew, but mervyn' own destini wa too remark 
not to absorb all my attention, and I refus to discuss ani other theme 
till that were fulli explained. He postpon hi own gratif to 
mine, and consent to relat the incid that had happen from the 
moment of our separ till the present. 




chapter xxix. 


At part with you, my purpos wa to reach the abod of the hadwin as 
speedili as possible. I travel therefor with diligence. set out 
so early, I expected, though on foot, to reach the end of my journey 
befor noon. the activ of muscl is no obstacl to thought. So far 
from be inconsist with intens musing, it is, in my own case, 
propiti to that state of mind. 

probabl no one had stronger motiv for ardent medit than I. My 
second journey to the citi wa prompt by reasons, and attend by 
incidents, that seem to have a present existence. To think upon them 
wa to view, more deliber and thoroughly, object and person that 
still hover in my sight. instead of their attribut be alreadi 
seen, and their consequ at an end, it seem as if a seri of 
numer year and unintermit contempl were requisit to 
comprehend them fully, and bring into exist their most moment 
effects. 

If men be chiefli distinguish from each other by the mode in which 
attent is employed, either on extern and sensibl objects, or 
mere on abstract idea and the creatur of reflection, I may justli 
claim to be enrol in the second class. My exist is a seri of 
thought rather than of motions. ratiocin and deduct leav my 
sens unemployed. the ful of my fanci render my eye vacant and 
inactive. sensat do not preced and suggest, but follow and are 
secondari to, the act of my mind. 

there wa one motive, however, which made me less inattent to the 
scene that wa continu shift befor and without me than I am 
wont to be. the loveliest form which I had hitherto seen wa that of 
clemenza lodi. I recal her condit as I had wit it, as 
welbeck had described, and as you had paint it. the past wa without 
remedy; but the futur was, in some degree, within our power to creat 
and to fashion. her state wa probabl dangerous. she might alreadi be 
forlorn, beset with temptat or with anguish; or danger might onli be 
approach her, and the worst evil be impend ones. 

I wa ignor of her state. could I not remov thi ignorance? would 
not some benefit redound to her from benefic and season 
interposition? 

you had mention that her abod had late been with mrs. villars, and 
that thi ladi still resid in the country. the resid had been 
suffici described, and I perceiv that I wa now approach it. 
In a short time I spi it paint roof and five chimney through an 
avenu of _catalpas_. 

when opposit the gate which led into thi avenue, I paused. It seem 
as if thi moment were to decid upon the liberti and innoc of thi 
being. In a moment I might place myself befor her, ascertain her true 
condition, and point out to her the path of honour and safety. thi 
opportun might be the last. longer delay might render interposit 
fruitless. 

but how wa I to interpose? I wa a stranger to her language, and she 
wa unacquaint with mine. To obtain access to her, it wa necessari 
onli to demand it. but how should I explain my view and state my wish 
when an interview wa gained? and what expedi wa it in my power to 
propose? 

"now," said I, "I perceiv the valu of that wealth which I have been 
accustom to despise. the power of eat and drinking, the natur and 
limit of exist and physic enjoyment, are not chang or enlarg 
by the increas of wealth. our corpor and intellectu want are 
suppli at littl expense; but our own want are the want of others, 
and that which remains, after our own necess are obviated, it is 
alway easi and just to employ in reliev the necess of others. 

"there are no superflu in my store. It is not in my power to suppli 
thi unfortun girl with decent raiment and honest bread. I have no 
hous to which to conduct her. I have no mean of secur her from 
famin and cold. 

"yet, though indig and feeble, I am not destitut of friend and of 
home. cannot she be admit to the same asylum to which I am now 
going?" thi thought wa sudden and new. the more it wa revolved, the 
more plausibl it seemed. thi wa not mere the sole expedient, but 
the best that could have been suggested. 

the hadwin were friendly, hospitable, unsuspicious. their board, though 
simpl and uncouth, wa wholesom and plenteous. their resid wa 
sequest and obscure, and not obnoxi to impertin inquiri and 
malign animadversion. their frank and ingenu temper would make 
them easi of persuasion, and their sympathi were prompt and 
overflowing. 

"I am nearli certain," continu I, "that they will instantli afford 
protect to thi desol girl. whi shall I not anticip their 
consent, and present myself to their embrac and their welcom in her 
company?" 

slight reflect show me that thi precipit wa improper. 
whether wallac had ever arriv at malverton, whether mr. hadwin had 
escap infection, whether hi hous were the abod of secur and 
quiet, or a scene of desolation, were question yet to be determined. 
the obviou and best proceed wa to hasten forward, to afford the 
hadwins, if in distress, the feebl consol of my friendship; or, 
if their state were happy, to procur their concurr to my scheme 
respect clemenza. 

actuat by these considerations, I resum my journey. look forward, 
I perceiv a chais and hors stand by the left-hand fence, at the 
distanc of some hundr yards. thi object wa not uncommon or strange, 
and, therefore, it wa scarc noticed. when I came near, however, 
methought I recognis in thi carriag the same in which my 
importun had procur a seat for the languish wallace, in the 
manner which I have formerli related. 

It wa a crazi vehicl and old-fashioned. when onc seen it could 
scarc be mistaken or forgotten. the hors wa held by hi bridl to a 
post, but the seat wa empty. My solicitud with regard to wallace' 
destiny, of which he to whom the carriag belong might possibl afford 
me some knowledge, made me stop and reflect on what measur it wa 
proper to pursue. 

the rider could not be at a great distanc from thi spot. hi absenc 
would probabl be short. By linger a few minut an interview might 
be gained, and the uncertainti and suspens of some hour be therebi 
precluded. I therefor waited, and the same person whom I had formerli 
encount made hi appearance, in a short time, from under a cops 
that skirt the road. 

He recognis me with more difficulti than attend my recognit of 
him. the circumstances, however, of our first meet were easili 
recal to hi remembrance. I eagerli inquir when and where he had 
part with the youth who had been, on that occasion, intrust to hi 
care. 

He answer that, on leav the citi and inhal the purer air of the 
field and woods, wallac had been, in a wonder degree, invigor 
and refreshed. An instantan and total chang appear to have been 
wrought in him. He no longer languish with fatigu or fear, but becam 
full of gayeti and talk. 

the sudden of thi transition; the leviti with which he relat and 
comment on hi recent danger and evils, excit the astonish of 
hi companion, to whom he not onli commun the histori of hi 
disease, but impart mani anecdot of a humor kind. some of these 
my companion repeated. I heard them with regret and dissatisfaction. 
they betoken a mind vitiat by intercours with the thoughtless and 
deprav of both sexes, and particularli with infam and proflig 
women. 

My companion proceed to mention that wallace' exhilar last but 
for a short time, and disappear as suddenli as it had appeared. He 
wa seiz with deadli sickness, and insist upon leav the carriage, 
whose movement shock hi stomach and head to an insupport degree. 
hi companion wa not void of apprehens on hi own account, but wa 
unwil to desert him, and endeavour to encourag him. hi effort 
were vain. though the nearest hous wa at the distanc of some hundr 
yards, and though it wa probabl that the inhabit of thi hous 
would refus to accommod one in hi condition, yet wallac could not 
be prevail on to proceed; and, in spite of persuas and 
remonstrance, left the carriag and threw himself on the grassi bank 
besid the road. 

thi person wa not unmind of the hazard which he incur by contact 
with a sick man. He conceiv himself to have perform all that wa 
consist with duti to himself and to hi family; and wallace, 
persist in affirm that, by attempt to ride farther, he should 
mere hasten hi death, wa at length left to hi own guidance. 

these were unexpect and mourn tidings. I had fondli imagin that 
hi safeti wa put beyond the reach of untoward accidents. now, however, 
there wa reason to suppos him to have perish by a linger and 
pain disease, render fatal by the selfish of mankind, by the 
want of season remedies, and exposur to inclement airs. some 
uncertainty, however, rest on hi fate. It wa my duti to remov it, 
and to carri to the hadwin no mangl and defect tale. where, I 
asked, had wallac and hi companion parted? 

It wa about three mile farther onward. the spot, and the hous within 
view from the spot, were accur described. In thi hous it wa 
possibl that wallac had sought an asylum, and some intellig 
respect him might be gain from it inhabitants. My inform wa 
journey to the city, so that we were oblig to separate. 

In consequ of thi man' descript of wallace' deportment, and 
the proof of a dissolut and thoughtless temper which he had given, I 
began to regard hi death as an event less deplorable. such a one wa 
unworthi of a be so devoutli pure, so ardent in fidel and 
tenderness, as susan hadwin. If he loved, it wa probabl that, in 
defianc of hi vows, he would seek a differ companion. If he adher 
to hi first engagements, hi motiv would be sordid, and the 
disclosur of hi latent defect might produc more exquisit miseri to 
hi wife than hi prematur death or treacher desertion. 

the preserv of thi man wa my sole motiv for enter the 
infect city, and subject my own life to the hazard from which my 
escap may almost be esteem miraculous. wa not the end 
disproport to the means? wa there arrog in believ my life a 
price too great to be given for his? 

I wa not, indeed, sorri for the past. My purpos wa just, and the 
mean which I select were the best my limit knowledg supplied. My 
happi should be drawn from reflect on the equiti of my 
intentions. that these intent were frustrat by the ignor of 
others, or my own, wa the consequ of human frailty. honest 
purposes, though they may not bestow happi on others, will, at 
least, secur it to him who foster them. 

By these reflect my regret were dissipated, and I prepar to 
rejoic alike, whether wallac should be found to have escap or to 
have perished. the hous to which I had been direct wa speedili 
brought into view. I inquir for the master or mistress of the mansion, 
and wa conduct to a ladi of a plain and housewif appearance. 

My curios wa fulli gratified. wallace, whom my descript easili 
identified, had made hi appear at her door on the even of the 
day on which he left the city. the dread of _the fever_ wa descant on 
with copiou and rude eloquence. I suppos her eloqu on thi theme 
to be design to apolog to me for her refus entranc to the sick 
man. the peroration, however, wa different. wallac wa admitted, and 
suitabl attent paid to hi wants. 

happily, the guest had noth to struggl with but extrem weakness. 
repose, nourish diet, and salubri air restor him in a short 
time to health. He linger under thi roof for three weeks, and then, 
without ani profess of gratitude, or offer of pecuniari 
remuneration, or inform of the cours which he determin to take, 
he left them. 

these facts, ad to that which I had previous known, threw no 
advantag light upon the charact of wallace. It wa obviou to 
conclud that he had gone to malverton, and thither there wa noth to 
hinder me from follow him. 

perhap one of my grossest defect is a precipit temper. I choos my 
path suddenly, and pursu it with impetu expedition. In the present 
instance, my resolut wa conceiv with unhesit zeal, and I 
walk the faster that I might the sooner execut it. miss hadwin 
deserv to be happy. love wa in her heart the all-absorb sentiment. 
A disappoint there wa a suprem calamity. deprav and folli must 
assum the guis of virtu befor it can claim her affection. thi 
disguis might be maintain for a time, but it detect must 
inevit come, and the sooner thi detect take place the more 
benefici it must prove. 

I resolv to unbosom myself, with equal and unbound confidence, to 
wallac and hi mistress. I would choos for thi end, not the moment 
when they were separate, but that in which they were together. My 
knowledge, and the sourc of my knowledge, rel to wallace, should 
be unfold to the ladi with simplic and truth. the lover should be 
present, to confute, to extenuate, or to verifi the charges. 

dure the rest of the day these imag occupi the chief place in my 
thoughts. the road wa miri and dark, and my journey prove to be more 
tediou and fatigu than I expected. At length, just as the even 
closed, the well-known habit appear in view. sinc my departure, 
winter had visit the world, and the aspect of natur wa desol and 
dreary. all around thi hous wa vacant, negligent, forlorn. the 
contrast between these appear and those which I had notic on my 
first approach to it, when the ground and the tree were deck with 
the luxuri and vivac of summer, wa mournful, and seem to 
foretoken ill. My spirit droop as I notic the gener inact 
and silence. 

I entered, without warning, the door that led into the parlour. No face 
wa to be seen or voic heard. the chimney wa ornamented, as in summer, 
with evergreen shrubs. though it wa now the second month of frost and 
snow, fire did not appear to have been late kindl on thi hearth. 

thi wa a circumst from which noth good could be deduced. had 
there been those to share it comfort who had share them on former 
years, thi wa the place and hour at which they commonli assembled. A 
door on one side led, through a narrow entry, into the kitchen. I open 
thi door, and pass toward the kitchen. 

No one wa there but an old man, squat in the chimney-corner. hi 
face, though wrinkled, denot undecay health and an unbend spirit. 
A homespun coat, leathern breech wrinkl with age, and blue yarn 
hose, were well suit to hi lean and shrivel form. On hi right 
knee wa a wooden bowl, which he had just replenish from a pipkin of 
hasti pud still smoke on the coals; and in hi left hand a spoon, 
which he had, at that moment, plung into a bottl of molass that 
stood besid him. 

thi action wa suspend by my entrance. He look up and exclaimed, 
"heyday! who' thi that come into other people' hous without so 
much as say 'bi your leave'? what' thee business? who' thee want?" 

I had never seen thi personag before. I suppos it to be some new 
domestic, and inquir for mr. hadwin. 

"ah!" repli he, with a sigh, "william hadwin. Is it him thee wants? 
poor man! He is gone to rest mani day since." 

My heart sunk within me at these tidings. "dead!" said I; "do you mean 
that he is dead?"--thi exclam wa utter in a tone of some 
vehemence. It attract the attent of some one who wa stand 
without, who immedi enter the kitchen. It wa eliza hadwin. the 
moment she beheld me she shriek aloud, and, rush into my arms, 
faint away. 

the old man drop hi bowl; and, start from hi seat, stare 
altern at me and at the breathless girl. My emotion, made up of 
joy, and sorrow, and surprise, render me for a moment powerless as 
she. At length he said, "I understand this. I know who thee is, and will 
tell her thee' come." So saying, he hastili left the room. 




chapter xxx. 


In a short time thi gentl girl recov her senses. she did not 
withdraw herself from my sustain arm, but, lean on my bosom, she 
resign herself to passion weeping. I did not endeavour to check 
thi effusion, believ that it influenc would be salutary. 

I had not forgotten the thrill sensibl and artless grace of thi 
girl. I had not forgotten the scrupl which had formerli made me check 
a passion whose tendenc wa easili discovered. these new proof of her 
affect were, at once, mourn and delightful. the untim fate of 
her father and my friend press with new forc upon my heart, and my 
tears, in spite of my fortitude, mingl with hers. 

the attent of both wa present attract by a faint scream, which 
proceed from above. immedi totter footstep were heard in the 
passage, and a figur rush into the room, pale, emaciated, haggard, 
and wild. she cast a pierc glanc at me, utter a feebl 
exclamation, and sunk upon the floor without sign of life. 

It wa not difficult to comprehend thi scene. I now conjectured, what 
subsequ inquiri confirmed, that the old man had mistaken me for 
wallace, and had carri to the elder sister the news of hi return. 
thi fatal disappoint of hope that had nearli been extinct, and 
which were now so power revived, could not be endur by a frame 
verg to dissolution. 

thi object recal all the energi of eliza, and engross all my 
solicitude. I lift the fallen girl in my arms; and, guid by her 
sister, carri her to her chamber. I had now leisur to contempl the 
chang which a few month had made in thi love frame. I turn away 
from the spectacl with anguish, but my wander eye were recal by 
some potent fascination, and fix in horror upon a form which evinc 
the last stage of decay. eliza knelt on one side, and, lean her face 
upon the bed, endeavour in vain to smother her sobs. I sat on the 
other motionless, and hold the passiv and wither hand of the 
sufferer. 

I watch with ineff solicitud the return of life. It return at 
length, but mere to betray symptom that it would speedili depart 
forever. for a time my faculti were palsied, and I wa made an 
impot spectat of the ruin that environ me. thi pusillanim 
quickli gave way to resolut and reflect better suit to the 
exig of the time. 

the first impuls wa to summon a physician; but it wa evid that the 
patient had been sink by slow degre to thi state, and that the 
last struggl had begun. noth remain but to watch her while 
expiring, and perform for her, when dead, the rite of interment. the 
survivor wa capabl of consol and of succour. I went to her and 
drew her gentli into anoth apartment. the old man, tremul and 
wonder-struck, seem anxiou to perform some service. I direct him to 
kindl a fire in eliza' chamber. meanwhil I persuad my gentl friend 
to remain in thi chamber, and resign to me the perform of everi 
offic which her sister' condit required. I sat besid the bed of 
the die till the mortal struggl wa past. 

I perceiv that the hous had no inhabit besid the two femal and 
the old man. I went in search of the latter, and found him crouched, as 
before, at the kitchen-fire, smoke hi pipe. I place myself on the 
same bench, and enter into convers with him. 

I gather from him that he had, for mani years, been mr. hadwin' 
servant. that late he had cultiv a small farm in thi 
neighbourhood for hi own advantage. stop one day in october, at the 
tavern, he heard that hi old master had late been in the city, had 
caught _the fever_, and after hi return had die with it. the moment he 
becam sick, hi servant fled from the house, and the neighbour 
refus to approach it. the task of attend hi sick-b wa allot 
to hi daughters, and it wa by their hand that hi grave wa dug and 
hi bodi cover with earth. the same terror of infect exist after 
hi death as before, and these hapless femal were desert by all 
mankind. 

old caleb wa no sooner inform of these particulars, than he hurri 
to the house, and had sinc continu in their service. hi heart wa 
kind, but it wa easili seen that hi skill extend onli to execut the 
direct of another. grief for the death of wallac and her father 
prey upon the health of the eldest daughter. the younger becam her 
nurse, and caleb wa alway at hand to execut ani order the 
perform of which wa on a level with hi understanding. their 
neighbour had not withheld their good offices, but they were still 
terrifi and estrang by the phantom of pestilence. 

dure the last week susan had been too weak to rise from her bed; yet 
such wa the energi commun by the tide that wallac wa alive, 
and had returned, that she leap upon her feet and rush down-stairs. 
how littl did that man deserv so strenuou and immort an affection! 

I would not allow myself to ponder on the suffer of these women. I 
endeavour to think onli of the best expedi for put an end to 
these calamities. after a moment' deliber I determin to go to a 
hous at some miles' distance; the dwell of one who, though not 
exempt from the reign panic, had shown more generos toward these 
unhappi girl than others. dure my former abod in thi district, I 
had ascertain hi character, and found him to be compassion and 
liberal. 

overpow by fatigu and watching, eliza wa no sooner relieved, by my 
presence, of some portion of her cares, than she sunk into profound 
slumber. I direct caleb to watch the hous till my return, which 
should be befor midnight, and then set out for the dwell of mr. 
ellis. 

the weather wa temper and moist, and render the foot of the 
meadow extrem difficult. the ground, that had late been frozen and 
cover with snow, wa now chang into gulli and pools, and thi wa 
no time to be fastidi in the choic of paths. A brook, swell by the 
recent _thaw_, wa likewis to be passed. the rail which I had formerli 
place over it by way of bridg had disappeared, and I wa oblig to 
wade through it. At length I approach the hous to which I wa going. 

At so late an hour, farmer and farmers' servant are usual abed, and 
their threshold is intrust to their watch-dogs. two belong to mr. 
ellis, whose feroc and vigil were truli formid to a stranger; 
but I hope that in me they would recognis an old acquaintance, and 
suffer me to approach. In thi I wa not mistaken. though my person 
could not be distinctli seen by starlight, they seem to scent me from 
afar, and met me with a thousand caresses. 

approach the house, I perceiv that it tenant were retir to 
their repose. thi I expected, and hasten to awaken mr. ellis, by 
knock briskli at the door. present he look out of a window above, 
and, in answer to hi inquiries, in which impati at be so 
unseason disturb wa mingl with anxiety, I told him my name, and 
entreat him to come down and allow me a few minutes' conversation. He 
speedili dress himself, and, open the kitchen door, we seat 
ourselv befor the fire. 

My appear wa suffici adapt to excit hi wonder; he had 
heard of my elop from the hous of mr. hadwin, he wa a stranger to 
the motiv that prompt my departure, and to the event that had 
befallen me, and no interview wa more distant from hi expect 
than the present. hi curios wa written in hi features, but thi 
wa no time to gratifi hi curiosity. the end that I now had in view wa 
to procur accommod for eliza hadwin in thi man' house. for thi 
purpos it wa my duti to describe, with simplic and truth, the 
inconveni which at present surround her, and to relat all that 
had happen sinc my arrival. 

I perceiv that my tale excit hi compassion, and I continu with 
new zeal to paint to him the helpless of thi girl. the death of 
her father and sister left her the properti of thi farm. her sex and 
age disqualifi her for superintend the harvest-field and the 
threshing-floor; and no expedi wa left but to leas the land to 
another, and, take up her abod in the famili of some kinsman or 
friend, to subsist, as she might easili do, upon the rent. meanwhil her 
continu in thi hous wa equal useless and dangerous, and I 
insinu to my companion the proprieti of immedi remov her to 
hi own. 

some hesit and reluct appear in him, which I immedi 
ascrib to an absurd dread of infection. I endeavoured, by appeal to 
hi reason as well as to hi pity, to conquer thi dread. I point out 
the true caus of the death of the elder daughter, and assur him the 
youngest knew no indisposit but that which aros from distress. I 
offer to save him from ani hazard that might attend hi approach 
the house, by accompani her hither myself. all that her safeti 
requir wa that hi door should not be shut against her when she 
present herself befor them. 

still he wa fear and reluctant; and, at length, mention that her 
uncl resid not more than sixteen mile farther; that he wa her 
natur protector, and, he dare to say, would find no difficulti in 
admit her into hi house. for hi part, there might be reason in 
what I said, but he could not bring himself to think but that there wa 
still some danger of _the fever_. It wa right to assist peopl in 
distress, to-be-sure; but to risk hi own life he did not think to be 
hi duty. He wa no relat of the family, and it wa the duti of 
relat to help each other. her uncl wa the proper person to assist 
her, and no doubt he would be as will as able. 

the mark of dubious and indecis which accompani these word 
encourag me in endeavour to subdu hi scruples. the increas of 
hi avers to my scheme kept pace with my remonstrances, and he 
final declar that he would, on no account, consent to it. 

elli wa by no mean hard of heart. hi determin did not prove the 
cold of hi charity, but mere the strength of hi fears. He wa 
himself an object more of compass than of anger; and he act like 
the man whose fear of death prompt him to push hi companion from the 
plank which save him from drowning, but which is unabl to sustain 
both. find him invinc to my entreaties, I thought upon the 
expedi which he suggest of seek the protect of her uncle. It 
wa true that the loss of parent had render her uncl her legal 
protector. hi knowledg of the world; hi hous and properti and 
influence, would, perhaps, fit him for thi offic in a more emin 
degre than I wa fitted. To seek a differ asylum might, indeed, be 
unjust to both; and, after some reflection, I not onli dismiss the 
regret which ellis' refus had given me, but even thank him for the 
intellig and counsel which he had afford me. I took leav of him, 
and hasten back to hadwin's. 

eliza, by caleb' report, wa still asleep. there wa no urgent 
necess for awaken her; but someth wa forthwith to be done with 
regard to the unhappi girl that wa dead. the proceed incumb on us 
wa obvious. all that remain wa to dig a grave, and to deposit the 
remain with as much solemn and decenc as the time would permit. 
there were two method of do this. I might wait till the next day; 
till a coffin could be made and convey hither; till the woman, whose 
trade it wa to make and put on the habili assign by custom to 
the dead, could be sought out and hire to attend; till kindred, 
friends, and neighbour could be summon to the obsequies; till a 
carriag were provid to remov the bodi to a burying-ground, belong 
to a meeting-house, and five mile distant; till those whose trade it 
wa to dig grave had prepar one, within the sacr enclosure, for her 
reception; or, neglect thi toilsome, tedious, and expens 
ceremonial, I might seek the grave of hadwin, and lay the daughter by 
the side of her parent. 

perhap I wa strong in my prefer of the latter mode. the custom of 
burial may, in most cases, be in themselv proper. If the custom be 
absurd, yet it may be gener proper to adher to them; but doubtless 
there are case in which it is our duti to omit them. I conceiv the 
present case to be such a one. 

the season wa bleak and inclement. much time, labour, and expens would 
be requir to go through the customari rites. there wa none but myself 
to perform these, and I had not the suitabl means. the miseri of eliza 
would onli be prolong by adher to these forms, and her fortun be 
needlessli diminish by the expens unavoid to be incurred. 

after muse upon these idea for some time, I rose from my seat, and 
desir caleb to follow me. We proceed to an outer shed where farmers' 
tool use to be kept. I suppli him and myself with a spade, and 
request him to lead me to the spot where mr. hadwin wa laid. 

He betray some hesit to comply, and appear struck with some 
degre of alarm, as if my purpos had been to molest, instead of 
securing, the repos of the dead. I remov hi doubt by explain my 
intentions; but he wa scarc less shocked, on discov the truth, 
than he had been alarm by hi first suspicions. He stammer out hi 
object to my scheme. there wa but one mode of burial, he thought, 
that wa decent and proper, and he could not be free to assist me in 
pursu ani other mode. 

perhap caleb' avers to the scheme might have been easili overcome; 
but I reflect that a mind like hi wa at onc flexibl and obstinate. 
He might yield to argument and entreaties, and act by their immedi 
impulse; but the impuls pass away in a moment, old and habitu 
convict were resumed, and hi deviat from the beaten track would 
be mere product of compunction. hi aid, on the present occasion, 
though of some use, wa by no mean indispensable. I forbor to solicit 
hi concurrence, or even to vanquish the scrupl he entertain against 
direct me to the grave of hadwin. It wa a groundless superstit 
that made one spot more suitabl for thi purpos than another. I 
desir caleb, in a mild tone, to return to the kitchen, and leav me to 
act as I thought proper. I then proceed to the orchard. 

one corner of thi field wa somewhat abov the level of the rest. the 
tallest tree of the group grew there, and there I had formerli place a 
bench, and made it my retreat at period of leisure. It had been 
recommend by it sequest situation, it luxuri verdure, and 
profound quiet. On one side wa a potato-field, on the other a 
_melon-patch_; and befor me, in rows, some hundr of apple-trees. 
here I wa accustom to seek the benefit of contempl and studi 
the manuscript of lodi. A few month had pass sinc I had last 
visit thi spot. what revolut had sinc occurred, and how gloomili 
contrast wa my present purpos with what had formerli led me hither! 

In thi spot I had hastili determin to dig the grave of susan. the 
grave wa dug. all that I desir wa a caviti of suffici dimens 
to receiv her. thi be made, I return to the house, lift the 
corps in my arms, and bore it without delay to the spot. caleb, seat 
in the kitchen, and eliza, asleep in her chamber, were wholli unappr 
of my motions. the grave wa covered, the spade reposit under the 
shed, and my seat by the kitchen-fir resum in a time appar too 
short for so solemn and moment a transaction. 

I look back upon thi incid with emot not easili described. It 
seem as if I act with too much precipitation; as if insensibility, 
and not reason, had occas that clear of conceptions, and 
bestow that firm of muscles, which I then experienced. I neither 
trembl nor waver in my purpose. I bore in my arm the be whom I 
had known and loved, through the whistl gale and intens dark of 
a winter' night; I heap earth upon her limbs, and cover them from 
human observation, without fluctuat or tremors, though not without 
feel that were aw and sublime. 

perhap some part of my steadfast wa owe to my late experience, 
and some mind may be more easili inur to peril emerg than 
others. If reason acquir strength onli by the diminut of 
sensibility, perhap it is just for sensibl to be diminished. 




chapter xxxi. 


the safeti of eliza wa the object that now occupi my cares. To have 
slept, after her example, had been most proper; but my uncertainti with 
regard to her fate, and my desir to conduct her to some other home, 
kept my thought in perpetu motion. I wait with impati till she 
should awak and allow me to consult with her on plan for futurity. 

her sleep termin not till the next day had arisen. have recov 
the remembr of what had late happened, she inquir for her 
sister. she want to view onc more the face and kiss the lip of her 
belov susan. some relief to her anguish she expect to deriv from 
thi privilege. 

when inform of the truth, when convinc that susan had disappear 
forever, she broke forth into fresh passion. It seem as if her loss 
wa not hopeless or complet as long as she wa suffer to behold the 
face of her friend and to touch her lips. she accus me of act 
without warrant and without justice; of defraud her of her dearest 
and onli consolation; and of treat her sister' sacr remain with 
barbar indiffer and rudeness. 

I explain in the gentlest term the reason of my conduct. I wa not 
surpris or vex that she, at first, treat them as futile, and as 
heighten my offence. such wa the impuls of a grief which wa 
properli excit by her loss. To be tranquil and steadfast, in the midst 
of the usual caus of impetuos and agony, is either the prerog 
of wisdom that sublim itself abov all selfish considerations, or the 
badg of giddi and unfeel folly. 

the torrent wa at length exhausted. upbraid wa at an end; and 
gratitude, and tenderness, and implicit acquiesc in ani scheme which 
my prudenc should suggest, succeeded. I mention her uncl as one to 
whom it would be proper, in her present distress, to apply. 

she start and betray uneasi at thi name. It wa evid that 
she by no mean concur with me in my notion of propriety; that she 
thought with avers of seek her uncle' protection. I request her 
to state her object to thi scheme, or to mention ani other which 
she thought preferable. 

she knew nobody. she had not a friend in the world but myself. she had 
never been out of her father' house. she had no relat but her uncl 
philip, and he--sh could not live with him. I must not insist upon her 
go to hi house. It wa not the place for her. she should never be 
happi there. 

I was, at first, inclin to suspect in my friend some caprici and 
groundless antipathy. I desir her to explain what in her uncle' 
charact made him so obnoxious. she refus to be more explicit, and 
persist in think that hi hous wa no suitabl abod for her. 

find her, in thi respect, invincible, I sought for some other 
expedient. might she not easili be accommod as a boarder in the 
city, or some village, or in a remot quarter of the country? ellis, her 
nearest and most opul neighbour, had refus to receiv her; but 
there were other who had not hi fears. there were others, within the 
compass of a day' journey, who were stranger to the caus of hadwin' 
death; but would it not be culpabl to take advantag of that ignorance? 
their complianc ought not to be the result of deception. 

while thu engaged, the incid of my late journey recur to my 
remembrance, and I asked, "i not the honest woman, who entertain 
wallace, just such a person as that of whom I am in search? her 
treatment of wallac show her to be exempt from chimer fears, 
prove that she ha room in her hous for an occasion inmate." 

encourag by these views, I told my weep companion that I had 
recollect a famili in which she would be kindli treated; and that, if 
she chose, we would not lose a moment in repair thither. horses, 
belong to the farm, graze in the meadows, and a coupl of these 
would carri us in a few hour to the place which I had select for her 
residence. On her eagerli assent to thi proposal, I inquir in 
whose care, and in what state, our present habit should be left. 

the father' properti now belong to the daughter. eliza' mind wa 
quick, active, and sagacious; but her total inexperi gave her 
sometim the appear of folly. she wa eager to fli from thi house, 
and to resign herself and her property, without limit or condition, 
to my control. our intercours had been short, but she reli on my 
protect and counsel as absolut as she had been accustom to do 
upon her father's. 

she knew not what answer to make to my inquiry. whatev I pleas to do 
wa the best. what did I think ought to be done? 

"ah!" thought I, "sweet, artless, and simpl girl! how wouldst thou have 
fared, if heaven had not sent me to thi succour? there are be in the 
world who would make a selfish use of thi confidence; who would beguil 
thee at onc of innoc and property. such am not I. thi welfar is a 
preciou deposit, and no father or brother could watch over it with more 
solicitud than I will do." 

I wa awar that mr. hadwin might have fix the destin of hi 
property, and the guardianship of hi daughters, by will. On suggest 
thi to my friend, it instantli remind her of an incid that took 
place after hi last return from the city. He had drawn up hi will, and 
gave it into susan' possession, who place it in a drawer, whenc it 
wa now taken by my friend. 

By thi will hi properti wa now found to be bequeath to hi two 
daughters; and hi brother, philip hadwin, wa name executor, and 
guardian to hi daughter till they should be twenti year old. thi 
name wa no sooner heard by my friend, than she exclaimed, in a tone of 
affright, "executor! My uncle! what is that? what power doe that give 
him?" 

"I know not exactli the power of executors. He will, doubtless, have 
possess of your properti till you are twenti year of age. your 
person will likewis be under hi care till that time." 

"must he decid where I am to live?" 

"he is vest with all the power of a father." 

thi assur excit the deepest consternation. she fix her eye on 
the ground, and wa lost, for a time, in the deepest reverie. 
recovering, at length, she said, with a sigh, "what if my father had 
made no will?" 

"in that case, a guardian could not be dispens with, but the right of 
name him would belong to yourself." 

"and my uncl would have noth to do with my affairs?" 

"I am no lawyer," said I; "but I presum all author over your person 
and properti would devolv upon the guardian of your own choice." 

"then I am free." say this, with a sudden motion, she tore in sever 
piec the will, which, dure thi dialogue, she had held in her hand, 
and threw the fragment into the fire. 

No action wa more unexpect to me than this. My astonish hinder 
me from attempt to rescu the paper from the flames. It wa consum 
in a moment. I wa at a loss in what manner to regard thi sacrifice. It 
denot a forc of mind littl in unison with that simplic and 
helpless which thi girl had hitherto displayed. It argu the 
deepest apprehens of mistreat from her uncle. whether hi 
conduct had justifi thi violent antipathy, I had no mean of judging. 
mr. hadwin' choic of him, as hi executor, wa certainli one proof of 
hi integrity. 

My abstract wa notic by eliza with visibl anxiety. It wa plain 
that she dread the impress which thi act of seem temer had 
made upon me. "do not be angri with me," said she; "perhap I have been 
wrong, but I could not help it. I will have but one guardian and one 
protector." 

the deed wa irrevocable. In my present ignor of the domest 
histori of the hadwins, I wa unqualifi to judg how far circumst 
might extenu or justifi the act. On both accounts, therefore, it wa 
improp to expati upon it. 

It wa conclud to leav the care of the hous to honest caleb; to 
fasten closet and drawers, and, carri away the money which wa found 
in one of them, and which amount to no inconsider sum, to repair 
to the hous formerli mentioned. the air wa cold; a heavi snow began to 
fall in the night; the wind blew tempestuously; and we were compel to 
confront it. 

In leav her dwelling, in which she had spent her whole life, the 
unhappi girl gave way afresh to her sorrow. It made her feebl and 
helpless. when place upon the horse, she wa scarc abl to maintain 
her seat. alreadi chill by the cold, blind by the drift snow, and 
cut by the blast, all my remonstr were need to inspir her with 
resolution. 

I am not accustom to regard the elements, or suffer them to retard or 
divert me from ani design that I have formed. I had overlook the weak 
and delic frame of my companion, and made no account of her be 
less abl to support cold and fatigu than myself. It wa not till we 
had made some progress in our way, that I began to view, in their true 
light, the obstacl that were to be encountered. I conceiv it, 
however, too late to retreat, and endeavour to push on with speed. 

My companion wa a skil rider, but her steed wa refractori and 
unmanageable. she wa able, however, to curb hi spirit till we had 
proceed ten or twelv mile from malverton. the wind and the cold 
becam too violent to be longer endured, and I resolv to stop at the 
first hous which should present itself to my view, for the sake of 
refresh and warmth. 

We now enter a wood of some extent, at the termin of which I 
rememb that a dwell stood. To pass thi wood, therefore, with 
expedition, wa all that remain befor we could reach a hospit 
asylum. I endeavour to sustain, by thi information, the sink 
spirit of my companion. while busi in convers with her, a blast of 
irresist forc twist off the highest branch of a tree befor us. 
It fell in the midst of the road, at the distanc of a few feet from her 
horse' head. terrifi by thi accident, the hors start from the 
path, and, rush into the wood, in a moment threw himself and hi 
rider on the ground, by encount the rug stock of an oak. 

I dismount and flew to her succour. the snow wa alreadi dy with the 
blood which flow from some wound in her head, and she lay without 
sens or motion. My terror did not hinder me from anxious search 
for the hurt which wa received, and ascertain the extent of the 
injury. her forehead wa consider bruised; but, to my unspeak 
joy, the blood flow from the nostrils, and was, therefore, to be 
regard as no mortal symptom. 

I lift her in my arms, and look around me for some mean of relief. 
the hous at which I propos to stop wa upward of a mile distant. I 
rememb none that wa nearer. To place the wound girl on my own 
horse, and proceed gentli to the hous in question, wa the sole 
expedient; but, at present, she wa senseless, and might, on recovering, 
be too feebl to sustain her own weight. 

To recal her to life wa my first duty; but I wa powerless, or 
unacquaint with the means. I gaze upon her features, and endeavoured, 
by press her in my arms, to inspir her with some warmth. I look 
toward the road, and listen for the wished-for sound of some carriag 
that might be prevail on to stop and receiv her. noth wa more 
improb than that either pleasur or busi would induc men to 
encount so chill and vehement a blast. To be light on by some 
travel was, therefore, a hopeless event. 

meanwhile, eliza' swoon continued, and my alarm increased. what effect 
her half-frozen blood would have in prolong thi condition, or 
prevent her return to life, awaken the deepest apprehensions. I 
left the wood, still bear her in my arms, and re-ent the road, 
from the desir of descrying, as soon as possible, the come passenger. 
I look thi way and that, and again listened. noth but the sweep 
blast, rent and fallen branches, and snow that fill and obscur the 
air, were perceivable. each moment retard the cours of my own blood 
and stiffen my sinews, and made the state of my companion more 
desperate. how wa I to act? To perish myself, or see her perish, wa an 
ignobl fate; courag and activ were still abl to avert it. My hors 
stood near, docil and obsequious; to mount him and to proceed on my 
way, hold my lifeless burden in my arms, wa all that remained. 

At thi moment my attent wa call by sever voic issu from 
the wood. It wa the note of gayeti and glee. present a sleigh, with 
sever person of both sexes, appeared, in a road which led through the 
forest into that in which I stood. they move at a quick pace, but their 
voic were hushed, and they check the speed of their horses, on 
discov us. No occurr wa more auspici than this; for I 
reli with perfect confid on the benevol of these persons, and, 
as soon as they came near, claim their assistance. 

My stori wa listen to with sympathy, and one of the young men, 
leap from the sleigh, assist me in place eliza in the place which 
he had left. A female, of sweet aspect and engag manners, insist 
upon turn back and hasten to the house, where it seem her father 
resided, and which the parti had just left. I rode after the sleigh, 
which in a few minut arriv at the house. the dwell wa spaciou 
and neat, and a vener man and woman, alarm by the quick return of 
the young people, came forth to know the cause. they receiv their 
guest with the utmost tenderness, and provid her with all the 
accommod which her condit required. their daughter relinquish 
the scheme of pleasur in which she had been engaged, and, compel 
her companion to depart without her, remain to nurs and consol the 
sick. 

A littl time show that no last injuri had been suffered. 
contusions, more troublesom than dangerous, and easili curabl by such 
applic as rural and tradit wisdom ha discovered, were the 
onli consequ of the fall. My mind, be reliev from 
apprehens on thi score, had leisur to reflect upon the use which 
might be made of the present state of things. 

when I remark the structur of thi house, and the featur and 
deport of it inhabitants, methought I discern a power 
resembl between thi famili and hadwin's. It seem as if some 
benign power had led us hither as to the most suitabl asylum that 
could be obtained; and, in order to suppli to the forlorn eliza the 
place of those parent and that sister she had lost, I conceiv that, 
if their concurr could be gained, no abod wa more suitabl than 
this. No time wa to be lost in gain thi concurrence. the curios 
of our host and hostess, whose name wa curling, speedili afford me an 
opportun to disclos the histori and real situat of my friend. 
there were no motiv to reserv or prevarication. there wa noth 
which I did not faith and circumstanti relate. I conclud with 
state my wish that they would admit my friend as a boarder into 
their house. 

the old man wa warm in hi concurrence. hi wife betray some 
scruples; which, however, her husband' argument and mine removed. I 
did not even suppress the tenor and destruct of the will, and the 
antipathi which eliza had conceiv for her uncle, and which I declar 
myself unabl to explain. It present appear that mr. curl had 
some knowledg of philip hadwin, and that the latter had acquir the 
reput of be obdur and profligate. He employ all mean to 
accomplish hi selfish ends, and would probabl endeavour to usurp the 
properti which hi brother had left. To provid against hi power and 
hi malic would be particularli incumb on us, and my new friend 
readili promis hi assist in the measur which we should take to 
that end. 




chapter xxxii. 


the state of my feel may be easili conceiv to consist of mixed, 
but, on the whole, of agreeable, sensations. the death of hadwin and hi 
elder daughter could not be thought upon without keen regrets. these it 
wa useless to indulge, and were outweigh by reflect on the 
person secur in which the survivor wa now placed. It wa hurt 
to expend my unprofit care upon the dead, while there exist one 
to whom they could be of essenti benefit, and in whose happi they 
would find an ampl compensation. 

thi happiness, however, wa still incomplete. It wa still expos to 
hazard, and much remain to be done befor adequ provis wa made 
against the worst of evils, poverty. I now found that eliza, be onli 
fifteen year old, stood in need of a guardian, and that the form of 
law requir that some one should make himself her father' 
administrator. mr. curling, be toler convers with these 
subjects, point out the mode to be pursued, and engag to act on thi 
occas as eliza' friend. 

there wa anoth topic on which my happiness, as well as that of my 
friend, requir us to form some decision. I formerli mentioned, that, 
dure my abod at malverton, I had not been insens to the 
attract of thi girl. An affect had stolen upon me, for which it 
wa easili discov that I should not have been deni a suitabl 
return. My reason for stifl these emotions, at that time, have been 
mentioned. It may now be asked, what effect subsequ event had 
produc on my feelings, and how far partak and reliev her 
distress had reviv a passion which may readili be suppos to have 
been, at no time, entir extinguished. 

the impedi which then exist were removed. our union would no 
longer risk the resent or sorrow of her excel parent. she had no 
longer a sister to divid with her the properti of the farm, and make 
what wa suffici for both, when live together, too littl for 
either separately. her youth and simplic required, beyond most 
others, a legal protector, and her happi wa involv in the success 
of those hope which she took no pain to conceal. 

As to me, it seem at first view as if everi incid conspir to 
determin my choice. omit all regard to the happi of others, my 
own interest could not fail to recommend a scheme by which the preciou 
benefit of compet and independ might be honestli obtained. the 
excurs of my fanci had sometim carri me beyond the bound 
prescrib by my situation, but they were, nevertheless, limit to that 
field to which I had onc some prospect of acquir a title. all I 
want for the basi of my gaudiest and most dazzl structur wa a 
hundr acr of plough-land and meadow. here my spirit of improvement, 
my zeal to invent and appli new maxim of household luxuri and 
convenience, new mode and instrument of tillage, new art connect 
with orchard, garden, and cornfield, were suppli with abund scope. 
though the want of these would not benumb my activity, or take away 
content, the possess would confer exquisit and perman enjoyments. 

My thought have ever hover over the imag of wife and children with 
more delight than over ani other images. My fanci wa alway activ on 
thi theme, and it reveri suffici ecstat and glowing; but, 
sinc my intercours with thi girl, my scatter vision were collect 
and concentrated. I had now a form and featur befor me; a sweet and 
melodi voic vibrat in my ear; my soul wa filled, as it were, with 
her lineament and gestures, action and looks. all ideas, possess 
ani relat to beauti or sex, appear to assum thi shape. they kept 
an immov place in my mind, they diffus around them an ineff 
complacency. love is mere of valu as a prelud to a more tender, 
intimate, and sacr union. wa I not in love? and did I not pant after 
the irrevoc bounds, the boundless privileges, of wedlock? 

the question which other might ask, I have ask myself:--wa I not in 
love? I am realli at a loss for an answer. there seem to be 
irresist weight in the reason whi I should refus to marry, and 
even forbear to foster love in my friend. I consid my youth, my 
defect education, and my limit views. I had pass from my cottag 
into the world. I had acquired, even in my transient sojourn among the 
busi haunt of men, more knowledg than the lucubr and employ 
of all my previou year had conferred. henc I might infer the 
childlik immatur of my understanding, and the rapid progress I wa 
still capabl of making. wa thi an age to form an irrevoc 
contract; to choos the companion of my futur life, the associ of my 
scheme of intellectu and benevol activity? 

I had reason to contemn my own acquisitions; but were not those of eliza 
still more slender? could I reli upon the perman of her equanim 
and her docil to my instructions? what qualiti might not time 
unfold, and how littl wa I qualifi to estim the charact of one 
whom no vicissitud or hardship had approach befor the death of her 
father,--whos ignor was, indeed, great, when it could justli be 
said even to exceed my own! 

should I mix with the world, enrol myself in differ class of 
society, be a wit to new scenes; might not my mode of judg 
undergo essenti variations? might I not gain the knowledg of be 
whose virtu wa the gift of experi and the growth of knowledge? who 
join to the modesti and charm of woman the benefit of education, the 
matur and steadfast of age, and with whose charact and 
sentiment my own would be much more congeni than they could possibl 
be with the extrem youth, rustic simplicity, and mental imperfect 
of eliza hadwin? 

To say truth, I wa now consciou of a revolut in my mind. I can 
scarc assign it true cause. No token of it appear dure my late 
retreat to malverton. subsequ incidents, perhaps, join with the 
influenc of meditation, had gener new views. On my first visit to 
the city, I had met with noth but scene of folly, depravity, and 
cunning. No wonder that the imag connect with the citi were 
disastr and gloomy; but my second visit produc somewhat differ 
impressions. maravegli, estwick, medlicote, and you, were be who 
inspir vener and love. your resid appear to beautifi and 
consecr thi spot, and gave birth to an opinion that, if citi are 
the chosen seat of miseri and vice, they are likewis the soil of all 
the laudabl and strenuou product of mind. 

My curios and thirst of knowledg had likewis receiv a new 
direction. book and inanim natur were cold and lifeless 
instructors. men, and the work of men, were the object of ration 
study, and our own eye onli could commun just concept of human 
performances. the influenc of manners, professions, and social 
institutions, could be thoroughli known onli by direct inspection. 

competence, fix properti and a settl abode, rural occup and 
conjug pleasures, were justli to be prized; but their valu could be 
known and their benefit fulli enjoy onli by those who have tri all 
scenes; who have mix with all class and ranks; who have partaken of 
all conditions; and who have visit differ hemispher and climat 
and nations. the next five or eight year of my life should be devot 
to activ and change; it should be a period of hardship, danger, and 
privation; it should be my apprenticeship to fortitud and wisdom, and 
be employ to fit me for the tranquil pleasur and steadfast exert 
of the remaind of my life. 

In consequ of these reflections, I determin to suppress that 
tender which the compani of miss hadwin produced, to remov ani 
mistak into which she had fallen, and to put it out of my power to 
claim for her more than the due of friendship. all ambiguities, in a 
case like this, and all delays, were hurtful. she wa not exempt from 
passion, but thi passion, I thought, wa young, and easili 
extinguished. 

In a short time her health wa restored, and her grief melt down into 
a tender melancholy. I chose a suitabl moment, when not embarrass by 
the presenc of others, to reveal my thoughts. My disclosur wa 
ingenu and perfect. I laid befor her the whole train of my thoughts, 
nearli in the order, though in differ and more copiou term than 
those, in which I have just explain them to you. I conceal nothing. 
the impress which her artless loveli had made upon me at 
malverton; my motiv for estrang myself from her society; the natur 
of my present feel with regard to her, and my belief of the state of 
her heart; the reason into which I had entered; the advantag of 
wedlock and it inconveniences; and, finally, the resolut I had 
form of seek the city, and, perhaps, of cross the ocean, were 
minut detailed. 

she interrupt me not, but chang looks, blushes, flutterings, and 
sighs, show her to be deepli and various affect by my discourse. I 
paus for some observ or comment. she seem consciou of my 
expectation, but had no power to speak. overpowered, at length, by her 
emotions, she burst into tears. 

I wa at a loss in what manner to constru these symptoms. I wait till 
her vehem wa somewhat subsided, and then said, "what think you of 
my schemes? your approb is of some moment: do you approv of them 
or not?" 

thi question excit some littl resentment, and she answered, "you 
have left me noth to say. go, and be happy; no matter what becom of 
me. I hope I shall be abl to take care of myself." 

the tone in which thi wa said had someth in it of upbraiding. "your 
happiness," said I, "i too dear to me to leav it in danger. In thi 
hous you will not need my protection, but I shall never be so far from 
you as to be disabl from hear how you fare, by letter, and of be 
activ for your good. you have some money, which you must husband well. 
ani rent from your farm cannot be soon expected; but what you have got, 
if you remain with mr. curling, will pay your board and all other 
expens for two years; but you must be a good economist. I shall 
expect," continu I, with a seriou smile, "a punctual account of all 
your say and doings. I must know how everi minut is employ and 
everi penni is expended, and, if I find you erring, I must tell you so 
in good round terms." 

these word did not dissip the sullen which her look had 
betrayed. she still forbor to look at me, and said, "I do not know how 
I should tell you everi thing. you care so littl about me that--i 
should onli be troublesome. I am old enough to think and act for myself, 
and shall advis with nobodi but myself." 

"that is true," said I. "I shall rejoic to see you independ and 
free. consult your own understanding, and act accord to it dictates. 
noth more is want to make you use and happy. I am anxiou to 
return to the city, but, if you will allow me, will go first to 
malverton, see that thing are in due order, and that old caleb is well. 
from thence, if you please, I will call at your uncle's, and tell him 
what ha happened. He may, otherwise, entertain pretens and form 
view erron in themselv and injuri to you. He may think himself 
entitl to manag your estate. He may either suppos a will to have 
been made, or may actual have heard from your father, or from others, 
of that which you burnt, and in which he wa name executor. hi 
boister and sordid temper may prompt him to seiz your hous and 
goods, unless season appriz of the truth; and, when he know the 
truth, he may start into rage, which I shall be more fit to encount 
than you. I am told that anger transform him into a feroci madman. 
shall I call upon him?" 

she shudder at the pictur which I had drawn of her uncle' character; 
but thi emot quickli gave place to self-upbraid for the manner in 
which she had repel my proffer of service. she melt onc more into 
tears, and exclaimed,-- 

"I am not worthi of the pain you take for me. I am unfeel and 
ungrateful. whi should I think ill of you for despis me, when I 
despis myself?" 

"you do yourself injustice, my friend. I think I see your most secret 
thoughts; and these, instead of excit anger or contempt, onli awaken 
compass and tenderness. you love; and must, therefore, conceiv my 
conduct to be pervers and cruel. I count on your harbour such 
thoughts. time onli and reflect will enabl you to see my motiv in 
their true light. hereaft you will recollect my words, and find them 
suffici to justifi my conduct. you will acknowledg the proprieti of 
my engag in the care of the world befor I sit down in retir 
and ease." 

"ah! how much you mistak me! I admir and approv of your schemes. what 
anger and distress me is, that you think me unworthi to partak of 
your care and labours; that you regard my compani as an obstacl and 
encumbrance; that assist and counsel must all proceed from you; and 
that no scene is fit for me, but what you regard as sloth and 
inglorious. 

"have I not the same claim to be wise, and active, and courageous, as 
you? If I am ignor and weak, do I not owe it to the same caus that 
ha made you so? and will not the same mean which promot your 
improv be likewis use to me? you desir to obtain knowledge, by 
travel and convers with mani persons, and studi mani sciences; 
but you desir it for yourself alone. Me you think poor, weak, and 
contemptible; fit for noth but to spin and churn. provid I exist, 
am screen from the weather, have enough to eat and drink, you are 
satisfied. As to strengthen my mind and enlarg my knowledge, these 
thing are valuabl to you, but on me they are thrown away. I deserv 
not the gift." 

thi strain, simpl and just as it was, wa wholli unexpected. I wa 
surpris and disconcerted. In my previou reason I had certainli 
consid her sex as utterli unfit her for those scene and 
pursuit to which I had destin myself. not a doubt of the valid of 
my conclus had insinu itself; but now my belief wa shaken, 
though it wa not subverted. I could not deni that human ignor wa 
curabl by the same mean in one sex as in the other; that fortitud 
and skill were of no less valu to one than to the other. 

questionless, my friend wa rendered, by her age and inexperience, if 
not by sex, more helpless and depend than I; but had I not been prone 
to overr the difficulti which I should encounter? had I not deem 
unjustli of her constanc and forc of mind? marriag would render her 
properti joint, and would not compel me to take up my abod in the 
woods, to abid forev in one spot, to shackl my curiosity, or limit 
my excursions. 

but marriag wa a contract aw and irrevocable. wa thi the woman 
with whom my reason enjoin me to blend my fate, without the power of 
dissolution? would not time unfold qualiti in her which I did not at 
present suspect, and which would evinc an incur differ in our 
minds? would not time lead me to the feet of one who more nearli 
approach that standard of ideal excel which poet and romanc 
had exhibit to my view? 

these consider were power and delicate. I knew not in what 
term to state them to my companion, so as to preclud the imput of 
arrog or indecorum. It becam me, however, to be explicit, and to 
excit her resent rather than mislead her judgment. she collect my 
mean from a few words, and, interrupt me, said,-- 

"how veri low is the poor eliza in your opinion! We are, indeed, both 
too young to be married. may I not see you, and talk with you, without 
be your wife? may I not share your knowledge, reliev your cares, and 
enjoy your confidence, as a sister might do? may I not accompani you in 
your journey and studies, as one friend accompani another? My 
properti may be yours; you may employ it for your benefit and mine; not 
becaus you are my husband, but my friend. you are go to the city. 
let me go along with you. let me live where you live. the hous that is 
larg enough to hold you will hold me. the fare that is good enough for 
you will be luxuri to me. oh! let it be so, will you? 

"you cannot think how studious, how thoughtful, how inquisitive, I will 
be. how tenderli I will nurs you when sick! it is possibl you may be 
sick, you know, and, no one in the world will be half so watch and 
affection as I shall be. will you let me?" 

In say this, her earnest gave new patho to her voice. insens 
she put her face close to mine, and, transport beyond the usual bound 
of reserv by the charm of that pictur which her fanci contemplated, 
she put her lip to my cheek, and repeated, in a melt accent, "will 
you let me?" 

you, my friends, who have not seen eliza hadwin, cannot conceiv what 
effect thi entreati wa adapt to produc in me. she ha sure the 
sweetest voice, the most speak features, and most delic symmetry, 
that ever woman possessed. her guileless simplic and tender made 
her more enchanting. To be the object of devot to a heart so fervent 
and pure was, surely, no common privilege. thu did she tender me 
herself; and wa not the gift to be receiv with eager and 
gratitude? 

no. I wa not so much a stranger to mankind as to acquiesc in thi 
scheme. As my sister or my wife, the world would suffer us to resid 
under the same roof; to appli to common use the same property; and daili 
to enjoy the compani of each other; but she wa not my sister, and 
marriag would be an act of the grossest indiscretion. I explain to 
her, in few words, the object to which her project wa liable. 

"well, then," said she, "let me live in the next house, in the 
neighbourhood, or, at least, in the same city. let me be where I may see 
you onc a day, or onc a week, or onc a month. shut me not wholli from 
your society, and the mean of becoming, in time, less ignor and 
foolish than I now am." 

after a pause, I replied, "I love you too well not to compli with thi 
request. perhap the citi will be as suitabl a resid as ani other 
for you, as it will, for some time, be most conveni to me. I shall be 
better abl to watch over your welfare, and suppli you with the mean of 
improvement, when you are within a small distance. At present, you must 
consent to remain here, while I visit your uncle, and afterward go to 
the city. I shall look out for you a suitabl lodging, and inform you 
when it is found. If you then continu in the same mind, I will come, 
and, have gain the approb of mr. curling, will conduct you to 
town." here end our dialogue. 




chapter xxxiii. 


though I had consent to thi scheme, I wa consciou that some hazard 
attend it. I wa afraid of calumny, which might troubl the peac or 
destroy the reput of my friend. I wa afraid of my own weakness, 
which might be seduc into an indiscreet marriag by the charm or 
suffer of thi bewitch creature. I felt that there wa no price 
too dear to save her from slander. A fair fame is of the highest 
import to a young female, and the loss of it but poorli suppli by 
the testimoni of her own conscience. I had reason for tenfold solicitud 
on thi account, sinc I wa her onli protector and friend. hence, I 
cherish some hope that time might chang her views, and suggest less 
danger schemes. meanwhile, I wa to lose no time in visit 
malverton and philip hadwin. 

about ten day had elaps sinc we had desert malverton. these were 
day of success storms, and travel had been render 
inconvenient. the weather wa now calm and clear, and, earli in the 
morn that ensu the dialogu which I have just related, I set out on 
horseback. 

honest caleb wa found eat hi breakfast nearli in the spot where he 
had been first discovered. He answer my inquiri by saying, that, two 
day after our departure, sever men had come to the house, one of whom 
wa philip hadwin. they had interrog him as to the condit of the 
farm, and the purpos of hi remain on it. william hadwin they knew 
to have been some time dead; but where were the girls, hi daughters? 

caleb answer that susy, the eldest, wa likewis dead. 

these tide excit astonishment. when die she, and how, and where 
wa she buried? 

It happen two day before, and she wa buried, he believed, but could 
not tell where. 

not tell where? By whom, then, wa she buried? 

really, he could not tell. some strang man came there just as she wa 
dying. He went to the room, and, when she wa dead, took her away, but 
what he did with the bodi wa more than he could say, but he had a 
notion that he buri it. the man stay till the morning, and then went 
off with lizzy, leav him to keep hous by himself. He had not seen 
either of them, nor, indeed, a singl soul since. 

thi wa all the inform that caleb could afford the visitants. It 
wa so lame and incred that they began to charg the man with 
falsehood, and to threaten him with legal animadversion. just then mr. 
elli enter the house, and, be made acquaint with the subject of 
discourse, told all that he himself knew. He relat the midnight visit 
which I had paid him, explain my former situat in the family, and 
my disappear in september. He state the advic he had given me to 
carri eliza to her uncle's, and my promis to compli with hi counsel. 
the uncl declar he had seen noth of hi niece, and caleb added, 
that, when she set out, she took the road that led to town. 

these hint afford ground for much conjectur and suspicion. elli 
now mention some intellig that he had gather respect me in a 
late journey to ----. It seem I wa the son of an honest farmer in that 
quarter, who marri a tidi girl of a milkmaid that live with him. My 
father had detect me in make some atroci advanc to my 
mother-in-law, and had turn me out of doors. I did not go off, 
however, without rifl hi drawer of some hundr of dollars, which 
he had laid up against a raini day. I wa note for such pranks, and wa 
hate by all the neighbour for my pride and laziness. It wa easy, by 
comparison of circumstances, for elli to ascertain that hadwin' 
servant mervyn wa the same against whom such heavi charg were laid. 

previous to thi journey, he had heard of me from hadwin, who wa loud 
in prais of my diligence, sobriety, and modesty. for hi part, he had 
alway been cautiou of give counten to vagrant that came from 
nobodi knew where, and work their way with a plausibl tongue. He wa 
not surpris to hear it whisper that betsi hadwin had fallen in love 
with the youth, and now, no doubt, he had persuad her to run away with 
him. the heiress of a fine farm wa a prize not to be met with everi 
day. 

philip broke into rage at thi news; swore that if it turn out so, hi 
niec should starv upon the town, and that he would take good care to 
balk the lad. hi brother he well knew had left a will, to which he wa 
executor, and that thi will would in good time be forthcoming. after 
much talk and ransack the house, and swear at hi truant niece, he 
and hi compani departed, charg caleb to keep the hous and it 
content for hi use. thi wa all that caleb' memori had retain of 
that day' proceedings. 

curl had late comment on the charact of philip hadwin. thi man 
wa total unlik hi brother, wa a note brawler and bully, a tyrant 
to hi children, a plagu to hi neighbours, and kept a rendezv for 
drunkard and idlers, at the sign of the bull' head, at ----. He wa 
not destitut of parts, and wa no less dread for cun than 
malignity. He wa covetous, and never miss an opportun of 
overreach hi neighbour. there wa no doubt that hi niece' properti 
would be embezzl should it ever come into hi hands, and ani power 
which he might obtain over her person would be exercis to her 
destruction. hi children were taint with the dissolut of their 
father, and marriag had not repair the reput of hi daughters, 
or cure them of depravity: thi wa the man whom I now propos to 
visit. 

I scarc need to say that the calumni of betti lawrenc gave me no 
uneasiness. My father had no doubt been deceived, as well as my father' 
neighbours, by the artific of thi woman. I pass among them for a 
thief and a profligate, but their error had hitherto been harmless to 
me. the time might come which should confut the tale without my 
efforts. betty, sooner or later, would drop her mask, and afford the 
antidot to her own poisons, unless some new incid should occur to 
make me hasten the catastrophe. 

I arriv at hadwin' house. I wa receiv with some attent as a 
guest. I looked, among the pimpl visag that fill the piazza, for 
that of the landlord, but found him in an inner apart with two or 
three more seat round a table. On intim my wish to speak with him 
alone, the other withdrew. 

hadwin' visag had some trace of resembl to hi brother; but the 
meek, placid air, pale cheeks, and slender form of the latter were 
power contrast with the bloat arrogance, imperi brow, and 
robust limb of the former. thi man' rage wa awaken by a straw; it 
impel him in an instant to oath and buffetings, and made hi life an 
etern brawl. the sooner my interview with such a personag should be 
at an end, the better. I therefor explain the purpos of my come as 
fulli and in as few word as possible. 

"your name, sir, is philip hadwin. your brother william, of malverton, 
die late and left two daughters. the youngest onli is now alive, and 
I come, commiss from her, to inform you that, as no will of her 
father' is extant, she is prepar to administ to hi estate. As her 
father' brother, she thought you entitl to thi information." 

the chang which took place in the counten of thi man, dure thi 
address, wa remarkable, but not easili described. hi cheek contract 
a deeper crimson, hi eye sparkled, and hi face assum an express 
in which curios wa mingl with rage. He bent forward, and said, in 
a hoars and contemptu tone, "pray, is your name mervyn?" 

I answered, without hesitation, and as if the question were wholli 
unimportant, "yes; my name is mervyn." 

"god damn it! you then are the damn rascal"--(but permit me to repeat 
hi speech without the oath with which it wa plenti interlarded. 
not three word were utter without be garnish with a--"god damn 
it!" "damnation!" "i'll be damn to hell if"--and the like energet 
expletives.) "you then are the rascal that rob billy' house; that 
ran away with the fool hi daughter; persuad her to burn her father' 
will, and have the hellish impud to come into thi house! but I 
thank you for it. I wa go to look for you; you'v save me trouble. 
i'll settl all account with you here. fair and softly, my good lad! If 
I don't bring you to the gallows--if I let you escap without such a 
dressing! damn impudence! fellow! i'v been at malverton. i'v heard 
of your tricks. so! find the will not quit to your mind, know 
that the executor would balk your schemes, you threw the will into the 
fire; you rob the hous of all the cash, and made off with the 
girl!--th old fellow saw it all, and will swear to the truth." 

these word creat some surprise. I meant not to conceal from thi man 
the tenor and destruct of the will, nor even the measur which hi 
niec had taken or intend to take. what I suppos to be unknown to 
him appear to have been commun by the talk caleb, whose 
mind wa more inquisit and less sluggish than first appear had 
led me to imagine. instead of mope by the kitchen-fir when eliza and 
I were convers in an upper room, it now appear that he had 
reconnoitr our proceed through some keyhol or crevice, and had 
relat what he had seen to hadwin. 

hadwin proceed to exhaust hi rage in oath and menaces. He frequent 
clench hi fist and thrust it in my face, drew it back as if to render 
hi blow more deadly; ran over the same seri of exclam on my 
impud and villany, and talk of the gallow and the whipping-post; 
enforc each word by the epithet _damnable_ and _hellish_; close each 
sentenc with--"and be curst to you!" 

there wa but one mode for me to pursue; all forcibl opposit to a 
man of hi strength wa absurd. It wa my provinc to make hi anger 
confin itself to words, and patient to wait till the paroxysm should 
end or subsid of itself. To effect thi purpose, I kept my seat, and 
care exclud from my counten everi indic of timid and 
panic on the one hand, and of scorn and defianc on the other. My look 
and attitud were those of a man who expect harsh words, but who 
entertain no suspicion that blow would be inflicted. 

I wa indebt for my safeti to an inflex adher to thi medium. 
To have strayed, for a moment, to either side, would have brought upon 
me hi blows. that he did not instantli resort to violenc inspir me 
with courage, sinc it depend on myself whether food should be 
suppli to hi passion. rage must either progress or decline; and, 
sinc it wa in total want of provocation, it could not fail of 
gradual subsiding. 

My demeanour wa calcul to damp the flame, not onli by it direct 
influence, but by divert hi attent from the wrong which he had 
received, to the novelti of my behaviour. the dispar in size and 
strength between us wa too evid to make him believ that I confid 
in my sinew for my defence; and, sinc I betray neither contempt nor 
fear, he could not but conclud that I trust to my own integr or to 
hi moderation. I seiz the first paus in hi rhetor to enforc thi 
sentiment. 

"you are angry, mr. hadwin, and are loud in your threats; but they do 
not frighten me. they excit no apprehens or alarm, becaus I know 
myself abl to convinc you that I have not injur you. thi is an inn, 
and I am your guest. I am sure I shall find better entertain than 
blows. come," continu I, smiling, "it is possibl that I am not so 
mischiev a wretch as your fanci paint me. I have no claim upon your 
niec but that of friendship, and she is now in the hous of an honest 
man, mr. curling, where she propos to continu as long as is 
convenient. 

"it is true that your brother left a will, which hi daughter burnt in 
my presence, becaus she dread the author which that will gave you, 
not onli over her property, but person. It is true that on leav the 
hous she took away the money which wa now her own, and which wa 
necessari to subsistence. It is true that I bore her company, and have 
left her in an honest man' keeping. I am answer for noth more. 
As to you, I meant not to injur you; I advis not the burn of the 
will. I wa a stranger, till after that event, to your character. I knew 
neither good nor ill of you. I came to tell you all this, because, as 
eliza' uncle, you had a right to the information." 

"so! you come to tell me that she burnt the will, and is go to 
administer--to what, I beseech you? To her father' property? ay, I 
warrant you. but take thi along with you:--that properti is mine; land, 
house, stock, everi thing. all is safe and snug under cover of a 
mortgage, to which billi wa kind enough to add a bond. one wa sued, 
and the other _enter up_, a week ago. So that all is safe under my 
thumb, and the girl may whistl or starv for me. I shall give myself no 
concern about the strumpet. you thought to get a prize; but, damn me, 
you'v met with your match in me. phil haddin' not so easili choused, I 
promis you. I intend to give you thi news, and a drub into the 
bargain; but you may go, and make haste. she burnt the will, did she, 
becaus I wa name in it,--and sent you to tell me so? good souls! It 
wa kind of you, and I am bound to be thankful. take her back news of 
the mortgage; and, as for you, leav my house. you may go scot-fre thi 
time; but I pledg my word for a sound beat when you next enter these 
doors. i'll pay it to you with interest. leav my house, I say!" 

"A mortgage," said I, in a low voice, and affect not to hear hi 
commands; "that will be sad news for my friend. why, sir, you are a 
fortun man. malverton is an excel spot; well water and manured; 
newli and complet fenced; not a larger barn in the county; oxen and 
hors and cow in the best order; I never set eye on a finer orchard. 
By my faith, sir, you are a fortun man. but, pray, what have you for 
dinner? I am hungri as a wolf. order me a beef-steak, and some potat 
or other. the bottl there,--it is cider, I take it; pray, push it to 
thi side." say this, I stretch out my hand toward the bottl 
which stood befor him. 

I confid in the power of a fearless and sedat manner. methought 
that, as anger wa the food of anger, it must unavoid subsid in a 
contest with equability. thi opinion wa intuitive, rather than the 
product of experience, and perhap I gave no proof of my sagac in 
hazard my safeti on it truth. hadwin' charact made him dread 
and obey by all. He had been accustom to readi and tremul 
submiss from men far more brawni and robust than I was, and to find 
hi most vehement menac and gestur total ineffectu on a be so 
slender and diminut at onc wound up hi rage and excit hi 
astonishment. one motion counteract and suspend the other. He lift 
hi hand, but delay to strike. one blow, appli with hi usual 
dexterity, wa suffici to destroy me. though seemingli careless, I 
wa watch of hi motions, and prepar to elud the stroke by 
shrink or stooping. meanwhile, I stretch my hand far enough to 
seiz the bottle, and, pour it content into a tumbler, put it to my 
lips:-- 

"come, sir, I drink your health, and wish you speedi possess of 
malverton. I have some interest with eliza, and will prevail on her to 
forbear all opposit and complaint. whi should she complain? while I 
live, she shall not be a beggar. No doubt your claim is legal, and 
therefor ought to be admitted. what the law gave, the law ha taken 
away. bless be the dispens of law! excel cider! open anoth 
bottle, will you, and, I beseech, hasten dinner, if you would not see me 
devour the table." 

It wa just, perhaps, to conjur up the demon avaric to fight with the 
demon anger. reason alon would, in such a contest, be powerless, but, 
in truth, I spoke without artific or disguise. If hi claim were legal, 
opposit would be absurd and pernicious. I meant not to reli upon hi 
own assertions, and would not acknowledg the valid of hi claim till 
I had inspect the deed. have institut suits, thi wa now in a 
public office, and there the inspect should be made. meanwhile, no 
reason could be urg whi I should part from him in anger, while hi 
kindr to eliza, and hi titl to her property, made it use to 
secur hi favour. It wa possibl to obtain a remiss of hi claims, 
even when the law enforc them; it would be imprud at least to 
diminish the chanc of remiss by foster hi wrath and provok 
hi enmity. 

"what!" he exclaimed, in a transport of fury, "a'n't I master of my own 
house? out, I say!" 

these were harsh terms, but they were not accompani by gestur and 
tone so menac as those which had befor been used. It wa plain that 
the tide, which so late threaten my destruction, had begun to 
recede. thi encourag me to persist. 

"be not alarmed, my good friend," said I, placidli and smiling. "A man 
of your bone need not fear a pigmi like me. I shall scarc be abl to 
dethron you in your own castle, with an armi of hostlers, tapsters, and 
cook at your beck. you shall still be master here, provid you use 
your influenc to procur me a dinner." 

hi acquiesc in a pacif system wa extrem reluct and 
gradual. He laid asid one sullen tone and wrath look after the 
other; and, at length, consent not onli to suppli me with a dinner, 
but to partak of it with me. noth wa more a topic of surpris to 
himself than hi forbearance. He knew not how it was. He had never been 
treat so before. He wa not proof against entreati and submission; but 
I had neither supplic nor submitted. the stuff that I wa made of 
wa at onc damnabl tough and devilishli pliant. when he thought of my 
impudence, in stay in hi hous after he had bade me leav it, he wa 
tempt to resum hi passion. when he reflect on my courage, in 
make light of hi anger, notwithstand hi known impetuos and my 
person inferiority, he could not withhold hi esteem. but my patienc 
under hi rebukes, my unalter equanimity, and my readi consent to 
the valid of hi claims, sooth and propiti him. 

An exempt from blow and abus wa all that I could gain from thi 
man. I told him the truth, with regard to my own history, so far as it 
wa connect with the hadwins. I exhibited, in affect colours, the 
helpless condit of eliza; but could extort from him noth but hi 
consent that, if she chose, she might come and live with him. He would 
give her victual and cloth for so much house-work as she wa abl to 
do. If she chose to live elsewhere, he promis not to molest her, or 
intermeddl in her concerns. the hous and land were hi by law, and he 
would have them. 

It wa not my provinc to revil or expostul with him. I state what 
measur would be adopt by a man who regard the interest of other 
more than hi own; who wa anxiou for the welfar of an innoc girl, 
connect with him so close by the tie of kindred, and who wa 
destitut of what is call natur friends. If he did not cancel, for 
her sake, hi bond and mortgage, he would, at least, afford her a frugal 
maintenance. He would extend to her, in all emergencies, hi counsel and 
protection. 

all that, he said, wa sheer nonsense. He could not suffici wonder 
at my folly, in propos to him to make a free gift of a hundr rich 
acres, to a girl too who scarc knew her right hand from her left; 
whom the first cun young rogu like myself would _chouse_ out of the 
whole, and take herself into the bargain. but my folli wa even 
surpass by my impudence, since, as the _friend_ of thi girl, I wa 
mere petit on my own account. I had come to him, whom I never 
saw before, on whom I had no claim, and who, as I well knew, had reason 
to think me a sharper, and modestli said, "here' a girl who ha no 
fortune. I am greatli in want of one. pray, give her such an estat that 
you have in your possession. If you do, i'll marri her, and take it into 
my own hands." I might be thank that he did not answer such a 
petit with a horse-whipping. but if he did not give her hi estate, 
he might extend to her, forsooth, hi counsel and protection. "that i'v 
offer to do," continu he. "she may come and live in my house, if she 
will. she may do some of the famili work. i'll discharg the chambermaid 
to make room for her. lizzy, if I rememb right, ha a pretti face. she 
can't have a better market for it than as chambermaid to an inn. If she 
mind her p' and q' she may make up a handsom sum at the year' end." 

I thought it time to break off the conference; and, my dinner be 
finished, took my leave, leav behind me the charact of _a queer 
sort of chap_. I speed to the prothonotary' office, which wa kept in 
the village, and quickli ascertain the truth of hadwin' pretensions. 
there exist a mortgage, with bond and warrant of attorney, to so great 
an amount as would swallow up everi thing at malverton. furnish with 
these tidings, I prepared, with a droop heart, to return to mr. 
curling's. 




chapter xxxiv. 


thi incid necessarili produc a chang in my view with regard to 
my friend. her fortun consist of a few hundr of dollars, which, 
frugal administered, might procur decent accommod in the 
country. when thi wa consumed, she must find subsist in tend 
the big wheel or the milk-pail, unless fortun should enabl me to place 
her in a more favour situation. thi state was, in some respects, 
but littl differ from that in which she had spent the former part of 
her life; but, in her father' house, these employ were dignifi 
by being, in some degree, voluntary, and reliev by frequent interv 
of recreat and leisure. now they were like to prove irksom and 
servile, in consequ of be perform for hire and impos by 
necessity. equality, parent solicitudes, and sisterli endearments, 
would be want to lighten the yoke. 

these inconveniences, however, were imaginary. thi wa the school in 
which fortitud and independ were to be learned. habit, and the 
puriti of rural manners, would, likewise, creat anew those tie which 
death had dissolved. the affect of parent and sister would be 
suppli by the fonder and more ration attach of friendship. 
these toil were not detriment to beauti or health. what wa to be 
dread from them wa their tendenc to quench the spirit of liber 
curiosity; to habitu the person to bodily, rather than intellectual, 
exertions; to supersed and creat indiffer or avers to the onli 
instrument of ration improvement, the pen and the book. 

thi evil, however, wa at some distanc from eliza. her present abod 
wa quiet and serene. here she might enjoy domest pleasur and 
opportun of mental improv for the come twelvemonth at least. 
thi period would, perhaps, be suffici for the format of studiou 
habits. what scheme should be adopt for thi end would be determin 
by the destini to which I myself should be reserved. 

My path wa alreadi chalk out, and my fanci now pursu it with 
uncommon pleasure. To resid in your family; to studi your profession; 
to pursu some subordin or casual mode of industry, by which I might 
purchas leisur for medic pursuits, for social recreations, and for 
the studi of mankind on your busi and throng stage, wa the scope of 
my wishes. thi destini would not hinder punctual correspond and 
occasion visit to eliza. her pen might be call into action, and her 
mind be awaken by books, and everi hour be made to add to her store 
of knowledg and enlarg the bound of her capacity. 

I wa spiritless and gloomi when I left ----; but reflect on my 
futur lot, and just view of the situat of my friend, insens 
restor my cheerfulness. I arriv at mr. curling' in the evening, and 
hasten to impart to eliza the issu of my commission. It gave her 
uneasiness, mere as it frustrat the design, on which she had fondli 
mused, of resid in the city. she wa somewhat consol by my promis 
of be her constant correspond and occasion visitor. 

next morn I set out on my journey hither, on foot. the way wa not 
long; the weather, though cold, wa wholesom and serene. My spirit 
were high, and I saw noth in the world befor me but sunshin and 
prosperity. I wa consciou that my happi depend not on the 
revolut of natur or the capric of man. all without was, indeed, 
vicissitud and uncertainty; but within my bosom wa a centr not to be 
shaken or removed. My purpos were honest and steadfast. everi sens 
wa the inlet of pleasure, becaus it wa the avenu of knowledge; and 
my soul brood over the world to ideas, and glow with exult at 
the grandeur and beauti of it own creations. 

thi felic wa too raptur to be of long duration. I gradual 
descend from these heights; and the remembr of past incidents, 
connect with the imag of your family, to which I wa returning, led 
my thought into a differ channel. welbeck and the unhappi girl whom 
he had betrayed; mrs. villar and wallace, were recollect anew. the 
view which I had formed, for determin the fate and afford 
assist to clemenza, were recalled. My former resolut with regard 
to her had been suspend by the uncertainti in which the fate of the 
hadwin was, at that time, wrapped. had it not becom necessari wholli 
to lay asid these resolutions? 

that, indeed, wa an irksom conclusion. No wonder that I struggl to 
repel it; that I foster the doubt whether money wa the onli 
instrument of benefit; whether caution, and fortitude, and knowledge, 
were not the genuin preserv from evil. had I not the mean in my 
hand of dispel her fatal ignor of welbeck and of those with 
whom she resided? wa I not authorized, by my previou though slender 
intercourse, to seek her presence? 

suppos I should enter mrs. villars' house, desir to be introduc to 
the lady, accost her with affection simplicity, and tell her the 
truth? whi be anxiou to smooth the way? whi deal in apologies, 
circuities, and innuendoes? all these are feebl and pervers 
refinements, unworthi of an honest purpos and an erect spirit. To 
believ her inaccess to my visit wa absurd. To wait for the 
permiss of those whose interest it might be to shut out visit wa 
cowardice. thi wa an infring of her liberti which equiti and law 
equal condemned. By what right could she be restrain from 
intercours with others? door and passag may be between her and me. 
with a purpos such as mine, no one had a right to close the one or 
obstruct the other. away with cowardli reluct and clownish 
scruples, and let me hasten thi moment to her dwelling. 

mrs. villar is the portress of the mansion. she will probabl present 
herself befor me, and demand the reason of my visit. what shall I say 
to her? the truth. To falter, or equivocate, or dissembl to thi woman 
would be wicked. perhap her charact ha been misunderstood and 
maligned. can I render her a greater servic than to appriz her of the 
aspers that have rest on it, and afford her the opportun of 
vindication? perhap she is inde selfish and profligate; the betray 
of youth and the agent of lasciviousness. doe she not deserv to know 
the extent of her error and the ignomini of her trade? doe she not 
merit the compass of the good and the rebuk of the wise? To shrink 
from the task would prove me cowardli and unfirm. thu far, at least, 
let my courag extend. 

alas! clemenza is unacquaint with my language. My thought cannot make 
themselv appar but by words, and to my word she will be abl to 
affix no meaning. yet is not that a hasti decision? the version from the 
drama of zeno which I found in her toilet wa probabl hers, and prove 
her to have a specul knowledg of our tongue. near half a year ha 
sinc elapsed, dure which she ha dwelt with talker of english, and 
consequ could not fail to have acquir it. thi conclus is 
somewhat dubious, but experi will give it certainty. 

hitherto I had stroll along the path at a linger pace. time enough, 
methought, to reach your threshold between sunris and moonlight, if my 
way had been three time longer than it was. you were the pleas 
phantom that hover befor me and beckon me forward. what a total 
revolut had occur in the cours of a few seconds! for thu long 
did my reason with regard to clemenza and the villar requir to 
pass through my understanding, and escape, in half-mutt soliloquy, 
from my lips. My muscl trembl with eagerness, and I bound forward 
with impetuosity. I saw noth but a vista of catalpas, leafless, 
load with icicles, and termin in four chimney and a paint 
roof. My fanci outstrip my footsteps, and wa busi in pictur face 
and rehears dialogues. present I reach thi new object of my 
pursuit, dart through the avenue, notic that some window of the 
hous were unclosed, drew thenc a hasti infer that the hous wa 
not without inhabitants, and knocked, quickli and loudly, for admission. 

some one within crept to the door, open it with seem caution, and 
just far enough to allow the face to be seen. It wa the timid, pale, 
and unwash face of a girl who wa readili suppos to be a servant, 
taken from a cottage, and turn into a bringer of wood and water and a 
scourer of tub and trenches. she wait in timor silenc the 
deliveri of my message. wa mrs. villar at home? 

"no; she ha gone to town." 

were ani of her daughter within? 

she could not tell; she believed--sh thought--which did I want? miss 
hetti or miss sally? 

"let me see miss hetty." say this, I push gentli against the door. 
the girl, half reluctant, yield way; I enter the passage, and, 
put my hand on the lock of a door that seem to lead into a 
parlour,--"i miss hetti in thi room?" 

no; there wa nobodi there. 

"go call her, then. tell her there is one who wish to see her on 
import business. I will wait for her come in thi room." So saying, 
I open the door, and enter the apartment, while the girl withdrew to 
perform my message. 

the parlour wa spaciou and expens furnished, but an air of 
neglig and disord wa everywher visible. the carpet wa wrinkl 
and unswept; a clock on the table, in a glass frame, so streak and 
spot with dust as scarc to be transparent, and the index 
motionless, and point at four instead of nine; ember scatter on 
the marbl hearth, and tong lie on the fender with the handl in the 
ashes; a harpsichord, uncovered, one end load with _scores_, tumbl 
togeth in a heap, and the other with volum of novel and plays, some 
on their edges, some on their backs, gape open by the scorch of 
their covers; rent; blurred; stained; blotted; dog-eared; tabl awry; 
chair crowd each other; in short, no object but indic the 
neglect or the ignor of domest neat and economy. 

My leisur wa employ in survey these objects, and in listen 
for the approach of miss hetty. some minut elapsed, and no one came. A 
reason for delay wa easili imagined, and I summon patienc to wait. I 
open a book; touch the instrument; survey the vase on the 
mantel-tree; the figur on the hangings, and the print of apollo and 
the sibyl, taken from salvator, and hung over the chimney. I eye my own 
shape and garb in the mirror, and ask how my rustic appear would 
be regard by that supercili and voluptu be to whom I wa 
about to present myself. 

present the latch of the door wa softli moved: it opened, and the 
simpleton, befor described, appeared. she spoke, but her voic wa so 
full of hesitation, and so near a whisper, that much attent wa 
need to make out her words:--miss hetti wa not at home; she wa gone 
to town with her _mistress_. 

thi wa a tale not to be credited. how wa I to act? she persist in 
maintain the truth of it.--"well, then," said I, at length, "tell 
miss salli that I wish to speak with her. she will answer my purpos 
just as well." 

miss salli wa not at home neither. she had gone to town too. they would 
not be back, she did not know when; not till night, she supposed. It wa 
so indeed; none of them wasn't at home; none but she and nanni in the 
kitchen: inde there wasn't. 

"go tell nanni to come here; I will leav my messag with her." she 
withdrew, but nanni did not receiv the summons, or thought proper not 
to obey it. all wa vacant and still. 

My state wa singular and critical. It wa absurd to prolong it; but to 
leav the hous with my errand unexecut would argu imbecil and 
folly. To ascertain clemenza' presenc in thi house, and to gain an 
interview, were yet in my power. had I not boast of my intrepid in 
brave denial and command when they endeavour to obstruct my 
passag to thi woman? but here were no obstacl nor prohibition. 
suppos the girl had said truth, that the matron and her daughter were 
absent, and that nanni and herself were the onli guardian of the 
mansion. So much the better. My design will not be opposed. I have onli 
to mount the stair, and go from one room to anoth till I find what I 
seek. 

there wa hazard, as well as plausibility, in thi scheme. I thought it 
best onc more to endeavour to extort inform from the girl, and 
persuad her to be my guid to whomsoev the hous contained. I put my 
hand to the bell and rung a brisk peal. No one came. I pass into the 
entry, to the foot of a staircase, and to a back-window. nobodi wa 
within hear or sight. 

onc more I reflect on the rectitud of my intentions, on the 
possibl that the girl' assert might be true, on the benefit of 
expedition, and of gain access to the object of my visit without 
interrupt or delay. To these consider wa ad a sort of 
charm, not easili explained, and by no mean justifiable, produc by 
the veri temer and hazard accompani thi attempt. I thought, 
with scorn emotions, on the bar and hinder which pride, and 
caprice, and delus maxim of decorum, rais in the way of human 
intercourse. I spurn at these semblanc and substitut of honesty, 
and delight to shake such fetter into air and trampl such 
impedi to dust. I want to see a human being, in order to promot 
her happiness. It wa doubt whether she wa within twenti pace of 
the spot where I stood. the doubt wa to be solved. how? By examin 
the space. I forthwith proceed to examin it. I reach the second 
story. I approach a door that wa closed. I knocked. after a pause, a 
soft voic said, "who is there?" 

the accent were as music as those of clemenza, but were in other 
respect different. I had no topic to discuss with thi person. I 
answer not, yet hesit to withdraw. present the same voic wa 
again heard:--"what is it you want? whi don't you answer? come in!" I 
compli with the command, and enter the room. 

It wa deliber and foresight that led me hither, and not chanc or 
caprice. hence, instead of be disconcert or vanquish by the 
object that I saw, I wa tranquil and firm. My curiosity, however, made 
me a vigil observer. two females, array with voluptu negligence, 
in a manner adapt to the utmost seclusion, and seat in a careless 
attitud on a sofa, were now discovered. 

both dart glanc at the door. one, who appear to be the youngest, 
no sooner saw me, than she shrieked, and, start from her seat, 
betray in the look which she success cast upon me, on herself, 
and on the chamber, whose apparatu wa in no less confus than that 
of the apart below, her conscious of the unseason of 
thi meeting. 

the other shriek likewise, but in her it seem to be the token of 
surpris rather than that of terror. there was, probably, somewhat in my 
aspect and garb that suggest an apolog for thi intrusion, as aris 
from simplic and mistake. she thought proper, however, to assum the 
air of one offended, and, look sternly,--"how now, fellow," said she, 
"what is this? whi come you hither?" 

thi question wa of matur age, but had not pass the period of 
attract and grace. all the beauti that natur had bestow wa 
still retained, but the portion had never been great. what she possess 
wa so model and embellish by such a carriag and dress as to give 
it most power over the sens of the gazer. In proportion, however, as 
it wa intend and adapt to captiv those who know none but 
physic pleasures, it wa qualifi to breed distast and avers in 
me. 

I am sensibl how much error may have lurk in thi decision. I had 
brought with me the belief of their be unchaste; and seized, perhap 
with too much avidity, ani appear that coincid with my 
prepossessions. yet the younger by no mean inspir the same disgust; 
though I had no reason to suppos her more unblemish than the elder. 
her modesti seem unaffected, and wa by no mean satisfied, like that 
of the elder, with defeat futur curiosity. the conscious of what 
had alreadi been expos fill her with confusion, and she would have 
flown away, if her companion had not detain her by some degre of 
force. "what ail the girl? there' noth to be frighten at. 
fellow!" she repeated, "what bring you here?" 

I advanc and stood befor them. I look steadfastly, but, I believe, 
with neither effronteri nor anger, on the one who address me. I spoke 
in a tone seriou and emphatical. "I come for the sake of speak to a 
woman who formerli resid in thi house, and probabl resid here 
still. her name is clemenza lodi. If she be here, I request you to 
conduct me to her instantly." 

methought I perceiv some inquietude, a less imperi and more 
inquisit air, in thi woman, on hear the name of clemenza. It wa 
momentary, and gave way to peremptori looks. "what is your busi with 
her? and whi did you adopt thi mode of inquiry? A veri extraordinari 
intrusion! Be good enough to leav the chamber. ani question proper to 
be answer will be answer below." 

"I meant not to intrud or offend. It wa not an idl or impertin 
motiv that led me hither. I wait below for some time after solicit 
an audienc of you through the servant. she assur me you were absent, 
and laid me under the necess of search for clemenza lodi myself, 
and without a guide. I am anxiou to withdraw, and request mere to be 
direct to the room which she occupies." 

"I direct you," repli she, in a more resolut tone, "to quit the room 
and the house." 

"impossible, madam," I replied, still look at her earnestly; "leav 
the hous without see her! you might as well enjoin me to pull the 
and on my head!--to walk barefoot to pekin! impossible!" 

some solicitud wa now mingl with her anger. "thi is strang 
insolence! unaccount behaviour!--begon from my room! will you 
compel me to call the gentlemen?" 

"be not alarmed," said I, with augment mildness. there was, indeed, 
compass and sorrow at my heart, and these must have somewhat 
influenc my looks. "be not alarmed. I came to confer a benefit, not to 
perpetr an injury. I came not to censur or expostul with you, 
but mere to counsel and aid a be that need both; all I want is to 
see her. In thi chamber I sought not you, but her. onli lead me to her, 
or tell me where she is. I will then rid you of my presence." 

"will you compel me to call those who will punish thi insol as it 
deserves?" 

"dearest madam! I compel you to nothing. I mere supplicate. I would 
ask you to lead me to these gentlemen, if I did not know that there are 
none but femal in the house. It is you who must receiv and compli 
with my petition. allow me a moment' interview with clemenza lodi. 
complianc will harm you not, but will benefit her. what is your 
objection?" 

"thi is the strangest proceeding! the most singular conduct! Is thi a 
place fit to parley with you? I warn you of the consequ of stay a 
moment longer. depend upon it, you will sore repent it." 

"you are obdurate," said I, and turn toward the younger, who listen 
to thi discours in tremor and panic. I took her hand with an air of 
humil and reverence. "here," said I, "there seem to be purity, 
innocence, and condescension. I took thi hous to be the templ of 
voluptuousness. femal I expect to find in it, but such onli as 
trade in licenti pleasures; specious, perhap not destitut of 
talents, beauty, and address, but dissolut and wanton, sensual and 
avaricious; yet in thi counten and carriag there are token of 
virtue. I am born to be deceived, and the semblanc of modesti is 
readili assumed. under thi veil, perhaps, lurk a taint heart and 
deprav appetites. Is it so?" 

she made me no answer, but somewhat in her look seem to evinc that 
my favour prepossess were just. I notic likewis that the 
alarm of the elder wa greatli increas by thi address to her 
companion. the thought suddenli occur that thi girl might be in 
circumst not unlik those of clemenza lodi; that she wa not 
appriz of the charact of her associates, and might by thi meet 
be rescu from similar evils. 

thi suspicion fill me with tumultu feelings. clemenza wa for a 
time forgotten. I paid no attent to the look or demeanour of the 
elder, but wa wholli occupi in gaze on the younger. My anxieti to 
know the truth gave patho and energi to my tone while I spoke:-- 

"who, where, what are you? Do you resid in thi house? are you a sister 
or daughter in thi family, or mere a visitant? Do you know the 
character, profession, and view of your companions? Do you deem them 
virtuous, or know them to be profligate? speak! tell me, I beseech you!" 

the maiden confus which had just appear in the counten of thi 
person now somewhat abated. she lift her eyes, and glanc by turn at 
me and at her who sat by her side. An air of seriou astonish 
overspread her features, and she seem anxiou for me to proceed. the 
elder, meanwhile, betray the utmost alarm, again upbraid my 
audacity, command me to withdraw, and admonish me of the danger I 
incur by lingering. 

I notic not her interference, but again entreat to know of the 
younger her true state. she had no time to answer me, suppos her not 
to want the inclination, for everi paus wa fill by the clamor 
importun and menac of the other. I began to perceiv that my 
attempt were useless to thi end, but the chief and most estim 
purpos wa attainable. It wa in my power to state the knowledg I 
possessed, through your means, of mrs. villar and her daughters. thi 
inform might be superfluous, sinc she to whom it wa given might 
be one of thi licenti family. the contrary, however, wa not 
improbable, and my tidings, therefore, might be of the utmost moment to 
her safety. 

A resolut and even impetu manner reduc my incess interrupt to 
silence. what I had to say, I compress in a few words, and adher to 
perspicu and candour with the utmost care. I still held the hand that 
I had taken, and fix my eye upon her counten with a steadfast 
that hinder her from lift her eyes. 

"I know you not; whether you be dissolut or chaste, I cannot tell. In 
either case, however, what I am go to say will be useful. let me 
faith repeat what I have heard. It is mere rumour, and I vouch not 
for it truth. rumour as it is, I submit it to your judgment, and hope 
that it may guid you into path of innoc and honour. 

"mrs. villar and her three daughter are englishwomen, who support 
for a time an unblemish reputation, but who, at length, were suspect 
of carri on the trade of prostitution. thi secret could not be 
conceal forever. the proflig who frequent their hous betray 
them. one of them, who die under their roof, after they had withdrawn 
from it into the country, disclos to hi kinsman, who attend hi 
death-bed, their genuin character. 

"the die man likewis relat incid in which I am deepli 
concerned. I have been connect with one by name welbeck. In hi hous 
I met an unfortun girl, who wa afterward remov to mrs. villars's. 
her name wa clemenza lodi. resid in thi house, under the control 
of a woman like mrs. villar and her daughters, must be injuri to her 
innocence, and from thi control I now come to rescu her." 

I turn to the elder, and continued,--"bi all that is sacred, I adjur 
you to tell me whether clemenza lodi be under thi roof! If she be not, 
whither ha she gone? To know thi I came hither, and ani difficulti or 
reluct in answer will be useless; till an answer be obtained, I 
will not go hence." 

dure thi speech, anger had been kindl in the bosom of thi woman. 
It now burst upon me in a torrent of opprobri epithets. I wa a 
villain, a calumniator, a thief. I had lurk about the house, till 
those whose sex and strength enabl them to cope with me had gone. I 
had enter these door by fraud. I wa a wretch, guilti of the last 
excess of insol and insult. 

To repel these reproaches, or endur them, wa equal useless. the 
satisfact that I sought wa onli to be gain by search the house. 
I left the room without speaking. did I act illeg in pass from 
one stori and one room to another? did I realli deserv the imput 
of rash and insolence? My behaviour, I well know, wa ambigu and 
hazardous, and perhap want in discretion, but my motiv were 
unquestion pure. I aim at noth but the rescu of a human 
creatur from distress and dishonour. 

I pretend not to the wisdom of experi and age; to the prais of 
forethought or subtlety. I choos the obviou path, and pursu it with 
headlong expedition. good intentions, unaid by knowledge, will, 
perhaps, produc more injuri than benefit, and therefor knowledg must 
be gained, but the acquisit is not momentary; is not bestow unask 
and untoil for. meanwhile, we must not be inact becaus we are 
ignorant. our good purpos must hurri to performance, whether our 
knowledg be greater or less. 




chapter xxxv. 


To explor the hous in thi manner wa so contrari to ordinari rules, 
that the design wa probabl wholli unsuspect by the women whom I had 
just left. My silence, at parting, might have been ascrib by them to 
the intimid influenc of invect and threats. henc I proceed 
in my search without interruption. 

present I reach a front chamber in the third story. the door wa 
ajar. I enter it on tiptoe. sit on a low chair by the fire, I 
beheld a femal figure, dress in a neglig but not indec manner. 
her face, in the postur in which she sat, wa onli half seen. it hue 
were sickli and pale, and in mourn unison with a feebl and emaci 
form. her eye were fix upon a babe that lay stretch upon a pillow 
at her feet. the child, like it mother, for such she wa readili 
imagin to be, wa meagr and cadaverous. either it wa dead, or could 
not be veri distant from death. 

the featur of clemenza were easili recognised, though no contrast 
could be greater, in habit and shape and complexion, than that which her 
present bore to her former appearance. all her rose had faded, and her 
brillianc vanished. still, however, there wa somewhat fit to 
awaken the tenderest emotions. there were token of inconsol 
distress. 

her attent wa wholli absorb by the child. she lift not her eye 
till I came close to her and stood befor her. when she discov me, a 
faint start wa perceived. she look at me for a moment, then, put 
one spread hand befor her eyes, she stretch out the other toward the 
door, and wave it in silence, as if to admonish me to depart. 

thi motion, howev emphatical, I could not obey. I wish to obtain 
her attention, but knew not in what word to claim it. I wa silent. In 
a moment she remov her hand from her eyes, and look at me with new 
eagerness. her featur bespok emot which, perhaps, flow from my 
like to her brother, join with the memori of my connect with 
welbeck. 

My situat wa full of embarrassment. I wa by no mean certain that 
my languag would be understood. I knew not in what light the polici and 
dissimul of welbeck might have taught her to regard me. what 
proposal, conduc to her comfort and her safety, could I make to her? 

onc more she cover her eyes, and exclaimed, in a feebl voice, "go 
away! begone!" 

As if satisfi with thi effort, she resum her attent to her 
child. she stoop and lift it in her arms, gazing, meanwhile, on it 
almost lifeless featur with intens anxiety. she crush it to her 
bosom, and, again look at me, repeated, "go away! go away! begone!" 

there wa somewhat in the line of her face, in her tone and gestures, 
that pierc to my heart. ad to this, wa my knowledg of her 
condition; her friendlessness; her poverty; the pang of unrequit 
love; and her expir infant. I felt my utter choked, and my tear 
struggl for passage. I turn to the window, and endeavour to 
regain my tranquillity. 

"what wa it," said I, "that brought me hither? the perfidi of welbeck 
must sure have long sinc been discovered. what can I tell her of the 
villar which she doe not alreadi know, or of which the knowledg will 
be useful? If their treatment ha been just, whi should I detract from 
their merit? If it ha been otherwise, their own conduct will have 
disclos their genuin character. though voluptu themselves, it doe 
not follow that they have labour to debas thi creature. though 
wanton, they may not be inhuman. 

"I can propos no chang in her condit for the better. should she be 
will to leav thi house, whither is it in my power to conduct her? 
Oh that I were rich enough to provid food for the hungry, shelter for 
the houseless, and raiment for the naked!" 

I wa rous from these fruitless reflect by the lady, whom some 
sudden thought induc to place the child in it bed, and, rising, to 
come toward me. the utter deject which her featur late betray 
wa now chang for an air of anxiou curiosity. "where," said she, in 
her broken english,--"wher is signor welbeck?" 

"alas!" return I, "I know not. that question might, I thought, with 
more proprieti be put to you than me." 

"I know where he be; I fear where he be." 

So saying, the deepest sigh burst from her heart. she turn from me, 
and, go to the child, took it again into her lap. it pale and sunken 
cheek wa quickli wet with the mother' tears, which, as she silent 
hung over it, drop fast from her eyes. 

thi demeanour could not but awaken curiosity, while it gave a new turn 
to my thoughts. I began to suspect that in the token which I saw there 
wa not onli distress for her child, but concern for the fate of 
welbeck. "know you," said I, "where mr. welbeck is? Is he alive? Is he 
near? Is he in calamity?" 

"I do not know if he be alive. He be sick. He be in prison. they will 
not let me go to him. and"--her her attent and mine wa attract by 
the infant, whose frame, till now motionless, began to be tremulous. it 
featur sunk into a more ghastli expression. it breath were 
difficult, and everi effort to respir produc a convuls harder than 
the last. 

the mother easili interpret these tokens. the same mortal struggl 
seem to take place in her featur as in those of her child. At length 
her agoni found way in a pierc shriek. the struggl in the infant wa 
past. hope look in vain for a new motion in it heart or it eyelids. 
the lip were closed, and it breath wa gone forever! 

the grief which overwhelm the unhappi parent wa of that outrag 
and desper kind which is wholli incompat with thinking. A few 
incoher motion and screams, that rent the soul, were follow by a 
deep swoon. she sunk upon the floor, pale and lifeless as her babe. 

I need not describ the pang which such a scene wa adapt to produc 
in me. these were render more acut by the helpless and ambigu 
situat in which I wa placed. I wa eager to bestow consol and 
succour, but wa destitut of all means. I wa plung into 
uncertainti and doubts. I gaze altern at the infant and it 
mother. I sighed. I wept. I even sobbed. I stoop down and took the 
lifeless hand of the sufferer. I bath it with my tears, and exclaimed, 
"ill-fat woman! unhappi mother! what shall I do for thi relief? how 
shall I blunt the edg of thi calamity, and rescu thee from new 
evils?" 

At thi moment the door of the apart wa opened, and the younger of 
the women whom I had seen below entered. her look betray the deepest 
constern and anxiety. her eye in a moment were fix by the 
decay form and the sad featur of clemenza. she shudder at thi 
spectacle, but wa silent. she stood in the midst of the floor, 
fluctuat and bewildered. I drop the hand that I wa holding, and 
approach her. 

"you have come," said I, "in good season. I know you not, but will 
believ you to be good. you have a heart, it may be, not free from 
corruption, but it is still capabl of piti for the miseri of others. 
you have a hand that refus not it aid to the unhappy. see; there is 
an infant dead. there is a mother whom grief has, for a time, depriv 
of life. she ha been oppress and betrayed; been rob of properti 
and reputation--but not of innocence. she is worthi of relief. have you 
arm to receiv her? have you sympathy, protection, and a home to bestow 
upon a forlorn, betrayed, and unhappi stranger? I know not what thi 
hous is; I suspect it to be no better than a brothel. I know not what 
treatment thi woman ha received. when her situat and want are 
ascertained, will you suppli her wants? will you rescu her from evil 
that may attend her continu here?" 

she wa disconcert and bewild by thi address. At length she 
said, "all that ha happened, all that I have heard and seen, is so 
unexpected, so strange, that I am amaz and distracted. your behaviour 
I cannot comprehend, nor your motiv for make thi address to me. I 
cannot answer you, except in one respect. If thi woman ha suffer 
injury, I have had no part in it. I knew not of her exist nor her 
situat till thi moment; and whatev protect or assist she 
may justli claim, I am both abl and will to bestow. I do not live 
here, but in the city. I am onli an occasion visit in thi house." 

"what, then!" I exclaimed, with sparkl eye and a raptur accent, 
"you are not profligate; are a stranger to the manner of thi house, 
and a detest of these manners? Be not a deceiver, I entreat you. I 
depend onli on your look and professions, and these may be dissembled." 

these questions, which inde argu a childish simplicity, excit her 
surprise. she look at me, uncertain whether I wa in earnest or in 
jest. At length she said, "your languag is so singular, that I am at a 
loss how to answer it. I shall take no pain to find out it meaning, 
but leav you to form conjectur at leisure. who is thi woman, and how 
can I serv her?" after a pause, she continued:--"i cannot afford her 
ani immedi assistance, and shall not stay a moment longer in thi 
house. there" (put a card in my hand) "i my name and place of 
abode. If you shall have ani propos to make, respect thi woman, I 
shall be readi to receiv them in my own house." So saying, she 
withdrew. 

I look wist after her, but could not but assent to her assertion, 
that her presenc here would be more injuri to her than benefici to 
clemenza. she had scarc gone, when the elder woman entered. there wa 
rage, sullenness, and disappoint in her aspect. these, however, were 
suspend by the situat in which she discov the mother and child. 
It wa plain that all the sentiment of woman were not extinguish in 
her heart. she summon the servant and seem prepar to take such 
measur as the occas prescribed. I now saw the folli of suppos 
that these measur would be neglected, and that my presenc could not 
essenti contribut to the benefit of the sufferer. still, however, I 
linger in the room, till the infant wa cover with a cloth, and the 
still senseless parent wa convey into an adjoin chamber. the woman 
then, as if she had not seen me before, fix scowl eye upon me, and 
exclaimed, "thief! villain! whi do you stay here?" 

"I mean to go," said I, "but not till I express my gratitud and 
pleasur at the sight of your attent to thi sufferer. you deem me 
insol and perverse, but I am not such; and hope that the day will 
come when I shall convinc you of my good intentions." 

"begone!" interrupt she, in a more angri tone. "begon thi moment, or 
I will treat you as a thief." she now drew forth her hand from under her 
gown, and show a pistol. "you shall see," she continued, "that I will 
not be insult with impunity. If you do not vanish, I will shoot you as 
a robber." 

thi woman wa far from want a forc and intrepid worthi of a 
differ sex. her gestur and tone were full of energy. they denot 
a haughti and indign spirit. It wa plain that she conceiv herself 
deepli injur by my conduct; and wa it absolut certain that her 
anger wa without reason? I had load her hous with atroci 
imputations, and these imput might be false. I had conceiv them 
upon such evid as chanc had provided; but thi evidence, intric 
and dubiou as human action and motiv are, might be void of truth. 

"perhaps," said I, in a sedat tone, "I have injur you; I have 
mistaken your character. you shall not find me less readi to repair, 
than to perpetrate, thi injury. My error wa without malice, and----" 

I had not time to finish the sentence, when thi rash and enrag woman 
thrust the pistol close to my head and fire it. I wa wholli unawar 
that her furi would lead her to thi excess. It wa a sort of mechan 
impuls that made me rais my hand and attempt to turn asid the 
weapon. I did thi deliber and tranquilly, and without conceiv 
that ani thing more wa intend by her movement than to intimid me. 
To thi precaution, however, I wa indebt for life. the bullet wa 
divert from my forehead to my left ear, and made a slight wound upon 
the surface, from which the blood gush in a stream. 

the loud of thi explosion, and the shock which the ball produc in 
my brain, sunk me into a momentari stupor. I reel backward, and should 
have fallen, had not I support myself against the wall. the sight of 
my blood instantli restor her reason. her rage disappeared, and wa 
succeed by terror and remorse. she clasp her hands, and exclaimed, 
"oh! what! what have I done? My frantic passion ha destroy me." 

I need no long time to show me the full extent of the injuri which I 
had suffer and the conduct which it becam me to adopt. for a moment I 
wa bewild and alarmed, but present perceiv that thi wa an 
incid more product of good than of evil. It would teach me caution 
in contend with the passion of another, and show me that there is 
a limit which the impetuos of anger will sometim overstep. 
instead of revil my companion, I address myself to her thus:-- 

"be not frighted. you have done me no injury, and, I hope, will deriv 
instruct from thi event. your rash had like to have sacrif 
the life of one who is your friend, and to have expos yourself to 
infami and death, or, at least, to the pang of etern remorse. learn 
from henc to curb your passions, and especi to keep at a distanc 
from everi murder weapon, on occas when rage is like to take 
place of reason. 

"I repeat that my motiv in enter thi hous were connect with 
your happi as well as that of clemenza lodi. If I have er in 
suppos you the member of a vile and pernici trade, that error wa 
worthi of be rectified, but violenc and invect tend onli to 
confirm it. I am incap of ani purpos that is not beneficent; but, 
in the mean that I use and in the evid on which I proceed, I am 
liabl to a thousand mistakes. point out to me the road by which I can 
do you good, and I will cheer pursu it." 

find that her fear had been groundless as to the consequ of her 
rashness, she renewed, though with less vehem than before, her 
imprec on my intermeddl and audaci folly. I listen till 
the storm wa nearli exhausted, and then, declar my intent to 
revisit the hous if the interest of clemenza should requir it, I 
resum my way to the city. 




chapter xxxvi. 


"why," said I, as I hast forward, "i my fortun so abund in 
unforeseen occurrences? Is everi man who leav hi cottag and the 
impress of hi infanc behind him usher into such a world of 
revolut and peril as have trammel my steps? or is my scene 
indebt for varieti and chang to my propens to look into other 
people' concerns, and to make their sorrow and their joy mine? 

"to indulg an adventur spirit, I left the precinct of the 
barn-door, enlist in the servic of a stranger, and encount a 
thousand danger to my virtu under the disastr influenc of welbeck. 
afterward my life wa set at hazard in the caus of wallace, and now am 
I load with the provinc of protect the helpless eliza hadwin and 
the unfortun clemenza. My wish are fervent, and my power shall not 
be inact in their defence; but how slender are these powers! 

"in the offer of the unknown ladi there is, indeed, some consol 
for clemenza. It must be my busi to lay befor my friend steven the 
particular of what ha befallen me, and to entreat hi direct how 
thi disconsol girl may be most effectu succoured. It may be wise 
to take her from her present abode, and place her under some chast and 
human guardianship, where she may gradual lose remembr of her 
dead infant and her speciou betrayer. the barrier that sever her from 
welbeck must be high as heaven and insuper as necessity. 

"but, soft! talk she not of welbeck? said she not that he wa in 
prison and wa sick? poor wretch! I thought thi cours wa at an end; 
that the penalti of guilt no longer weigh down thi heart; that thi 
misde and thi remors were buri in a common and obscur grave; but 
it seem thou art still alive. 

"i it ration to cherish the hope of thi restor to innoc and 
peace? thou art no obdur criminal; hadst thou less virtue, thi 
compunct would be less keen. wert thou deaf to the voic of duty, 
thi wander into guilt and folli would be less fertil of anguish. 
the time will perhap come, when the measur of thi transgress and 
calam will overflow, and the folli of thi choic will be too 
conspicu to escap thi discernment. surely, even for such 
transgressor as thou, there is a salutari power in the precept of 
truth and the lesson of experience. 

"but thou art imprison and art sick. this, perhaps, is the crisi of 
thi destiny. indig and dishonour were the evil to shun which thi 
integr and peac of mind have been lightli forfeited. thou hast found 
that the price wa given in vain; that the hollow and deceit 
enjoy of opul and digniti were not worth the purchase; and 
that, frivol and unsubstanti as they are, the onli path that lead 
to them is that of honesti and diligence. thou art in prison and art 
sick; and there is none to cheer thi hour with offic of kindness, or 
uphold thi faint courag by the suggest of good counsel. for such 
as thou the world ha no compassion. mankind will pursu thee to the 
grave with execrations. their cruelti will be justifi or palliated, 
sinc they know thee not. they are unacquaint with the goad of thi 
conscienc and the bitter retribut which thou art daili suffering. 
they are full of their own wrongs, and think onli of those token of 
exult and complac which thou wast studiou of assum in thi 
intercours with them. It is I onli that thoroughli know thee and can 
rightli estim thi claim to compassion. 

"I have somewhat partaken of thi kindness, and thou meritest some 
gratitud at my hands. shall I not visit and endeavour to consol thee 
in thi distress? let me, at least, ascertain thi condition, and be the 
instrument in repair the wrong which thou hast inflicted. let me 
gain, from the contempl of thi misery, new motiv to sincer and 
rectitude." 

while occupi by these reflections, I enter the city. the thought 
which engross my mind relat to welbeck. It is not my custom to defer 
till to-morrow what can be done to-day. the destini of man frequent 
hang upon the laps of a minute. "I will stop," said I, "at the prison; 
and, sinc the moment of my arriv may not be indifferent, I will go 
thither with all possibl haste." I did not content myself with walking, 
but, regardless of the comment of passengers, hurri along the way at 
full speed. 

have inquir for welbeck, I wa conduct through a dark room, 
crowd with beds, to a staircase. never befor had I been in a prison. 
never had I smelt so noisom an odour, or survey face so begrim 
with filth and misery. the wall and floor were alik squalid and 
detestable. It seem that in thi hous exist would be bereav of 
all it attractions; and yet those faces, which could be seen through 
the obscur that encompass them, were either void of care or 
distort with mirth. 

"this," said I, as I follow my conductor, "i the resid of 
welbeck. what contrast are these to the repos and splendour, pictur 
walls, glossi hangings, gild sofas, mirror that occupi from ceil 
to floor, carpet of tauris, and the spotless and transcend 
brillianc of coverlet and napkins, in thi former dwelling! here 
brawl and the shuffl of rude feet are eternal. the air is load 
with the exhal of diseas and the fume of debauchery. thou art 
coop up in airless space, and, perhaps, compel to share thi narrow 
cell with some stupid ruffian. formerly, the breez were court by thi 
lofti windows. aromat shrub were scatter on thi hearth. menials, 
splendid in apparel, show their face with diffid in thi 
apartment, trod lightli on thi marbl floor, and suffer not the 
sanctiti of silenc to be troubl by a whisper. thi lamp shot it ray 
through the transpar of alabaster, and thi fragrant lymph flow 
from vase of porcelain. such were formerli the decor of thi 
hall, the embellish of thi existence; but now--alas!----" 

We reach a chamber in the second story. My conductor knock at the 
door. No one answered. repeat knock were unheard or unnot by the 
person within. At length, lift a latch, we enter together. 

the prison lay upon the bed, with hi face turn from the door. I 
advanc softly, make a sign to the keeper to withdraw. welbeck wa 
not asleep, but mere buri in reverie. I wa unwil to disturb hi 
musing, and stood with my eye fix upon hi form. He appear 
unconsci that ani one had entered. 

At length, utter a deep sigh, he chang hi posture, and perceiv 
me in my motionless and gaze attitude. recollect in what circumst 
we had last parted. welbeck had, no doubt, carri away with him from 
that interview a firm belief that I should speedili die. hi prognostic, 
however, wa fate to be contradicted. 

hi first emot were those of surprise. these gave place to 
mortif and rage. after eye me for some time, he avert hi 
glances, and that effort which is made to dissip some obstacl to 
breath show me that hi sensat were of the most excruci 
kind. He laid hi head upon the pillow, and sunk into hi former musing. 
He disdained, or wa unable, to utter a syllabl of welcom or contempt. 

In the opportun that had been afford me to view hi countenance, I 
had observ token of a kind veri differ from those which use to be 
visible. the gloomi and malign were more conspicuous. health had 
forsaken hi cheeks, and taken along with it those flexibl part which 
formerli enabl him to cover hi secret torment and insidi purpos 
beneath a veil of benevol and cheerfulness. "alas!" said I, loud 
enough for him to hear me, "here is a monument of ruin. despair and 
mischiev passion are too deepli root in thi heart for me to tear 
them away." 

these express did not escap hi notice. He turn onc more and 
cast sullen look upon me. there wa somewhat in hi eye that made me 
shudder. they denot that hi reveri wa not that of grief, but of 
madness. I continued, in a less steadfast voic than before:-- 

"unhappi clemenza! I have perform thi message. I have visit him that 
is sick and in prison. thou hadst caus for anguish and terror, even 
greater caus than thou imaginedst. would to god that thou wouldst be 
content with the report which I shall make; that thi misguid 
tender would consent to leav him to hi destiny, would suffer him 
to die alone; but that is a forbear which no eloqu that I 
possess will induc thee to practise. thou must come, and wit for 
thyself." 

In speak thus, I wa far from forese the effect which would be 
produc on the mind of welbeck. I wa far from intend to instil into 
him a belief that clemenza wa near at hand, and wa prepar to enter 
hi apartment; yet no other imag but these would, perhaps, have rous 
him from hi lethargy, and awaken that attent which I wish to 
awaken. He start up, and gaze fear at the door. 

"what!" he cried. "what! Is she here? Ye powers, that have scatter 
woe in my path, spare me the sight of her! but from thi agoni I will 
rescu myself. the moment she appear I will pluck out these eye and 
dash them at her feet." 

So saying, he gaze with augment eager upon the door. hi hand 
were lift to hi head, as if readi to execut hi frantic purpose. I 
seiz hi arm and besought him to lay asid hi terror, for that 
clemenza wa far distant. she had no intention, and besid wa unable, 
to visit him. 

"then I am respited. I breath again. no; keep her from a prison. drag 
her to the wheel or to the scaffold; mangl her with stripes; tortur 
her with famine; strangl her child befor her face, and cast it to the 
hungri dog that are howl at the gate; but--keep her from a prison. 
never let her enter these doors." there he stopped; hi eye be fix 
on the floor, and hi thought onc more buri in reverie. I 
resumed:-- 

"she is occupi with other grief than those connect with the fate of 
welbeck. she is not unmind of you; she know you to be sick and in 
prison; and I came to do for you whatev offic your condit might 
require, and I came at her suggestion. she, alas! ha full employ 
for her tear in water the grave of her child." 

He started. "what! dead? say you that the child is dead?" 

"it is dead. I wit it death. I saw it expir in the arm of it 
mother; that mother whom I formerli met under your roof bloom and 
gay, but whom calam ha tarnish and withered. I saw her in the 
raiment of poverty, under an accurs roof: desolate; alone; unsolac 
by the counten or sympathi of human beings; approach onli by those 
who mock at her distress, set snare for her innocence, and push her to 
infamy. I saw her lean over the face of her die babe." 

welbeck put hi hand to hi head, and exclaimed, "curs on thi lips, 
infern messenger! chant elsewher thi rueful ditty! vanish! if thou 
wouldst not feel in thi heart fang red with blood less guilti than 
thine." 

till thi moment the uproar in welbeck' mind appear to hinder him 
from distinctli recognis hi visitant. now it seem as if the 
incid of our last interview suddenli sprung up in hi remembrance. 

"what! thi is the villain that rifl my cabinet, the maker of my 
poverti and of all the evil which it ha sinc engendered! that ha led 
me to a prison! execr fool! you are the author of the scene that you 
describe, and of horror without number and name. To whatev crime I 
have been urg sinc that interview, and the fit of mad that made 
you destroy my property, they spring from your act; they flow from 
necessity, which, had you held your hand at that fate moment, would 
never have existed. 

"how dare you thrust yourself upon my privacy? whi am I not alone? fly! 
and let my miseri want, at least, the aggrav of behold their 
author. My eye loath the sight of thee! My heart would suffoc thee 
with it own bitterness! begone!" 

"I know not," I answered, "whi innoc should trembl at the rave 
of a lunatic; whi it should be overwhelm by unmerit reproaches! whi 
it should not deplor the error of it foe, labour to correct those 
errors, and----" 

"thank thi fate, youth, that my hand are tie up by my scorn; thank thi 
fate that no weapon is within reach. much ha pass sinc I saw thee, 
and I am a new man. I am no longer inconst and cowardly. I have no 
motiv but contempt to hinder me from expiat the wrong which thou 
hast done me in thi blood. I disdain to take thi life. go; and let thi 
fidelity, at least, to the confid which I have place in thee, be 
inviolate. thou hast done me harm enough, but canst do, if thou wilt, 
still more. thou canst betray the secret that are lodg in thi bosom, 
and rob me of the comfort of reflect that my guilt is known but to 
one among the living." 

thi suggest made me pause, and look back upon the past. I had 
confid thi man' tale to you. the secreci on which he so fondli 
lean wa at an end. had I act culpabl or not? 

but whi should I ruminate, with anguish and doubt, upon the past? the 
futur wa within my power, and the road of my duti wa too plain to be 
mistaken. I would disclos to welbeck the truth, and cheer 
encount everi consequence. I would summon my friend to my aid, and 
take hi counsel in the critic emerg in which I wa placed. I 
ought not to reli upon myself alon in my effort to benefit thi being, 
when anoth wa so near whose discern and benevolence, and 
knowledg of mankind, and power of afford relief, were far superior 
to mine. 

influenc by these thoughts, I left the apart without speaking; 
and, procur pen and paper, despatch to you the billet which brought 
about our meeting. 




chapter xxxvii. 


mervyn' auditor allow no paus in their attent to thi story. 
have ended, a deep silenc took place. the clock which stood upon the 
mantel had sound twice the customari _larum_, but had not been heard 
by us. It wa now struck a third time. It wa _one_. our guest appear 
somewhat startl at thi signal, and looked, with a mourn sort of 
earnestness, at the clock. there wa an air of inquietud about him 
which I had never observ in an equal degre before. 

I wa not without much curios respect other incid than those 
which had just been relat by him; but, after so much fatigu as he had 
undergone, I thought it improp to prolong the conversation. 

"come," said I, "mi friend, let us to bed. thi is a drowsi time, and, 
after so much exercis of mind and body, you cannot but need some 
repose. much ha happen in your absence, which is proper to be known 
to you; but our discours will be best defer till to-morrow. I will 
come into your chamber by day-dawn, and unfold to you particulars." 

"nay," said he, "withdraw not on my account. If I go to my chamber, it 
will not be to sleep, but to meditate, especi after your assur 
that someth of moment ha occur in my absence. My thoughts, 
independ of ani caus of sorrow or fear, have receiv an impuls 
which solitud and dark will not stop. It is imposs to know too 
much for our safeti and integrity, or to know it too soon. what ha 
happened?" 

I did not hesit to compli with hi request, for it wa not difficult 
to conceiv that, howev tire the limb might be, the adventur of 
thi day would not be easili expel from the memori at night. I told 
him the substanc of the convers with mrs. althorpe. He smile at 
those part of the narr which relat to himself; but when hi 
father' deprav and poverti were mentioned, he melt into tears. 

"poor wretch! I, that knew thee in thi better days, might have easili 
divin thi consequence. I foresaw thi poverti and degrad in the 
same hour that I left thi roof. My soul droop at the prospect, but I 
said, It cannot be prevented, and thi reflect wa an antidot to 
grief; but, now that thi ruin is complete, it seem as if some of it 
were imput to me, who forsook thee when the succour and counsel of a 
son were most needed. thou art ignor and vicious, but thou art my 
father still. I see that the suffer of a better man than thou art 
would less afflict me than thine. perhap it is still in my power to 
restor thi liberti and good name, and yet--that is a fond wish. thou 
art past the age when the ignor and grovel habit of a human 
be are suscept of cure." there he stopped, and, after a gloomi 
pause, continued:-- 

* * * * * 

I am not surpris or afflict at the misconcept of my neighbour 
with relat to my own character. men must judg from what they see; 
they must build their conclus on their knowledge. I never saw in the 
rebuk of my neighbour ani thing but laudabl abhorr of vice. they 
were too eager to blame, to collect materi of censur rather than of 
praise. It wa not me whom they hate and despised. It wa the phantom 
that pass under my name, which exist onli in their imagination, and 
which wa worthi of all their scorn and all their enmity. 

what I appear to be in their eye wa as much the object of my own 
disapprob as of theirs. their reproach onli evinc the rectitud 
of their decisions, as well as of my own. I drew from them new motiv 
to complacency. they fortifi my persever in the path which I had 
chosen as best; they rais me higher in my own esteem; they heighten 
the claim of the reproach themselv to my respect and my 
gratitude. 

they thought me slothful, incurious, destitut of knowledg and of all 
thirst of knowledge, insolent, and profligate. they say that in the 
treatment of my father I have been ungrat and inhuman. I have stolen 
hi property, and desert him in hi calamity. therefor they hate and 
revil me. It is well; I love them for these proof of their discern 
and integrity. their indign at wrong is the truest test of their 
virtue. 

It is true that they mistak me, but that aris from the circumst 
of our mutual situation. they examin what wa expos to their view, 
they grasp at what wa place within their reach. To decid contrari 
to appearances, to judg from what they knew not, would prove them to be 
brutish and not rational, would make their decis of no worth, and 
render them, in their turn, object of neglect and contempt. 

It is true that I hate school; that I sought occas of absence, and 
finally, on be struck by the master, determin to enter hi presenc 
no more. I love to leap, to run, to swim, to climb tree and to clamber 
up rocks, to shroud myself in thicket and stroll among woods, to obey 
the impuls of the moment, and to prate or be silent, just as my humour 
prompt me. all thi I love more than to go to and fro in the same 
path, and at state hour to look off and on a book, to read just as 
much and of such a kind, to stand up and be seated, just as anoth 
thought proper to direct. I hate to be classed, cribbed, rebuked, and 
ferul at the pleasur of one who, as it seem to me, knew no guid in 
hi reward but caprice, and no prompter in hi punish but passion. 

It is true that I took up the spade and the hoe as rarely, and for as 
short a time, as possible. I prefer to rambl in the forest and 
loiter on the hill; perpetu to chang the scene; to scrutin the 
endless varieti of objects; to compar one leaf and pebbl with another; 
to pursu those train of thought which their resembl and 
differ suggested; to inquir what it wa that gave them thi place, 
structure, and form, were more agreeabl employ than plough and 
threshing. 

My father could well afford to hire labour. what my age and my 
constitut enabl me to do could be done by a sturdi boy, in half the 
time, with half the toil, and with none of the reluctance. the boy wa a 
bond-servant, and the cost of hi cloth and food wa next to nothing. 
true it is, that my servic would have save him even thi expense, but 
my motiv for declin the effort were not hastili weigh or 
superfici examined. these were my motives. 

My frame wa delic and feeble. exposur to wet blast and vertic 
sun wa sure to make me sick. My father wa insens to thi 
consequence; and no degre of dilig would pleas him but that which 
would destroy my health. My health wa dearer to my mother than to me. 
she wa more anxiou to exempt me from possibl injuri than reason 
justified; but anxiou she was, and I could not save her from anxieti 
but by almost wholli abstain from labour. I thought her peac of mind 
wa of some value, and that, if the inclin of either of my parent 
must be gratifi at the expens of the other, the prefer wa due to 
the woman who bore me; who nurs me in disease; who watch over my 
safeti with incess tenderness; whose life and whose peac were 
involv in mine. I should have deem myself brutish and obdur 
wick to have load her with fear and care mere to smooth the brow 
of a froward old man, whose avaric call on me to sacrific my eas 
and my health, and who shift to other shoulder the provinc of 
sustain me when sick, and of mourn for me when dead. 

I likewis believ that it becam me to reflect upon the influenc of 
my decis on my own happiness; and to weigh the profit flow to my 
father from my labour, against the benefit of mental exercise, the 
pleasur of the wood and streams, health sensations, and the luxuri 
of musing. the pecuniari profit wa petti and contemptible. It obviat 
no necessity. It purchas no ration enjoyment. It mere provoked, by 
furnish the mean of indulgence, an appetit from which my father wa 
not exempt. It cherish the seed of deprav in him, and lessen the 
littl stock of happi belong to my mother. 

I did not detain you long, my friends, in portray my parents, and 
recount domest incidents, when I first told you my story. what had 
no connect with the histori of welbeck and with the part that I have 
act upon thi stage I thought it proper to omit. My omiss wa 
likewis prompt by other reasons. My mind is enerv and feeble, 
like my body. I cannot look upon the suffer of those I love without 
exquisit pain. I cannot steel my heart by the forc of reason, and by 
submiss to necessity; and, therefore, too frequent employ the 
cowardli expedi of endeavour to forget what I cannot rememb 
without agony. 

I told you that my father wa sober and industri by habit; but habit 
is not uniform. there were interv when hi plod and tame spirit 
gave place to the malic and furi of a demon. liquor were not sought by 
him; but he could not withstand entreaty, and a potion that produc no 
effect upon other chang him into a maniac. 

I told you that I had a sister, whom the art of a villain destroyed. 
alas! the work of her destruct wa left unfinish by him. the blow 
and contum of a misjudg and implac parent, who scrupl not 
to thrust her, with her new-born infant, out of doors; the curs and 
taunt of unnatur brothers, left her no altern but death.----but 
I must not think of this; I must not think of the wrong which my mother 
endur in the person of her onli and darl daughter. 

My brother were the copyist of the father, whom they resembl in 
temper and person. My mother dote on her own imag in her daughter and 
in me. thi daughter wa ravish from her by self-violence, and her 
other children by disease. I onli remain to appropri her affect 
and fulfil her hopes. thi alon had furnish a suffici reason whi I 
should be care of my health and my life, but my father' charact 
suppli me with a motiv infinit more cogent. 

It is almost incredible, but nevertheless true, that the onli be 
whose presenc and remonstr had ani influenc on my father, at 
moment when hi reason wa extinct, wa myself. As to my person 
strength, it wa nothing; yet my mother' person wa rescu from 
brutal violence; he wa checked, in the midst of hi feroci career, 
by a singl look or exclam from me. the fear of my rebuk had even 
some influenc in enabl him to resist temptation. If I enter the 
tavern at the moment when he wa lift the glass to hi lips, I never 
weigh the injunct of decorum, but, snatch the vessel from hi 
hand, I threw it on the ground. I wa not deter by the presenc of 
others; and their censur on my want of filial respect and duti were 
listen to with unconcern. I chose not to justifi myself by expati 
on domest miseries, and by call down that piti on my mother which I 
knew would onli have increas her distress. 

the world regard my deport as insol and pervers to a degre of 
insanity. To deni my father an indulg which they thought harmless, 
and which, indeed, wa harmless in it influenc on other men; to 
interfer thu publicli with hi social enjoyments, and expos him to 
mortif and shame, wa loudli condemned; but my duti to my mother 
debar me from elud thi censur on the onli term on which it 
could have been eluded. now it ha ceas to be necessari to conceal 
what pass in domest retirements, and I should willingli confess the 
truth befor ani audience. 

At first my father imagin that threat and blow would intimid hi 
monitor. In thi he wa mistaken, and the detect of thi mistak 
impress him with an involuntari rever for me, which set bound to 
those excess which disdain ani other control. henc I deriv new 
motiv for cherish a life which wa useful, in so mani ways, to my 
mother. 

My condit is now changed. I am no longer on that field to which the 
law, as well as reason, must acknowledg that I had some right, while 
there wa ani in my father. I must hazard my life, if need be, in the 
pursuit of the mean of honest subsistence. I never spare myself while 
in the servic of mr. hadwin; and, at a more inclement season, should 
probabl have incur some hazard by my diligence. 

these were the motiv of my _idleness_,--for my abstain from the 
common toil of the farm pass by that name among my neighbours; 
though, in truth, my time wa far from be wholli unoccupi by manual 
employments, but these requir less exert of bodi or mind, or were 
more connect with intellectu efforts. they were pursu in the 
seclus of my chamber or the recess of a wood. I did not labour to 
conceal them, but neither wa I anxiou to attract notice. It wa 
suffici that the censur of my neighbour wa unmerited, to make me 
regard it with indifference. 

I sought not the societi of person of my own age, not from sullen or 
unsoci habits, but mere becaus those around me were total 
unlik myself. their tast and occup were incompat with mine. 
In my few books, in my pen, in the veget and anim exist 
around me, I found companion who adapt their visit and intercours 
to my conveni and caprice, and with whom I wa never tire of 
communing. 

I wa not unawar of the opinion which my neighbour had form of my 
be improperli connect with betti lawrence. I am not sorri that I 
fell into compani with that girl. her intercours ha instruct me in 
what some would think imposs to be attain by one who had never 
haunt the impur recess of licenti in a city. the knowledg 
which a resid in thi town for ten year gave her audaci and 
inquisit spirit she impart to me. her character, proflig and 
artful, libidin and impudent, and made up of the impress which a 
citi life had produc on her coars but activ mind, wa open to my 
study, and I studi it. 

I scarc know how to repel the charg of illicit conduct, and to 
depict the exact speci of intercours subsist between us. I alway 
treat her with freedom, and sometim with gayety. I had no motiv to 
reserve. I wa so form that a creatur like her had no power over my 
senses. that speci of temptat adapt to entic me from the true 
path wa wide differ from the artific of betty. there wa no 
point at which it wa possibl for her to get possess of my fancy. I 
watch her while she practis all her trick and blandishments, as I 
regard a similar deport in the _anim salax ignavumque_ who 
inhabit the sty. I made effort to pursu my observ 
unembarrassed; but my effort were made, not to restrain desire, but to 
suppress disgust. the difficulti lay, not in withhold my caresses, 
but in forbear to repuls her with rage. 

decorum, indeed, wa not outraged, and all limit were not overstep 
at once. dubiou advanc were employed; but, when found unavailing, 
were displac by more shameless and direct proceedings. she wa too 
littl vers in human natur to see that her last expedi wa alway 
wors than the preceding; and that, in proport as she lost sight of 
decency, she multipli the obstacl to her success. 

betti had mani entic in person and air. she wa ruddy, smooth, and 
plump. To these she added--i must not say what, for it is strang to 
what length a woman destitut of modesti will sometim go. but, all 
her artific avail her not at all in the contest with my 
insensibilities, she resort to extrem which it would serv no good 
purpos to describ in thi audience. they produc not the consequ 
she wished, but they produc anoth which wa by no mean displeas 
to her. An incid one night occurred, from which a sagaci observ 
deduc the exist of an intrigue. It wa useless to attempt to 
rectifi hi mistak by explain appear in a manner consist 
with my innocence. thi mode of explic impli a _continence_ in me 
which he deni to be possible. the standard of possibilities, 
especi in vice and virtue, is fashion by most men after their own 
character. A temptat which thi judg of human natur knew that _he_ 
wa unabl to resist, he sage conclud to be irresist by ani 
other man, and quickli establish the belief among my neighbours, that 
the woman who marri the father had been prostitut to the son. though 
I never admit the truth of thi aspersion, I believ it useless to 
deny, becaus no one would credit my denial, and becaus I had no power 
to disprov it. 




chapter xxxviii. 


what other inquiri were to be resolv by our young friend, we were 
now, at thi late hour, oblig to postpon till the morrow. I shall 
pass over the reflect which a stori like thi would natur 
suggest, and hasten to our next interview. 

after breakfast next morning, the subject of last night' convers 
wa renewed. I told him that someth had occur in hi absence, in 
relat to mrs. wentworth and her nephew, that had perplex us not a 
little. "mi inform is obtained," continu I, "from wortley; and it 
is noth less than that young clavering, mrs. wentworth' nephew, is, 
at thi time, actual alive." 

surprise, but none of the embarrass of guilt, appear in hi 
counten at these tidings. He look at me as if desir that I 
should proceed. 

"it seems," ad I, "that a letter wa late receiv by thi ladi 
from the father of clavering, who is now in europe. thi letter report 
that thi son wa late met with in charleston, and relat the mean 
which old mr. claver had use to prevail upon hi son to return home; 
means, of the success of which he entertain well-ground hopes. what 
think you?" 

"I can onli reject it," said he, after some pause, "a untrue. the 
father' correspond may have been deceived. the father may have been 
deceived, or the father may conceiv it necessari to deceiv the aunt, 
or some other supposit as to the sourc of the error may be true; but 
an error it sure is. claver is not alive. I know the chamber where 
he died, and the wither pine under which he lie buried." 

"if she be deceived," said I, "it will be imposs to rectifi her 
error." 

"I hope not. An honest front and a straight stori will be sufficient." 

"how do you mean to act?" 

"visit her, without doubt, and tell her the truth. My tale will be too 
circumstanti and consist to permit her to disbelieve." 

"she will not hearken to you. she is too strongli prepossess against 
you to admit you even to a hearing." 

"she cannot help it. unless she lock her door against me, or stuff her 
ear with wool, she must hear me. her prepossess are reasonable, but 
are easili remov by tell the truth. whi doe she suspect me of 
artifice? becaus I seem to be alli to welbeck, and becaus I 
disguis the truth. that she think ill of me is not her fault, but my 
misfortune; and, happili for me, a misfortun easili removed." 

"then you will tri to see her?" 

"I will see her, and the sooner the better. I will see her to-day; thi 
morning; as soon as I have seen welbeck, whom I shall immedi visit 
in hi prison." 

"there are other embarrass and danger of which you are not aware. 
welbeck is pursu by mani person whom he ha defraud of larg sums. 
By these person you are deem an accomplic in hi guilt, and a 
warrant is alreadi in the hand of offic for arrest you wherev 
you are found." 

"in what way," said mervyn, sedately, "do they imagin me a partak of 
hi crime?" 

"I know not. you live with him. you fled with him. you aid and 
conniv at hi escape." 

"are these crimes?" 

"I believ not, but they subject you to suspicion." 

"to arrest and to punishment?" 

"to detent for a while, perhaps. but these alon cannot expos you to 
punishment." 

"I thought so. then I have noth to fear." 

"you have imprison and obloquy, at least, to dread." 

"true; but they cannot be avoid but by my exil and skulk out of 
sight,--evil infinit more formidable. I shall, therefore, not avoid 
them. the sooner my conduct is subject to scrutiny, the better. will 
you go with me to welbeck?" 

"I will go with you." 

inquir for welbeck of the keeper of the prison, we were inform that 
he wa in hi own apartment, veri sick. the physician attend the 
prison had been called, but the prison had preserv an obstin and 
scorn silence; and had neither explain hi condition, nor consent 
to accept ani aid. 

We now went alon into hi apartment. hi sensibl seem fast 
ebbing, yet an emot of joy wa visibl in hi eye at the appear 
of mervyn. He seem likewis to recognis in me hi late visitant, and 
made no object to my entrance. 

"how are you thi morning?" said arthur, seat himself on the bedside, 
and take hi hand. the sick man wa scarc abl to articul hi 
reply:--"i shall soon be well. I have long to see you. I want to leav 
with you a few words." He now cast hi languid eye on me. "you are hi 
friend," he continued. "you know all. you may stay." 

there now succeed a long pause, dure which he close hi eyes, and 
resign himself as if to an oblivion of all thought. hi puls under my 
hand wa scarc perceptible. from thi in some minut he recovered, 
and, fix hi eye on mervyn, resumed, in a broken and feebl 
accent:-- 

"clemenza! you have seen her. week ago, I left her in an accurs 
house; yet she ha not been mistreated. neglect and abandon indeed, 
but not mistreated. save her, mervyn. comfort her. awaken chariti for 
her sake. 

"I cannot tell you what ha happened. the tale would be too long,--too 
mournful. yet, in justic to the living, I must tell you something. My 
woe and my crime will be buri with me. some of them, but not all. 

"ere this, I should have been mani leagu upon the ocean, had not a 
newspap fallen into my hand while on the eve of embarkation. By that 
I learn that a treasur wa buri with the remain of the ill-fat 
watson. I wa destitute. I wa unjust enough to wish to make thi 
treasur my own. prone to think I wa forgotten, or number with the 
victim of pestilence, I ventur to return under a careless disguise. I 
penetr to the vault of that desert dwell by night. I dug up 
the bone of my friend, and found the girdl and it valuabl contents, 
accord to the accur descript that I had read. 

"I hasten back with my prize to baltimore, but my evil destini 
overtook me at last. I wa recognis by emissari of jamieson, 
arrest and brought hither, and here shall I consumm my fate and 
defeat the rage of my creditor by death. but first----" 

here welbeck stretch out hi left hand to mervyn, and, after some 
reluctance, show a roll of lead. 

"receiv this," said he. "in the use of it, be guid by your honesti 
and by the same advertis that furnish me the clue by which to 
recov it. that be secured, the world and I will part forever. 
withdraw, for your presenc can help me nothing." 

We were unwil to compli with hi injunction, and continu some 
longer time in hi chamber; but our kind intent avail nothing. He 
quickli relaps into insensibility, from which he recov not again, 
but next day expired. such, in the flower of hi age, wa the fate of 
thoma welbeck. 

whatev interest I might feel in accompani the progress of my young 
friend, a sudden and unforeseen emerg compel me again to leav 
the city. A kinsman, to whom I wa bound by mani obligations, wa 
suffer a linger disease, and, imagining, with some reason, hi 
dissolut to be not far distant, he besought my compani and my 
assistance, to soothe, at least, the agoni of hi last hour. I wa 
anxiou to clear up the mysteri which arthur' conduct had produced, 
and to shield him, if possible, from the evil which I fear await 
him. It wa impossible, however, to declin the invit of my 
kinsman, as hi resid wa not a day' journey from the city. I wa 
oblig to content myself with occasion information, impart by 
mervyn' letter or those of my wife. 

meanwhile, on leav the prison, I hast to inform mervyn of the true 
natur of the scene which had just passed. By thi extraordinari 
occurrence, the properti of the mauric wa now in honest hands. 
welbeck, stimul by selfish motives, had done that which ani other 
person would have found encompass with formid danger and 
difficulties. how thi attempt wa suggest or executed, he had not 
inform us, nor wa it desir to know. It wa suffici that the 
mean of restor their own to a destitut and meritori famili were 
now in our possession. 

have return home, I unfold to mervyn all the particular 
respect william and the mauric which I had late learn from 
wortley. He listen with deep attention, and, my stori be finished, 
he said, "in thi small compass, then, is the patrimoni and subsist 
of a numer family. To restor it to them is the obviou 
proceeding--but how? where do they abide?" 

"william and watson' wife live in baltimore, and the mauric live 
near that town. the advertis allud to by wortley, and which are 
to be found in ani newspaper, will inform us; but, first, are we sure 
that ani or all of these bill are contain in thi covering?" 

the lead wa now unrolled, and the bill which william had describ 
were found enclosed. noth appear to be deficient. Of this, however, 
we were scarc qualifi to judge. those that were the properti of 
william might not be entire, and what would be the consequ of 
present them to him, if ani had been embezzl by welbeck? 

thi difficulti wa obviat by mervyn, who observ that the 
advertis describ these bill would afford us ampl inform 
on thi head. "have found out where the mauric and mrs. watson live, 
noth remain but to visit them, and put an end, as far as lie in my 
power, to their inquietudes." 

"what! would you go to baltimore?" 

"certainly. can ani other expedi be proper? how shall I otherwis 
insur the safe convey of these papers?" 

"you may send them by post." 

"but whi not go myself?" 

"I can hardli tell, unless your appear on such an errand may be 
suspect like to involv you in embarrassments." 

"what embarrassments? If they receiv their own, ought they not to be 
satisfied?" 

"the inquiri will natur be made as to the manner of gain 
possess of these papers. they were late in the hand of watson, but 
watson ha disappeared. suspicion are awak respect the caus of hi 
disappearance. these suspicion are connect with welbeck, and 
welbeck' connect with you is not unknown." 

"these are evils, but I see not how an ingeni and open conduct is 
adapt to increas these evils. If they come, I must endur them." 

"I believ your decis is right. No one is so skil an advoc in a 
cause, as he whose caus it is. I reli upon your skill and address, and 
shall leav you to pursu your own way. I must leav you for a time, but 
shall expect to be punctual inform of all that passes." with thi 
agreement we parted, and I hasten to perform my intend journey. 




chapter xxxix. 


I am glad, my friend, thi nimbl pen ha got so far upon it journey. 
what remain of my stori may be despatch in a trice. I have just now 
some vacant hours, which might possibl be more use employed, but 
not in an easier manner or more pleasant. so, let me carri on thi 
thread. 

first, let me mention the resolut I had form at the time I part 
with my friend. I had sever object in view. one wa a confer with 
mrs. wentworth; anoth wa an interview with her whom I met with at 
villars's. My heart melt when I thought upon the desol condit of 
clemenza, and determin me to direct my first effort for her relief. 
for thi end I wa to visit the femal who had given me a direct to 
her house. the name of thi person is achsa fielding, and she lived, 
accord to her own direction, at no. 40 walnut street. 

I went thither without delay. she wa not at home. have gain 
inform from the servant as to when she might be found, I proceed 
to mrs. wentworth's. In go thither my mind wa deepli occupi in 
meditation; and, with my usual careless of forms, I enter the 
hous and made my way to the parlour, where an interview had formerli 
taken place between us. 

have arrived, I began, though somewhat unseasonably, to reflect upon 
the topic with which I should introduc my conversation, and 
particularli the manner in which I should introduc myself. I had open 
door without warning, and travers passag without be noticed. 
thi had arisen from my thoughtlessness. there wa no one within hear 
or sight. what wa next to be done? should I not return softli to the 
outer door, and summon the servant by knocking? 

prepar to do this, I heard a footstep in the entri which suspend my 
design. I stood in the middl of the floor, attent to these 
movements, when present the door opened, and there enter the 
apart mrs. wentworth herself! she came, as it seemed, without 
expect of find ani one there. when, therefore, the figur of a 
man caught her vagrant attention, she start and cast a hasti look 
toward me. 

"pray!" (in a peremptori tone,) "how came you here, sir? and what is 
your business?" 

neither arrogance, on the one hand, nor humility, upon the other, had 
ani part in model my deportment. I came not to deprec anger, or 
exult over distress. I answered, therefore, distinctly, firmly, and 
erectly,-- 

"I came to see you, madam, and convers with you; but, be busi with 
other thoughts, I forgot to knock at the door. No evil wa intend by 
my negligence, though proprieti ha certainli not been observed. will 
you pardon thi intrusion, and condescend to grant me your attention?" 

"to what? what have you to say to me? I know you onli as the accomplic 
of a villain in an attempt to deceiv me. there is noth to justifi 
your come hither, and I desir you to leav the hous with as littl 
ceremoni as you enter it." 

My eye were lower at thi rebuke, yet I did not obey the command. 
"your treatment of me, madam, is such as I appear to you to deserve. 
appear are unfavour to me, but those appear are false. I 
have concur in no plot against your reput or your fortune. I 
have told you noth but the truth. I came hither to promot no selfish 
or sinist purpose. I have no favour to entreat, and no petit to 
offer, but that you will suffer me to clear up those mistak which you 
have harbour respect me. 

"I am poor. I am destitut of fame and of kindred. I have noth to 
consol me in obscur and indigence, but the approb of my own 
heart and the good opinion of those who know me as I am. the good may be 
led to despis and condemn me. their avers and scorn shall not make 
me unhappy; but it is my interest and my duti to rectifi their error if 
I can. I regard your charact with esteem. you have been mistaken in 
condemn me as a liar and impostor, and I came to remov thi mistake. 
I came, if not to procur your esteem, at least to take away hatr and 
suspicion. 

"but thi is not all my purpose. you are in an error in relat not 
onli to my character, but to the situat of your nephew clavering. I 
formerli told you, that I saw him die; that I assist at hi burial: 
but my tale wa incoher and imperfect, and you have sinc receiv 
intellig to which you think proper to trust, and which assur you 
that he is still living. all I now ask is your attention, while I relat 
the particular of my knowledge. 

"proof of my verac or innoc may be of no valu in your eyes, but 
the fate of your nephew ought to be known to you. certainty, on thi 
head, may be of much import to your happiness, and to the regul 
of your futur conduct. To hear me patient can do you no injury, and 
may benefit you much. will you permit me to go on?" 

dure thi address, littl abat of resent and scorn wa 
visibl in my companion. 

"I will hear you," she replied. "your invent may amus if it doe not 
edify. but, I pray you, let your stori be short." 

I wa oblig to be content with thi ungrac concession, and 
proceed to begin my narration. I describ the situat of my 
father' dwelling. I mention the year, month, day, and hour of her 
nephew' appear among us. I expati minut on hi form, 
features, dress, sound of hi voice, and repeat hi words. hi 
favourit gestur and attitud were faith described. 

I had gone but a littl way in my story, when the effect were visibl 
in her demeanour which I expect from it. her knowledg of the youth, 
and of the time and manner of hi disappearance, made it imposs for 
me, with so minut a narrative, to impos upon her credulity. everi 
word, everi incid related, attest my truth, by their agreement with 
what she herself previous knew. 

her suspici and angri watch wa quickli exchang for downcast 
looks, and steal tears, and sigh difficultli repressed. meanwhile, I 
did not pause, but describ the treatment he receiv from my mother' 
tenderness, hi occupations, the freak of hi insanity, and, finally, 
the circumst of hi death and funeral. 

thenc I hasten to the circumst which brought me to the city; 
which place me in the servic of welbeck, and oblig me to perform so 
ambigu a part in her presence. I left no difficulti to be solved, and 
no question unanticipated. 

"I have now finish my story," I continued, "and accomplish my design 
in come hither. whether I have vindic my integr from your 
suspicions, I know not. I have done what in me lay to remov your error; 
and, in that, have done my duty. what more remains? ani inquiri you 
are pleas to make, I am readi to answer. If there be none to make, I 
will compli with your former commands, and leav the hous with as 
littl ceremoni as I enter it." 

"your story," she replied, "ha been unexpected. I believ it fully, and 
am sorri for the hard thought which past appear have made me 
entertain concern you." 

here she sunk into mourn silence. "the information," she at length 
resumed, "which I have receiv from anoth quarter respect that 
unfortun youth, astonish and perplex me. It is inconsist with 
your story, but it must be found on some mistake, which I am, at 
present, unabl to unravel. welbeck, whose connect ha been so 
unfortun to you----" 

"unfortunate! dear madam! how unfortunate? It ha done away a part of my 
ignor of the world in which I live. It ha led me to the situat 
in which I am now placed. It ha introduc me to the knowledg of mani 
good people. It ha made me the wit and the subject of mani act of 
benefic and generosity. My knowledg of welbeck ha been use to 
me. It ha enabl me to be use to others. I look back upon that 
allot of my destini which first led me to hi door, with gratitud 
and pleasure. 

"would to heaven," continu I, somewhat chang my tone, "intercours 
with welbeck had been as harmless to all other as it ha been to me! 
that no injuri to fortun and fame, and innoc and life, had been 
incur by other greater than ha fallen upon my head! there is one 
being, whose connect with him ha not been utterli dissimilar in it 
origin and circumst to mine, though the catastroph has, indeed, 
been wide and mourn different. 

"and yet, within thi moment, a thought ha occur from which I deriv 
some consol and some hope. you, dear madam, are rich. these 
spaciou apartments, thi plenti accommodation, are yours. you have 
enough for your own gratif and convenience, and somewhat to 
spare. will you take to your protect arms, to your hospit roof, 
an unhappi girl whom the art of welbeck have rob of fortune, 
reputation, and honour, who is now languish in poverty, weep over 
the lifeless remain of her babe, surround by the agent of vice, and 
trembl on the verg of infamy?" 

"what can thi mean?" repli the lady. "of whom do you speak?" 

"you shall know her. you shall be appriz of her claim to your 
compassion. her story, as far as is known to me, I will faith 
repeat to you. she is a stranger; an italian; her name is clemenza 
lodi." 

"clemenza lodi! good heaven!" exclaim mrs. wentworth; "why, surely--it 
cannot be. and yet--i it possibl that you are that person?" 

"I do not comprehend you, madam." 

"A friend ha relat a transact of a strang sort. It is scarc an 
hour sinc she told it me. the name of clemenza lodi wa mention in 
it, and a young man of most singular deport wa described. but tell 
me how you were engag on thursday morning." 

"I wa come to thi citi from a distance. I stop ten minut at the 
hous of----" 

"mrs. villars?" 

"the same. perhap you know her and her character. perhap you can 
confirm or rectifi my present opinion concern her. It is there that 
the unfortun clemenza abides. It is thenc that I wish her to be 
speedili removed." 

"I have heard of you; of your conduct upon that occasion." 

"of me?" answer I, eagerly. "do you know that woman?" So saying, I 
produc the card which I had receiv from her, and on which her name 
wa written. 

"I know her well. she is my countrywoman and my friend." 

"your friend? then she is good; she is innocent; she is generous. will 
she be a sister, a protectress, to clemenza? will you exhort her to a 
deed of charity? will you be, yourself, an exampl of beneficence? 
direct me to miss fielding, I beseech you. I have call on her already, 
but in vain, and there is no time to be lost." 

"whi are you so precipitate? what would you do?" 

"take her away from that hous instantly--br her hither--plac her 
under your protection--g her mrs. wentworth for a counsellor--a 
friend--a mother. shall I do this? shall I hie thither to-day, thi veri 
hour--now? give me your consent, and she shall be with you befor noon." 

"bi no means," repli she, with earnestness. "you are too hasty. An 
affair of so much import cannot be despatch in a moment. there are 
mani difficulti and doubt to be first removed." 

"let them be reserv for the future. withhold not your help hand 
till the struggl ha disappear forever. think on the gulf that is 
alreadi gape to swallow her. thi is no time to hesit and falter. I 
will tell you her story, but not now; we will postpon it till 
to-morrow, and first secur her from impend evils. she shall tell it 
you herself. In an hour I will bring her hither, and she herself shall 
recount to you her sorrows. will you let me?" 

"your behaviour is extraordinary. I can scarc tell whether thi 
simplic be real or affected. one would think that your common sens 
would show you the improprieti of your request. To admit under my roof a 
woman notori dishonoured, and from an infam house----" 

"mi dearest madam! how can you reflect upon the situat without 
irresist pity? I see that you are thoroughli awar of her past 
calam and her present danger. Do not these urg you to make hast to 
her relief? can ani lot be more deplor than hers? can ani state be 
more perilous? poverti is not the onli evil that oppress or that 
threaten her. the scorn of the world, and her own compunction, the 
death of the fruit of her error and the wit of her shame, are not 
the worst. she is expos to the temptat of the profligate; while 
she remain with mrs. villars, her infami accumulates; her further 
debas is facilitated; her return to reput and to virtu is 
obstruct by new bars." 

"how know I that her debas is not alreadi complet and 
irremediable? she is a mother, but not a wife. how came she thus? Is her 
be welbeck' prostitut no proof of her guilt?" 

"alas! I know not. I believ her not veri culpable; I know her to be 
unfortunate; to have been rob and betrayed. you are a stranger to her 
history. I am myself imperfectli acquaint with it. 

"but let me tell you the littl that I know. perhap my narr may 
caus you to think of her as I do." 

she did not object to thi proposal, and I immedi recount all 
that I had gain from my own observations, or from welbeck himself, 
respect thi forlorn girl. have finish my narrative, I proceed 
thus:-- 

"can you hesit to employ that power which wa given you for good 
ends, to rescu thi sufferer? take her to your home; to your bosom; to 
your confidence. keep aloof those temptat which beset her in her 
present situation. restor her to that puriti which her desol 
condition, her ignorance, her misplac gratitud and the artific of a 
skil dissembler, have destroyed, if it be destroyed; for how know we 
under what circumst her ruin wa accomplished? with what pretences, 
or appearances, or promises, she wa won to compliance?" 

"true. I confess my ignorance; but ought not that ignor to be 
remov befor she make a part of my family?" 

"oh, no! It may be afterward removed. It cannot be remov before. By 
bring her hither you shield her, at least, from futur and possibl 
evils. here you can watch her conduct and sift her sentiment 
conveni and at leisure. should she prove worthi of your charity, 
how justli may you congratul yourself on your season effort in 
her cause! If she prove unworthy, you may then demean yourself accord 
to her demerits." 

"I must reflect upon it.--to-morrow----" 

"let me prevail on you to admit her at once, and without delay. thi 
veri moment may be the critic one. to-day we may exert ourselv with 
success, but to-morrow all our effort may be fruitless. whi fluctuate, 
whi linger, when so much good may be done, and no evil can possibl be 
incurred? It requir but a word from you; you need not move a finger. 
your hous is large. you have chamber vacant and convenient. consent 
onli that your door shall not be bar against her; that you will treat 
her with civility: to carri your kind into effect; to persuad her 
to attend me hither and to place herself in your care, shall be my 
province." 

these and mani similar entreati and reason were ineffectual. her 
gener disposit wa kind, but she wa unaccustom to strenuou or 
sudden exertions. To admit the persuas of such an advoc to so 
uncommon a scheme as that of share her hous with a creatur thu 
previous unknown to her, thu load with suspicion and with obloquy, 
wa not possible. 

I at last forbor importunity, and request her to tell me when I might 
expect to meet with mrs. field at her lodgings. inquiri wa made to 
what end I sought an interview. I made no secret of my purpose. 

"are you mad, young man?" she exclaimed. "mrs. field ha alreadi been 
egregi imprudent. On the faith of an ancient slight acquaint 
with mrs. villar in europe, she suffer herself to be decoy into a 
visit. instead of take warn by numer token of the real 
charact of that woman, in her behaviour and in that of her visitants, 
she consent to remain there one night. the next morn took place 
that astonish interview with you which she ha sinc describ to me. 
she is now warn against the like indiscretion. and, pray, what 
benevol scheme would you propos to her?" 

"ha she property? Is she rich?" 

"she is. unhappily, perhaps, for her, she is absolut mistress of her 
fortune, and ha neither guardian nor parent to control her in the use 
of it." 

"ha she virtue? doe she know the valu of affluenc and a fair fame? 
and will not she devot a few dollar to rescu a fellow-creatur from 
indig and infami and vice? sure she will. she will hazard noth 
by the boon. I will be her almoner. I will provid the wretch stranger 
with food and raiment and dwelling; I will pay for all, if mrs. 
fielding, from her superfluity, will suppli the means. clemenza shall 
owe life and honour to your friend, till I am abl to suppli the need 
sum from my own stock." 

while thu speaking, my companion gaze at me with steadfastness:--"i 
know not what to make of you. your languag and idea are those of a 
lunatic. are you acquaint with mrs. fielding?" 

"yes. I have seen her two day ago, and she ha invit me to see her 
again." 

"and on the strength of thi acquaint you expect to be her almoner? 
To be the medium of her charity?" 

"I desir to save her trouble; to make chariti as light and easi as 
possible. 'twill be better if she perform those offic herself. 'twill 
redound more to the credit of her reason and her virtue. but I solicit 
her benign onli in the caus of clemenza. for her onli do I wish at 
present to call forth her generos and pity." 

"and do you imagin she will intrust her money to one of your age and 
sex, whom she know so imperfectly, to administ to the want of one 
whom she found in such a hous as mrs. villars's? she never will. she 
mention her imprud engag to meet you, but she is now warn 
against the folli of such confidence. 

"you have told me plausibl stori of yourself and of thi clemenza. I 
cannot say that I disbeliev them, but I know the way of the world too 
well to bestow implicit faith so easily. you are an extraordinari young 
man. you may possibl be honest. such a one as you, with your educ 
and address, may possibl have pass all your life in a hovel; but it 
is scarc credible, let me tell you. I believ most of the fact 
respect my nephew, becaus my knowledg of him befor hi flight 
would enabl me to detect your falsehood; but there must be other proof 
besid an innoc brow and a volubl tongue, to make me give full 
credit to your pretensions. 

"I have no claim upon welbeck which can embarrass you. On that score, 
you are free from ani molest from me or my friends. I have 
suspect you of be an accomplic in some vile plot, and am now 
inclin to acquit you; but that is all that you must expect from me, 
till your charact be establish by other mean than your own 
assertions. I am engag at present, and must therefor request you to 
put an end to your visit." 

thi strain wa much unlik the strain which preced it. I imagined, by 
the mild of her tone and manners, that her unfavour 
prepossess were removed; but they seem to have suddenli regain 
their pristin force. I wa somewhat disconcert by thi unexpect 
change. I stood for a minut silent and irresolute. 

just then a knock wa heard at the door, and present enter that veri 
femal whom I had met with at villars's. I caught her figur as I 
glanc through the window. mrs. wentworth dart at me mani signific 
glances, which command me to withdraw; but, with thi object in view, 
it wa impossible. 

As soon as she entered, her eye were fix upon me. certain 
recollect natur occur at that moment, and made her cheek 
glow. some confus reign for a moment, but wa quickli dissipated. 
she did not notic me, but exchang salut with her friend. 

all thi while I stood near the window, in a situat not a littl 
painful. certain tremor which I had not been accustom to feel, and 
which seem to possess a mystic relat to the visitant, disabl me 
at onc from take my leave, or from perform ani use purpos by 
staying. At length, struggl for composure, I approach her, and, 
show her the card she had given me, said,-- 

"agreeabl to thi direction, I call an hour ago, at your lodgings. I 
found you not. I hope you will permit me to call onc more. when shall 
I expect to meet you at home?" 

her eye were cast on the floor. A kind of indirect attent wa fix 
on mrs. wentworth, serv to intimid and check her. At length she 
said, in an irresolut voice, "I shall be at home thi evening." 

"and thi evening," repli I, "I will call to see you." So saying, I 
left the house. 

thi interv wa tedious, but wa to be endur with equanimity. I wa 
impati to be gone to baltimore, and hope to be abl to set out by 
the dawn of next day. meanwhile, I wa necessarili to perform someth 
with respect to clemenza. 

after dinner I accompani mrs. steven to visit miss carlton. I wa 
eager to see a woman who could bear advers in the manner which my 
friend had described. 

she met us at the door of her apartment. her serious wa not abat 
by her smile of affabl and welcome. "mi friend!" whisper I, "how 
truli love is thi miss carlton! are the heart and the intellig 
within worthi of these features?" 

"yes, they are. the account of her employments, of her resign to 
the ill fate of the brother whom she loves, prove that they are." 

My eye were rivet to her counten and person. I felt 
uncontrol eager to speak to her, and to gain her good opinion. 

"you must know thi young man, my dear miss carlton," said my friend, 
look at me; "he is my husband' friend, and profess a great desir 
to be yours. you must not treat him as a mere stranger, for he know 
your charact and situat already, as well as that of your brother." 

she look at me with benignity:--"i accept hi friendship willingli and 
gratefully, and shall endeavour to convinc him that hi good opinion is 
not misplaced." 

there now ensu a convers somewhat general, in which thi young 
woman show a mind vigor from exercis and unembarrass by care. 
she affect no conceal of her own condition, of her wants, or her 
comforts. she laid no stress upon misfortunes, but contriv to deduc 
some benefici consequ to herself, and some motiv for gratitud to 
heaven, from everi wayward incid that had befallen her. 

thi demeanour embolden me, at length, to inquir into the caus of 
her brother' imprisonment, and the natur of hi debt. 

she answer frankli and without hesitation:--"it is a debt of hi 
father's, for which he made himself respons dure hi father' 
life. the act wa gener but imprudent, as the event ha shown; 
though, at the time, the unhappi effect could not be foreseen. 

"mi father," continu she, "wa arrest by hi creditor, at a time 
when the calm and comfort of hi own dwell were necessari to hi 
health. the creditor wa obdurate, and would releas him upon no 
condit but that of receiv a bond from my brother, by which he 
engag to pay the debt at sever success time and in small 
portions. all these instal were discharg with great difficulti 
indeed, but with suffici punctuality, except the last, to which my 
brother' earn were not adequate." 

"how much is the debt?" 

"four hundr dollars." 

"and is the state of the creditor such as to make the loss of four 
hundr dollar of more import to him than the loss of liberti to 
your brother?" 

she answered, smiling, "that is a veri abstract view of things. On such 
a question you and I might, perhaps, easili decid in favour of my 
brother; but would there not be some danger of decid partially? hi 
conduct is a proof of hi decision, and there is no power to chang it." 

"will not argument chang it? methink in so plain a case I should be 
abl to convinc him. you say he is rich and childless. hi annual 
incom is ten time more than thi sum. your brother cannot pay the debt 
while in prison; whereas, if at liberty, he might slowli and final 
discharg it. If hi human would not yield, hi avaric might be 
brought to acquiesce." 

"but there is anoth passion which you would find it somewhat harder to 
subdue, and that is hi vengeance. He think himself wronged, and 
imprison my brother, not to enforc payment, but to inflict misery. If 
you could persuad him that there is no hardship in imprisonment, you 
would speedili gain the victory; but that could not be attempt 
consist with truth. In proport to my brother' suffer is hi 
gratification." 

"you draw an odiou and almost incred portrait." 

"and yet such a one would serv for the like of almost everi second 
man we meet." 

"and is such your opinion of mankind? your experi must sure have 
been of a rueful tenor to justifi such hard thought of the rest of your 
species." 

"bi no means. It ha been what those whose situat disabl them from 
look further than the surfac of thing would regard as unfortunate; 
but, if my good and evil were equit balanced, the former would be 
the weightiest. I have found kind and good in great numbers, but 
have likewis met prejudic and rancor in many. My opinion of farquhar 
is not lightli taken up. I saw him yesterday, and the natur of hi 
motiv in the treatment of my brother wa plain enough." 

here thi topic wa succeed by others, and the convers ceas not 
till the hour had arriv on which I had preconcert to visit mrs. 
fielding. I left my two friend for thi purpose. 

I wa admit to mrs. fielding' presenc without scrupl or 
difficulty. there were two femal in her company, and one of the other 
sex, well-dressed, elderly, and sedat persons. their discours turn 
upon polit topics, with which, as you know, I have but slight 
acquaintance. they talk of fleet and armies, of robespierr and pitt, 
of whom I had onli a newspaper-knowledge. 

In a short time the women rose, and, huddl on their cloaks, 
disappeared, in compani with the gentleman. be thu left alon with 
mrs. fielding, some embarrass wa mutual betrayed. with much 
hesitation, which, however, gradual disappeared, my companion, at 
length, began the conversation:-- 

"you met me lately, in a situation, sir, on which I look back with 
trembl and shame, but not with ani self-condemnation. I wa led into 
it without ani fault, unless a too hasti confid may be style a 
fault. I had known mrs. villar in england, where she live with an 
untaint reputation, at least; and the sight of my countrywoman, in a 
foreign land, awaken emot in the indulg of which I did not 
imagin there wa either ani guilt or ani danger. she invit me to see 
her at her hous with so much urgenc and warmth, and solicit me to 
take a place immedi in a chais in which she had come to the city, 
that I too incauti complied. 

"you are a stranger to me, and I am unacquaint with your character. 
what littl I have seen of your deportment, and what littl I have 
late heard concern you from mrs. wentworth, do not produc 
unfavour impressions; but the apolog I have made wa due to my own 
reputation, and should have been offer to you whatev your charact 
had been." there she stopped. 

"I came not hither," said I, "to receiv an apology. your demeanour, on 
our first interview, shield you suffici from ani suspicion or 
surmis that I could form. what you have now mention wa likewis 
mention by your friend, and wa fulli believ upon her authority. My 
purpose, in coming, relat not to you, but to another. I desir mere 
to interest your generos and justic on behalf of one whose destitut 
and danger condit may lay claim to your compass and your 
succour." 

"I comprehend you," said she, with an air of some perplexity. "I know 
the claim of that person." 

"and will you compli with them?" 

"in what manner can I serv her?" 

"bi give her the mean of living." 

"doe she not possess them already?" 

"she is destitute. her depend wa wholli place upon one that is 
dead, by whom her person wa dishonour and her fortun embezzled." 

"but she still lives. she is not turn into the street. she is not 
destitut of home." 

"but what a home!" 

"such as she may choos to remain in." 

"she cannot choos it. she must not choos it. she remain through 
ignorance, or through the incapac of leav it." 

"but how shall she be persuad to a change?" 

"I will persuad her. I will fulli explain her situation. I will suppli 
her with a new home." 

"you will persuad her to go with you, and to live at a home of your 
provid and on your bounty?" 

"certainly." 

"would that chang be worthi of a cautiou person? would it benefit her 
reputation? would it prove her love of independence?" 

"mi purpos are good. I know not whi she should suspect them. but I am 
onli anxiou to be the instrument. let her be indebt to one of her own 
sex, of unquestion reputation. admit her into thi house. invit her 
to your arms. cherish and consol her as your sister." 

"befor I am convinc that she deserv it? and even then, what regard 
shall I, young, unmarried, independent, affluent, pay to my own 
reput in harbour a woman in these circumstances?" 

"but you need not act yourself. make me your agent and almoner. onli 
suppli her with the mean of subsist through me." 

"would you have me act a clandestin part? hold meet with one of 
your sex, and give him money for a purpos which I must hide from the 
world? Is it worth while to be a dissembl and impostor? and will not 
such conduct incur more danger surmis and suspicion than would 
aris from act openli and directly? you will forgiv me for remind 
you, likewise, that it is particularli incumb upon those in my 
situat to be circumspect in their intercours with men and with 
strangers. thi is the second time that I have seen you. My knowledg of 
you is extrem dubiou and imperfect, and such as would make the 
conduct you prescrib to me, in a high degree, rash and culpable. you 
must not, therefore, expect me to pursu it." 

these word were deliv with an air of firm and dignity. I wa 
not insens to the truth of her representations. "I confess," said I, 
"what you have said make me doubt the proprieti of my proposal; yet I 
would fain be of servic to her. cannot you point out some practic 
method?" 

she wa silent and thoughtful, and seem indispos to answer my 
question. 

"I had set my heart upon success in thi negotiation," continu I, "and 
could not imagin ani obstacl to it success; but I find my ignor 
of the world' way much greater than I had previous expected. you 
defraud yourself of all the happi redound from the act of make 
other happy. you sacrific substanc to show, and are more anxiou to 
prevent unjust aspers from light on yourself, than to rescu a 
fellow-creatur from guilt and infamy. 

"you are rich, and abound in all the conveni and luxuri of life. 
A small portion of your superflu would obviat the want of a be 
not less worthi than yourself. It is not avaric or avers to labour 
that make you withhold your hand. It is dread of the sneer and 
surmis of malevol and ignorance. 

"I will not urg you further at present. your determin to be wise 
should not be hasty. think upon the subject calmli and sedately, and 
form your resolut in the cours of three days. At the end of that 
period I will visit you again." So saying, and without wait for 
comment or answer, I withdrew. 




chapter xl. 


I mount the stage-coach at daybreak the next day, in compani with a 
sallow frenchman from st. domingo, hi fiddle-case, an ape, and two 
femal blacks. the frenchman, after pass the suburbs, took out hi 
violin and amus himself with hum to hi own _tweedle-tweedle_. the 
monkey now and then munch an apple, which wa given to him from a 
basket by the blacks, who gaze with stupid wonder, and an exclamatori 
_la! la!_ upon the pass scenery, or chatter to each other in a sort 
of open-mouthed, half-articulate, monotonous, singsong jargon. 

the man look seldom either on thi side or that; and spoke onli to 
rebuk the frolic of the monkey, with a "tenez! dominique! prenez 
garde! diabl noir!" 

As to me, my thought wa busi in a thousand ways. I sometim gaze at 
the face of my _four_ companions, and endeavour to discern the 
differ and same between them. I took an exact account of the 
features, proportions, looks, and gestur of the monkey, the congolese, 
and the creol gaul. I compar them together, and examin them apart. 
I look at them in a thousand differ point of view, and pursued, 
untir and unsatiated, those train of reflect which began at each 
chang of tone, feature, and attitude. 

I mark the countri as it success aros befor me, and found 
endless employ in examin the shape and substanc of the fence, 
the barn, and the cottage, the aspect of earth and of heaven. how great 
are the pleasur of health and of mental activity! 

My chief occupation, however, relat to the scene into which I wa 
about to enter. My imagin were, of course, crude and inadequate; 
and I found an uncommon gratif in compar realities, as they 
success occurred, with the pictur which my wayward fanci had 
depicted. 

I will not describ my dreams. My proper task is to relat the truth. 
neither shall I dwell upon the imag suggest by the condit of the 
countri through which I passed. I will confin myself to mention the 
transact connect with the purpos of my journey. 

I reach baltimor at night. I wa not so fatigu but that I could 
rambl through the town. I intended, at present, mere the 
gratif of a stranger' curiosity. My visit to mrs. watson and her 
brother I design should take place on the morrow. the even of my 
arriv I deem an unseason time. 

while rove about, however, it occur to me, that it might not be 
impolit to find the way to their habit even now. My purpos of 
gener curios would equal be serv whichev way my step were 
bent; and to trace the path to their dwell would save me the troubl 
of inquiri and interrog to-morrow. 

when I look forward to an interview with the wife of watson, and to 
the subject which would be necessarili discuss at that interview, I 
felt a trembl and misgiv at my heart. "surely," thought I, "it 
will becom me to exercis immeasur circumspect and address; and 
yet how littl are these adapt to the impetuos and candour of my 
nature! 

"how am I to introduc myself? what am I to tell her? that I wa a sort 
of wit to the murder of her husband? that I receiv from the hand 
of hi assassin the letter which I afterward transmit to her? and, 
from the same hands, the bill contain in hi girdle? 

"how will she start and look aghast! what suspicion will she harbour? 
what inquiri shall be made of me? how shall they be disarm and 
eluded, or answered? deep consider will be necessari befor I trust 
myself to such an interview. the come night shall be devot to 
reflect upon thi subject." 

from these thought I proceed to inquiri for the street mention in 
the advertisement, where mrs. watson wa said to reside. the street, 
and, at length, the habitation, wa found. have reach a station 
opposite, I paus and survey the mansion. It wa a wooden edific of 
two stories, humble, but neat. you ascend to the door by sever stone 
steps. Of the two lower windows, the shutter of one were closed, but 
those of the other were open. though late in the evening, there wa no 
appear of light or fire within. 

besid the hous wa a paint fence, through which wa a gate lead 
to the back of the building. guid by the impuls of the moment, I 
cross the street to the gate, and, lift the latch, enter the 
pave alley, on one side of which wa a pale fence, and on the other 
the house, look through two window into the alley. 

the first window wa dark like those in front; but at the second a light 
wa discernible. I approach it, and, look through, beheld a plain 
but neat apartment, in which parlour, kitchen, and nurseri seem to be 
united. A fire burn cheer in the chimney, over which wa a 
tea-kettle. On the hearth sat a smile and play cherub of a boy, 
toss someth to a black girl who sat opposite, and whose innoc 
and regular featur want onli a differ hue to make them beautiful. 
near it, in a rocking-chair, with a sleep babe in her lap, sat a 
femal figur in plain but neat and becom attire. her postur 
permit half her face to be seen, and save me from ani danger of 
be observed. 

thi counten wa full of sweet and benignity, but the sad 
that veil it lustr wa profound. her eye were now fix upon the 
fire and were moist with the tear of remembrance, while she sung, in 
low and scarcely-aud strains, an artless lullaby. 

thi spectacl exercis a strang power over my feelings. while 
occupi in medit on the featur of the mother, I wa unawar of 
my conspicu situation. the black girl, have occas to chang her 
situation, in order to reach the ball which wa thrown at her, unluckili 
caught a glanc of my figur through the glass. In a tone of half 
surpris and half terror, she cri out, "oh! see dare! a man!" 

I wa tempt to draw suddenli back, but a second thought show me the 
improprieti of depart thu abruptli and leav behind me some alarm. 
I felt a sort of necess for apolog for my intrus into these 
precincts, and hasten to a door that led into the same apartment. I 
knocked. A voic somewhat confus bade me enter. It wa not till I 
open the door and enter the room, that I fulli saw in what 
embarrass I had incauti involv myself. 

I could scarc obtain suffici courag to speak, and gave a confus 
assent to the question, "have you busi with me, sir?" she offer me 
a chair, and I sat down. she put the child, not yet awakened, into the 
arm of the black, who kiss it and rock it in her arm with great 
satisfaction, and, resum her seat, look at me with inquisit 
mingl with complacency. 

after a moment' pause, I said, "I wa direct to thi hous as the 
abod of mr. ephraim williams. can he be seen, madam?" 

"he is not in town at present. If you will leav a messag with me, I 
will punctual deliv it." 

the thought suddenli occurred, whether ani more wa need than mere 
to leav the bill suitabl enclosed, as they alreadi were, in a packet. 
thu all pain explan might be avoided, and I might have reason 
to congratul myself on hi season absence. actuat by these 
thoughts, I drew forth the packet, and put it into her hand, saying, "I 
will leav thi in your possession, and must earnestli request you to 
keep it safe until you can deliv it into hi own hands." 

scarc had I said thi befor new suggest occurred. wa it right 
to act in thi clandestin and mysteri manner? should I leav these 
person in uncertainti respect the fate of a husband and a brother? 
what perplexities, misunderstandings, and suspens might not grow out 
of thi uncertainty? and ought they not to be preclud at ani hazard to 
my own safeti or good name? 

these sentiment made me involuntarili stretch forth my hand to retak 
the packet. thi gesture, and other signific in my manners, join 
to a trembl conscious in herself, fill my companion with all 
the token of confus and fear. she altern look at me and at 
the paper. her trepid increased, and she grew pale. these emot 
were counteract by a strong effort. 

At length she said, falteringly, "I will take good care of them, and 
will give them to my brother." 

she rose and place them in a drawer, after which she resum her seat. 

On thi occas all my wari forsook me. I cannot explain whi my 
perplex and the troubl of my thought were greater upon thi than 
upon similar occasions. howev it be, I wa incap of speaking, and 
fix my eye upon the floor. A sort of electr sympathi pervad my 
companion, and terror and anguish were strongli manifest in the 
glanc which she sometim stole at me. We seem fulli to understand 
each other without the aid of words. 

thi imbecil could not last long. I gradual recov my composure, 
and collect my scatter thoughts. I look at her with seriousness, 
and steadfastli spoke:--"ar you the wife of amo watson?" 

she started:--"i am indeed. whi do you ask? Do you know ani thing 
of----?" there her voic failed. 

I repli with quickness, "yes. I am fulli acquaint with hi destiny." 

"good god!" she exclaimed, in a paroxysm of surprise, and bend 
eagerli forward, "mi husband is then alive! thi packet is from him. 
where is he? when have you seen him?" 

"'ti a long time since." 

"but where, where is he now? Is he well? will he return to me?" 

"never." 

"merci heaven!" (look upward and clasp her hands,) "I thank 
thee at least for hi life! but whi ha he forsaken me? whi will he not 
return?" 

"for a good reason," said I, with augment solemnity, "he will never 
return to thee. long ago wa he laid in the cold grave." 

she shrieked; and, at the next moment, sunk in a swoon upon the floor. I 
wa alarmed. the two children shrieked, and ran about the room terrifi 
and unknow what they did. I wa overwhelm with somewhat like 
terror, yet I involuntarili rais the mother in my arms, and cast about 
for the mean of recal her from thi fit. 

time to effect thi had not elapsed, when sever persons, appar 
mrs. watson' neighbours, and rais by the outcri of the girls, 
hastili enter the room. they look at me with mingl surpris and 
suspicion; but my attitude, be not that of an injur but helper; my 
countenance, which show the pleasur their entrance, at thi critic 
moment, afford me; and my words, in which I besought their assistance, 
and explained, in some degree, and briefly, the caus of those 
appearances, remov their ill thoughts. 

presently, the unhappi woman, be carri by the new-com into a 
bedroom adjoining, recov her sensibility. I onli wait for this. I 
had done my part. more inform would be useless to her, and not to 
be given by me, at least in the present audience, without embarrass 
and peril. I suddenli determin to withdraw, and this, the attent of 
the compani be otherwis engaged, I did without notice. I return to 
my inn, and shut myself up in my chamber. such wa the chang which, 
undesigned, unforeseen, half an hour had wrought in my situation. My 
cautiou project had perish in their conception. that which I had 
deem so arduous, to requir such circumspect approaches, such 
well-concert speeches, wa done. 

I had start up befor thi woman as if from the pore of the ground. I 
had vanish with the same celerity, but had left her in possess of 
proof suffici that I wa neither spectr nor demon. "I will visit 
her," said I, "again. I will see her brother, and know the full effect 
of my disclosure. I will tell them all that I myself know. ignor 
would be no less injuri to them than to myself; but, first, I will 
see the maurices." 




chapter xli. 


next morn I aros betimes, and equip myself without delay. I had 
eight or ten mile to walk, so far from the town be the resid of 
these people; and I forthwith repair to their dwelling. the person 
whom I desir to see were known to me onli by name, and by their place 
of abode. It wa a mother and her three daughter to whom I now carri 
the mean not onli of compet but riches; mean which they, no doubt, 
had long ago despair of regaining, and which, among all possibl 
messengers, one of my age and guis would be the least suspect of 
be abl to restore. 

I arrived, through intric ways, at eleven o'clock, at the hous of 
mrs. maurice. It wa a neat dwelling, in a veri fanci and rustic 
style, in the bosom of a valley, which, when decor by the verdur 
and blossom of the come season, must possess mani charms. At present 
it wa nake and dreary. 

As I approach it, through a long avenue, I observ two femal 
figures, walk arm-in-arm and slowli to and fro, in the path in which 
I now was. "these," said I, "are daughter of the family. graceful, 
well-dressed, fashion girl they seem at thi distance. may they be 
deserv of the good tide which I bring!" see them turn toward 
the house, I mend my pace, that I might overtak them and request 
their introduct of me to their mother. 

As I more nearli approached, they again turned; and, perceiv me, they 
stood as if in expect of my message. I went up to them. 

A singl glance, cast at each, made me suspect that they were not 
sisters; but, somewhat to my disappointment, there wa noth highli 
prepossess in the counten of either. they were what is everi day 
met with, though less embellish by brilliant draperi and turban, in 
market and streets. An air somewhat haughty, somewhat supercilious, 
lessen still more their attractions. these defects, however, were 
noth to me. 

I inquired, of her that seem to be the elder of the two, for mrs. 
maurice. 

"she is indisposed," wa the cold reply. 

"that is unfortunate. Is it not possibl to see her?" 

"no;" with still more gravity. 

I wa somewhat at a loss how to proceed. A paus ensued. At length the 
same ladi resumed, "what' your business? you can leav your messag 
with me." 

"with nobodi but her. If she be not _very_ indisposed----" 

"she is veri indisposed," interrupt she, peevishly. "if you cannot 
leav your message, you may take it back again, for she must not be 
disturbed." 

thi wa a singular reception. I wa disconcert and silent. I knew not 
what to say. "perhaps," I at last observed, "some other time----" 

"no," (with increas heat,) "no other time. she is more like to be 
wors than better. come, betsy," said she, take hold of her 
companion' arm; and, hie into the house, shut the door after her, 
and disappeared. I stood, at the bottom of the steps, confound at such 
strang and unexpect treatment. I could not withdraw till my purpos 
wa accomplished. after a moment' pause, I step to the door, and 
pull the bell. A negro came, of a veri unpropiti aspect, and, 
open the door, look at me in silence. To my question, wa mrs. 
mauric to be seen? he made some answer, in a jargon which I could not 
understand; but hi word were immedi follow by an unseen person 
within the house:--"mrs. mauric can't be seen by anybody. come in, 
cato, and shut the door." thi injunct wa obey by cato without 
ceremony. 

here wa a dilemma! I came with ten thousand pound in my hands, to 
bestow freeli on these people, and such wa the treatment I received. "I 
must adopt," said I, "a new mode." 

I lift the latch, without a second warning, and, cato have 
disappeared, went into a room, the door of which chanc to be open, on 
my right hand. I found within the two femal whom I had accost in the 
portico. I now address myself to the younger:--"thi intrusion, when I 
have explain the reason of it, will, I hope, be forgiven. I come, 
madam----" 

"yes," interrupt the other, with a counten suffus by 
indignation, "I know veri well whom you come from, and what it is that 
prompt thi insolence; but your employ shall see that we have not 
sunk so low as he imagines. cato! bob! I say." 

"mi employer, madam! I see you labour under some great mistake. I have 
no employer. I come from a great distance. I come to bring intellig 
of the utmost import to your family. I come to benefit and not to 
injur you." 

By thi time, bob and cato, two sturdi blacks, enter the room. "turn 
thi person," said the imperi lady, regardless of my explanations, 
"out of the house. don't you hear me?" she continued, observ that 
they look one upon the other and hesitated. 

"surely, madam," said I, "you are precipitate. you are treat like an 
enemi one who will prove himself your mother' best friend." 

"will you leav the house?" she exclaimed, quit besid herself with 
anger. "villains! whi don't you do as I bid you?" 

the black look upon each other, as if wait for an example. their 
habitu defer for everi thing _white_, no doubt, held their hand 
from what they regard as a profanation. At last bob said, in a 
whining, beseech tone, "why, missee, massa buckra wanna go for doo, 
dan he winna go fo' wee." 

the ladi now burst into tear of rage. she held out her hand, 
menacingly. "will you leav the house?" 

"not willingly," said I, in a mild tone. "I came too far to return with 
the busi that brought me unperformed. I am persuaded, madam, you 
mistak my charact and my views. I have a messag to deliv your 
mother which deepli concern her and your happiness, if you are her 
daughter. I mere wish to see her, and leav with her a piec of 
import news; news in which her fortun is deepli interested." 

these word had a wonder effect upon the young lady. her anger wa 
checked. "good god!" she exclaimed, "are you watson?" 

"no; I am onli watson' representative, and come to do all that watson 
could do if he were present." 

she wa now importun to know my business. 

"mi busi lie with mrs. maurice. advertisements, which I have seen, 
direct me to her, and to thi house; and to her onli shall I deliv my 
message." 

"perhaps," said she, with a face of apology, "I have mistaken you. mrs. 
mauric is my mother. she is realli indisposed, but I can stand in her 
place on thi occasion." 

"you cannot repres her in thi instance. If I cannot have access to 
her now, I must go; and shall return when you are will to grant it." 

"nay," repli she, "she is not, perhaps, so veri sick but that I will 
go, and see if she will admit you." So saying, she left me for three 
minutes; and, returning, said her mother wish to see me. 

I follow up-stairs, at her request; and, enter an ill-furnish 
chamber, found, seat in an arm-chair, a ladi seemingli in years, pale, 
and visibl infirm. the line of her counten were far from lay 
claim to my reverence. It wa too much like the daughter's. 

she look at me, at my entrance, with great eagerness, and said, in a 
sharp tone, "pray, friend, what is it you want with me? make haste; tell 
your story, and begone." 

"mi stori is a short one, and easili told. amo watson wa your agent in 
jamaica. He sold an estat belong to you, and receiv the money." 

"he did," said she, attempt ineffectu to rise from her seat, and 
her eye beam with a signific that shock me; "he did, the 
villain, and purloin the money, to the ruin of me and my daughters. 
but if there be justic on earth it will overtak him. I trust I shall 
have the pleasur one day--i hope to hear he' hanged. well, but go on, 
friend. He _did_ sell it, I tell you." 

"he sold it for ten thousand pounds," I resumed, "and invest thi sum 
in bill of exchange. watson is dead. these bill came into my hands. I 
wa late informed, by the public papers, who were the real owners, and 
have come from philadelphia with no other view than to restor them to 
you. there they are," continu I, place them in her lap, entir and 
untouched. 

she seiz the papers, and look at me and at her daughter, by turns, 
with an air of one suddenli bewildered. she seem speechless, and, 
grow suddenli more ghastli pale, lean her head back upon the chair. 
the daughter screamed, and hasten to support the languid parent, who 
difficultli articulated, "oh, I am sick; sick to death. put me on the 
bed." 

I wa astonish and affright at thi scene. some of the domestics, of 
both colours, entered, and gaze at me with surprise. involuntarili I 
withdrew, and return to the room below, into which I had first 
entered, and which I now found deserted. 

I wa for some time at a loss to guess at the caus of these 
appearances. At length it occur to me, that joy wa the sourc of the 
sick that had seiz mrs. maurice. the abrupt recoveri of what had 
probabl been deem irretriev would natur produc thi effect 
upon a mind of a certain texture. 

I wa deliber whether to stay or go, when the daughter enter the 
room, and, after express some surpris at see me, whom she 
suppos to have retired, told me that her mother wish to see me again 
befor my departure. In thi request there wa no kindness. all wa 
cold, supercilious, and sullen. I obey the summon without speaking. 

I found mrs. mauric seat in her arm-chair, much in her former guise. 
without desir me to be seated, or relax aught in her asper of 
look and tones,--"pray, friend, how did you _come by_ these papers?" 

"I assur you, madam, they were honestli _come by_," answer I, 
sedat and with half a smile; "but, if the whole is there that wa 
missing, the mode and time in which they came to me is matter of 
concern onli to myself. Is there ani deficiency?" 

"I am not sure. I don't know much of these matters. there may be less. I 
dare say there is. I shall know that soon. I expect a friend of mine 
everi minut who will look them over. I don't doubt you can give a good 
account of yourself." 

"I doubt not but I can--to those who have a right to demand it. In thi 
case, curios must be veri urgent inde befor I shall consent to 
gratifi it." 

"you must know thi is a suspici case. watson, to-be-sure, embezzl 
the money; to-be-sure, you are hi accomplice." 

"certainly," said I, "mi conduct, on thi occasion, prove that. what I 
have brought to you, of my own accord; what I have restor to you, 
fulli and unconditionally, it is plain watson embezzled, and that I wa 
aid in the fraud. To restor what wa never stolen alway betray the 
thief. To give what might be kept without suspicion is, without doubt, 
arrant knavery. To be serious, madam, in come thu far, for thi 
purpose, I have done enough; and must now bid you farewell." 

"nay, don't go yet. I have someth more to say to you. My friend, i'm 
sure, will be here presently. there he is;" (notic a peal upon the 
bell.) "polly, go down, and see if that' mr. somers. If it is, bring 
him up." the daughter went. 

I walk to the window absorb in my own reflections. I wa 
disappoint and dejected. the scene befor me wa the unpleas 
revers of all that my fancy, while come hither, had foreboded. I 
expect to find virtuou indig and sorrow lifted, by my means, to 
affluenc and exultation. I expect to wit the tear of gratitud 
and the caress of affection. what had I found? noth but sordidness, 
stupidity, and illiber suspicion. 

the daughter stay much longer than the mother' patienc could endure. 
she knock against the floor with her heel. A servant came up. "where' 
polly, you slut? It wa not you, hussy, that I wanted. It wa her." 

"she is talk in the parlour with a gentleman." 

"mr. somers, I suppose; hey, fool? run with my compliment to him, 
wench. tell him, pleas walk up." 

"it is not mr. somers, ma'am." 

"no? who then, saucebox? what gentleman can have ani thing to do with 
polly?" 

"I don't know, ma'am." 

"who said you did, impertinence? run, and tell her I want her thi 
instant." 

the summon wa not delivered, or polli did not think proper to obey it. 
full ten minut of thought silenc on my part, and of mutter 
vexat and impati on that of the old lady, elaps befor polly' 
entrance. As soon as she appeared, the mother began to complain bitterli 
of her inattent and neglect; but polly, take no notic of her, 
address herself to me, and told me that a gentleman below wish to 
see me. I hasten down, and found a stranger, of a plain appearance, in 
the parlour. hi aspect wa liber and ingenuous; and I quickli 
collected, from hi discourse, that thi wa the brother-in-law of 
watson, and the companion of hi last voyage. 




chapter xlii. 


My eye sparkl with pleasur at thi unexpect interview, and I 
willingli confess my desir to commun all the knowledg of hi 
brother' destini which I possessed. He told me, that, return late to 
baltimore, on the last evening, he found hi sister in much agit 
and distress, which, after a time, she explain to him. she likewis 
put the packet I had left into hi hands. 

"I leav you to imagine," continu he, "mi surpris and curios at 
thi discovery. I was, of course, impati to see the bearer of such 
extraordinari tidings. thi morning, inquir for one of your 
appear at the taverns, I was, at length, inform of your arriv 
yesterday in the stage; of your go out alon in the evening; of your 
subsequ return; and of your earli departur thi morning. 
accident I light on your footsteps; and, by suitabl inquiri on 
the road, have final trace you hither. 

"you told my sister her husband wa dead. you left with her paper that 
were probabl in hi possess at the time of hi death. I understand 
from miss mauric that the bill belong to her mother have just been 
deliv to her. I presum you have no object to clear up thi 
mystery." 

"to you I am anxiou to unfold everi thing. At thi moment, or at ani 
time, but the sooner the more agreeabl to me, I will do it." 

"this," said he, look around him, "i no place; there is an inn, not 
a hundr yard from thi gate, where I have left my horse; will you go 
thither?" I readili consented, and, call for a privat apartment, I 
laid befor thi man everi incid of my life connect with welbeck 
and watson; my full, circumstantial, and explicit stori appear to 
remov everi doubt which he might have entertain of my integrity. 

In william I found a plain, good man, of a temper confid and 
affectionate. My narrat be finished, he expressed, by unaffect 
tokens, hi wonder and hi grief on account of watson' destiny. To my 
inquiries, which were made with frank and fervour, respect hi 
own and hi sister' condition, he said that the situat of both wa 
deplor till the recoveri of thi property. they had been save from 
utter ruin, from beggari and a jail, onli by the generos and leniti 
of hi creditors, who did not suffer the suspici circumst 
attend watson' disappear to outweigh former proof of hi 
probity. they had never relinquish the hope of receiv some tide 
of their kinsman. 

I relat what had just pass in the hous of mrs. maurice, and 
request to know from him the histori and charact of thi family. 

"they have treat you," he answered, "exactli as ani one who knew them 
would have predicted. the mother is narrow, ignorant, bigoted, and 
avaricious. the eldest daughter, whom you saw, resembl the old ladi in 
mani things. age, indeed, may render the similitud complete. At 
present, pride and ill-humour are her chief characteristics. 

"the youngest daughter ha noth in mind or person in common with her 
family. where they are irascible, she is patient; where they are 
imperious, she is humble; where they are covetous, she is liberal; where 
they are ignor and indolent, she is studiou and skilful. It is rare, 
indeed, to find a young ladi more amiabl than miss fanni maurice, or 
who ha had more cross and afflict to sustain. 

"the eldest daughter alway extort the suppli of her wants, from her 
parents, by threat and importunities; but the younger could never be 
prevail upon to employ the same means, and, hence, she suffer 
inconveni which, to ani other girl, born to an equal rank, would 
have been, to the last degree, humili and vexatious. To her they 
onli afford new opportun for the display of her most shine 
virtues,--fortitud and charity. No instanc of their sordid or 
tyranni ever stole a murmur from her. for what they had given, exist 
and a virtuou education, she said they were entitl to gratitude. what 
they withheld wa their own, in the use of which they were not 
account to her. she wa not asham to owe her subsist to her 
own industry, and wa onli held by the pride of her family--in thi 
instanc their pride wa equal to their avarice--from seek out some 
lucr kind of employment. sinc the shock which their fortun 
sustain by watson' disappearance, she ha been permit to pursu 
thi plan, and she now teach music in baltimor for a living. No one, 
however, in the highest rank, can be more gener respect and 
caress than she is." 

"but will not the recoveri of thi money make a favour chang in her 
condition?" 

"I can hardli tell; but I am inclin to think it will not. It will not 
chang her mother' character. her pride may be awaken anew, and she 
may oblig miss fanni to relinquish her new profession, and that will be 
a chang to be deplored." 

"what good ha been done, then, by restor thi money?" 

"if pleasur be good, you must have confer a great deal on the 
maurices; upon the mother and two of the daughters, at least,--th onli 
pleasure, indeed, which their natur can receive. It is less than if 
you had rais them from absolut indigence, which ha not been the 
case, sinc they had wherewith to live upon besid their jamaica 
property. but how?" continu williams, suddenli recollect himself; 
"have you claim the reward promis to him who should restor these 
bills?" 

"what reward?" 

"no less than a thousand dollars. It wa publicli promis under the 
hand of mrs. mauric and of hemmings, her husband' executor." 

"really," said I, "that circumst escap my attention, and I wonder 
that it did; but is it too late to repair the evil?" 

"then you have no scrupl to accept the reward?" 

"certainli not. could you suspect me of so strang a punctilio as that?" 

"yes; but I know not why. the stori you have just finish taught me to 
expect some unreason refin upon that head. To be hired, to be 
bribed, to do our duti is suppos by some to be degrading." 

"thi is no such bribe to me. I should have act just as I have done, 
had no recompens been promised. In truth, thi ha been my conduct, for 
I never onc thought of the reward; but, now that you remind me of it, I 
would gladli see it bestowed. To fulfil their engagements, in thi 
respect, is no more than justic in the maurices. To one in my condit 
the money will be highli useful. If these peopl were poor, or gener 
and worthy, or if I myself were alreadi rich, I might less repin at 
their withhold it; but, thing be as they are with them and with 
me, it would, I think, be gross injustic in them to withhold, and in me 
to refuse." 

"that injustice," said williams, "will, on their part, I fear, be 
committed. 'ti piti you first appli to mrs. maurice. noth can be 
expect from her avarice, unless it be wrest from her by a lawsuit." 

"that is a forc which I shall never apply." 

"had you gone first to hemmings, you might, I think, have look for 
payment. He is not a mean man. A thousand dollars, he must know, is not 
much to give for forti thousand. perhaps, indeed, it may not yet be too 
late. I am well known to him, and, if you please, will attend you to him 
in the evening, and state your claim." 

I thank accept thi offer, and went with him accordingly. I found 
that hem had been with mrs. mauric in the cours of the day; had 
receiv from her intellig of thi transaction, and had entertain 
the expect of a visit from me for thi veri purpose. 

while william explain to him the natur of my claim, he scan me 
with great intentness. hi auster and inflex brow afford me 
littl room to hope for success, and thi hopeless wa confirm by 
hi silenc and perplex when william had made an end. 

"to-be-sure," said he, after some pause, "the contract wa explicit. 
to-be-sure, the condit on mr. mervyn' side have been performed. 
certain it is, the bill are entir and complete, but mrs. mauric will 
not consent to do her part, and mrs. maurice, to whom the paper were 
presented, is the person by whom, accord to the term of the 
contract, the reward must be paid." 

"but mrs. maurice, you know, sir, may be legal compel to pay," said 
williams. 

"perhap she may; but I tell you plainly, that she never will do the 
thing without compulsion. legal process, however, in thi case, will 
have other inconveni besid delay. some curios will natur 
be excited, as to the histori of these papers. watson disappear a 
twelvemonth ago. who can avoid asking, where have these paper been 
deposit all thi while, and how came thi person in possess of 
them?" 

"that kind of curiosity," said I, "i natur and laudable, and gladli 
would I gratifi it. disclosur or conceal in that case, however, 
would nowis affect my present claim. whether a bond, legal executed, 
shall be paid, doe not depend upon determin whether the payer is 
fondest of boil mutton or roast beef. truth, in the first case, ha no 
connect with truth in the second. So far from elud thi curiosity, 
so far from studi concealment, I am anxiou to publish the truth." 

"you are right, to-be-sure," said hemmings. "curios is a natural, but 
onli an incidental, consequ in thi case. I have no reason for 
desir that it should be an unpleas consequ to you." 

"well, sir," said williams, "you think that arthur mervyn ha no remedi 
in thi case but the law?" 

"mrs. maurice, to-be-sure, will never pay but on compulsion. mervyn 
should have known hi own interest better. while hi left hand wa 
stretch out to give, hi right should have been held forth to receive. 
As it is, he must be content with the aid of law. ani attorney will 
prosecut on condit of receiv _half the sum_ when recovered." 

We now rose to take our leave, when hemmings, desir us to paus a 
moment, said, "to-be-sure, in the utmost strict of the term of our 
promise, the reward wa to be paid by the person who receiv the 
papers; but it must be own that your claim, at ani rate, is 
equitable. I have money of the deceas mr. mauric in my hands. these 
veri bill are now in my possession. I will therefor pay you your due, 
and take the consequ of an act of justic on myself. I wa prepar 
for you. sign that receipt, and there is a _check_ for the amount." 




chapter xliii. 


thi unexpect and agreeabl decis wa accompani by an invit 
to supper, at which we were treat by our host with much affabl and 
kindness. find me the author of williams' good fortun as well as 
mrs. maurice's, and be assur by the former of hi entir convict 
of the rectitud of my conduct, he laid asid all reserv and distanc 
with regard to me. He inquir into my prospect and wishes, and 
profess hi willing to serv me. 

I dealt with equal unreserv and frankness. "I am poor," said I. "money 
for my veri expens hither I have borrow from a friend, to whom I am, 
in other respects, much indebted, and whom I expect to compens onli 
by gratitud and futur services. 

"in come hither, I expect onli an increas of my debts; to sink 
still deeper into poverty; but happili the issu ha made me rich. thi 
hour ha given me competence, at least." 

"what! call you a thousand dollar competence?" 

"more than competence. I call it an abundance. My own ingenuity, while I 
enjoy health, will enabl me to live. thi I regard as a fund, first to 
pay my debts, and next to suppli defici occas by untoward 
accid or ill health, dure the ensu three or four year at 
least." 

We part with thi new acquaint at a late hour, and I accept 
williams' invit to pass the time I should spend at baltimore, 
under hi sister' roof. there were sever motiv for prolong thi 
stay. what I had heard of miss fanni mauric excit strong wish to be 
person acquaint with her. thi young ladi wa affection 
attach to mrs. watson, by whose mean my wish were easili 
accomplished. 

I never wa in habit of reserve, even with those whom I had no reason 
to esteem. with those who claim my admir and affection, it wa 
imposs to be incommunicative. befor the end of my second interview, 
both these women were mistress of everi moment incid of my life, 
and of the whole chain of my feel and opinions, in relat to everi 
subject, and particularli in relat to themselves. everi topic 
disconnect with these is compar lifeless and inert. 

I found it easi to win their attention, and to render them commun 
in their turn. As full disclosur as I had made without condit or 
request, my inquiri and exampl easili obtain from mrs. watson and 
miss maurice. the former relat everi event of her youth, and the 
circumst lead to her marriage. she depict the charact of her 
husband, and the whole train of suspens and inquietud occas by 
hi disappearance. the latter did not hide from me her opinion upon ani 
import subject, and made me thoroughli acquaint with her actual 
situation. 

thi intercours wa strang fascinating. My heart wa buoy up by a 
kind of intoxication. I now found myself exalt to my genial element, 
and began to tast the delight of existence. In the intercours of 
ingenu and sympathet minds, I found a pleasur which I had not 
previous conceived. 

the time flew swiftli away, and a fortnight pass almost befor I wa 
awar that a day had gone by. I did not forget the friend whom I had 
left behind, but maintain a punctual correspond with stevens, to 
whom I impart all occurrences. 

the recoveri of my friend' kinsman allow him in a few day to return 
home. hi first object wa the consol and relief of carlton, whom, 
with much difficulty, he persuad to take advantag of the law in 
favour of insolv debtors. carlton' onli debt wa owe to hi uncle, 
and, by render up everi speci of property, except hi cloth and 
the implement of hi trade, he obtain a full discharge. In 
conjunct with hi sister, he onc more assum the pen, and, be 
no longer burden with debt he wa unabl to discharge, he resumed, 
togeth with hi pen, hi cheerfulness. their mutual industri wa 
suffici for their decent and moder subsistence. 

the chief reason for my hasti return wa my anxieti respect clemenza 
lodi. thi reason wa remov by the activ and benevol of my 
friend. He paid thi unfortun stranger a visit at mrs. villars's. 
access wa easili obtained, and he found her sunk into the deepest 
melancholy. the recent loss of her child, the death of welbeck, of which 
she wa soon apprized, her total depend upon those with whom she wa 
placed, who, however, had alway treat her without barbar or 
indecorum, were the calam that weigh down her spirits. 

My friend easili engag her confid and gratitude, and prevail 
upon her to take refug under hi own roof. mrs. wentworth' scruples, 
as well as those of mrs. fielding, were remov by hi argument and 
entreaties, and they consent to take upon themselves, and divid 
between them, the care of her subsist and happiness. they 
condescend to express much curios respect me, and some interest 
in my welfare, and promis to receiv me, on my return, on the foot 
of a friend. 

with some reluctance, I at length bade my new friend farewell, and 
return to philadelphia. noth remained, befor I should enter on my 
project scheme of studi and employment, under the guidanc of stevens, 
but to examin the situat of eliza hadwin with my own eyes, and, if 
possible, to extric my father from hi unfortun situation. 

My father' state had given me the deepest concern. I figur to myself 
hi condition, besot by brutal appetites, reduc to beggary, shut up 
in a noisom prison, and condemn to that societi which must foster all 
hi deprav propensities. I revolv variou scheme for hi relief. A 
few hundr would take him from prison; but how should he be afterward 
dispos of? how should he be cure of hi indol habits? how should 
he be screen from the contagion of viciou society? By what means, 
consist with my own want and the claim of others, should I 
secur to him an accept subsistence? 

exhort and exampl were vain. noth but restraint would keep him 
at a distanc from the haunt of brawl and debauchery. the want of 
money would be no obstacl to prodig and waste. credit would be 
resort to as long as it would answer hi demand. when that failed, he 
would onc more be thrown into a prison; the same mean to extric him 
would have to be repeated, and money be thu put into the pocket of the 
most worthless of mankind, the agent of drunken and blasphemy, 
without ani perman advantag to my father, the princip object of my 
charity. 

though unabl to fix on ani plausibl mode of proceeding, I determined, 
at least, to discov hi present condition. perhap someth might 
suggest itself, upon the spot, suit to my purpose. without delay I 
proceed to the villag of newtown, and, alight at the door of the 
prison, inquir for my father. 

"sawni mervyn you want, I suppose," said the keeper. "poor fellow! He 
came into limbo in a crazi condition, and ha been a burden on my hand 
ever since. after linger along for some time, he wa at last kind 
enough to give us the slip. It is just a week sinc he drank hi last 
pint--and _died_." 

I wa greatli shock at thi intelligence. It wa some time befor my 
reason came to my aid, and show me that thi wa an event, on the 
whole, and on a disinterest and dispassion view, not unfortunate. 
the keeper knew not my relat to the deceased, and readili recount 
the behaviour of the prison and the circumst of hi last hours. 

I shall not repeat the narrative. It is useless to keep aliv the sad 
remembrance. He wa now beyond the reach of my chariti or pity; and, 
sinc reflect could answer no benefici end to him, it wa my duti 
to divert my thought into differ channels, and live henceforth for 
my own happi and that of those who were within the sphere of my 
influence. 

I wa now alon in the world, so far as the total want of kindr 
creat solitude. not one of my blood, nor even of my name, wa to be 
found in thi quarter of the world. Of my mother' kindr I knew 
nothing. So far as friendship or servic might be claim from them, to 
me they had no existence. I wa destitut of all those benefit which 
flow from kindred, in relat to protection, advice, or property. My 
inherit wa nothing. not a singl relic or trinket in my possess 
constitut a memori of my family. the scene of my childish and 
juvenil day were dreari and desolate. the field which I wa wont to 
traverse, the room in which I wa born, retain no trace of the past. 
they were the properti and resid of strangers, who knew noth of 
the former tenants, and who, as I wa now told, had hasten to 
new-model and transform everi thing within and without the habitation. 

these imag fill me with melancholy, which, however, disappear in 
proport as I approach the abod of my belov girl. absenc had 
endear the imag of my _bess_--i love to call her so--to my soul. I 
could not think of her without a melt soft at my heart, and tear 
in which pain and pleasur were unaccount mingled. As I approach 
curling' house, I strain my sight, in hope of distinguish her 
form through the even dusk. 

I had told her of my purpose, by letter. she expect my approach at 
thi hour, and wa stationed, with a heart throb with impatience, at 
the roadside, near the gate. As soon as I alighted, she rush into my 
arms. 

I found my sweet friend less blithesom and content than I wished. her 
situation, in spite of the parent and sisterli regard which she 
receiv from the curlings, wa mourn and dreari to her imagination. 
rural busi wa irksome, and insuffici to fill up her time. her 
life wa tiresome, and uniform, and heavy. 

I ventur to blame her discontent, and point out the advantag of 
her situation. "whence," said I, "can these dissatisfact and 
repin arise?" 

"I cannot tell," said she; "I don't know how it is with me. I am alway 
sorrow and thoughtful. perhap I think too much of my poor father 
and of susan; and yet that can't be it, neither, for I think of them but 
seldom; not half as much as I ought, perhaps. I think of nobodi almost 
but you. instead of mind my business, or chat and laugh with 
peggi curling, I love to get by myself,--to read, over and over, your 
letters, or to think how you are employ just then, and how happi I 
should be if I were in fanni maurice' place. 

"but it is all over now; thi visit reward me for everi thing. I wonder 
how I could ever be sullen or mopeful. I will behav better, inde I 
will, and be always, as now, a most happi girl." 

the greater part of three day wa spent in the societi of my friend, in 
listen to her relat of all that had happen dure my absence, 
and in communicating, in my turn, everi incid which had befallen 
myself. after thi I onc more return to the city. 




chapter xliv. 


I now set about carri my plan of life into effect. I began with 
ardent zeal and unweari dilig the career of medic study. I 
bespok the counsel and instruct of my friend; attend him on hi 
profession visits, and acted, in all practic cases, as hi 
substitute. I found thi applic of time more pleasur than I had 
imagined. My mind gladli expand itself, as it were, for the recept 
of new ideas. My curios grew more eager in proport as it wa 
suppli with food, and everi day ad strength to the assur that I 
wa no insignific and worthless being; that I wa destin to be 
_something_ in thi scene of existence, and might some time lay claim to 
the gratitud and homag of my fellow men. 

I wa far from being, however, monopol by these pursuits. I wa 
form on purpos for the gratif of social intercourse. To love 
and to be loved; to exchang heart and mingl sentiment with all the 
virtuou and amiabl whom my good fortun had place within the circuit 
of my knowledge, I alway esteem my highest enjoy and my chief 
duty. 

carlton and hi sister, mrs. wentworth, and achsa fielding, were my most 
valuabl associ beyond my own family. with all these my 
correspond wa frequent and unreserved, but chiefli with the latter. 
thi ladi had digniti and independence, a gener and enlighten 
spirit, beyond what her educ had taught me to expect. she wa 
circumspect and cautiou in her deportment, and wa not prompt to make 
advances, or accept them. she withheld her esteem and confid until 
she had full proof of their be deserved. 

I am not sure that her treatment of me wa fulli conform to her 
rules. My manners, indeed, as she onc told me, she had never met with 
in another. ordinari rule were so total overlook in my behaviour, 
that it seem imposs for ani one who knew me to adher to them. No 
option wa left but to admit my claim to friendship and confid 
instantly, or to reject them altogether. 

I wa not consciou of thi singularity. the intern and undiscov 
charact of anoth weigh noth with me in the question whether 
they should be treat with frank or reserve. I felt no scrupl on 
ani occas to disclos everi feel and everi event. ani one who 
could listen found me will to talk. everi talker found me will to 
listen. everi one had my sympathi and kindness, _without_ claim it; 
but I _claimed_ the kind and sympathi of everi one. 

achsa fielding' counten bespoke, I thought, a mind worthi to be 
known and to be loved. the first moment I engag her attention, I told 
her so. I relat the littl stori of my family, spread out befor her 
all my reason and determinations, my notion of right and wrong, my 
fear and wishes. all thi wa done with sincer and fervour, with 
gestures, actions, and looks, in which I felt as if my whole soul wa 
visible. her superior age, sedateness, and prudence, gave my deport 
a filial freedom and affection, and I wa fond of call her "_mamma_." 

I particularli dwelt upon the histori of my dear country-girl; paint 
her form and countenance; recount our dialogues, and relat all my 
scheme for make her wise, and good, and happy. On these occas my 
friend would listen to me with the mutest attention. I show her the 
letter I received, and offer her for her perus those which I wrote 
in answer, befor they were seal and sent. 

On these occas she would look by turn on my face and away from me. 
A vari hue would play upon her cheek, and her eye were fuller than 
wa common, of meaning. 

"such-and-such," I onc said, "are my notions; now, what do _you_ 
think?" 

"_think_!" emphatically, and turn somewhat aside, she answered; 
"that you are the most--_strange_ of human creatures." 

"but tell me," I resumed, follow and search her avert eyes; "am 
I right? would you do thus? can you help me to improv my girl? I wish 
you knew the bewitch littl creature. how would that heart overflow 
with affect and with gratitud toward you! she should be your 
daughter. no--you are too nearli of an age for that. A sister; her 
_elder_ sister, you should be. _that_, when there is no other relation, 
includ them all. fond sister you would be, and I the fond brother of 
you both." 

My eye glisten as I spoke. In truth, I am in that respect a mere 
woman. My friend wa more power moved. after a momentari struggl 
she burst into tears. 

"good heaven!" said I, "what ail you? are you not well?" 

her look betray an unaccount confusion, from which she quickli 
recovered:--"it wa folli to be thu affected. someth ail me, I 
believe, but it is past. but, come, you want some line of finish the 
descript of the _boa_ in La cepide." 

"true. and I have twenti minut to spare. poor frank is veri ill 
indeed, but he cannot be seen till nine. we'll read till then." 

thu on the wing of pleasur and improv pass my time; not 
without some hues, occasionally, of a darker tint. My heart wa now and 
then detect in sighing. thi occur when my thought glanc at the 
poor eliza, and measured, as it were, the interv between us. "we are 
too--_too_ far apart," thought I. 

the best solac on these occas wa the compani of mrs. fielding; her 
music, her discourse, or some book which she set me to rehears to 
her. one evening, when prepar to pay her a visit, I receiv the 
follow letter from my bess:-- 

_to A. mervyn._ 

curling's, may 6, 1794. 

where doe thi letter you promis me stay all thi while? indeed, 
arthur, you torment me more than I deserve, and more than I could ever 
find it in my heart to do you. you treat me cruelly. I must say so, 
though I offend you. I must write, though you do not deserv that I 
should, and though I fear I am in a humour not veri fit for writing. I 
had better go to my chamber and weep; weep at your--_unkindness_, I wa 
go to say; but, perhaps, it is onli forgetfulness; and yet what can 
be more unkind than forgetfulness? I am sure I have never forgotten you. 
sleep itself, which wrap all other imag in forgetfulness, onli bring 
you nearer, and make me see you more distinctly. 

but where can thi letter stay?--oh! that--hush! foolish girl! If a word 
of that kind escap thi lips, arthur will be angri with thee; and then, 
indeed, thou mightest weep in earnest. _then_ thou wouldst have some 
caus for thi tears. more than onc alreadi ha he almost broken thi 
heart with hi reproaches. sore and weak as it now is, ani new 
reproach would assuredli break it quite. 

I _will_ be content. I will be as good a housewif and dairywoman, stir 
about as briskly, and sing as merrily, as peggi curling. whi not? I am 
as young, as innocent, and enjoy as good health. alas! she ha reason to 
be merry. she ha father, mother, brothers; but I have none. and he that 
wa all these, and more than all these, to me, has--_forgotten_ me. 

but, perhaps, it is some accid that hinders. perhap oliv left the 
market earlier than he use to do; or you mistook the house; or perhap 
some poor creatur wa sick, wa taken suddenli ill, and you were busi 
in chafe hi clay-cold limbs; it fell to you to wipe the clammi drop 
from hi brow. such thing often happen (don't they, arthur?) to peopl 
of your trade, and some such thing ha happen now; and that wa the 
reason you did not write. 

and if so, shall I repin at your silence? Oh no! At such a time the 
poor bess might easili be, and ought to be, forgotten. she would not 
deserv your love if she could repin at a silenc brought about thi 
way. 

and oh! may it be so! may there be noth wors than this! If the sick 
man--see, arthur, how my hand trembles. can you read thi scrawl? what 
is alway bad, my fear make wors than ever. 

I must not think that. and yet, if it be so, if my friend himself be 
sick, what will becom of me? Of me, that ought to cherish you and 
comfort you; that ought to be your nurse. endur for you your sickness, 
when she cannot remov it. 

oh! that----i _will_ speak out--oh that thi strang scrupl had never 
possess you! whi should I _not_ be with you? who can love you and 
serv you as well as I? In sick and health, I will consol and 
assist you. whi will you depriv yourself of such a comfort and such 
an aid as I would be to you? 

dear arthur, think better of it. let me leav thi dreari spot, where, 
indeed, as long as I am thu alone, I can enjoy no comfort. let me come 
to you. I will put up with ani thing for the sake of see you, though 
it be but onc a day. ani garret or cellar in the dirtiest lane or 
darkest alley will be good enough for me. I will think it a palace, so 
that I can _but_ see you now and then. 

Do not refuse--do not argu with me, so fond you alway are of arguing! 
My heart is set upon your compliance. and yet, dearli as I prize your 
company, I would not ask it, if I thought there wa ani thing improper. 
you say there is, and you talk about it in a way that I do not 
understand. for my sake, you tell me, you refuse; but let me entreat you 
to compli for my sake. 

your pen cannot teach me like your tongue. you write me long letters, 
and tell me a great deal in them; but my soul droop when I call to mind 
your voic and your looks, and think how long a time must pass befor I 
see you and hear you again. I have no spirit to think upon the word and 
paper befor me. My eye and my thought wander far away. 

I bethink me how mani question I might ask you; how mani doubt you 
might clear up if you were but within hearing. If you were but close to 
me; but I cannot ask them here. I am too poor a creatur at the pen, 
and, somehow or another, it alway happens, I can onli write about 
myself or about you. By the time I have said all this, I have tire my 
fingers, and when I set about tell you how thi poem and that stori 
have affect me, I am at a loss for words; I am bewild and bemazed, 
as it were. 

It is not so when we talk to one another. with your arm about me, and 
your sweet face close to mine, I can prattl forever. then my heart 
overflow at my lips. after hour thu spent, it seem as if there were 
a thousand thing still to be said. then I can tell you what the book 
ha told me. I can repeat score of vers by heart, though I heard them 
onli onc read; but it is becaus _you_ have read them to me. 

then there is nobodi here to answer my questions. they never look into 
books. they hate books. they think it wast of time to read. even peggy, 
who you say ha natur a strong mind, wonder what I can find to 
amus myself in a book. In her play mood, she is alway teas me to 
lay it aside. 

I do not mind her, for I like to read; but, if I did not like it before, 
I could not help do so ever sinc you told me that nobodi could gain 
your love who wa not fond of books. and yet, though I like it on that 
account more than I did, I don't read somehow so earnestli and 
understand so well as I use to do when my mind wa all at ease, alway 
frolicsome, and ever upon _tiptoe_, as I may say. 

how strang (have you not observ it?) I am alter of late!--i, that 
wa ever light of heart, the veri soul of gayety, brimful of glee, am 
now demur as our old _tabby_--and not half as wise. tabbi had wit 
enough to keep her paw out of the coals, wherea poor I have--but no 
matter what. It will never come to pass, I see that. So mani reason for 
everi thing! such look forward! arthur, are not men sometim too 
_wise_ to be happy? 

I am now _so_ grave. not one smile can peggi sometim get from me, 
though she tri for it the whole day. but I know how it comes. strange, 
indeed, if, lose father and sister, and thrown upon the wide world, 
penniless and _friendless_ too, now that _you_ forget me, I should 
continu to smile. no. I never shall smile again. At least, while I stay 
here, I never shall, I believe. 

If a certain somebodi suffer me to live with him,--_near_ him, I 
mean,--perhap the sight of him as he enter the door, perhap the sound 
of hi voice, asking, "where is my bess?" might produc a smile. such a 
one as the veri thought produc now,--yet not, I hope, so transient, 
and so quickli follow by a tear. women are born, they say, to trouble, 
and tear are given them for their relief. 'ti all veri true. 

let it be as I wish, will you? If oliv bring not back good tidings, if 
he bring not a letter from thee, or thi letter still refus my 
request,--i don't know what may happen. consent, if you love your poor 
girl. 

e.h. 




chapter xlv. 


the read of thi letter, though it made me mournful, did not hinder 
me from pay the visit I intended. My friend notic my discomposure. 

"what, arthur! thou art quit the 'penseroso' to-night. come, let me 
cheer thee with a song. thou shalt have thi favourit ditty." she 
step to the instrument, and, with more than airi lightness, touch 
and sung:-- 

"now knit hand and beat the ground 
In a light, fantast round, 
till the telltal sun descri 
our conceal'd solemnity." 

her music, though blithsom and aerial, wa not suffici for the end. 
My cheer would not return even at her bidding. she again notic 
my sedateness, and inquir into the cause. 

"thi girl of mine," said I, "ha infect me with her own sadness. 
there is a letter I have just received." she took it and began to read. 

meanwhile, I place myself befor her, and fix my eye steadfastli 
upon her features. there is no book in which I read with more pleasur 
than the face of woman. _that_ is gener more full of meaning, and of 
better mean too, than the hard and inflex lineament of man; and 
_this_ woman' face ha no parallel. 

she read it with visibl emotion. have gone through it, she did not 
lift her eye from the paper, but continu silent, as if buri in 
thought. after some time, (for I would not interrupt the pause,) she 
address me thus:-- 

"thi girl seem to be veri anxiou to be with you." 

"a much as I am that she should be so." My friend' counten 
betray some perplexity. As soon as I perceiv it, I said, "whi are 
you thu grave?" some littl confus appeared, as if she would not 
have her graviti discovered. "there again," said I, "new token in your 
face, my good mamma, of someth which you will not mention. yet, sooth 
to say, thi is not your first perplexity. I have notic it before, and 
wondered. It happen onli when my _bess_ is introduced. someth in 
relat to her it must be, but what I cannot imagine. whi doe _her_ 
name, particularly, make you thoughtful, disturbed, dejected? there 
now--but I must know the reason. you don't agre with me in my notion 
of thi girl, I fear, and you will not disclos your thoughts." 

By thi time, she had gain her usual composure, and, without notic 
my comment on her looks, said, "sinc you are both of one mind, whi 
doe she not leav the country?" 

"that cannot be, I believe. mrs. steven say it would be disreputable. 
I am no profici in etiquette, and must, therefore, in affair of thi 
kind, be guid by those who are. but would to heaven I were truli her 
father or brother! then all difficulti would be done away." 

"can you serious wish that?" 

"why, no. I believ it would be more ration to wish that the world 
would suffer me to act the fatherli or brotherli part, without the 
relationship." 

"and is that the onli part you wish to act toward thi girl?" 

"certainly, the onli part." 

"you surpris me. have you not confess your love for her?" 

"I _do_ love her. there is noth upon earth more dear to me than my 
_bess_." 

"but love is of differ kinds. she wa love by her father----" 

"less than by me. He wa a good man, but not of live feelings. 
besides, he had anoth daughter, and they share hi love between them; 
but she ha no sister to share _my_ love. calamity, too, ha endear 
her to me; I am all her consolation, dependence, and hope, and nothing, 
surely, can induc me to abandon her." 

"her relianc upon you for happiness," repli my friend, with a sigh, 
"i plain enough." 

"it is; but whi that sigh? and yet I understand it. It remonstr with 
me on my incapac for her support. I know it well, but it is wrong to 
be cast down. I have youth, health, and spirits, and ought not to 
despair of live for my own benefit and hers; but you sigh again, and 
it is imposs to keep my courag when _you_ sigh. Do tell me what you 
mean by it." 

"you partli guess the cause. she trust to you for happiness, but I 
somewhat suspect she trust in vain." 

"in vain! I beseech you, tell me whi you think so." 

"you say you love her: whi then not make her your wife?" 

"mi wife! sure her extrem youth, and my destitut condition, will 
account for that." 

"she is fifteen; the age of delic fervour, of inartifici love, and 
suitabl enough for marriage. As to your condition, you may live more 
easili togeth than apart. she ha no fals tast or pervers desir 
to gratify. she ha been train in simpl mode and habits. besides, 
that object can be remov anoth way. but are these all your 
objections?" 

"her youth I object to, mere in connect with her mind. she is too 
littl improv to be my wife. she want that solid of mind, that 
matur of intellig which ten year more may possibl give her, but 
which she cannot have at thi age." 

"you are a veri prudenti youth: then you are will to wait ten year 
for a wife?" 

"doe that follow? becaus my bess will not be qualifi for wedlock in 
less time, doe it follow that I must wait for her?" 

"I spoke on the supposit that you love her." 

"and that is true; but love is satisfi with studi her happi as 
her father or brother. some year hence, perhap in half a year, (for 
thi passion, call wed or _marriage-wishing_ love, is of sudden 
growth,) my mind may chang and noth may content me but to have bess 
for my wife. yet I do not expect it." 

"then you are determin against marriag with thi girl?" 

"of course; until that love come which I feel not now; but which, no 
doubt, will come, when bess ha had the benefit of five or eight year 
more, unless previous excit by another." 

"all thi is strange, arthur. I have heretofor suppos that you 
actual love (I mean with the _marriage-seeking_ passion) your 
_bess_." 

"I believ I onc did; but it happen at a time when marriag wa 
improper; in the life of her father and sister, and when I had never 
known in what femal excel consisted. sinc that time my happier 
lot ha cast me among women so far abov eliza hadwin,--so far above, 
and so wide differ from ani thing which time is like to make 
her,--that, I own, noth appear more unlik than that I shall ever 
love her." 

"are you not a littl caprici in that respect, my good friend? you 
have prais your _bess_ as rich in natur endowments; as have an 
artless puriti and rectitud of mind, which somewhat supersed the use 
of formal education; as be full of sweet and tenderness, and in 
her person a veri angel of loveliness." 

"all that is true. I never saw featur and shape so delic 
beautiful; I never knew so young a mind so quick-sight and so firm; 
but, nevertheless, she is not the creatur whom I would call my _wife_. 
My bosom-slave; counsellor; friend; the mother; the pattern; the 
tutoress of my children, must be a differ creature." 

"but what are the attribut of thi _desirable_ which bess wants?" 

"everi thing she wants. age, capacity, acquirements, person, features, 
hair, complexion, all, all are differ from thi girl's." 

"and pray of what kind may they be?" 

"I cannot portray them in words--but yes, I can:--th creatur whom I 
shall worship:--it sound oddly, but, I verili believe, the sentiment 
which I shall feel for my wife will be more akin to worship than ani 
thing else. I shall never love but such a creatur as I now imag to 
myself, and _such_ a creatur will deserve, or almost deserve, worship. 
but thi creature, I wa go to say, must be the exact counterpart, my 
good mamma--of _yourself_." 

thi wa said veri earnestly, and with eye and manner that fulli 
express my earnestness; perhap my express were unwittingli strong 
and emphatic, for she start and blushed, but the caus of her 
discomposure, whatev it was, wa quickli removed, and she said,-- 

"poor bess! thi will be sad news to thee!" 

"heaven forbid!" said I; "of what moment can my opinion be to her?" 

"strang question that thou art. thou knowest that her gentl heart is 
touch with love. see how it show itself in the tender and inimit 
strain of thi epistle. doe not thi sweet ingenu bewitch you?" 

"it doe so, and I love, beyond expression, the sweet girl; but my love 
is, in some inconceiv way, differ from the passion which that 
_other_ creatur will produce. she is no stranger to my thoughts. I will 
impart everi thought over and over to her. I question not but I shall 
make her happi without forfeit my own." 

"would marriag with her be a forfeitur of your happiness?" 

"not absolut or forever, I believe. I love her company. her absenc 
for a long time is irksome. I cannot express the delight with which I 
see and hear her. To mark her features, beam with vivacity; play 
in her pleasures; to hold her in my arms, and listen to her prattle, 
alway music voluble, alway sweetli tender, or artlessli 
intelligent--and thi you will say is the dearest privileg of marriage; 
and so it is; and dearli should I prize it; and yet, I fear my heart 
would droop as often as that _other_ imag should occur to my fancy. for 
then, you know, it would occur as someth never to be possess by me. 

"now, thi imag might, indeed, seldom occur. the intervals, at least, 
would be serene. It would be my interest to prolong these interv as 
much as possible, and my endeavour to thi end would, no doubt, have 
some effect. besides, the bitter of thi reflect would be 
lessen by contemplating, at the same time, the happi of my belov 
girl. 

"I should likewis have to remember, that to continu unmarri would 
not necessarili secur me the possess of the _other_ good----" 

"but these reflections, my friend," (broke she in upon me,) "are of as 
much forc to induc you to marry, as to reconcil you to a marriag 
alreadi contracted." 

"perhap they are. assuredly, I have not a hope that the _fancied_ 
excel will ever be mine. such happi is not the lot of humanity, 
and is, least of all, within my reach." 

"your diffidence," repli my friend, in a timor accent, "ha not 
mani examples; but your character, without doubt, is all your own, 
possess all and disclaim all,--is, in few words, your picture." 

"I scarc understand you. Do you think I ever shall be happi to that 
degre which I have imagined? think you I shall ever meet with an exact 
copi of _yourself_?" 

"unfortun you will be, if you do not meet with mani better. your 
bess, in personals, is, beyond measure, _my_ superior, and in mind, 
allow for differ in years, quit as much so." 

"but that," return I, with quick and fervour, "i not the object. 
the veri counterpart of _you_ I want; neither wors nor better, nor 
differ in ani thing. just such form, such features, such hues. just 
that melt voice, and, abov all, the same habit of think and 
conversing. In thought, word, and deed; gesture, look, and form, that 
rare and preciou creatur whom I shall love must be your resemblance. 
your----" 

"have done with these comparisons," interrupt she, in some hurry, "and 
let us return to the country-girl, thi bess. 

"you once, my friend, wish me to treat thi girl of your as my 
sister. Do you know what the duti of a sister are?" 

"they impli no more kind or affect than you alreadi feel toward 
my bess. are you not her sister?" 

"I ought to have been so. I ought to have been proud of the relat you 
ascrib to me, but I have not perform ani of it duties. I blush to 
think upon the cold and pervers of my heart. with such mean as 
I possess, of give happi to others, I have been thoughtless and 
inact to a strang degree; perhaps, however, it is not yet too late. 
are you still will to invest me with all the right of an elder 
sister over thi girl? and will she consent, think you?" 

"certainli she will; she has." 

"then the first act of sistership will be to take her from the country; 
from person on whose kind she ha no natur claim, whose manner 
and charact are unlik her own, and with whom no improv can be 
expected, and bring her back to her sister' hous and bosom, to provid 
for her subsist and education, and watch over her happiness. 

"I will not be a nomin sister. I will not be a sister by halves. _all_ 
the right of that relat I will have, or none. As for you, you have 
claim upon her on which I must be permit to judge, as becom the 
elder sister, who, by the loss of all other relations, must occupi the 
place, possess the rights, and fulfil the duties, of father, mother, and 
brother. 

"she ha now arriv at an age when longer to remain in a cold and 
churlish soil will stunt her growth and wither her blossoms. We must 
hasten to transplant her to a genial element and a garden well enclosed. 
have so long neglect thi charm plant, it becom me henceforth 
to take her wholli to myself. 

"and now, for it is no longer in her or your power to take back the 
gift, sinc she is fulli mine, I will charg you with the offic of 
conduct her hither. I grant it you as a favour. will you go?" 

"go! I will fly!" I exclaimed, in an ecstasi of joy, "on pinion swifter 
than the wind. not the linger of an instant will I bear. look! one, 
two, three--thirti minut after nine. I will reach curling' gate by 
the morn' dawn. I will put my girl into a chaise, and by noon she 
shall throw herself into the arm of her sister. but first, shall I not, 
in some way, manifest my gratitude?" 

My sens were bewildered, and I knew not what I did. I intend to 
kneel, as to my mother or my deity; but, instead of that, I clasp her 
in my arms, and kiss her lip fervently. I stay not to discov the 
effect of thi insanity, but left the room and the house, and, call 
for a moment at stevens's, left word with the servant, my friend be 
gone abroad, that I should not return till the morrow. 

never wa a lighter heart, a gayeti more overflow and more buoyant, 
than mine. all cold from a boister night, at a chilli season, all 
weari from a rug and miri road, were charm away. I might have 
ridden; but I could not brook delay, even the delay of inquir for and 
equip a horse. I might thu have save myself fatigue, and have lost 
no time; but my mind wa in too great a tumult for deliber and 
forecast. I saw noth but the imag of my girl, whom my tide would 
render happy. 

the way wa longer than my fond imagin had foreseen. I did not 
reach curling' till an hour after sunrise. the distanc wa full 
thirty-f miles. As I hasten up the green lane lead to the house, 
I spi my bess pass through a cover way, between the dwell and 
kitchen. I caught her eye. she stop and held up her hands, and then 
ran into my arms. 

"what mean my girl? whi thi catch of the breath? whi thi sobbing? 
look at me, my love. It is arthur,--h who ha treat you with 
forgetfulness, neglect, and cruelty." 

"oh, do not," she replied, hide her face with her hand. "one singl 
reproach, ad to my own, will kill me. that foolish, wick letter--i 
could tear my finger for write it." 

"but," said I, "I will kiss them;" and put them to my lips. "they have 
told me the wish of my girl. they have enabl me to gratifi her 
wishes. I have come to carri thee thi veri moment to town." 

"lord bless me, arthur," said she, lost in a sweet confusion, and her 
cheeks, alway glowing, glow still more deeply, "indeed, I did not 
mean----i meant only----i will stay here----i would rather stay----" 

"it griev me to hear that," said I, with earnestness; "I thought I wa 
studi our mutual happiness." 

"it griev you? don't say so. I would not griev you for the world; 
but, indeed, indeed, it is too soon. such a girl as I am not yet fit 
to--liv in your city." again she hid her glow face in my bosom. 

"sweet consciousness! heavenli innocence!" thought I; "may achsa' 
conjectur prove false!--y have mistaken my design, for I do not 
intend to carri you to town with such a view as you have hinted; but 
mere to place you with a belov friend, with achsa fielding, of whom 
alreadi you know so much, where we shall enjoy each other' compani 
without restraint or intermission." 

I then proceed to disclos to her the plan suggest by my friend, and 
to explain all the consequ that would flow from it. I need not say 
that she assent to the scheme. she wa all raptur and gratitude. 
prepar for departur were easili and speedili made. I hire a 
chais of a neighbour farmer, and, accord to my promise, by noon 
the same day, deliv the timid and bash girl into the arm of her 
new sister. 

she wa receiv with the utmost tenderness, not onli by mrs. fielding, 
but by all my friends. her affection heart wa encourag to pour 
forth all it feel as into the bosom of a mother. she wa reinspir 
with confidence. her want of experi wa suppli by the gentlest 
admonit and instructions. In everi plan for her improv 
suggest by her new _mamma_, (for she never call her by ani other 
name,) she engag with docil and eagerness; and her behaviour and 
her progress exceed the most sanguin hope that I had form as to 
the soft of her temper and the acut of her genius. 

those grace which a polish education, and intercours with the better 
class of society, are adapt to give, my girl possessed, in some 
degree, by a nativ and intuit refin and sagac of mind. all 
that wa to be obtain from actual observ and instruct wa 
obtain without difficulty; and in a short time noth but the 
affection simplic and unpervert feel of the country-girl 
bespok the origin condition. 

"what art so busi about, arthur? alway at thi pen of late. come, I must 
know the fruit of all thi toil and all thi meditation. I am determin 
to scrape acquaint with haller and linnæus. I will begin thi veri 
day. all one' friends, you know, should be ours. love ha made mani a 
patient, and let me see if it cannot, in my case, make a physician. but, 
first, what is all thi write about?" 

"mrs. wentworth ha put me upon a strang task,--not disagreeable, 
however, but such as I should, perhaps, have declined, had not the 
absenc of my bess, and her mamma, made the time hang somewhat heavy. I 
have, often than once, and far more circumstanti than now, told 
her my adventures, but she is not satisfied. she want a written 
narrative, for some purpos which she tell me she will disclos to me 
hereafter. 

"luckily, my friend steven ha save me more than half the trouble. He 
ha done me the favour to compil much of my histori with hi own hand. 
I cannot imagin what could prompt him to so wearisom an undertaking; 
but he say that adventur and a destini so singular as mine ought not 
to be abandon to forget like ani vulgar and _every-day_ 
existence. besides, when he wrote it, he suspect that it might be 
necessari to the safeti of my reput and my life, from the 
consequ of my connect with welbeck. time ha annihil that 
danger. all enmiti and all suspicion are buri with that ill-fat 
wretch. wortley ha been won by my behaviour, and confid in my 
integr now as much as he formerli suspect it. I am glad, however, 
that the task wa performed. It ha save me a world of writing. I had 
onli to take up the broken thread, and bring it down to the period of my 
present happiness; and thi wa done, just as you trip along the 
entri thi morning. 

"to bed, my friend; it is late, and thi delic frame is not half so 
abl to encount fatigu as a youth spent in the hay-field and the 
dairi might have been expect to be." 

"I will, but let me take these sheet along with me. I will read them, 
that I am determined, befor I sleep, and watch if you have told the 
whole truth." 

"do so, if you please; but rememb one thing. mrs. wentworth request 
me to write not as if it were design for her perusal, but for those 
who have no previou knowledg of her or of me. 'twa an odd request. I 
cannot imagin what she mean by it; but she never act without good 
reason, and I have done so. and now, withdraw, my dear, and farewell." 




chapter xlvi. 


move on, my quill! wait not for my guidance. reanim with thi 
master' spirit, all airi light! A heyday rapture! A mount impuls 
sway him: lift him from the earth. 

I must, cost what it will, rein in thi upward-pulling, 
forward-going--what shall I call it? but there are times, and now is one 
of them, when word are poor. 

It will not do--down thi hill, up that steep; through thi thicket, 
over that hedge--i have _laboured_ to fatigu myself: to reconcil me to 
repose; to loll on a sofa; to pore over a book, to ani thing that 
might win for my heart a respit from these throbs; to deceiv me into a 
few _tolerable_ moment of forgetfulness. 

let me see; they tell me thi is monday night. onli three day yet to 
come! If thu restless to-day; if my heart thu bound till it mansion 
scarc can hold it, what must be my state to-morrow! what next day! 
what as the hour hasten on; as the sun descends; as my hand touch 
her in sign of wed unity, of love without interval; of concord 
without end! 

I must quell these tumults. they will disabl me else. they will wear 
out all my strength. they will drain away life itself. but who could 
have thought! So soon! not three month sinc I first set eye upon her. 
not three week sinc our plight love, and onli three day to 
termin suspens and give me _all_. 

I must compel myself to quiet; to sleep. I must find some refug from 
anticip so excruciating. all extrem are agonies. A joy like thi 
is too big for thi narrow tenement. I must thrust it forth; I must bar 
and bolt it out for a time, or these frail wall will burst asunder. 
the pen is a pacifier. It check the mind' career; it circumscrib her 
wanderings. It trace out and compel us to adher to one path. It ever 
wa my friend. often it ha blunt my vexations; hush my stormi 
passions; turn my peevish to soothing; my fierc reveng to 
heart-dissolv pity. 

perhap it will befriend me now. It may temper my impetu wishes; lull 
my intoxication; and render my happi supportable; and, indeed, it 
ha produc partli thi effect already. My blood, within the few 
minut thu employed, flow with less destruct rapidity. My thought 
rang themselv in less disorder. and, now that the conquest is 
effected, what shall I say? I must continu at the pen, or shall 
immedi relapse. 

what shall I say? let me look back upon the step that led me hither. 
let me recount the preliminaries. I cannot do better. 

and first as to achsa fielding,--to describ thi woman. 

To recount, in brief, so much of her histori as ha come to my knowledg 
will best account for that zeal, almost to idolatry, with which she has, 
ever sinc I thoroughli knew her, been regard by me. 

never saw I one to whom the term _lovely_ more truli belonged. and yet 
in statur she is too low; in complexion dark and almost sallow; and her 
eyes, though black and of pierc lustre, have a cast which I cannot 
well explain. It lessen without destroy their lustr and their forc 
to charm; but all person defect are outweigh by her heart and her 
intellect. there is the secret of her power to entranc the soul of the 
listen and beholder. It is not onli when she sing that her utter 
is musical. It is not onli when the occas is urgent and the topic 
moment that her eloqu is rich and flowing. they are alway so. 

I had vow to love her and serv her, and been her frequent visitant, 
long befor I wa acquaint with her past life. I had casual pick 
up some intelligence, from others, or from her own remarks. I knew veri 
soon that she wa english by birth, and had been onli a year and a half 
in america; that she had scarc pass her twenty-fifth year, and wa 
still embellish with all the grace of youth; that she had been a 
wife; but wa uninform whether the knot had been unti by death or 
divorce; that she possess considerable, and even splendid, fortune; 
but the exact amount, and all besid these particulars, were unknown to 
me till some time after our acquaint wa begun. 

one even she had been talk veri earnestli on the influenc 
annexed, in great britain, to birth, and had given me some exampl of 
thi influence. meanwhil my eye were fix steadfastli on hers. the 
peculiar in their express never befor affect me so strongly. A 
vagu resembl to someth seen elsewhere, on the same day, 
occurred, and occas me to exclaim, suddenly, in a paus of her 
discourse,-- 

"a I live, my good mamma, those eye of your have told me a secret. I 
almost think they spoke to me; and I am not less amaz at the 
strang than at the distinct of their story." 

"and, pr'ythee, what have they said?" 

"perhap I wa mistaken. I might have been deceiv by a fanci voice, 
or have confound one word with anoth near akin to it; but let me die 
if I did not think they said that you were--_a jew_." 

At thi sound, her featur were instantli veil with the deepest 
sorrow and confusion. she put her hand to her eyes, the tear started, 
and she sobbed. My surpris at thi effect of my word wa equal to my 
contrition. I besought her to pardon me for have thu unknowingli 
alarm and griev her. 

after she had regain some composure, she said, "you have not offended, 
arthur. your surmis wa just and natural, and could not alway have 
escap you. connect with that word are mani sourc of anguish, which 
time ha not, and never will, dri up; and the less I think of past 
event the less will my peac be disturbed. I wa desir that you 
should know noth of me but what you see; noth but the present and 
the future, mere that no allus might occur in our convers 
which will call up sorrow and regret that will avail nothing. 

"I now perceiv the folli of endeavour to keep you in ignorance, and 
shall therefore, onc for all, inform you of what ha befallen me, that 
your inquiri and suggest may be made and fulli satisfi at once, 
and your curios have no motiv for call back my thought to what I 
ardent desir to buri in oblivion. 

"mi father wa inde a _jew_, and one of the most opul of hi nation 
in london,--a portugues by birth, but came to london when a boy. He had 
few of the moral or extern qualiti of jews; for I suppos there is 
some justic in the obloquy that follow them so closely. He wa frugal 
without meanness, and cautiou in hi dealings, without extortion. I 
need not fear to say this, for it wa the gener voice. 

"me, an onli child, and, of course, the darl of my parents, they 
train up in the most liber manner. My educ wa pure english. 
I learn the same thing and of the same master with my neighbours. 
except frequent their church and repeat their creed, and partak 
of the same food, I saw no differ between them and me. henc I grew 
more indifferent, perhaps, than wa proper, to the distinct of 
religion. they were never enforc upon me. No pain were taken to fill 
me with scrupl and antipathies. they never stood, as I may say, upon 
the threshold. they were often thought upon, but were vagu and easili 
elud or forgotten. 

"henc it wa that my heart too readili admit impress that more 
zeal and more parent caution would have save me from. they could 
scarc be avoided, as my societi wa wholli english, and my youth, my 
education, and my father' wealth made me an object of much attention. 
and the same caus that lull to sleep my own watch had the 
same effect upon that of others. To regret or to prais thi remiss 
is now too late. certain it is, that my destiny, and not a happi 
destiny, wa fix by it. 

"the fruit of thi remiss wa a passion for one who fulli return 
it. almost as young as I, who wa onli sixteen; he knew as littl as 
myself what obstacl the differ of our birth wa like to rais 
between us. hi father, sir ralph fielding, a man nobli born, high in 
office, splendidli allied, could not be expect to consent to the 
marriag of hi eldest son, in such green youth, to the daughter of an 
alien, a portuguese, a jew; but these impedi were not seen by my 
ignorance, and were overlook by the youth' passion. 

"but, strang to tell, what common prudenc would have so confid 
predict did not happen. sir ralph had a numer family, like to be 
still more so; had but slender patrimony; the incom of hi offic 
nearli made up hi all. the young man wa headstrong, impetuous, and 
would probabl disregard the inclin of hi family. yet the father 
would not consent but on one condition,--that of my admiss to the 
english church. 

"no veri strenuou opposit to these term could be expect from me. 
At so thoughtless an age, with an educ so unfavour to religi 
impressions; swayed, likewise, by the strongest of human passions; made 
somewhat impatient, by the compani I kept, of the disreput and scorn to 
which the jewish nation are everywher condemned, I could not be 
expect to be veri avers to the scheme. 

"mi fear as to what my father' decis would be were soon at an end. 
He love hi child too well to thwart her wish in so essenti a 
point. find in me no scruples, no unwillingness, he thought it absurd 
to be scrupul for me. My own heart have abjur my religion, it wa 
absurd to make ani difficulti about a formal renunciation. these were 
hi avow reason for concurrence, but time show that he had probabl 
other reasons, founded, indeed, in hi regard for my happiness, but such 
as, if they had been known, would probabl have strengthen into 
invinc the reluct of my lover' family. 

"no marriag wa ever attend with happier presages. the numer 
relat of my husband admit me with the utmost cordial among 
them. My father' tender wa unab by thi change, and those 
humili to which I had befor been expos were now no more; and 
everi tie wa strengthened, at the end of a year, by the feel of a 
_mother_. I had need, indeed, to know a season of happiness, that I 
might be fit to endur the sad revers that succeeded. one after the 
other my disast came, each one more heavi than the last, and in such 
swift success that they hardli left me time to breathe. 

"I had scarc left my chamber, I had scarc recov my usual 
health, and wa abl to press with true fervour the new and preciou 
gift to my bosom, when melancholi tide came. I wa in the country, at 
the seat of my father-in-law, when the messeng arrived. 

"A shock tale it was! and told abruptly, with everi unpiti 
aggravation. I hint to you onc my father' death. the _kind_ of 
death--oh! my friend! It wa horrible. He wa then a placid, vener 
old man; though mani symptom of disquiet had long befor been 
discov by my mother' watch tenderness. yet none could suspect 
him capabl of such a deed; for none, so care had he conduct hi 
affairs, suspect the havoc that mischanc had made of hi property. 

"i, that had so much reason to love my father,--i will leav you to 
imagin how I wa affect by a catastroph so dreadful, so 
unlooked-for. much less could I suspect the caus of hi despair; yet he 
had foreseen hi ruin befor my marriage; had resolv to defer it, for 
hi daughter' and hi wife' sake, as long as possible, but had still 
determin not to surviv the day that should reduc him to indigence. 
the desper act wa thu preconcerted--thu deliberate. 

"the true state of hi affair wa laid open by hi death. the failur 
of great mercantil hous at frankfort and lieg wa the caus of hi 
disasters. 

"thu were my prospect shut in. that wealth which, no doubt, furnish 
the chief induc with my husband' famili to concur in hi choice, 
wa now suddenli exchang for poverty. 

"bred up, as I had been, in pomp and luxury; consciou that my wealth 
wa my chief secur from the contempt of the proud and bigoted, and my 
chief titl to the station to which I had been raised, and which I the 
more delight in becaus it enabl me to confer so great oblig 
on my husband,--what revers could be harder than this, and how much 
bitter wa ad by it to the grief occas by the violent death 
of my father! 

"yet loss of fortune, though it mortifi my pride, did not prove my 
worst calamity. perhap it wa scarc to be rank with evils, sinc 
it furnish a touchston by which my husband' affect were to be 
tried; especi as the issu of the trial wa auspicious; for my 
misfortun seem onli to heighten the interest which my charact had 
made for me in the heart of all that knew me. the patern regard of 
sir ralph had alway been tender, but that tender seem now to be 
redoubled. 

"new event made thi consol still more necessary. My unhappi 
mother!--sh wa nearer to the dread scene when it happened; had no 
surviv object to beguil her sorrow; wa rendered, by long habit, 
more depend upon fortun than her child. 

"A melancholy, alway mute, wa the first effect upon my mother. noth 
could charm her eye, or her ear. sweet sound that she onc loved, and 
especi when her darl child wa the warbler, were heard no longer. 
how, with stream eyes, have I sat and watch the dear lady, and 
endeavour to catch her eye, to rous her attention!--but I must not 
think of these things. 

"but even thi distress wa littl in comparison with what wa to come. 
A frenzi thu mute, motionless, and vacant, wa succeed by fits, 
talkative, outrageous, requir incess superintendence, restraint, 
and even violence. 

"whi led you me thu back to my sad remembrances? excus me for the 
present. I will tell you the rest some other time; to-morrow." 

to-morrow, accordingly, my friend resum her story. 

"let me now make an end," said she, "of my mourn narrative, and 
never, I charg you, do ani thing to reviv it again. 

"deep as wa my despondency, occas by these calamities, I wa not 
destitut of some joy. My husband and my child were love and 
affectionate. In their caresses, in their welfare, I found peace; and 
might still have found it, had there not been----. but whi should I open 
afresh wound which time ha imperfectli closed? but the stori must some 
time be told to you, and the sooner it is told and dismiss to 
forget the better. 

"mi ill fate led me into compani with a woman too well known in the idl 
and dissip circles. her charact wa not unknown to me. there wa 
noth in her featur or air to obviat disadvantag 
prepossessions. I sought not her intercourse; I rather shun it, as 
unpleas and discreditable, but she would not be repulsed. 
self-invited, she made herself my frequent guest; took unsolicit part 
in my concerns; did me mani kind offices; and, at length, in spite of my 
counter-inclination, won upon my sympathi and gratitude. 

"no one in the world, did I fondli think, had I less reason to fear than 
mrs. waring. her charact excit not the slightest apprehens for my 
own safety. she wa upward of forty, nowis remark for grace or 
beauty; tawdri in her dress; accustom to render more conspicu the 
trace of age by her attempt to hide them; the mother of a numer 
family, with a mind but slenderli cultivated; alway care to save 
appearances; studious preserv distanc with my husband, and he, 
like myself, endur rather than wish her society. what could I fear 
from the art of such a one? 

"but alas! the woman had consumm address. patience, too, that noth 
could tire. watch that none could detect. insinu the wiliest 
and most subtle. thu wound she herself into my affections, by an 
unexampl persever in seem kindness; by tender confidence; by 
art gloss of past misconduct; by self-rebuk and feign 
contritions. 

"never were stratagem so intricate, dissimul so profound! but 
still, that such a one should seduc my husband; young, generous, 
ambitious, impati of contum and reproach, and sure not 
indifferent; befor thi fatal intercourse, not indiffer to hi wife 
and child!--yet so it was! 

"I saw hi discontents; hi struggles; I heard him curs thi woman, and 
the more deepli for my attempts, unconsci as I wa of her 
machinations, to reconcil them to each other, to do away what seem a 
causeless indignation, or antipathi against her. how littl I suspect 
the natur of the conflict in hi heart, between a new passion and the 
claim of pride; of conscienc and of humanity; the claim of a child 
and a wife; a wife, alreadi in affliction, and place all that yet 
remain of happiness, in the firm of hi virtue; in the continu 
of hi love; a wife, at the veri hour of hi medit flight, full of 
terror at the near approach of an event whose agoni demand a doubl 
share of a husband' supporting, encourag love---- 

"good heaven! for what evil are some of thi creatur reserved! 
resign to thi decree, in the last and most cruel distress, was, 
indeed, a hard task. 

"he wa gone. some unavoid engag call him to hamburg wa 
pleaded. yet to leav me at such an hour! I dare not upbraid, nor 
object. the tale wa so specious! the fortun of a friend depend on 
hi punctual journey. the falsehood of hi stori too soon made itself 
known. He wa gone, in compani with hi detest paramour! 

"yet, though my vigil wa easili deceived, it wa not so with 
others. A creditor, who had hi bond for three thousand pounds, pursu 
and arrest him at harwich. He wa thrown into prison, but hi 
companion--let me, at least, say that in her praise--would not desert 
him. she took lodg near the place of hi confinement, and saw him 
daily. that, had she not done it, and had my person condit allowed, 
should have been my province. 

"indign and grief hasten the pain crisi with me. I did not 
weep that the second fruit of thi unhappi union saw not the light. I 
wept onli that thi hour of agoni wa not, to it unfortun mother, 
the last. 

"I felt not anger; I had noth but compass for fielding. gladli 
would I have recal him to my arm and to virtue; I wrote, adjur 
him, by all our past joys, to return; vow onli gratitud for hi new 
affection, and claim onli the recompens of see him restor to 
hi family; to liberty; to reputation. 

"but, alas! field had a good but a proud heart. He look upon hi 
error with remorse, with self-detestation, and with the fatal belief 
that it could not be retrieved; shame made him withstand all my 
reason and persuasions, and, in the hurri of hi feelings, he made 
solemn vow that he would, in the moment of restor liberty, abjur hi 
countri and hi famili forever. He bore indignantli the yoke of hi new 
attachment, but he strove in vain to shake it off. her behaviour, alway 
yielding, doting, supplicative, preserv him in her fetters. though 
upbraided, spurned, and banish from hi presence, she would not leav 
him, but, by new effort and new artifices, soothed, appeased, and won 
again and kept hi tenderness. 

"what my entreati were unabl to effect, hi father could not hope to 
accomplish. He offer to take him from prison; the creditor offer to 
cancel the bond, if he would return to me; but thi condit he 
refused. all hi kindred, and one who had been hi bosom-friend from 
childhood, join in beseech hi complianc with these conditions; 
but hi pride, hi dread of my merit reproaches, the merit and 
dissuas of hi new companion, whose sacrific for hi sake had not 
been small, were obstacl which noth could subdue. 

"far, indeed, wa I from impos these conditions. I wait onli till, 
by certain arrangements, I could gather enough to pay hi debts, to 
enabl him to execut hi vow: empti would have been my claim to hi 
affection, if I could have suffered, with the mean of hi deliver 
in my hands, my husband to remain a moment in prison. 

"the remain of my father' vast fortun wa a jointur of a thousand 
pound a year, settl on my mother, and, after her death, on me. My 
mother' helpless condit put thi revenu into my disposal. By thi 
mean wa I enabled, without the knowledg of my father-in-law or my 
husband, to purchas the debt, and dismiss him from prison. He set out 
instantly, in compani with hi paramour, to france. 

"when somewhat recov from the shock of thi calamity, I took up my 
abod with my mother. what she had wa enough, as you perhap will 
think, for plenti subsistence; but to us, with habit of a differ 
kind, it wa littl better than poverty. that reflection, my father' 
memory, my mother' deplor state, which everi year grew worse, and 
the late misfortune, were the chief companion of my thoughts. 

"the dear child, whose smile were uninterrupt by hi mother' 
afflictions, wa some consol in my solitude. To hi instruct and 
to my mother' want all my hour were devoted. I wa sometim not 
without the hope of better days. full as my mind wa of fielding' 
merits, convinc by former proof of hi ardent and gener spirit, I 
trust that time and reflect would destroy that spell by which he 
wa now bound. 

"for some time, the progress of these reflect wa not known. In 
leav england, field drop all correspond and connect with 
hi nativ country. He part with the woman at rouen, leav no trace 
behind him by which she might follow him, as she wish to do. she never 
return to england, but die a twelvemonth afterward in switzerland. 

"a to me, I had onli to muse day and night upon the possibl destini of 
thi belov fugitive. hi incens father care not for him. He had 
cast him out of hi patern affections, ceas to make inquiri 
respect him, and even wish never to hear of him again. My boy 
succeed to my husband' place in hi grandfather' affections, and in 
the hope and view of the family; and hi mother want noth which 
their compassion and respect love could bestow. 

"three long and tediou year pass away, and no tide were received. 
whether he were live or dead, nobodi could tell. At length, an english 
traveller, go out of the customari road from italy, met with 
fielding, in a town in the venaissin. hi manners, habits, and language, 
had becom french. He seem unwil to be recognis by an old 
acquaintance, but, not be abl to avoid this, and becom gradual 
familiar, he inform the travel of mani particular in hi present 
situation. It appear that he had made himself use to a neighbour 
_seigneur_, in whose _château_ he had long live on the foot of a 
brother. franc he had resolv to make hi futur country, and, among 
other chang for that end, he had laid asid hi english name, and 
taken that of hi patron, which wa _perrin_. He had endeavour to 
compens himself for all other privations, by devot himself to 
rural amus and to study. 

"he care shun all inquiri respect me; but, when my name wa 
mention by hi friend, who knew well all that had happened, and my 
gener welfare, togeth with that of hi son, asserted, he show deep 
sensibility, and even consent that I should be made acquaint with 
hi situation. 

"I cannot describ the effect of thi intellig on me. My hope of 
bring him back to me were suddenli revived. I wrote him a letter, in 
which I pour forth my whole heart; but hi answer contain avow of 
all hi former resolutions, to which time had onli made hi adher 
more easy. A second and third letter were written, and an offer made to 
follow him to hi retreat and share hi exile; but all my effort 
avail nothing. He solemnli and repeatedli renounc all the claim of 
a husband over me, and absolv me from everi oblig as a wife. 

"hi part in thi correspond wa perform without harsh or 
contempt. A strang mixtur there wa of patho and indifference; of 
tender and resolution. henc I continu deriv hope, which time, 
however, brought no nearer to certainty. 

"at the open of the revolution, the name of perrin appear among the 
deputi to the constitu assembl for the district in which he 
resided. He had thu succeed in gain all the right of a french 
citizen; and the hope of hi return becam almost extinct; but that, 
and everi other hope respect him, ha sinc been total extinguish 
by hi marriag with marguerit d'almont, a young ladi of great merit 
and fortune, and a nativ of avignon. 

"A long period of suspens wa now at an end, and left me in a state 
almost as full of anguish as that which our first separ produced. 
My sorrow were increas by my mother' death, and, thi incid 
free me from those restraint upon my motion which befor existed, I 
determin to come to america. 

"mi son wa now eight year old, and, hi grandfath claim the 
provinc of hi instruction, I wa persuad to part with him, that he 
might be sent to a distant school. thu wa anoth tie removed, and, in 
spite of the well-meant importun of my friends, I persist in my 
scheme of cross the ocean." 

I could not help, at thi part of her narration, express my surpris 
that ani motiv were strong enough to recommend thi scheme. 

"it wa certainli a freak of despair. A few month would, perhaps, have 
allay the fresh grief, and reconcil me to my situation; but I would 
not paus or deliberate. My scheme wa oppos by my friend with great 
earnestness. dure my voyage, affright by the danger which 
surround me, and to which I wa wholli unused, I heartili repent of 
my resolution; but now, methinks, I have reason to rejoic at my 
perseverance. I have come into a scene and societi so new, I have had so 
mani claim made upon my ingenu and fortitude, that my mind ha been 
divert in some degre from former sorrows. there are even time when I 
wholli forget them, and catch myself indulg in cheer reveries. 

"I have often reflect with surpris on the natur of my own mind. It 
is eight year sinc my father' violent death. how few of my hour 
sinc that period have been bless with serenity! how mani night and 
days, in hate and linger succession, have been bath in tear and 
torment with regrets! that I am still alive, with so mani caus of 
death, and with such a slow-consum malady, is sure to be wonder 
at. 

"I believ the worst foe of man, at least of men in grief, are solitud 
and idleness. the same eternally-occur round of object feed hi 
disease, and the effect of mere vacanc and uniform are sometim 
mistaken for those of grief. yes, I am glad I came to america. My 
relat are importun for my return, and till late I had some 
thought of it; but I think now I shall stay where I am for the rest of 
my days. 

"sinc I arrived, I am becom more of a student than I use to be. I 
alway love literature, but never, till of late, had I a mind enough at 
eas to read with advantage. I now find pleasur in the occup which 
I never expect to find. 

"you see in what manner I live. the letter which I brought secur me a 
flatter recept from the best peopl in your country; but scene of 
gay resort had noth to attract me, and I quickli withdrew to that 
seclus in which you now find me. here, alway at leisure, and 
mistress of everi laudabl mean of gratification, I am not without the 
belief of seren day yet to come." 

I now ventur to inquir what were her latest tide of her husband. 

"at the open of the revolution, I told you, he becam a champion of 
the people. By hi zeal and hi effort he acquir such import as 
to be deput to the nation assembly. In thi post he wa the adher 
of violent measures, till the subvers of monarchy; and then, when too 
late for hi safety, he check hi career." 

"and what ha sinc becom of him?" 

she sigh deeply. "you were yesterday read a list of the proscrib 
under robespierre. I check you. I had good reason. but thi subject 
grow too painful; let us chang it." 

some time after, I ventur to renew thi topic; and discov that 
fielding, under hi new name of perrin d'almont, wa among the outlaw 
deputi of last year,[1] and had been slain in resist the offic 
sent to arrest him. My friend had been inform that hi _wife_, 
marguerit d'almont, whom she had reason to believ a woman of great 
merit, had elud persecution, and taken refug in some part of america. 
she had made variou attempts, but in vain, to find out her retreat. 
"ah!" said I, "you must commiss me to find her. I will hunt her 
through the contin from penobscot to savannah. I will not leav a 
nook unsearched." 

[footnot 1: 1793.] 




chapter xlvii. 


none will be surpris that, to a woman thu unfortun and thu 
deserving, my heart willingli render up all it sympathies; that, as I 
partook of all her grief, I hailed, with equal delight, those omen of 
felic which now, at length, seem to play in her fancy. 

I saw her often,--a often as my engag would permit, and often 
than I allow myself to visit ani other. In thi I wa partli selfish. 
So much entertainment, so much of the best instruction, did her 
convers afford me, that I never had enough of it. 

her experi had been so much larger than mine, and so wholli 
different, and she possess such unbound facil of recount all 
she had seen and felt, and absolut sincer and unreserv in thi 
respect were so fulli establish between us, that I can imagin noth 
equal instruct and delight with her conversation. 

book are cold, jejune, vexati in their sparing of inform at 
one time and their impertin loquac at another. besides, all they 
choos to give they give at once; they allow no questions, offer no 
further explanations, and bend not to the capric of our curiosity. 
they talk to us behind a screen. their tone is lifeless and monotonous. 
they charm not our attent by mute signific of gestur and looks. 
they spread no light upon their mean by cadenc and emphasi and 
pause. 

how differ wa mrs. fielding' discourse! So versatile; so bend to 
the chang of the occasion; so obsequi to my curiosity, and so 
abund in that veri knowledg in which I wa most deficient, and on 
which I set the most value, the knowledg of the human heart; of 
societi as it exist in anoth world, more abund in the varieti 
of custom and characters, than I had ever had the power to witness. 

partli selfish I have said my motiv were, but not so, as long as I saw 
that my friend deriv pleasure, in her turn, from my company. not that 
I could add directli to her knowledg or pleasure, but that expans of 
heart, that eas of utter and flow of idea which alway were 
occas by my approach, were sourc of true pleasur of which she 
had been long deprived, and for which her privat had given her a 
higher relish than ever. 

she live in great affluenc and independence, but made use of her 
privileg of fortun chiefli to secur to herself the command of her 
own time. she had been long ago tire and disgust with the dull and 
fulsom uniform and parad of the play-hous and ballroom. formal 
visit were endur as mortif and penances, by which the 
delight of privaci and friendli intercours were by contrast increased. 
music she loved, but never sought it in place of public resort, or from 
the skill of mercenari performers; and book were not the least of her 
pleasures. 

As to me, I wa wax in her hand. without design and without effort, I 
wa alway of that form she wish me to assume. My own happi becam 
a secondari passion, and her gratif the great end of my being. 
when with her, I thought not of myself. I had scarc a separ or 
independ existence, sinc my sens were occupi by her, and my mind 
wa full of those idea which her discours communicated. To medit on 
her look and words, and to pursu the mean suggest by my own 
thoughts, or by her, conducive, in ani way, to her good, wa all my 
business. 

"what a fate," said I, at the conclus of one of our interviews, "ha 
been yours! but, thank heaven, the storm ha disappear befor the age 
of sensibl ha gone past, and without dri up everi sourc of 
happiness. you are still young; all your power unimpaired; rich in the 
compass and esteem of the world; wholli independ of the claim and 
capric of others; ampli suppli with that mean of usefulness, 
call money; wise in that experi which onli advers can give. 
past evil and sufferings, if incur and endur without guilt, if 
call to view without remorse, make up the materi of present joy. 
they cheer our most dreari hour with the widespread accent of 'well 
done,' and they heighten our pleasur into somewhat of celesti 
brilliancy, by furnish a deep, a ruefully-deep, contrast. 

"from thi moment, I will ceas to weep for you. I will call you the 
happiest of women. I will share with you your happi by wit 
it; but that shall not content me. I must some way contribut to it. 
tell me how I shall serv you. what can I do to make you happier? poor 
am I in everi thing but zeal, but still I may do something. what--pray 
tell me, what can I do?" 

she look at me with sweet and solemn significance. what it wa exactli 
I could not divine, yet I wa strang affect by it. It wa but a 
glance, instantli withdrawn. she made me no answer. 

"you must not be silent; you _must_ tell me what I can do for you. 
hitherto I have done nothing. all the servic is on your side. your 
convers ha been my study, a delight study, but the profit ha 
onli been mine. tell me how I can be grateful: my voic and manner, I 
believe, seldom beli my feelings." At thi time, I had almost done what 
a second thought made me suspect to be unauthorized. yet I cannot tell 
why. My heart had noth in it but rever and admiration. wa she 
not the substitut of my lost mamma? would I not have clasp that 
belov shade? yet the two be were not just the same, or I should 
not, as now, have check myself, and onli press her hand to my lips. 

"tell me," repeat I, "what can I do to serv you? I read to you a 
littl now, and you are pleas with my reading. I copi for you when you 
want the time. I guid the rein for you when you choos to ride. humbl 
offices, indeed, though, perhaps, all that a raw youth like me can do 
for you; but I can be still more assiduous. I can read sever hour in 
the day, instead of one. I can write ten time as much as now. 

"are you not my lost mamma come back again? and yet, not _exactly_ her, 
I think. someth different; someth better, I believe, if that be 
possible. At ani rate, methink I would be wholli yours. I shall be 
impati and uneasi till everi act, everi thought, everi minute, 
someway doe you good. 

"how!" said I, (her eye, still averted, seem to hold back the tear 
with difficulty, and she made a motion as if to rise,) "have I griev 
you? have I been importunate? forgiv me if I have offend you." 

her eye now overflow without restraint. she articulated, with 
difficulty, "tear are too prompt with me of late; but they did not 
upbraid you. pain ha often caus them to flow, but now 
it--is--_pleasure_." 

"what a heart must your be!" I resumed. "when suscept of such 
pleasures, what pang must formerli have rent it!--but you are not 
displeased, you say, with my importun zeal. you will accept me as 
your own in everi thing. direct me; prescrib to me. there must be 
_something_ in which I can be of still more use to you; some way in 
which I can be wholli yours----" 

"_wholli mine!_" she repeated, in a smother voice, and rising. "leav 
me, arthur. It is too late for you to be here. It wa wrong to stay so 
late." 

"I have been wrong; but how too late? I enter but thi moment. It is 
twilight still; is it not?" 

"no: it is almost twelve. you have been here a long four hours; short 
one I would rather say,--but inde you must go." 

"what made me so thoughtless of the time? but I will go, yet not till 
you forgiv me." I approach her with a confid and for a purpos at 
which, upon reflection, I am not a littl surprised; but the be 
call mervyn is not the same in her compani and in that of another. 
what is the difference, and whenc come it? her word and look engross 
me. My mind want room for ani other object. but whi inquir whenc the 
difference? the superior of her merit and attract to all those 
whom I knew would sure account for my fervour. indifference, if I 
felt it, would be the onli just occas of wonder. 

the hour was, indeed, too late, and I hasten home. steven wa wait 
my return with some anxiety. I apolog for my delay, and recount to 
him what had just passed. He listen with more than usual interest. 
when I had finished,-- 

"mervyn," said he, "you seem not be awar of your present situation. 
from what you now tell me, and from what you have formerli told me, one 
thing seem veri plain to me." 

"pr'ythee, what is it?" 

"eliza hadwin:--do you wish--could you bear--to see her the wife of 
another?" 

"five year henc I will answer you. then my answer may be, 'no; I wish 
her onli to be mine.' till then, I wish her onli to be my pupil, my 
ward, my sister." 

"but these are remot considerations; they are bar to marriage, but not 
to love. would it not molest and disquiet you to observ in her a 
passion for another?" 

"it would, but onli on her own account; not on mine. At a suitabl age 
it is veri like I may love her, becaus it is likely, if she hold on 
in her present career, she will then be worthy; but at present, though I 
would die to insur her happiness, I have no wish to insur it by 
marriag with her." 

"i there no other whom you love?" 

"no. there is one worthier than all others; one whom I wish the woman 
who shall be my wife to resembl in all things." 

"and who is thi model?" 

"you know I can onli mean achsa fielding." 

"if you love her likeness, whi not love herself?" 

I felt my heart leap.--"what a thought is that! love her I _do_ as I 
love my god; as I love virtue. To love her in anoth sens would brand 
me for a lunatic." 

"to love her as a woman, then, appear to you an act of folly." 

"in me it would be wors than folly. 'twould be frenzy." 

"and why?" 

"why? really, my friend, you astonish me. nay, you startl me--for a 
question like that impli a doubt in you whether I have not actual 
harbour the thought." 

"no," said he, smiling, "presumptu though you be, you have not, 
to-be-sure, reach so high a pitch. but still, though I think you 
innoc of so heinou an offence, there is no harm in ask whi you 
might not love her, and even seek her for a wife." 

achsa field _mi wife_! good heaven!--th veri sound threw my soul 
into unconquer tumults. "take care, my friend," continu I, in 
beseech accents, "you may do me more injuri than you conceive, by 
even start such a thought." 

"true," said he, "a long as such obstacl exist to your success; so 
mani incur objections: for instance, she is six year older than 
you." 

"that is an advantage. her age is what it ought to be." 

"but she ha been a wife and mother already." 

"that is likewis an advantage. she ha wisdom, becaus she ha 
experience. her sensibl are stronger, becaus they have been 
exercis and chastened. her first marriag wa unfortunate. the purer 
is the felic she will tast in a second! If her second choic be 
propitious, the greater her tender and gratitude." 

"but she is a foreigner; independ of control, and rich." 

"all which are bless to herself, and to him for whom her hand is 
reserved; especi if, like me, he is indigent." 

"but then she is unsightli as a _night-hag_, tawni as a moor, the eye of 
a gipsy, low in stature, contempt diminutive, scarc bulk enough 
to cast a shadow as she walks, less luxuri than a char log, fewer 
elast than a sheet pebble." 

"hush! hush! blasphemer!"--(and I put my hand befor hi mouth)--"hav I 
not told you that in mind, person, and condition, she is the type after 
which my enamour fanci ha model my wife?" 

"oh ho! then the object doe not lie with you. It lie with her, it 
seems. she can find noth in you to esteem! and, pray, for what fault 
do you think she would reject you?" 

"I cannot tell. that she can ever balanc for a moment, on such a 
question, is incredible. _me! me!_ that achsa field should think of 
me!" 

"incredible, indeed! you, who are loathsom in your person, an idiot in 
your understanding, a villain in your morals! deformed! withered! vain, 
stupid, and malignant. that such a one should choos _you_ for an idol!" 

"pray, my friend," said I, anxiously, "jest not. what mean you by a hint 
of thi kind?" 

"I will not jest, then, but will soberli inquire, what fault are they 
which make thi lady' choic of you so incredible? you are younger than 
she, though no one, who mere observ your manner and heard you talk, 
would take you to be under thirty. you are poor: are these impediments?" 

"I should think not. I have heard her reason with admir eloqu 
against the vain distinct of properti and nation and rank. they were 
onc of moment in her eyes; but the sufferings, humiliations, and 
reflect of year have cure her of the folly. her nation ha 
suffer too much by the inhuman antipathi of religi and polit 
faction; she, herself, ha felt so often the contum of the rich, 
the high-born, and the bigoted, that----" 

"pr'ythee, then, what dost imagin her object to be?" 

"why--i don't know. the thought wa so aspiring; to call her _mi wife_ 
wa a height of bliss the veri far-off view of which made my head 
dizzy." 

"A height, however, to attain which you suppos onli her consent, her 
love, to be necessary?" 

"without doubt, her love is indispensable." 

"sit down, arthur, and let us no longer treat thi matter lightly. I 
clearli see the import of thi moment to thi lady' happi and 
yours. It is plain that you love thi woman. how could you help it? A 
brilliant skin is not hers; nor eleg proportions; nor majest 
stature: yet no creatur had ever more power to bewitch. her manner 
have grace and digniti that flow from exquisit feelings, delic 
taste, and the quickest and keenest penetration. she ha the wisdom of 
men and of books. her sympathi are enforc by reason, and her 
chariti regul by knowledge. she ha a woman' age, fortun more 
than you wish, and a spotless fame. how could you fail to love her? 

"_you_, who are her chosen friend, who partak her pleasur and share 
her employments, on whom she almost exclus bestow her societi and 
confidence, and to whom she thu afford the strongest of all indirect 
proof of impass esteem,--how could you, with all that firm of 
love, join with all that discern of her excellence, how could you 
escap the enchantment? 

"you have not thought of marriage. you have not suspect your love. 
from the puriti of your mind, from the idolatri with which thi woman 
ha inspir you, you have imagin no delight beyond that of enjoy 
her societi as you now do, and have never foster a hope beyond thi 
privilege. 

"how quickli would thi tranquil vanish, and the true state of your 
heart be evinced, if a rival should enter the scene and be entertain 
with preference! then would the seal be removed, the spell be broken, 
and you would awaken to terror and to anguish. 

"of this, however, there is no danger. your passion is not felt by you 
alone. from her treatment of you, your diffid disabl you from 
seeing, but noth can be clearer to me than that she love you." 

I start on my feet. A flush of scorch heat flow to everi part of 
my frame. My templ began to throb like my heart. I wa half delirious, 
and my delirium wa strang compound of fear and hope, of delight 
and of terror. 

"what have you done, my friend? you have overturn my peac of mind. 
till now the imag of thi woman ha been follow by complac and 
sober rapture; but your word have dash the scene with dismay and 
confusion. you have rais up wishes, and dreams, and doubts, which 
possess me in spite of my reason, in spite of a thousand proofs. 

"good god! you say she loves,--lov _me_!--me, a boy in age; bred in 
clownish ignorance; scarc usher into the world; more than 
childishli unlearn and raw; a barn-door simpleton; a plough-tail, 
kitchen-hearth, turnip-ho novice! she, thu splendidli endowed; thu 
alli to nobles; thu gift with arts, and adorn with graces; that 
she should choos me, me for the partner of her fortune; her affections; 
and her life! It cannot be. yet, if it were; if your guess 
should--prove--oaf! madman! To indulg so fatal a chimera! So rash a 
dream! 

"mi friend! my friend! I feel that you have done me an irrepar 
injury. I can never more look her in the face. I can never more frequent 
her society. these new thought will beset and torment me. My disquiet 
will chain up my tongue. that overflow gratitude; that innoc joy, 
unconsci of offence, and know no restraint, which have hitherto 
been my titl to her favour, will fli from my featur and manners. I 
shall be anxious, vacant, and unhappi in her presence. I shall dread to 
look at her, or to open my lips, lest my mad and unhallow ambit 
should betray itself." 

"well," repli stevens, "thi scene is quit new. I could almost find 
it in my heart to piti you. I did not expect this; and yet, from my 
knowledg of your character, I ought, perhaps, to have foreseen it. thi 
is a necessari part of the drama. A joyou certainty, on these 
occasions, must alway be preced by suspens and doubts, and the 
close will be joyou in proport as the prelud are excruciating. Go 
to bed, my good friend, and think of this. time and a few more 
interview with mrs. field will, I doubt not, set all to rights." 




chapter xlviii. 


I went to my chamber, but what differ sensat did I carri into it 
from those with which I had left it a few hour before! I stretch 
myself on the mattress and put out the light; but the swarm of new 
imag that rush on my mind set me again instantli in motion. all wa 
rapid, vague, and undefined, weari and distract my attention. I 
wa rous as by a divin voice, that said, "sleep no more! mervyn shall 
sleep no more." 

what chiefli occupi me wa a nameless sort of terror. what shall I 
compar it to? methinks, that one fall from a tree overhang a 
torrent, plung into the whirl eddy, and gasp and struggl 
while he sink to rise no more, would feel just as I did then. nay, some 
such imag actual possess me. such wa one of my reveries, in which 
suddenli I stretch my hand, and caught the arm of a chair. thi act 
call me back to reason, or rather gave my soul opportun to roam 
into a new track equal wild. 

wa it the abrupt of thi vision that thu confound me? wa it a 
latent error in my moral constitution, which thi new conjunctur drew 
forth into influence? these were all the token of a mind lost to 
itself; bewildered; unhinged; plung into a drear insanity. 

noth less could have prompt so fantastically; for, midnight as it 
was, my chamber' solitud wa not to be supported. after a few turn 
across the floor, I left the room, and the house. I walk without 
design and in a hurri pace. I post straight to the hous of mrs. 
fielding. I lift the latch, but the door did not open. It was, no 
doubt, locked. 

"how come this?" said I, and look around me. the hour and occas 
were unthought of. habitu to thi path, I had taken it 
spontaneously. "how come this?" repeat I. "lock upon _me_! but I 
will summon them, I warrant me,"--and rung the bell, not timidli or 
slightly, but with violence. some one hasten from above. I saw the 
glimmer of a candl through the keyhole. 

"strange," thought I; "a candl at noonday!"--th door wa opened, and 
my poor bess, robe in a careless and hasti manner, appeared. she 
start at sight of me, but mere becaus she did not, in a moment, 
recognis me.--"ah! arthur, is it you? come in. My mamma ha want you 
these two hours. I wa just go to despatch philip to tell you to 
come." 

"lead me to her," said I. 

she led the way into the parlour.--"wait a moment here; I will tell her 
you are come;"--and she trip away. 

present a step wa heard. the door open again, and then enter a 
man. He wa tall, elegant, sedat to a degre of sadness; someth in 
hi dress and aspect that bespok the foreigner, the frenchman. 

"what," said he, mildly, "i your busi with my wife? she cannot see 
you instantly, and ha sent me to receiv your commands." 

"your _wife_! I want mrs. fielding." 

"true; and mrs. field is my wife. thank heaven, I have come in time 
to discov her, and claim her as such." 

I start back. I shuddered. My joint slackened, and I stretch my 
hand to catch someth by which I might be save from sink on the 
floor. meanwhile, field chang hi counten into rage and fury. 
He call me villain! bade me avaunt! and drew a shine steel from hi 
bosom, with which he stab me to the heart. I sunk upon the floor, and 
all, for a time, wa dark and oblivion! At length, I return as it 
were to life. I open my eyes. the mist disappeared, and I found 
myself stretch upon the bed in my own chamber. I rememb the fatal 
blow I had received. I put my hand upon my breast; the spot where the 
dagger entered. there were no trace of a wound. all wa perfect and 
entire. some miracl had made me whole. 

I rais myself up. I re-examin my body. all around me wa hushed, 
till a voic from the pavement below proclaim that it wa "past three 
o'clock." 

"what!" said I; "ha all thi miser pageantry, thi midnight 
wandering, and thi omin interview, been no more than--_a dream_?" 

It may be proper to mention, in explan of thi scene, and to show 
the thorough perturb of my mind dure thi night, intellig 
gain some day after from eliza. she said, that about two o'clock, on 
thi night, she wa rous by a violent ring of the bell. she wa 
startl by so unseason a summons. she slept in a chamber adjoin 
mrs. fielding's, and hesit whether she should alarm her friend; but, 
the summon not be repeated, she had determin to forbear. 

ad to this, wa the report of mrs. stevens, who, on the same night, 
about half an hour after I and her husband had retired, imagin that 
she heard the street door open and shut; but, thi be follow by 
no other consequence, she suppos herself mistaken. I have littl doubt 
that, in my feverish and troubl sleep, I actual went forth, post 
to the hous of mrs. fielding, rung for admission, and shortli after 
return to my own apartment. 

thi confus of mind wa somewhat allay by the return of light. It 
gave way to more uniform but not less rueful and despond perceptions. 
the imag of achsa fill my fancy, but it wa the harbing of noth 
but humili and sorrow. To outroot the convict of my own 
unworthiness, to persuad myself that I wa regard with the tender 
that steven had ascrib to her, that the discoveri of my thought 
would not excit her anger and grief, I felt to be impossible. 

In thi state of mind, I could not see her. To declar my feel would 
produc indign and anguish; to hide them from her scrutini wa not 
in my power; yet, what would she think of my estrang myself from her 
society? what expedi could I honestli adopt to justifi my absence, 
and what employ could I substitut for those preciou hour 
hitherto devot to her? 

"_this_ afternoon," thought I, "she ha been invit to spend at 
stedman' country-hous on schuylkill. she consent to go, and I wa to 
accompani her. I am fit onli for solitude. My behaviour, in her 
presence, will be enigmatical, capricious, and morose. I must not go: 
yet what will she think of my failure? not to go will be injuri and 
suspicious." 

I wa undetermined. the appoint hour arrived. I stood at my 
chamber-window, torn by a varieti of purposes, and sway altern by 
repugn arguments. I sever time went to the door of my apartment, 
and put my foot upon the first step of the staircase, but as often 
paused, reconsidered, and return to my room. 

In these fluctuat the hour passed. No messeng arriv from mrs. 
fielding, inquir into the caus of my delay. wa she offend at my 
negligence? wa she sick and disabl from going, or had she chang her 
mind? I now rememb her part word at our last interview. were 
they not suscept of two constructions? she said my visit wa too 
long, and bade me begone. did she suspect my presumption, and is she 
determin thu to punish me? 

thi terror ad anew to all my former anxieties. It wa imposs to 
rest in thi suspense. I would go to her; I would lay befor her all the 
anguish of my heart; I would not spare myself. she shall not reproach me 
more sever than I will reproach myself. I will hear my sentenc from 
her own lips, and promis unlimit submiss to the doom of separ 
and exil which she will pronounce. 

I went forth to her house. the drawing-room and summer-hous were empty. 
I summon philip the footman: hi mistress wa gone to mr. stedman's. 

"how?--to stedman's?--in whose company?" 

"miss stedman and her brother call for her in the carriage, and 
persuad her to go with them." 

now my heart sunk, indeed! miss stedman' _brother_! A youth, forward, 
gallant, and gay! flush with prosperity, and just return from 
europe, with all the confid of age, and all the ornament of 
education! she ha gone with him, though pre-engag to me! poor arthur, 
how art thou despised! 

thi inform onli heighten my impatience. I went away, but 
return in the evening. I wait till eleven, but she came not back. I 
cannot justli paint the interv that pass till next morning. It wa 
void of sleep. On leav her house, I wander into the fields. everi 
moment increas my impatience. "she will probabl spend the morrow at 
stedman's," said I, "and possibl the next day. whi should I wait for 
her return? whi not seek her there, and rid myself at onc of thi 
agon suspense? whi not go thither now? thi night, wherev I spend 
it, will be unacquaint with repose. I will go; it is alreadi near 
twelve, and the distanc is more than eight miles. I will hover near the 
hous till morning, and then, as earli as possible, demand an 
interview." 

I wa well acquaint with stedman' villa, have formerli been there 
with mrs. fielding. I quickli enter it precincts. I went close to the 
house; look mourn at everi window. At one of them a light wa to 
be seen, and I took variou station to discover, if possible, the 
person within. methought onc I caught a glimps of a female, whom my 
fanci easili imagin to be achsa. I sat down upon the lawn, some 
hundr feet from the house, and opposit the window whenc the light 
proceeded. I watch it, till at length some one came to the window, 
lift it, and, lean on her arms, continu to look out. 

the preced day had been a veri sultri one: the night, as usual after 
such a day and the fall of a violent shower, wa delight seren and 
pleasant. where I stood wa enlighten by the moon. whether she saw me 
or not, I could hardli tell, or whether she distinguish ani thing but 
a human figure. 

without reflect on what wa due to decorum and punctilio, I 
immedi drew near the house. I quickli perceiv that her attent 
wa fixed. neither of us spoke, till I had place myself directli under 
her; I then open my lips, without know in what manner to address 
her. she spoke first, and in a startl and anxiou voice:-- 

"who is that?" 

"arthur mervyn; he that wa two day ago your friend." 

"mervyn! what is it that bring you here at thi hour? what is the 
matter? what ha happened? Is anybodi sick?" 

"all is safe; all are in good health." 

"what then do you come hither for at such an hour?" 

"I meant not to disturb you; I meant not to be seen." 

"good heavens! how you frighten me! what can be the reason of so 
strange----" 

"be not alarmed. I meant to hover near the hous till morning, that I 
might see you as earli as possible." 

"for what purpose?" 

"I will tell you when we meet, and let that be at five o'clock; the sun 
will then be risen; in the cedar-grov under the bank; till when, 
farewell." 

have said this, I prevent all expostulation, by turn the angl of 
the house, and hasten toward the shore of the river. I rove about 
the grove that I have mentioned. In one part of it is a rustic seat and 
table, shroud by tree and shrubs, and an interven eminence, from 
the view of those in the house. thi I design to be the close scene 
of my destiny. 

present I left thi spot, and wander upward through embarrass and 
obscur paths, start forward or check my pace, accord as my 
wayward medit govern me. shall I describ my thoughts? 
impossible! It wa certainli a temporari loss of reason; noth less 
than mad could lead into such deviou tracks, drag me down to so 
hopeless, helpless, panic a depth, and drag me down so suddenly; lay 
waste, as at a signal, all my flourish structures, and reduc them in 
a moment to a scene of confus and horror. 

what did I fear? what did I hope? what did I design? I cannot tell; my 
gloom were to retir with the night. the point to which everi 
tumultu feel wa link wa the come interview with achsa. that 
wa the boundari of fluctuat and suspense. here wa the seal and 
ratif of my doom. 

I rent a passag through the thicket, and struggl upward till I 
reach the edg of a consider precipice; I laid me down at my 
length upon the rock, whose cold and hard surfac I press with my 
bare and throb breast. I lean over the edge; fix my eye upon 
the water and wept--plentifully; but why? 

may _this_ be my heart' last beat, if I can tell why? 

I had wander so far from stedman's, that, when rous by the light, I 
had some mile to walk befor I could reach the place of meeting. achsa 
wa alreadi there. I slid down the rock above, and appear befor her. 
well might she be startl at my wild and abrupt appearance. 

I place myself, without utter a word, upon a seat opposit to her, 
the tabl between, and, cross my arm upon the table, lean my head 
upon them, while my face wa turn toward and my eye fix upon hers. 
I seem to have lost the power and the inclin to speak. 

she regard me, at first, with anxiou curiosity; after examin my 
looks, everi emot wa swallow up in terrifi sorrow. "for god' 
sake!--what doe all thi mean? whi am I call to thi place? what 
tidings, what fear tidings, do you bring?" 

I did not chang my postur or speak. "what," she resumed, "could 
inspir all thi woe? keep me not in thi suspense, arthur; these look 
and thi silenc shock and afflict me too much." 

"afflict you?" said I, at last; "I come to tell you what, now that I am 
here, I cannot tell----" there I stopped. 

"say what, I entreat you. you seem to be veri unhappy--such a 
change--from yesterday!" 

"yes! from yesterday; all then wa a joyou calm, and now all is--but 
then I knew not my infamy, my guilt----" 

"what word are these, and from you, arthur? guilt is to you impossible. 
If puriti is to be found on earth, it is lodg in your heart. what have 
you done?" 

"I have dared--how littl you expect the extent of my daring! that such 
as I should look upward with thi ambition." 

I stood up, and take her hand in mine, as she sat, look earnestli 
in her face:--"i come onli to beseech your pardon. To tell you my crime, 
and then disappear forever; but first let me see if there be ani omen of 
forgiveness. your looks--they are kind; heavenly; compassion still. I 
will trust them, I believe; and yet" (let go her hands, and turn 
away) "thi offenc is beyond the reach even of _your_ mercy." 

"how beyond measur these word and thi deport distress me! let me 
know the worst; I cannot bear to be thu perplexed." 

"why," said I, turn quickli round and again take her hands, "that 
mervyn, whom you have honour and confid in, and bless with your 
sweet regards, ha been----" 

"what ha he been? divin amiable, heroic in hi virtue, I am sure. 
what els ha he been?" 

"thi mervyn ha imagined, ha dared--wil you forgiv him?" 

"forgiv you what? whi don't you speak? keep not my soul in thi 
suspense." 

"he ha dared--but do not think that I am he. continu to look as now, 
and reserv your kill glances, the vengeanc of those eyes, as for 
one that is absent.----why, what--you weep, then, at last. that is a 
propiti sign. when piti drop from the eye of our judge, then should 
the suppliant approach. now, in confid of pardon, I will tell you; 
thi mervyn, not content with all you have hitherto grant him, ha 
dared--to _love_ you; nay, to think of you as of _hi wife_!" 

her eye sunk beneath mine, and, disengag her hands, she cover her 
face with them. 

"I see my fate," said I, in a tone of despair. "too well did I predict 
the effect of thi confession; but I will go--_and unforgiven_." 

she now partli uncov her face. the hand wa withdrawn from her 
cheek, and stretch toward me. she look at me. 

"arthur! I _do_ forgiv thee."--with what accent wa thi uttered! with 
what looks! the cheek that wa befor pale with terror wa now crimson 
over by a differ emotion, and delight swam in her eye. 

could I mistake? My doubts, my new-born fears, made me trembl while I 
took the offer hand. 

"surely," falter I, "I am not--i cannot be--so blessed." 

there wa no need of words. the hand that I held wa suffici 
eloquent. she wa still silent. 

"surely," said I, "mi sens deceiv me. A bliss like thi cannot be 
reserv for me. tell me onc more--set my doubt heart at rest." 

she now gave herself to my arms:--"i have not words--let your own heart 
tell you, you have made your achsa----" 

At thi moment, a voic from without (it wa miss stedman's) called, 
"mrs. fielding! where are you?" 

My friend start up, and, in a hasti voice, bade me begone. "you must 
not be seen by thi giddi girl. come hither thi evening, as if by my 
appointment, and I will return with you."--sh left me in a kind of 
trance. I wa immovable. My reveri wa too delicious;--but let me not 
attempt the picture. If I can convey no imag of my state previou to 
thi interview, my subsequ feel are still more beyond the reach 
of my power to describe. 

agreeabl to the command of my mistress, I hasten away, evad path 
which might expos me to observation. I speedili made my friend partak 
of my joy, and pass the day in a state of solemn but confus rapture. 
I did not accur portray the variou part of my felicity. the whole 
rush upon my soul at once. My concept were too rapid and too 
comprehens to be distinct. 

I went to stedman' in the evening. I found in the accent and look of 
my achsa new assur that all which had late pass wa more than a 
dream. she made excus for leav the stedman sooner than ordinary, 
and wa accompani to the citi by her friend. We drop mrs. field 
at her own house, and thither, after accompani miss stedman to her 
own home, I return upon the wing of tremul impatience. 

now could I repeat everi word of everi convers that ha sinc taken 
place between us; but whi should I do that on paper? indeed, it could 
not be done. all is of equal value, and all could not be compris but 
in mani volumes. there need noth more deepli to imprint it on my 
memory; and, while thu review the past, I should be iniquit 
neglect the present. what is given to the pen would be taken from 
her; and that, indeed, would be--but no need of say what it would be, 
sinc it is impossible. 

I mere write to allay these tumult which our necessari separ 
produces; to aid me in call up a littl patienc till the time 
arriv when our persons, like our minds, shall be unit forever. that 
time--may noth happen to prevent--but noth can happen. but whi 
thi omin misgiv just now? My love ha infect me with these 
unworthi terrors, for she ha them too. 

thi morn I wa relat my dream to her. she started, and grew pale. 
A sad silenc ensu the cheer that had reign before:--"whi 
thu dejected, my friend?" 

"I hate your dream. It is a horrid thought. would to god it had never 
occur to you!" 

"why, surely, you place no confid in dreams?" 

"I know not where to place confidence; not in my present promis of 
joy,"--and she wept. I endeavour to sooth or consol her. why, I 
asked, did she weep? 

"mi heart is sore. former disappoint were so heavy; the hope which 
were blast were so like my present ones, that the dread of a like 
result will intrud upon my thoughts. and now your dream! indeed, I know 
not what to do. I believ I ought still to retract--ought, at least, to 
postpon an act so irrevocable." 

now wa I oblig again to go over my catalogu of argument to induc 
her to confirm her propiti resolut to be mine within the week. I, 
at last, succeeded, even in restor her serenity, and beguil her 
fear by dwell on our futur happiness. 

our household, while we stay in america,--in a year or two we hie to 
europe,--should be _thus_ composed. fidelity, and skill, and pure 
morals, should be sought out, and enticed, by gener recompenses, into 
our domest service. duti which should be light and regular.--such 
and such should be our amus and employ abroad and at home: 
and would not thi be true happiness? 

"oh yes--if it may be so." 

"it shall be so; but thi is but the humbl outlin of the scene; 
someth is still to be ad to complet our felicity." 

"what more can be added?" 

"what more? can achsa ask what more? she who ha not been _only_ a 
wife----" 

but whi am I indulg thi pen-prattle? the hour she fix for my 
return to her is come, and now take thyself away, quill. lie there, snug 
in thi leathern case, till I call for thee, and that will not be veri 
soon. I believ I will abjur thi compani till all is settl with my 
love. yes; I _will_ abjur thee; so let _this_ be thi last office, till 
mervyn ha been made the happiest of men. 


the end. 






end of the project gutenberg ebook of arthur mervyn, by charl brockden brown 

*** end OF thi project gutenberg ebook arthur mervyn *** 

***** thi file should be name 18508-8.txt or 18508-8.zip ***** 
thi and all associ file of variou format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/1/8/5/0/18508/ 

produc by graem mackreth and the onlin distribut 
proofread team at http://www.pgdp.net 


updat edit will replac the previou one--th old edit 
will be renamed. 

creat the work from public domain print edit mean that no 
one own a unit state copyright in these works, so the foundat 
(and you!) can copi and distribut it in the unit state without 
permiss and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the gener term of use part of thi license, appli to 
copi and distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a regist trademark, and may not be use if you 
charg for the ebooks, unless you receiv specif permission. If you 
do not charg anyth for copi of thi ebook, compli with the 
rule is veri easy. you may use thi ebook for nearli ani purpos 
such as creation of deriv works, reports, perform and 
research. they may be modifi and print and given away--y may do 
practic anyth with public domain ebooks. redistribut is 
subject to the trademark license, especi commerci 
redistribution. 



*** start: full licens *** 

the full project gutenberg licens 
pleas read thi befor you distribut OR use thi work 

To protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promot the free 
distribut of electron works, by use or distribut thi work 
(or ani other work associ in ani way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agre to compli with all the term of the full project 
gutenberg-tm licens (avail with thi file or onlin at 
http://gutenberg.org/license). 


section 1. gener term of use and redistribut project gutenberg-tm 
electron work 

1.a. By read or use ani part of thi project gutenberg-tm 
electron work, you indic that you have read, understand, agre to 
and accept all the term of thi licens and intellectu properti 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agre to abid by all 
the term of thi agreement, you must ceas use and return or destroy 
all copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in your possession. 
If you paid a fee for obtain a copi of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work and you do not agre to be bound by the 
term of thi agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entiti to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a regist trademark. It may onli be 
use on or associ in ani way with an electron work by peopl who 
agre to be bound by the term of thi agreement. there are a few 
thing that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electron work 
even without compli with the full term of thi agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of thing you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electron work if you follow the term of thi agreement 
and help preserv free futur access to project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compil copyright in the collect of project 
gutenberg-tm electron works. nearli all the individu work in the 
collect are in the public domain in the unit states. If an 
individu work is in the public domain in the unit state and you are 
locat in the unit states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or creat deriv 
work base on the work as long as all refer to project gutenberg 
are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promot free access to electron work by 
freeli share project gutenberg-tm work in complianc with the term of 
thi agreement for keep the project gutenberg-tm name associ with 
the work. you can easili compli with the term of thi agreement by 
keep thi work in the same format with it attach full project 
gutenberg-tm licens when you share it without charg with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are locat also govern 
what you can do with thi work. copyright law in most countri are in 
a constant state of change. If you are outsid the unit states, check 
the law of your countri in addit to the term of thi agreement 
befor downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribut or 
creat deriv work base on thi work or ani other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundat make no represent concern 
the copyright statu of ani work in ani countri outsid the unit 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remov all refer to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the follow sentence, with activ link to, or other immedi 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm licens must appear promin 
whenev ani copi of a project gutenberg-tm work (ani work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copi or distributed: 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.org 

1.e.2. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is deriv 
from the public domain (doe not contain a notic indic that it is 
post with permiss of the copyright holder), the work can be copi 
and distribut to anyon in the unit state without pay ani fee 
or charges. If you are redistribut or provid access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associ with or appear on the 
work, you must compli either with the requir of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permiss for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is post 
with the permiss of the copyright holder, your use and distribut 
must compli with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and ani addit 
term impos by the copyright holder. addit term will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm licens for all work post with the 
permiss of the copyright holder found at the begin of thi work. 

1.e.4. Do not unlink or detach or remov the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens term from thi work, or ani file contain a part of thi 
work or ani other work associ with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribut or redistribut thi 
electron work, or ani part of thi electron work, without 
promin display the sentenc set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
activ link or immedi access to the full term of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribut thi work in ani binary, 
compressed, mark up, nonproprietari or proprietari form, includ ani 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provid access to or 
distribut copi of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the offici version 
post on the offici project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org), 
you must, at no addit cost, fee or expens to the user, provid a 
copy, a mean of export a copy, or a mean of obtain a copi upon 
request, of the work in it origin "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. ani altern format must includ the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens as specifi in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. Do not charg a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copi or distribut ani project gutenberg-tm work 
unless you compli with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charg a reason fee for copi of or provid 
access to or distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work provid 
that 

- you pay a royalti fee of 20% of the gross profit you deriv from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm work calcul use the method 
you alreadi use to calcul your applic taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
ha agre to donat royalti under thi paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literari archiv foundation. royalti payment 
must be paid within 60 day follow each date on which you 
prepar (or are legal requir to prepare) your period tax 
returns. royalti payment should be clearli mark as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat at the 
address specifi in section 4, "inform about donat to 
the project gutenberg literari archiv foundation." 

- you provid a full refund of ani money paid by a user who notifi 
you in write (or by e-mail) within 30 day of receipt that s/he 
doe not agre to the term of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must requir such a user to return or 
destroy all copi of the work possess in a physic medium 
and discontinu all use of and all access to other copi of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accord with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of ani 
money paid for a work or a replac copy, if a defect in the 
electron work is discov and report to you within 90 day 
of receipt of the work. 

- you compli with all other term of thi agreement for free 
distribut of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. If you wish to charg a fee or distribut a project gutenberg-tm 
electron work or group of work on differ term than are set 
forth in thi agreement, you must obtain permiss in write from 
both the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundat as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunt and employe expend consider 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcrib and proofread 
public domain work in creat the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despit these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electron 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limit to, incomplete, inaccur or 
corrupt data, transcript errors, a copyright or other intellectu 
properti infringement, a defect or damag disk or other medium, a 
comput virus, or comput code that damag or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limit warranty, disclaim OF damag - except for the "right 
of replac or refund" describ in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and ani other parti distribut a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work under thi agreement, disclaim all 
liabil to you for damages, cost and expenses, includ legal 
fees. you agre that you have NO remedi for negligence, strict 
liability, breach OF warranti OR breach OF contract except those 
provid IN paragraph f3. you agre that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and ani distributor under thi agreement will not BE 
liabl TO you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punit OR 
incident damag even IF you give notic OF the possibl OF such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limit right OF replac OR refund - If you discov a 
defect in thi electron work within 90 day of receiv it, you can 
receiv a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explan to the person you receiv the work from. If you 
receiv the work on a physic medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entiti that provid you with 
the defect work may elect to provid a replac copi in lieu of a 
refund. If you receiv the work electronically, the person or entiti 
provid it to you may choos to give you a second opportun to 
receiv the work electron in lieu of a refund. If the second copi 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in write without further 
opportun to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limit right of replac or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, thi work is provid to you 'as-is', with NO other 
warranti OF ani kind, express OR implied, includ but not limit TO 
warranti OF merchant OR fit for ani purpose. 

1.f.5. some state do not allow disclaim of certain impli 
warranti or the exclus or limit of certain type of damages. 
If ani disclaim or limit set forth in thi agreement violat the 
law of the state applic to thi agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaim or limit permit by 
the applic state law. the invalid or unenforc of ani 
provis of thi agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemn - you agre to indemnifi and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, ani agent or employe of the foundation, anyon 
provid copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in accord 
with thi agreement, and ani volunt associ with the production, 
promot and distribut of project gutenberg-tm electron works, 
harmless from all liability, cost and expenses, includ legal fees, 
that aris directli or indirectli from ani of the follow which you do 
or caus to occur: (a) distribut of thi or ani project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addit or delet to ani 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) ani defect you cause. 


section 2. inform about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonym with the free distribut of 
electron work in format readabl by the widest varieti of comput 
includ obsolete, old, middle-ag and new computers. It exist 
becaus of the effort of hundr of volunt and donat from 
peopl in all walk of life. 

volunt and financi support to provid volunt with the 
assist they need, is critic to reach project gutenberg-tm' 
goal and ensur that the project gutenberg-tm collect will 
remain freeli avail for gener to come. In 2001, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundat wa creat to provid a secur 
and perman futur for project gutenberg-tm and futur generations. 
To learn more about the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat 
and how your effort and donat can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundat web page at http://www.pglaf.org. 


section 3. inform about the project gutenberg literari archiv 
foundat 

the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educ corpor organ under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt statu by the intern 
revenu service. the foundation' ein or feder tax identif 
number is 64-6221541. it 501(c)(3) letter is post at 
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contribut to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. feder law and your state' laws. 

the foundation' princip offic is locat at 4557 melan dr. S. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but it volunt and employe are scatter 
throughout numer locations. it busi offic is locat at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact link and up to date contact 
inform can be found at the foundation' web site and offici 
page at http://pglaf.org 

for addit contact information: 
dr. gregori B. newbi 
chief execut and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 

section 4. inform about donat to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot surviv without wide 
spread public support and donat to carri out it mission of 
increas the number of public domain and licens work that can be 
freeli distribut in machin readabl form access by the widest 
array of equip includ outdat equipment. mani small donat 
($1 to $5,000) are particularli import to maintain tax exempt 
statu with the irs. 

the foundat is commit to compli with the law regul 
chariti and charit donat in all 50 state of the unit 
states. complianc requir are not uniform and it take a 
consider effort, much paperwork and mani fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. We do not solicit donat in locat 
where we have not receiv written confirm of compliance. To 
send donat or determin the statu of complianc for ani 
particular state visit http://pglaf.org 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribut from state where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibit 
against accept unsolicit donat from donor in such state who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

intern donat are grate accepted, but we cannot make 
ani statement concern tax treatment of donat receiv from 
outsid the unit states. u.s. law alon swamp our small staff. 

pleas check the project gutenberg web page for current donat 
method and addresses. donat are accept in a number of other 
way includ checks, onlin payment and credit card 
donations. To donate, pleas visit: http://pglaf.org/don 


section 5. gener inform about project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. 

professor michael S. hart is the origin of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a librari of electron work that could be freeli share 
with anyone. for thirti years, he produc and distribut project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with onli a loos network of volunt support. 

project gutenberg-tm ebook are often creat from sever print 
editions, all of which are confirm as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notic is included. thus, we do not necessarili 
keep ebook in complianc with ani particular paper edition. 

most peopl start at our web site which ha the main PG search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.org 

thi web site includ inform about project gutenberg-tm, 
includ how to make donat to the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundation, how to help produc our new ebooks, and how to 
subscrib to our email newslett to hear about new ebooks. 

*** end: full licens *** 
