the project gutenberg ebook of anim ghosts, by elliott o'donnel 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.org 


title: anim ghost 
or, anim haunt and the hereaft 

author: elliott o'donnel 

releas date: april 23, 2006 [ebook #18233] 

language: english 


*** start OF thi project gutenberg ebook anim ghost *** 




produc by barbara tozier, graem mackreth and the onlin 
distribut proofread team at http://www.pgdp.net 






anim ghost 

or, 

anim haunt and the hereaft 

BY elliott o'donnel 

author OF 

"the sorceri club," "werwolves," "byway OF ghostland," "scottish 
ghosts," "haunt hous OF london," "haunt hous OF england and 
wales," "dream and their meanings," "for satan' sake," "the unknown 
depths," "dinevah the beautiful," "jenni barlowe," "ghostli phenomena," 
"mrs. e.m. ward' reminiscences," etc. etc. 

london 

william rider & son, ltd. 
cathedr house, paternost row, e.c. 
1913 

_first publish november, 1913._ 




prefac 

If human beings, with all their vices, have a futur life, assuredli 
animals, who in charact so often equal, nay, excel human beings, have 
a futur life also. 

those who in the scriptur find a key to all things, can find noth 
in them to confut thi argument. there is no say of christ that 
justifi one in suppos that man is the onli being, whose exist 
extend beyond the grave. 

granted, however, mere for the sake of argument, that we have some 
ground for the denial of a futur exist for animals, consid the 
injustic such a denial would involve. take, for example, the case of 
the horse. harm no one, and without thought of reward, it toil for 
man all it life, and when too old to work it is put to death without 
even the compens of a well-earn rest. but if compens be 
god' law,--a I, for one, believ it to be--and also the _raison 
d'être_ of a hereafter, then sure the creator, whose chief claim to 
our respect and vener lie in the fact that He is just and 
merciful, will take good care that the horse--th gentle, patient, 
never-complain horse--i well compensated--compens in a golden 
hereafter. 

consid again, the case of anoth of our four-foot friends--th dog; 
the faithful, affectionate, obedi and forgiv dog, the dog who is 
so often call upon to stand all sort of rough treatment, and is shot 
or poisoned, if, provok beyond endurance, he at last round on hi 
persecutors, and bites. and the cat--th timid, peac cat who is 
mauled, and all but pull in two by cruel children, and beaten to a 
jelli when in sheer agoni and fright it scratches. reflect again, on the 
cow and the sheep, fed onli to suppli our wants; shout at and kicked, 
if, when nearli scare out of their senses, they wander off the track; 
and pole-axed, or done to death in some equal atroci manner when 
the sicken demand for flesh food is at it height. 

and yet, you say, these innocent, unoffending--and, I say, 
martyred--anim are to have no future, no compensation. monstrous! 
absurd! It is an effronteri to common sense, philosophy--anything, 
everything. It is a damn lie, damn bigotry, damn nonsense. the 
whole anim world will live again; and it will be man--spoilt, 
presumptuous, degener man--who will not particip in anoth life, 
unless he veri much improves. 

think well over this,--you who preach the gospel of man' 
pre-eminence;--y who prate of god and know noth whatsoev about 
him! the horse, dog, cat,--even the wild animals, whose vices, 
perchance, pale besid your own, may go to heaven befor you. the 
suprem architect is neither a nero, nor a stuart, nor a clown. He will 
recompens all who deserv recompense, be they great or small--bip or 
quadruped. 

It is to testifi to a futur exist for anim and to creat a wider 
interest in it that I have undertaken to compil thi book; and my 
object, I think, can best be achiev in my own way, the way of the 
investig of haunt places. the mere fact that there are 
manifest of "dead" peopl (pardon the paradox) prove some kind of 
life after death for human beings; and happili the same proof is 
avail with regard a futur life for animals; inde there are as 
mani anim phantasm as human--perhap more; hence, if the human be 
live again, so do hi dumb friends. 

Be comfort then, you who love your pets, and have been kind to them. 
you will see them all again, on the soft undi pastur land of your 
elysium and theirs. 

Be warned, you--you who have despis animals, and have been cruel to 
them. who know but that, in your futur life, you may be as they are 
now--in subjection? 

* * * * * 

My task in write thi book ha been consider lighten by the 
extrem courtesi and kind of mr. shirley, mr. eveleigh nash, and the 
proprietor of the _review of reviews_, in allow me to make use of 
extract and quotat from their most valuabl works. 

elliott o'donnell. 




content 


part I 


chapter I 

cat 

page 

the black cat of the old manor house, oxenby--correspond _re_ cat 
phantasms--th headless cat of no. ----, lower seedley road, seedley, 
manchester--th cat on the post--myst properti of cat 3 


chapter II 

dog 

the case of jame durham--th grey dog of ---- house, birmingham--th 
dog in the cupboard--how the ghost of a dog save life--a precentor' 
adventure--phantom dog seen on souter fell--th jump ghost--dog seen 
befor a death--a dog scare by a canin ghost--th phantom dachshund of 
w---- street, london, w.--an all hallow eve ghost--th strang 
disappear of mr. jeremiah dance--phantasm of live dogs--th 
yellow dog of k---- university--n ghost in the form of dogs--th 
mauth doog--spectr hound 57 


chapter iii 

hors and the unknown 

A phantom cavalcade--th miller on the grey horse--a phantom hors 
and rider--th white hors of eastover--th afrikander' story--herald 
of death--phantom coach in u.s.a.--a stori from marseilles--summari of 
horses--phantasm of live horses--hors and the psychic faculti of 
scent--phantom policeman and horse--phantom huntsmen and hors 139 


chapter IV 

bulls, cows, pigs, etc. 

the kirk-grim--phantasm of a goat--phantom hog of the moat 
grange--sheep--spectr flock of sheep in germani 212 


part II 


chapter V 

wild anim and the unknown 

anim phantasm and the moon--th case of martin tristram--phantasm of 
cat and ape--haunt by a white rabbit--john wesley' ghost--psych 
faculti in hare and rabbit 223 


chapter VI 

inhabit OF the jungl 

elephants, lions, tigers, etc.--th white tiger--jungl anim and 
psychic faculti 254 


part iii 


chapter vii 

bird and the unknown 


case from _occult review_--bird haunt in russia--haunt in 
the countri church--capt. morgan' experiences--addenda--old author 
on bird omen 273 


chapter viii 

A brief retrospect 300 


part I 

domest anim and their associ with the unknown 




anim ghost 




chapter I 

cat 


In open thi volum on anim and their associ with the 
unknown, I will commenc with a case of haunt in the old manor 
house, at oxenby. 

My inform wa a mrs. hartnoll, whom I can see in my mind' eye, as 
distinctli as if I were look at her now. her wa a person that 
no laps of time, noth could efface; a person that made itself 
felt on boy of all temperaments, most of all, of course, on those 
who--lik myself--wer highli strung and sensitive. 

she wa classic mistress at l.'s, the then well-known dame school in 
clifton, where for three years--prior to migrat to a public school--i 
wa well ground in all the mystic of kennedy' latin primer and 
smith' first greek principia. 

I doubt if she got anyth more than a veri small salary--gov 
in those day were shockingli remunerated--and I know,--poor soul, she 
had to work monstrous hard. drum latin and greek into head as 
thick as our wa no easi task. 

but there were times, when the excess tension on the nerv prove 
too much, mrs. hartnol stole a littl relaxation; when she allow 
herself to chat with us, and even to smile--heavens! those smiles! and 
when--i can feel the tingl of my puls at the bare mention of 
it--sh spoke about herself, state she had onc been young--a 
declar so astounding, so utterli beyond our comprehension, that we 
were render quit speechless--and told us anecdotes. 

Of mani of her narr I have no recollection, but one or two, which 
interest me more than the rest, are almost as fresh in my mind as when 
recounted. the one that appeal to me most, and which I have everi 
reason to believ is absolut true,[1] is as follows:--i give it as 
nearli as I can in her own somewhat stilt style:-- 

"up to the age of nineteen, I resid with my parent in the manor 
house, oxenby. It wa an old building, date back, I believe, to the 
reign of edward vi, and had origin serv as the resid of nobl 
families. built, or, rather, face with split flints, and edg and 
buttress with cut grey stone, it had a majest though veri gloomi 
appearance, and seen from afar resembl noth so much as a huge and 
grotesqu decor sarcophagus. In the centr of it frown and 
menac front wa the devic of a cat, construct out of black 
shingles, and have white shingl for the eyes; the effect be 
curious realistic, especi on moonlight nights, when anyth more 
lifelik and sinist could scarc have been conceived. the artist, 
whoever he was, had a more than human knowledg of cats--h portray 
not mere their bodi but their souls. 

[footnot 1: I have subsequ met sever peopl who experienc the 
same phenomena in the house, which wa stand a short time ago.] 

"in style the front of the hous wa somewhat castellated. two 
semicircular bows, or half towers, place at a suitabl distanc from 
each other, rose from the base to the summit of the edifice, to the 
height of four or five stairs; and were pierced, at everi floor, with 
row of stone-mullion windows. the flat wall between had larger 
windows, light the great hall, gallery, and upper apartments. these 
window were wholli compos of stain glass, engrav with everi 
imagin fantast design--imps, satyrs, dragons, witches, 
queer-shap trees, hands, eyes, circles, triangl and cats. 

"the towers, half includ in the building, were complet circular 
within, and contain the wind stair of the mansion; and whoever 
ascend them when a storm wa rage seem rise by a whirlwind to 
the clouds. 

"in the upper room even the wildest scream of the hurrican were 
drown in the rattl clamour of the assault casements. when a gale 
of wind took the build in front, it rock it to the foundations, 
and, at such times, threaten it instant demolition. 

"midway between the tower there stood forth a heavi stone porch with a 
gothic gateway, surmount by a battlement parapet, made gabl 
fashion, the apex of which wa garnish by a pair of dolphins, rampant 
and antagonistic, whose corkscrew tail seem contorted--especi at 
night--bi the last agoni of rage convulsed. the porch door stood 
open, except in tremend weather; the inner one were regularli shut 
and bar after all who entered. they led into a wide vault and lofti 
hall, the wall of which were decor with fade tapestry, that rose, 
and fell, and rustl in the most mysteri fashion everi time there 
wa the suspicion--and often bare the suspicion--of a breeze. 

"interspers with the tapestry--and in great contrast to it 
antiquity--wer quit modern and veri ordinari portrait of my family. 
the gener fit and furniture, both of the hall and house, were 
sombr and handsome--truss-beams, corbels, girder and panel were of 
the blackest oak; and the gener effect of all this, augmented, if 
anything, by the windows, which were too high and narrow to admit of 
much light, wa much the same as that produc by the interior of a 
subterranean chapel or charnel house. 

"from the hall proceed doorway and passages, more than my memori can 
now particularize. Of these portals, one at each end conduct to the 
tower stairs, other to recept room and domest offices. 

"the whole of the hous be too larg for us, onli one wing--th right 
and newer of the two--wa occupied, the other wa unfurnished, and 
gener shut up. I say gener becaus there were time when either 
my mother or father--th servant never ventur there--forgot to lock 
the doors, and the handl yield to my dare fingers, I 
surreptiti crept in. 

"everywhere--even in daylight, even on the sunniest of mornings--wer 
dark shadow that hung around the ingl and recess of the rooms, the 
deep cupboards, the passages, and silent, wind staircases. 

"there wa one corridor--long, low, vaulted--wher these shadow 
assembl in particular. I can see them now, as I saw them then, as they 
have come to me mani time in my dreams, group about the doorways, 
flit to and fro on the bare, dismal boards, and congreg in 
menac cluster at the head of the sepulchr staircas lead to the 
cellars. generally, and except at time when the weather wa 
particularli violent, the silenc here wa so emphat that I could 
never feel it wa altogeth natural, but rather that it wa assum 
especi for my benefit--to intimid me. If I moved, if I coughed, 
almost if I breathed, the whole passag wa fill with hoars 
reverber echoes, that, in my affright ears, appear to termin 
in a seri of mirthless, malevol chuckles. once, when fascin 
beyond control, I stole on tipto along the passage, momentarili 
expect a door to fli open and someth grim and horribl to pounc 
out on me, I wa brought to a standstil by a loud, clang noise, as 
if a pail or some such utensil were set down veri roughli on a stone 
floor. then there wa the sound of rush footstep and of someon 
hastili ascend the cellar staircase. In fear anticip as to 
what I should see--for there wa someth in the sound that told me 
they were not made by anyth human--i stood in the middl of the 
passag and stared. up, up, up they came, until I saw the dark, 
indefinit shape of someth veri horrid, but which I could not--i dare 
not--define. It wa accompani by the clang of a pail. I tri to 
scream, but my tongu cleav to the roof of my mouth prevent my 
utter a syllable, and when I essay to move, I found I wa 
temporarili paralysed. the thing came rush down on me. I grew ici 
cold all over, and when it wa within a few feet of me, my horror wa so 
great, I fainted. 

"on recov consciousness, it wa some minut befor I summon up 
courag to open my eyes, but when I did so, they alight on noth but 
the empti passage--th thing had disappeared. 

"on anoth occasion, when I wa clandestin pay a visit to the 
unus wing, and wa in the act of mount one of the staircas 
lead from the corridor, I have just described, to the first floor, 
there wa the sound of a furiou scuffl overhead, and someth dash 
down the stair past me. I instinct look up, and there, glare 
down at me from over the balustrade, wa a veri white face. It wa that 
of a man, but veri badli proportioned--th forehead be low and 
receding, and the rest of the face too long and narrow. the crown rose 
to a kind of peak, the ear were point and set veri low down and far 
back. the mouth wa veri cruel and thin-lipped; the teeth were yellow 
and uneven. there wa no hair on the face, but that on the head wa red 
and matted. the eye were obliqu set, pale blue, and full of an 
express so absolut malign that everi atom of blood in my vein 
seem to congeal as I met their gaze. I could not clearli see the bodi 
of the thing, as it wa hazi and indistinct, but the impress I got of 
it wa that it wa clad in some sort of tight-fitting, fantast 
garment. As the land wa in semi-darkness, and the face at all event 
wa most startlingli visible, I conclud it brought with it a light of 
it own, though there wa none of that lurid glow attach to it, which 
I subsequ learn is almost insepar from spirit phenomena seen 
under similar conditions. 

"for some seconds, I wa too overcom with terror to move, but my 
faculti at length reassert themselves, I turn round and flew to 
the other wing of the hous with the utmost precipitation. 

"one would have thought that after these experi noth would have 
induc me to have run the risk of anoth such encounter, yet onli a 
few day after the incid of the head, I wa again impel by a 
fascin I could not withstand to visit the same quarters. In sickli 
anticip of what my eye would alight on, I stole to the foot of the 
staircas and peep cautious up. To my infinit joy there wa noth 
there but a bright patch of sunshine, that, in the most unusu fashion, 
had forc it way through from one of the slit of window near at 
hand. 

"after gaze at it long enough to assur myself it wa onli sunshine, I 
quit the spot, and proceed on my way down the vault corridor. 
just as I wa pass one of the doors, it opened. I stopped--terrified. 
what could it be? bit by bit, inch by inch, I watch the gap slowli 
widen. At last, just as I felt I must either go mad or die, someth 
appeared--and, to my utter astonishment, it wa a big, black cat! 
limp painfully, it came toward me with a curious, glide motion, 
and I perceiv with a thrill of horror that it had been veri cruelli 
maltreated. one of it eye look as if it had been goug out--it 
ear were lacerated, whilst the paw of one of it hind-leg had either 
been torn or hack off. As I drew back from it, it made a feebl and 
pathet effort to reach me and rub itself against my legs, as is the 
way with cats, but in so do it fell down, and utter a half purr, 
half gurgle, vanished--seem to sink through the hard oak boards. 

"that even my youngest brother met with an accid in the barn at 
the back of the house, and died. though I did not then associ hi 
death with the apparit of the cat, the latter shock me much, for I 
wa extrem fond of animals. I did not dare ventur in the wing again 
for nearli two years. 

"when next I did so, it wa earli one june morning--between five and 
six, and none of the family, save my father, who wa out in the field 
look after hi men, were as yet up. I explor the dread corridor 
and staircase, and wa cross the floor of one of the room I had 
hitherto regard as immun from ghostli influences, when there wa an 
ici rush of wind, the door behind me slam to violently, and a heavi 
object struck me with great forc in the hollow of my back. with a cri 
of surpris and agoni I turn sharpli round, and there, lie on the 
floor, stretch out in the last convuls of death, wa the big black 
cat, maim and bleed as it had been on the previou occasion. how I 
got out of the room I don't recollect. I wa too horror-stricken to know 
exactli what I wa doing, but I distinctli rememb that, as I tug 
the door open, there wa a low, gleeful chuckle, and someth slip 
by me and disappear in the direct of the corridor. At noon that day 
my mother had a seizur of apoplexy, and die at midnight. 

"again there wa a laps of years--thi time nearli four--when, sent on 
an errand for my father, I turn the key of one of the door lead 
into the empti wing, and onc again found myself within the haunt 
precincts. all wa just as it had been on the occas of my last 
visit--gloom, still and cobweb reign everywhere, whilst 
permeat the atmospher wa a feel of intens sad and 
depression. 

"I did what wa requir of me as quickli as possible, and wa cross 
one of the room to make my exit, when a dark shadow fell athwart the 
threshold of the door, and I saw the cat. 

* * * * * 

"that even my father drop dead as he wa hasten home through 
the fields. He had long suffer from heart disease. 

"after hi death we--that is to say, my brother, sister and self--wer 
oblig to leav the hous and go out into the world to earn our living. 
We never went there again, and never heard if ani of the subsequ 
tenant experienc similar manifestations." 

thi is as nearli as I can recollect mrs. hartnoll' story. but as it is 
a good mani year sinc I heard it, there is just a possibl of some 
of the details--th smaller one at all events--hav escap my 
memory. 

when I wa grown up, I stay for a few week near oxenby, and met, at a 
garden party, a mr. and mrs. wheeler, the then occup of the manor 
house. 

I ask if they believ in ghosts, and told them I had alway heard 
their hous wa haunted. 

"well," they said, "we never believ in ghost till we came to oxenby, 
but we have seen and heard such strang thing sinc we have been in the 
manor hous that we are now prepar to believ anything." 

they then went on to tell me that they--and mani of their visitor and 
servants--had seen the phantasm of a veri hideou and malign old 
man, clad in tight-fit hosieri of mediæv days, and a maim and 
bleed big, black cat, that seem sometim to drop from the ceiling, 
and sometim to be thrown at them. In one of the passag all sort of 
queer sounds, such as whinings, meanings, screeches, clang of pail 
and rattl of chains, were heard, whilst something, no one could ever 
see distinctly, but which they all felt to be indescrib nasty, 
rush up the cellar step and flew past, as if engag in a desper 
chase. indeed, the disturb were of so constant and harrow a 
nature, that the wing had to be vacat and wa eventu lock up. 

the wheeler excav in differ part of the haunt wing and found, 
in the cellar, at a depth of some eight or nine feet, the skeleton of 
three men and two women; whilst in the wainscot of the passag they 
discov the bone of a boy, all of which remain they had properli 
inter in the churchyard. accord to local tradition, hand down 
through mani centuri by word of mouth, the hous origin belong 
to a knight, who, with hi wife, wa kill out hunting. He had onli one 
child, a boy of about ten, who becam a ward in chancery. the man 
appoint by the crown as guardian to thi child prove an inhuman 
monster, and after ill-treat the lad in everi conceiv manner, 
eventu murder him and tri to substitut a bastard boy of hi own 
in hi place. for a time the fraud succeeded, but on it be 
eventu found out, the murder and hi offspr were both brought 
to trial and hanged. 

dure hi occup of the house, mani peopl were seen to enter the 
premises, but never leav them, and the place got the most sinist 
reputation. among other deed credit to the murder and hi 
offspr wa the mutil and boil of a cat--th particular pet of 
the young heir, who wa compel to wit the whole revolt 
process. year later, a subsequ owner of the properti had a monument 
erect in the churchyard to the memori of thi poor, abus child, and 
on the front of the hous construct the devic of the cat. 

though it is imposs to determin what amount of truth there may be 
in thi tradition, it certainli seem to accord with the hauntings, and 
to suppli some sort of explan to them. the ghostli head on the 
banist might well be that of the low and brutal guardian, whose 
spirit would be the exact counterpart of hi mind. the figur seen, and 
nois heard in the passage, point to the re-enact of some tragedy, 
possibl the murder of the heir, or the slaughter of hi cat, in either 
of which a bucket might easili have play a grimli signific part. 
and if human murder and their victim have phantasms, whi should not 
anim have phantasm too? whi should not the phenomenon of the cat 
seen by mrs. hartnol and the wheeler have been the actual phantasm of 
an earthbound cat? 

No amount of reasoning--religi or otherwise--ha as yet annihil 
the possibl of all form of earthli life possess spirits. 

letter from MY wife 

I heard the forego account from my husband when first I met him year 
ago, and I know it to be true. I have seen the rooms, etc. in the old 
manor house, oxenby, where the incid mrs. hartnol mention took 
place. 

ada B. o'donnell. 

_july_ 2, 1913. 

To further substanti my view with regard to a futur exist for 
animals, I reproduc (bi permiss of the editor) the follow letter 
and articl that have appear from time to time in the _occult 
review_:-- 


letter 1 

_that other cat_ 

one even about four year ago I wa in my drawing-room with two 
friends; we were all stand up on the point of go to bed, and onli 
wait till the old cook had succeed in induc the grey persian cat 
to come in for the night. thi wa sometim difficult, and then cook 
came up as on thi occas and call him from the balcony, and the 
french window wa wide open, when a cat rush in at the window and 
through the door. 

"what wa that?" we said, look at one another. It wa not kitty, the 
grey persian, but darker, and wa it realli a cat, or what? My friend 
"rügen" ha written the account of what she saw befor see what I 
have said. "iona" confirm our description. what I saw seem dark and 
shadowi and yet unmistak a cat. It seem to me like the predecessor 
of kitty, which wa a black persian; he had the same habit of come in 
at night by thi window, and he constantli rush through the room, and 
downstairs, be in a hurri for hi supper. A moment or two afterward 
the grey cat walk slowli in, and though we search the house, we 
could find no other. 

"thanet." 


letter 2 


_fräulein mullet' story_ 

three or four year ago, iona and I were sit in the drawing-room on 
a sunday evening, when cook came in to ask for kitti (a silver-grey 
persian cat) to settl him in the kitchen for the night. kitti wa still 
in the garden, and cook went to the balconi call him. 

suddenli I saw a black cat fli in and disappear behind or under a 
seat. first, I did not take much notic of this. but when a minut after 
kitti slowli and solemnli step in, follow by cook, it struck me 
that the dark someth could not have been kitty, and thanet and iona 
made the remark simultaneously. now we began to look for the dark one 
all over the place without ani result. cook had not seen ani cat pass 
her on the balcony, but kitti the grey one. thanet had had a black 
persian cat, which die befor kitti came. 

"rügen." 


letter 3 


I can entir corrobor the account written by "thanet" and "rügen." 

I rememb that I saw someth like a dark shadow move veri quickli and 
disappear in front of a cottag piano. I exclaim simultan with 
my friend "what wa that?" and share their surpris when no black cat 
wa found, and the grey persian walk in unconcernedli through the open 
window. 

"iona." 


letter 4 


_what kitti saw_ 

cook said, "I wish you would come downstair and see how strang kitti 
behav as soon as I open the cupboard. there is noth in it but the 
wood; I turn it all out to see what might be the reason--not even a 
mousehol can I find." some day previous cook had told me that 
noth could induc kitti to sleep in hi basket, and one day he would 
not eat ani food in the kitchen, and hi meal had to be given him 
outside. So I went down to pleas cook. kitti wa pick up, and while 
cook pet and stroke him, she knelt down and open the cupboard. 
kitty, stretch hi neck and look with big, frighten eye into 
the cupboard' corner, suddenli turn round; struggl out of cook' 
hold and rush over her shoulder, he flew out of the kitchen. get 
up, cook said: "that' alway what he does, just as if he wa see 
someth horrible!" 

next day I encourag cook to talk of ruff, the former black cat, which 
had been a great favourit of hers, and which she had been nurs when 
he wa dying. "oh, poor thing, when he wa ill, he would creep into dark 
corners, so I put him in hi basket into the cupboard, make it veri 
comfort for him, and there he died"--point to the veri corner 
which caus such horror to kitty. 


"rügen." 


letter 5 


_captain humphries' story--a materi cat_ 

My son had the follow experi at the age of four year in our 
worcestershir home. 

He wa an onli child and spent much of hi time in the compani of a cat 
who share hi tast and pursuit even to the extent of fish in the 
river weir with him, the cat be far more profici at the sport than 
the boy. when the cat die we none of us dare to break the news to the 
child, and were much surpris when he ask us to say whi hi cat onli 
came to play with him at night nowadays. when we question him about 
it, he stoutli maintain that hi cat wa there in bodili form everi 
night after he went to bed, look much the same but a littl thinner. 

At about the same age, one even after be in bed one hour, I heard 
him cri out, and go upstair (hi maid also heard and ran up) and 
ask him what wa the matter, he said that an old gentleman with a 
long grey beard like hi grandfath came into hi room, and stood at 
the front of hi bed. At the veri moment, the former had a seizur in 
hi carriag while drive through the street of birmingham, from which 
he die without regain consciousness; later on he recogn a 
photograph of hi grandfath as be the person he saw at the foot of 
hi bed. My wife, the maid, and myself can vouch for the accuraci of 
these statements, also friend to whom we have relat these facts. 

"munster." 


letter 6 


_mrs. e.j. ellis' story--"th old woman' cat"_ 

My wife, write mr. ellis, who wa brought up in germany, and who is not 
suffici confid about her english to attempt to put down anyth 
for public in that language, tell me the follow stori for the 
_occult review_:-- 

"when I wa a littl girl live with my famili near michelstadt in the 
odenwald, I rememb an old woman like an old witch, whose name wa 
louise, and who wa call 'pfeiff louise,' becaus she exhibit pipe 
for sale in her cottag window, along with the cheap dress-stuffs, 
needl and threads, and simpl toy for children which were her 
stock-in-trade. she had a favourit cat which wa devot to her, but 
it attach doesn't seem to have been enough to make her happy, for 
she marri a young sergeant name lautenschlager, who might have been 
her son--or inde her grandson--and who, as everyon said, court her 
for her money. she die as long ago as 1869, and dure her last ill 
the devot cat wa alway with her. It kept watch besid the bodi when 
she wa dead, and refus to be driven away. In a fit of exasper 
lautenschlag seiz it, carri it off, and drown it in the littl 
river mumling, at a place where the road from michelstadt to the 
neighbour villag steinbach run near the water' edge. It wa 
border with poplar then, but chestnut tree shade it now. 

"soon after hi first wife wa buri lautenschlag marri again, and 
open an eating-hous in steinbach, where he establish hi second 
wife. He had a sister whom he place in the cottag of poor 'pfeiff 
louise.' she carri on the business, and everi day lautenschlag use 
to walk over from steinbach to see how she wa get on, return in 
the even to hi wife, who use to relat to my mother that he 
frequent came home terrifi and bath in perspiration, for as he 
pass the place where he had drown the cat, it ghost use to come 
out of the river and run besid him along the dark road, sometim 
terrifi him still more by jump in front of him. 

"after a few year of marri life the second wife died, and 
lautenschlag marri a third. the littl cottag busi had 
prospered, and in it place he now had a consider draper' shop in 
michelstadt. He continu to walk over from steinbach, where now the 
third wife live in the eating-house, and the ghost of the cat continu 
to frighten him by appear at nightfal as he walk besid the river. 

"I can rememb hear hi third wife describ hi dread of it, and my 
mother ha told me how both the sister and the second wife use to say 
the same thing, though I wa too young then for them to tell me about 
it. lautenschlag use also to complain to the countri peopl who came 
to dine at hi eating-house. He consid himself an ill-us man, and 
felt that the supernatur power were treat him veri hardly, and 
subject him to a real persecution. I have onli the convers of 
hi wife and the gossip of the villag to vouch for hi sincerity, and 
the genuin of the apparit is support onli by lautenschlager' 
word, but hi evid anger and agit were accept as genuine, and 
no one dream of doubt hi word. He wa not at all a dreami or 
imagin man, and did not drink. hi passion wa mere momentary. He 
wa not onli a draper and cater but a usurer, and realiz someth 
of a fortun by lend money on good secur to peasant and farmer 
who, it wa said, did not consid how they bound themselv when they 
sign the paper he put befor them. 

"lautenschlag continu to be haunt by the cat-ghost at irregular 
interv for more than twenti years, and it made a mark chang in hi 
character. He becam serious, and dure the latter part of hi life 
would onli talk about religion and read sacr literature. He die about 
ten year ago." 

"feline." 


letter 7 


_A spectral fox-terrier_ 

two or three year ago I visit a medium (mrs. davi of 44 laburnum 
grove, portsmouth). I had been seat onli a few minut when a littl 
pug-dog of her look up in the direct of my knee and down toward 
my feet, growl and howl in a most strang manner. 

"what on earth is he look at?" I exclaimed. 

"oh," said the medium, "there is a littl fox-terri lie across your 
feet; one half of hi face is quit dark and the other half white, but 
he ha such a peculiar black patch over the eye that one would almost 
think it wa a black bruise." now, sir, I had such a littl dog in 
india, but thi ladi did not know of him, and would never have known had 
he not, as I afterward found, die out there. thi is not onli a case 
of the appear of an anim after death, but also a case in which it 
wa seen by anoth animal, as also by the medium. I am also told that 
the pug-dog who had thi vision of my dog wa onc seen to pounc upon 
what seem to the medium to be sever cats, near the copper in the 
sculleri of the same house. the medium ask a neighbour if the previou 
occup had had ani cats. "oh, yes," repli the neighbour, "and badli 
the poor thing were served, for they were cruelli thrown into the 
copper, which wa full of boil water." 

"simla" (m. conder). 


letter 8 


_kill by a street car, but walk in at the front door_ 

some five year ago we had a littl puppi about six month old. I use 
to train him to alway go round the back way to come into the house. one 
day he got hurt and run over, be instantli kill by a street car. A 
day or two after the accid I wa go in my front door and I saw the 
dog go up the step in front of me, as plain as I ever saw him in my 
life. It seem he knew that I had taught him he must not go in the 
front way, becaus he would go a few step and then turn round and look 
at me, as though he want to see how I wa take it, and I posit 
saw him go to the full length of the hall into the house, a distanc of 
about twenti feet, befor he disappeared. I saw him do thi at least 
three time in two month that we stay in that flat. I told at least a 
half-dozen peopl of the incid at the time it happened, and I can 
vouch for it authenticity. 

I remain, your truly, 

"majilton" 
(chas. A. thompson, chicago, ill., u.s.a.). 


letter 9 


_mrs. vincent taylor' experience. A spirit purr_ 

one even in february, 1906, my son and I were quietli reading, in 
full gaslight, our small grey cat lie on the sofa a short distanc 
from where I sat. suddenli I saw on my knee a larg red and white cat 
which belong to us in india, which wa a veri dear famili friend and 
as fond of us as a child. 

On leav india we were oblig to give him to a friend, and in the end 
he share the usual fate of pet in that country, make a meal for some 
wild animal. 

"rufie-oofie," in hi spirit shape, pur vigorously, rub hi head 
against me and give everi sign of delight at see us again. I did 
not speak, but in a few minut my son look up and said, "mother, 
rufie-oofi is on your knee," when the spirit cat jump down and went 
to him to be petted. then he return to me, and walk along the sofa 
to where our present cat, "kim," wa asleep. the spirit cat, with a look 
of almost human fun, pat kim' head, the latter awak with a start. 
rufie-oofi continu to make play dab at kim' ears, kim follow 
each movement with glare eyes, distinctli see and realiz that 
anoth cat wa invad hi sofa, but not in the least angri with him 
and quit readi to play. after a few minut the spirit cat came back to 
my knee, whereupon the earth cat display jealousi which rufie-oofi 
resented, but befor they came to actual "words" the spirit cat retir 
behind the veil. 

"arjüna." 


letter 10 


sir, 

the follow note of psycholog experi with anim may be of 
interest:-- 

I had a colli who live to a good old age. she wa deaf and infirm, and 
one hind-leg wa paralysed, so that it drag as she walked. I wa 
taken ill, not seriously, nor so as in ani way to affect my brain, but 
as my poor old dog would insist on come and lie in my room the 
doctor insist on her be destroyed. I felt that her life wa no 
pleasur to her, and she wa kill with chloroform. three day 
afterward in the afternoon I heard her come upstair with her drag 
hind-leg. I heard her step come along the long passag which had my 
room at the end, and lost them about half-way up. On the third day I 
call her and spoke to her, put out my hand as if she would come 
and put her head under it, and told her all wa right. I never heard her 
ani more. 

I believ that on one occas she told me by thought transfer that 
she had no water in her pan. the pan wa alway filled, and I knew that 
she want something, but thought of all other want but water. she made 
her eye protrude, and look at me intently, and "water" flash into 
my mind. I look and found the pan empty. It is, of course, possibl 
that the suggest came from my own subconsci mind. I never saw the 
aura of a human being, but I onc had a kind of vision of thi dog, 
which expert have told me wa her aura. I wa sit by the fire, 
somewhat somnolent, and he wa lie on the hearthrug. all at onc hi 
golden brown coat disappeared, and I saw a mass of reddish brown or 
perhap I should say brownish red, and on one side of it wa an 
irregular patch of fleeci white, border with sapphir blue. I wa told 
that the brownish red repres the dog' anim instincts, the pearli 
white hi anim innocence, and the sapphir blue hi devot 
instinct, in hi case direct to me as hi deity. whether ani of your 
reader have had similar experi and explain them similarly, I do 
not know. 

I had to go abroad one summer and my dog wa ill with eczema, and as I 
did not veri much trust the maid I wa leav in charge, I sent him to 
the vet' to be treated. As soon as I reach my destin I wrote to 
a friend to go and inquir how he was. she repli that the dog wa 
perfectli miserable, and that he had an enorm wound on hi back, that 
he had eaten noth for a week, that he wa too weak to stand, and that 
if he were hers, she would have him put out of hi miseri at once. I 
wrote at onc to the vet, tell him to telegraph "curable" or 
"hopeless," and to act accordingly. meanwhile, I sat that afternoon in 
the bürgerpark by myself and imagin the dog upon my lap, and myself 
stroke and heal him. after thi I found myself fulli believ that 
he would get better. the telegram I receiv wa "curable," and my 
friend wrote a second letter and said it wa a miracle, for the dog wa 
quit convalescent. He recov perfectly. here, again, however, it may 
have been that he wa break hi heart for a friend, and that my 
friend' visit cheer him. Or may not both caus have had their 
effect? 

"ambros zail martyn." 

here is anoth case in the verac of which I have everi confidence. I 
will call it 


_the headless cat of no. ---- lower seedley road, seedley, manchester_ 

It wa relat to me by mr. robert dane, who wa at one time a tenant of 
no. ---- lower seedley road, seedley. I quot it as nearli as possibl 
in hi words, thus:-- 

"when we--mi wife and i--took no. ---- lower seedley road, no 
possibl of the place be haunt cross our minds. inde ghost 
were the veri last thing we reckon on, as neither of us had the 
slightest belief in them. like the gener of solicitors, I am stodgi 
and unimaginative, whilst my wife is the most practic and 
matter-of-fact littl woman you would meet in a day' march. nor wa 
there anyth about the hous that in ani way suggest the 
superphysical. It wa airi and light--no dark corner nor sinist 
staircases--and equip throughout with all modern conveniences. We 
began our leas in june--th hottest june I remember--and noth 
occur to disturb us till october. 

"it happen then in thi wise. I will quot from my diary:-- 

"_monday, octob 11th_.--dick--that is my brother-in-law--and I, at 11 
p.m., were sit smoke and chat togeth in the study. all the 
rest of the household had gone to bed. We had no light in the room--a 
dick had a headache--sav the fire, and that had burn so low that it 
feebl glimmer scarc enabl us to see each other' face. after a 
space of sudden and thought silence, dick took the stump of a cigar 
from hi lip and threw it in the grate, where for a few moment it lay 
glow in the gloom. 

"'jack,' he said, 'you will think me mad, but there is someth deuc 
queer about thi room to-night--someth in the atmospher I cannot 
define, but which I have never felt here--or inde anywhere--before. 
look at that cigar-end--look!' 

"I did so, and receiv a shock. what I saw wa certainli not the stump 
dick had had in hi mouth, but an eye--a large, red and lurid eye--that 
look up at us with an express of the utmost hate. 

"dick rais the shovel and struck at it, but without effect--it still 
glare at us. A great horror then seiz us, and unabl to remov our 
gaze from the hellish thing, we sat glu to our chair stare at it. 
thi state of affair last till the clock in the hall outsid struck 
twelve, when the eye suddenli vanished, and we both felt as if some 
intens evil influenc had been suddenli removed. 

"dick did not like the idea of sleep alone, and ask if he might 
keep the electr light on in hi room all night. tremend 
extravagance, but under the circumst excusable. I confess I 
devoutli wish it wa morning. 

"_tuesday, octob 12th._--i wa awaken at 11.30 p.m. by delia say 
to me, 'oh, edward, there have been such dread nois on the landing, 
just as if a cat were be worri to death by dogs. hark! there it is 
again.' and as she spoke, from appar just outsid the door, came a 
seri of loud screeches, accompani by savag growl and snarls. 

"not know what to make of it, as we had no anim of our own in the 
house, but conclud that a door or window have been left open, a dog 
and cat had got in from outside, I lit a candle, and open the bedroom 
door. instantli the sound ceas and there wa dead silence, and 
although I search everywhere, not a vestig of ani anim wa to be 
seen. moreov all the door lead into the garden were shut and 
locked, and the window closed. not wish to frighten delia, I 
laughingli assur her the cat--a black tom--wa all right, that it wa 
sit on the roof of the summer-house, look none the wors for it 
treatment, and that I had sent the dog--a terrier--fli out of the 
gate with a well-deserv kick. I explain it wa my fault about the 
front door be left open--mi brain had been a bit overstrain through 
excess work--and ask her on no account to blame the servants. I 
grow alarm at time when I realiz how easi lawyer make lying. 

"_friday, octob 21st._--on my way to bed last night I encount a 
rush of ici cold air at the first bend of the staircase. the candl 
flare up, a bright blue flame, and went out. something--an anim of 
sorts--cam tear down the stair past me, and on peer over the 
banisters, I saw, look up at me from the well of dark beneath, 
two big red eyes, the counterpart of the one dick and I had seen on 
octob 11th. I threw a matchbox at them, but without effect. It wa 
onli when I switch on the electr light that they disappeared. I 
search the hous most carefully, but there were no sign of ani 
animal. join delia, feel nervou and henpecky. 

"_monday, novemb 7th._--tom and mabl came run into delia' room 
in a great state of excit after tea to-day. 'mother!' they cried, 
'mother! Do come! some horrid dog ha got a cat in the spare room and is 
tear it to pieces.' delia, who wa mend my sock at the time, 
flung them anywhere, and spring to her feet, flew to the spare room. 
the door wa shut, but proceed from within wa the most appal 
pandemonium of screech and snarls, just as if some dog had got hold of 
a cat by the neck and wa shake it to death. delia swung open the door 
and rush in. the room wa empty--not a trace of a cat or dog 
anywhere--and the sound ceased! On my return home delia met me in the 
garden. 'jack!' she said, 'I have probe the mysteri at last. the hous 
is haunted! We must leave.' 

"_saturday, novemb 12th._--sublet hous to jame barstow, retir oil 
merchant, to-day. He come in on the 30th. hope he'll like it! 

"_tuesday, novemb 15th._--cook left to-day. 'i'v no fault to find 
with you, mum,' she condescendingli explain to delia. 'it' not you, 
nor the children, nor the food. it' the nois at night--screech 
outsid my door, which sound like a cat, but which I know can't be a 
cat, as there is no cat in the house. thi morning, mum, shortli after 
the clock struck two, thing came to a climax. hear someth in the 
corner and wonder if it wa a mouse--i ain't a bit afraid of mice, 
mum--i sat up in bed and wa get readi to strike a light--th 
matchbox wa in my hand--when someth heavi sprang right on the top of 
me and gave a loud growl in my ear. that finish me, mum--i fainted. 
when I came to myself, I wa too frighten to stir, but lay with my 
head under the blanket till it wa time to get up. I then search 
everywhere, but there wa no sign of ani dog, and as the door wa lock 
there wa no possibl of ani dog have got in dure the night. mum, 
I wouldn't go through what I suffer again for fifti pounds; i'v got 
palpit even now; and I would rather go without my month' wage 
than sleep in that room anoth night.' delia paid her up to date, and 
she went directli after tea. 

"_friday, novemb 18th._--a I wa come out of the bathroom at 11 
p.m. someth fell into the bath with a loud splash. I turn to see 
what it was--ther wa noth there. I ran up the stair to bed, three 
step at a time! 

"_sunday, novemb 20th._--went to church in the morn and heard the 
usual oxford drawl. On the way back I wa ponder over the sermon and 
wish I could contort the law as success as parson contort the 
scriptures, when dot--sh is six to-day--cam run up to me with a 
veri scare express in her eyes. 'father,' she cried, pluck me by 
the sleeve, 'do hurri up. mother is veri ill.' full of dread 
anticipations, I tore home, and on arriv found delia lie on the 
sofa in a violent fit of hysterics. It wa fulli an hour befor she 
recov suffici to tell me what had happened. her account run 
thus:-- 

"'after you went to church,' she began, 'I made the custard pudding, 
jelli and blancmang for dinner, heard the children their collects, and 
had just sat down with the intent of write a letter to mother, when 
I heard a veri pathet mew coming, so I thought, from under the sofa. 
think it wa some stray cat that had got in through one of the 
windows, I tri to entic it out, by call "puss, puss," and make 
the usual silli nois peopl do on such occasions. No cat come out and 
the mew still continuing, I knelt down and peer under the sofa. 
there wa no cat there. had it been night I should have been veri much 
afraid, but I could scarc reconcil myself to the idea of ghost 
with the room fill with sunshine. resum my seat I went on with my 
writing, but not for long. the mew grew nearer. I distinctli heard 
someth crawl out from under the sofa; there wa then a pause, dure 
which you could have heard the proverbi pin fall, and then someth 
sprang upon me and dug it claw in my knees. I look down, and to my 
horror and distress, perceived, stand on it hind-legs, paw my 
clothes, a large, tabbi cat, without a head--th neck termin in a 
mangl stump. the sight so appal me that I don't know what happened, 
but nurs and the children came in and found me lie on the floor in 
hysterics. can't we leav the hous at once?' 

"_wednesday, novemb 30th._--left no. ---- lower seedley road at 2 p.m. 
had an aw scurri to get thing pack in time, and dread open 
certain of the packing-cas lest we shall find all the crockeri 
smashed. just as we were start delia cri out that she had left her 
reticul behind, and I wa despatch in search of it. I search 
everywhere--til I wa worn out, for I know what delia is--and wa 
leav the premis in full anticip of be sent back again, when 
there wa a loud commot in the hall, just as if a dog had suddenli 
pounc on a cat, and the next moment a larg tabby, with the head hewn 
away as delia had described, rush up to me and tri to spring on to 
my shoulders. At thi junctur one of the servant cautious open the 
hall door from without, and inform me I wa wanted. the cat instantli 
vanished, and, on my reach the carriag in a state of breathless 
hast and trepidation, delia told me she had found her reticule--sh had 
been sit on it all the time!" 

In a subsequ note in hi diari a year or so later mr. dane says: 
"after innumer enquiri _re_ the histori of no. ---- lower seedley 
road prior to our inhabit it, I have at length elicit the fact that 
twelv year ago a mr. and mrs. barlow live there. they had one son, 
arthur, whom they spoilt in the most outrag fashion, even to the 
extent of encourag him in act of cruelty. To afford him amus 
they use to buy rat for hi dog--a fox-terrier--to worry, and on one 
occas procur a stray cat, which the servant afterward declar 
wa mangl in the most shock manner befor be final destroy 
by arthur. here, then, in my opinion, is a veri feasibl explan for 
the hauntings--th phenomenon seen wa the phantasm of the poor, 
tortur cat. for if human tragedi are re-enact by ghosts, whi not 
anim tragedi too? It is absurd to suppos man ha the monopoli of 
soul or spirit." 


_the cat on the post_ 

In her _ghost and famili legends_ mrs. crow narrat the follow 
case of a haunt by the phantom of a cat:-- 

"after the doctor' story, I fear mine will appear too trifling," said 
mrs. m., "but as it is the onli circumst of the kind that ever 
happen to myself, I prefer give it you to ani of the mani stori I 
have heard. 

"about fifteen year ago I wa stay with some friend at a 
magnific old seat in yorkshire, and our host be veri much crippl 
with the gout, wa in the habit of drive about the park and 
neighbourhood in a low poni phaeton, on which occas I often 
accompani him. one of our favourit excurs wa to the ruin of an 
old abbey just beyond the park, and we gener return by a 
remark pretti rural lane lead to the village, or rather small 
town, of c----. 

"one fine summer' even we had just enter thi lane when, see 
the hedg full of wild flowers, I ask my friend to let me alight and 
gather some. I walk befor the carriag pick honeysuckl and rose 
as I went along, till I came to a gate that led into a field. It wa a 
common countri gate with a post on each side, and on one of these post 
sat a larg white cat, the finest anim of the kind I had ever seen; 
and as I have a weak for cat I stop to admir thi sleek, fat 
puss, look so wonder comfort in a veri uncomfort 
position, the top of the post, on which it wa sit with it feet 
doubl up under it, be out of all proport to it body, for no 
angola ever rival it in size. 

"'come on gently,' I call to my friend; 'here' such a magnific 
cat!' for I fear the approach of the phaeton would startl it away 
befor he had seen it. 

"'where?' said he, pull up hi hors opposit the gate. 

"'there,' said I, point to the post. 'isn't he a beauty? I wonder if 
it would let me stroke it?' 

"'i see no cat,' said he. 

"'there on the post,' said I, but he declar he saw nothing, though 
puss sat there in perfect composur dure thi colloquy. 

"'don't you see the cat, james?' said I in great perplex to the 
groom. 

"'yes, ma'am; a larg white cat on that post.' 

"I thought my friend must be joking, or lose hi eyesight, and I 
approach the cat, intend to take it in my arm and carri it to the 
carriage; but as I drew near she jump off the post, which wa natur 
enough, but to my surpris she jump into nothing--a she jump she 
disappeared! No cat in the field--non in the lane--non in the ditch! 

"'where did she go, james?' 

"'i don't know, ma'am. I can't see her,' said the groom, stand up in 
hi seat and look all round. 

"I wa quit bewildered; but still I had no glimmer of the truth; and 
when I got into the carriag again my friend said he thought I and jame 
were dreaming, and I retort that I thought he must be go blind. 

"I had a commiss to execut as we pass through the town, and I 
alight for that purpos at the littl haberdasher's; and while they 
were serv me I mention that I had seen a remark beauti cat 
sit on a gate in the lane, and ask if they could tell me who it 
belong to, ad it wa the largest cat I ever saw. 

"the owner of the shop, and two women who were make purchases, 
suspend their proceedings, look at each other and then look at me, 
evid veri much surprised. 

"'wa it a white cat, ma'am?' said the mistress. 

"'yes, a white cat; a beauti creatur and----' 

"'bless me!' cri two or three, 'the lady' seen the white cat of 
c----. It hasn't been seen these twenti years.' 

"'master wish to know if you'll soon be done, ma'am. the poni is 
get restless,' said james. 

"of cours I hurri out, and got into the carriage, tell my friend 
that the cat wa well known to the peopl at c----, and that it wa 
twenti year old. 

"in those days, I believe, I never thought of ghosts, and least of all 
should have thought of the ghost of a cat; but two even afterwards, 
as we were drive down the lane, I again saw the cat in the same 
posit and again my companion could not see it, though the groom did. 
I alight immediately, and went up to it. As I approach it turn it 
head and look full toward me with it soft mild eyes, and a friendli 
expression, like that of a love dog; and then, without move from the 
post, it began to fade gradual away, as if it were a vapour, till it 
had quit disappeared. all thi the groom saw as well as myself; and now 
there could be no mistak as to what it was. A third time I saw it in 
broad daylight, and my curios greatli awakened, I resolv to make 
further enquiri amongst the inhabit of c----, but befor I had an 
opportun of do so, I wa summon away by the death of my eldest 
child, and I have never been in that part of the world since. 

"however, I onc mention the circumst to a ladi who wa acquaint 
with that neighbourhood, and she said she had heard of the white cat of 
c----, but had never seen it." 

thi is mrs. m.' account as relat by mrs. crowe, and after perus 
the authoress' prefac to the work, I am inclin to give it full 
credence. 


_the mystic properti of cats_ 

the most common form of anim phenomena seen in haunt hous are 
undoubtedli those of cats. the number of place report to me as be 
haunt by cat is almost incredible--in one street in whitechapel there 
are no less than four. thi state of affair may possibl be account 
for by the fact that cats, more than ani other anim that live in 
houses, meet with sudden and unnatur ends, especi in the poorer 
districts, where the doctrin of kind to anim ha not as yet made 
itself thoroughli felt. now I am touch on the subject of cat ghosts, 
it may not be out of place to reproduc the follow articl of mine, 
entitl "cat and the unknown," which appear in the _occult review_ 
for december, 1912:-- 

"since, from all ages, the cat ha been close associ with the 
supernatural, it is not surpris to learn that imag and symbol of 
that anim figur in the templ of the sun and moon, respectively, in 
ancient egypt. accord to horapollo, the cat wa worship in the 
templ of heliopolis, sacr to the sun, becaus the size of the pupil 
of the cat' eye is regul by the height of the sun abov the 
horizon. 

"other author suggest a rather more subtle--and, in my opinion, 
more probable--reason, namely, that the link between the sun and the cat 
is not mere physic but superphysical, that the cat is attract to 
the sun not onli becaus it love warmth, but becaus the sun keep off 
terrifi and antagonist occult forces, to the influenc of which 
the cat, abov all other animals, is special susceptible; a fact fulli 
recogn by the egyptians, who, to show their understand and 
appreci of thi felin attachment, took care that whenev a templ 
wa dedic to the sun an imag or symbol of the cat wa place 
somewhere, well in evidence, within the precincts. 

"to make thi theori all the more probable, imag and symbol of the 
cat were dedic to the moon, the moon be univers regard as 
the quintess of everyth supernatural, the veri cockpit, in fact, 
of mysteri and spookism. the nocturn habit of the cat, it love of 
prowl about dure moonlight hours, and the spectacl of it two 
round, gleam eyes, may, of course, as plutarch seem to have thought, 
have suggest to the egyptian human influenc and analogy, and thu 
the presenc of it effigi in templ to isi would be partially, at all 
events, account for; though, as before, I am inclin to think there 
is anoth and rather more subtl reason. 

"from endless experi made in haunt houses, I have prove to my 
own satisfaction, at least, that the cat act as a thoroughli reliabl 
psychic barometer. 

"the dog is sometim unawar of the proxim of the unknown. when the 
ghost materi or in some other way demonstr it advent, the 
dog, occasionally, is wholli undisturbed--th cat never. I have never 
yet had a cat with me that ha not shown the most obviou sign of 
terror and uneasi both befor and dure a superphys 
manifestation. 

"now, although I won't go so far as to say that ghostli demonstr 
are actual depend on the moon--that they occur onli on night when 
the moon is visible--experi ha led me to believ that the moon most 
certainli doe influenc them--that moonlight night are much more 
favour to ghostli appear than other nights. hence--ther is 
thi much in common between the moon and cats--th one influenc and 
the other is influenc by psychic phenomena--a fact that could scarc 
have fail to be recogn by so keen observ of the occult as the 
ancient egyptians. 

"the presenc of the cat' effigi in the templ of isi might thu be 
explained. over and over again we come across the cat in the land of the 
pharaohs. It seem to be insepar from the esoter side of egyptian 
life. the goddess bast is depict with a cat' head, hold the 
sistrum, i.e. the symbol of the world' harmony, in her hand. 

"one of the most ancient symbol of the cat is to be found in the 
necropoli of thebes, which contain the tomb of hana (who probabl 
belong to the eleventh dynasty). there, hana is depict stand 
erect, proud and kingly, with hi favourit cat borehaki--borehaki, the 
pictur of all thing strang and psychic, and from whom one cannot help 
suppos he may have chosen hi occult inspiration--at hi feet. So 
sure were the egyptian that the cat possess a soul that they deem 
it worthi of the same funer rite they bestow on man. cat were 
embalmed, and innumer cat mummi have been discov in wooden 
coffin at bubastis, speos, artemido and thebes. when a cat die the 
egyptian shave their eyebrows, not onli to show grief at the loss of 
their love one, but to avert subsequ misfortune. 

"so long as a cat wa in hi hous the egyptian felt safe from inim 
supernatur influences, but if there wa no cat in the hous at night, 
then ani undesir from the occult world might visit him. indeed, in 
such high esteem did the egyptian hold the cat, that they voluntarili 
incur the gravest risk when it life wa in peril. No one of them 
appreci the cat and set a higher valu on it mystic properti than 
the sultan el-daher-beybas, who reign in a.d. 1260, and ha been 
compar with william of tripoli for hi courage, and with nero for hi 
cruelty. el-daher-beyba kept hi palac swarm with cats, and--if we 
may give credenc to tradition--wa seldom to be seen unaccompani by 
one of these animals. when he died, he left the proce from the 
product of a garden to support hi felin friends--an exampl that found 
mani subsequ imitators. indeed, until compar recent in 
cairo, cat were regularli fed, between noon and sunset, in the outer 
court of the mehkemeh. 

"in geneva, rome and constantinople, though cat were gener deem 
to have soul and to possess psychic properties, they were thought to 
deriv them from evil sources, and so strong wa the prejudic against 
these unfortun anim on thi account, that all through the middl 
age we find them suffer such barbar tortur as onli the pervert 
mind of a fanatical, priest-ridden peopl could devis (which 
treatment, no doubt, partly, at all events, account for the mani 
palaces, houses, etc., in those particular countries, state to have 
been haunt by the spirit of cats). 

"the devil wa popularli suppos to appear in the shape of a black tom 
in prefer to assum ani other guise, and the bare fact of an old 
woman be seen, onc or twice, with a black cat by her side wa quit 
suffici to earn for her the reput of a witch. It would be idle, 
of course, to expect peopl in these unmedit time to believ there 
wa ever the remotest truth underli these so-cal phantast 
supposit of the past; yet, accord to reliabl testimony, there 
are, at the present moment, mani hous in england haunt by phantasm 
in the form of black cats, of so sinist and hostil an appearance, 
that one can onli assum that unless they are the actual spirit of 
cats, earthbound through cruel and viciou propensities, they must be 
vice-elementals, i.e. spirit that have never inhabit ani materi 
body, and which have either been gener by viciou thoughts, or els 
have been attract elsewher to a spot by some crime or viciou act 
onc perpetr there. vice-element is mere the modern name for 
fiend or demon. 

"apart from hi luciferan qualities, the cat wa award all sort of 
other qualities, not the least import of which wa it prophet 
capability. If a cat wash it face, raini weather wa regard as 
inevitable; if a cat frolick on the deck of a ship, it wa a sure sign 
of a storm; whilst if a live ember fell on a cat, an earthquak shock 
would speedili be felt. cats, too, were reput the harbing of good 
and bad fortune. not a person in normandi but believed, at one time, 
that the spectacl of a tortoiseshel cat, climb a tree, foretold 
death from accident, and that a black cat cross one' path, in the 
moonlight, presag death from an epidemic. two black cat view in the 
open between 4 and 7 a.m. were gener believ to predict a death; 
wherea a strang white cat, heard mew on a doorstep, wa loudli 
welcom as the indic of an approach marriage. accord to 
tradition, one learn that cat were occasion made use of in 
medicine; to cure peasant of skin diseases, french sorcer sprinkl 
the afflict part with three drop of blood drawn from the vein under 
a cat' tail; whilst blind wa treat by blow into the 
patient' eyes, three time a day, the dust made from ash of the head 
of a black cat that had been burn alive. 

"talk of burn cat remind me of a horribl practic that wa 
preval in the hebrid as late as 1750. It wa firmli believ there 
that cat were extraordinarili psychic, and that a sure mean of get 
in close touch with occult powers, and of obtain from them the 
faculti of second sight--such as the cat possessed--wa to offer up as 
sacrific innumer black cats. the process wa veri simple. A black 
cat wa fasten to a spit befor a slow fire, and as soon as the 
wretch anim wa well roasted, anoth took it place; victim be 
suppli without intermission, until their vocifer scream brought to 
the scene a number of ghostli cat who join in the chorus. the desir 
climax wa reached, when an enorm phantom cat suddenli appeared, and 
inform the oper that it wa will to grant him ani one request 
if he would onli refrain from hi cruel persecution. the oper at 
onc demand the faculti of second sight--a power more highli prize in 
the hebrid than ani other--and the moment it wa bestow on him, set 
free the remain cats. had all race been as barbar dispos as 
these occult-hung westerners, cat would soon have becom extinct; 
but it is comfort to think that in some part of the world a veri 
differ valu wa set on their psychic properties. 

"in variou part of europ (some district of england included) white 
cat were thought to attract benevol dispos fairies, and a 
peasant would as soon have thought of cut off hi fingers, or 
otherwis maltreat himself, as be unkind to an anim of thi 
species. In the fairi lore of half europ we have instanc of 
luck-bring cats--each countri produc it own version of puss in 
boots, dame mitchel and her cat, the white cat, dick whittington and 
hi cat, etc. It is the same in asia, too; for nowher are such stori 
more prolif than in china and persia. 

"to sum up--in all clime and in all period of past history, the cat 
wa credit with mani propens that brought it into affin and 
sympathi with the supernatural--or to quot the up-to-d 
term--superphys world. let us review the cat to-day, and see to what 
extent thi past regard of it is justified. 

"firstly, with respect to it as the harbing of fortune. ha a cat 
insight into the future? can it presag wealth or death? I am inclin 
to believ that certain cat can at all event forese the advent of the 
latter; and that they do thi in the same manner as the shark, crow, 
owl, jackal, hyena, etc., viz. by their abnorm develop sens of 
smell. My own and other people' experi ha led me to believ that 
when a person is about to die, some kind of phantom, maybe, a spirit 
whose special function it is to be present on such occasions, is in 
close proxim to the sick or injur one, wait to escort hi or her 
soul into the world of shadows--and that certain cat scent it 
approach. 

"therein then--in thi wonder properti of smell--li one of the 
secret to the cat' mysteri powers, it ha the psychic faculti of 
scent--of scent ghosts. some people, too, have thi faculty. In a 
recent murder case, in the north of england, a rustic wit gave it in 
her evid that she wa sure a tragedi wa about to happen becaus she 
"smelt death in the house," and it made her veri uneasy. cat possess 
thi peculiar are affect in a similar manner--they are uneasy. 

"befor a death in a hous I have watch a cat show gradual 
increas sign of uneasiness. It ha move from place to place, unabl 
to settl in ani one spot for ani length of time, had frequent fit of 
shivering, gone to the door, snif the atmosphere, thrown back it 
head and mew in a low, plaintiv key, and shown the greatest 
reluct to be alon in the dark. 

"thi faculty--possess by certain cats--may in some measur explain 
certain of the superstit respect them. take, for example, that of 
cat cross one' path predict death. 

"the cat is drawn to the spot becaus it scent the phantom of death, 
and cannot resist it magnet attraction. 

"from this, it doe not follow that the person who see the cat is go 
to die, but that death is overtak someon associ with that 
person; and it is in connect with the latter that the spirit of the 
grave is present, employing, as a medium of prognostication, the cat, 
which ha been given the psychic faculti of smell that it might be so 
used. 

"but although I regard thi theori as veri feasible, I do not attribut 
to cats, with the same degre of certainty, the power to presag good 
fortune, simpli becaus I have had no experi of it myself. yet, 
adopt the same line of argument, I see no reason whi cat should not 
prognost good as well as evil. 

"there may be phantom repres of prosperity, in just the same 
manner as there are those repres of death; they, too, may also 
have some distinguish scent (flower have variou odours, so whi not 
spirits?) and certain cats, i.e. white cat in particular, may be 
attract by it. 

"thi becom all the more probabl when one consid how veri 
impression the cat is--how veri sensit to kindness. there are 
some stranger with whom the cat will at onc make friends, and other 
whom it will studious avoid. why? the explanation, I fancy, lie onc 
more in the occult--in the cat' psychic faculti of smell. kind peopl 
attract benevol dispos phantoms, which bring with them an 
agreeabl scent atmosphere, that, in turn, attract cats. the cat 
come to one person becaus it know by the smell of the atmospher 
surround him, or her, that it ha noth to fear--that the person is 
essenti gentl and benignant. On the contrary, cruel peopl attract 
malevol phantoms, distinguish also to the cat by their smell, a 
smell typic of cruelty--often of homicid lunaci (I have particularli 
notic how cat have shrunk from peopl who have afterward becom 
danger insane). Is thi sens of smell, then, the keynot to the 
halo of mysteri that ha for all time surround the cat--that ha led 
to it bitter persecution--that ha made it the hero of fairi lore, the 
pet of old maids? I believ it is--i believ that in thi psychic 
faculti of smell lies, in degree, the solut to the oft-ask 
riddle--whi is the cat uncanny? have then satisfi oneself on thi 
point, namely, that cat are in the possess of rare psychic 
properties, is it like that the unknown power which have so endow 
them, should withhold from them either soul or spirits? Is it not 
contrari to reason, instinct, and observ to suppos that the mani 
thoroughli materi and grossli mind people--peopl whose whole be 
are steep in money worship--w see around us everi day should have 
spirits, and that pretty, refin and artistic-look cats, whose 
occult power place them in the veri closest connect with the 
superphysical, should not? monstrous--th bare concept of such 
incongru in the one case, and such an omiss in the other, is 
inconceivable, wholli irreconcil with the notion of ani other than a 
mummer of a creator--a mere court fool of a god." 




chapter II 

apparit OF dog 


one of the most extraordinari case of haunt by the phantasm of 
dog is relat in an old christma number of the _review of reviews_, 
edit by the late mr. w.t. stead, and entitl "real ghost stories." 

"the most remarkable," write mr. stead, "of all the stori which I 
have heard concern ghost which touch is one that reach me from 
darlington. I owe this, as I owe so mani of the other narr in thi 
collection, to the rev. harri kendall, of darlington, whose painstak 
persever in the collect of all matter of thi kind cannot be too 
highli praised. mr. kendal is a congreg minist of old 
standing. He wa my pastor when I wa edit the _northern echo_, and 
he is the author of a remark book, entitl _all the world' akin_. 
the follow narr is quit uniqu in it way, and fortun he 
wa abl to get it at first hand from the onli live person present. 
here we have a ghost which not onli strike the first blow, hit a 
man fair in the eye, but afterward set a ghostli dog upon hi victim 
and then disappears. the narr wa sign by mr. jame durham as 
late as decemb 5th, 1890." mr. stead then proce to quot the 
account which he had from mr. kendall, and which I append _ad verbum_ 
from the _review of reviews_. It is as follows: "I wa night watchman at 
the old darlington and stockton station at the town of darlington, a few 
yard from the first station that ever existed. I wa there fifteen 
years. I use to go on duti about 8 p.m. and come off at 6 a.m. I had 
been there a littl while--perhap two or three years--and about forti 
year ago. one night dure winter at about 12 o'clock or 12.30 I wa 
feel rather cold with stand here and there; I said to myself, 'I 
will away down and get someth to eat.' there wa a porter' cellar 
where a fire wa kept on and a coal-hous wa connect with it. So I 
went down the steps, took off my overcoat, and had just sat down on the 
bench opposit the fire and turn up the ga when a strang man came 
out of the coal-house, follow by a big black retriever. As soon as he 
enter my eye wa upon him, and hi eye upon me, and we were intent 
watch each other as he move on to the front of the fire. there he 
stood look at me, and a curiou smile came over hi countenance. He 
had a stand-up collar and a cut-away coat with gilt button and a scotch 
cap. all at onc he struck at me, and I had the impress that he hit 
me. I up with my fist and struck back at him. My fist seem to go 
through him and struck against the stone abov the fireplace, and 
knock the skin off my knuckles. the man seem to be struck back into 
the fire, and utter a strange, unearthli squeak. immedi the dog 
grip me by the calf of my leg, and seem to caus me pain. the man 
recov hi position, call off the dog with a sort of click of the 
tongue, then went back into the coal-house, follow by the dog. I 
light my dark lantern and look into the coal-house, but there wa 
neither dog nor man, and no outlet for them except the one by which they 
had entered. 

"I wa satisfi that what I had seen wa ghostly, and it account for 
the fact that when the man had first come into the place where he sat I 
had not challeng him with ani enquiry. next day, and for sever 
weeks, my account caus quit a commotion, and a host of peopl spoke 
to me about it; among the rest old edward pease, father of railways, and 
hi three sons, john, joseph, and henry. old edward sent for me to hi 
hous and ask me all particulars. He and other put thi question to 
me: "are you sure you were not asleep and had the nightmare?" My answer 
wa quit sure, for I had not been a minut in the cellar, and wa just 
go to get someth to eat. I wa certainli not under the influenc 
of strong drink, for I wa then, as I have been for forty-nin years, a 
teetotaler. My mind at the time wa perfectli free from trouble. what 
increas the excit wa the fact that a man a number of year 
before, who wa employ in the offic of the station, had commit 
suicide, and hi bodi had been carri into thi veri cellar. I knew 
noth of thi circumstance, nor of the bodi of the man, but mr. peas 
and other who had known him, told me my descript exactli 
correspond to hi appear and the way he dressed, and also that he 
had a black retriev just like the one which grip me. I should add 
that no mark or effect remain on the spot where I seem to be seized. 

"(signed) jame durham. 
"_dec. 9th, 1890._" 

follow the abov statement mr. stead append mr. kendall' reason 
for believ that what jame durham experienc wa object psychic 
phenomena, and neither produc dure sleep nor by hallucination. 

the argument use strike me as be so concis and sensibl that I 
think it will not be out of place to reproduc them. 

"first," mr. kendal says, "he (jame durham) wa accustom as watchman 
to be up all night, and therefor not like from that caus to feel 
sleepy. secondly, he had scarc been a minut in the cellar, and, 
feel hungry, wa just go to get someth to eat. thirdly, if he 
wa asleep at the begin of the vision, he must have been awak 
enough dure the latter part of it when he had knock the skin off hi 
knuckles. fourthly, there wa hi own confid testimony. I strongli 
inclin to the opinion that there wa an object caus for the vision, 
and that it wa genuin apparitional." 

So interest wa mr. kendal in the case that he visit the spot some 
short time later. He wa taken into the cellar where the manifest 
took place, and hi guide, an old offici of the north road station, 
inform him he well rememb the clerk--a man of the name of 
winter--who commit suicid there, and show him the exact spot where 
he had shot himself with a pistol. In dress and appear mr. winter 
correspond minut with the phenomenon describ by jame durham, and 
he had had a black retriever. 

mr. kendal came away more convinc than ever of the verac of jame 
durham' story, though he admit it wa not evidenti after the high 
standard of the s.p.r. I do not know whether the s.p.r. publish the 
case, and I certainli do not think mr. kendal need have mind if they 
did not--for after all there is no reason to suppos the judgment of the 
s.p.r. is alway infallible. 

mr. stead doe not comment on the apparit of the dog, which lead one 
to suppos case of anim phantasm were by no mean uncommon to him. 


_the grey dog of ---- house, birmingham_ 

accord to a stori current in the midlands, a hous in birmingham, 
near the roman cathol cathedral, wa onc veri badli haunted. A famili 
who took up their abod in it in the 'eighti complain of hear all 
sort of uncanni sounds--such as scream and sighs--com from a room 
behind the kitchen. On one occas the tenant' wife, on enter the 
sitting-room, wa almost startl out of her sens at seeing, stand 
befor the fireplace, the figur of a tall, stout man with a large, grey 
dog by hi side. what wa so alarm about the man wa hi face--it wa 
appar a mere blob of flesh without ani featur in it. the ladi 
scream out, whereupon there wa a terrif crash, as if all the 
crockeri in the hous had been suddenli clash on the stone floor; and 
a friend of the lady's, attract to the spot by the noise, saw two 
cloud of vapour, one resembl a man and the other a dog, which, after 
hover over the hearth for sever seconds, final dispers 
altogether. 

A gasfitter, when work in the house, saw the same figur no less 
than nine times, and so distinctli that he wa abl to give a detail 
descript of both the man and dog. 

the hous seem to have been well known in birmingham, and wa certainli 
stand as recent as 1885. mani theori were advanc as to it 
history, the one gain most credenc be that it wa occupied, in 
1829, by a man who suppli the medic student with human bodies. 

It wa notic at the time that mani peopl who were seen to enter the 
hous in the compani of the owner were never seen to leav it, which 
accord well with the theori of resurrect men. 

No suggest ha been offer to account for the animal, which may veri 
easili have been the phantom of the murderer' dog, or, what is rather 
less likely, the dog of one of hi numer victims. 

anyhow, explan or no explanation, the fact remain the hous wa 
haunt in the manner described, and F. grey, a warwickshir chief 
constable, in hi _recollections_, publish 1821, allud to it. 


_the dog in the cupboard_ 

miss prettyman, whom I met some year ago in cornwall, told me she onc 
live in a hous in westmorland that wa haunt by the apparit of a 
larg dog, envelop in a blueish glow, which appar eman from 
within it. the dog, whilst appear in all part of the house, 
invari vanish in a big cupboard at the back of the hall staircase. 
miss prettyman, her family, sever of their visitors, and the servant 
all saw the same phantasm, and were, perhaps, more frighten by the 
sudden of it advent than by it actual appearance. 

the theori wa that it wa the ghost of some dog that had been cruelli 
done to death--poss by starvation--in the cupboard. 


_how the ghost of a dog save life_ 

when I wa a boy, an elderli friend of mine, miss lefanu, narrat to me 
an anecdot which impress me much. It wa to thi effect. 

miss lefanu wa walk one day along a veri lone countri lane, when 
she suddenli observ an enorm newfoundland dog follow in her wake 
a few yard behind. be veri fond of dogs, she call out to it in a 
caress voic and endeavour to stroke it. To her disappointment, 
however, it dodg aside, and repeat the manoeuvr everi time she 
tri to touch it. At length, lose patience, she desisted, and resum 
her walk, the dog still follow her. In thi fashion they went on, 
until they came to a particularli dark part of the road, where the 
branch of the tree almost met overhead, and there wa a pool of 
stagnant, slimi water, suggest of great depth. On the one side the 
hedg wa high, but on the other there wa a slight gap lead into a 
thick spinney. miss lefanu never visit the spot alon after dusk, and 
had been warn against it even in the daytime. As she drew near to it, 
everyth that she had ever heard about it flash across her mind, and 
she wa more than onc on the verg of turn back, when the sight of 
the big, friendly-look dog plod behind, reassur her, she 
press on. just as she came to the gap, there wa a loud snap of 
twigs, and, to her horror, two tramps, with singularli sinist faces, 
sprang out, and were about to strike her with their bludgeons, when the 
dog, utter a low, omin growl, dash at them. In an instant the 
express of murder joy in their eye die out, one of abject terror 
took it place, and, drop their weapons, they fled, as if the veri 
salvat of their soul depend on it. As may be imagined, miss lefanu 
lost no time in get home, and the first thing she did on arriv 
there wa to go into the kitchen and order the cook to prepare, at once, 
a thoroughli good meal for her gallant rescuer--th newfoundland dog, 
which she had shut up secur in the back yard, with the laugh 
remark, "there--y can't escap me now." judg of her astonishment, 
however, when, on her return, the dog had gone. As the wall of the back 
yard were twelv feet high, and the door had been shut all the 
while--no one have pass through them--it wa imposs for the 
anim to have escaped, and the onli interpret that could possibl 
be put on the matter wa that the dog wa superphysical--a conclus 
that wa subsequ confirm by the experi of variou other 
people. As the result of exhaust enquiri miss lefanu eventu 
learn that mani year before, on the veri spot where the tramp had 
leap out on her, a pedlar and hi newfoundland dog had been discov 
murdered. 

thi stori be true, then, there is one more link in the chain of 
evid to show that dogs, as well as men, have spirits, and spirit 
that can, on occasion, at least, perform deed of practic service. 


_A precentor' story_ 

the late mr. w.t. stead, in hi volum of _real ghost stories_, narrat 
the following, which by reason of it be wit by three peopl 
simultaneously, may be regard as highli evidential. 

In repli to mr. stead' request to hear the anecdot the precentor say 
(I quot him _ad verbum_): 

"I wa walking, about nine year ago, one night in august, about ten 
o'clock, and about half a mile from the hous where we are now sitting. 
I wa go along the public road between the hamlet of mill of haldan 
and ballock. I had with me two young women, and we were leisur 
walk along, when suddenli we were startl by see a woman, a child 
about seven year old, and a newfoundland dog jump over the stone wall 
which wa on one side of the road, and walk on rapidli in front of us. I 
wa not in the least frightened, but my two companion were veri much 
startled. what bother me wa that the woman, the child, and the dog, 
instead of come over the wall natur one after the other, as would 
have been necessari for them to do, had come over with a bound, 
simultan leap the wall, light on the road, and then hurri 
on without a word. leav my two companions, who were too frighten to 
move, I walk rapidli after the trio. they walk on so quickli that it 
wa with difficulti that I got up to them. I spoke to the woman, she 
never answered. I walk besid her for some littl distance, and then 
suddenli the woman, the child, and the newfoundland dog disappeared. I 
did not see them go anywhere, they simpli were no longer there. I 
examin the road minutely, at the spot where they had disappeared, to 
see if it wa possibl for them to have gone through a hole in the wall 
on either side; but it wa quit imposs for a woman and a child to 
get over a high dyke on either side. they had disappeared, and I onli 
regret that I did not tri to pass my stick right through their bodies, 
to see whether or not they had ani resistance. find they had gone, I 
return to my ladi friends, who were quit unnerved, and who, with 
difficulty, were induc to go on to the end of their journey." 

one of hi companions, mr. stead goe on to explain, who heard him tell 
the stori at the time, corrobor the fact that it had made a great 
impress on those who had seen it. noth wa ever ascertain as to 
ani woman, child, or newfoundland dog that had ever been in the district 
before. when they got to ballock they enquir of the keeper of the 
bridg whether a woman, a child, and a dog had pass that way, but he 
had seen nothing. the apparit had disappear as suddenli as it had 
appeared. mr. stead' articl end here. Of course, one can onli surmis 
as to the natur of the phenomena. No member of the psychic research 
societi could do more--and in the absenc of ani authent histori of 
the spot where the manifest occurred, such a surmis can be of 
littl value. sinc the phenomena were seen by three peopl at the same 
time, it is quit safe to assum they were objective, but it is 
imposs to lay down the law as to whether they were actual phantasm 
of the dead--of a woman, child, and newfoundland dog who had all three 
met with some violent end--or phantasm of three live beings, who, 
happen to think of that local at the same time, had project 
their immateri bodi there simultaneously. but whichev of these 
altern be true, the same thing hold good in either case, viz. 
that the newfoundland dog had a spirit--and what appli to one dog 
should assuredli appli to the generality, if not, indeed, to all. 


_phantom dog seen on souter fell_ 

miss harriet martineau, in her _english lakes_, refer to certain 
strang phenomena seen from time to time on souter fell. 

In 1745, for example, a mr. wren and hi servant saw, simultaneously, a 
man and dog pursu some hors along a razor-lik ridg of rocks, on 
which it wa obvious imposs for ani ordinari be to gain a bare 
foothold, let alon walk. they watch the figur until the latter 
suddenli vanished, when mr. wren and hi servant, thinking, perhaps, the 
man, dog, and hors had realli fallen over the cliff, went to look for 
them. they search elsewhere, but despit their vigilance, noth wa 
to be found, and convinc at last that what they had seen wa someth 
superphysical, they came away mystified, and no doubt somewhat 
frightened. 

there is no suggest to make here other than the manifest may 
have been the phantasm of a man, dog, and hors that at some former 
date had been killed, either accident or purposely, in or near that 
spot. 


_the jump ghost_ 

mr. georg sinclair, in hi work _satan' invis world discovered_, 
give a detail account of haunt in a hous in mari king' close, 
edinburgh. 

the house, at the time mr. sinclair writes, wa occupi by mr. thoma 
coltheart, a law agent. seat one afternoon at home reading, mrs. 
coltheart wa immeasur startl at seeing, suspend in mid-air 
gaze at her, the head of an old man. she utter some sort of 
exclamation, most probabl a cry, and the apparit at onc vanished. 
some night later, when in bed, both she and her husband saw the same 
head, which wa present join by the head of a child, and a long, 
nake arm, which tri to catch hold of them. 

On anoth occasion, a member of the coltheart famili wa greatli 
alarm by the sudden appear of a larg dog, which leap on the 
chair by her side, and as suddenli disappeared. 

everi effort wa made to lay the ghosts. ministers--and one know how 
piou scotch clergymen are--wer call in, but their exhortations, 
instead of dispel or even minim the phenomena, onli increas 
them. It wa a case of more prayers, more spooks; which state of 
affairs, howev complimentari to the ministers' power of address, wa 
scarc as comfort to the colthearts, who, unabl to bear the 
strang sight and nois ani longer, evacu the premises. As no 
other tenant could be found, the hous wa eventu pull down, and 
a row of fine modern build now occupi the site. As the histori of 
the place could never be trace with ani degre of authenticity, one can 
do no more than specul as to the caus of the disturbances, which, I 
am inclin to think, were due to the phantom of peopl and anim 
that had onc actual live and die there. 


_dog seen befor a death_ 

mrs. crowe, in her _night side of nature_, mention the case of a young 
ladi name p----, who saw a big black dog twice suddenli appear and 
disappear by her side, immedi befor the death of her mother. 

In _the unseen world_ a stori is also told of the phantasm of a big 
black dog appear on the bed of a cornish child, doom to die shortli 
afterwards, the same dog invari manifest itself befor the death 
of ani member of the child' family. 

there are so mani case of a similar kind--on hear of them nearli 
everywher one goes--that one is led to believ some of them, at least, 
must be true. there is no more reason to believ all ghost-stori teller 
are liars, than there is to believ all parson are liars--and thi 
be so, addit proof is afford of the continu of the dog' 
life after death; for these famili canin ghost are more than probabl 
the phantasm of dog that onc belong to families--mayb centuri 
ago--and met their fate in some cruel and unnatur manner. 


_A dog scare by a canin ghost_ 

A friend of mine, edward morgan, had a terrier that wa found one 
morning, poison in a big stone kennel. soon afterward thi friend 
came to me and said, "I have got a new dog--a spaniel--but noth will 
induc it to enter the kennel in which poor zack wa poisoned. come and 
see!" 

I did so, and what he said wa true. mack (morgan gave all hi dog 
name that rhymed--zack, mack, jack, tack, and even whack and smack), 
when carri to the entranc of the kennel, resolut refus to cross 
the threshold, barking, whining, and exhibit unmistak symptom of 
fear. I knelt down, and peer into the kennel saw two lumin eye 
and the distinct outlin of a dog' head. 

"morgan!" I exclaimed, "the mysteri is easili solved; there' a dog in 
here." 

"nonsense!" morgan cried, speak veri excitedly. 

"but there is," I retorted, "see for yourself." 

morgan immedi bent down and poke hi head into the kennel. 

"what rot," he said. "you'r have me on, there' noth here." 

"what!" I cried, "do you mean to say you can see no dog?" 

"no!" he replied, "there is none!" 

"let me look again!" I said, and kneel down, I peep in. 

"do you mean to say you can't see a dog' face and eye look straight 
at us?" I asked. 

"no," he answered, "I can see nothing." and to prove to me the truth of 
what he said, he fetch a pole and rake about the kennel vigor 
with it. We both, then, tri to make mack enter, and morgan at last 
caught hold of him and place him forcibl inside. mack' terror knew no 
limit. He gave one loud howl, and fli out of the kennel with hi ear 
hang back, tore past into the front garden, where we left him in 
peace. morgan wa still sceptic as to there be anyth wrong with 
the kennel, but two day later wrote to me as follows:-- 

"I must apolog for doubt you the other day. I have just had, what 
you declar you saw, corroborated. A friend of my wife' wa call 
here thi afternoon, and, on hear of mack' refus to sleep in the 
kennel, at onc said, 'I know what' the matter. it' the smell. mack 
scent the poison which wa use to destroy zack. have the kennel 
thoroughli fumigated, and you'll have no more trouble.' At my wife' 
request she went into the yard to have a look at it, and the moment she 
bent down, she cri out like you did, 'why, there' a dog inside--a 
terrier!' My wife and I both look and could see nothing. the lady, 
however, persisted, and, on my hand her a stick, struck at the figur 
she saw. To her amaz the stick went right through it. then, and not 
till then, did we tell her of your experience. 'well!' she exclaimed, 
'I have never believ in ghosts, but I do so now. I am quit certain 
that what I see is the phantom of zack! how glad I am, becaus I am at 
last assur anim have spirit and can come back to us.'" 

In conclud the account of phantasm of dead dogs, let me quot two 
case taken from my work entitl _the haunt hous of london_, 
publish by mr. eveleigh nash, of fawsid house, king street, covent 
garden, london, w.c., in 1909. the case are these:-- 


_the phantom dachshund of w---- st., london, w._ 

In letter no. 1 my correspond writes:-- 

"though I am by no mean over-indulg to dogs, the latter gener 
greet me veri effusively, and it would seem that there is someth in 
my individu that is peculiarli attract to them. thi be so, I 
wa not greatli surpris one day, when in the immedi neighbourhood 
of x---- street, to find myself persist follow by a rough-hair 
dachshund wear a gaudi yellow collar. I tri to scare it away by 
shake my sunshad at it, but all to no purpose--it came resolut on; 
and I wa begin to despair of get rid of it, when I came to 
x---- street, where my husband onc practis as an oculist. there it 
suddenli alter it tactics, and instead of keep at my heels, 
becam my conductor, forg slowli ahead with a glide motion that 
both puzzl and fascin me. I furthermor observ that 
notwithstand the temperature--it wa not a whit less than nineti 
degre in the shade--th leg and stomach of the dachshund were cover 
with mud and drip with water. when it came to no. 90 it halted, and 
veer swiftli round, eye me in the strangest manner, just as if it 
had some secret it wa burst to disclose. It remain in thi 
attitud until I wa within two or three feet of it--certainli not 
more--when, to my unlimit amazement, it absolut vanished--melt 
away into thin air. 

"the iron gate lead to the area wa closed, so that there wa nowher 
for it to have hidden, and, besides, I wa almost bend over it at the 
time, as I want to read the name on it collar. there be no one 
near at hand, I could not obtain a second opinion, and so came away 
wonder whether what I had seen wa actual a phantasm or a mere 
hallucination. no. 90, I might add, judg by the brass plate on the 
door, wa inhabit by a doctor with an unpronounc foreign name," 
etc. etc. 

I think one cannot help attach a great deal of import to what 
thi ladi says, as her languag is strictli moder throughout, and 
becaus she doe not seem to have been biass by ani special view on 
the subject of anim futurity. 

correspond no. 2 (who, by the way, is a total stranger to the writer 
whose letter I have just quoted) is candidli devot to dogs, regard 
them as in everi way on a par with, if not actual superior to, most 
human beings. still, notwithstand thi partiality, and consequ 
profus of term of endearment, which will doubtless prove somewhat 
nauseat to many, her letter is, in my opinion, valuable, becaus it 
not onli refer to the phenomenon I have mentioned, but to a certain 
extent furnish a reason for it occurrence. the ladi write as 
follows:-- 

"I onc had a rough-hair dachshund, robert, whom I love devotedly. We 
were live at the time near h---- street, which alway had a peculiar 
attract for dear robert, who, I am now oblig to confess, had rather 
too much liberty--more, indeed, than eventu prove good for him. the 
servant complain that robert rule the house, and I believ what they 
said wa true, for my sister and I idol him, give him the veri 
best of everyth and never have the heart to refus him anyth he 
wanted. you will probabl scarc credit it, but I have sat up all 
night nurs him when he had a cold and wa otherwis indisposed. can 
you therefor imagin my feel when my darl wa absent one day 
from dinner? such a thing had never happen before, for, fond of 
morn 'constitutionals' as poor robert was, he wa alway the soul of 
punctual at meal times. 

"neither my sister nor I would hear of eat anything. whilst he wa 
missing, not a morsel did we touch, but slip on our hats, and 
bid the servant do the same, we scour the neighbourhood instead. 
the afternoon pass without ani sign of robert, and when bedtim came 
(he alway slept in our room) and still no sign of our pet, I thought 
we should both have gone mad. Of course, we advertised, select the 
most popular and, accordingly, the most like papers, and we resort 
to other mediums, too, but, alas! it wa hopeless. our darl littl 
robert wa irrevocably, irredeem lost. for day we were utterli 
inconsolable, do noth but mope morning, noon, and night. I cannot 
tell you how forlorn we felt, nor how long we should have remain in 
that state but for an incid which, although reveal the terribl 
manner of hi death, gave us everi reason to feel sure we were not 
part from him for all time, but would meet again in the great 
hereafter. It happen in thi wise: I wa walk along w---- street 
one even when, to my intens joy and surprise, I suddenli saw my 
darl stand on the pavement a few feet ahead of me, regard me 
intent from out of hi pathet brown eyes. A sensat of extrem 
cold now stole over me, and I notic with someth akin to a shock 
that, in spite of the hot, dri weather, robert look as if he had been 
in the rain for hours. He wore the bright yellow collar I had bought him 
shortli befor hi disappearance, so that had there been ani doubt as to 
hi ident that would have remov it instantly. On my call to him, 
he turn quickli round and, with a slight gestur of the head as if 
bid me to follow, he glide forward. My natur impuls wa to run 
after him, pick him up and smother him with kisses; but tri as hard as I 
could, I could not diminish the distanc between us, although he never 
appear to alter hi pace. I wa quit out of breath by the time we 
reach h---- street, where, to my surprise, he stop at no. 90 and, 
turn round again, gaze at me in the most beseech manner. I can't 
describ that look; suffic it to say that no human eye could have been 
more expressive, but of what beyond the most profound love and sorrow I 
cannot, I dare not, attempt to state. I have ponder upon it through 
the whole of a mid-summ night, but not even the severest of my mental 
effort have enabl me to solv it to my satisfaction. could I but do 
that, I feel I should have fathom the greatest of all mysteries--th 
mysteri of life and death. 

"I do not know for how long we stood there look at one another, it 
may have been minut or hours, or, again, but a few paltri seconds. He 
took the initi from me, for, as I leap forward to rais him in my 
arms, he glide through the stone step into the area. 

"convinc now that what I beheld wa robert' apparition, I determin 
to see the strang affair through to the bitter end, and enter the 
gate, I also went down into the area. the phantom had come to an abrupt 
halt by the side of a low wooden box, and as I foolishli made an 
abort attempt to reach it with my hand, it vanish instantaneously. 
I search the area thoroughly, and wa assur that there wa no 
outlet, save by the step I had just descended, and no hole, nor nook, 
nor cranni where anyth the size of robert could be complet hidden 
from sight. what did it all mean? ah! I knew robert had alway had a 
weak for explor areas, especi in h---- street, and in the box 
where hi wraith disappear I espi a piec of raw meat! 

"now there are way in which a piec of raw meat may lie without 
arous suspicion, but the posit of thi morsel strang suggest 
that it had been place there carefully, and for assuredli no other 
purpos than to entic stray animals. resolv to interrog the owner 
of the hous on the subject, I rap at the front door, but wa 
inform by the manservant, obvious a german, that hi master never 
saw anyon without an appointment. I then did a veri unwis thing--i 
explain the purpos of my visit to thi man, who not onli deni ani 
knowledg of my dog, but declar the meat must have been thrown into 
the area by some passer-by. 

"'no one in di hous trow away gut meat like dat,' he explained, 'we 
eat all we can git here, we have nut for de animals. pleas go away 
at once, or de master will be veri angry. He stand no nonsens from 
anyone.' 

"and as I had no alternative--for, after all, who would regard a ghost 
in the light of evidence?--i had to obey. I found out, however, from a 
medic friend that no. 90 wa tenant by mr. k----, an anglo-german 
who wa deem a veri clever fellow at a certain london hospital, where 
he wa often occupi in vivisection. 

"'i dare say,' my friend went on to remark, 'k---- doe a littl 
vivisect in hi privat surgery, by way of practice, and--well, you 
see, these foreign chap are not so squeamish in some respect as we 
are.' 

"'but can't he be stopped?' I asked. 'it is horrible, monstrou that he 
should be allow to murder our pets.' 

"'you don't know for certain that he has,' wa the reply, 'you onli 
suppos so from what you say you saw, and evid of that immateri 
natur is no evid at all. no, you can do noth except to be extra 
care in future, and if you have anoth dog make him steer clear of 
no. 90 h---- street.' 

"I wa sensibl enough to see that he wa right, and the matter dropped. 
I soon notic one thing, however, namely, that there were no more 
piec of meat temptingli display in the box, so it is just possibl 
k---- got wind of my enquiries, and thought it polici to desist from hi 
nefari practices. 

"poor robert! To think of him suffer such a cruel and ignomini 
death, and my be powerless to aveng it. sure if vivisect is 
realli necessary, and the welfar of mankind cannot be advanc by ani 
less barbar system, whi not oper on creatur less deserv of 
our love and piti than dogs? On creatur which whilst be nearer 
alli to man in physiolog and anatomy, are at the same time far below 
the level of brute creation in charact and disposition. 

"for example, whi not experi on wife-beat and cowardli street 
ruffians, and, one might reason add, on all those 
pseudo-humanitarian who, by their constant petit to parliament for 
the abolit of the lash, encourag everi form of blackguard and 
bestiality?" 

thi conclud the letter of correspond no. 2, and with the sentiment 
in the close paragraph I must say I heartili agree--onli I should 
like to add a few more peopl to the list. 

one other case of haunt of thi type is taken from my same work. 

"one all hallow e'en," wrote a mrs. sebuim, "I wa stay with some 
friend in hampstead, and we amus ourselv by work spells, to 
commemor the night. there is one spell in which one walk alon down 
a path sow hempseed, and repeat some fantast words; when one is 
suppos to see those that are destin to come into one' life in the 
near future. eager to put thi spell to the test, I went into the garden 
by myself and, walk boldli along a path, border on each side by 
evergreens, sprinkl hempse lavishly. 

"noth happening, I wa about to desist, when suddenli I heard a 
patter on the gravel, and turn round I beheld an ugli littl 
black-and-tan mongrel run toward me, wag it stumpi tail. not 
at all prepossess with the creature, for my own dog are pure-bred, 
and think it must have stray into the grounds, I wa about to 
drive it out, and had put down my hand to prevent it jump on my 
dress, when, to my astonishment, it had vanished. It liter melt 
away into fine air beneath my veri eyes. not know what to make of the 
incident, but feel inclin to attribut it to a trick of the 
imagination, I rejoin my friends. I did not tell them what had 
happened, although I made a memorandum of it in one of my innumer 
notebooks. within six month of thi incid I wa greatli astonish 
to find a dog, correspond with the one I have just described, run 
about on the lawn of my hous in bath. how the anim got there wa a 
complet mystery, and, what is stranger still, it seem to recogn 
me, for it rush toward me, frantic wag it diminut tail. I 
had not the heart to turn it away, as it seem quit homeless, and so 
the forlorn littl mongrel wa permit to make it home in my 
house--and a veri happi home it prove to be. for three year all went 
well, and then the end came swiftli and unexpectedly. I wa in 
blackheath at the time, and the mongrel wa in bath. It wa all hallow 
e'en, but there wa no hempse sowing, for no one in the hous but 
myself took the slightest interest in anyth appertain to the 
superphys or mystic. eleven o'clock came, and I retir to rest; my 
bed be one of those antiqu four-posters, hung with curtain that 
shine crimson in the ruddi glow of a cheer fire. all my prepar 
complete, I had pull back the hangings, and wa about to slip in 
between the sheets, when, to my unbound amazement, what should I see 
sit on the counterpan but the black-and-tan mongrel. It wa he 
right enough, there could not be anoth such ugli dog, though, unlik 
hi usual self, he evinc no demonstr of joy. On the contrary, he 
appear downright miserable. hi ear hung, hi mouth dropped, and hi 
blear littl eye were wateri and sad. 

"greatli perplexed, if not alarmed, at so extraordinari a phenomenon, I 
nevertheless felt constrain to put out my hand to comfort him--when, 
as I had half anticipated, he immedi vanished. two day later I 
receiv a letter from bath, and in a postscript I read that 'the 
mongrel' (we never call it by ani other name) 'had been run over and 
kill by a motor, the accid occur on all hallow e'en, about 
eleven o'clock.' 'of course,' my sister wrote, 'you won't mind veri 
much--it wa so extrem ugly, and--well--w were onli too glad it wa 
none of the other dogs.' but my sister wa wrong, for notwithstand 
it unsightli appear and hopeless lack of breed, I had grown to like 
that littl black-and-tan more than ani of my rare and choic pets." 

the follow account, which conclud my note on haunt by dog 
phantasms, wa sent me mani year ago by a gentleman then live in 
virginia, u.s.a. It run thus:-- 


_the strang disappear of mr. jeremiah dance_ 

"twenti pound a year for a twelve-room hous with larg front lawn, 
good stabl and big kitchen gardens. that sound all right," I 
commented. "but whi so cheap?" 

"well," the advertiser--mr. baldwin by name, a short, stout gentleman, 
with keen, glitter eyes--replied, "well, you see, it' a bit of a 
distanc from the town, and--er--most peopl prefer be nearer--lik 
neighbour and all that sort of thing." 

"like neighbours!" I exclaimed. "I don't. i'v just seen about enough of 
them. drain all right?" 

"oh, yes! perfect." 

"water?" 

"excellent." 

"everyth in good condition?" 

"first rate." 

"loneli the onli thing peopl object to?" 

"that is so." 

"then i'll oblig you to send someon to show me over the house, for I 
think it is just the sort of place we want. you see, after be bottl 
up in a theatr all the afternoon and evening, one like to get away 
somewher where it is quiet--somewher where one can lie in bed in the 
morn inhal pure air and undisturb by street traffic." 

"I understand," mr. baldwin responded, "but--er--it is rather late now; 
wouldn't you prefer to see over it in the morning? everyth look at 
it worst--it veri worst--in the twilight." 

"oh, i'll make allow for the dusk," I said. "you haven't got ani 
ghost stow away there, have you?" and he went off into a roar of 
laughter. 

"no, the hous is not haunted," mr. baldwin replied. "not that it would 
much matter to you if it were, for I can see you don't believ in 
spooks." 

"believ in spooks!" I cried. "not much. I would as soon believ in 
patent hair restorers. let me see over it at once." 

"veri well, sir. i'll take you there myself," mr. baldwin replied, 
somewhat reluctantly. "here, tim--fetch the key of the crow' nest and 
tell higgin to bring the trap round." 

the boy he address flew, and in a few minut the sound of wheel and 
the jingl of har announc the vehicl wa at the door. 

ten minut later and I and my escort were bowl merrili over the 
ground in the direct of the crow' nest. It wa earli autumn, and the 
cool even air, fragrant with the mellow of the lusciou virginian 
pippin, wa ting also with the sad insepar from the demis of 
a long and gloriou summer. evid of decay and death were 
everywhere--in the brown fallen leav of the oak and elms; in the bare 
and denud ditches. here a giant mill-wheel, half immers in a dark, 
still pool, stood idl and silent; there a hovel, but recent inhabit 
by hop-pickers, wa now tenantless, it glassless window board over, 
and a wealth of dead and rot veget matter in thick profus 
over the tini path and the singl stone doorstep. 

"i it alway as quiet and desert as this?" I ask of my companion, 
who continu crack hi whip as if he like to hear the 
reverber of it echoes. 

"always," wa the reply, "and sometim more so. you ain't use to the 
country?" 

"not very. I want to tri it by way of a change. are you well vers in 
the cri of birds? what wa that?" 

We were fast approach an exceedingli gloomi bit of the road where 
there were plantat on each side, and the tree unit their 
fantast fork branch overhead. I thought I had never seen so 
dismal-look a spot, and a sudden lower of the temperatur made me 
draw my overcoat tighter round me. 

"that--oh, a night bird of some sort," mr. baldwin replied. "an ugli 
sound, wasn't it? beastli things, I can't imagin whi they were created. 
whoa--steadi there, steady." 

the hors rear as he spoke, and take a violent plung forward, set 
off at a wild gallop. A moment later, and I utter an exclam of 
astonishment. keep pace with us, although appar not move at 
more than an ordinari walk pace, wa a man of medium height, dress 
in a panama hat and albert coat. He had a thin, aquilin nose, a rather 
pronounc chin, wa clean-shaven, and had a startlingli white 
complexion. By the side of him trot two poodles, whose close-crop 
skin show out with remark perspicuity. 

"who the deuc is he?" I asked, rais my voic to a shout on account 
of the loud clatter made by the horse' hoof and the wheels. 

"who? what?" mr. baldwin shout in return. 

"why, the man walk along with us!" 

"man! I can see no man!" mr. baldwin growled. 

I look at him curiously. It may, of course, have been due to the 
terrif speed we were going, to the difficulti of hold in the horse, 
but hi cheek were ashi pale, and hi teeth chattered. 

"do you mean to say," I cried, "that you can see no figur walk on my 
side of the hors and actual keep pace with it?" 

"of cours I can't," mr. baldwin snapped. "no more can you. it' an 
hallucin caus by the moonlight through the branch overhead. 
i'v experienc it more than once." 

"then whi don't you have it now?" I queried. 

"don't ask so mani questions, please," mr. baldwin shouted. "don't you 
see it is as much as I can do to hold the brute in? heaven preserv us, 
we were nearli over that time." 

the trap rose high in the air as he spoke, and then drop with such a 
jolt that I wa nearli thrown off, and onli save myself by the skin of 
my teeth. A few yard more the spinney ceased, and we were away out in 
the open country, plung and gallop as if our veri soul depend 
on it. from all side queer and fantast shadow of objects, which 
certainli had no materi counterpart in the moon-kiss sward of the 
rich, ripe meadows, rose to greet us, and fill the lane with their 
black-and-whit wavering, ether forms. the even wa one of 
wonder for which I had no name--wond associ with an ici that 
wa far from agreeable. I wa not at all sure which I like best--th 
black, stygian, tree-lin part of the road we had just left, or the 
wide ocean of brilliant moonbeam and streak suggestions. 

the figur of the man and the dog were equal vivid in each. though I 
could no longer doubt they were noth mortal, they were altogeth 
unlik what I had imagin ghosts. like the gener of peopl who are 
psychic and who have never had an experi of the superphysical, my 
concept of a phantasm wa a "thing" in white that made ridicul 
groan and still more ridicul clank of chains. but here wa 
someth different, someth that looked--save, perhaps, for the 
excess pallor of it cheeks--just like an ordinari man. I knew it wa 
not a man, partli on account of it extraordinari performance--no man, 
even if run at full speed, could keep up with us like that; partli 
on account of the unusu natur of the atmosphere--which wa altogeth 
indefinable--it brought with it; and also becaus of my own 
sensations--mi intens horror which could not, I felt certain, have been 
gener by anyth physical. 

I cogit all thi in my mind as I gaze at the figure, and in order 
to make sure it wa no hallucination, I shut first one eye and then the 
other, cover them altern with the palm of my hand. the figure, 
however, wa still there, still pace along at our side with the 
regular swing, swing of the born walker. We kept on in thi fashion till 
we arriv at a rusti iron gate leading, by mean of a weed-cov 
path, to a low, two-stori white house. here the figur left us, and 
as it seem to me vanish at the foot of the garden wall. 

"thi is the house," mr. baldwin panted, pull up with the greatest 
difficulty, the hors evinc obviou antipathi to the iron gate. "and 
these are the keys. i'm afraid you must go in alone, as I dare not leav 
the anim even for a minute." 

"oh, all right," I said. "I don't mind, now that the ghost, or whatev 
you like to call it, ha gone; i'm myself again." 

I jump down, and thread my way along the bramble-entangl path, 
reach the front door. On open it, I hesitated. the big, 
old-fashion hall, with the great, frown staircas lead to the 
galleri overhead, the mani open door show nought but bare, desert 
board within, the grim passages, all moonlit and peopl onli with 
queer flicker shadows, suggest much that wa terrifying. I fanci 
I heard noises, nois like stealthi footstep move from room to 
room, and tipto along the passag and down the staircase. onc my 
heart almost stop beat as I saw what, at first, I took to be a 
white face peer at me from a far recess, but which I eventu 
discov wa onli a daub of whitewash; and, onc again, my hair all 
but rose on end, when one of the door at which I wa look swung open 
and someth came forth. oh, the horror of that moment, as long as I 
live I shall never forget it. the someth wa a cat, just a rather 
lean but otherwis material, black tom; yet, in the state my nerv were 
then, it creat almost as much horror as if it had been a ghost. Of 
course, it wa the figur of the walk man that wa the caus of all 
thi nervousness; had it not appear to me I should doubtless have 
enter the hous with the utmost sang-froid, my mind set on noth but 
the condit of the walls, drains, etc. As it was, I held back, and it 
wa onli after a sever mental struggl I summon up the courag to 
leav the doorway and explore. cautiously, veri cautiously, with my 
heart in my mouth, I move from room to room, halt everi now and then 
in dread suspens as the wind, sough through across the open land 
behind the house, blew down the chimney and set the window-fram 
jarring. At the commenc of one of the passag I wa immeasur 
startl to see a dark shape poke forward, and then spring hurriedli 
back, and wa so frighten that I dare not advanc to see what it was. 
moment after moment sped by, and I still stood there, the cold sweat 
ooz out all over me, and my eye fix in hideou expect on the 
blank wall. what wa it? what wa hide there? would it spring out on 
me if I went to see? At last, urg on by a fascin I found 
imposs to resist, I crept down the passage, my heart throb 
pain and my whole be overcom with the most sickli 
anticipations. As I drew nearer to the spot, it wa as much as I could 
do to breathe, and my respir came in quick jerk and gasps. six, 
five, four, two feet and I wa at the dread angle. anoth step--taken 
after the most prodigi battle--and--noth sprang out on me. I wa 
confront onli with a larg piec of paper that had come loos from the 
wall, and flap backward and forward each time the breez from 
without rustl past it. the reaction after such an agoni of suspens 
wa so great, that I lean against the wall, and laugh till I cried. 
A noise, from somewher away in the basement, call me to myself, I 
went downstair and investigated. again a shock--thi time more sudden, 
more acute. press against the window-pan of one of the front 
reception-room wa the face of a man--with corpse-lik cheek and pale, 
malevol eyes. I wa petrified--everi drop of my blood wa congealed. 
My tongu glu to my mouth, my arm hung helpless. I stood in the 
doorway and stare at it. thi went on for what seem to me an 
eternity. then came a revelation. the face wa not that of a ghost but 
of mr. baldwin, who, get alarm at my long absence, had come to 
look for me. 

We left the premis together. all the way back to the town I 
thought--should I, or should I not, take the house? seen as I had seen 
it, it wa a ghoulish-look place--a weird as a pari catacomb--but 
then daylight make all the difference. view in the sunshine, it would 
be just like ani other house--plain brick and mortar. I like the 
situation; it wa just far enough away from a town to enabl me to 
escap all the smoke and traffic, and near enough to make shop easy. 
the onli obstacl were the shadows--th strange, enigmat shadow I 
had seen in the hall and passages, and the figur of the walker. dare I 
take a hous that knew such visitors? At first I said no, and then yes. 
something, I could not tell what, urg me to say yes. I felt that a 
veri grave issu wa at stake--that a great wrong connect in some 
manner with the mysteri figur await righting, and that the hand 
of fate point at me as the one and onli person who could do it. 

"are you sure the hous isn't haunted?" I demanded, as we slowli roll 
away from the iron gate, and I lean back in my seat to light my pipe. 

"haunted!" mr. baldwin scoffed, "why, I thought you didn't believ in 
ghosts--laugh at them." 

"no more I do believ in them," I retorted, "but I have children, and we 
know how imagin children are." 

"I can't undertak to stop their imaginations." 

"no, but you can tell me whether anyon els ha imagin anyth 
there. imagin is sometim veri infectious." 

"a far as I know, then, no; leastways, I have not heard tell of it." 

"who wa the last tenant?" 

"mr. jeremiah dance." 

"whi did he leave?" 

"how do I know? got tire of be there, I suppose." 

"how long wa he there?" 

"nearli three years." 

"where is he now?" 

"that' more than I can say. whi do you wish to know?" 

"why!" I repeated. "becaus it is more satisfactori to me to hear about 
the hous from someon who ha live in it. ha he left no address?" 

"not that I know of, and it' more than two year sinc he wa here." 

"what! the hous ha been empti all that time?" 

"two year is not veri long. houses--even town houses--ar frequent 
unoccupi for longer than that. I think you'll like it." 

I did not speak again till the drive wa over, and we drew up outsid 
the landlord' house. I then said, "let me have an agreement. i'v made 
up my mind to take it. three year and the option to stay on." 

that wa just like me. whatev I did, I did on the spur of the moment, 
a mode of procedur that often led me into difficulties. 

A month later and my wife, children, servants, and I were all ensconc 
in the crow' nest. 

that wa in the begin of october. well, the month pass by, and 
novemb wa fairli in befor anyth remark happened. It then came 
about in thi fashion. 

jennie, my eldest child, a self-wil and rather bad-temp girl of 
about twelve, evad the vigil of her mother, who had forbidden her 
to go out as she had a cold, ran to the gate one even to see if I wa 
anywher in sight. though bare five o'clock, the moon wa high in the 
sky, and the shadow of the big tree had alreadi commenc their 
gambol along the roadside. 

jenni clamber up the gate as children do, and peer over, suddenli 
espi what she took to be me, stride toward the house, at a swing 
pace, and follow by two poodles. 

"poppa," she cried, "how cute of you! onli to think of you bring home 
two doggies! oh, poppa, naughti poppa, what will mum say?" and climb 
over into the lane at immin danger to life and limb, she tore 
frantic toward the figure. To her dismay, however, it wa not me, 
but a stranger with a horribl white face and big glassi eye which he 
turn down at her and stared. she wa so frighten that she fainted, 
and some ten minut later I found her lie out there on the road. from 
the descript she gave me of the man and dogs, I felt quit certain 
they were the figur I had seen; though I pretend the man wa a 
tramp, and assur her she would never see him again. A week passed, and 
I wa begin to hope noth would happen, when one of the servant 
gave notic to leave. 

At first she would not say whi she did not like the house, but when 
press made the follow statement:-- 

"it' haunted, mrs. b----. I can put up with mice and beetles, but not 
with ghosts. i'v had a queer sensation, as if water wa fall down my 
spine, ever sinc i'v been here, but never saw anyth till last 
night. I wa then in the kitchen get readi to go to bed. jane and 
emma had alreadi gone up, and I wa prepar to follow them, when, all 
of a sudden, I heard footsteps, quick and heavy, cross the gravel and 
approach the window. 

"'the boss,' say I to myself; 'mayb he' forgot the key and can't get 
in at the front door.' 

"well, I went to the window and wa about to throw it open, when I got 
an aw shock. press against the glass, look in at me, wa a 
face--not the boss' face, not the face of anyon living, but a horrid 
white thing with a droop mouth and wide-open, glassi eyes, that had 
no more express in them than a pig. As sure as i'm stand here, 
mrs. b----, it wa the face of a corpse--th face of a man that had die 
no natur death. and by it side, stand on their hind-legs, and 
stare in at me too were two dogs, both poodles--also no live things, 
but dead, horribl dead. well, they stare at me, all three of them, for 
perhap a minute, certainli not less, and then vanished. that' whi i'm 
leaving, mrs. b----. My heart wa never overstrong. I alway suffer 
with palpitations, and if I saw those head again, it would kill me." 

after thi my wife spoke to me seriously. 

"jack," she said, "are you sure there' noth in it? I don't think 
mari would leav us without a good cause, and the descript of what 
she saw talli exactli with the figur that frighten jennie. jenni 
assur me she never said a word about it to the servants. they can't 
both have imagin it." 

I did not know what to say. My conscienc prick me. without a doubt I 
ought to have told my wife of my own experi in the lane, and have 
consult her befor take the house. suppos she, or ani of the 
children, should die of fright, it would be my fault. I should never 
forgiv myself. 

"you'v someth on your mind! what is it?" my wife demanded. 

I hesit a moment or two and then told her. the next quarter of an 
hour wa one I do not care to recollect, but when it wa over, and she 
had had her say, it wa decid I should make enquiri and see if there 
wa ani possibl way of get rid of the ghosts. with thi end in 
view, I drove to the town, and after sever fruitless effort wa at 
length introduc to a mr. marsden, clerk of one of the banks, who, in 
repli to my questions, said: 

"well, mr. b----, it' just thi way. I do know something, only--in a 
small place like this--on ha to be so extra care what one says. 
some year ago a mr. jeremiah danc occupi the crow' nest. He came 
here appar a total stranger, and though often in the town, wa onli 
seen in the compani of one person--hi landlord, mr. baldwin, with 
whom--if local gossip is to be reli on--h appear to be on term of 
the greatest familiarity. indeed, they were seldom apart, walk about 
the lane arm-in-arm, visit each other' hous on altern evenings, 
call each other "teddy" and "leslie." thi state of thing continu 
for nearli three years, and then peopl suddenli began to comment on the 
fact that mr. danc had gone, or at least wa no longer visible. An 
errand-boy, return back to town, late one evening, swore to be 
pass on the way by a trap contain mr. baldwin and mr. dance, who 
were speak in veri loud voices--just as if they were have a violent 
altercation. On reach that part of the road where the tree are 
thickest overhead, the lad overtook them, or rather mr. baldwin, 
prepar to mount into the trap. mr. danc wa nowher to be seen. and 
from that day to thi noth ha ever been heard of him. As none of hi 
friend or relat came forward to rais enquiries, and all hi bill 
were paid--sever of them by mr. baldwin--no one took the matter up. 
mr. baldwin pooh-pooh the errand-boy' story, and declar that, on 
the night in question, he had been alon in an altogeth differ part 
of the county, and knew noth whatev of mr. dance' movements, 
further than that he had recent announc hi intent of leav the 
crow' nest befor the expir of the three years' lease. He had not 
the remotest idea where he was. He claim the furnitur in payment of 
the rent due to him." 

"did the matter end there?" I asked. 

"in one sens of the word, yes--in another, no. within a few week of 
dance' disappear rumour got afloat that hi ghost had been seen on 
the road, just where, you may say, you saw it. As a matter of fact, i'v 
seen it myself--and so have crowd of other people." 

"ha anyon ever spoken to it?" 

"yes--and it ha vanish at once. I went there one night with the 
purpos of lay it, but, on it appear suddenly, I confess I wa so 
startled, that I not onli forgot what I had rehears to say, but ran 
home, without utter as much as a word." 

"and what are your deduct of the case?" 

"the same as everyon else's," mr. marsden whispered, "only, like 
everyon else, I dare not say." 

"had mr. danc ani dogs?" 

"yes--two poodles, of which, much to mr. baldwin' annoy (everyon 
notic this), he use to make the most ridicul fuss." 

"humph!" I observed. "that settl it! ghosts! and to think I never 
believ in them before! well, I am go to try." 

"tri what?" mr. marsden said, a note of alarm in hi voice. 

"tri lay it. I have an idea I may succeed." 

"I wish you luck, then. may I come with you?" 

"thanks, no!" I rejoined. "I would rather go there alone." 

I said thi in a well-light room, with the hum of a crowd 
thoroughfar in my ears. twenti minut later, when I had left all that 
behind, and wa fast approach the darkest part of an except 
dark road, I wish I had not. At the veri spot, where I had previous 
seen the figures, I saw them now. they suddenli appear by my side, and 
though I wa go at a great rate--for the hors took fright--they kept 
easi pace with me. twice I essay to speak to them, but could not 
ejacul a syllabl through sheer horror, and it wa onli by nerv 
myself to the utmost, and forc my eye away from them, that I wa 
abl to stick to my seat and hold on to the reins. On and on we dashed, 
until trees, road, sky, univers were obliter in one blind 
whirlwind that got up my nostrils, choke my ears, and deaden me to 
everything, save the all-terrorizing, instinct knowledge, that the 
figur by my side, were still there, stalk along as quietli and 
leisur as if the hors had been go at a snail' pace. 

At last, to my intens relief--for never had the ride seem longer--i 
reach the crow' nest, and as I hurriedli dismount from the trap, 
the figur shot past me and vanished. onc insid the house, and in the 
bosom of my family, where all wa light and laughter, courag returned, 
and I upbraid myself bitterli for thi cowardice. 

I confess to my wife, and she insist on accompani me the 
follow afternoon, at twilight, to the spot where the ghost appear 
to originate. To our intens dismay, we had not been there more than 
three or four minutes, befor dora, our youngest girl, a pretty, 
sweet-temp child of eight, came run up to us with a telegram, 
which one of the servant had ask her to give us. My wife, snatch 
it from her, and read it, wa about to scold her severely, when she 
suddenli paused, and clutch hold of the child with one hand, point 
hyster at someth on one side of her with the other. I looked, 
and dora looked, and we both saw, stand erect and stare at us, the 
spare figur of a man, with a ghastli white face and dull, lifeless 
eyes, clad in a panama hat, albert coat, and small, patent-leath 
boots; besid him were two glossy--abnorm glossy--poodles. 

I tri to speak, but, as before, wa too frighten to articul a 
sound, and my wife wa in the same plight. with dora, however, it wa 
otherwise, and she electrifi us by go up to the figure, and 
exclaiming: 

"who are you? you must feel veri ill to look so white. tell me your 
name." 

the figur made no reply, but glide slowli forward, move up to a 
large, isol oak, and point with the index finger of it left hand 
at the trunk of the tree, seemingli sank into the earth and vanish 
from view. 

for some second everyon wa silent, and then my wife exclaimed: 

"jack, I shouldn't wonder if dora hasn't been the mean of solv the 
mystery. examin the tree closely." 

I did so. the tree wa hollow, and insid it were three skeletons! 

* * * * * 

here follow an extract from a local paper: 


"_sensat discoveri in a wood near marytown_ 

"whilst explor in a wood, near marytown, the other evening, a parti 
of the name of b---- discov three skeletons--a human be and two 
dogs--in the trunk of an oak. from the remnant of cloth still 
adher to the human remains, the latter were prove to be those of an 
individu known as mr. jeremiah dance, whose strang disappear from 
the crow' nest--th hous he rent in the neighbourhood--som two 
year ago, wa the occas of much comment. On closer examination, 
extraordinari to relate, the remain have been prove to be those of a 
woman; and from certain abras on the skull, there is littl doubt 
she met with a violent end." 

A second extract taken from the same paper run thus:-- 


"_suicid at marytown_ 

"late last night perci baldwin, the man who is under arrest on suspicion 
of have caus the death of the unknown woman, whose skeleton wa 
found on monday in the trunk of a tree, commit suicid by hang 
himself with hi suspend to the ceil of hi cell. pin on hi 
coat wa a slip of paper bear these words: 'she wa my wife--i love 
her. she took to drink--i part from her. she becam a dog-worshipper. 
I kill her--and her dogs.'" 


_phantasm of live dogs_ 

I could quot innumer case of peopl who have either seen or heard 
the spirit of dead dogs. however, as space doe not permit of this, I 
proceed to the oft-rais question, "do anim as well as peopl 
project themselves?" My repli is--yes; accord to my experi they 
do. 

some friend of mine have a big tabbi that ha frequent been seen in 
two place at the same time; for example, it ha been observ by 
sever peopl to be sit on a chair in the dining-room, and, at the 
same moment, it ha been seen by two or more other person extend at 
full length befor the kitchen fire--th latter figur prove to be it 
immaterial, or what some design it astral body, which vanish the 
instant an attempt is made to touch it. the onli explan of thi 
phenomenon seem to me to lie in projection--th cat possess the 
faculti of separating--in thi instance, unconsciously--it spiritu 
from it physic body--th former travel anywhere, regardless of 
space, time and materi obstacles. I have often had experi similar 
to thi with a friend' dog. I have been seat in a room, either 
read or writing, and on look up have distinctli seen the dog lie 
on the carpet in front of me. A few minut later a scrape at the door 
or window--both of which have been shut all the while--and on my rise 
to see what wa there, I have discov the dog outside! had I not been 
so posit I had seen the dog on the ground in front of me, I might 
have thought it wa an hallucination; but hallucin are never so 
vivid nor so lasting--moreover, other peopl have had similar 
experi with the same dog. and whi not? dogs, on the whole, are 
everi whit as reason and reflect as the bulk of human beings! and 
how much nobler! compare, for a moment, the dog you know--no matter 
whether mastiffs, retrievers, dachshunds, poodles, or even pekinese, 
with your acquaintances--with the peopl you see everywher around 
you--false, greedy, spiteful, scandal-lov women, money-grub 
attorneys, lying, swindl tradesmen, vulgar parvenus, finicki curates, 
brutal roughs, spoilt, cruel children, hypocrit of both sexes--compar 
them carefully--and the comparison is entir in favour of the dog! 
and if the creat power (or powers) ha favour these wholli selfish 
and degener human be with spirits, and ha confer on certain 
of them the faculti of project those spirits, can one imagine, for 
one moment, that similar gift have been deni to dogs--their superior 
in everi respect? pshaw! out upon it! To think so would mean to think 
the unthinkable, to attribut to god qualiti of partiality, injustic 
and whimsicality, which would render him little, if anything, better 
than a jame the second of england, or a loui the fifteenth of france. 

besides, from my own experience, and the experi of those with whom 
I have been brought in contact, I can safe affirm that there are 
phantasm (and therefor spirits) of both live and dead dog in just 
the same proport as there are phantasm (and therefor spirits) of 
both live and dead human beings. 


_psychic properti of dogs_ 

some, not all, dogs--lik cats--possess the psychic properti of scent 
the advent of death, and they indic their fear of it by the most 
dismal howling. In my opinion there is veri littl doubt that dog 
actual see some kind of phantasm that, know when death is about to 
take place, visit the hous of the doom and stand besid his, or 
her, couch. I have had thi phantasm describ to me, by those who 
declar they have seen it, as a veri tall, hood figure, clad in a 
dark, loose, flow costume--it face never discernible. It would, of 
course, be foolish to say that a dog howl in a hous is invari 
the sign of death; there are mani other and obviou caus which produc 
someth of a similar effect; but I think one may be pretti well 
assur that, when the howl is accompani by unmistak sign of 
terror, then someone, either in the hous at the time, or connect 
with someon in the house, will shortli die. 


_dog in haunt houses_ 

when I investig a haunt house, I gener take a dog with me, 
becaus experi ha taught me that a dog seldom fail to give notice, 
in some way or another--eith by whining, or growling, or crouch 
shiver at one' feet, or spring on one' lap and tri to buri 
it head in one' coat--of the proxim of a ghost. I had a dog with 
me, when ghost-hunting, not so veri long ago, in a well-known haunt 
hous in gloucestershire. the dog--mi onli companion--and I sat on the 
staircas lead from the hall to the first floor. just about two 
o'clock the dog gave a loud growl. I put my hand out and found it wa 
shiver from head to foot. almost directli afterward I heard the loud 
clatter of fire-iron from somewher away in the basement, a door 
banged, and then something, or someone, began to ascend the stairs. up, 
up, up came the footsteps, until I could see--first of all a bluish 
light, then the top of a head, then a face, white and luminous, stare 
up at me. A few more steps, and the whole thing wa disclos to view. 
It wa the figur of a girl of about sixteen, with a shock head of red 
hair, on which wa stuck, all awry, a dirti little, old-fashion 
servant' cap. she wa clad in a cotton dress, soil and bedraggled, 
and had on her feet a pair of elastic-sid boots, that look as if 
they would fall to piec each step she took. but it wa her face that 
rivet my attent most. It wa startlingli white and full of an 
express of the most hopeless misery. the eyes, wide open and glassy, 
were turn direct on mine. I wa too appal either to stir or utter a 
sound. the phantasm came right up to where I stood, paus for a second, 
and then slowli went on; up, up, up, until a sudden bend in the 
staircas hid it from view. for some second there wa a continu of 
the footsteps, then there came a loud splash from somewher outsid and 
below--and then silence--sepulchr and omnipotent. 

I did not wait to see if anyth further would happen. I fled, and 
dick, my dog friend, who wa appar even more frighten than I, 
fled with me. We arriv home--panic-stricken. 

over and over again, on similar occasions, I have had a dog with me, and 
the same thing ha occurred--th dog ha made some nois indic of 
great fear, remain in a state of stupor dure the actual presenc of 
the apparition. 


_psychic propens of dog compar with those of cats_ 

though dog are, perhaps, rather more alarm at the unknown than cats, 
I do not think they have a keener sens of it proximity. still, for the 
veri reason that they show greater--mor unmistakable--ind of 
fear, they make surer psychic barometers. the psychic faculti of scent 
in dog would seem to be more limit than that in cats; for, wherea 
cat can not onli detect the advent and presenc of pleasant and 
unpleas phantom by their smells, few dog can do more than detect 
the approach of death. dog make friend nearly, if not quite, as 
readili with cruel and brutal peopl as with kind ones, simpli becaus 
they cannot, so easili as cats, distinguish by their scent the 
unpleas type of spirit cruel and brutal peopl attract; in all 
probability, they are not even awar of the presenc of such spirits. 

It would seem, on the face of it, that sinc dog are, on the whole, of 
a gentler disposit than cats, that is to say, not quit so cruel and 
savage, the phantasm of dog would be less like to be earth-bound 
than those of cats; but, then, one must take into consider the 
other qualiti of the two animals, and when these are put in the 
balance, one may find littl to choose--morally--between the cat and 
the dog. anyhow, after make allow for the fact that mani more cat 
die unnatur death than dogs, there would seem to be small numer 
differ in their hauntings--cas of dog ghost appear to be just 
as common as case of cat ghosts. 

apropo of phantom dogs, my friend dr. G. west write to me thus:-- 

"of the older english univers mani stori are told of bizarr 
happenings,--of duels, raggings, suicid and such-like--in olden times; 
but of k., venerable, illustri K. of ireland, few and far between are 
the account of similar occurrences. thi is one, however, and it deal 
with the phantom of a dog:-- 

"one evening, toward the end of the eighteenth century, john kelly, a 
dean of the colleg (extrem unpopular on account of hi suppos 
harsh treatment of some of the undergraduates), wa about to commenc 
hi supper, when he heard a low whine, and look down, saw a larg 
yellow dog cross the floor in front of him, and disappear immedi 
under the full-length portrait that hung over the antiqu chimney-piece. 
someth prompt him, he glanc at the picture. the eye that look 
into hi blinked. 

"'it must be the result of an overtax brain,' he said to himself. 
'those rascal undergradu have got on my nerves.' 

"he shut hi eyes; and re-open them, stare hard at the portrait. It 
wa not a delusion. the eye that gaze back at him were alive--al 
with the spirit of mockery; they smiled, laughed, jeered; and, as they 
did so, the knowledg of hi surround wa brought forcibl home to 
him. the room in which he wa seat wa situat at the end of a long, 
cheerless, stone passag in the western wing of the college. away from 
all the other room of the building, it wa absolut isolated; and had 
long born the reput of be haunt by a dog, which wa said to 
appear onli befor some catastrophe. the dean had hitherto commit the 
stori to the categori of fables. but now,--now, as he sat all alon in 
that big silent room, lit onli with the reddish ray of a fast-set 
august sun, and stare into the gleam eye befor him--h wa oblig 
to admit the extrem probabl of spookdom. never befor had the 
colleg seem so quiet. not a sound--not even the creak of a board 
or the far-away laugh of a student, common enough nois on most 
nights--fel on hi ears. the hush wa omnipotent, depressing, 
unnerving; he could onli associ it with the supernatural. though he 
wa too fascin to remov hi gaze from the thing befor him, he 
could feel the room fill with shadows, and feel them steal through the 
half-open windows, and, unit with those alreadi in the corners, glide 
noiselessli and surreptiti toward him. He felt, too, that he wa 
under the surveil of countless invis visages, all scan him 
curiously, and delight beyond measur at the sight of hi terror. 

"the moment pass in a breathless state of tension. He stare at the 
eyes, and the eye stare back at him. onc he endeavour to rise, but 
a dead weight seem to fall on hi shoulder and hold him back; and 
twice, when he tri to speak--to make some sound, no matter what, to 
break the appal silence--hi throat close as if under the pressur 
of cruel, relentless fingers. 

"but the _ultima thule_ of hi emot had yet to come. there wa a 
slight stir behind the canvas, a thud, a hollow groan that echo and 
re-echo throughout the room like the muffl clap of distant thunder, 
and the eye suddenli underw a metamorphosis--they grew glaze and 
glassi like the eye of a dead person. A cold shudder ran through the 
dean, hi hair stood on end, hi blood turn to ice. again he essay 
to move, to summon help; again he failed. the strain on hi nerv 
prove more than he could bear. A sudden sensat of nausea surg 
through him; hi eye swam; hi brain reeled; there wa a loud buzz 
in hi ears; he knew no more. some moment later one of the colleg 
servant arriv at the door with a bundl of letters, and on receiv 
no repli to hi raps, entered. 

"'good heavens! what' the matter?' he cried, gaze at the figur of 
the dean, loll head downward on the table. 'merci prudence, the 
gentleman is dead! no, he ain't--som of the young gent will be sorri 
enough for that--he' fainted.' 

"the good fellow pour out some water in a tumbler, and wa proceed 
to sprinkl the dean' face with it, when, a nois attract hi 
attention, he peer round at the picture. It wa bulg from the wall; 
it wa falling! and, good god, what wa that that wa fall with 
it--that huge black object? A coffin? no, not a coffin, but a corpse! 
the servant ran to the door shrieking, and, in less than a minute, 
passag and room were fill to overflow with a scare crowd of 
enquir offici and undergraduates. 

"'what ha happened? what' the matter with the dean? ha he had a fit, 
or what? and the picture? and--anderson? anderson lie on the floor! 
hurt? no, not hurt, dead! murdered!' 

"in an instant there wa silence, and the white-fac throng close in 
on one anoth as if for protection. In front of them, besid the fallen 
picture, lay the bodi of the most gay and popular student in the 
college--bob anderson--bob anderson with a stream of blood run from 
a deep incis in hi back made with some sharp instrument, that had 
been driven home with tremend force. He had, without doubt, been 
murdered. but by whom? then one of the undergraduates, a bright, boyish, 
fair-hair giant, name o'farroll, immens popular both on account of 
hi prowess in sport and an untold number of the most audaci 
escapades, spoke out: 

"'i saw anderson, about an hour ago, cross the quadrangle. I ask 
him where he wa going, and he replied, "to old kelly. I intend pay 
him out for 'gating' me last week." I enquir how, and he replied: 
"i'v a gloriou plan. you know that portrait stuck over hi 
mantel-shelf? well! In poke about the room the other day, when the old 
man wa out, I had a great find. directli behind the pictur is the door 
of a secret room, so neatli cover by the design on the wall that it 
is not discernible. It wa onli by the merest fluke I discov it. I 
wa take down the pictur with the idea of "touch up" the face, 
when my knuckl bump against the panel of the wall, touch a 
spring, and the door flew open, reveal an apart about six by 
eight feet large. I at onc explor it, and found it could be enter 
by the chimney. An idea then struck me--i would play a trick upon the 
dean by hide in thi secret chamber one even while he wa feeding, 
cut out the eye of the portrait, and peer through the caviti 
at him. and this,' o'farrol continued, point at the fallen picture, 
'i what he evid did after I left him. you can see the eye of the 
portrait have been removed.' 

"'that is so, shure,' one of the other undergraduates, mick maguire--six 
feet two in hi socks, everi inch--exclaimed. 'and, what is more, I knew 
all about it. anderson told me yesterday what he wa go to do, and I 
want to join him, but he said I would never get up the chimney, I 
would stick there. and, bedad, I think he wa right.' 

"at thi remark, despit the grim of the moment, sever of those 
present laughed. 

"'come, come, gentlemen!' one of the offici cried, 'thi is no time 
for levity. mr. anderson ha been murdered, and the question is--bi 
whom?' 

"'then, if that' the onli thing that is troubl you,' o'farrol put 
in, 'I fanci the solut is right here at hand,' and he look 
significantli at the dean. 

"an omin silenc followed, dure which all eye were fix on john 
kelly, some anxiously, some mere enquiringly, but not a few angrily, 
for kelly, as I have said before, had made himself particularli 
obnoxi just then by hi behaviour to the rowdier students; and, as 
ha ever been the case at k., these form no small portion of the 
community. 

"the dean hardli seem to realiz the situation. the digniti of offic 
blind him to danger. 

"'what do you mean?' he spluttered. 'I know noth of what happen to 
mr. anderson! really, really, o'farroll, your presumpt is 
preposterous.' 

"'there wa no one els in here but you and he, mr. kelly,' o'farrol 
retort coolly. 'it' onli natur we should think you know someth 
of what happened!' 

"on the arriv of the polic who had been sent for somewhat 
reluctantly--for the prestig of the colleg at that date wa veri dear 
to all--th premis were thoroughli searched, and, no other culprit 
be found, first of all dean kelli wa apprehended, and then, to make 
a good job of it, hi accuser, deni o'farroll. 

"all the colleg wa agog with excitement. No one could believ the dean 
wa a murderer; and it wa just as inconceiv to think o'farrol had 
commit the deed. and yet if neither of them had kill anderson, who 
in god' name had kill him? 

"the night succeed the affair, whilst the dean and o'farrol were 
still in jail await the inquest, a parti of undergradu were 
discuss the situat in maguire' rooms, when the door burst open, 
and into their midst, almost breathless with excitement, came a measly, 
bespectacl youth name brady--patrick brady. 

"'i'm aw sorri to disturb you fellows,' he stammered, 'but there 
have been odd nois just outsid my room all the evening, and i'v just 
seen a queer kind of dog, that vanished, god know how. i--i--well, you 
will call me an ass, of course, but i'm afraid to stay there alone, and 
that' the long and short of it.' 

"'begorra!' maguir exclaimed, 'it can't be poor bob' ghost already! 
what sort of nois were they?' 

"'nois like laughter!' bradi said. 'loud peal of horrid laughter.' 

"'someon tri to frighten you,' one of the undergrad observed, 'and 
faith, he succeeded. you are twice as white as ani sheet.' 

"'it' ill-tim mirth, anyhow,' someon els put in, 'with anderson' 
dead bodi upstairs. i'm for make an exampl of the blackguard.' 

"'and i,'--'and i,' the other echoed. 

"A gener movement followed, and head by bradi the process move 
to the north wing of the college. At that time, be it remembered, a 
larg proport of K. undergrad were in residence--now it is 
otherwise. On reach brady' room the crowd halt outsid and 
listened. for some time there wa silence; and then a laugh--low, 
monotonous, unmirthful, metallic--com as it were from some adjac 
chamber, and so unnatural, so abhorring, that it held everyon 
spell-bound. It die away in the reverber of the stone corridor, 
it echo seem to awak a choru of other laugh hardli less 
dreadful. again there wa silence, no one dare to express hi 
thoughts. then, as if by common consent, all turn precipit into 
brady' room and slam the door. 

"'that is what I heard,' bradi said. 'what doe it mean?' 

"'i it the mean of it you'r want to know?' maguir observed. 
'sure 'ti the devil, for no one but him could make such a noise. i'v 
never heard the like of it before. who ha the room on either side of 
you?' 

"'these?' bradi replied, point to the right. 'no one. they were 
vacat at easter, and are be repaint and decorated. these on the 
left--dobson, who is, I happen to know, at the present moment in co. 
mayo. He won't be back till next week.' 

"'then we can search them,' a student call hartnol intervened. 

"'to be sure we can,' bradi replied, 'but I doubt if you'll find 
anyone.' 

"A search wa made, and bradi prove to be correct. not a vestig of 
anyon wa discovered. 

"much mystified, maguire' parti wa prepar to depart, when hartnoll, 
who had taken the keenest interest in the proceedings, suddenli said, 
'who ha the room over yours, brady? sound, as you know, play curiou 
tricks, and it is just as like as not that laugh came from above.' 

"'oh, I don't think so,' bradi answered. 'the man overhead is belton, a 
veri decent sort. He is go in for hi final shortly, and is sweat 
fear hard at present. We might certainli ask him if he heard the 
noise.' 

"the student agreeing, bradi led the way upstairs, and in respons to 
their summon belton hastili open the door. He wa a typic 
book-worm--thin, pale and rather emaciated, but with a pleasant 
express in hi eye and mouth, that all felt wa assuring. 

"'hulloa!' he exclaimed, 'it isn't often i'm favour with a surpris 
parti of thi sort. come in'; and he press them so hard that they felt 
constrain to accept hi hospitality, and befor long were all seat 
round the fire, quaf whiski and puf cigar as if they meant to 
make a night of it. At two o'clock someon suggest that it wa high 
time they thought of bed, and belton rose with them. 

"'befor we turn in, let' have anoth search,' he said. 'it' strang 
you should all hear that nois except me--unless, of course, it came 
from below.' 

"'but there' noth under me,' bradi remarked, 'except the dine 
hall.' 

"'then let' search that,' belton went on. 'we ought to make a thorough 
job of it now we'v onc begun. besides, I don't relish be in thi 
lone place with that laugh "knocking" around, ani more than you do.' 

"he went with them, and they complet overhaul the ground 
floor--hall, dining-room, studies, passages, vestibules, everywher that 
wa not bar to them; but they were no wiser at the end of their 
search than at the beginning; there wa not the slightest clue as to the 
author of the laugh. 

* * * * * 

"on the morrow there wa a fresh shock. one of the colleg servants, on 
enter mr. maguire' room to call him, found that gentleman half 
dress and lie on the floor. 

"terrifi beyond measure, the servant bent over him and discov he 
wa dead, obvious stab with the same weapon that had put an end to 
bob anderson. 

"the factotum at onc gave the alarm. everyon in the colleg came 
troop to the room, and for the second time within three day a 
gener hue and cri wa raised. all, again, to no purpose--th murder 
had left no trace as to hi identity. however, one thing at least wa 
established, and that wa the innoc of dean kelli and deni 
o'farroll. they were both liberated. 

"then hartnoll, who seem to have been a regular sherlock holmes, got to 
work in grim earnest. On the floor in maguire' room he pick up a 
diminut silver-top pencil, which had roll under the fender and 
had so escap observation. He ask sever of maguire' most intim 
friend if they rememb see the pencil-cas in maguire' 
possession, but they shook their heads. He enquir in other quarters, 
too, but with no better result, and final resolv to ask brady, who 
belong to quit a differ set from himself. with that object in view 
he set off to brady' room shortli after supper. As there wa no 
respons to hi raps, he at length open brady' door. In front of the 
hearth in a big easi chair sat a figure. 

"'brady, by all that' holy,' hartnol exclaimed. 'bi jupiter, the 
beggar' asleep. that' what come of swot too hard! brady!' 

"approach the chair he call again, 'brady!' and get no reply, 
pat the figur gentli on the back. 

"'be jabbers, you sleep soundly, old fellow!' he said. 'how about that!' 
and he shook him heartili by the shoulder. the instant he let go the 
figur collapsed. In order to get a closer view hartnol then struck a 
light with the tinder box. 

"the flicker of the candl flame fell on brady' face. It wa 
white--ghastli white; there wa no anim in it; the jaw dropped. 

"with a cri of horror hartnol sprang back, and as he did so a great 
yellow dog dash across the hearth in front of him, whilst from 
somewher close at hand came a laugh--long, low and satirical. A cold 
terror grip hartnoll, and for a moment or so he wa on the verg of 
fainting. however, hear voic in the quadrangle, he pull himself 
together, approach the window on tiptoe, and, peer through the 
glass, perceiv to hi utmost joy two of hi friend directli beneath 
him. 'I say, you fellows,' he call in low tones, 'come up here 
quickly--brady' rooms. i'v seen the phantom dog. there' been anoth 
tragedy, and the murder is close at hand. come quietli and we may 
catch him!' 

"he then retrac hi step to the centr of the room and listened. 
again there came the laugh--subtle, protracted, hellish--and it seem 
to him as if it must origin in the room overhead. 

"A nois in the direct of the hearth made him look round. some loos 
plaster had fallen, and whilst he still gazed, more fell. the truth of 
the whole thing then dawn on him. the murder wa in the chimney. 

"hartnol wa a creatur of impulse. In the excit of the moment he 
forgot danger, and the dastardli natur of the crime gave him more than 
hi usual amount of courage. He rush at the chimney, and, regardless 
of soot and darkness, began an impromptu ascent. 

"half-way up someth struck him--once, twice, thrice,--sharply, and 
there wa a soft, malevol chuckle. 

"at thi junctur the two undergradu arriv in brady' room. No one 
wa there--noth save a hunched-up figur on a chair. 

"'hartnoll!' they whispered. 'hartnoll!' No reply. they call 
again--stil no reply. again and again they called, until at length, 
through sheer fatigue, they desisted, and seiz with a sudden panic 
fled precipit downstair and out into the quadrangle. 

"onc more the alarm wa given, and onc again the whole college, wild 
with excitement, hasten to the scene of the outrage. 

"thi time there wa a doubl mystery. bradi had been murdered--hartnol 
had disappeared. the polic were summon and the whole build 
ransacked; but no one thought of the chimney till the search wa nearli 
over, and half the throng--overcom with fatigue--had retired. o'farrol 
wa the discoverer. happen to glanc at the hearth he saw someth 
drop. 

"'for heaven' sake, you fellows!' he shouted. 'look! blood! you may 
take it from me there' a corps in the chimney.' 

"A dozen candl invad the hearth, and a herculean policeman undertook 
the ascent. In breathless silenc the crowd below waited, and, after a 
few second of intens suspense, two helpless leg appear on the hob. 
bit by bit, the rest of the bodi followed, until, at length, the whole 
figur of hartnoll, black, bleeding, bloodstained, wa disclos to 
view. 

"at first it wa thought that he wa dead; but the surgeon who had 
hurri to the scene pronounc him still alive, there aros a 
tremend cheer. the murder had at all event been foil thi time. 

"'begorrah!' cri o'farroll, 'hartnol wa after the murder when he 
wa struck, and shure i'll be after him the same way myself.' and befor 
anyon could prevent him o'farrol wa up the chimney. up, up, up, until 
he found himself go down, down, down; and then--bedad--h step 
right out on to the floor of belton' room. 

"'hulloa!' the latter exclaimed, look not a bit disconcerted, 'that' 
a curiou mode of make your entranc into my domain! whi didn't you 
come by the door?' 

"'because,' o'farrol replied, point to a patch of soot near the 
washstand, 'I follow you. own up, dicki belton. you'r the 
culprit--y did for them all.' and belton laughed. 

* * * * * 

"yes, it wa true; overwork had turn belton' brain, and he wa 
subsequ sent to a crimin lunat asylum for the rest of hi life. 
but there were moment when he wa compar sane, and in these 
interim he confess everything. anderson had told him that he wa 
go to hoax the dean, and fill with indign at the idea of such 
a trick be play on a colleg official--for he, belton, wa a great 
favourit with the 'beaks'--h had accompani anderson on the plea of 
help him, intending, in reality, to frustrat him. It wa not till he 
wa in the chimney, crouch behind anderson, that the thought of 
kill hi fellow-stud had enter hi mind. the heat of hi 
hiding-place, act on an alreadi overwork brain, hasten on the 
madness; and hi finger close on a clasp knife in one of hi 
pockets, inspir him with a desir to kill. 

"the work onc begun, he had argu with himself, would have to be 
continued, and he had then and there decid that all unruli 
undergradu should be exterminated. 

"with what measur of success thi determin wa carri out need 
not be recapitul here; but with regard to the phantom dog a few 
word may be added. sinc it appear immedi befor the committ 
of each of the three murder I have just record (it wa seen by mr. 
kelli befor the death of bob anderson; by brady, befor the murder of 
maguire; and by hartnoll, befor bradi wa murdered), I think there can 
neither be doubt as to it exist nor as to the purport of it 
visits. 

"moreover, it latest appear in the university, report to me quit 
recently, preced a seriou outbreak of fire." 


_nation ghost in the form of dogs_ 

one of the most notori dog ghost is the gwyllgi in wales. thi 
apparition, which is of a particularli terrifi appearance, chiefli 
haunt the lane lead from mousiad to lisworney crossways. 

belief in a spectral dog, however, is common all over the british isles. 
the apparit doe not belong to ani one breed, but appear equal 
often as a hound, setter, terrier, shepherd dog, newfoundland and 
retriever. In lancashir it is call the "trash" or "striker"; trash, 
becaus the sound of it tread is thought to resembl a person walk 
along a miry, sloppi road, with heavi shoes; striker, becaus it is said 
to utter a curiou screech which may be taken as a warn of the 
approach death of some rel or friend. when follow the phantom 
retreats, glare at it pursuer, and either sink into the ground with 
a harrow shriek, or disappear in some equal mysteri manner. 

In norfolk and cambridgeshir thi spectr is name the "shuck," the 
local name for shag--and is report to haunt churchyard and other 
dreari spots. 

In the parish of overstrand, there use to be a lane call "shuck' 
lane," name after thi phantasm. 

round about leed the spectr dog is call "padfoot," and is about the 
size of a donkey, with shaggi hair and larg eye like saucers. My 
friend mr. barker tell me there was, at one time, a ghost in the 
hebrid call the lamper, which wa like a veri big, white dog with no 
tail. It ran sometim straight ahead, but usual in circles, and to 
see it wa a prognost of death. mr. barker, go home by the 
sea-coast, saw the lamper in the hedge. He struck at it, and hi stick 
pass right through it. the lamper rush away, whine and howl 
alternately, and disappeared. mr. barker wa so scare that he ran all 
the way home. On the morrow, he learn of hi father' death. 

In northumberland, durham, and variou part of yorkshire, the 
ghost-dog, which is firmli believ in, is style barguest, bahrgeist, 
or boguest; whilst in lancashir it is term the boggart. it most 
common form in these counti is a large, black dog with flame eyes; 
and it appear is a certain prognost of death. 

accord to tradit there wa onc a "barguest" in a glen between 
darlington and houghton, near throstlenest. anoth haunt a piec of 
wast land abov a spring call the oxwells, between wreghorn and 
headingley hill, near leeds. On the death of ani person of local 
import in the neighbourhood the creatur would come forth, follow 
by all the other dogs, bark and howling. (henderson refer to these 
haunt in hi _folk-lor of northern counties_.) 

anoth form of thi anim spectr is the capelthwaite, which, 
accord to common report, had the power of appear in the form of 
ani quadruped, but usual chose that of a large, black dog. 


"_the mauth doog_" 

one of the most famou canin apparit is that of the "mauth doog," 
onc said--and, I believe, still said--to haunt peel castle, isl of 
man. 

it favourit place, so I am told, wa the guard-chamber, where it use 
to crouch by the fireside. the sentry, so the stori runs, got so 
accustom to see it, that they ceas to be afraid; but, as they 
believ it to be of evil origin, wait for an opportun to seiz 
them, they were veri particular what they said or did, and refrain 
from swear in it presence. the mauth doog use to come out and 
return by the passag through the church, by which the sentri on duti 
had to go to deliv the key everi night to the captain. these men, 
however, were far too nervou to go alone, and were invari 
accompani by one of the retainers. On one occasion, however, one of 
the sentinels, in a fit of drunken bravado, swore he wa afraid of 
nothing, and insist on go alone. hi comrad tri to dissuad 
him, upon which he becam abusive, curs the mauth doog, and said he 
would d----d well strike it. An hour later, he return absolut mad 
with horror, and speechless; nor could he even make signs, wherebi hi 
friend could understand what had happen to him. He die soon 
after--hi featur distorted--in violent agony. after thi the 
apparit wa never seen again. 

As to what class of spirit the spectr dog belongs, that is imposs 
to say. At the most we can onli surmise, and I should think the chanc 
of it be the actual phantasm of some dead dog or an element are 
about equal. It is probabl sometim the one and sometim the other; 
and it origin is veri possibl like that of the banshee. 


_spectral hounds_ 

As with the spectr dog, so with pack of hounds, stori of them come 
from all part of the country. 

gervas of tilburi state that as long ago as the thirteenth centuri a 
pack of spectral hound wa frequent witnessed, on night when the 
moon wa full, scamper across forest and downs. In the twelfth 
centuri the pack wa known as "the herlething" and haunted, chiefly, the 
bank of the wye. 

roby, in hi _tradit of lancashire_; hardwick, in hi _traditions, 
superstitions, and folk-lore_; homerton, in hi _isl of loch awe_; 
wirt sykes, in hi _british goblins_; sir walter scott, and others, all 
refer to them. In the north of england they are known as "gabriel' 
hounds"; in devon as the "wisk," "yesk," "yeth," or "heath hounds"; in 
wale as the "cwn annwn" or "cyn y wybr"; in cornwal as the "devil and 
hi dandy-dogs"; and in the neighbourhood of leed as the "gabbl 
retchets." they are common all over the continent. In appear they 
are usual describ as monstrous, human-head dogs, black, with fieri 
eye and teeth, and sprinkl all over with blood. they make a great 
howl noise, which is veri shrill and mournful, and appear to be in 
hot pursuit of some unseen quarry. when they approach a house, it may be 
taken as a certain sign someon in that hous will die veri shortly. 

accord to mr. roby, a spectr huntsman known by the name gabriel 
ratchets, accompani by a pack of phantom hounds, is said to hunt a 
milk-whit doe round the eagle' crag in the vale of todmorden everi all 
hallow eve. 

these hound were also seen in norfolk. A famou ecclesiast, when on hi 
way to the coast, wa forc to spend the night in the king' lynn inn, 
owe to a violent snowstorm. retir to bed directli after supper, he 
tri to forget hi disappoint in read a volum of sermon he had 
bought at a second-hand shop in buri st. edmunds. 

"I think I can use thi one," he said to himself. "it will do nice for 
the peopl of aylesham. they are so steep in hypocrisi that noth 
short of violent denunci will bring it home to them. thi I think, 
however, will pierc even their skins." 

A sudden nois made him spring up. 

"hounds!" he exclaimed. "and at thi time of night! good heavens!" 

He flew to the window, and there, career through the yard, bay as 
they ran, were, at least, fifti luminous, white hounds. instead of 
leap the stone wall, they pass right through it, and the bishop 
then realiz that they were gabriel hounds. the follow even he 
receiv tide of hi son's--hi onli son's--death. 

I have heard that the "yeth hounds" were seen, not so long ago, in a 
parish in yorkshir by an old poacher call barnes. barn wa walk 
in the field one night, when he suddenli heard the bay of the 
hounds, and the hoars shout of the huntsman. the next moment the whole 
pack hove in view and tore past him so close that he receiv a cut from 
"the whip" on hi leg. To hi surprise, however, it did not hurt him, it 
onli felt ici cold. He then knew that he had seen the "yeth hounds." 


_A spectral pack of hound in russia_ 

A gentleman of the name of rappaport whom I onc met in southampton told 
me of an experi he had onc had with a spectral pack of hound on 
the slope of the urals. "it wa about half-past eleven one winter' 
night," he said, "and I wa drive through a thick forest, when my 
coachman suddenli lean back in hi seat and call out, 'do you hear 
that?' I listened, and from afar came a plaintive, whine sound. 'it' 
not volki, is it?' I asked. 'i'm afraid so, master,' the coachman 
replied, 'they'r come on after us.' 

"'but they are some way off still!' I said. 

"'that is so,' he responded, 'but wolv run quick, and our hors are 
tired. If we can reach the lake first we shall be all right, but should 
they overtak us befor we get there--' and he shrug hi great 
shoulder suggestively. 'not anoth word,' I cried. 'drive--dr as if 
'twere the devil himself. I have my rifl ready, and will shoot the 
first wolf that show itself.' 

"'veri good, master,' he answered. 'I will do everyth that can be 
done to save your skin and mine.' He crack hi whip, and away flew the 
hors at a breakneck speed. but fast as they went, they could not 
outstrip the sound of the howling, which gradual drew nearer and 
nearer, until around the curv we had just pass shot into view a huge 
gaunt wolf. I rais my rifl and fired. the beast fell, but anoth 
instantli took it place, and then anoth and another, till the whole 
pack came into sight, and close behind us wa an ocean of white, 
tossing, foam-fleck jaw and red gleam eyes. 

"I empti my rifl into them as fast as I could pull the trigger, but 
it onli check them momentarily. A few snaps, and of their wound 
brethren there wa noth left but a pile of glisten bones. then, 
hie away, and they were onc again in red-hot pursuit. At last our pace 
slackened, and still I could see no sign of the lake. A great grey 
shape, follow by others, then rush by us and tri to reach the 
horses' flank with their sharp, gleam teeth. A few more seconds, 
and I knew we should be both fighting, back to back, the last great 
fight for existence. inde I had ceas firing, and wa alreadi 
begin to strike out furious with the butt end of my rifle, when a 
new sound arrest my attention. the bay of dogs! 'dogs!' I screamed, 
'dogs, ivan!' (that wa the coachman' name) 'dogs!' and, in my mad joy, 
I brain two wolv in as mani blows. the next moment a larg pack of 
enorm white hound came race down on us. the wolv did not wait to 
disput the field; they all turn tail and, with loud howl of terror, 
rush off in the direct they had come. On came the hounds--mor 
beauti dog I had never seen; as they swept by, more than one brush 
against my knees, though I could feel noth save intens cold. when 
they were about twenti yard ahead of us, they slow down, and 
maintain that distanc in front of us till we arriv on the shore of 
the lake. there they halted, and throw back their heads, bay as if 
in farewell, and suddenli vanished. We knew then that they were no 
earthli hounds, but spirit ones, sent by a merci provid to save 
us from a cruel death." 




chapter iii 

hors and the unknown 


As in my chapter on cat and dogs, I will prefac thi chapter on 
hors with instanc of alleg haunt localities. 

I take my first case from mr. w.t. stead' _real ghost stories_, 
publish in 1891. It is call "A weird stori from the indian hills," 
and mr. stead prelud it thus: the "tale is told by gener barter, 
c.b., of careystown, whitegate, co. cork. At the time he wit the 
spectral cavalcad he wa live on the hill in india, and when one 
even he wa return home he caught sight of a rider and attend 
come toward him. the rest of the story, given in the general' own 
words, is as follows:-- 

"at thi time the two dog came, and, crouch at my side, gave low, 
frighten whimpers. the moon wa at the full--a tropic moon--so 
bright that you could see to read a newspap by it light, and--i saw 
the parti befor me advanc as plainli as it were noon day. they were 
abov me some eight or ten feet on the bridle-road, the earth thrown 
down from which slope to within a pace or two of my feet. On the parti 
came, until almost in front of me, and now I had better describ them. 
the rider wa in full dinner dress, with white waistcoat, and wear a 
tall chimney-pot hat, and he sat a power hill poni (dark brown, with 
mane and tail) in a listless sort of way, the rein hang loos from 
both hands. A syce led the poni on each side, but their face I could 
not see, the one next to me have hi back to me and the one farthest 
off be hidden by the pony' head. each held the bridl close by the 
bit, the man next me with hi right and the other with hi left hand, 
and the hand were on the thigh of the rider, as if to steadi him in 
hi seat. As they approached, I know they could not get to ani place 
other than my own, call out in hindustani, 'quon hai?' (who is it?). 
there wa no answer, and on they came until right in front of me, when I 
said, in english, 'hullo, what the d----l do you want here?' instantli 
the group came to a halt, the rider gather the bridl rein up in 
both hands, turn hi face, which had hitherto been look away from 
me, toward me, and look down upon me. the group wa still as in a 
tableau, with the bright moon shine upon it, and I at onc recogn 
the rider as lieuten b., whom I had formerli known. the face, 
however, wa differ from what it use to be; in the place of be 
clean-shaven, as when I use to know it, it wa now surround by a 
fring (what use to be known as a newgat fringe), and it wa the face 
of a dead man, the ghastli waxen pallor of it brought out more 
distinctli in the moonlight by the dark fring of hair by which it wa 
encircled; the body, too, wa much stouter than when I had known it in 
life. 

"I mark thi in a moment; and then resolv to lay hold of the thing, 
whatev it might be. I dash up the bank, and the earth which had been 
thrown on the side give under my feet, I fell forward up the bank on 
my hands, recov myself instantly. I gain the road, and stood in 
the exact spot where the group had been, but which wa now vacant, there 
wa not the trace of anything; it wa imposs for them to go on, the 
road stop at a precipic about twenti yard further on, and it wa 
imposs to turn and go back in a second. all thi flash through my 
mind, and I then ran along the road for about 100 yards, along which 
they had come, until I had to stop for want of breath, but there wa no 
trace of anything, and not a sound to be heard. I then return home, 
where I found my dogs, who, on all other occas my most faith 
companions, had not come with me along the road. 

"next morn I went up to d., who belong to the same regiment as b., 
and gradual induc him to talk of him. I said, 'how veri stout he had 
becom lately, and what possess him to allow hi beard to grow with 
that horrid fringe?' D. replied, 'yes, he becam veri bloat befor hi 
death. you know he led a veri fast life, and while on the sick list he 
allow the fring to grow, in spite of all that we could say to him, 
and I believ he wa buri with it.' I ask him where he got the poni 
I had seen, describ it minutely. 'why,' said d., 'how do you know 
anyth about all this? you hadn't seen B. for two or three years, and 
the poni you never saw. He bought him at peshawur, and kill him one 
day ride in hi reckless fashion down the hill to trete.' I then told 
him what I had seen the night before. 

"once, when the gallop sound wa veri distinct, I rush to the door 
of my house. there I found my hindoo bearer, stand with a tatti in 
hi hand. I ask him what he wa there for. He said that there came a 
sound of ride down the hill, and 'pass him like a typhoon,' and went 
round the corner of the house, and he wa determin to waylay it, 
whatev it was." 

In comment on the case, mr. stead remarks, "that such a stori as 
this, grave told by a british gener in the present day, help us to 
understand how our ancestor came to believ in the wonder stori of 
hern the hunter." I do not know about hern the hunter, but it is at 
all event good testimoni that hors as well as men have spirits, for 
one of the ghost the gener saw was, undoubtedly, that of the poni 
murder by B. whi it wa still ridden by the phantom of it former 
master is anoth question. 

the next case I narrat is also taken from mr. stead' same work. It wa 
sent him by one of the lead townsmen of cowes, in the isl of wight, 
and run thus:-- 

"on a fine even in april, 1859, the writer wa ride with a friend 
on a countri road. twilight wa close down on us, when, after a 
silenc of some minutes, my friend suddenli exclaimed: 

"'no man know me better than you do, J. Do you think I am a nervous, 
easili frighten sort of man?' 

"'far from it,' said I, 'among all the men I know in the wild countri I 
have live and work in, I know none more fearless or of more 
unhesit nerve.' 

"'well,' said he, 'I think I am that, too, and though I have travel 
these road all sort of hours, summer and winter, for twenti years, I 
never met anyth to startl me, or that I could not account for, until 
last monday evening. about thi time it was. ride old fan' (a chestnut 
mare) 'here on thi cross-' (a four-way cross) 'road, on my near side 
wa a man on a grey horse, come from thi left-hand road. I had to 
pull my off-rein to give myself room to pass ahead of him; he wa come 
at a right angl to me. As I pass the head of the hors I call out 
"good night." hear no reply, I turn in my saddl to the off-side, 
to see whether he appear to be asleep as he rode, but to my surpris I 
saw neither man nor horse. So sure wa I that I had seen such, that I 
wheel old fan round, and rode back to the middl of the cross, and on 
neither of the four road could I see a man or horse, though there wa 
light enough to see two hundr or three hundr yards, as we can now. 
well, I then rode over that gate' (a gate at one corner open into a 
grass field), 'think he might have gone that way; look down by 
each hedge, I could see noth of my man and horse; and then--and not 
until then--i felt myself thrill and start with a shudder sens that 
I had seen someth uncanny, and, jove! I put the mare down thi hill 
we are on now at her veri best pace. but the strangest part of my stori 
is to come,' said he, continuing. 

"'after I had done my busi at the farmhous here, at foot of thi 
hill, I told the old farmer and hi wife what I had seen, as I have now 
told you. the old man said: 

"'"for mani year I have known thee, m----, on thi road, and have you 
never seen the like befor on that cross?" 

"'"seen what before?" I said. 

"'"why, a man in light-colour cloth on a grey horse," said he. 

"'"no, never," said I, "but I swear I have thi evening." 

"'the farmer asked, "had I never heard of what happen to the miller of 
l---- mill about forti year ago?" 

"'"no, never a word," I told him. 

"'"well," he said, "about forti year ago thi miller, return from 
market, wa waylaid and murder on that cross-road, pocket rifl of 
money and watch. the hors ran home, about a mile away. two serving-men 
set out with lantern and found their master dead. He wa dressed, as 
miller often do in thi part of the country, in light-colour clothes, 
and the hors wa a grey horse. the murder were never found. these 
are facts," continu the farmer. "I took thi farm soon after it all 
happened, and, though I have known all this, and have pass over that 
cross sever thousand of times, I never knew anyth unusu there 
myself, but there have been a number of peopl who tell the same stori 
you have told mother and me, m----, and describ the appear as you 
have done to us to-night."'" 

mr. stead goe on to add: "four even after all thi occur my 
friend relat it to me as we were ride along the same road. He 
continu to pass there mani time everi year for ten years, but never a 
day saw anyth of that sort." 

My next case, a reproduct of a letter in the _occult review_ of 
september, 1906, read thus:-- 


"_a phantom hors and rider--mrs. gaskin anderston' story_ 

"the follow stori is, I think, veri remarkable, and I give it exactli 
as it wa told to me, and written down at the time. 

"A number of member of a gentleman' club were talk and discussing, 
amongst other subjects, the possibl of there be a futur state 
for animals. one of the member said: 

"'i firmli believ there is. In my earli youth I had a practic as a 
medic man in one of the midland counties. one of my patient wa a 
veri wealthi man, who own larg tract of land and had a stud 
compos entir of bay hors with black points--thi wa a hobbi of 
his, and he would never have ani others. one day a messeng came 
summon me to mr. l----, as he had just met with a veri bad accident, 
and wa on the point of death. I mount my hors and start off 
without delay. As I wa ride through the front gate to the house, I 
heard a shot, and to my amaz the veri man I wa go to visit rode 
past at a furiou pace, ride a wretched-look chestnut with one 
white forefoot and a white star on it forehead. arriv at the hous 
the butler said: 

"'"he ha gone, sir; they had to shoot the horse--y would hear the 
shot--and at the same moment my master died." 

"'he had had thi hors sent on approval; whilst ride it, it back 
over a precipice, injur mr. l---- fatally, and on be taken to the 
stabl it wa found necessari to shoot it.'--alpha." 

the next case I append (I publish it in a weekli journal some year 
ago) wa relat to me by a captain beauclerk. 


_the white hors of eastover_ 

when I came down to breakfast one morn I found amongst sever 
letter await me one from colonel onslow, the command offic of 
my regiment when I first joined. He had alway been rather partial to 
me, and the friendship between us continu after hi retirement. I 
heard from him regularli at more or less prolong intervals, and either 
at christma or easter invari receiv an invit to spend a few 
day with him. On thi occas he wa most anxiou that I should 
accept. 

"do come to us for easter," he wrote. "I am sure thi place will 
interest you--it is haunted." 

the cun fellow! He knew I wa veri keen on psychic research work, 
and would go almost anywher on the bare chanc of see a ghost. 

At that time I wa quit open-minded, I had arriv at no definit 
conclus as to the exist or non-exist of ghosts. but to tell 
the truth, I doubt veri much if the colonel' word, in these 
circumstances, could be reli upon. I had grave suspicion that thi 
"haunting" wa but an invent for the purpos of get me to 
eastover. however, as it wa just possibl that I might be 
mistaken--that there realli wa a ghost, and as I had not seen colonel 
onslow for a long time, and indulg in feel of the warmest regard 
both for him and hi wife, I resolv to go. 

accordingli I set out earli in the afternoon of the good friday. the 
weather, which had been muggi in london, grew colder and colder the 
further we advanc along the line, and by the time we reach eastov 
there wa everi prospect of a storm. 

As I expected, a close carriag had been sent to meet me; for the 
colonel, carri conservatism--with more conservat than sense, 
perhaps--to a fine point, cherish a deep-root avers to 
innov of ani sort, and consequ abhor motors. hi house, 
eastov hall, is three mile from the station, and lie at the foot of 
a steep spine of the chilterns. 

the ground of eastov hall were extensive; but, in the ordinari sense, 
far from beautiful. To me, however, they were more than beautiful; there 
wa a grandeur in them--a grandeur that appeal to me far more than 
mere beauty--th grandeur of desolation, the grandeur of the unknown. As 
we pass through the massiv iron gate of the lodge, I look upon 
countless acr of withered, undul grass; upon a few rank sedges; 
upon a score or so of decay trees; upon a house--huge, bare, grey and 
massive; upon bleak walls; upon vacant, eye-lik windows; upon crude, 
scenic inhospitality, the veri magnitud of which overpow me. I have 
said it wa cold; but there hung over the estat of eastov an ici 
that brought with it a quickening, a sicken of the heart, and a 
dreari that, whilst be depress in the extreme, was, withal, 
sublime. sublim and mysterious; mysteri and insoluble. A thousand 
fanci swarm through my mind; yet I could grappl with none; and I 
wa loth to acknowledg that, although there are combin of veri 
simpl materi object which might have had the power of affect me 
thus, yet ani attempt to analys that power wa beyond--far beyond--mi 
mental capability. 

the house, though old--and it black oak panellings, silent staircases, 
dark corridors, and gener air of gloom were certainli suggest of 
ghosts--did not affect me in the same degree. the fear it inspir wa 
the ordinari fear inspir by the ordinari superphysical, but the fear I 
felt in the ground wa a fear creat by someth out of the 
way--someth far more bizarr than a mere phantom of the dead. 

the colonel ask me if I had experienc ani unusu sensat the 
moment I enter the house, and I told him, "yes." 

"nearli everyon does," he replied, "and yet, so far as I know, no one 
ha ever seen anything. the nois we hear all round the hous have 
late been more frequent. I won't describ them; I want to learn your 
unbiass opinion of them first." 

We then had tea, and whilst the rest--ther wa a larg 
house-party--indulg in music and cards, the colonel and I had a 
delight chat about old times. I went to bed in the firm resolut of 
keep awak till at least two; but I wa veri tired, and the excess 
cold had made me extrem sleepy; consequently, despit my heroic 
efforts, I gradual doze off, and knew no more till it wa broad 
daylight and the butler enter my room with a cup of tea. when I came 
down to breakfast I found everyon in the best of spirits. the onslow 
are "great hands" at origin entertainments, and the announc that 
there would be a mask ball that even wa receiv with tremend 
enthusiasm. 

"to-night we dance, to-morrow we feed on easter egg and fanci cakes," 
one of the guest laughingli whispered. "what a nice order 
programme! I hear, too, we are to have a real old-fashion easter 
day--heav and lifting, and stool-ball. egad! the colonel deserv 
knighthood!" 

soon after breakfast there wa a gener stamped to seeton and 
dinstabl to buy gifts; for in that respect again the onslow stuck to 
old customs, and there wa a gener interchang of present on easter 
morning. My purchas made, I join one or two of the house-parti at 
lunch in seeton, cycl back alon to eastov in time for tea; and, at 
five o'clock, commenc my first explor of the grounds. the sky 
have becom cloud my progress wa somewhat slow. I did the park 
first, and I had not gone veri far befor I detect the same presenc I 
had so acut felt the previou afternoon. like the scent of a wild 
beast, it had a certain defin track which I follow astutely, 
eventu come to a full stop in front of a wall of rock. I then 
perceiv by the aid of a few fit ray of suppress light, which at 
interv struggl success through a black bank of clouds, the 
yawn mouth of a big cavern, from the roof of which hung innumer 
stalactites. I now suddenli realiz that I wa in a veri lonely, 
isol spot, and becam immeasur perturbed. the unknown someth 
in the atmospher which had inspir me with so much fear wa here 
conglomerated--it wa no longer the mere essence--it wa the whole 
thing. the whole thing, but what wa that thing? A hideou fascin 
made me keep my gaze rivet on the gape hole opposit me. At first I 
could make out nothing--noth but jag wall and roof, and empti 
darkness; then there suddenli appear in the veri innermost recess of 
the cave a faint glow of crimson light which grew and grew, until with 
startl abrupt it resolv itself into two huge eyes, red and 
menacing. the sight wa so unexpected, and, by reason of it intens 
malignity, so appalling, that I wa simpli dumbfounded. I could do 
noth but stare at the thing--paralys and speechless. I made a 
desper effort to get back my self-possession; I strove with all my 
might to reason with myself, to assur myself that thi wa the suprem 
moment of my life, the moment I had so long and earnestli desired. but 
it wa in vain; I wa terrified--helplessly, hopelessli terrified. the 
eye moved, they drew nearer and nearer to me, and as they did so they 
becam more and more hostile. I open my mouth to shout for help, I 
could feel my lung burst under the tension; not a sound came; and 
then--then, as the eye close on me, and I could feel the cold, clammi 
weight press me down, there rang out, loud and clear, in the keen and 
cut air of the spring evening, a whole choir of voices--th villag 
choral society. 

I am not particularli fond of music--certainli not of villag music, 
howev well train it may be; but I can honestli affirm that, at that 
moment, no sound could have been more welcom to me than those old 
folk-song pipe by the rustics, for the instant they commenc the 
spell that so close held me prison wa broken, my faculti 
returned, and reel back out of the clutch of the hate thing, I 
joy turn and fled. 

I relat my adventur to the colonel, and he told me that the cave wa 
gener deem to be the most haunt spot in the grounds, that no one 
care to ventur there alon after dark. 

"I have myself mani time visit the cave at night--in the compani of 
others," he said, "and we have invari experienc sensat of the 
utmost horror and repulsion, though we have seen nothing. It must be a 
devil." 

I thought so, too, and exclaim with some vehem that the proper 
cours for him to pursu wa to have the cave fill in or blasted. that 
night I awok at about one o'clock with the feel veri strong on me 
that someth wa prowl about under my window. for some time I 
fought against the impuls to get out of bed and look, but at last I 
yielded. It wa bright moonlight--everi obstacl in the ground stood 
out with wonder clearness--and directli beneath the window, peer 
up at me, were the eyes--red, lurid, satanical. A dog barked, and they 
vanished. I did not sleep again that night, not until the daylight 
broke, when I had bare shut my eye befor I wa arous by decidedli 
materi bang on the door and hyper-boister easter greetings. 

after breakfast a few of the parti went to church, a few into the 
nurseri to romp with the children, whilst the rest dispers in 
differ directions. At luncheon all met again, and there wa much 
merry-mak over the tansi cakes--veri foolish, no doubt, but to me at 
least veri delightful, and perhap a wise practice, at times, even for 
the most prosaic. In the afternoon the colonel took me for a drive to a 
charmingli picturesqu villag in the chilterns, whenc we did not set 
out on our way back till it wa twilight. 

the colonel wa a good whip, and the horse, though young and rather 
high-spirited, was, he said, veri depend on the whole, and had never 
caus him ani trouble. We spun along at a brisk trot--th last villag 
separ us from the hall wa past, and we were on a high eminence, 
almost within sight of home, when a startl chang in the atmospher 
suddenli becam apparent--it turn ici cold. I made some sort of 
comment to the colonel, and as I did so the hors shied. 

"hulloa!" I exclaimed. "doe she often do this?" 

"no, not often, onli when we are on thi road about thi time," wa the 
grim rejoinder. "keep your eye open and sit tight." 

We were now amid sceneri of the same desol type that had so impress 
me the day of my arrival. gaunt, barren hills, wild, uncultiv 
levels, sombr valleys, inhabit onli by grotesqu enigmat shadow 
that came from heaven know where, and hem us in on all sides. 

A larg quarry, half full of water and partli overgrown with brambles, 
rivet my attention, and as I gaze fixedli at it I saw, or fanci I 
saw, the shape of someth larg and white--vividli white--ris from 
the bottom. 

the glimps I caught of it was, however, onli momentary, for we were 
move along at a great pace, and I had hardli seen the last of it 
befor the quarri wa left behind and we were descend a long and 
gradual declivity. there wa but littl wind, but the cold wa 
benumbing; neither of us spoke, and the silenc wa unbroken save by the 
monoton patter, patter of the horse' hoof on the hard road. 

We were, I should say, about half-way down the hill, when away in our 
rear, from the direct of the quarry, came a loud protract neigh. I 
at onc look round, and saw stand on the crest of the emin we 
had just quitted, and most vividli outlin against the envelop 
darkness, a gigant horse, white and luminous. 

At that moment our own mare took fright; we were abruptli swung forward, 
and, had I not--mind of the colonel' warning--been "sit tight," 
I should undoubtedli have been thrown out. We dash downhil at a 
terrif rate, our mare mad with terror, and on peer over my shoulder 
I saw, to my horror, the white steed tear along not fifti yard 
behind us. I wa now abl to get a vivid impress of the monstrou 
beast. although the night wa dark, a strong, lurid glow, which seem 
to eman from all over it, enabl me to see distinctli it broad, 
muscular breast; it panting, steam flanks; it long, grace leg 
with their hairi fetlock and shoeless, shine hoofs; it power but 
arch back; it lofty, coloss head with wave forelock and broad, 
massiv forehead; it snort nostrils; it distended, foam jaws; 
it huge, glisten teeth; and it lips, wreath in a savag grin. On 
and on it raced, it stride prodigious, it mighti mane rise and 
falling, and blow all around it in unrestrain confusion. 

A slip--a singl slip, and we should be entir at it mercy. 

our own hors wa now out of control. A seri of violent plunges, which 
nearli succeed in unseat me, had enabl her to get the check of 
the bit between her teeth so as to render it utterli useless; and she 
had then start off at a speed I can onli liken to flying. fortun 
we were now on a more or less level ground, and the road, everi inch of 
which our hors knew, wa smooth and broad. 

I glanc at the colonel convuls clutch the reins; he wa 
cling to hi seat for dear life, hi hat gone. I want to speak, but 
I knew it wa useless--th shriek of the air as it roar past us 
deaden all sounds. onc or twice I glanc over the side of the trap. 
the rapid with which we were move caus a hideou delusion--th 
ground appear to be glide from beneath us; and I experienc the 
sensat of rest on nothing. despit our danger, however, from 
natur causes--a danger which, I knew, could not have been more 
acute--mi fear were wholli of the superphysical. It wa not the horror 
of be dash to piec I dreaded--it wa the horror of the phantom 
horse--of it sinister, hostil appearance--of it unknown powers. what 
would it do if it overtook us? with each success breath I drew I 
felt sure the fate event--th long-anticip crisis--had come. 

At last my expect were realized. the teeth of the gigant steed 
close down on me, it nostril hiss resist out of me--i swerved, 
tottered, fell; and as I sank on the ground my sens left me. 

On come to I found myself in a propped-up posit on the floor of a 
tini room with someon pour brandi down my throat. happily, beyond a 
sever shock, I had sustain no injury--a suffici miracul 
circumstance, as the trap had come to grief in fail to clear the 
lodg gates, the hors had skin it knees, and the colonel had 
fractur hi shoulder. Of the phantom hors not a glimps had been 
seen. even the colonel, strang to relate, though he had manag to peep 
round, had not seen it. He had heard and felt a presence, that wa all; 
and after listen to my experience, he own he wa truli thank he 
wa onli clair-audient. 

"A gift like yours," he said, with more candour than kindness, "i a 
curse, not a blessing. and now I have your corroboration, I might as 
well tell you that we have long suspect the ghost to be a horse, and 
have attribut it haunt to the fact that, some time ago, when 
explor in the cave, sever prehistor remain of hors were 
found, one of which we kept, whilst we present the other to a 
neighbour museum. I dare say there are heap more." 

"undoubtedli there are," I said, "but take my advic and leav them 
alone--re-int the remain you have alreadi unearthed--and thu put a 
stop to the hauntings. If you go on excav and keep the bone you 
find, the disturb will, in all probability, increase, and the 
haunt will becom not onli mani but multiform." 

needless to say the colonel carri out my injunct to the letter. 
far from continu hi work of excav he lost no time in restor 
the bone he had kept to their origin resting-place; after which, as I 
predicted, the haunt ceased. 

thi case, to me, is veri satisfactory, as it testifi to what wa 
unquestion an actual phantasm of the dead--of a dead horse--albeit 
that hors wa prehistoric; and such hors are all the more like to 
be earth-bound on account of their wild, untam natures. 

here is anoth account of a phantom hors taken from mr. stead' _real 
ghost stories_. It is written by an afrikand who, in a letter to mr. 
stead, says: 

"I am not a believ in ghosts, nor never was; but see you want a 
censu of them, I can't help give you a remark experi of 
mine. It wa some three summer back, and I wa out with a parti of boer 
hunters. We had cross the northern boundari of the transvaal, and were 
camp on the ridg of the sembombo. I had been out from sunrise, and 
wa return about dusk with the skin of a fine black ostrich thrown 
across the saddl in front of me, in the best of spirit at my good 
luck. make straight for the camp, I had hardli enter a thick bush 
when I thought that I heard somebodi behind me. look behind, I saw a 
man mount on a white horse. you can imagin my surprise, for my hors 
wa the onli one in camp, and we were the onli parti in the country. 
without consid I quicken my pace into a canter, and on do so 
my follow appear to do the same. At thi I lost all confidence, and 
made a run for it, with my follow in hot pursuit, as it appear to my 
imagination; and I did race for it (the skin went fli in about two 
minutes, and my rifl would have done the same had it not been strap 
over my shoulders). thi I kept up until I rode into camp right among 
the pal cook the even meal. the boer about the camp were quick 
in their enquiri as to my distress condition, and regain 
confidence, I wa put them off as best I could, when the old boss 
(an old boer of some sixty-eight or seventi years), look up from the 
fire, said: 

"'the white horse! the englishman ha seen the white horse.' 

"thi I denied, but to no purpose. and that night round the camp fire I 
took the troubl to make enquiri as to the anteced of the white 
horse. and the old boer, after he had command silence, began. He said: 

"'the english are not brave, but foolish. We beat them at majuba, some 
twenty-f season back. there wa an englishman here like you; he had 
brought a hors with him, against our advice, to be kill with the fly, 
the same as your will be in a day or two. and he, like you, would go 
where he wa told not to go; and one day he went into a bush (that veri 
bush you rode through to-night), and he shot seven elephants, and the 
next day he went in to fetch the ivory, and about night hi hors came 
into camp riderless, and wa dead from the fli befor the sun went down. 
the englishman is in that bush now; anyway, he never came back. and now 
anybodi who ventur into that bush is chase by the white horse. I 
wouldn't go into that bush for all the ivori in the land. the english 
are not brave, but foolish; we beat them at majuba.' 

"here he ran into a torrent of abus of all englishmen in general, and 
in particular. and I took the opportun of roll myself up in my 
blanket for the night, sleep all the better for my adventure. 

"now, mr. stead, I don't believ in ghosts, but I wa firmli convinc 
dure that run of mine, and can vouch for the accuraci of it, not 
have heard a word of the englishman or hi white hors befor my 
headlong return to the camp that night. I shortli hope to be near that 
bush again, but, like the old boer, I can say I wouldn't go into that 
bush again for all the ivori in the land. 

"p.s.--a few day after we drop across a troop of eleph without 
enter the fatal bush, and manag to bag seven, photograph of which 
I took, and shall be pleas to send for your inspection, if desired." 

there can be veri littl doubt that the phantom the afrikand saw wa 
the actual spirit of a dead horse. 

anoth experi of haunt by the same anim wa told me by a 
chelsea artist who assur me it wa absolut true. I append it as 
nearli as possibl in hi own words. 


_herald of death_ 

"it is mani year ago," he began, "sinc I came into my property, 
heatherleigh hall, near carlisle, cumberland. It wa left me by my 
great-uncle, gener wimpole, whom I had never seen, but who had made me 
hi heir in prefer to hi other nephews, owe to my reput 
like to an aunt, to whom he wa greatli attached. Of cours I wa 
much envied, and I dare say a good mani unkind thing were said about 
me, but I did not care--heatherleigh hall wa mine, and I had as much 
right to it as anyon else. I came there all alone--mi two brothers, 
dick and hal, the one a soldier and the other a sailor, were both away 
on foreign service, whilst beryl, my one and onli sister, wa stay 
with her fiancé' famili in bath. never shall I forget my first 
impressions. depict the day--an octob afternoon. the air mellow, the 
leav yellow, and the sun a golden red. not a trace of cloud or wind 
anywhere. everyth seren and still. A broad highway; a wood; a lodg 
in the midst of the wood; larg iron gates; a broad carriag drive, 
plant on either side with lofti pine and elms, whose gnarl and 
fork branch threw grotesqu and not altogeth pleas shadow on 
the pale gravel. 

"at the end of the avenue, at least a quarter of a mile long, wide 
expans of soft, velveti grass, interspers at regular interv with 
plot of flowers--dahlias, michaelma daisies--no longer in their first 
bloom--chrysanthemums, etc. beyond the lawn, the house, and beyond that 
again, and on either side, big, old-fashion garden full of 
fruit--fruit of all kinds, some, such as grape and peaches, in monster 
green-houses, and others--lusci pears, blenheim oranges, golden 
pippins, etc.--in rich profus in the open, the whole encompass by a 
high and solid brick wall, top with a bed of mortar and broken glass. 
the house, which wa built, or, rather, face with split flints, and 
edg and buttress with cut grey stone, had a majest but gloomi 
appearance. it front, lofti and handsome, wa somewhat castel in 
style, two semicircular bows, or half-moons, place at a suitabl 
distanc from each other, rise from the base to the summit of the 
edifice; these were pierced, at everi floor, with row of 
stone-mullion windows, rise to the height of four or five stories. 
the flat wall between had larger windows, light the great hall, 
gallery, and upper apartments. these window were abundantli ornament 
with stain glass, repres the arms, honours, and alms-de of 
the wimpol family. 

"the towers, half includ in the building, were complet circular 
within, and contain the wind stair of the mansion; and whoso 
ascend them, when the winter wind wa blowing, seem rise by a 
tornado to the clouds. midway between the tower wa a heavi stone 
porch, with a gothic gateway, surmount by a battlement parapet, made 
gabl fashion, the apex of which wa garnish by a pair of dolphins, 
rampant and antagonistic, whose corkscrew tail seem contort by the 
last agoni of rage convulsed. 

"the porch door thrown open to receiv me, led into a hall, wide, 
vault and lofty, and decor here and there with remnant of 
tapestri and grim portrait of the wimpoles. one pictur in particular 
rivet my attention. hung in an obscur corner, where the light rare 
penetrated, it repres the head and shoulder of a young man with a 
strikingli beauti face--th featur small and regular like those of 
a woman--th hair yellow and curly. It wa the eye that struck me 
most--they follow me everywher I went with a persist that wa 
posit alarming. there wa someth in them I had never seen in 
canva eye before, someth deeper and infinit more intric than 
could be produc by mere paint--someth human and yet not human, 
friendli and yet not friendly; someth baffling, enigmatical, 
haunting. I enquir of my deceas relative' age housekeeper, mrs. 
grimstone--whom I had retained--whos portrait it was, and she repli 
with a scare look, 'horace, youngest son of sir algernon wimpole, who 
die here in 1745.' 

"'the face fascin me,' I said. 'i there ani histori attach to 
it?' 

"'why, yes, sir!' she responded, her eye fix on the floor, 'but the 
late master never like refer to it.' 

"'i it as bad as that?' I said, laughing. 'tell me!' 

"'well, sir,' she began, 'they do say as how sir algernon, who wa a 
thorough countri squire--veri fond of hunt and shoot and all sort 
of manli exercises--nev like mr. horace, who wa delic and 
dandified--what the folk in those day use to style a macaroni. the 
climax came when mr. horac took up with the jacobites. sir algernon 
would have noth more to do with him then and turn him adrift. one 
day there wa a great commot in the neighbourhood, the govern 
troop were hunt the place in search of rebels, and who should come 
gallop up the avenu with a coupl of trooper in hot pursuit but mr. 
horace. the nois brought out sir algernon, and he wa so infuri to 
think that hi son wa the caus of the disturbance, a "disgrac 
young cub," he call him, that despit mr. horace' entreati for 
protection, he ran him through with hi sword. It wa a dread thing 
for a father to do, and sir algernon bitterli repent it. hi wife, 
who had been devot to mr. horace, left him, and at last, in a fit of 
despondency, he hang himself--out there, on one of the elm line the 
avenue. It is still standing. ever sinc then they do say that the wood 
is haunted, and that befor the death of ani member of the famili mr. 
horac is seen gallop along the old carriag drive.' 

"'pleasant,' I grunted. 'and how about the house--i it haunt too?' 

"'i daresn't say,' she murmured. 'some will tell you it is, and some 
will tell you it isn't.' 

"'in which categori are you included?' I asked. 

"'well!' she said 'I have live here happi and comfort forty-f 
year the day after to-morrow, and that speak for itself, don't it?' 
and with that she hobbl off and show me the way to the dining-room. 

"what a hous it was! from the hall proceed doorway and passages, 
more than the ordinari memori could retain. Of these portals, one at 
each end conduct to the tower stairs, others, to the reception-room 
and domest offices. In the right wing, besid bedroom galore, wa a 
lofti and spaciou pictur gallery; in the left--a chapel; for the 
wimpol were, formerly, roman catholics. the gener fit and 
furniture, both of the hall and hous in general, were substantial, 
vener and strongli corrobor of what mrs. grimston hint 
at--they suggest ghosts. 

"the walls, line with black oak panels, or dark hang that flutter 
mysteri each time the wind blew, were funer indeed; and so high 
and narrow were the windows, that littl wa to be discern through 
them but cross-bar portion of the sky. one spot in particular 
appeal to my nerves--and that, a long, vault stone passag lead 
from a morn room to the foot of the back staircase. here the voic 
and even the footstep echo with a hollow, low response, and often 
when I have been hurri along it--i never dare walk slowly--i have 
fancied--and mayb it wa more than fancy--i have been pursued. 

"time passed, and from be mere use to my new environments, I grew 
to take a pride in them, to love them. I made the acquaint of 
sever of my neighbours, those I deem the most desirable, and on 
return from winter abroad, brought home a bride, a young polish 
girl, who ad lustr to the surroundings, and in no small degre 
help to dissip the gloom. indeed, had it not been for the pictur 
in the hall, and for the twilight shadow and twilight footstep in the 
stone passage, I should soon have ceas to think of ghosts. ghosts, 
forsooth! when all around me vibrat with the sound of girlish 
laughter, and the summer sunshine, sparkl on the golden curl of my 
child-wife, saw itself reflect a millionfold in the allur depth of 
her azur eyes. In halcyon day like these who think of ghost and 
death? 

"and yet! It is in just such time as these that hell is nearest. there 
came a night in august when the air wa so hot and sultri that I could 
scarc breathe, and unabl to bear the atmospher of the hous and 
garden ani longer, I sought the cool of the wood. olga--mi 
wife--did not accompani me, as she wa suffer from a slight--thank 
god, it wa onli slight--sunstroke. It wa close on midnight, and there 
wa a dead still abroad that seem as if it must be universal--a 
if it envelop the whole of nature. I tri to realiz london--to 
depict the strand and piccadilly, aglow with artifici light and 
reverber with the roll of countless traffic and the tread of 
million of feet. 

"I failed. the incongru of such imagin here--her amidst 
omnipot silence--rend such thought impossible. A leaf rustled, 
and it rustl sound to my ear like the gentl close of some 
giant door. A twig fell, and I turn sharpli round, convinc I should 
see a pile of broken debris. I love all trees, but I love them best by 
day--to me it seem that night utterli metamorph them--br out in 
them a subtler, darker side one would littl suspect. here, in thi oak, 
for instance, wa an example. In the morn one see in it nought but 
quiet dignity, vener old age, benevolence, and, by reason of the 
ampl protect it branch afford from the sun, chariti and 
philanthropy. it leav are bright, dainty, pretty; it trunk suggest 
noth but a cosi and sooth retreat for student and lovers. but 
now--se how different! these great spreading, gnarl branch are 
hands, claws--monstr and menacing; those leav no longer bright 
remind me of a hearse' plumes; their rustling--of the rustl and 
switch of a pall or winding-sheet. the trunk, black, sinuous, 
towering, is assuredli no piec of timber, but someth pulpy, 
someth intangible, someth antagonistic, mystic, devilish. I turn 
from it and shudder. then my mind revert to the elm--th elm on which 
sir algernon hang himself. I rememb it is not more than twenti yard 
from where I stand. I stare down at the soil, at the clump of crest 
dog's-tail and stray blade of succul darnel; I forc my attent on 
a toadstool, whose soft and lowli head gleam sickli white in the 
moonbeams. I glanc from it to a sleep close-cap dandelion, from 
it to a thistle, from it again to a late bush vetch, and then, 
willy-nilly, to the accurs elm. My god! what a change. It wasn't like 
that when I pass it at noon. It wa just an ordinari tree then, but 
now, now--and what is that--that sinist bundle--suspend from one 
of it curl branches? A cold sweat burst out on me, my knee 
tremble, my hair begin to rise on end. swing round, I am about to 
rush away--blindli rush away--hither, thither, anywhere--anywher out of 
sight of that tree and of all the hideou possibl it promis to 
materi for me. I have not taken five strides, however, befor I am 
pull sharpli up by the sound of horse' hoofs--of hoof on the hard 
gravel, away in the distance. they speedili grow nearer. A hors is 
galloping, gallop toward me along the broad carriag drive. nearer, 
nearer and nearer it comes! who is it? what is it? A deadli nausea 
seiz me, I swerve, totter, reel, and am onli prevent from fall by 
the time interfer of a pine. the concuss with it leviathan 
trunk clear my senses. all my faculti becom wonder and 
pain alert. I would give my veri soul if it were not so--if I could 
but fall asleep or faint. the sound of the hoof is veri much nearer 
now, so near inde that I may see the man--heaven grant it may be onli 
a man after all--ani moment. ah! my heart give a great sickli jerk. 
someth ha shot into view. there, not fifti yard from me, where the 
road curves, and the break in the foliag overhead admit a great flood 
of moonlight. I recogn the "thing" at once; it' not a man, it' 
noth human, it' the pictur I know so well and dread so much, the 
portrait of horac wimpole, that hang in the main hall--and it' 
mount on a coal-black hors with wildli fli mane and foam mouth. 
On and on they come, thud, thud, thud! the man is not dress as a 
rider, but is wear the costum in the picture--i.e. that of a 
macaroni! A nut! more fit for a lady' seminari than a fine, old english 
mansion. 

"someth besid me rustles--rustl angrily, and I know, I can feel, 
it is the bundl on the branch--th ghastly, groaning, creaking, 
croak caricatur of sir algernon. the horseman come up to me--our 
eye meet--i am look in those of a dead--of a long sinc dead man--mi 
blood freezes. 

"he flash past me--thud, thud, thud! A bend in the road, and he 
vanish from sight. but I can still hear him, still hear the mad patter 
of hi horse' hoof as they bear him onward, lifeless, fleshless, 
weightless, to hi ancient home. god piti the soul that know no rest. 

"how I got back to the hous I hardli know. I believ it wa with my 
eye shut, and I am certain I ran all the way. 

"about four o'clock the follow afternoon I receiv a cablegram from 
malta. intuit warn me to prepar for the worst. it content were 
unpleasantli short and pithy--'h drown at two o'clock thi 
morning.--dick.' 

"two year passed--again an august night, hot and oppress as before, 
and again--though sure against my will, my better judgment, if you 
like--i visit the wood. horse' hoof just the same as before. the 
same galloping, the same figure, the same eyes! the same mad, 
panic-stricken flight home, and, earli in the succeed afternoon, a 
similar cablegram--thi time from sicily. 'dick die at midnight. 
dysentery.--andrews.' 

"jack andrew wa dick' pal--hi bosom friend. So onc again the 
phantom rider had brought it grisli message--play it ghoulish rôle. 
My brother were both dead now, and onli beryl remained. anoth year 
sped by and the last night in october--a monday--saw me, impel by a 
fascin I could not resist, onc again in the wood. Up to a point 
everyth happen as before. As the monoton church clock struck 
twelve, from afar came the sound of hoofs. nearer, nearer, nearer, and 
then with startl abrupt the rider shot into view. and now, mix 
with the awful, indescrib terror the figur alway convey with it, 
came a feel of intens rage and indignation. should beryl--beryl whom 
I love next best to my wife--b torn from me even as dick and hal had 
been? no! ten thousand time no! sooner than that I would risk anything. 
A sudden inspiration, come mayb from the whisper leaves, or from 
the elm, or from the mysteri flicker moonbeams, flash through 
me. could I not intercept the figures, drive them back? By do so 
someth told me beryl might be saved. A terribl struggl at onc took 
place within me, and it wa onli after the most desper effort that I 
at length succeed in fight back my terror and flung myself out into 
the middl of the drive. No word of mine can describ all I went 
through as I stood there anticip the arriv of the phantoms. At 
length they came, right up to me; and as, with frantic resolution, I 
screw up courag to plant myself directli in their path, and stare up 
into the rider' eyes, the huge steed halted, gave one shrill neigh, and 
turn round, gallop back again, disappear whither it had 
emerged. 

"two day afterward I receiv a letter from my brother-in-law. 

"'i have been have an aw time,' he wrote. 'mi darl beryl ha 
been fright ill. On monday night we gave up all hope of her 
recovery, but at twelv o'clock, when the doctor bid us prepar for the 
end, the most extraordinari thing happened. turn over in bed, she 
distinctli call out your name, and rallied. and now, thank god, she is 
complet out of danger. the doctor say it is the most astonish 
recoveri he ha ever known.' 

* * * * * 

"that is twenti year ago, and i'v not seen the phantom rider since. 
nor do I fanci he will appear again, for when I look into the eye of 
the pictur in the hall, they are no longer wandering, but at rest." 

* * * * * 

perhaps, one of the most interest account of the phantasm of a hors 
in my possess is that record by c.e. g----, a friend of my boyhood. 
write to me from the unit state some month ago, he says: 

"know how interest you are in all case of hauntings, and in those 
relat to anim ghost especially, I am send you an account of an 
'experience' that happen to my uncle, mr. john dale, about six month 
ago. He wa return to hi home in bishopstone, near helena, montana, 
shortli after dark, and had arriv at a particularli lone part of the 
road where the tree almost meet overhead, when hi hors show sign 
of restlessness. It slacken down, halted, shivered, whinnied, and kept 
up such a seri of antics, that my uncl descend from the trap to see 
if anyth wa wrong with it. He thought that, perhaps, it wa go to 
have some kind of fit, or an attack of ague, which is not an uncommon 
complaint among anim in hi part of the country, and he wa prepar 
to give it a dose of quinine, when suddenli it rear up violently, and 
befor he could stop it, wa career along the road at lightn 
speed. My uncl wa now in a pretti mess. He wa strand in a forest 
without a lantern, ten miles, at least, from home. feel too depress 
to do anything, he sat down by the roadside, and serious thought of 
remain there till daybreak. A twing of rheumatism, however, remind 
him the ground wa littl warmer than ice, and made him realiz that 
lie on it would be court death. consequently, he got up, and 
set hi lip grimly, struck out in the direct of bishopstone. At 
everi step he took the track grew darker. shadow of tree and 
countless other things, for which he could see no counterpart, crept out 
and render it almost imposs for him to tell where to tread. A 
peculiar, indefin dread also began to make itself felt, and the 
dark seem to him to assum an entir new character. He plod 
on, break into a jog-trot everi now and then, and whistl by way of 
companionship. the still wa sepulchral--h strain hi ears, but 
could not even catch the sound of those tini anim that are usual 
heard in the thicket and furze-bush at night; and all hi movement 
were exaggerated, until their echo seem to reverber through the 
whole forest. A turn of the road brought him into view of someth that 
made hi heart throb with delight. stand by the waysid wa an 
enorm coach with four huge hors paw the ground impatiently. My 
uncl rush up to the driver, who wa so envelop in wraps, he could 
not see hi face, and in a voic trembl with emot beg for the 
favour of a lift--if not to helena itself, as far in that direct as 
the coach wa going. the driver made no reply, but with hi hand 
motion my uncl to get in. the latter did not need a second bidding, 
and the moment he wa seated, the vehicl start off. It wa a large, 
roomi conveyance, but had a stifl atmospher about it that struck my 
uncl as most unpleasant; and although he could see no one, he 
intuit felt he wa not alone, and that more than one pair of eye 
were watch him. 

"the coach did not go as fast as my uncl expected, but move with a 
curiou glide motion, and the wheel made no nois whatever. thi 
ad to my uncle' apprehensions, and he almost made up hi mind to 
open the carriag door and jump out. something, however, which he could 
not account for restrain him, and he maintain hi seat. outside, all 
wa still profoundli dark. the tree were scarc distinguish as 
deeper mass of shadow, and were recogniz onli by the resin 
odour, that, from time to time, sluggishli flow in at the open window 
as the coach roll on. 

"at length they overtook some other vehicle, and for the first time for 
some hour my uncl heard the sound of solid wheels, which were as 
welcom to him as ani joy bells. just as they were pass the 
conveyance--a small wagonett drawn by a pair of horses, the latter took 
fright; there were loud shout and a great stampede, and my uncle, who 
lean out of the coach window, caught a glimps of the vehicl dash 
along ahead of them at a fright speed. the driver of the coach, 
appar total unconcerned, continu hi journey at the same 
regular, mechan pace. 

"present my uncl heard the sound of rush water, and knew they must 
be near the usk, a tributari of the battle, which wa onli five mile 
from hi house. 

"the forest now ceased, and they cross the road over the bridg in a 
brilliant burst of moonlight. about a mile or so further on the coach 
halted, and, to my uncle' surprise, he found himself in front of a 
hous he had no recollect of see before. He got out, and to hi 
horror saw that instead of ride in a coach he had been ride in a 
hearse, and that the hors had on their head gigant sabl plumes. 

"while he wa stand gaze at the extraordinari equipage, the door of 
the hous slowli opened, and two figur came out carri a small 
coffin, which they place insid the vehicle. He then heard loud peal 
of mad, hilari laughter, and coach and hors immedi vanished. 
My uncl arriv home safely, but the shock of what he had experienc 
kept him in bed for some days. He learn that a phantom coach similar 
to the one he had ridden in had been seen in the forest twenti year 
previously, and that it wa suppos to be a prognost of some 
great misfortune, which supposition, in my uncle' case at least, prove 
true, as hi wife die of apoplexi a few day after thi adventure." 

yet anoth case of haunt by the phantasm of a hors come to me 
from a gentleman in marseilles, who told it me thus:-- 

"it wa 9 p.m. when I left my friend maitland' hotel in châteauborne, 
and, face north, set out on my way to liffre, where my headquart 
had been for the past fortnight. liffr is in the hills, and the road 
which separ it from châteauborne, wild and lone enough in daylight 
and when the weather is fair, is almost untravers in winter. the 
night in question wa christma eve; the snow had fallen heavili dure 
the day, and with the wind blow in ici draught from the north-east, 
there wa everi prospect of anoth downfall. maitland press me to 
stay in hi hotel. 'it is sheer folly,' he said, 'for you to attempt to 
get home in weather like this. It is pitch dark, you are not familiar 
with the route, and if you don't wander off the track and tumbl over a 
precipice, you will walk into a snowdrift. Be sensible--sleep here!' 

"much, however, as I should have like to follow hi counsel, I did not 
feel justifi in do so, as I had a lot of correspond to attend 
to, and I realiz it wa most necessari for me to get back to liffr 
without ani further delay. 

"it wa true the night wa inki black; but, with the aid of a lamp, I 
hadn't the slightest doubt I could find my way. maitland barter for a 
candl lantern with hi host, and arm with this, a flagon of brandi 
and water and a thick stick, I said good-by to châteauborne. 

"A coupl of hundr yard saw me beyond the outskirt of the town, 
wherein I wa the sole pedestrian, and silenc reign supreme. On and 
on I plodded, the feeble, yellow light of my lantern just prevent 
me--but onli just--from wander from the track. the road, which for 
the first mile or so wa toler level, gradual began to rise, and, 
as it did so, I notic for the first time indistinct imag of 
gigantic, nake tree that becom more and more numerous, and closer 
and closer together, at length unit their long and grotesqu shape 
branch overhead, and I found myself in the depth of a vast forest. 
the snow, which had up to the present held off, now recommenc to fall, 
and present the wind, which had for some time been slowli acquir 
strength, came howl through the tree with the utmost fury, the first 
blast swish the lantern out of my hand and hurl me with 
consider forc into an undergrowth of thorn and brambles, out of 
which I extric myself with no littl difficulty. 

"I wa now in the sorriest of plights--envelop on all side in stygian 
dark I wa unabl to discov my lantern, and wa thu total at 
the merci of the ruthless elements. there were onli two cours befor 
me--eith I must remain where I wa and be frozen to death, or, make 
a guess at the route, I must push on ahead and run the risk of end my 
life at the bottom of a ravine. I chose the latter. grope about with 
my feet, until I at length discov what I thought must be the right 
track, I push ahead, and, stagger and stumbl forward, manag to 
make some sort of progress, terribl slow though it was. the blind 
dark of the snowi night, the intens silenc and utter solitud of 
the place, combin with the knowledg that on all side of me lay hole 
and chasms, dampen my spirit and rais strang phantom in my 
imagination. the wind now rose, and the dismal sigh of the tree 
speedili grew into a seri of the most perturb screeches, as the 
branch and trunk sway to and fro like reed befor the violenc of 
the hurricane. 

"at thi junctur I gave myself up for lost, and, come to a standstil 
up to my knee in snow, wa prepar to lie down and die, when, to my 
great joy, a light suddenli appear ahead of me, and the next moment a 
man, mount on a big white horse, rode noiselessli up to me. He wa 
wrap in a shaggi great-coat, and a slouch hat worn low over hi eye 
complet hid hi face from me. In hi disengag hand he carri a 
lantern. 

"'bi jove!' I exclaimed, 'I am glad to see you, for i'v lost the track 
to liffre. can you tell me, or, better still, show me, the way to some 
hous where I can put up for the remaind of the night?' 

"the stranger made no reply, but bid me follow with a wave of hi 
hand, rode silent in front of me, and although I tri to keep up with 
him, I could not; and the odd thing was, that without appar 
increas hi pace, he alway maintain hi distance. after proceed 
in thi manner for possibl ten minutes, we suddenli turn to the left, 
and I found myself in a big clear in the wood, with a long, low-built 
hous opposit me. 

"mi guid then paused, and indic the front door of the hous with 
an emphat gestur of hi hand, seem suddenli to melt away into thin 
air, for although I peer about me on all side to tri to find some 
indic of him, neither he nor hi hors wa anywher to be seen. 
think thi wa rather queer, but quit readi to attribut it to 
natur causes, I approach the building, and, make use of my 
knuckl in lieu of a knocker, beat a loud tattoo on the woodwork. there 
wa no response. again I rapped, and the door slowli open reveal a 
pair of gleaming, dark eyes. 'what do you want?' enquir a harsh voic 
in barbar accents. 'A night' lodging,' I replied; 'and i'm will 
to pay a good price for it, for i'm more than half frozen.' 

"at thi the door open wider, and I found myself confront by a woman 
with a candle. she had not the most prepossess of expressions, though 
her hair, eye and featur were decidedli good. she wa dress with 
tawdri smartness--earrings, necklace, and rings, and veri high-heel 
buckl shoes. indeed, her costum wa so out of keep with the 
rustic of her surround as to be quit extraordinary. thi fact 
struck me at once, as did her fingers, which, though spatul and ugly, 
had been manicured, and of cours veri much over-manicured, for effect. 
had thi not been the case, I probabl should not have notic them. but 
the unnatur gloss on them, exagger by the candlelight, made me 
look, and I wa at onc impress with the crimin format of the 
fingers--th club-shap end denot someth veri bad--someth 
homicidal--and as my eye wander from the hand to the face, I saw 
with a thrill of horror that the ear were set low down and far back on 
the head, and that the eye gleam with the sinist glitter of the 
wolf. 

"still, I must take my chance--th woman or the wood--it had to be one 
of the two. 'if you'll step inside, monsieur,' she said, 'i'll see what 
can be done for you. We have onli recent come here, and the hous is 
anyhow at present. still, if you don't mind rough it a little, we can 
let you have a bed, and you can reli upon me that it is clean and 
well-aired.' I follow her eagerly, and she led me down a narrow 
passag into a big room with a low ceiling, travers with a ponder 
oak beam, blacken with the smoke of endless peat fires. 

"befor the blaze faggot on the hearth sat a burly-look individu 
in a blue blouse. On our arriv he arose, and as hi huge form tower 
abov me, I thought I had never seen anyon quit so hideous, nor so 
utterli unlik the orthodox frenchman. obey hi injunction--for I can 
scarc call it an invitation--to sit down, I took a seat by the fire, 
and warm my half-frozen limbs, wait impati whilst the woman 
made up my bed and prepar supper. 

"the storm had now reach cyclon dimensions, and under it stupend 
furi the whole house--stoutli built though it was--sway on it 
foundations. the howl of the wind in the rude, old-fashion chimney 
and along the passage, and the frenzi beat of the snow against the 
diamond window-panes, deaden all other noises, and render ani 
attempt at convers absolut abortive. So I ate my meal in 
silence, pretend not to notic the subtl interchang of glanc that 
constantli took place between the strang assort pair. whether they 
were husband and wife, what the man did for a living, were question 
that continu occur to me, and I found my eye incessantli 
wander to the numer packing-cases, pile of carpets, cask and 
other articles, which corrobor the woman' statement that they had 
but recent 'move in.' onc I attempt to empti the coffe (which wa 
black and peculiarli bitter) under the table, but had to desist, as I 
saw the man' devilish eye fix searchingli on me. I then push asid 
the cup, and on the woman ask if it wa not to my liking, I shout 
out that I wa not in the least thirsty. after thi incid the covert 
look becam more numerous, and my suspicion increas accordingly. 

"at the first opportun I got up, and signal my intent to go to 
bed, wa prepar to leav my seat, when my host, walk to a 
cupboard, fetch out a bottl of cognac, and pour out a tumbler, 
hand it me with a mien that I dare not refuse. 

"the woman then led me up a flight of rickety, wooden step and into a 
sepulchral-look chamber with no other furnitur in it save a long, 
narrow, iron bedstead, a dilapid washstand, a veri unsteady, common 
deal table, on which wa a looking-glass and a collar stud, and a 
rush-bottom chair. set the candlestick on the dressing-table, and 
assur me again that the bed wa well aired, my hostess withdrew, 
observ as she left the room that she would get me a nice breakfast 
and call me at seven. At seven! how I wish it wa seven now! As I 
stood in the midst of the floor shivering--for the room wa ici cold, I 
suddenli saw a dark shadow emerg from a remot corner of the room and 
slide surreptiti toward the door, where it halted. My eye then 
fell on the lock, and I perceiv that there wa no key. No key! and 
that evil-look pair below! I must barricad the door somehow. yet 
with what? there wa noth of ani weight in the room! nothing! I began 
to feel horribl tire and sleepy--so sleepi that it wa onli with 
suprem effort I could prevent my eyelid closing. ah! I had it--a 
wedge! I had a knife. Of wood there wa plenty--a piec off the 
washstand, table, or chair. anyth would suffice. I essay to 
struggl to the chair, my limb tottered, my eyelid closed. then the 
shadow from the doorway move toward and through me, and with the 
cold of it passag I revived! with desper energi I cut a coupl 
of chunk off the washstand, and pare them down, eventu succeed 
in slip them in the crack of the door, and render it imposs 
to open from the outside. that done, I stagger to the bed, and 
falling, dress as I was, on the counterpane, sank into a deep sleep. 
how long I slept I cannot say. I suddenli heard the loud neigh of a 
hors which seem to come from just under my window, and, as in a 
vision, saw by my side in the bed a someth which gradual develop 
into the figur of a man, the counterpart of the mysteri be in the 
shaggi coat who had guid me to the house. He wa fulli dressed, sound 
asleep and breath heavily. As I wa look a dark shadow fell across 
the sleeper' face, and on glanc up I perceived, to my horror, a 
black someth crawl on the floor. nearer and nearer it came, until 
it reach the side of the bed, when I immedi recogn the evil, 
smirk face of my hostess. In one hand she held a lamp and in the 
other a horn-handl knife. set the lamp on the floor, she coolli 
undid the collar of the sleep man, and I saw a stud, the counterpart 
of the one on the dressing-table, fall on the bare board with a sharp 
tap, and disappear in the surround darkness. then the woman felt the 
edg of the knife with her repuls thumb, and calmli cut the helpless 
man' throat. I screamed--and the murderess and her victim instantli 
vanished--and I realiz I wa alon in the room and veri much awake. 
whether all that had occur wa a dream, I cannot say with certainty, 
though I am inclin to think not. 

"for some minut my heart pulsat painfully, and then as the sound of 
it throb grew fainter and fainter, I heard a curiou nois outsid 
my room--someon wa ascend the stairs. I endeavour to rise, but 
could not--fear, an awful, ungovern fear, held me spellbound. the 
step paus outsid the door, the handl of which wa gentli turned. 
then there wa a suggest silence, then whispering, then anoth 
turn of the handle, and then--mi state of coma abruptli ended, and I 
step noiselessli out of bed and crept to the window. I wa heard. 
'stop him,' the woman cri out, 'he' tri to escape. use the gun.' 
she hurl herself against the door as she spoke, whilst the man tore 
downstairs. 

"it wa now a matter of seconds, the slightest accident, a hesitation, 
and I wa lost. swing open the window, I scrambl on the ledge, and 
without the slightest idea of the distance--dropped! there wa a brief 
rush through air and I alighted--saf and sound--on the snow. 
bless snow! had it not been for the snow I should in all probabl 
have hurt myself! I alight not an instant too soon, for hardli had I 
touch the ground befor my gigant host came tear round the angl 
of the wall with a lantern in one hand and gun in the other. I 
immedi dash away, and, thank to the intens dark of the 
morning--for it must have been two o'clock--had no difficulti in evad 
my pursuer, who fire twice in rapid succession. 

"on and on I went, sometim fall up to my armpit in the snowdrift, 
and sometim stun myself against a low-hang branch of a tree. 
with the first ray of sunlight, however, my troubl came to an end. 
the snow had ceas falling, and I quickli alight on a track, which 
brought me to a village, whenc I obtain a convey into liffre. 

"I report the affair to the local police, and a parti of gendarm at 
onc set off to arrest the miscreants. but, alas, they had fled. the 
hous wa pull down, and, on the soil be excavated, a dozen or more 
skeleton of men and women--al show unmistak sign of foul 
play--togeth with the remain of a horse, were found in variou part 
of the premises. the place wa a verit golgotha. I suppos the 
phantom hors and rider had appear to me with the sole purpos of 
make their fate known. If so, they at all event partli achiev their 
end, though the mysteri surround their ident wa never solved. all 
the remains, both human and animal, were remov elsewhere, and accord 
a decent burial. the site of their origin interment, however, is, I 
believe, still haunted, and mayb will remain so till the miscreant are 
brought to book." 


_brief summary_ 

after a littl consider I am inclin to think there are quit as 
mani authent case of haunt by the phantasm of hors as by the 
phantasm of cat and dogs. innumer hors die unnatur deaths. 
apart from those kill in war, many,--mor particularly, it is true, in 
the olden times,--hav been murder in the highway along with their 
masters; whilst all but the compar few, when no longer of use to 
their owners, are butcher in the slaughter-house, and subsequ 
despatch to the zoolog gardens, to be eaten by lion and tigers. 
So much for christianity, and for man' gratitude. how much better would 
the promot of the white slave traffic act be employed, if,--instead 
of tri to pass a bill which obvious cannot cure the evil it aim 
at, but can only, by divert the cours of that evil, drive from 
pillar to post thousand of defenceless, albeit er women,--they were 
to labour to secur a peac end for our four-foot toilers, who 
work for us all their lives, never strike, never think of a pension for 
old age, and never even dream of a vote. alas! If onli our poor hors 
could vote, what a differ attitud would our pharisa politician 
at onc adopt toward them! 


_phantasm of live horses_ 

from what I have experienc and have been told, I am of the opinion 
that hors possess the same faculti of separ their immateri from 
their materi bodies, as cat and dogs. I knew a virginian ladi who had 
a piebald hors that frequent appear simultan in two places. 
she live in an old countri hous near winchfield, and one morn when 
she went into the breakfast-room, she wa surpris to see the piebald 
hors stand on the gravel path, outsid the window, look in at 
her. when she call it by name, it immedi melt into fine air. 
go round to the stabl she found the hors in it stall, and on 
enquiri wa inform that it had been there all the time. 

the same thing frequent occurred, other member of the household 
besid herself wit it, and so like, in all it details, wa the 
immateri hors to the material, that they were often at a loss to tell 
which wa which. the phenomenon sometim occur when the real hors 
wa awake, and sometim when it wa asleep, prove that the anim 
possess the faculti of project it spiritu ego--astr body, or 
whatev you like to call it--both conscious and unconsciously. I know 
of mani similar instances. 


_hors and the psychic faculti of scent_ 

horses, in a rather less degre than cats, and in much the same degre 
as dogs, possess the properti of scent the advent and presenc of 
spirits. On more than one occasion, when I have been ride after dusk, 
my hors ha suddenli come to an abrupt halt and shown unmistak 
sign of terror. I have not been abl to see anyth to account for it 
conduct, but on subsequ enquiri have learned, either that a tragedi 
wa actual known to have taken place there, or that the spot had long 
born a reput for be haunted. and my experi are the 
experi of countless other people. 

befor a death a hors will often neigh repeatedli outsid the hous of 
the doom person, and not infrequ show evid of terror in 
pass close to it, from which I deduc the hors can at all event 
scent the proxim of the phantom of death. like the dog, however, I 
think it onli possess thi peculiar psychic properti in a limit 
degree. It can, for example, readili detect the whereabout of phantasm 
haunt localities, but not so easili those haunt people. 

It show littl or no discrimin on sight, between cruel and brutal 
peopl and those who are kind, give the same amount of pass space 
to the one as it doe to the other. yet, on the other hand, I have 
watch hors at night, stand in the fields, their head thrown 
back, a transfixed, far-off express in their eyes, snif the 
atmosphere--and snuffl it in a manner that strongli suggest to me 
they were carri on, by mean of some silent, secret code, a 
convers with some superphys presence, which they either saw or 
scented, veri like both. 

scent, I am convinced, is the medium of conversation, not onli between 
superphys animals, but between materi animals, and if we ever wish 
to convers with spirit we must employ cats, dogs, and hors to teach 
us. 


_phantom coaches_ 

there are few part of the british isles--few countri in europe--which 
have not their phantom coaches. perhap the most famou are those that 
haunt a road near newport, south wales, and an old highway in devon. 


_A spectr coach and hors in pembrokeshire_ 

miss mari L. lewes, in an articl call "some more welsh ghosts," that 
appear in the _occult review_ for december, 1907, write thus:-- 

"in common with sever other district in great britain and ireland, 
pembrokeshir possess a good 'phantom coach' legend, local in the 
southern part of the county, at a place where four road meet, call 
sampson cross. In old day the belat farmer drive home in hi gig 
from market wa apt to cast a nervou glanc over hi shoulder as hi 
poni slowli climb the last pitch lead up to the cross. for 
tradit say that everi night a certain ladi Z. (who live in the 
seventeenth century, and whose monument is in the church close by) 
drive over from tenby, ten mile distant, in a coach drawn by headless 
horses, guid by a headless coachman. she also ha no head, and 
arriv by midnight at sampson cross, the whole equipag is said to 
disappear in a flame of fire, with a loud nois of explosion." 

miss mari L. lew goe on to add:-- 

"A clergyman live in the immedi neighbourhood, who told the writer 
the story, said that some peopl believ the ghostli travel had been 
safe 'laid' mani year ago in the water of the lake not far off. He 
added, howev that might be, it wa an odd fact that hi sedat and 
elderli cob, when driven home past the cross after nightfall, would 
invari start as if frighten there, a thing which never happen by 
daylight." 

what these kind of spectral hors are no one can say. At the 
most--despit what theosophist and occultist may declar to the 
contrary--on can onli theorize--and the specul of one person, be 
he who he may, seem to me to be of no more consequ than those of 
another. 

for my own part I am inclin to think that whereas, in some cases, the 
ghostli coach hors are the phantom of hors that were kill on the 
highways, in other they are either vice-elementals, or element whose 
particular function it is to prognost death,--eith the death of 
those who see them, or the death of someon connect with those who see 
them. 


_A phantom hors and policeman_ 

accord to one of my correspondents, mr. t---- p----, a compar 
modern phantom rider ha been seen in canada. write to me from c----, 
where he lives, he says: "it is state that thi town is period 
haunt by the phantom of a tall, fair policeman mount on a white 
hors and cloth in the uniform of the 'forties--namely, tail coat, 
tight trousers, and tall hat. hi 'phantom' beat extend from a gateway 
at the commenc of cod hill, along the park side of pablo street to 
sutton street, and adam street, down dane street, and back, through 
pablo street, to the gateway on cod hill." 

A gentleman well known in the art world, who, in order to avoid 
publicity, wish to be design mr. bates, gave me hi experi of 
the phenomena as follows:-- 

"yes, I have seen the ghostli policeman and hi milk-whit horse. I wa 
walk along pablo street on the park side, one grey afternoon in 
november, with the express intent of meet a friend at my club in 
royal street, when to my surprise, just as I wa about a hundr yard 
from the gateway on cod hill, I wa overtaken by a tall, fair-hair 
man, ride a white horse. He wa so dress that I stare in 
astonishment. He wa wear the costum of seventi or eighti year ago, 
and remind me of the policemen in cruikshank' illustr of 
dickens. I wa not frightened, becaus I thought he must be someon 
masquerading; and, in my curios to see hi face, I hasten my step 
to overtak him. I failed; for although he appear to be ride slowly, 
hardli move at all, I could not draw an inch nearer to him. thi made 
me think, and I examin him more critically. then I notic sever 
thing about him, that, at first, had escap my notice. they were 
these: (one) that although he wa mount he wa wear walk 
clothes--h had on long trouser and thick, clumsi boots; (two) that hi 
ear and neck were perfectli colourless, of an unnatur and startl 
white; (three) that despit the incongru of hi attire, no one but 
myself seem to see him. On he rode, neither look to the left nor to 
the right, until he came to sutton street, when, without pay the 
slightest attent to the traffic, he began to cross over. there were 
crowd of vehicl pass at the time, and one of them rush right on 
him. make sure he would be killed, I utter an ejacul of 
horror. judge, then, of my amazement, when, instead of see him lie 
on the ground, crush out of all shape, I saw him still ride on, as 
leisur and unconcernedli as if he had been on a countri road. the 
vehicl had pass right through him. though I had hitherto scof at 
ghosts, I wa now certain I had seen one, and suddenli becom 
consciou how veri cold it was, I tore on, not feel at all 
comfort till I had reach the warm, cheery, and thoroughli materi 
quarter of my club." 

To corrobor the evid of "mr. bates," I append a narr given 
me verbal by miss hartly, who, like mr. bates, had, up to the time of 
her experience, pose as a pronounc and somewhat bitter sceptic. she 
wa an emphat freethinker, and had then no belief whatsoev in a 
futur life. now she believ "a sight" more than most people. 

"one afternoon, in february, 1911," she stated, "just as twilight wa 
commencing, I left the park, where I had been exercis my dog, and 
turn into pablo street, made for bright street. At the corner of wolf 
street I saw someth so strang that I involuntarili halted. ride 
slowli along on a big white horse, a few pace ahead of me, wa an 
enorm policeman in the quaint attir of the 'forties--top hat, tail 
coat, tight trousers, just as I had so often seen portray in old 
books. He wa ride stiffly, as if unaccustom to the saddle, and kept 
look rigidli in front of him. think it wa someon do it either 
for a joke or a wager, I wa greatli tickled, and kept say to myself, 
'well, you are a sport, an A1 sport.' I tri to catch him up, to see 
how he made up hi face, but could not, for although the hors never 
seem to quicken it pace--a mere crawl--and I ran, it nevertheless 
maintain precis the same distanc in front of me. when we had 
progress in thi fashion some hundr or so yards, I perceiv a citi 
policeman advanc toward us. 

"'come, now,' I said to myself, 'we shall see some fun--th 1911 copper 
meet the peeler of 1840. I wonder what he will think of him.' 

"to my intens astonishment, however, neither even as much as gave the 
other a fleet glance, but pass by unmoved, and, to all appearance, 
wholli unconsci of each other. 

"A few yard further, I espi a negro look intent in a store 
window. just as the strang policeman came up to him, he gave a violent 
start, turn round and stare at him, gasped, hi cheek ashi pale, hi 
eye bulging, made some exclam I could not catch, and, dash past 
me, fled. then, and not till then, did I begin to feel funny. further 
on still we came to a crossing. A carriag and pair with a coronet on 
the panel of the door wa stand waiting. directli the policeman 
approached, both the hors rear so violently, they all but threw the 
coachman off the box. one of the men cri out, 'heavens, bill, what' 
that?' but the other and older of the two, who wa cling to the rein 
with all hi might, mere swore. 

"convinc now that I wa on the trail of someth not human--someth 
in all probabl superphysical, and, impel by a fascin I could 
not resist, I followed. 

"at the top of wolf street the policeman paused, then cross slowli 
over, turn into dane street, down which he continu to ride with the 
same mechan and automat tread. At length, when within a few feet 
of a certain shop, over which is a flat that ha long born a reput 
for be haunted, the hors came to a dead halt, and hors and rider, 
veer slowli round, look at me. what I saw I shall never forget. I 
saw the face of the dead--th long sinc dead. for some moment they 
confront me, and then--vanished, vanish where they stood. I saw them 
again, under precis the same conditions, two day later, and I have 
seen them onc since. I am not an imagin or highly-strung person, 
but am, on the contrary, exceedingli practic and matter-of-fact, no 
better proof of which I can give than thi fact--i am engag to be 
marri to a quebec solicitor!" 


_an irish haunting_ 

mr. reginald B. span, in a most interest articl call "some 
glimps of the unseen," that appear in the _occult review_ for 
february, 1906, write as follows:-- 

"anoth strang incident, which also occur in ireland, wa told me 
by a coachman in my cousin' employ at kilpeacon, near limerick. thi 
man had previous been a park-keep to lord donerail in co. cork. one 
bright moonlight night, he wa come across lord doneraile' park, 
have been round to see that the gate were shut, when hi attent 
wa drawn to the distant bay of hounds, and he stop to listen, as 
the sound seem to proceed from within the park walls, and he knew 
there were no hound kept on the estate. hi young son wa with him, and 
also heard the noise, which wa get louder and clearer, and wa 
evid move rapidli in their direction. hi first idea wa that a 
pack of hound which were kept in the hunt kennel a few mile away, 
had escap and had somehow got into the park, although he had seen that 
the gate were closed, and there wa realli no way by which they could 
have entered. the bay of hounds, as if in 'full cry,' sound closer 
and closer, and suddenly, out of the shadow of some trees, a number of 
foxhounds, run at full speed, appear in the clear light of the 
moon. they race past the amaz spectat (a whole pack of them), 
follow close by an elderli man on a larg horse. although they came 
veri near, no sound could be heard but the bay of one or two of the 
hounds. the gallop of the hors wa not heard at all. they swung 
across the grass at a tremend pace, and were lost to view round the 
end of a plantation. the park-keep knew that all the gate were shut, 
and that it would be imposs for a pack of hound to pass out, and he 
thought the mysteri might be solv the next day. however, it never wa 
explained--bi ani natur cause. No hound or horseman had been in the 
park. the mansion wa closed, lord donerail be away, and no one had 
the right of enter the ground within the park walls. He heard later 
that there wa a stori in the neighbourhood about 'the ghost' of a 
former lord donerail 'haunting' the park--and possibl the spectral 
horseman wa he. I question the man and hi son close about it, and 
am convinc they were not deceiv by hallucination, and that their 
account is perfectli true." 

To thi account mr. span add thi note:-- 

"the apparit of hound and huntsman wa wit on an estat 
belong to lord doneraile, in the south of ireland (donerail park); 
the man who told me the incid wa coachman in the servic of my 
cousin, near limerick. hi young son confirm hi father' account, as 
he also saw it. 

"your faithfully, 

"reginald B. span." 

To throw addit light on the matter mr. ralph shirley, editor of the 
_occult review_, publish the follow letter, written to him by lord 
doneraile:-- 

"dear shirley, 

"it is rather a curiou thing that neither ladi castletown nor ladi 
donerail ha ever heard of the stori of the moonlight vision of lord 
donerail and the pack of hounds. however, there is a man at donerail 
call jones, a chemist, who is a most enthusiast antiquarian and a 
dabbler in the occult sciences, and he take the greatest interest in 
all that concern the st. legers. ladi castletown wrote to him, and the 
repli come from hi brother (I suppos he is away), and that I send 
you. 

"ladi donerail say it must refer to the third lord donerail of the 
first creation, who wa kill in a duel afterwards; and there appear to 
be a lot of stori which jone ha ferret out or been told. Of 
course, I don't know how far you could say jone wa authentic. all I 
can say is that he believ the thing himself. 

"your sincerely, 

"doneraile." 

"_dec. 27, 1905._" 

"I should explain," add mr. shirley, "that ladi castletown is daughter 
to the late lord doneraile, and present owner of donerail house. here 
follow the enclosure, i.e. the extract made by walter A. jones, 
doneraile, from hi ms. note on the legend of peasantri in connect 
with donerail branch of the st. leger family. date decemb 21, 1905. 

"I have heard," so it runs, "the follow stori respect the lord 
doneraile, who pursu the chase from ballydineen through gloun-na-goth 
wilkinson' lawn, through byblox, across the ford of shanagh aha 
keel-ahboobleen into waskin' glen into the old deer park at old court, 
thenc into the hors close, and from thenc into the park. He appear 
to take particular delight in wilkinson' lawn accord to tradition, 
for it wa there that the nobl stag wa lost sight of, and of cours it 
wa there he wa most search for. It wa onli last autumn that two 
gentlemen were go to a fair, as I heard, and lead a veri fine 
hors behind the trap. the night be fine and moonlight, they stop 
at the iron gate there to light their pipes, when a gentleman dress in 
old style, with buckskin leggings, walk through the iron gate, though 
closed, and pat the led hors on the neck. they both agre that he 
wa most like to gentlemen of the st. leger famili whom they had known. 
the radiant boy also appear here, and for year in the earli part of 
last centuri no one would pass there after nightfall. the lord 
doneraile, who is believ by the peasantri to stand under lord 
doneraile' oak, it ha been told me positively, wa third viscount. 

"there is an old man call reardon here now who saw a gentleman ride 
a power black hors along lord doneraile' rout in the middl of the 
day, and hi sister who wa with him fail to see the horseman, though 
her brother had to pull her out of hi way. 

"I went up to saffron hill last winter to see the ostrich-lik ghost 
which is there, and I heard a great sweep as of hound and hors go 
past me. paddi shea, late herd to lord doneraile, also would swear he 
saw the phantom lord donerail pursu the chase often. I have heard 
that jame mullain also saw him in wilkinson' lawn, but have not ani 
further proof. 

"it is veri few peopl will admit have seen these things. georg 
buckley, present keeper of the donerail park, got a great fright one 
night which might have been from the same cause." 

In thi case it seem more than like the huntsman, hors and hound 
were all _bona fide_ phantasm of the dead. 


_wild darrell_ 

littlecote, as everyon knows, is haunt by the spirit of the 
notori "wild will darrell" and the hors he invari rode, and 
which eventu broke hi neck. 

but there are mani wild darrells; all europ is overrun by them. they 
nightli tear, on their phantom horses, over the german and norwegian 
forest and moor-land that echo and re-echo with their hoars shout 
and the mourn bay of their grisli hounds. 

mani travel in russia and germani journey through the forest at 
night have caught the sound of wails,--of moan that, start from the 
far distance, have gradual come nearer and nearer. then they have 
heard the wind of a horn, the shout and curs of the huntsman, 
and in a bite cold wind have seen the whole cavalcad sweep by. 

accord to variou author on the subject thi spectral chase goe 
by differ names. In thuringia and elsewhere, it is "hakelnberg" or 
"hackelnbarend,"--th stori be that hakelnberg, a german knight, who 
had devot hi whole life to the chase, on hi death-b had told the 
offici priest that he care not a jot for heaven, but onli for 
hunting; the priest lose patienc and exclaiming, "then hunt till 
doomsday." 

so, in all weathers, in snow and ice, hakelnberg, hi hors and hounds, 
are seen career after imaginari game. 

there are similar stori current in the netherlands, denmark, russia, 
and practic all over europe, and not onli europe, but in mani of the 
state and depart of the new world. thi be so, I think there 
must be a substanti substratum of truth underli the beliefs, 
phantast as they may appear, and yet, are no more phantast than mani 
of the stori we are ask to give absolut credenc to in the bible. 

In old castil the spirit of a moorish leader who won mani victori 
over the spaniards, and wa drown by reason of hi heavi armour in a 
swamp of the river duero, still haunt hi burial-place, a piec of 
marshi ground, near burgos. there, weird noises, such as the wind of 
a huntsman' horn and the neigh of a horse, are heard, and the 
phantasm of the dead moor is seen mount on a white hors follow by 
twelv huge, black hounds. 

In sweden mani of the peasant say, when a nois like that of a coach 
and hors is heard rumbl past in the dead of night, "it is the white 
rider," whilst in norway they say of the same sounds, "it is the hunt of 
the devil and hi four horses." In saxoni the rider is believ to be 
barbarossa, the celebr hero of olden days. near fontainebleau, hugh 
capet is state to ride a gigant sabl hors to the palace, where he 
hunt befor the assassin of henri iv; and in the land the rider 
is thought to be juda iscariot. In other part of franc the wild 
huntsman is known as harlequin or henequin, and in some part of 
brittani he is "herod in pursuit of the holi innocents." (alas, that no 
such herod visit london! how welcom would he be, were he onli to flout 
a few of the brawl brat who, allow to go anywher they please, 
make an inferno of everi road they choos to play in.) 

here my note on hors end; and although the evid I have offer 
may have fail to convinc many, I myself am fulli satisfi that these 
nobl and indispens anim do not termin their exist in thi 
world, but pass on to another, and, let us all sincer hope, far 
happier, plane. 




chapter IV 

bulls, cows, pigs, etc. 


from the hebrid there come to me a case of the phantasm of a black 
bull, that, on certain night in the year, is heard bellow insid the 
shed where it wa killed. 

there are mani account of ghostli cow heard "mooing" in the moor and 
bog-land of scotland and ireland respectively, and not a few case of 
whole herd of phantom cattl seen, glide along, one behind the other, 
with silent, noiseless tread. though I have never had the opportun of 
experi with cow to see if they are sensit to the 
superphysical, I see no reason whi they should not be, and I feel quit 
certain they will particip in "the futur life." 

apropo of pigs, mr. dyer, in hi _ghost world_, says, "anoth form of 
spectr anim is the kirk-grim, which is believ to haunt mani 
churches. sometim it is a pig, sometim a horse, the haunt spectr 
be the spirit of an anim buri aliv in the churchyard for the 
purpos of scare away the sacrilegious." 

mr. dyer goe on to say that it wa the custom of the old christian 
church to buri a lamb under the altar; and that if anyon enter a 
church out of servic time and happen to see a littl lamb spring 
across the choir and vanish, it wa a sure prognost of the death 
of some child; and if thi apparit wa seen by the grave-digg the 
death would take place immediately. mr. dyer also tell us that the 
danish kirk-grim wa thought to hide itself in the tower of a church in 
prefer to ani other place, and that it wa thought to protect the 
sacr buildings. accord to the same writer, in the street of 
kroskjoberg, a grave sow, or, as it wa called, a "gray-sow," wa 
frequent seen, and it wa said to be the apparit of a sow formerli 
buri alive; it appear foretel death or calamity. 


_phantasm of a goat_ 

mrs. crowe, in her _night side of nature_, relat one case of a hous 
near philadelphia, u.s.a., that wa haunt by a varieti of phenomena, 
among other that of a spectr resembl a goat. 

"other extraordinari thing happen in the house," she writes, "which 
had the reput of be haunted, although the son had not believ 
it, and had thereupon not mention the report to the father. 

"one day the children said they had been run after 'such a queer 
thing in the cellar; it wa like a goat, and not like a goat, but it 
seem to be like a shadow.'" 

thi explan doe not appear to be veri satisfactory, but as I have 
heard of one or two other case of premis be haunt by what, 
undoubtedly, were the phantasm of goats, I think it highli probabl it 
wa the ghost of a goat in thi instance, too. 


_the phantom pig of the chiltern hills_ 

A good mani year ago there wa a stori current of an extraordinari 
haunt by a herd of pigs. the chief author on the subject wa a 
farmer, who wa an eye-wit of the phenomena. I will call him mr. B. 

mr. b., as a boy, live in a small hous call the moat grange, which 
wa situat in a veri lone spot near four cross-roads, connect 
four towns. 

the house, deriv it name from the fact that a moat surround it, 
stood near the meet point of the four roads, which wa the site of a 
gibbet, the bodi of the crimin be buri in the moat. 

well, the b---- had not been live long on the farm, befor they were 
awaken one night by hear the most dread noises, partli human and 
partli animal, seemingli proceed from a neighbour spinney, and on 
go to a long front window overlook the cross-roads, they saw a 
number of spot creatur like pigs, screaming, fight and tear 
up the soil on the site of the criminals' cemetery. 

the sight wa so unexpect and alarm that the b---- were appalled, 
and mr. B. wa about to strike a light on the tinder-box, when the most 
diabol white face wa press against the outsid of the window-pan 
and stare in at them. 

thi wa the climax, the children shriek with terror, and mrs. b., 
fall on her knees, began to pray, whereupon the face at the window 
vanished, and the herd of pigs, ceas their disturbance, tore 
frantic down one of the high roads, and disappear from view. 

similar phenomena were seen and heard so frequent afterwards, that the 
b---- eventu had to leav the farm, and subsequ enquiri led 
to their learn that the place had long born the reput of be 
haunted, the ghost be suppos to be the earth-bound spirit of the 
execut criminals. whether thi wa so or not must, of course, be a 
matter of conjecture--th herd of hog may well have been the phantasm 
of actual earth-bound pigs--attract to the spot by a sort of 
fellow-feel for the criminals, whose gross and carnal natur would 
no doubt appeal to them. 

A lane in hertfordshir was--and, perhaps, still is--haunt by the 
phantasm of a big white sow which had accident been run over and 
killed. It wa occasion heard grunting, and had the unpleas knack 
of approach one noiselessli from the rear, and of make the most 
unearthli nois just behind one' back. 


_sheep_ 

lamb and sheep, possess finer natur than goat and pigs, would 
appear to be less earth-bound, and, in all probability, onli temporarili 
haunt the spot that wit their usual barbar ends. 

most slaughter-hous are haunt by them--as, indeed, by mani other 
animals. A scottish moor long bore the reput for be haunt by a 
phantom flock of sheep, which were alway heard "baaing" plaintiv 
befor a big storm. 

It wa suppos they were the ghost of a flock that had perish in 
the memor sever weather of christmas, 1880. here is a case that may 
be regard as typic of haunt by sheep, presum the earth-bound 
spirit of sheep, overwhelm in some great storm or unexpect 
catastrophe. 


"_the spectr flock of sheep in germany_" 

"dure the seven years' war in germany," write mrs. crowe, in her 
_night side of nature_, "a drover lost hi life in a drunken squabbl on 
the high road. 

"for some time there wa a sort of rude tombstone, with a cross on it, 
to mark the spot where hi bodi wa interred, but thi ha long fallen, 
and a mileston now fill it place. nevertheless, it continu to be 
commonli assert by the countri people, and also by variou travellers, 
that they have been delud on that spot by seeing, as they imagine, 
herd of beasts, which on investig prove to be mere visionary. Of 
course, mani peopl look upon thi as a superstition; but a veri regular 
confirm of the stori occur in the year 1826, when two gentlemen 
and two ladi were pass the spot in a post-carriage. one of these 
wa a clergyman, and none of them had ever heard of the phenomenon said 
to be attach to the place. they had been discuss the prospect of 
the minister, who wa on hi way to a vicarage, to which he had just 
been appointed, when they saw a larg flock of sheep, which stretch 
quit across the road, and wa accompani by a shepherd and a 
long-hair black dog. As to meet cattl on that road wa noth 
uncommon, and inde they had met sever drove in the cours of one 
day, no remark wa made at the moment, till suddenli each look at the 
other, and said, 'what' becom of the sheep?' quit perplex at their 
sudden disappearance, they call to the postilion to stop, and all got 
out, in order to mount the littl elev and look around, but still 
unabl to discov them, they now bethought themselv of ask the 
postilion where they were; when, to their infinit surprise, they 
learn that he had not seen them. upon this, they bade him quicken hi 
pace, that they might overtak a carriag that had pass them shortli 
before, and enquir if that parti had seen the sheep; but they had not. 

"four year later a postmaster, name j., wa on the same road, drive 
a carriage, in which were a clergyman and hi wife, when he saw a larg 
flock of sheep near the same spot. see they were veri fine wethers, 
and suppos them to have been bought at a sheep-fair that wa then 
take place a few mile off, J. drew up hi rein and stop hi 
horses, turn at the same time to the clergyman to say that he want 
to enquir the price of the sheep, as he intend go next day to the 
fair himself. whilst the minist wa ask him what sheep he meant, J. 
got down and found himself in the midst of the animals, the size and 
beauti of which astonish him. they pass him at an unusu rate, 
whilst he made hi way through them to find the shepherd; when, on 
get to the end of the flock, they suddenli disappeared. He then 
first learnt that hi fellow-travel had not seen them at all." 

So write mrs. crowe, and I quot the case in support of my argument 
that sheep, like horses, cats, dog and all other kind of animals, 
possess spirits, and consequ have a futur state of existence. 

I have not yet experi with sheep, goats, or pigs, but I do not 
doubt but that they are more or less sensit to superphys 
influences, and possess the psychic faculti of scent the 
unknown--though not, perhaps, in so great a degre as ani of the other 
anim I have enumerated. 




part II 

wild anim and the unknown 




chapter V 

wild anim and the unknown 


_apes_ 

the follow case of anim haunt wa record in automat 
writing:-- 

"I sank wearili into my easi chair befor the fire, which burn with a 
fit and sullen glow in the tini grate of my one room--bar and 
desol as onli the room of an unsuccess author can be. 

"mi condit wa pitiable. for the past twelv month I had not earn 
a cent, and of my small capit there now remain but two pound to 
ward the hound of starvat from my door. In the moonlight I could 
perceiv all the bare of the apartment. would to god fanci would 
ride to me on thi moonbeam and give me inspiration! 'twa inde 
weird--thi silver ether path connect the moon with the earth, and 
the more I gaze along it, the more I wish to leav my bodi and escap 
to the star-light vaults. certainly, from a convers I had onc 
had with a member of the new occult society, I believ it possibl by 
concentr all the mental activ in one channel, so to overcom 
the barrier which prevent the soul visit scene of the ether 
world, as to pass materi to the spot upon which the idea are 
fixed. but although I had essayed--how mani time I do not like to 
confess--to gain that amount of concentr necessari for the 
separ of the soul from the body, up to the present all my attempt 
had been fruitless. doubtless there had been a something--too minut 
even for definition--that had interrupt my self-abstraction--a 
someth that had wreck my venture, just when I felt it to be on the 
verg of completion. and wa it like that now, when my idea were 
misti and vague, I should be more successful? I want to quit the cruel 
bond of natur and be free--fre to roam and ramble. but where? 

"at length, as I gaze into the moonlight, I lost all cogniz of the 
object around me, and my eye becam fix on the mountain of the 
moon, which I discovered, with a start, were no longer specks. I found, 
to my amazement, I had left my bodi and wa career swiftli through 
space--infinit space. the rang open up in front of me, spread out 
far and wide, winding, black and awful--their solemn grandeur lost in 
that terribl desol which make the moon appear like a hideou 
nightmare. I could see with amaz clear the side of the 
mountains; there were enorm black fissures, some of them hundr of 
feet in width--and the more I gaze the more impress I grew with the 
silence. there wa no life. there were no seas, no lakes, no trees, no 
grass, no sigh nor moan of the wind, noth to remind me of the 
earth I now found to my terror I had actual quitted. everyth around 
me wa black--th sky, the mountains, the vast pits, the dried-up mouth 
of which gape dismally. 

"with the movement of a man in a fit, I essay to hinder the fini of 
my mad plunge. I wave my limb violently, kick out and shriek in 
the agoni of fear. I curs and prayed, wept and laugh alternately, 
did everything, yet nothing, that could save me from contact with the 
lone desert so horribl close. nearer and nearer I approached, until at 
last my feet rest on the hard cake soil. for the first few minut 
after my arriv I wa too overwhelm with fear to do other than remain 
stationary. the ground beneath my feet swarm with myriad of foul and 
long-leg insects, thing with unwieldi pincer and protrud eyes; 
thing cover with scali armour; hybrid of beetl and scorpions. I 
have a distinct recollect of one huge-joint centiped make a 
viciou grab at my leg; he fail to make hi teeth meet in anyth 
tangible, and emit a venom hiss disappear in a circular pit. 

"whilst I wa the victim of thi insect' feroc the horizon had 
becom darken by the shadowi outlin of an enorm apish form. I 
want to run away, but could not, and wa compelled, sore against my 
will, to wit it approach. never shall I forget the agoni of doubt 
I endur dure it advance. No man in a tiger' den, nor deer tie to 
a tree await it destroyer, could have suffer more than I did then, 
and my terror increas tenfold when I recogn in the 
monster--neppon--a young gorilla that had been under my charg and had 
given me no end of troubl when I wa head keeper in the zoolog 
garden at berne. 

"I never hate anyth so much as I had hate that baboon. At my hand 
it had undergon a thousand subtl torments. I had pinch it, poke it, 
pull it hair, frighten it by put on mask and make all sort 
of queer noises, and final I had secretli poison it. and now we 
stood face to face without ani bar between us. never shall I forget the 
look of intens satisfact in it hideou eyes, as it gaze 
encount mine. 

"in that strang forlorn world we face each other; I, the tyrant once, 
now the quarry. In the wild of it glee it caper about like a mad 
thing, execut the most exagger antic that augment my terror. 
everi second I anticip an assault, and the knowledg of my fear 
lent addit fierc to it gambols. A sudden chang in my 
attitud at length made it cease. the use had return to my limbs; my 
muscl were quivering, and befor it could stop me I had fled! the 
wildest of chase then ensued. I ran with a speed that would have shame 
a record-beat on earth. with extraordinari nimbl I vault over 
titan boulder of rocks; jump across dyke of infinit depth, 
scurri like lightn over tract of rough, lacer ground, and 
never for one instant felt like flagging. 

"suddenly, to my horror, I came to an abrupt standstill, and the cri of 
some hunt anim burst from my lips. unwittingli I had run against a 
huge wall of granite, and escap wa now impossible. again and again I 
claw the hard rock, until the skin hung in shred from my fingers, and 
the blood patter on the dark soil, that in all probabl had never 
tast moistur before. all thi amus my pursuer vastly; it watch 
with the leisur of one who know it fish will be land in safety, and 
there suddenli came to me, through my olfactori nerves, a knowledg that 
it wa speak to me in the languag of scents--th languag I never 
understood till now wa the languag of all animals. 

"'reach, a littl higher,' it said; 'there are nich up there, and you 
must stretch your limbs. ha! ha! Do you rememb how you use to make me 
stretch mine? you do! well, you needn't shiver. explain to me how it is 
I find you here.' 

"'i cannot comprehend,' I gasp with a gesticul that wa 
grotesque. 

"the great beast laugh in my face. 'how so?' it queried. 'you use to 
quibbl me upon my dull wits; must I now return the compliment? ha! 
there' blood on your hands. blood! I will lick it up.' and with a 
mock grin it advanced. 

"'keep off! keep off!' I shouted. 'mi god, will thi dream never cease?' 

"'the dream, as you call it,' the gorilla jeered, 'ha onli just begun; 
the climax of your horror ha yet to come. If you cannot tell me the 
purport of your visit I will tell you mine. can your lordship spare the 
time to listen?' 

"I gave no answer. I clutch the wall and utter incoher cri like 
some frighten madman. 

"the gorilla felt the muscl in it hairi fingers, and show it huge 
teeth. I look eagerli at my enemy. 

"'come, you haven't yet guess my riddle; you are dull to-night,' it 
said lightly. 'that old wine of your made you sleep too soundly. don't 
let me disturb you. I will explain. thi moon is now my home--i share it 
with the spirit of all the anim and insect that were onc on your 
earth. and now that we are free from such as you--fre to wander 
anywher we like without fear of be shot, or caught and caged--w are 
happy. and what make us still happier is the knowledg that the 
major of men and women will never have a joyou after-st like 
ours. they will be earth-bound in that miser world of theirs, and 
compel to keep to their old haunts, scare to death with their ugli 
face all who have the misfortun to see them. there is anoth fate in 
store for you, however. Do you know what it is?' 

"it paused. No sound other than that occas by hi bump on the 
soil broke the impress hush. 

"'do you know?' it said again. 'well, I will tell you. i'm go to kill 
you right away, so that your spirit--it' all nonsens to talk about 
souls, such as you have no soul--wil be earth-bound here--her for 
ever--and will be a perpetu sourc of amus to all of us anim 
ghosts.' 

"it then began to jabber ferociously, and, crouch down, prepar to 
spring. 

"'for heaven' sake,' I shrieked, 'for heaven' sake.' 

"but I might as well have appeal to the wind. It had no sens of 
mercy. 

"'he, he!' it screamed. 'what a joke--what a splendid joke. your wit 
never seem to degenerate, hugesson! i'm wonder if you will be as 
funni when you'r a ghost. get ready. i'm coming, coming,' and as the 
sky deepen to an awe-inspir black, and the star grew larger, 
brighter, fiercer; and the great lone desert appeal to me with a 
forc unequal before, it sprang through the air. 

"A sing in my ear and a great bloodi mist rose befor my eyes. the 
wail and screech of a million soul wa born in loud protract 
echo through the drum of my ears. men and women with evil face rose 
up from crag and boulder to spit and tear at me. I saw creatur of such 
damn ugli that my soul scream aloud with terror. and then from 
the mountain top the bolt of heaven wa let loose. everi spirit wa 
swept away like chaff befor the burst of wind that, hurl and 
shrieking, bore down upon me. I gave myself up for lost. I felt all the 
agoni of suffocation, my lung were torn from my palpit body; my 
leg wrench round in their sockets; my feet whirl upward in that 
gust of devilish air. all--excruciating, damn pain--and _pro 
tempore_--i knew no more." 

* * * * * 

n.b.--it wa subsequ ascertained, by my friend the late mr. supton, 
that a man name hugesson, who had been for a short time head keeper at 
the zoolog gardens, had been found dead, in bed, by hi landlady, 
with a look on hi face so aw that she had fled shriek from the 
room. the death was, of course, attribut to syncope, but my 
friend--who, by the way, had never heard of hugesson befor he receiv 
the forego account through the medium of planchette--told me, and I 
agre with him, that from similar case that had come within hi 
experience, it wa most probabl that hugesson had in realiti project 
himself, and had perish in the manner described. 

No more improb than the abov stori is that sent me by my old school 
friend martin tristram, who die last year. 

I style it "the case of martin tristram." It is reproduc from a 
magazin publish some three year ago. 

after martin tristram onc took up spiritu hi visit to me becam 
most erratic, and I not onli never knew when to expect him, but I wa 
not alway sure, when he did come, that it wa he. 

thi sound extraordinary--to see a man is assuredli to recogn him! 
not always--bi no mean always! 

there are circumst in which a man lose hi identity, when hi 
"ego" is supplant by anoth ego, when he ceas to be himself, and 
assum an individu which is entir differ from himself. 

thi is undoubtedli the case in madness, imbecility, epilepsy, so-cal 
total loss of memori through cerebr injury, hypnotism, sometim in 
project when the astral bodi get detained, and also not infrequ 
in investig peculiar instanc of psychic phenomena. 

but if the astral bodi ha been evict from it carnal home, whither 
ha it gone? and what is the natur of the thing that ha taken it 
place? 

ah! these are inde puzzles--puzzl I am devot a lifetim to solve. 

there have been moment when unseen hand have gradual begun to pull 
asid the obscur veil, when the ident of the usurp spirit ha 
seem on the verg of be disclos to me, and I have been about to 
be initi into the greatest and most zealous guard of all 
secrets. 

there have been times, I say, when my occult research have actual 
brought me to thi climax; but up to the present I have invari been 
disappointed--th curtain ha suddenli fallen, the esoter ego ha 
shrunk into it shell, and the mysteri surround it ha remain 
impenetrable. 

thi is but one, albeit perhap the most striking, of the mani method 
through which the superphys endeavour to get in immedi contact 
with the physical. 

I wa unpleasantli remind of it when martin tristram' carnal bodi 
came to visit me one night sever year ago. I wa awar that it wa 
not tristram. hi manner were the same, hi voic had not altered; 
but there wa an express in hi eye that told of a veri differ 
spirit from martin' dwell within that body. 

the night be cold, he close the door carefully, and cross the 
room to where I sat by the fire, threw himself in an easi chair, and 
gaze medit at me. 

My room in bloomsburi were not lonely. they had more than their share 
of "brawl brats" on either side; there were no gloomi recess or 
ghost-suggest cupboards, and I never onc experienc in them the 
slightest apprehens of sudden superphys manifestations, yet I 
cannot help say that as I met that glanc from the pseudo-tristram' 
eye I felt my flesh begin to creep. 

He sat for so long in silenc that I began to wonder if he ever meant to 
speak. 

"the secret of success in see certain class of apparitions," he 
said at length, "to a veri great extent lie in sympathy. sympathy! and 
now for my story. I will tell it to you in the 'third person.'" 

I look at tristram' face in dismay. "the third person!" 

"yes, the third person," he grave rejoined, "and under the 
circumst the onli person. you see it is now close on midnight." 

I look at the clock. great heavens! what he said wa correct. A whole 
even had slip by without my knowledge. He would, of course, have 
to stay the night. I suggest it to him. 

"mi dear fellow," he replied, with an odd smile, "don't worri about me. 
I am not depend on ani trains. I shall be home by two o'clock." 

I shivered--a draught of cold air had in all probabl stolen through 
the crack of the ill-fit window-frames. 

"you have on one of your queer moods, martin," I expostulated. "to be 
home by two o'clock you must fly! but proceed--at all costs, the story." 

tristram rais an eyebrow, a true sign that someth of special 
interest would follow. 

"you know bruges?" he began. 

I nodded. 

"veri well, then," he went on. "exactli a week ago martin tristram 
arriv there from antwerp. the hour wa late, the weather boisterous, 
tristram wa tired, and ani lodg wa better than none. 

"hail a four-wheeler, he ask the jehu to drive him to some decent 
hostel where the sheet were clean and the tariff moderate; and the 
fellow, gather up the reins, took him at a snail' pace to a 
mediæval-look tavern in La rue croissante. you rememb that street? 
perhap not! It is quit a back street, extrem narrow, veri tortuous, 
and miser light with a few gas-lamp of the usual antiqu belgian 
order. 

"tristram wa too tired, however, to be fastidious; he felt he could lie 
down and go to sleep anywhere, and what scrupl he might have had were 
entir dissip by the appear of the charm girl who answer 
the door. 

"it is not expedi to dwell upon her--sh play a veri minor part, if, 
indeed, any, in the story. martin tristram mere thought her pretty, 
and that, as I have said, fulli reconcil him to take up hi quarter 
in the house. 

"he has, as you are doubtless aware, a weak for vivid colouring, and 
her bright yellow hair, carmin lips, and scarlet stock struck him 
impress as she led the way to hi bed-chamber, where she somewhat 
reluctantli part from him with a subtli attract smile. 

"left to himself, martin sleepili examin hi surroundings. the room, 
oak-panel throughout, wa long, low, and gloomy; an enormous, 
old-fashioned, empti fireplac occupi the centr of one of the walls; 
on the one side of it wa an oak settee, on the other an equal 
ponder black oak chest. 

"heavi oaken beam travers the ceiling, and the sombre, funer 
charact of the room wa further increas by a coloss and antiqu 
four-post which, place in the exact middl of the chamber, face a 
gigant mirror attach to grotesqu carv and excess lofti 
sabl supports. 

"view in the feeble, fluctuat candlelight, the latter seem 
endow with some peculiar and emphat weird life--their 
glistening, polish surfac threw a dozen and one fantast but oddli 
human shadow on the boards, as at the same time they appear in 
bewild altern to increas and diminish in stature. 

"tristram hastili undressed, and stretch himself between the 
blankets, prepar to go to sleep. like yourself, and for a similar 
reason, he never sleep on hi left side. accordingli he occupi the 
right portion onli of the enorm bed. 

"whi he did not fall asleep at onc he could not explain; he fanci 
that it might be becaus he wa overtired. thi undoubtedli had 
someth to do with it, as also had the remark noises--footfalls, 
creaks, and sighs--that came from everi corner of the apart the 
moment the light wa out. 

"he listen to these inexplic sound with increas alarm until 
the sonor clock from somewher outsid boom 'one,' when, quit 
unaccountably, he fell asleep, awak on the stroke of two from a 
dread nightmare. 

"to hi intens astonish and constern he wa no longer alon in 
the bed--someone, or something, wa lie by hi side on the left-hand 
side of the bed. 

"at first hi thought revert to the young ladi with the scarlet 
stockings; then, a sensat of ici coldness, whilst speedili reassur 
him with regard to her, struck him with the utmost terror. who or what 
could it be? 

"for some second he lay in breathless silence, too frighten even to 
stir, and panic-stricken lest the violent beat of hi heart should 
arous the mysteri visitor. but at length, impel by an 
irresist impulse, he sat up in bed and open hi eyes. the room 
wa aglow with a phosphoresc light, and in the depth of the 
glitter mirror he saw a startl reproduct of the phantasmagor 
four-poster. 

"he instinct felt that there wa some extraordinari chang in the 
supports, and that the suspicion he had at first entertain as to 
their semi-human properti had becom verified; but, merci for hi 
sanity, he found it imposs to look. hi attent wa immedi 
rivet on the object by hi side, which he recogn with a thrill of 
surpris wa a bronz and beard man of rather more than middl age, 
who appear to be buri in the most profound sleep. 

"the pictur wa so vividli portray in the glass that tristram could 
see the gentl heav of the bedcloth each time the sleeper breathed. 

"fascin beyond measur at such an unlooked-for spectacle, and 
desir of a closer inspection, tristram, with a suprem effort, 
manag to tear away hi eye from the mirror and to glanc at the bed, 
where, to hi unmitig astonishment, he saw no one. 

"quit unabl to know what to make of the phenomenon, he again direct 
hi gaze to the glass, and there right enough lay the sleeper. 

"A cold shudder now ran through tristram--h could no longer disguis 
from himself what he had in realiti thought all along, that the room wa 
haunted! 

"the usual symptom accompani occult manifest rapidli made 
themselv known. tristram wa constrain to stare at the lumin 
glitter befor him in helpless expectation; to save hi soul he could 
neither have stir nor utter the faintest ejaculation. He saw in the 
mirror the door of the bedroom slowli open, and a hideous, apish face 
peep stealthili in, not at him, but at the sleeper. 

"next he watch a figure, brown, hairi and lurid--th figur of some 
huge monkey--com crawl into the room on all-fours, and follow each 
of it tell-tal movement as, sidl up to it sleep victim, it 
suddenli hurl itself at him, choke him to death with it long 
fingers. 

"thi wa the climax--tristram saw no more. the phosphoresc light 
die out, the mirror darkened, and on sink back on hi pillow, he 
realiz with the wildest delight he wa onc again alone--hi bedfellow 
had gone! 

"tristram wa so unnerv by all that had happen that he made up hi 
mind to leav the hous at daybreak, a decis which, however, wa 
alter on the appear of the sun and the charm littl girl in 
the red stockings. 

"after breakfasting, tristram stroll about the town, chanc to meet 
an old school-fellow, name heriot, in the rue de mermadotte. 

"heriot had onli recent come to bruges; he wa dissatisfi with hi 
lodgings, and readili fell in with tristram' suggest that they 
should 'dig' together. 

"the maid with the yellow hair wa more pleas than ever, heriot fell 
desper in love with her, and it wa close on midnight befor he 
could be persuad to bid her good night and accompani tristram to the 
bed-chamber. 

"'i wonder whi she told me not to sleep on the left side of the bed?' he 
said to martin, as they began to undress. 

"tristram glanc guiltili at the mirror. for reason of hi own he 
hadn't as much as hint to heriot what he had seen there the previou 
night, and he wa not at all sure now that it might not have been a 
nightmar or an hallucination; anyhow, he would like to put it to the 
test befor mention it to anyone, and heriot, whom he knew to be a 
sceptic with regard to ghosts, wa so strong and hale a man physic 
that, happen what might, he had no apprehens whatev concern 
him. 

"regret that he wa oblig to disobey the wish of a lady, heriot 
declar hi prefer for the left side of the bed, ad that if the 
maiden wa so highli enamour of him, she must put herself to the 
inconveni of a few extra yards. 'infatu like hers,' he 
maintained, 'should sure overcom all obstacles.' 

"noth loth, tristram gave in to him, and befor mani minut had 
elaps both men had fallen into a deep sleep. 

"on the stroke of two tristram awoke, perspir horribly. the room wa 
onc again aglow with a phosphoresc light, and he felt the presenc 
next to him of someth cold and clammy. 

"unabl to look elsewhere, he wa again compel to gaze in the mirror, 
where he saw, to hi constern and horror, no heriot, but in hi 
place the man with the bronz face and bushi beard. 

"he had hardli recov from the shock occas by thi discoveri 
when the door surreptiti opened, and the figur of the ape glide 
noiselessli in. 

"again he wa temporarili paralysed, hi limb lose all their power of 
action and hi tongu cleav to the roof of hi mouth. 

"the movement of the phantasm were entir repetitionari of the 
previou night. approach the bed on 'all-fours,' it leapt on it 
victim, the tragedi be accompani thi time by the most realist 
choke and gurgles, to all of which tristram wa oblig to listen in 
an agoni of doubt and terror. the drama ended, tristram wa overcom by 
a sudden fit of drowsiness, and sink back on to hi pillow, slept 
till broad daylight. 

"anxiou to question heriot as to whether he, too, had been a wit of 
the ghostli transact he touch him lightli on the shoulder. there 
wa no reply. He touch him again, and still no answer. He touch him 
yet a third time, and as there wa still no response, he lean over hi 
shoulder and peer into hi face. 

"heriot wa dead!" 

* * * * * 

"'thi is the fourth death in that bed within the last twelv month 
that I can swear to,' the english doctor remark to tristram, as they 
walk down the street together, 'and alway from the same cause, 
failur of the heart due to a sudden shock. If you take my advice, 
you'll clear out of the place at once.' 

"tristram thought so too, but befor he went he had a talk with the 
girl in the red stockings. 

"'i can't tell you all I know,' she said to him, as he kiss her; 'but 
I wouldn't sleep a night in that room for a fortune, though I believ 
it' quit safe if you keep on the right side of the bed. I wish your 
friend had done so, he wa so handsome,' and tristram, not a littl 
hurt, let go her hand, and made arrang for the funeral." 

* * * * * 

"and is that all?" I asked, as tristram' materi bodi paused. 

"it may be," wa the reply, "but that is whi i'v come to you. don't be 
gull by tristram into ani investig in that house. enthusiasm for 
hi research work make him unconsci callous, and if he onc got 
you there he might, even against your better judgment, persuad you to 
sleep on the left side! good night!" 

I shook hand with him and he departed. the follow even I heard it 
all again from tristram himself--th real tristram. 

needless to say, hi conclud remark differ essentially. with 
unbound cordial he urg me to accompani him back again to bruges, 
and i--declined! 

* * * * * 

He wrote to me afterward to say that he had discov the histori of 
the house--a man, a music-hal artist, answer to the descript of 
the figur in the bed--had onc live there with a perform ape, an 
orang-outang, and happen to annoy the anim one day, the latter had 
kill him. the brute wa eventu shot! 

"thi experi of mine," tristram added, "i of the greatest value, 
for it ha thoroughli convinc me of one thing at least--and that--that 
ape have spirits! and if that be so, so must all other kind of 
animals. Of cours they must." 


_phantasm of cat and baboon_ 

A sister of a well-known author tell me there use to be a hous call 
"the swallows," stand in two acr of land, close to a villag near 
basingstoke. 

In 1840 a mr. bishop of tring bought the house, which had long stood 
empty, and went to live there in 1841. after be there a fortnight two 
servant gave notic to leave, state that the place wa haunt by a 
larg cat and a big baboon, which they constantli saw steal down the 
staircas and passages. they also testifi to hear sound as of 
somebodi be strangled, proceed from an empti attic near where 
they slept, and of the scream and groan of a number of peopl be 
horribl tortur in the cellar just underneath the dairy. On go to 
see what wa the caus of the disturbances, noth wa ever visible. By 
and by other member of the household began to be harass by similar 
manifestations. the news spread through the village, and crowd of 
peopl came to the hous with light and sticks, to see if they could 
wit anything. 

one night, at about twelv o'clock, when sever of the watcher were 
station on guard in the empti courtyard, they all saw the form of a 
huge cat and a baboon rise from the close grate of the larg cellar 
under the old dairy, rush past them, and disappear in a dark angl of 
the walls. the same figur were repeatedli seen afterward by mani 
other persons. earli in december, 1841, mr. bishop, hear fear 
screams, accompani by deep and hoars jabberings, appar come 
from the top of the house, rush upstairs, whereupon all wa instantli 
silent, and he could discov nothing. after that, mr. bishop set to 
work to get rid of the house, and wa fortun enough to find as a 
purchas a retir colonel, who wa soon, however, scare out of it. 
thi wa in 1842; it wa soon after pull down. the ground wa use 
for the erect of cottages; but the haunt be transfer to 
them, they were speedili vacated, and no one ever dare to inhabit 
them, they were eventu demolished, the site on which they stood 
be convert into allotments. 

there were mani theori as to the histori of "the swallows"; one be 
that a highwayman, known as steeplechas jock, the son of a scottish 
chieftain, had onc pli hi trade there and murder mani people, 
whose bodi were suppos to be buri somewher on or near the 
premises. He wa said to have had a terribl though decidedli unorthodox 
ending--fal into a vat of boil tar, a rave madman. but what 
were the phantasm of the ape and cat? were they the earth-bound spirit 
of the highwayman and hi horse, or simpli the spirit of two animals? 
though either theori is possible, I am inclin to favour the former. 


_psychic bears_ 

edmund lenthal swifte, appoint in 1814 keeper of the crown jewel in 
the tower of london, refer in an articl in _note and queries_, 1860, 
to variou unaccount phenomena happen in the tower dure hi 
resid there. He say that one night in the jewel office, one of the 
sentri wa alarm by a figur like a huge bear issu from 
underneath the jewel room door. He thrust at it with hi bayonet, which, 
go right through it, stuck in the doorway, whereupon he drop in a 
fit, and wa carri senseless to the guard-room. when on the morrow mr. 
swift saw the soldier in the guard-room, hi fellow-sentinel wa also 
there, and the latter testifi to have seen hi comrade, befor the 
alarm, quiet and active, and in full possess of hi faculties. He wa 
now, so mr. swift added, chang almost beyond recognition, and die 
the follow day. 

mr. georg offer, in refer to thi incident, allud to queer nois 
have been heard at the time the figur appeared. presum that the 
sentinel wa not the victim of an hallucination, the question aris as 
to the kind of spirit that he saw. the bear, judg by case that have 
been told me, is by no mean an uncommon occult phenomenon. the 
difficulti is how to classifi it, since, upon no question appertain 
to the psychic, can one dogmatize. To quot from a clever poem that 
appear in the januari number of the _occult review_, to pretend one 
know anyth definit about the immateri world is all "swank". At 
the most we--parsons, priests, theosophists, christian scientists, 
psychic research professors,--at the most can onli speculate. 
nothing--noth whatsoever, beyond the bare fact that there are 
phenomena, unaccount by physic laws, ha as yet been discovered. 
all the time and energi and space that have been devot by scientist 
to the investig of spiritu and to make test in automat 
write are, in my opinion--and, I believe, I speak for the man in the 
street--hopelessli futile. No one, who ha ever realli experienc 
spontan ghostli manifestations, could for one moment believ in the 
genuin of the phenomena produc at séances. they have never 
deceiv me, and I am of the opinion spirit cannot be convok to 
order, either through a so-cal medium fall into a so-cal 
trance, through table-turning, automat writing, or anyth else. If a 
spirit comes, it will come either voluntarily, or in obedi to some 
unknown power--and certainli neither to satisfi the curios of a crowd 
of sensation-lov men and women, nor to be analys by some cold, 
calculating, presumptu professor of physic whose proper sphere is 
the laboratory. 

but to proceed. the phenomenon of the big bear, provid again it wa 
realli objective, may have been the phantasm of some prehistor 
creatur whose bone lie inter beneath the tower; for we know the 
valley of the thame wa infest with giant reptil and quadrup of 
all kind (I inclin to thi theory); or it may have been a 
vice-elemental, or--th phantasm of a human be who live a pure 
anim life, and whose spirit would natur take the form most close 
resembl it. 

* * * * * 

judg by the number of experi relat to me, haunt by phantom 
hare and rabbit would appear to be far from uncommon. there is thi 
difference, however, between the haunt by the two speci of 
animal--phantom hare usual portend death or some grave catastrophe, 
either to the wit himself, or to someon immedi associ with 
him; wherea phantom rabbit are seldom prophetic, and may gener be 
look upon mere as the earth-bound spirit of some poor rabbit that 
have met with untim ends. 


_haunt by a white rabbit_ 

mr. w.t. stead, in hi _real ghost stories_, give an account of the 
haunt by a phantom rabbit in a hous in ---- road. He doe not, 
however, mention ani locality. after describ sever of the phenomena 
which disturb variou occup of the place, he goe on to say, in 
the languag of mrs. a., who narrat the incident:-- 

"A dog which lay on the rug also heard the sounds, for he prick up hi 
ear and barked. without a moment' delay she flew to the door, call 
the dog to follow her, intend as she did so to open the hall door and 
call for assistance, but the dog, though an excel hous dog, 
crouch at her feet and whined, but would not follow her up the stairs, 
so she carri him up in her arms, and reach the door, call for 
assistance; when, however, the dining-room door were opened, the room 
were in perfect quiet and destitut of ani sign of life." 

the behaviour of the dog here accord exactli with the behaviour of dog 
I have had in haunt houses, and substanti my theori that dog are 
excel psychic barometers. 

"after the famili had been in the hous a few weeks, a white rabbit made 
it appearance. thi uncanni anim would suddenli appear in a room in 
which member of the famili were seated, and after glide round and 
slip under chair and tables, would disappear through a brick wall 
as easili as through an open door." 

thi is the invari trick of ghosts; they seldom, however, open 
doors. mrs. A. adds:-- 

"some year have now elaps sinc the incid I have now relat took 
place, and again, in respons to order given by the enterpris 
landlord of the property, long-clos door and window have been thrown 
open, and painter and paperhang have brought their skill to bear 
upon gruesom room and halls; the hous is onc more inhabited, thi 
time by a widow ladi and some grown-up sons. these tenant come from a 
distance, and are entir stranger both to the neighbourhood and the 
former histori of the house, but, to use her own words, the mistress 
'cannot understand what ail the house,' her son insist on sleep 
togeth in one room, and the quiet of the hous is constantli be 
broken by the errat appear of a larg white rabbit, which the 
inmat are frequent engag chasing, but are never abl to find." 

mr. stead offer no explanation. I can see no other conclusion, however, 
than that thi ghost wa the actual phantasm of some rabbit that had 
been done to death in the house, probabl by the boy whose apparit 
wa among the other manifest seen there. 


_john wesley' ghost_ 

In hi articl "more glimps of the unseen" (_occult review_, october, 
1906), mr. reginald B. span writes:-- 

"dure the extraordinari manifest which occur in the hous of 
john wesley at epworth, the phantom form of two anim appeared, one 
be a larg white rabbit, and the other an anim like a badger, which 
use to appear in the bedroom and run about and then disappear, whilst 
the variou bang and rap were at their loudest." 

thi is the onli case I have ever come across of the ghost of a badger. 
I think it must be unique. mr. span adds: "mani strang and inexplic 
thing occur in that hous which were not due to ani natur caus or 
reason. I rememb that loud rap use to sound round my room at 
nights, even when I had a light burning. I wa often awaken by 
rap on the floor of my bedroom, which would then sound on the wall 
and furniture, and were heard by other occupi room some distanc 
off." this, again, is most interesting, as ghost seldom visit light 
rooms. mr. span continues:-- 

"it wa in the afternoon in broad daylight when my brother saw thi 
mysteri animal. 

"he wa in the drawing-room alone, and as he wa stand at one side of 
the room look at a pictur on the walls, he heard a nois behind him, 
and found, on look round, that a sofa which gener lay against 
one of the wall had been lift by some unknown power into the middl 
of the room, at the same time he saw an anim like a rabbit run from 
under the sofa across the room and disappear into the wall. He search 
everywher for the animal, which could not have escap from the room, 
as the door and window were closed, but wa unabl to find ani sign of 
one or ani hole wherebi one might have pass out." 


_the psychic faculti in hare and rabbits_ 

hare and rabbit are veri suscept to the superphysical, the 
presenc of which they scent in the same manner as do hors and dogs. 

I have known them to evinc the greatest symptom of terror when brought 
into a haunt house. 




chapter VI 

inhabit OF the jungl 


_elephants, lions, tigers, etc._ 

eleph undoubtedli possess the faculti of scent spirit in a veri 
mark degree. It is most difficult to get an eleph to pass a spot 
where ani phantasm is known to appear. the big beast at onc come to a 
halt, trembles, trumpets, and turn round, can onli be urg forward 
by the gentlest coaxing. 

jungl are full of the ghost of slain men and animals, and afford more 
varieti in haunt than ani other localities. the spirit of such 
cruel creatur as lions, tigers, leopards, are veri much earth-bound, 
and may be seen or heard night after night haunt the site of their 
former depredations. 

the follow case of a tiger ghost wa narrat to me year ago by a 
gentleman whom I will style mr. De silva, p.w.d. I publish hi account 
in a popular weekli journal, as follows:-- 


_the white tiger_ 

"tap! tap! tap. someon wa come behind me. I halted, and in the 
brilliant moonlight saw a figur hobbl along--first one thin leg, 
then the other, alway with the same measur stride--accompani with 
the same tap of the stick. I had no wish for hi company, though the 
road wa lonely, and I fear the presenc of tigers, so I hurri on, 
and the faster I went, the nearer he seem to come. tap! tap! tap! the 
man wa blind and a leper, and so repuls ugli that the nigger on 
the settlement regard him with superstiti awe. I had a horror of 
tigers, but of leper even greater. and I love my wife with no ordinari 
love. So I hurri on, and he follow quickli after me. 

"the night wa brilliant, even more so, I thought, than wa ordinary, 
and the veri brillianc made me fear, for my shadow, the shadow of the 
trees, shadow for which I had no name, flicker across the road, were 
lost to sight to return again, and the jungl wa get nearer. the 
open countri on either side ceased, one by one tall blade of jungl 
grass shook their head in the gentl breeze, and the silenc of the 
dark beyond began to make itself felt. A night bird whizz past me, 
croak out a dismal incant from it black throat; someth at 
which I did not care to look clatter from under a stone I loosen 
with my foot, and sped into the shade, and I hasten on. 

"tap! tap! tap! faster and faster, and faster came the blind man. I 
could smell the oil on hi body, hear hi breathing. 

"'whoever you are, sahib, stop!' 

"there wa fear in hi voic as he whine out these words, a fear which 
increas my own; but I pretend not to hear, and press on faster. 

"the dark grew; high over my head at either side of the road wave 
the grass, rustl to and fro, and sing to sleep the insect 
nestl on it green stalk with it old-tim song of the jungle. 

"the grass ahead of me slowli parted; my heart beat quicker, the tap 
behind me ceased--it wa onli some small animal. what wa it? A small 
hyaena? no. A jackal, a lame jackal, and it look at me from out of 
eye that for some reason or other made me shiver. I did not know what 
there wa about the jackal that wa differ from what I had seen in 
ani other jackal, but there wa a something. and as I look at it in 
awe, it vanished--melt into thin air. 

"the moment after a second jackal appear just where the other one had 
been standing, but there wa noth remark about thi one, and on 
my bend down, pretend to look for a stone to throw at it, it slunk 
back silent and stealthili whenc it had come, and I hurri on 
faster than ever, know a tiger wa near at hand. 

"tap! tap! tap! I bless the presenc of the blind man. 

"'for god' sake, sahib, stop! for the love of allah, sahib, stop!' (you 
know how they talk, o'donnell.) 'the jackals, did you see them? I knew 
them by their smell, the smell of the live and of the dead. walk with 
me, sahib, for allah' sake.' 

"presently, o'donnell, I heard a heavier rustl in the grass than the 
wind makes; a rustl that kept pace with me and went along by my side, 
never halting, but faster and faster, and faster. 

"A short distanc ahead of me wa a patch of bright light, where the 
cross-road met. A few yard more and the jungl grass would end. 

"I thought of this, o'donnell--th beggar might not know the road so 
well as I. He had no wife, no child; he wa a leper, onli a leper--and 
my teeth chattered. 

"here the colonel paus and wipe hi forehead. 

"I slacken my speed, the rustl by my side slow down, and the 
tap grew faster. I wa close to the whiten road. 

"'sahib, the bless of allah be on you for stopping. sahib, let me 
walk by your side.' 

"(to the end of my days, o'donnell, I shall never forgiv myself, and 
yet I want you to understand it wa for my wife--and child.) I slunk 
into the shade. two step more and the tap would pass me. the stick 
struck the ground within one inch of my foot; my heart almost ceas to 
beat; I gaze in fascin at the spot in the jungl opposite. the 
heavi rustl had stopped; onli the gentl sigh of the wind went on. 
the two step were taken, the blind man paus on the cross-roads. He 
wa ghastli in the moonlight. I shuddered. hi eye peer enquiringli 
round on all sides; he wa look for me; he had lost hi way; he 
fear the tiger. 

"suddenli someth huge shot like an arrow from the dark opposit 
me. I bow my head, o'donnell, and mutter a prayer, for I thought my 
end had come. 

"A terribl scream rang out in the clear night air. I wa saved. 

"'allah curs you and yours, sahib.' 

"I open my eyes; an enorm tiger wa bend over the leper, 
search for the most conveni spot in hi bodi to afford a tight 
grip. 

"the man' sightless eye were turn toward the moon, hi teeth shone 
white and even; with the stripe horror pur in hi face, he thought 
of vengeanc on me. 

"I dare not move. I could not pass, o'donnell. I had no gun. the big 
brute found a nice place to catch hold. It open it mouth so that I 
could see it glisten teeth. It look down at it paws, where the 
cruel claw glittered, and they seem to afford it keen 
satisfaction--it wa a tigress and vain--then it lower it head, and 
the leper shrieked. I watch it pick him up as if he were one of it 
cubs; saw the blood trickl down it soft white throat into the dusti 
road, and then it trot grace away, and wa lost in the dark 
of the jungle. there wa a deathlik silenc after this. I wait a few 
minutes, and then I got up. 

"I had onli a short distanc to go, and I no longer fear the presenc 
of man-eaters--ther wa not like to be another. hour afterwards, 
o'donnell, when I lay in my hammock as safe as a fortress, I fanci I 
heard the dead man' cry, fanci I heard hi curse. No one wa more 
devot to a wife than I wa to mine. our had been pure a love match, 
and it wa against my wish that she had accompani me to such an 
out-of-the-way place as seconee. I told her about my adventure, 
suppress the leper' curse; and I wa glad I did so, as she wa 
greatli distressed. 

"'thank good you escaped, charlie,' she said. 'I am so sorri for the 
poor leper. I suppos you couldn't have help him.' 

"'i might have fetch my rifle,' I replied, 'and tri to rescu him, 
of course. but I fear it wouldn't have been of much avail, as he would 
have been badli maul by then.' 

"mi wife sighed. 'ah, well,' she said, 'love is selfish! It make one 
forget others. still, I wouldn't have it otherwise.' 

"'i wish thi railway job here wa over,' I murmured, sit with my 
elbow on my knee and look over the flat ground, sun-bak and 
barren, away toward the dark jungl and the still darker mountain 
tower abov them; and as I gaze a shadow seem to blur my vision 
and a voic to whisper in my ears, 'bewar of my curse.' 

"I took cushai, one of the nativ servants, into confidence. 

"'now, cushai,' I said, 'you know all the superstit of the 
country--th evil eye and the rest of them. tell me, what can the die 
curs of a leper do?' 

"cushai turn pale under hi skin. 

"'not of nahra!' he stuttered, swing the knife with which he had been 
cut maiz in hi hand, 'not of nahra, the leper of futtebah. sahib, 
if you were curs by him, beware. He wa learn in the black arts; he 
could heal ulcer by repeat a prayer, he could bring on fever.' 

"at this, o'donnell, I turn cold. I had live long in india. I had 
seen their so-cal juggling, had experienc also strang case of 
telepathy, and knew quit suffici of their intimaci with the 
supernatur element to be afraid. 

"'you must keep the young sahib safe,' cushai said, 'and the white lady. 
I wish it hadn't been nahra.' 

"I took hi advice. My boy, eric, wa more close supervis than ever, 
and as to my wife, I beg and entreat her not to move from the hous 
until the tiger wa dead, and I search for it everywhere. 

"the dri season passed, the wet came, and my work still kept me in 
seconee. At time there came to us rumour of the man-eater--of anoth 
victim--but it never visit our bungalow, where the bright rifl lean 
against the wall wait for it. 

"I certainli did meet with slight misfortunes, which the more timid 
might have put down to the work of the curse. 

"mi littl finger wa squash in the lay down of a rail, and eric 
had sever bout of sickness. 

"it wa nearli a year after the leper' death that alarm rumour of a 
man-eat have been at work again were spread about us. sever 
nigger were carri off or badli bitten, and the wound show 
symptom of the loathsom diseas so well known and fear by us 
all--leprosy. 

"I knew from that it must be the same tiger. 

"'the tiger is near,' someon would cri out, and a stamped among the 
nativ workmen would ensue. 

"'whi the white tiger?' I ask cushai. 

"'because, sahib,' he replied, 'the leprosi ha made it so! tigers, like 
men, and all other animals, go white even to their hair. I have not told 
them the story, sahib; they onli know it must have caught the leprosy. 
To them nahra is still living.' 

"then, o'donnell, when I thought of what wa at stake, and of all the 
hideou possibl the presenc of thi brute created, I took my 
rifl and went out to search for it. In the evenings, when the dark 
cloud from the mountain descend and the wind hiss through the 
jungl grass, I plod along with no other companion than my winchest 
repeater--searching, alway search for the damn tiger. I found it, 
o'donnell, came upon it just as it wa in the midst of a meal--din 
off a native--and I shot it twice befor it recov from it 
astonish at see me. the second shot took effect--i can swear to 
that, for I took particular note of the red splash of blood on it 
forehead where the bullet entered, and I went right up to it to make 
sure. As god is abov us, no anim wa more dead. 

"'the curs won't come now, cushai,' I said, laughing. 'i'v kill the 
white tiger.' 

"'kill the white tiger, sahib! allah bless you for that!' cushai 
replied. 

"'but don't laugh too soon. nahra wa a clever man, wonder clever; 
he did not speak empti words,' and as hi eye wander to the dark 
hill again I fanci a shadow dart along the sky, and the curs came 
back to my ears. 

"I wa superintend the line one afternoon; the back of the nigger 
were bend doubl under the burden of the great iron rod when I heard 
a terribl cry. 

"'the white tiger! the white tiger!' rod fell with a crash, spade 
follow suit, a choru of shriek fill the air, and leg scamper 
off in all directions. I wa fifti yard from my rifle, and a huge 
creatur wa slowli approach between it and me. 

"I could hardli believ my eyes--th white tiger, the tiger I knew I had 
killed! here it was! here befor me! the same in everi detail, and yet 
in some strange, indefin manner not the same. On it came, a huge 
patch of lumin white, noiselessly, stealthily--th mark of the bullet 
plainli visibl on it big, flat forehead. step by step it approach 
me, it paw no longer with the colour of health, but dull and worn. 
and as it came, the cold shadow of desol seem to fall around it. 
noth stirred; there wa no nois whatever, not even the sound of it 
feet crush the loosen soil. on, on, on nearer, nearer and nearer. 

"shun by all, avoid by it fellow-creatur of the jungle, a blight 
to all and everything, it drew in a line with me. not onc did it eye 
meet mine, o'donnell; not onc did it glare at the nativ who were 
hide on the bank of the cutting; but it stole silent on it way 
with a someth in it movement that left no doubt but that it wa 
engag in no casual venture. I remembered, o'donnell, that my wife had 
promis to come with eric to meet me along the cutting, as she wa sure 
no tiger would be there. I ran as fast as I could, and yet somehow my 
feet seem weight down. I curs my folli for not forbid my wife 
to come. 

"it wa uphil till I got to the bend, and it might have been a 
mountain, it seem so steep. I knew if the thing I had seen met them a 
littl farther on, they would be cornered, as the cut narrow veri 
much, leav not more than twenti yards, and that wa a gener 
estimate. At last, after what seem an eternity, I reach the summit 
of the slope; the tiger wa a mere speck along the line. I rush after 
it as fast as I could go, stumbling, half falling, pull myself 
together, and tear on, and the faster I went the quicker move the 
great white figure. A feel of despair seiz me; all my fond for 
my wife becam intensifi tenfold, and wa reveal to me then in it 
true nature; she wa the one great tie that made life dear to me. even 
my love for eric pale away befor the blind affect I bore her. I 
tore madli on, shout at the same time, anyth to make the white 
tiger awar of my presence, to keep it from see her. anoth bend in 
the road hid it from view. the same hideou fear grip me hard and 
fast, as I strain everi muscl in the mad pursuit. At last I ran round 
the curve, and saw befor me the tableau I had dreaded. the tiger wa 
crouching, readi to spring on the group of three--eva, eric and the 
ayah. they were paralys with fear, and stood on the rail stare at 
it, unabl to move or utter a sound. I well understood their feelings, 
and knew they were labour in their mind as to whether the thing that 
confront them wa a creatur of flesh and blood, or what it was. they 
could not take their eye off it, and, as a consequence, did not see me. 
the white tiger now went through a seri of actions, so lifelik that I 
could not but believ it wa real, and that I had been deceiv in 
think I had kill it. it haunch quivered, it got readi to spring, 
and my rifl flew to my shoulder. I saw it mark eric, and read the 
increas agoni in my wife' eyes. the critic moment came. anoth 
second, and the thing, be it materi or supernatural, would jump. I 
must fire at all costs. If mortal, I must kill it, if ghostly, the nois 
of my rifl might demateri it. and, as god is my judge, o'donnell, 
at that moment I had not the least idea which of it was--tig or 
phantom. It sprang--mi brain reeled--mi finger grew numb, and as my 
wife suddenli bound forward, the shadowi form of nahra seem to rise 
from the ground and mock me. with a suprem effort I jerk my finger 
back and fired. bang! the sound of the explos act like a 
safety-valv to the pent-up feel of all, and there wa a choru of 
shrieks. I rush forward--th ayah lay on the ground, face downward and 
motionless. My wife had hold of eric, who wa shake all over. Of the 
tiger there were no signs. It had complet vanished. 

"'thank god,' I exclaimed, kiss my wife feverishly. 'thank god! It 
wa onli a ghost! but it wa veri alarming, wasn't it?' 

"'alarming!' my wife gasped, 'it wa awful! I quit thought it wa real! 
so did eric, and so did ---- '--then her eye fell on the ayah, and she 
gave a great start. 'charlie!' she cried, 'for mercy' sake look at her! 
I dare not! Is she all right?' 

"I turn the ayah over--sh wa dead! fright had kill her! 

"I then told my wife of the curs of nahra, and of the phantom I thought 
I had seen of him, when the white tiger wa springing. when I had 
finished, my wife hid her face in my shoulder. 

"'charlie!' she said, 'I did someth awful. I saw what I then took to 
be the real white tiger singl out eric, and in my anxieti to save him 
from the brute, I push the ayah in front of him. and the thing sprang 
on her instead. It wa noth short of murder! and yet--well, there 
were extenu circumstances, weren't there?' 

"'of cours there were,' I said--for I verili believed, o'donnell, fear 
had, for the time being, turn her brain. 

"on our way home she suddenli call my attent to eric. 

"'charlie,' she cried, 'what' that mark on hi cheek? he' hurt!' 

"I looked--and my heart turn sick within me. On the boy' cheek wa a 
faint red scratch, just as might have been caus by a slight, veri 
slight contact with some animal' claw. 

"'sahib!' cushai whisper to me, when he saw it and heard of our 
adventure. 'sahib! beware! nahra wa a clever man. He must have use the 
spirit of the white tiger as hi tool. let the medicin man examin the 
scar.' 

"I did so. I took eric to a dr. nicholson, who live close by. 

"he look at the wound curious for a few moments, and then said to 
me--h wa renown for hi plain speaking--'mr. De silva, there' no 
use beat about the bush, and prolong the agoni unnecessarili for 
you and your wife. the boy' got leprosy--god alon know how! At the 
most he may live six weeks.' 

"the shock, of course, wa terrible. eric had to be isol from 
everyone--even from those who love him best--and die within a month. 

"'sahib, I knew!' cushai said to me the day of the funeral, 'I knew some 
disast would befal you. nahra wa a wonder man, and hi curs had 
to be fulfilled. you may rest assured, however, noth further will 
befal you, for I saw nahra in a vision thi morning, and he told me 
both hi and the white tiger' spirit were now on friendli terms, and 
would troubl you no more.' 

"mi wife and I left the place at once, and for a long time I live in a 
hell of suspens lest she should develop the infern disease. By a 
merci providence, however, she did no such thing, but, on the 
contrary, pick up in health in the most marvel fashion; indeed, 
she onli told me yesterday, she felt better than she had done for years. 
i'v told you the story, o'donnell--and it is true in everi 
detail--becaus it goe a long way to substanti your theori that 
animals, as well as human beings, have a futur life." 

"I am absolut sure they have!" I replied. 


_jungl anim and psychic faculties_ 

It is, of course, imposs to say whether anim of the jungl 
possess psychic faculties, without put them to the test, and this, 
for obviou reasons, is extrem difficult. but sinc I have found that 
such properti are possessed--in vari degree--bi all anim I have 
tested, it seem onli too probabl that bear and tigers, and all beast 
of prey, are similarli endowed. 

It would be interest to experi with a beast of prey in a haunt 
locality; to observ to what extent it would be awar of the advent of 
the unknown, and to note it behaviour in the actual presenc of the 
phenomena. 




part iii 

bird and the unknown 




chapter vii 

bird and the unknown 


As edgar allan poe ha suggest in hi immort poem of "the raven," 
there is a strong link between certain speci of bird and the unknown. 

We all know that vultures, kite and crow scent dead bodi from a 
great way off, but we don't all know that these and other kind of bird 
possess, in addition, the psychic properti of scent the advent not 
onli of the phantom of death, but of many, if not, indeed, all other 
spirits. within my knowledg there have been case when, befor a death 
in the house, ravens, jackdaws, canaries, magpies, and even parrots, 
have shown unmistak sign of uneasi and distress. the raven ha 
croak in a high-pitched, abnorm key; the jackdaw and canari have 
becom silent and dejected, from time to time shivering; the magpi even 
ha feign death; the parrot ha shriek incessantly. owls, too, are 
sure predictor of death, and may be heard hoot in the most dole 
manner outsid the hous of anyon doom to die shortly. 

In an articl entitl "psychic records," the editor of the _occult 
review_ (in the august number, 1905) suppli the follow anecdot of 
ghost of bird furnish him by hi correspondents. 

"in the autumn of 1877 my husband wa lie serious ill with rheumat 
fever, and I had sat up sever nights. At last the doctor insist on 
my go to bed; and veri unwillingli I retir to a spare room. while 
undress I wa surpris to see a veri larg white bird come from the 
fireplace, make a hover circl round me, and final go to the top of 
a larg doubl chest of drawers. I wa too tire to troubl about it, 
and thought I would let it remain until morning. the next morn I said 
to the housemaid: 

"'there wa a larg bird in the spare room last night, which flew to the 
top of the drawers. see that it is put out.' 

"the nurse, who wa present, said: 

"'oh, dear, ma'am, I am afraid that is an omen, and mean the master 
won't live,' and she wa confirm in her opinion by the maid say she 
had searched, and there wa no trace of ani bird. 

"I wa quit angry, as my husband wa decidedli better, had slept 
through the night, and we thought the crisi had passed. I went to hi 
bedsid and found him quietli sleeping, but he never woke, and in about 
an hour pass quietli away. 

"I thought no more of the bird, fanci I must have been mistaken from 
be overtired. 

"some month after my husband' death my youngest littl one wa born; 
he live for twelv months, and then had an attack of bronchitis. He 
slept in a cot in my room, and I wa undress one night, when thi 
same larg white bird came from hi cot, float round me, and 
disappear in the fireplace. At the time I did not for a moment think 
of it as anyth but a strang coincidence, and in no way connect it 
with baby' illness. 

"the next morn I wa sit by the drawing-room fire with babi on my 
lap. the doctor came in, look at him, sound hi chest, and 
pronounc him much better. As he wa a friend of the family, he sat 
down on the other side of the fireplac and wa chat in an ordinari 
way, when he suddenli jump up with an exclamation, 'why, what doe 
thi mean?' and took the child from my arm quit dead! 

"for two year we saw noth more of the white bird, and we had move 
to anoth place. 

"one day I wa in my room, and my two littl girls, age six and eight, 
were stand at the window watch a kitten in the garden, when 
suddenli the youngest cri out: 

"'oh, mamma! look at that great white bird,' put her hand as if to 
catch it, exactli in the way it fli round one. 

"I saw nothing, and the elder child said, 'don't be silly, jessie; there 
is no bird.' 

"'but there is,' said the child. 'don't you see? there, look! there it 
is!' 

"I look at my watch. It wa twenti minut past three. 

"two day after we receiv the news that a niec of mine had die at 
twenti minut past three. the children had never known anyth of the 
former appearances, as we had never talk about it befor them. We have 
seen noth sinc of the bird, but have for some year had no death in 
the family." 

So run the articl in the _occult review_, and I can corrobor it 
with similar experi that have happen to my friend and to me. 

some year ago, for instance, a great friend of my wife' died, and on 
the day of the funer a larg bird tri to fli in at the window of the 
room where the corps lay; while, shortli afterwards, an exactli similar 
bird visit the window of my wife' and my room in a house, sever 
hundr of mile away. If it wa onli a coincidence, it wa a veri 
extraordinari one. 

then again, thi spring, just befor the death of one of my wife' 
relatives, a larg bird flew violent against the window-pan behind 
which my wife wa sitting--an incid that had never happen to her in 
that hous before. 

undoubtedly, spirit in the guis of birds--most probabl they are the 
phantasm of bird that have actual onc live on the materi 
plane--ar the messeng of death. 


_A case of bird haunt in east russia_ 

some year ago the neighbourhood of orskaia, in east russia, wa rous 
by an affair of a veri remark nature. the bodi of a handsom young 
peasant woman, call marth popenkoff, wa found in a lone part of 
the road, between orskaia and orenburg, with the skin of her face and 
bodi shockingli torn and lacerated, but without there be ani wound 
deep enough to caus her death, which the doctor attribut to syncope. 

the peopl of orskaia, not satisfi with thi verdict, declar marth 
had been murdered, and made such a loud clamour that the editor of the 
local paper at last voic their sentiment in the _east russia 
chronicle_. It wa then that M. durant, a smart young french engineer, 
temporarili resid in those parts, becam interest in the case, and 
decid to investig it thoroughly. with thi end in view he wrote to 
hi friend M. hersant--a keen student of the occult--in saratova, to 
join him, and three day after the despatch of hi letter met the latter 
at the orskaia railway station. M. durant retail the case as they 
drove to hi house. 

"it is a remark affair, in everi way," he said. "the woman wa 
lead a perfectli respect marri life; she wa hard-work and 
industrious, and beyond the fact that she wa over-indulg to her 
children, doe not seem to have had ani seriou faults. As far as I can 
ascertain she had no enemies." 

"nor secret lovers?" M. hersant asked. 

"no; she wa quit straight." 

"and you feel sure she wa murdered?" 

"I do. public opinion so strongli favour that view." 

"did you see the mark on the woman?" 

"I did, and could make noth of them. after supper I will take you to 
see her, in the morgue." 

"what--sh is still unburied?" 

"yes--but there is noth unusu about that. In these part bodi 
are often kept for ten days--sometim even longer." 

M. durant wa as good as hi word; after they had partaken of a somewhat 
hasti meal, they set out to the morgue, where they made a care 
inspect of the poor woman' remains. 

M. hersant examin the mark on the woman' bodi veri close with hi 
magnifying-glass. 

"ah!" he suddenli exclaimed, bend down and almost touch the corps 
with hi nose, "ah!" 

"have you made a discovery?" M. durant enquired. 

"I prefer not to say at present," M. hersant replied. "I should like to 
see the spot where thi bodi wa found--now." 

"we will go there at once," M. durant rejoined. 

the scene of the tragedi wa the orenburg road, at the foot of two 
littl hills; and on either side were the slope fields, yellow with 
the nod corn. 

"that is the exact place where she lay," M. durant said, indic with 
hi finger a dark patch on a littl wooden bridg span a stream, 
within a stone' throw of a tumbledown mill-house, all overgrown with 
ivi and lichens. M. hersant look round and snif the air with hi 
nostrils. 

"there is an air of loneli about thi spot," he remarked, "that in 
itself suggest crime. If thi were an ordinari murder, one could well 
imagin the assassin wa aid in hi diabol work by the 
configur of the land which, shelv as it does, slip down into 
the narrow valley, so as to preclud ani possibl of escap on the 
part of the victim. the place seem especi design by provid as 
a death-trap. let us have a look at the interior of thi building." 

"the polic have search it thoroughly," M. durant said. 

"i'v no doubt," M. hersant repli drily. "no one know better than I 
what the thorough of the polic means." 

they enter the premis cautiously, sinc the roof wa in a ricketi 
condition, and ani slight concuss might dislodg an avalanch of 
stone and plaster. while M. durant stood glanc round him rather 
impatiently, M. hersant made a care scrutini of the walls. 

"humph," he said at last. "a you so rightli observed, henri, thi is a 
remark case. I have finish my investig for to-night. let us 
be go home. to-morrow I should like to visit marthe' home." 

thi convers took place shortli befor midnight; some six hour 
later all orskaia wa ring with the news that marth popenkoff' 
three children had all been found dead in their beds, their face and 
bodi lacer in exactli the same manner as their mother's. there 
seem to be no doubt now that marth had been murdered, and the 
populac cri shame on the police; for the assassin wa still at large. 
they agre that the murder could be no other than peter popenkoff, 
and the editor of the local paper repeat these statements, peter 
popenkoff wa duli charg with the crimes, and arrested. He wa 
pronounc guilti by all except M. hersant; and of cours M. hersant 
thought him guilty, too; onli he like to think differ from anyon 
else. 

"I don't want to commit myself," wa all they could get out of him. "I 
may have someth to say later on." 

M. durant laugh and shrug hi shoulders. 

"it, undoubtedly, is peter popenkoff," he observed. "I had an idea that 
he wa the culprit all along." 

but a day or two later, peter popenkoff wa found dead in prison with 
the skin on hi face and hand all torn to shreds. 

"there! didn't we say so?" cri the inconsequ mob. "peter popenkoff 
wa innocent. one of the polic themselv is the murderer." 

"come, you must acknowledg that we are on the right track now--it is 
one of the police," M. durant said to hi friend. 

but M. hersant onli shook hi head. 

"I acknowledg noth of the sort," he said. "come with me to the 
mill-hous to-night, and I will then tell you what I think." 

To thi proposit M. durant willingli agreed, and, accompani by hi 
friend and the villag priest, set off. On their arrival, M. hersant 
produc a big compass, and on the earth floor of the mill-hous drew a 
larg circle, in which he made with white chalk variou sign and 
symbols. He then sat in the middl of it, and bade hi two companion 
stand in the doorway and watch. the night grew darker and darker, and 
present into the air stole a someth that all three men at onc 
realiz wa supernatural. M. hersant cough nervously, the priest 
cross himself, and M. durant call out, "thi is get ridiculous. 
these mediæv proceed are too absurd. let us go home." the next 
moment, from the far distance, a church clock began to strike. It wa 
midnight, and an impress silenc fell on the trio. then there came a 
nois like the flutter of wings, a loud, blood-curdl scream, half 
human and half animal, and a huge black owl, whirl down from the roof 
of the building, perch in the circl directli in front of M. hersant. 

"pray, father! pray quickly," M. hersant whispered. "pray for the dead, 
and sprinkl the circl with holi water." 

the priest, as well as hi trembl limb would allow, obeyed; 
whereupon the bird instantli vanished. 

"for heaven' sake," M. durant gasped, "tell us what it all means." 

"onli this," M. hersant said solemnly, "the phantasm we saw caus the 
death of the popenkoff family. It is the spirit of an owl that the 
children, encourag by their parents, kill in a most cruel manner. As 
soon as I examin marthe' body, I perceiv the mutil were due 
to a bird; and when I visit thi mill on the eve of my arrival, I knew 
that a bird had onc live here; that it had been captur with lime and 
murdered, and that it haunt the place." 

"how could you know that?" the priest exclaim in astonishment. 

"I am clairvoyant. I saw the bird' ghost as it appear to us just now. 
afterward I enquir of the popenkoffs' neighbours, and the inform 
I gather fulli confirm my suspicions--that the unfortun bird had 
been put to death in a most barbar manner. the death of the three 
children laid to rest ani doubt I may have had with regard to the 
superphys play a part in the death of marthe. then when her 
better-half had been serv likewise, I wa certain that all five 
pseudo-murd were wholli and sole act of retribution, and that they 
were perpetrated--i am inclin to think involuntarily--bi the spirit of 
the owl itself. accordingly, I decid to hold a séanc here--her in 
it old haunt, and if possibl to put an end to the earth-bound 
condit and wander of the soul of the unhappi bird. thank to 
father mickledoff we have done so, and there will be no more so-cal 
murder near orskaia." 


_haunt by the phantasm of birds_ 

one of the most curiou case of haunt by the phantasm of bird 
happen toward the end of the eighteenth centuri in a church not 
twenti mile from london. the sexton start the rumours, declar that 
he had heard strang noises, appar proceed from certain vault 
contain the tomb of two old and distinguish families. the noises, 
which gener occur on friday nights, most often took the form of 
mockings, suggest to some of the listeners--th enact of a murder, 
and to other mere the flap of wings. 

the case soon attract consider attention, peopl flock to the 
church from all over the country-side, and it wa not long befor 
certain person came forward and declar they had ascertain the caus 
of the disturbance. the churchwarden, sexton, and hi wife and other 
all swore to see a huge crow peck and claw at the coffin in 
the vaults, and fli about the chancel of the church, and perch on 
the communion rails. when they tri to seiz it, it immedi 
vanished. 

An old lady, who came of a famili of well-to-do yeomen, and who live 
near the church about that time, said that the peopl in the town had 
for mani year been convinc the church there wa haunt by the 
phantom of a bird, which they believ to be the earth-bound soul of a 
murderer, who, owe to hi wealth, wa inter in the churchyard, 
instead of be buri at the cross-road with the customari wooden 
stake driven through the middl of hi body. thi belief of the yokel 
receiv some corrobor from a neighbour squire, who said he had 
seen the phantasm, and wa quit posit it wa the earth-bound soul of 
a crimin whose famili histori wa known to him, and whose remain lay 
in the churchyard. 

thi is all the inform that I have been abl to gather on the 
subject, but it is enough to, at least, suggest the church was, at one 
time, haunt by the phantom of a bird, but whether the earth-bound soul 
of a murder take that guise, or the spirit of an actual dead bird, 
it is imposs to say. 


_the ghost of an evil bird_ 

henri spicer, in hi _strang thing amongst us_, tell the stori of a 
captain morgan, an honour and vivaci gentleman, who, arriv in 
london in 18--, put up for the night in a large, old-fashion hotel. 
the room in which he slept wa full of heavy, antiqu furniture, 
reminisc of the day of king georg I, one of the worst period in 
modern english histori for crime. despite, however, hi grimli 
suggest surroundings, captain morgan quickli got into bed and wa 
soon asleep. He wa abruptli awaken by the sound of flapping, and, on 
look up, he saw a huge black bird with outstretch wing and fieri 
red eye perch on the rail at the foot of the four-post bed. 

the creatur flew at him and endeavour to peck hi eyes. captain 
morgan resisted, and after a desper struggl succeed in drive it 
to a sofa in the corner of the room, where it settl down and regard 
him with great fear in it eyes. determin to destroy it, he flung 
himself on the top of it, when, to hi surpris and terror, it 
immedi crumbl into nothingness. He left the hous earli next 
morning, convinc that what he had seen wa a ghost, but mr. spicer 
offer no explan as to how one should classifi the phenomenon. 

It may have been the earth-bound spirit of the crimin or vicious 
inclin person who had onc live there, or it may have been the 
phantom of an actual bird. either altern is feasible. 

I have heard there is an old hous near poole, in dorset, and anoth in 
essex, which were formerli haunt by spectral birds, and that as late 
as 1860 the phantasm of a bird, mani time the size of a raven, wa so 
frequent seen by the inmat of a hous in dean street, soho, that 
they eventu grew quit accustom to it. but bird haunt are not 
confin to houses, and are far more often to be met with out of doors; 
inde there are veri few woods, and moors, and common that are not 
subject to them. I have constantli seen the spirit of all manner of 
bird in the park in dublin and london. greenwich park, in particular, 
is full of them. 


_addendum to bird and the unknown_ 

though their unlov aspect and solitari mode of life may in some 
measur account for the prejudic and suspicion with which the owl, 
crow, raven, and one or two other bird have alway been regarded, there 
are undoubtedli other and more subtl reason for their unpopularity. 

the ancient without except credit these bird with psychic 
properties. 

"ignarr bubo dirum mortalibu omen," said ovid; whilst speak of the 
fatal prognost of the crow virgil wrote: 

"saep sinistra cava praedixit ab ilic cornix." 

A number of crow are state to have flutter about cicero' head on 
the day he wa murdered. 

plini says, "these birds, crow and rooks, all of them keep much 
prattling, and are full of chat, which most men take for an unlucki sign 
and presag of ill-fortune." 

ramesay, in hi work _elminthologia_ (1688), writes: 

"if a crow fli over the hous and croak thrice, how do they fear they, 
or someon els in the family, shall die." 

the bittern is also a bird of ill omen. allud to thi bird, bishop 
hall onc said: 

"if a bittern fli over thi man' head by night, he will make hi 
will"; whilst sir humphri davi wrote: 

"I know a man of veri high digniti who wa exceedingli move by omens, 
and who never went out shoot without a bittern' claw fasten to hi 
button-hol by a riband, which he thought ensur him 'good luck.'" 

raven and swallow both, at times, prognost death. In lloyd' 
_stratagem of jerusalem_ (1602) he says: 

"bi swallow light upon pirrhus' tents, and light upon the mast of 
mar. antonius' ship, sail after cleopatra to egypt, the soothsay 
did prognost that pirrhu should be slain at argo in greece, and 
mar. antoniu in egypt." 

He allud to swallow follow cyru from persia to scythia, from 
which the "wise men" foretold hi death. raven follow alexand the 
great from india to babylon, which wa regard by all who saw them as a 
fatal sign. 

"'ti not for nought that the raven sing now on my left and, croaking, 
ha onc scrape the earth with hi feet," wrote plautus. 

other refer to the same bird are as follows: 

"the raven himself is hoars 
that croak the fatal entranc of duncan 
under my battlements."--(_macbeth._) 

"it come o'er my memori 
As doth the raven o'er the infect house, 
bode to all."--(_othello._) 

"that toll 
the sick man' passport in her hollow beak, 
and in the shadow of the silent night 
doth shake contagion from her sabl wings." 
(_jew of malta._) 

"i it not omin in all countri where crow 
and raven croak upon trees?"--(_hudibras._) 

"the bode raven on her cottag sat, 
and with hoars croak warn us of our fate." 
(_the dirge._) 

"in cornwall," write mr. hunt, in hi work on popular beliefs, etc., of 
the west of england, "it is believ that the croak of a raven over 
the hous bode evil to some of the family. the follow incident, 
given to me by a realli intellig man, illustr the feeling: 

"'one day our famili were much annoy by the continu croak of a 
raven over the house. some of us believ it to be a token; other 
derid the idea. but one good lady, our next-door neighbour, said: 

"'"just mark the day, and see if someth doe not come of it." 

"'the day and hour were care noted. month pass away, and 
unbeliev were loud in their boast and enquiri after the token. 
the fifth month arrived, and with it a black-edg letter from 
australia, announc the death of one of the member of the famili in 
that country. On compar the date of the death and the raven' croak, 
they were found to have occur on the same day.'" 

In an old number of _note and queries_ a correspond relat that in 
somersetshir the appear of a singl jackdaw is regard as a sure 
prognost of evil. He goe on to add that the men employ in the 
quarri in the avon gorge, clifton, bristol, had more than onc notic 
a jackdaw perch on the chain that span the river, prior to some 
catastroph among them. 

dead magpi were onc hung over the doorway of haunt hous to keep 
away ghosts; it be almost univers believ that all phantasm 
share the same dread of thi bird. ghost of magpi themselv are, 
however, far from uncommon; on dartmoor and exmoor, for example, I have 
seen sever of them, gener in the immedi vicin of bog or 
deep holes. 

witch were much attach to thi bird, and were said to often assum 
it shape after death. 

"magpies," say mr. william jones, in hi _credulities, past and 
present_, "are mysteri everywhere. A ladi live near carlstad, in 
sweden, grievous offend a farm woman who came into the court of her 
hous ask for food. the woman wa told 'to take that magpi hang 
upon the wall and eat it.' she took the bird and disappeared, with an 
evil glanc at the lady, who had been so ill-advis as to insult a 
finn, whose magic powers, it is well known, far exceed those of the 
gipsies." (other author corrobor thi statement; and I have 
heard it said that the finn can surpass even the famou trick of the 
indians.) mr. jones, in the same story, says: "present the number 
increased, and the lady, who at first had been amused, becam troubled, 
and tri to drive them away by variou devices. all wa to no purpose. 
she could not move without a larg compani of magpies; and they becam 
at length so dare as to hop on her shoulder." (thi read like 
hallucination. however, as I have heard of similar cases, in which there 
ha been no doubt as to the object of the phenomena, I see no 
reason whi these magpi should not have been object too.) "then she 
took to her bed in a room with close shutters, although even thi wa 
not an effectu protection, for the magpi kept tap at the 
shutter day and night." mr. jone adds: "the lady' death is not 
recorded; but it is fulli expect that, die when she may, all the 
magpi of wermland will be present at her funeral." 

there is a hous in great russel street, w.c., where the haunt take 
the form of a magpi that tap at one of the window everi morn 
between two and three, and then appear insid the room, perch on what 
look like a huge alpin stick, suspend horizont in the air, about 
seven feet from the floor. the moment a sound is made the apparit 
vanishes. It is thought to be the spirit of a magpi that wa done to 
death in a veri cruel manner in that room mani year ago. there is a 
stori current to the effect that a lady, when visit the british 
museum one day, happen to pass some slight remark about one of the 
egyptian mummi case (not the notori one), and that on quit the 
build she felt a sharp peck on her neck. she put up her hand to the 
injur part, and felt the distinct impress of a bird' claw on it. 
she could see nothing, however. that night--and for everi succeed 
night for six weeks--sh wa awaken at two o'clock by the phantom of 
an enorm magpi that flutter over the bed, and wa clearli visibl 
to herself and her sister. the phenomenon worri her so that she becam 
ill, and wa eventu order abroad. she went to cairo and enjoy a 
brief respite; the hauntings, however, began again, and thi time becam 
so persist that she at last lost her reason, and had to be brought 
home and confin in a privat asylum, where she shortli afterward 
died. though I cannot vouch for the truth of thi story, I do think it 
is somewhat riski to make fun of certain of the egyptian relic in the 
museum. they may be haunt by someth infinit more alarm than 
the ghost of magpies. there are mani say respect the magpi as a 
harbing of ill luck. In lancashire, for example, there is thi rhyme: 

"one for anger, two for mirth, 
three for a wedding, four for a birth, 
five for rich, six for poor, 
seven for a witch, I dare tell you no more." 

from further north come thi couplet: 

"magpie, magpie, chatter and flee, 
turn up thi tail, and good luck fall me." 

rooks, again, are veri psychic birds; they alway leav their haunt 
near an old hous shortli befor a death take place in it, becaus 
their highli develop psychic faculti of scent enabl them to detect 
the advent of the phantom of death, of which they have the greatest 
horror. A rook is of great service, when investig haunt houses, 
as it nearli alway give warn of the appear of the unknown by 
violent flap of the wings, loud croaking, and other unmistak 
symptom of terror. 

owls, though no less sensit to superphys influence, are not 
scare by it; they and bats, alon among the mani kind of anim I 
have tested, take up their abod in haunt localities, and with the 
utmost sang-froid appear to enjoy the presenc of the unknown, even in 
it most terrifi form. 

the owl ha been associ with the darker side of the unknown longer 
than ani other bird. 

"solaque, culminibu ferali carmin bubo. saep queri et longa in 
fletum ducer voces," write virgil. 

pliny, in describ thi bird, says, "bubo funebri et maxim 
abominatus"; whilst chaucer writes: "the owl eke that of death the bode 
ybringeth." 

In the arundel famili a white owl is said to be a sure indic of 
death. 

that shakespear attach no littl import to the fatal cri of 
the bird may be gather from the scene in _macbeth_, when the murder 
asks: 

"didst thou not hear a noise?" and ladi macbeth answers: 

"I heard the owl scream and the cricket cry"; and the scene in _richard 
iii_, where richard interrupt a messeng of evil news with the words: 

"out on ye, owls! noth but song of death?" 

gray speak of "moping" owls; chatterton exclaims, "harke! the deth 
owl loud doth synge"; whilst hogarth introduc the same bird in the 
murder scene of hi _four stage of cruelty_. 

nor is the belief in the sinist prophet properti of the owl 
confin to the white races; we find it everywhere--among the red 
indians. west africans, siamese, and aborigin of australia. 

In cornwall, and in other corner of the country, the crow of a cock 
at midnight wa formerli regard as indic the passag of death 
over the house; also if a cock crew at a certain hour for two or three 
night in succession, it wa thought to be a sure sign of earli death to 
some member of the household. In _note and queries_ a correspond 
remark that crow hen are not uncommon, that their crow is veri 
similar to the crow of a veri young cock, and must be taken as a certain 
presag of some dire calamity. 

It wa gener held that in all haunt local the ghost would at 
onc vanish--not to appear again till the follow night--at the first 
crow of the cock after midnight. I believ there is a certain amount 
of truth in this--at all event cocks, as I myself have proved, are 
invari sensit to the presenc of the superphysical. 

the whistler is also a veri psychic bird. spenser, in hi _faeri 
queene_ (book ii, canto xii, st. 31), allud to it thus:-- 

"the whistler shrill, that whoso hear doth die"; 

whilst sir walter scott refer to it in a similar sens in hi _ladi of 
the lake_. 

the yellow-hamm wa formerli the object of much persecution, sinc it 
wa believ that it receiv three drop of the devil' blood on it 
feather everi may morning, and never appear without presag ill 
luck. parrot do not appear to be veri suscept to the influenc of 
the unknown, and indic littl or no dread of superphys 
demonstrations. 

doves, wrens, and robin are bird of good omen, and the mani 
superstit regard them are all associ with good luck. doves, I 
have found in particular, are veri safe psychic baromet in haunt 
houses. 

It is almost univers held to be unlucki to kill a robin. A 
correspond of _note and queries_ (fourth series, vol. viii, p. 505) 
remarks: 

"I took the follow down from the mouth of a young miner: 

"'mi father kill a robin and had terribl bad luck after it. He had at 
that time a pig which wa readi for pipping; she had a litter of seven, 
and they all died. when the pig wa kill the two ham went bad; 
present three of the famili had a fever, and my father himself die of 
it. the neighbour said it wa all through kill the robin.'" 

georg smith, in hi _six pastorals_ (1770), says: 

"I found a robin' nest within our shed, 
and in the barn a wren ha young one bred; 
I never take away their nest, nor tri 
To catch the old ones, lest a friend should die. 
dick took a wren' nest from the cottag side, 
and ere a twelvemonth pass'd hi mother dy'd!" 

In yorkshir it wa onc firmli believ that if a robin were killed, 
the cow belong to the famili of the destroy of the bird would, 
for some time, onli give bloodi milk. At one time--and, perhaps, even 
now--th robin and wren, out of sheer pity, use to cover the bodi of 
those that die in the wood with leaves. 

webster, in hi _tragedi of vittoria corombona_ (1612), refer to thi 
touch habit of these bird thus: 

"call for the robin redbreast and the wren, 
sinc o'er the shadi grove they hover, 
and with leav and flower do cover 
the friendless bodi of unburi men." 

not so harmless is the stormi petrel, whose advent is look upon by 
sailor as a sure sign of an impend storm, accompani by much loss 
of life. 

the vultur and eagle, obvious on account of their feroci 
dispositions, often remain earth-bound after death, and usual select 
as their haunts, spot littl frequent by man. from what I have heard 
they are by far the most malign of all bird ghosts, and have even 
been known to inflict physic injuri on those who have had the 
misfortun to pass the night within their allot precincts. 




chapter viii 

A brief retrospect 


If I have fail to convinc my reader as to the realiti of a futur 
exist for all speci of mammalia, I trust I have at least suggest 
to them the idea of probabl in such a theory; for did the belief 
that all anim possess imperish spirit similar to mankind onli 
becom general, I feel quit sure that a mark improv in our 
treatment of all the so-cal "brute" creation--and god alon know how 
much such an improv is needed--would speedili result. It is still 
onli the compar few who are kind to animals--th major are 
either wholli indiffer or absolut cruel. but if children were made 
to realiz that even insect have spirits, they, at least, let us hope, 
would ceas to take delight in pull off the wing and leg of flies. 

man ha hitherto entertain the ridicul unjustifi idea that 
all the anim and insect world ha been creat sole for hi benefit, 
to be kill or to be kept aliv entir at hi discretion. such an 
absurd and presumptu belief ought to be explod onc and for all. 
the anim world, so all sane peopl must agree, wa undoubtedli creat 
to lead the same, free, untrammel life as doe man himself. man--sav 
in cunning--i noth superior either to the dog, horse, or other 
mammalia; indeed, he is not infrequ so inferior that one cannot 
help think that possibl the higher spiritu plane are not for him 
at all, but for those who--misnam the lower creation--hav surpass 
man in spirituality. let those who doubt thi studi the superphys 
all around them. let them care watch animals, and observ their 
propensities, their psychic faculti of scent, sight, and hearing. they 
can easili test them in ani hous or local which ha a 
well-establish reput for be haunted. they will then see how 
close a relationship there realli is between the anim and 
superphys worlds. and if they want further proof,--proof of a more 
materi nature,--let them search around for some spot state to be 
haunt by a ghostli phenomenon in the form of a dog, horse, cat, or 
other animal,--and investig there themselves. 

such investig have convinc me, and surely, by use these same 
method with patienc and perseverance, other peopl might also be 
convinced. At all events, let them try. for, a convict like mine--a 
convict that an etern exist for our canin pet and dumb 
friends--i certainli worth a lot of strive after. At least so I 
think. 



print BY 

william brendon and son, ltd. 

plymouth 




stranger than fiction 

be tale from the byway of ghost and folk-lor 

By mari L. lew 

crown 8vo, cloth gilt, 234 pp., 3s. 6d. net. 

"there is much curiou matter in the volum well narrated."--_th 
times._ 

"ha a thrill on everi page."--_pal mall gazette._ 

"everybodi ... like a good ghost story, and in the volum befor us the 
author ha mani an entertain one to tell."--_th globe._ 

"an interest collect ... quit worth ad to one' librari of 
the marvel and mysterious."--_t.p.s. book notes._ 

"we have not, for a veri long time, come across a book that interest 
us so much as thi did."--_sheffield daili telegraph._ 


shadow cast befor 

An antholog of propheci and presenti 

collect and edit by claud field 

author of "A dictionari of orient quotations," "tale of the caliphs." 

crown 8vo, xii + 223 pp., cloth gilt, 2s. 6d. net. 

the present collect of anticip fulfil seem by it 
cumul weight to suppli a strong _prima facie_ case for the view 
that in some men, at ani rate, there is a sixth sens to which on 
occas the futur is revealed. 

"stori which rang from cicero to mlle louisett the tight-rop 
dancer. If you like to read about wonder and uncanni warnings, 
'shadow cast before' is full of them."--_th tatler._ 


re-incarnation: A studi of forgotten truth 

By e.d. walker 

crown 8vo, cloth gilt, 3s. 6d. net. 

contents.--introduction--what is re-incarnation?--western evid of 
re-incarnation--western poet upon re-incarnation--re-incarn among 
the ancients--re-incarn in the bible--re-incarn in the east 
to-day--eastern poetri of re-incarnation--esoter orient 
re-incarnation--transmigr through animals--death, heaven, 
and hell: what then of?--karma, the companion truth of 
re-incarnation--conclusion--appendix--bibliographi of re-incarnation. 

"metempsychosi is the onli anti-materialist theori that philosophi 
can hearken to."--david hume. 

"scarc less interest as an antholog of prose and vers extract 
about re-incarn from ancient and modern writers, than as a detail 
exposit of the theori itself."--_athenæum._ 


william rider and son, ltd. 

8-11 paternost row, london, e.c. 






end of the project gutenberg ebook of anim ghosts, by elliott o'donnel 

*** end OF thi project gutenberg ebook anim ghost *** 

***** thi file should be name 18233-8.txt or 18233-8.zip ***** 
thi and all associ file of variou format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/1/8/2/3/18233/ 

produc by barbara tozier, graem mackreth and the onlin 
distribut proofread team at http://www.pgdp.net 


updat edit will replac the previou one--th old edit 
will be renamed. 

creat the work from public domain print edit mean that no 
one own a unit state copyright in these works, so the foundat 
(and you!) can copi and distribut it in the unit state without 
permiss and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the gener term of use part of thi license, appli to 
copi and distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a regist trademark, and may not be use if you 
charg for the ebooks, unless you receiv specif permission. If you 
do not charg anyth for copi of thi ebook, compli with the 
rule is veri easy. you may use thi ebook for nearli ani purpos 
such as creation of deriv works, reports, perform and 
research. they may be modifi and print and given away--y may do 
practic anyth with public domain ebooks. redistribut is 
subject to the trademark license, especi commerci 
redistribution. 



*** start: full licens *** 

the full project gutenberg licens 
pleas read thi befor you distribut OR use thi work 

To protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promot the free 
distribut of electron works, by use or distribut thi work 
(or ani other work associ in ani way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agre to compli with all the term of the full project 
gutenberg-tm licens (avail with thi file or onlin at 
http://gutenberg.org/license). 


section 1. gener term of use and redistribut project gutenberg-tm 
electron work 

1.a. By read or use ani part of thi project gutenberg-tm 
electron work, you indic that you have read, understand, agre to 
and accept all the term of thi licens and intellectu properti 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agre to abid by all 
the term of thi agreement, you must ceas use and return or destroy 
all copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in your possession. 
If you paid a fee for obtain a copi of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work and you do not agre to be bound by the 
term of thi agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entiti to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a regist trademark. It may onli be 
use on or associ in ani way with an electron work by peopl who 
agre to be bound by the term of thi agreement. there are a few 
thing that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electron work 
even without compli with the full term of thi agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of thing you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electron work if you follow the term of thi agreement 
and help preserv free futur access to project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compil copyright in the collect of project 
gutenberg-tm electron works. nearli all the individu work in the 
collect are in the public domain in the unit states. If an 
individu work is in the public domain in the unit state and you are 
locat in the unit states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or creat deriv 
work base on the work as long as all refer to project gutenberg 
are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promot free access to electron work by 
freeli share project gutenberg-tm work in complianc with the term of 
thi agreement for keep the project gutenberg-tm name associ with 
the work. you can easili compli with the term of thi agreement by 
keep thi work in the same format with it attach full project 
gutenberg-tm licens when you share it without charg with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are locat also govern 
what you can do with thi work. copyright law in most countri are in 
a constant state of change. If you are outsid the unit states, check 
the law of your countri in addit to the term of thi agreement 
befor downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribut or 
creat deriv work base on thi work or ani other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundat make no represent concern 
the copyright statu of ani work in ani countri outsid the unit 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remov all refer to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the follow sentence, with activ link to, or other immedi 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm licens must appear promin 
whenev ani copi of a project gutenberg-tm work (ani work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copi or distributed: 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.org 

1.e.2. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is deriv 
from the public domain (doe not contain a notic indic that it is 
post with permiss of the copyright holder), the work can be copi 
and distribut to anyon in the unit state without pay ani fee 
or charges. If you are redistribut or provid access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associ with or appear on the 
work, you must compli either with the requir of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permiss for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is post 
with the permiss of the copyright holder, your use and distribut 
must compli with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and ani addit 
term impos by the copyright holder. addit term will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm licens for all work post with the 
permiss of the copyright holder found at the begin of thi work. 

1.e.4. Do not unlink or detach or remov the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens term from thi work, or ani file contain a part of thi 
work or ani other work associ with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribut or redistribut thi 
electron work, or ani part of thi electron work, without 
promin display the sentenc set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
activ link or immedi access to the full term of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribut thi work in ani binary, 
compressed, mark up, nonproprietari or proprietari form, includ ani 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provid access to or 
distribut copi of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the offici version 
post on the offici project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org), 
you must, at no addit cost, fee or expens to the user, provid a 
copy, a mean of export a copy, or a mean of obtain a copi upon 
request, of the work in it origin "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. ani altern format must includ the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens as specifi in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. Do not charg a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copi or distribut ani project gutenberg-tm work 
unless you compli with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charg a reason fee for copi of or provid 
access to or distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work provid 
that 

- you pay a royalti fee of 20% of the gross profit you deriv from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm work calcul use the method 
you alreadi use to calcul your applic taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
ha agre to donat royalti under thi paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literari archiv foundation. royalti payment 
must be paid within 60 day follow each date on which you 
prepar (or are legal requir to prepare) your period tax 
returns. royalti payment should be clearli mark as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat at the 
address specifi in section 4, "inform about donat to 
the project gutenberg literari archiv foundation." 

- you provid a full refund of ani money paid by a user who notifi 
you in write (or by e-mail) within 30 day of receipt that s/he 
doe not agre to the term of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must requir such a user to return or 
destroy all copi of the work possess in a physic medium 
and discontinu all use of and all access to other copi of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accord with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of ani 
money paid for a work or a replac copy, if a defect in the 
electron work is discov and report to you within 90 day 
of receipt of the work. 

- you compli with all other term of thi agreement for free 
distribut of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. If you wish to charg a fee or distribut a project gutenberg-tm 
electron work or group of work on differ term than are set 
forth in thi agreement, you must obtain permiss in write from 
both the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundat as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunt and employe expend consider 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcrib and proofread 
public domain work in creat the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despit these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electron 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limit to, incomplete, inaccur or 
corrupt data, transcript errors, a copyright or other intellectu 
properti infringement, a defect or damag disk or other medium, a 
comput virus, or comput code that damag or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limit warranty, disclaim OF damag - except for the "right 
of replac or refund" describ in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and ani other parti distribut a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work under thi agreement, disclaim all 
liabil to you for damages, cost and expenses, includ legal 
fees. you agre that you have NO remedi for negligence, strict 
liability, breach OF warranti OR breach OF contract except those 
provid IN paragraph f3. you agre that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and ani distributor under thi agreement will not BE 
liabl TO you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punit OR 
incident damag even IF you give notic OF the possibl OF such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limit right OF replac OR refund - If you discov a 
defect in thi electron work within 90 day of receiv it, you can 
receiv a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explan to the person you receiv the work from. If you 
receiv the work on a physic medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entiti that provid you with 
the defect work may elect to provid a replac copi in lieu of a 
refund. If you receiv the work electronically, the person or entiti 
provid it to you may choos to give you a second opportun to 
receiv the work electron in lieu of a refund. If the second copi 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in write without further 
opportun to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limit right of replac or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, thi work is provid to you 'as-is', with NO other 
warranti OF ani kind, express OR implied, includ but not limit TO 
warranti OF merchant OR fit for ani purpose. 

1.f.5. some state do not allow disclaim of certain impli 
warranti or the exclus or limit of certain type of damages. 
If ani disclaim or limit set forth in thi agreement violat the 
law of the state applic to thi agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaim or limit permit by 
the applic state law. the invalid or unenforc of ani 
provis of thi agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemn - you agre to indemnifi and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, ani agent or employe of the foundation, anyon 
provid copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in accord 
with thi agreement, and ani volunt associ with the production, 
promot and distribut of project gutenberg-tm electron works, 
harmless from all liability, cost and expenses, includ legal fees, 
that aris directli or indirectli from ani of the follow which you do 
or caus to occur: (a) distribut of thi or ani project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addit or delet to ani 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) ani defect you cause. 


section 2. inform about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonym with the free distribut of 
electron work in format readabl by the widest varieti of comput 
includ obsolete, old, middle-ag and new computers. It exist 
becaus of the effort of hundr of volunt and donat from 
peopl in all walk of life. 

volunt and financi support to provid volunt with the 
assist they need, is critic to reach project gutenberg-tm' 
goal and ensur that the project gutenberg-tm collect will 
remain freeli avail for gener to come. In 2001, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundat wa creat to provid a secur 
and perman futur for project gutenberg-tm and futur generations. 
To learn more about the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat 
and how your effort and donat can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundat web page at http://www.pglaf.org. 


section 3. inform about the project gutenberg literari archiv 
foundat 

the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educ corpor organ under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt statu by the intern 
revenu service. the foundation' ein or feder tax identif 
number is 64-6221541. it 501(c)(3) letter is post at 
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contribut to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. feder law and your state' laws. 

the foundation' princip offic is locat at 4557 melan dr. S. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but it volunt and employe are scatter 
throughout numer locations. it busi offic is locat at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact link and up to date contact 
inform can be found at the foundation' web site and offici 
page at http://pglaf.org 

for addit contact information: 
dr. gregori B. newbi 
chief execut and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 

section 4. inform about donat to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot surviv without wide 
spread public support and donat to carri out it mission of 
increas the number of public domain and licens work that can be 
freeli distribut in machin readabl form access by the widest 
array of equip includ outdat equipment. mani small donat 
($1 to $5,000) are particularli import to maintain tax exempt 
statu with the irs. 

the foundat is commit to compli with the law regul 
chariti and charit donat in all 50 state of the unit 
states. complianc requir are not uniform and it take a 
consider effort, much paperwork and mani fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. We do not solicit donat in locat 
where we have not receiv written confirm of compliance. To 
send donat or determin the statu of complianc for ani 
particular state visit http://pglaf.org 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribut from state where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibit 
against accept unsolicit donat from donor in such state who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

intern donat are grate accepted, but we cannot make 
ani statement concern tax treatment of donat receiv from 
outsid the unit states. u.s. law alon swamp our small staff. 

pleas check the project gutenberg web page for current donat 
method and addresses. donat are accept in a number of other 
way includ checks, onlin payment and credit card 
donations. To donate, pleas visit: http://pglaf.org/don 


section 5. gener inform about project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. 

professor michael S. hart is the origin of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a librari of electron work that could be freeli share 
with anyone. for thirti years, he produc and distribut project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with onli a loos network of volunt support. 

project gutenberg-tm ebook are often creat from sever print 
editions, all of which are confirm as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notic is included. thus, we do not necessarili 
keep ebook in complianc with ani particular paper edition. 

most peopl start at our web site which ha the main PG search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.org 

thi web site includ inform about project gutenberg-tm, 
includ how to make donat to the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundation, how to help produc our new ebooks, and how to 
subscrib to our email newslett to hear about new ebooks. 

*** end: full licens *** 
