 
project gutenberg' frankenstein, by mari wollstonecraft (godwin) shelley 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.net 


title: frankenstein 
or the modern prometheu 

author: mari wollstonecraft (godwin) shelley 

releas date: june 17, 2008 [ebook #84] 
last updated: januari 13, 2018 

language: english 

charact set encoding: utf-8 

*** start OF thi project gutenberg ebook frankenstein *** 




produc by judith boss, christi phillips, lynn hanninen, 
and david meltzer. html version by Al haines. 
further correct by menno de leeuw. 



frankenstein; 


or, the modern prometheu 




by 


mari wollstonecraft (godwin) shelley 






content 




letter 1 

letter 2 

letter 3 

letter 4 

chapter 1 

chapter 2 

chapter 3 

chapter 4 

chapter 5 

chapter 6 

chapter 7 

chapter 8 

chapter 9 

chapter 10 

chapter 11 

chapter 12 

chapter 13 

chapter 14 

chapter 15 

chapter 16 

chapter 17 

chapter 18 

chapter 19 

chapter 20 

chapter 21 

chapter 22 

chapter 23 

chapter 24 





letter 1 
prefac 
_to mrs. saville, england._ 


st. petersburgh, dec. 11th, 17—. 


you will rejoic to hear that no disast ha accompani the 
commenc of an enterpris which you have regard with such evil 
forebodings. I arriv here yesterday, and my first task is to assur 
my dear sister of my welfar and increas confid in the success 
of my undertaking. 

I am alreadi far north of london, and as I walk in the street of 
petersburgh, I feel a cold northern breez play upon my cheeks, which 
brace my nerv and fill me with delight. Do you understand thi 
feeling? thi breeze, which ha travel from the region toward 
which I am advancing, give me a foretast of those ici climes. 
inspirit by thi wind of promise, my daydream becom more fervent 
and vivid. I tri in vain to be persuad that the pole is the seat of 
frost and desolation; it ever present itself to my imagin as the 
region of beauti and delight. there, margaret, the sun is for ever 
visible, it broad disk just skirt the horizon and diffus a 
perpetu splendour. there—for with your leave, my sister, I will put 
some trust in preced navigators—ther snow and frost are banished; 
and, sail over a calm sea, we may be waft to a land surpass in 
wonder and in beauti everi region hitherto discov on the habit 
globe. it product and featur may be without example, as the 
phenomena of the heavenli bodi undoubtedli are in those undiscov 
solitudes. what may not be expect in a countri of etern light? I 
may there discov the wondrou power which attract the needl and may 
regul a thousand celesti observ that requir onli thi 
voyag to render their seem eccentr consist for ever. I 
shall satiat my ardent curios with the sight of a part of the world 
never befor visited, and may tread a land never befor imprint by 
the foot of man. these are my enticements, and they are suffici to 
conquer all fear of danger or death and to induc me to commenc thi 
labori voyag with the joy a child feel when he embark in a littl 
boat, with hi holiday mates, on an expedit of discoveri up hi 
nativ river. but suppos all these conjectur to be false, you 
cannot contest the inestim benefit which I shall confer on all 
mankind, to the last generation, by discov a passag near the pole 
to those countries, to reach which at present so mani month are 
requisite; or by ascertain the secret of the magnet, which, if at 
all possible, can onli be effect by an undertak such as mine. 

these reflect have dispel the agit with which I began my 
letter, and I feel my heart glow with an enthusiasm which elev me 
to heaven, for noth contribut so much to tranquillis the mind as 
a steadi purpose—a point on which the soul may fix it intellectu 
eye. thi expedit ha been the favourit dream of my earli years. I 
have read with ardour the account of the variou voyag which have 
been made in the prospect of arriv at the north pacif ocean 
through the sea which surround the pole. you may rememb that a 
histori of all the voyag made for purpos of discoveri compos the 
whole of our good uncl thomas’ library. My educ wa neglected, 
yet I wa passion fond of reading. these volum were my studi 
day and night, and my familiar with them increas that regret which 
I had felt, as a child, on learn that my father’ die injunct 
had forbidden my uncl to allow me to embark in a seafar life. 

these vision fade when I perused, for the first time, those poet 
whose effus entranc my soul and lift it to heaven. I also 
becam a poet and for one year live in a paradis of my own creation; 
I imagin that I also might obtain a nich in the templ where the 
name of homer and shakespear are consecrated. you are well 
acquaint with my failur and how heavili I bore the disappointment. 
but just at that time I inherit the fortun of my cousin, and my 
thought were turn into the channel of their earlier bent. 

six year have pass sinc I resolv on my present undertaking. I 
can, even now, rememb the hour from which I dedic myself to thi 
great enterprise. I commenc by inur my bodi to hardship. I 
accompani the whale-fish on sever expedit to the north sea; 
I voluntarili endur cold, famine, thirst, and want of sleep; I often 
work harder than the common sailor dure the day and devot my 
night to the studi of mathematics, the theori of medicine, and those 
branch of physic scienc from which a naval adventur might deriv 
the greatest practic advantage. twice I actual hire myself as an 
under-m in a greenland whaler, and acquit myself to admiration. I 
must own I felt a littl proud when my captain offer me the second 
digniti in the vessel and entreat me to remain with the greatest 
earnestness, so valuabl did he consid my services. 

and now, dear margaret, do I not deserv to accomplish some great purpose? 
My life might have been pass in eas and luxury, but I prefer glori to 
everi entic that wealth place in my path. oh, that some encourag 
voic would answer in the affirmative! My courag and my resolut is 
firm; but my hope fluctuate, and my spirit are often depressed. I am 
about to proceed on a long and difficult voyage, the emerg of which 
will demand all my fortitude: I am requir not onli to rais the spirit 
of others, but sometim to sustain my own, when their are failing. 

thi is the most favour period for travel in russia. they fli 
quickli over the snow in their sledges; the motion is pleasant, and, in 
my opinion, far more agreeabl than that of an english stagecoach. the 
cold is not excessive, if you are wrap in furs—a dress which I have 
alreadi adopted, for there is a great differ between walk the 
deck and remain seat motionless for hours, when no exercis 
prevent the blood from actual freez in your veins. I have no 
ambit to lose my life on the post-road between st. petersburgh and 
archangel. 

I shall depart for the latter town in a fortnight or three weeks; and my 
intent is to hire a ship there, which can easili be done by pay the 
insur for the owner, and to engag as mani sailor as I think necessari 
among those who are accustom to the whale-fishing. I do not intend to 
sail until the month of june; and when shall I return? ah, dear sister, how 
can I answer thi question? If I succeed, many, mani months, perhap years, 
will pass befor you and I may meet. If I fail, you will see me again soon, 
or never. 

farewell, my dear, excel margaret. heaven shower down bless on you, 
and save me, that I may again and again testifi my gratitud for all your 
love and kindness. 

your affection brother, 

R. walton 






letter 2 




_to mrs. saville, england._ 


archangel, 28th march, 17—. 


how slowli the time pass here, encompass as I am by frost and snow! 
yet a second step is taken toward my enterprise. I have hire a 
vessel and am occupi in collect my sailors; those whom I have 
alreadi engag appear to be men on whom I can depend and are certainli 
possess of dauntless courage. 

but I have one want which I have never yet been abl to satisfy, and the 
absenc of the object of which I now feel as a most sever evil, I have no 
friend, margaret: when I am glow with the enthusiasm of success, there 
will be none to particip my joy; if I am assail by disappointment, no 
one will endeavour to sustain me in dejection. I shall commit my thought 
to paper, it is true; but that is a poor medium for the commun of 
feeling. I desir the compani of a man who could sympathis with me, whose 
eye would repli to mine. you may deem me romantic, my dear sister, but I 
bitterli feel the want of a friend. I have no one near me, gentl yet 
courageous, possess of a cultiv as well as of a capaci mind, whose 
tast are like my own, to approv or amend my plans. how would such a 
friend repair the fault of your poor brother! I am too ardent in execut 
and too impati of difficulties. but it is a still greater evil to me 
that I am self-educated: for the first fourteen year of my life I ran wild 
on a common and read noth but our uncl thomas’ book of voyages. 
At that age I becam acquaint with the celebr poet of our own 
country; but it wa onli when it had ceas to be in my power to deriv it 
most import benefit from such a convict that I perceiv the 
necess of becom acquaint with more languag than that of my nativ 
country. now I am twenty-eight and am in realiti more illiter than mani 
schoolboy of fifteen. It is true that I have thought more and that my 
daydream are more extend and magnificent, but they want (a the painter 
call it) _keeping;_ and I greatli need a friend who would have sens 
enough not to despis me as romantic, and affect enough for me to 
endeavour to regul my mind. 

well, these are useless complaints; I shall certainli find no friend on the 
wide ocean, nor even here in archangel, among merchant and seamen. yet 
some feelings, unal to the dross of human nature, beat even in these 
rug bosoms. My lieutenant, for instance, is a man of wonder courag 
and enterprise; he is madli desir of glory, or rather, to word my phrase 
more characteristically, of advanc in hi profession. He is an 
englishman, and in the midst of nation and profession prejudices, 
unsoften by cultivation, retain some of the noblest endow of 
humanity. I first becam acquaint with him on board a whale vessel; 
find that he wa unemploy in thi city, I easili engag him to assist 
in my enterprise. 

the master is a person of an excel disposit and is remark in the 
ship for hi gentl and the mild of hi discipline. thi 
circumstance, ad to hi well-known integr and dauntless courage, made 
me veri desir to engag him. A youth pass in solitude, my best year 
spent under your gentl and feminin fosterage, ha so refin the 
groundwork of my charact that I cannot overcom an intens distast to 
the usual brutal exercis on board ship: I have never believ it to be 
necessary, and when I heard of a marin equal note for hi kindli 
of heart and the respect and obedi paid to him by hi crew, I felt 
myself peculiarli fortun in be abl to secur hi services. I heard 
of him first in rather a romant manner, from a ladi who owe to him the 
happi of her life. this, briefly, is hi story. some year ago he love 
a young russian ladi of moder fortune, and have amass a consider 
sum in prize-money, the father of the girl consent to the match. He saw 
hi mistress onc befor the destin ceremony; but she wa bath in 
tears, and throw herself at hi feet, entreat him to spare her, 
confess at the same time that she love another, but that he wa poor, 
and that her father would never consent to the union. My gener friend 
reassur the suppliant, and on be inform of the name of her lover, 
instantli abandon hi pursuit. He had alreadi bought a farm with hi 
money, on which he had design to pass the remaind of hi life; but he 
bestow the whole on hi rival, togeth with the remain of hi 
prize-money to purchas stock, and then himself solicit the young 
woman’ father to consent to her marriag with her lover. but the old 
man decidedli refused, think himself bound in honour to my friend, who, 
when he found the father inexorable, quit hi country, nor return 
until he heard that hi former mistress wa marri accord to her 
inclinations. “what a nobl fellow!” you will exclaim. He is 
so; but then he is wholli uneducated: he is as silent as a turk, and a kind 
of ignor careless attend him, which, while it render hi conduct 
the more astonishing, detract from the interest and sympathi which 
otherwis he would command. 

yet do not suppose, becaus I complain a littl or becaus I can 
conceiv a consol for my toil which I may never know, that I am 
waver in my resolutions. those are as fix as fate, and my voyag 
is onli now delay until the weather shall permit my embarkation. the 
winter ha been dread severe, but the spring promis well, and it 
is consid as a remark earli season, so that perhap I may sail 
sooner than I expected. I shall do noth rashly: you know me 
suffici to confid in my prudenc and consider whenev the 
safeti of other is commit to my care. 

I cannot describ to you my sensat on the near prospect of my 
undertaking. It is imposs to commun to you a concept of 
the trembl sensation, half pleasur and half fearful, with which 
I am prepar to depart. I am go to unexplor regions, to “the 
land of mist and snow,” but I shall kill no albatross; therefor do not 
be alarm for my safeti or if I should come back to you as worn and 
woeful as the “ancient mariner.” you will smile at my allusion, but I 
will disclos a secret. I have often attribut my attach to, my 
passion enthusiasm for, the danger mysteri of ocean to that 
product of the most imagin of modern poets. there is someth 
at work in my soul which I do not understand. I am practic 
industrious—painstaking, a workman to execut with persever and 
labour—but besid thi there is a love for the marvellous, a belief 
in the marvellous, intertwin in all my projects, which hurri me out 
of the common pathway of men, even to the wild sea and unvisit 
region I am about to explore. 

but to return to dearer considerations. shall I meet you again, after 
have travers immens seas, and return by the most southern cape of 
africa or america? I dare not expect such success, yet I cannot bear to 
look on the revers of the picture. continu for the present to write to 
me by everi opportunity: I may receiv your letter on some occas when 
I need them most to support my spirits. I love you veri tenderly. 
rememb me with affection, should you never hear from me again. 

your affection brother, 
robert walton 






letter 3 




_to mrs. saville, england._ 


juli 7th, 17—. 


My dear sister, 

I write a few line in hast to say that I am safe—and well advanc 
on my voyage. thi letter will reach england by a merchantman now on 
it homeward voyag from archangel; more fortun than I, who may not 
see my nativ land, perhaps, for mani years. I am, however, in good 
spirits: my men are bold and appar firm of purpose, nor do the 
float sheet of ice that continu pass us, indic the danger 
of the region toward which we are advancing, appear to dismay them. We 
have alreadi reach a veri high latitude; but it is the height of 
summer, and although not so warm as in england, the southern gales, 
which blow us speedili toward those shore which I so ardent desir 
to attain, breath a degre of renov warmth which I had not 
expected. 

No incid have hitherto befallen us that would make a figur in a 
letter. one or two stiff gale and the spring of a leak are 
accid which experienc navig scarc rememb to record, and 
I shall be well content if noth wors happen to us dure our voyage. 

adieu, my dear margaret. Be assur that for my own sake, as well as 
yours, I will not rashli encount danger. I will be cool, 
persevering, and prudent. 

but success _shall_ crown my endeavours. wherefor not? thu far I 
have gone, trace a secur way over the pathless seas, the veri star 
themselv be wit and testimoni of my triumph. whi not 
still proceed over the untam yet obedi element? what can stop the 
determin heart and resolv will of man? 

My swell heart involuntarili pour itself out thus. but I must 
finish. heaven bless my belov sister! 

r.w. 






letter 4 




_to mrs. saville, england._ 


august 5th, 17—. 


So strang an accid ha happen to us that I cannot forbear 
record it, although it is veri probabl that you will see me befor 
these paper can come into your possession. 

last monday (juli 31st) we were nearli surround by ice, which close 
in the ship on all sides, scarc leav her the sea-room in which 
she floated. our situat wa somewhat dangerous, especi as we 
were compass round by a veri thick fog. We accordingli lay to, 
hope that some chang would take place in the atmospher and weather. 

about two o’clock the mist clear away, and we beheld, stretch out 
in everi direction, vast and irregular plain of ice, which seem to 
have no end. some of my comrad groaned, and my own mind began to 
grow watch with anxiou thoughts, when a strang sight suddenli 
attract our attent and divert our solicitud from our own 
situation. We perceiv a low carriage, fix on a sledg and drawn by 
dogs, pass on toward the north, at the distanc of half a mile; a 
be which had the shape of a man, but appar of gigant stature, 
sat in the sledg and guid the dogs. We watch the rapid progress 
of the travel with our telescop until he wa lost among the 
distant inequ of the ice. 

thi appear excit our unqualifi wonder. We were, as we believed, 
mani hundr mile from ani land; but thi apparit seem to denot that 
it wa not, in reality, so distant as we had supposed. shut in, however, by 
ice, it wa imposs to follow hi track, which we had observ with the 
greatest attention. 

about two hour after thi occurr we heard the ground sea, and befor 
night the ice broke and freed our ship. we, however, lay to until the 
morning, fear to encount in the dark those larg loos mass which 
float about after the break up of the ice. I profit of thi time to 
rest for a few hours. 

In the morning, however, as soon as it wa light, I went upon deck and 
found all the sailor busi on one side of the vessel, appar 
talk to someon in the sea. It was, in fact, a sledge, like that we 
had seen before, which had drift toward us in the night on a larg 
fragment of ice. onli one dog remain alive; but there wa a human 
be within it whom the sailor were persuad to enter the vessel. 
He wa not, as the other travel seem to be, a savag inhabit of 
some undiscov island, but a european. when I appear on deck the 
master said, “here is our captain, and he will not allow you to perish 
on the open sea.” 

On perceiv me, the stranger address me in english, although with a 
foreign accent. “befor I come on board your vessel,” said he, 
“will you have the kind to inform me whither you are bound?” 

you may conceiv my astonish on hear such a question address 
to me from a man on the brink of destruct and to whom I should have 
suppos that my vessel would have been a resourc which he would not 
have exchang for the most preciou wealth the earth can afford. I 
replied, however, that we were on a voyag of discoveri toward the 
northern pole. 

upon hear thi he appear satisfi and consent to come on board. 
good god! margaret, if you had seen the man who thu capitul for 
hi safety, your surpris would have been boundless. hi limb were 
nearli frozen, and hi bodi dread emaci by fatigu and 
suffering. I never saw a man in so wretch a condition. We attempt 
to carri him into the cabin, but as soon as he had quit the fresh 
air he fainted. We accordingli brought him back to the deck and 
restor him to anim by rub him with brandi and forc him to 
swallow a small quantity. As soon as he show sign of life we 
wrap him up in blanket and place him near the chimney of the 
kitchen stove. By slow degre he recov and ate a littl soup, 
which restor him wonderfully. 

two day pass in thi manner befor he wa abl to speak, and I often 
fear that hi suffer had depriv him of understanding. when he 
had in some measur recovered, I remov him to my own cabin and 
attend on him as much as my duti would permit. I never saw a more 
interest creature: hi eye have gener an express of 
wildness, and even madness, but there are moment when, if anyon 
perform an act of kind toward him or doe him ani the most 
trifl service, hi whole counten is light up, as it were, with 
a beam of benevol and sweet that I never saw equalled. but he 
is gener melancholi and despairing, and sometim he gnash hi 
teeth, as if impati of the weight of woe that oppress him. 

when my guest wa a littl recov I had great troubl to keep off 
the men, who wish to ask him a thousand questions; but I would not 
allow him to be torment by their idl curiosity, in a state of bodi 
and mind whose restor evid depend upon entir repose. 
once, however, the lieuten ask whi he had come so far upon the ice 
in so strang a vehicle. 

hi counten instantli assum an aspect of the deepest gloom, and 
he replied, “to seek one who fled from me.” 

“and did the man whom you pursu travel in the same fashion?” 

“yes.” 

“then I fanci we have seen him, for the day befor we pick you up we 
saw some dog draw a sledge, with a man in it, across the ice.” 

thi arous the stranger’ attention, and he ask a multitud of 
question concern the rout which the dæmon, as he call him, had 
pursued. soon after, when he wa alon with me, he said, “I have, 
doubtless, excit your curiosity, as well as that of these good 
people; but you are too consider to make inquiries.” 

“certainly; it would inde be veri impertin and inhuman in me to 
troubl you with ani inquisit of mine.” 

“and yet you rescu me from a strang and peril situation; you have 
benevol restor me to life.” 

soon after thi he inquir if I thought that the break up of the 
ice had destroy the other sledge. I repli that I could not answer 
with ani degre of certainty, for the ice had not broken until near 
midnight, and the travel might have arriv at a place of safeti 
befor that time; but of thi I could not judge. 

from thi time a new spirit of life anim the decay frame of the 
stranger. He manifest the greatest eager to be upon deck to watch for 
the sledg which had befor appeared; but I have persuad him to remain in 
the cabin, for he is far too weak to sustain the raw of the atmosphere. 
I have promis that someon should watch for him and give him instant 
notic if ani new object should appear in sight. 

such is my journal of what relat to thi strang occurr up to the 
present day. the stranger ha gradual improv in health but is veri 
silent and appear uneasi when anyon except myself enter hi cabin. 
yet hi manner are so concili and gentl that the sailor are all 
interest in him, although they have had veri littl commun 
with him. for my own part, I begin to love him as a brother, and hi 
constant and deep grief fill me with sympathi and compassion. He must 
have been a nobl creatur in hi better days, be even now in wreck 
so attract and amiable. 

I said in one of my letters, my dear margaret, that I should find no friend 
on the wide ocean; yet I have found a man who, befor hi spirit had been 
broken by misery, I should have been happi to have possess as the brother 
of my heart. 

I shall continu my journal concern the stranger at intervals, 
should I have ani fresh incid to record. 




august 13th, 17—. 


My affect for my guest increas everi day. He excit at onc my 
admir and my piti to an astonish degree. how can I see so 
nobl a creatur destroy by miseri without feel the most poignant 
grief? He is so gentle, yet so wise; hi mind is so cultivated, and 
when he speaks, although hi word are cull with the choicest art, 
yet they flow with rapid and unparallel eloquence. 

He is now much recov from hi ill and is continu on the deck, 
appar watch for the sledg that preced hi own. yet, although 
unhappy, he is not so utterli occupi by hi own miseri but that he 
interest himself deepli in the project of others. He ha frequent 
convers with me on mine, which I have commun to him without 
disguise. He enter attent into all my argument in favour of my 
eventu success and into everi minut detail of the measur I had taken 
to secur it. I wa easili led by the sympathi which he evinc to use the 
languag of my heart, to give utter to the burn ardour of my soul 
and to say, with all the fervour that warm me, how gladli I would 
sacrific my fortune, my existence, my everi hope, to the further of my 
enterprise. one man’ life or death were but a small price to pay for 
the acquir of the knowledg which I sought, for the dominion I should 
acquir and transmit over the element foe of our race. As I spoke, a 
dark gloom spread over my listener’ countenance. At first I 
perceiv that he tri to suppress hi emotion; he place hi hand befor 
hi eyes, and my voic quiver and fail me as I beheld tear trickl 
fast from between hi fingers; a groan burst from hi heav breast. I 
paused; at length he spoke, in broken accents: “unhappi man! Do you 
share my madness? have you drunk also of the intox draught? hear me; 
let me reveal my tale, and you will dash the cup from your lips!” 

such words, you may imagine, strongli excit my curiosity; but the 
paroxysm of grief that had seiz the stranger overcam hi weaken 
powers, and mani hour of repos and tranquil convers were 
necessari to restor hi composure. 

have conquer the violenc of hi feelings, he appear to despis 
himself for be the slave of passion; and quell the dark tyranni of 
despair, he led me again to convers concern myself personally. He ask 
me the histori of my earlier years. the tale wa quickli told, but it 
awaken variou train of reflection. I spoke of my desir of find a 
friend, of my thirst for a more intim sympathi with a fellow mind than 
had ever fallen to my lot, and express my convict that a man could 
boast of littl happi who did not enjoy thi blessing. 

“I agre with you,” repli the stranger; “we are 
unfashion creatures, but half made up, if one wiser, better, dearer than 
ourselves—such a friend ought to be—do not lend hi aid to 
perfection our weak and faulti natures. I onc had a friend, the most 
nobl of human creatures, and am entitled, therefore, to judg respect 
friendship. you have hope, and the world befor you, and have no caus for 
despair. but i—i have lost everyth and cannot begin life 
anew.” 

As he said thi hi counten becam express of a calm, settl 
grief that touch me to the heart. but he wa silent and present 
retir to hi cabin. 

even broken in spirit as he is, no one can feel more deepli than he 
doe the beauti of nature. the starri sky, the sea, and everi sight 
afford by these wonder region seem still to have the power of 
elev hi soul from earth. such a man ha a doubl existence: he 
may suffer miseri and be overwhelm by disappointments, yet when he 
ha retir into himself, he will be like a celesti spirit that ha a 
halo around him, within whose circl no grief or folli ventures. 

will you smile at the enthusiasm I express concern thi divin 
wanderer? you would not if you saw him. you have been tutor and 
refin by book and retir from the world, and you are therefor 
somewhat fastidious; but thi onli render you the more fit to 
appreci the extraordinari merit of thi wonder man. sometim I 
have endeavour to discov what qualiti it is which he possess that 
elev him so immeasur abov ani other person I ever knew. I 
believ it to be an intuit discernment, a quick but never-fail 
power of judgment, a penetr into the caus of things, unequal 
for clear and precision; add to thi a facil of express and a 
voic whose vari inton are soul-subdu music. 




august 19th, 17—. 


yesterday the stranger said to me, “you may easili perceive, captain 
walton, that I have suffer great and unparallel misfortunes. I had 
determin at one time that the memori of these evil should die with 
me, but you have won me to alter my determination. you seek for 
knowledg and wisdom, as I onc did; and I ardent hope that the 
gratif of your wish may not be a serpent to sting you, as mine 
ha been. I do not know that the relat of my disast will be 
use to you; yet, when I reflect that you are pursu the same 
course, expos yourself to the same danger which have render me 
what I am, I imagin that you may deduc an apt moral from my tale, one 
that may direct you if you succeed in your undertak and consol you 
in case of failure. prepar to hear of occurr which are usual 
deem marvellous. were we among the tamer scene of natur I might 
fear to encount your unbelief, perhap your ridicule; but mani thing 
will appear possibl in these wild and mysteri region which would 
provok the laughter of those unacquaint with the ever-vari power 
of nature; nor can I doubt but that my tale convey in it seri 
intern evid of the truth of the event of which it is composed.” 

you may easili imagin that I wa much gratifi by the offer 
communication, yet I could not endur that he should renew hi grief by 
a recit of hi misfortunes. I felt the greatest eager to hear 
the promis narrative, partli from curios and partli from a strong 
desir to amelior hi fate if it were in my power. I express 
these feel in my answer. 

“I thank you,” he replied, “for your sympathy, but it is 
useless; my fate is nearli fulfilled. I wait but for one event, and then I 
shall repos in peace. I understand your feeling,” continu he, 
perceiv that I wish to interrupt him; “but you are mistaken, my 
friend, if thu you will allow me to name you; noth can alter my 
destiny; listen to my history, and you will perceiv how irrevoc it is 
determined.” 

He then told me that he would commenc hi narr the next day when I 
should be at leisure. thi promis drew from me the warmest thanks. I have 
resolv everi night, when I am not imper occupi by my duties, to 
record, as nearli as possibl in hi own words, what he ha relat dure 
the day. If I should be engaged, I will at least make notes. thi 
manuscript will doubtless afford you the greatest pleasure; but to me, who 
know him, and who hear it from hi own lips—with what interest and 
sympathi shall I read it in some futur day! even now, as I commenc my 
task, hi full-ton voic swell in my ears; hi lustrou eye dwell on me 
with all their melancholi sweetness; I see hi thin hand rais in 
animation, while the lineament of hi face are irradi by the soul 
within. strang and harrow must be hi story, fright the storm which 
embrac the gallant vessel on it cours and wreck it—thus! 





chapter 1 

I am by birth a genevese, and my famili is one of the most 
distinguish of that republic. My ancestor had been for mani year 
counsellor and syndics, and my father had fill sever public 
situat with honour and reputation. He wa respect by all who 
knew him for hi integr and indefatig attent to public 
business. He pass hi younger day perpetu occupi by the 
affair of hi country; a varieti of circumst had prevent hi 
marri early, nor wa it until the declin of life that he becam a 
husband and the father of a family. 

As the circumst of hi marriag illustr hi character, I cannot 
refrain from relat them. one of hi most intim friend wa a 
merchant who, from a flourish state, fell, through numer 
mischances, into poverty. thi man, whose name wa beaufort, wa of a 
proud and unbend disposit and could not bear to live in poverti 
and oblivion in the same countri where he had formerli been 
distinguish for hi rank and magnificence. have paid hi debts, 
therefore, in the most honour manner, he retreat with hi 
daughter to the town of lucerne, where he live unknown and in 
wretchedness. My father love beaufort with the truest friendship and 
wa deepli griev by hi retreat in these unfortun circumstances. 
He bitterli deplor the fals pride which led hi friend to a conduct 
so littl worthi of the affect that unit them. He lost no time in 
endeavour to seek him out, with the hope of persuad him to begin 
the world again through hi credit and assistance. 

beaufort had taken effectu measur to conceal himself, and it wa ten 
month befor my father discov hi abode. overjoy at thi discovery, 
he hasten to the house, which wa situat in a mean street near the 
reuss. but when he entered, miseri and despair alon welcom him. beaufort 
had save but a veri small sum of money from the wreck of hi fortunes, but 
it wa suffici to provid him with susten for some months, and in 
the meantim he hope to procur some respect employ in a 
merchant’ house. the interv was, consequently, spent in inaction; 
hi grief onli becam more deep and rankl when he had leisur for 
reflection, and at length it took so fast hold of hi mind that at the end 
of three month he lay on a bed of sickness, incap of ani exertion. 

hi daughter attend him with the greatest tenderness, but she saw 
with despair that their littl fund wa rapidli decreas and that 
there wa no other prospect of support. but carolin beaufort 
possess a mind of an uncommon mould, and her courag rose to support 
her in her adversity. she procur plain work; she plait straw and 
by variou mean contriv to earn a pittanc scarc suffici to 
support life. 

sever month pass in thi manner. her father grew worse; her time 
wa more entir occupi in attend him; her mean of subsist 
decreased; and in the tenth month her father die in her arms, leav 
her an orphan and a beggar. thi last blow overcam her, and she knelt 
by beaufort’ coffin weep bitterly, when my father enter the 
chamber. He came like a protect spirit to the poor girl, who 
commit herself to hi care; and after the inter of hi friend he 
conduct her to geneva and place her under the protect of a 
relation. two year after thi event carolin becam hi wife. 

there wa a consider differ between the age of my parents, but 
thi circumst seem to unit them onli closer in bond of devot 
affection. there wa a sens of justic in my father’ upright mind 
which render it necessari that he should approv highli to love 
strongly. perhap dure former year he had suffer from the 
late-discov unworthi of one belov and so wa dispos to set 
a greater valu on tri worth. there wa a show of gratitud and 
worship in hi attach to my mother, differ wholli from the 
dote fond of age, for it wa inspir by rever for her 
virtu and a desir to be the mean of, in some degree, recompens 
her for the sorrow she had endured, but which gave inexpress grace 
to hi behaviour to her. everyth wa made to yield to her wish 
and her convenience. He strove to shelter her, as a fair exot is 
shelter by the gardener, from everi rougher wind and to surround her 
with all that could tend to excit pleasur emot in her soft and 
benevol mind. her health, and even the tranquil of her hitherto 
constant spirit, had been shaken by what she had gone through. dure 
the two year that had elaps previou to their marriag my father had 
gradual relinquish all hi public functions; and immedi after 
their union they sought the pleasant climat of italy, and the chang 
of scene and interest attend on a tour through that land of wonders, 
as a restor for her weaken frame. 

from itali they visit germani and france. I, their eldest child, wa born 
at naples, and as an infant accompani them in their rambles. I remain 
for sever year their onli child. much as they were attach to each 
other, they seem to draw inexhaust store of affect from a veri 
mine of love to bestow them upon me. My mother’ tender caress and 
my father’ smile of benevol pleasur while regard me are my 
first recollections. I wa their playth and their idol, and someth 
better—their child, the innoc and helpless creatur bestow on 
them by heaven, whom to bring up to good, and whose futur lot it wa in 
their hand to direct to happi or misery, accord as they fulfil 
their duti toward me. with thi deep conscious of what they owe 
toward the be to which they had given life, ad to the activ spirit 
of tender that anim both, it may be imagin that while dure 
everi hour of my infant life I receiv a lesson of patience, of charity, 
and of self-control, I wa so guid by a silken cord that all seem but 
one train of enjoy to me. 

for a long time I wa their onli care. My mother had much desir to have a 
daughter, but I continu their singl offspring. when I wa about five 
year old, while make an excurs beyond the frontier of italy, they 
pass a week on the shore of the lake of como. their benevol 
disposit often made them enter the cottag of the poor. this, to my 
mother, wa more than a duty; it wa a necessity, a 
passion—rememb what she had suffered, and how she had been 
relieved—for her to act in her turn the guardian angel to the 
afflicted. dure one of their walk a poor cot in the fold of a vale 
attract their notic as be singularli disconsolate, while the number 
of half-cloth children gather about it spoke of penuri in it worst 
shape. one day, when my father had gone by himself to milan, my mother, 
accompani by me, visit thi abode. she found a peasant and hi wife, 
hard working, bent down by care and labour, distribut a scanti meal to 
five hungri babes. among these there wa one which attract my mother far 
abov all the rest. she appear of a differ stock. the four other were 
dark-eyed, hardi littl vagrants; thi child wa thin and veri fair. her 
hair wa the brightest live gold, and despit the poverti of her 
clothing, seem to set a crown of distinct on her head. her brow wa 
clear and ample, her blue eye cloudless, and her lip and the mould of 
her face so express of sensibl and sweet that none could behold 
her without look on her as of a distinct species, a be heaven-sent, 
and bear a celesti stamp in all her features. 

the peasant woman, perceiv that my mother fix eye of wonder and 
admir on thi love girl, eagerli commun her history. she wa 
not her child, but the daughter of a milanes nobleman. her mother wa a 
german and had die on give her birth. the infant had been place with 
these good peopl to nurse: they were better off then. they had not been 
long married, and their eldest child wa but just born. the father of their 
charg wa one of those italian nurs in the memori of the antiqu glori 
of italy—on among the _schiavi ognor frementi,_ who exert 
himself to obtain the liberti of hi country. He becam the victim of it 
weakness. whether he had die or still linger in the dungeon of austria 
wa not known. hi properti wa confiscated; hi child becam an orphan and 
a beggar. she continu with her foster parent and bloom in their rude 
abode, fairer than a garden rose among dark-leav brambles. 

when my father return from milan, he found play with me in the hall of 
our villa a child fairer than pictur cherub—a creatur who seem 
to shed radianc from her look and whose form and motion were lighter 
than the chamoi of the hills. the apparit wa soon explained. with hi 
permiss my mother prevail on her rustic guardian to yield their 
charg to her. they were fond of the sweet orphan. her presenc had seem 
a bless to them, but it would be unfair to her to keep her in poverti 
and want when provid afford her such power protection. they 
consult their villag priest, and the result wa that elizabeth lavenza 
becam the inmat of my parents’ house—mi more than 
sister—th beauti and ador companion of all my occup and 
my pleasures. 

everyon love elizabeth. the passion and almost reverenti 
attach with which all regard her became, while I share it, my 
pride and my delight. On the even previou to her be brought to 
my home, my mother had said playfully, “I have a pretti present for my 
victor—tomorrow he shall have it.” and when, on the morrow, she 
present elizabeth to me as her promis gift, I, with childish 
seriousness, interpret her word liter and look upon elizabeth 
as mine—min to protect, love, and cherish. all prais bestow on 
her I receiv as made to a possess of my own. We call each other 
familiarli by the name of cousin. No word, no express could bodi 
forth the kind of relat in which she stood to me—mi more than 
sister, sinc till death she wa to be mine only. 





chapter 2 

We were brought up together; there wa not quit a year differ in 
our ages. I need not say that we were stranger to ani speci of 
disunion or dispute. harmoni wa the soul of our companionship, and 
the divers and contrast that subsist in our charact drew us 
nearer together. elizabeth wa of a calmer and more concentr 
disposition; but, with all my ardour, I wa capabl of a more intens 
applic and wa more deepli smitten with the thirst for knowledge. 
she busi herself with follow the aerial creation of the poets; 
and in the majest and wondrou scene which surround our swiss 
home —the sublim shape of the mountains, the chang of the seasons, 
tempest and calm, the silenc of winter, and the life and turbul of 
our alpin summers—sh found ampl scope for admir and delight. 
while my companion contempl with a seriou and satisfi spirit the 
magnific appear of things, I delight in investig their 
causes. the world wa to me a secret which I desir to divine. 
curiosity, earnest research to learn the hidden law of nature, 
glad akin to rapture, as they were unfold to me, are among the 
earliest sensat I can remember. 

On the birth of a second son, my junior by seven years, my parent gave 
up entir their wander life and fix themselv in their nativ 
country. We possess a hous in geneva, and a _campagne_ on belrive, 
the eastern shore of the lake, at the distanc of rather more than a 
leagu from the city. We resid princip in the latter, and the 
live of my parent were pass in consider seclusion. It wa my 
temper to avoid a crowd and to attach myself fervent to a few. I wa 
indifferent, therefore, to my school-fellow in general; but I unit 
myself in the bond of the closest friendship to one among them. henri 
clerval wa the son of a merchant of geneva. He wa a boy of singular 
talent and fancy. He love enterprise, hardship, and even danger for 
it own sake. He wa deepli read in book of chivalri and romance. He 
compos heroic song and began to write mani a tale of enchant and 
knightli adventure. He tri to make us act play and to enter into 
masquerades, in which the charact were drawn from the hero of 
roncesvalles, of the round tabl of king arthur, and the chivalr 
train who shed their blood to redeem the holi sepulchr from the hand 
of the infidels. 

No human be could have pass a happier childhood than myself. My 
parent were possess by the veri spirit of kind and indulgence. 
We felt that they were not the tyrant to rule our lot accord to 
their caprice, but the agent and creator of all the mani delight 
which we enjoyed. when I mingl with other famili I distinctli 
discern how peculiarli fortun my lot was, and gratitud assist 
the develop of filial love. 

My temper wa sometim violent, and my passion vehement; but by some 
law in my temperatur they were turn not toward childish pursuit 
but to an eager desir to learn, and not to learn all thing 
indiscriminately. I confess that neither the structur of languages, 
nor the code of governments, nor the polit of variou state 
possess attract for me. It wa the secret of heaven and earth 
that I desir to learn; and whether it wa the outward substanc of 
thing or the inner spirit of natur and the mysteri soul of man 
that occupi me, still my inquiri were direct to the metaphysical, 
or in it highest sense, the physic secret of the world. 

meanwhil clerval occupi himself, so to speak, with the moral 
relat of things. the busi stage of life, the virtu of heroes, 
and the action of men were hi theme; and hi hope and hi dream wa 
to becom one among those whose name are record in stori as the 
gallant and adventur benefactor of our species. the saintli soul 
of elizabeth shone like a shrine-ded lamp in our peac home. 
her sympathi wa ours; her smile, her soft voice, the sweet glanc of 
her celesti eyes, were ever there to bless and anim us. she wa 
the live spirit of love to soften and attract; I might have becom 
sullen in my study, rough through the ardour of my nature, but that 
she wa there to subdu me to a semblanc of her own gentleness. and 
clerval—could aught ill entrench on the nobl spirit of clerval? yet 
he might not have been so perfectli humane, so thought in hi 
generosity, so full of kind and tender amidst hi passion for 
adventur exploit, had she not unfold to him the real loveli of 
benefic and made the do good the end and aim of hi soar 
ambition. 

I feel exquisit pleasur in dwell on the recollect of childhood, 
befor misfortun had taint my mind and chang it bright vision of 
extens use into gloomi and narrow reflect upon self. besides, 
in draw the pictur of my earli days, I also record those event which 
led, by insens steps, to my after tale of misery, for when I would 
account to myself for the birth of that passion which afterward rule my 
destini I find it arise, like a mountain river, from ignobl and almost 
forgotten sources; but, swell as it proceeded, it becam the torrent 
which, in it course, ha swept away all my hope and joys. 

natur philosophi is the geniu that ha regul my fate; I desire, 
therefore, in thi narration, to state those fact which led to my 
predilect for that science. when I wa thirteen year of age we all went 
on a parti of pleasur to the bath near thonon; the inclem of the 
weather oblig us to remain a day confin to the inn. In thi hous I 
chanc to find a volum of the work of corneliu agrippa. I open it 
with apathy; the theori which he attempt to demonstr and the wonder 
fact which he relat soon chang thi feel into enthusiasm. A new 
light seem to dawn upon my mind, and bound with joy, I commun my 
discoveri to my father. My father look carelessli at the titl page of my 
book and said, “ah! corneliu agrippa! My dear victor, do not wast 
your time upon this; it is sad trash.” 

if, instead of thi remark, my father had taken the pain to explain to me 
that the principl of agrippa had been entir explod and that a modern 
system of scienc had been introduc which possess much greater power 
than the ancient, becaus the power of the latter were chimerical, while 
those of the former were real and practical, under such circumst I 
should certainli have thrown agrippa asid and have content my 
imagination, warm as it was, by return with greater ardour to my 
former studies. It is even possibl that the train of my idea would never 
have receiv the fatal impuls that led to my ruin. but the cursori glanc 
my father had taken of my volum by no mean assur me that he wa 
acquaint with it contents, and I continu to read with the greatest 
avidity. 

when I return home my first care wa to procur the whole work of thi 
author, and afterward of paracelsu and albertu magnus. I read and 
studi the wild fanci of these writer with delight; they appear to me 
treasur known to few besid myself. I have describ myself as alway 
have been imbu with a fervent long to penetr the secret of 
nature. In spite of the intens labour and wonder discoveri of modern 
philosophers, I alway came from my studi discont and unsatisfied. 
sir isaac newton is said to have avow that he felt like a child pick 
up shell besid the great and unexplor ocean of truth. those of hi 
successor in each branch of natur philosophi with whom I wa acquaint 
appear even to my boy’ apprehens as tyro engag in the same 
pursuit. 

the untaught peasant beheld the element around him and wa acquaint 
with their practic uses. the most learn philosoph knew littl 
more. He had partial unveil the face of nature, but her immort 
lineament were still a wonder and a mystery. He might dissect, 
anatomise, and give names; but, not to speak of a final cause, caus 
in their secondari and tertiari grade were utterli unknown to him. I 
had gaze upon the fortif and impedi that seem to keep 
human be from enter the citadel of nature, and rashli and 
ignorantli I had repined. 

but here were books, and here were men who had penetr deeper and knew 
more. I took their word for all that they averred, and I becam their 
disciple. It may appear strang that such should aris in the eighteenth 
century; but while I follow the routin of educ in the school of 
geneva, I was, to a great degree, self-taught with regard to my favourit 
studies. My father wa not scientific, and I wa left to struggl with a 
child’ blindness, ad to a student’ thirst for knowledge. 
under the guidanc of my new preceptor I enter with the greatest 
dilig into the search of the philosopher’ stone and the elixir 
of life; but the latter soon obtain my undivid attention. wealth wa an 
inferior object, but what glori would attend the discoveri if I could 
banish diseas from the human frame and render man invulner to ani but 
a violent death! 

nor were these my onli visions. the rais of ghost or devil wa a 
promis liber accord by my favourit authors, the fulfil of which 
I most eagerli sought; and if my incant were alway unsuccessful, I 
attribut the failur rather to my own inexperi and mistak than to a 
want of skill or fidel in my instructors. and thu for a time I wa 
occupi by explod systems, mingling, like an unadept, a thousand 
contradictori theori and flounder desper in a veri slough of 
multifari knowledge, guid by an ardent imagin and childish 
reasoning, till an accid again chang the current of my ideas. 

when I wa about fifteen year old we had retir to our hous near 
belrive, when we wit a most violent and terribl thunderstorm. It 
advanc from behind the mountain of jura, and the thunder burst at onc 
with fright loud from variou quarter of the heavens. I remained, 
while the storm lasted, watch it progress with curios and delight. 
As I stood at the door, on a sudden I beheld a stream of fire issu from an 
old and beauti oak which stood about twenti yard from our house; and so 
soon as the dazzl light vanished, the oak had disappeared, and noth 
remain but a blast stump. when we visit it the next morning, we found 
the tree shatter in a singular manner. It wa not splinter by the 
shock, but entir reduc to thin ribbon of wood. I never beheld 
anyth so utterli destroyed. 

befor thi I wa not unacquaint with the more obviou law of 
electricity. On thi occas a man of great research in natur 
philosophi wa with us, and excit by thi catastrophe, he enter on 
the explan of a theori which he had form on the subject of 
electr and galvanism, which wa at onc new and astonish to me. 
all that he said threw greatli into the shade corneliu agrippa, 
albertu magnus, and paracelsus, the lord of my imagination; but by 
some fatal the overthrow of these men disinclin me to pursu my 
accustom studies. It seem to me as if noth would or could ever 
be known. all that had so long engag my attent suddenli grew 
despicable. By one of those capric of the mind which we are perhap 
most subject to in earli youth, I at onc gave up my former 
occupations, set down natur histori and all it progeni as a deform 
and abort creation, and entertain the greatest disdain for a 
would-b scienc which could never even step within the threshold of 
real knowledge. In thi mood of mind I betook myself to the 
mathemat and the branch of studi appertain to that scienc as 
be built upon secur foundations, and so worthi of my consideration. 

thu strang are our soul constructed, and by such slight ligament 
are we bound to prosper or ruin. when I look back, it seem to me 
as if thi almost miracul chang of inclin and will wa the 
immedi suggest of the guardian angel of my life—th last effort 
made by the spirit of preserv to avert the storm that wa even 
then hang in the star and readi to envelop me. her victori wa 
announc by an unusu tranquil and glad of soul which 
follow the relinquish of my ancient and latterli torment 
studies. It wa thu that I wa to be taught to associ evil with 
their prosecution, happi with their disregard. 

It wa a strong effort of the spirit of good, but it wa ineffectual. 
destini wa too potent, and her immut law had decre my utter and 
terribl destruction. 





chapter 3 

when I had attain the age of seventeen my parent resolv that I 
should becom a student at the univers of ingolstadt. I had 
hitherto attend the school of geneva, but my father thought it 
necessari for the complet of my educ that I should be made 
acquaint with other custom than those of my nativ country. My 
departur wa therefor fix at an earli date, but befor the day 
resolv upon could arrive, the first misfortun of my life 
occurred—an omen, as it were, of my futur misery. 

elizabeth had caught the scarlet fever; her ill wa severe, and she wa 
in the greatest danger. dure her ill mani argument had been urg to 
persuad my mother to refrain from attend upon her. she had at first 
yield to our entreaties, but when she heard that the life of her 
favourit wa menaced, she could no longer control her anxiety. she 
attend her sickbed; her watch attent triumph over the malign 
of the distemper—elizabeth wa saved, but the consequ of thi 
imprud were fatal to her preserver. On the third day my mother 
sickened; her fever wa accompani by the most alarm symptoms, and the 
look of her medic attend prognost the worst event. On her 
deathb the fortitud and benign of thi best of women did not desert 
her. she join the hand of elizabeth and myself. “mi 
children,” she said, “mi firmest hope of futur happi were 
place on the prospect of your union. thi expect will now be the 
consol of your father. elizabeth, my love, you must suppli my place to 
my younger children. alas! I regret that I am taken from you; and, happi 
and belov as I have been, is it not hard to quit you all? but these are 
not thought befit me; I will endeavour to resign myself cheer to 
death and will indulg a hope of meet you in anoth world.” 

she die calmly, and her counten express affect even in death. 
I need not describ the feel of those whose dearest tie are rent 
by that most irrepar evil, the void that present itself to the 
soul, and the despair that is exhibit on the countenance. It is so 
long befor the mind can persuad itself that she whom we saw everi day 
and whose veri exist appear a part of our own can have depart 
for ever—that the bright of a belov eye can have been 
extinguish and the sound of a voic so familiar and dear to the ear 
can be hushed, never more to be heard. these are the reflect of 
the first days; but when the laps of time prove the realiti of the 
evil, then the actual bitter of grief commences. yet from whom ha 
not that rude hand rent away some dear connection? and whi should I 
describ a sorrow which all have felt, and must feel? the time at 
length arriv when grief is rather an indulg than a necessity; and 
the smile that play upon the lips, although it may be deem a 
sacrilege, is not banished. My mother wa dead, but we had still 
duti which we ought to perform; we must continu our cours with the 
rest and learn to think ourselv fortun whilst one remain whom the 
spoiler ha not seized. 

My departur for ingolstadt, which had been defer by these events, 
wa now again determin upon. I obtain from my father a respit of 
some weeks. It appear to me sacrileg so soon to leav the repose, 
akin to death, of the hous of mourn and to rush into the thick of 
life. I wa new to sorrow, but it did not the less alarm me. I wa 
unwil to quit the sight of those that remain to me, and abov 
all, I desir to see my sweet elizabeth in some degre consoled. 

she inde veil her grief and strove to act the comfort to us all. 
she look steadili on life and assum it duti with courag and 
zeal. she devot herself to those whom she had been taught to call 
her uncl and cousins. never wa she so enchant as at thi time, 
when she recal the sunshin of her smile and spent them upon us. 
she forgot even her own regret in her endeavour to make us forget. 

the day of my departur at length arrived. clerval spent the last 
even with us. He had endeavour to persuad hi father to permit 
him to accompani me and to becom my fellow student, but in vain. hi 
father wa a narrow-mind trader and saw idl and ruin in the 
aspir and ambit of hi son. henri deepli felt the misfortun 
of be debar from a liber education. He said little, but when 
he spoke I read in hi kindl eye and in hi anim glanc a 
restrain but firm resolv not to be chain to the miser detail 
of commerce. 

We sat late. We could not tear ourselv away from each other nor 
persuad ourselv to say the word “farewell!” It wa said, and we 
retir under the pretenc of seek repose, each fanci that the 
other wa deceived; but when at morning’ dawn I descend to the 
carriag which wa to convey me away, they were all there—mi father 
again to bless me, clerval to press my hand onc more, my elizabeth to 
renew her entreati that I would write often and to bestow the last 
feminin attent on her playmat and friend. 

I threw myself into the chais that wa to convey me away and indulg in 
the most melancholi reflections. I, who had ever been surround by 
amiabl companions, continu engag in endeavour to bestow mutual 
pleasure—i wa now alone. In the univers whither I wa go I 
must form my own friend and be my own protector. My life had hitherto 
been remark seclud and domestic, and thi had given me invinc 
repugn to new countenances. I love my brothers, elizabeth, and 
clerval; these were “old familiar faces,” but I believ myself 
total unfit for the compani of strangers. such were my reflect as 
I commenc my journey; but as I proceeded, my spirit and hope rose. I 
ardent desir the acquisit of knowledge. I had often, when at home, 
thought it hard to remain dure my youth coop up in one place and had 
long to enter the world and take my station among other human beings. 
now my desir were compli with, and it would, indeed, have been folli to 
repent. 

I had suffici leisur for these and mani other reflect dure my 
journey to ingolstadt, which wa long and fatiguing. At length the 
high white steepl of the town met my eyes. I alight and wa 
conduct to my solitari apart to spend the even as I pleased. 

the next morn I deliv my letter of introduct and paid a visit to 
some of the princip professors. chance—or rather the evil 
influence, the angel of destruction, which assert omnipot sway over me 
from the moment I turn my reluct step from my father’ 
door—l me first to M. krempe, professor of natur philosophy. He 
wa an uncouth man, but deepli imbu in the secret of hi science. He 
ask me sever question concern my progress in the differ branch 
of scienc appertain to natur philosophy. I repli carelessly, and 
partli in contempt, mention the name of my alchemist as the princip 
author I had studied. the professor stared. “have you,” he 
said, “realli spent your time in studi such nonsense?” 

I repli in the affirmative. “everi minute,” continu M. kremp with 
warmth, “everi instant that you have wast on those book is utterli 
and entir lost. you have burden your memori with explod system 
and useless names. good god! In what desert land have you lived, 
where no one wa kind enough to inform you that these fanci which you 
have so greedili imbib are a thousand year old and as musti as they 
are ancient? I littl expected, in thi enlighten and scientif 
age, to find a discipl of albertu magnu and paracelsus. My dear 
sir, you must begin your studi entir anew.” 

So saying, he step asid and wrote down a list of sever book 
treat of natur philosophi which he desir me to procure, and 
dismiss me after mention that in the begin of the follow 
week he intend to commenc a cours of lectur upon natur 
philosophi in it gener relations, and that M. waldman, a fellow 
professor, would lectur upon chemistri the altern day that he 
omitted. 

I return home not disappointed, for I have said that I had long 
consid those author useless whom the professor reprobated; but I 
return not at all the more inclin to recur to these studi in ani 
shape. M. kremp wa a littl squat man with a gruff voic and a 
repuls countenance; the teacher, therefore, did not prepossess me in 
favour of hi pursuits. In rather a too philosoph and connect a 
strain, perhaps, I have given an account of the conclus I had come 
to concern them in my earli years. As a child I had not been 
content with the result promis by the modern professor of natur 
science. with a confus of idea onli to be account for by my 
extrem youth and my want of a guid on such matters, I had retrod the 
step of knowledg along the path of time and exchang the 
discoveri of recent inquir for the dream of forgotten alchemists. 
besides, I had a contempt for the use of modern natur philosophy. 
It wa veri differ when the master of the scienc sought 
immort and power; such views, although futile, were grand; but now 
the scene wa changed. the ambit of the inquir seem to limit 
itself to the annihil of those vision on which my interest in 
scienc wa chiefli founded. I wa requir to exchang chimera of 
boundless grandeur for realiti of littl worth. 

such were my reflect dure the first two or three day of my 
resid at ingolstadt, which were chiefli spent in becom 
acquaint with the local and the princip resid in my new 
abode. but as the ensu week commenced, I thought of the inform 
which M. kremp had given me concern the lectures. and although I 
could not consent to go and hear that littl conceit fellow deliv 
sentenc out of a pulpit, I recollect what he had said of M. 
waldman, whom I had never seen, as he had hitherto been out of town. 

partli from curios and partli from idleness, I went into the lectur 
room, which M. waldman enter shortli after. thi professor wa veri 
unlik hi colleague. He appear about fifti year of age, but with an 
aspect express of the greatest benevolence; a few grey hair cover hi 
temples, but those at the back of hi head were nearli black. hi person 
wa short but remark erect and hi voic the sweetest I had ever heard. 
He began hi lectur by a recapitul of the histori of chemistri and 
the variou improv made by differ men of learning, pronounc 
with fervour the name of the most distinguish discoverers. He then took 
a cursori view of the present state of the scienc and explain mani of 
it elementari terms. after have made a few preparatori experiments, he 
conclud with a panegyr upon modern chemistry, the term of which I 
shall never forget: 

“the ancient teacher of thi science,” said he, 
“promis imposs and perform nothing. the modern master 
promis veri little; they know that metal cannot be transmut and that 
the elixir of life is a chimera but these philosophers, whose hand seem 
onli made to dabbl in dirt, and their eye to pore over the microscop or 
crucible, have inde perform miracles. they penetr into the recess 
of natur and show how she work in her hiding-places. they ascend into the 
heavens; they have discov how the blood circulates, and the natur of 
the air we breathe. they have acquir new and almost unlimit powers; 
they can command the thunder of heaven, mimic the earthquake, and even 
mock the invis world with it own shadows.” 

such were the professor’ words—rath let me say such the word of 
the fate—enounc to destroy me. As he went on I felt as if my soul 
were grappl with a palpabl enemy; one by one the variou key were 
touch which form the mechan of my being; chord after chord wa 
sounded, and soon my mind wa fill with one thought, one conception, 
one purpose. So much ha been done, exclaim the soul of 
frankenstein—more, far more, will I achieve; tread in the step 
alreadi marked, I will pioneer a new way, explor unknown powers, and 
unfold to the world the deepest mysteri of creation. 

I close not my eye that night. My intern be wa in a state of 
insurrect and turmoil; I felt that order would thenc arise, but I 
had no power to produc it. By degrees, after the morning’ dawn, 
sleep came. I awoke, and my yesternight’ thought were as a dream. 
there onli remain a resolut to return to my ancient studi and to 
devot myself to a scienc for which I believ myself to possess a 
natur talent. On the same day I paid M. waldman a visit. hi 
manner in privat were even more mild and attract than in public, 
for there wa a certain digniti in hi mien dure hi lectur which in 
hi own hous wa replac by the greatest affabl and kindness. I 
gave him pretti nearli the same account of my former pursuit as I had 
given to hi fellow professor. He heard with attent the littl 
narrat concern my studi and smile at the name of corneliu 
agrippa and paracelsus, but without the contempt that M. kremp had 
exhibited. He said that “these were men to whose indefatig zeal 
modern philosoph were indebt for most of the foundat of their 
knowledge. they had left to us, as an easier task, to give new name 
and arrang in connect classif the fact which they in a 
great degre had been the instrument of bring to light. the 
labour of men of genius, howev erron directed, scarc ever 
fail in ultim turn to the solid advantag of mankind.” I 
listen to hi statement, which wa deliv without ani presumpt 
or affectation, and then ad that hi lectur had remov my 
prejudic against modern chemists; I express myself in measur 
terms, with the modesti and defer due from a youth to hi 
instructor, without let escap (inexperi in life would have 
made me ashamed) ani of the enthusiasm which stimul my intend 
labours. I request hi advic concern the book I ought to 
procure. 

“I am happy,” said M. waldman, “to have gain a 
disciple; and if your applic equal your ability, I have no doubt of 
your success. chemistri is that branch of natur philosophi in which the 
greatest improv have been and may be made; it is on that account that 
I have made it my peculiar study; but at the same time, I have not 
neglect the other branch of science. A man would make but a veri sorri 
chemist if he attend to that depart of human knowledg alone. If your 
wish is to becom realli a man of scienc and not mere a petti 
experimentalist, I should advis you to appli to everi branch of natur 
philosophy, includ mathematics.” 

He then took me into hi laboratori and explain to me the use of hi 
variou machines, instruct me as to what I ought to procur and 
promis me the use of hi own when I should have advanc far enough in 
the scienc not to derang their mechanism. He also gave me the list of 
book which I had requested, and I took my leave. 

thu end a day memor to me; it decid my futur destiny. 





chapter 4 

from thi day natur philosophy, and particularli chemistry, in the 
most comprehens sens of the term, becam nearli my sole occupation. 
I read with ardour those works, so full of geniu and discrimination, 
which modern inquir have written on these subjects. I attend the 
lectur and cultiv the acquaint of the men of scienc of the 
university, and I found even in M. kremp a great deal of sound sens 
and real information, combined, it is true, with a repuls 
physiognomi and manners, but not on that account the less valuable. In 
M. waldman I found a true friend. hi gentl wa never ting by 
dogmatism, and hi instruct were given with an air of frank and 
good natur that banish everi idea of pedantry. In a thousand way 
he smooth for me the path of knowledg and made the most abstrus 
inquiri clear and facil to my apprehension. My applic wa at 
first fluctuat and uncertain; it gain strength as I proceed and 
soon becam so ardent and eager that the star often disappear in the 
light of morn whilst I wa yet engag in my laboratory. 

As I appli so closely, it may be easili conceiv that my progress 
wa rapid. My ardour wa inde the astonish of the students, and 
my profici that of the masters. professor kremp often ask me, 
with a sli smile, how corneliu agrippa went on, whilst M. waldman 
express the most heartfelt exult in my progress. two year 
pass in thi manner, dure which I paid no visit to geneva, but wa 
engaged, heart and soul, in the pursuit of some discoveri which I 
hope to make. none but those who have experienc them can conceiv 
of the entic of science. In other studi you go as far as 
other have gone befor you, and there is noth more to know; but in 
a scientif pursuit there is continu food for discoveri and wonder. 
A mind of moder capac which close pursu one studi must 
infal arriv at great profici in that study; and I, who 
continu sought the attain of one object of pursuit and wa 
sole wrap up in this, improv so rapidli that at the end of two 
year I made some discoveri in the improv of some chemic 
instruments, which procur me great esteem and admir at the 
university. when I had arriv at thi point and had becom as well 
acquaint with the theori and practic of natur philosophi as 
depend on the lesson of ani of the professor at ingolstadt, my 
resid there be no longer conduc to my improvements, I thought 
of return to my friend and my nativ town, when an incid 
happen that protract my stay. 

one of the phenomena which had peculiarli attract my attent wa 
the structur of the human frame, and, indeed, ani anim endu with 
life. whence, I often ask myself, did the principl of life proceed? 
It wa a bold question, and one which ha ever been consid as a 
mystery; yet with how mani thing are we upon the brink of becom 
acquainted, if cowardic or careless did not restrain our 
inquiries. I revolv these circumst in my mind and determin 
thenceforth to appli myself more particularli to those branch of 
natur philosophi which relat to physiology. unless I had been 
anim by an almost supernatur enthusiasm, my applic to thi 
studi would have been irksom and almost intolerable. To examin the 
caus of life, we must first have recours to death. I becam 
acquaint with the scienc of anatomy, but thi wa not sufficient; I 
must also observ the natur decay and corrupt of the human body. 
In my educ my father had taken the greatest precaut that my 
mind should be impress with no supernatur horrors. I do not ever 
rememb to have trembl at a tale of superstit or to have fear 
the apparit of a spirit. dark had no effect upon my fancy, and 
a churchyard wa to me mere the receptacl of bodi depriv of 
life, which, from be the seat of beauti and strength, had becom 
food for the worm. now I wa led to examin the caus and progress of 
thi decay and forc to spend day and night in vault and 
charnel-houses. My attent wa fix upon everi object the most 
insupport to the delicaci of the human feelings. I saw how the 
fine form of man wa degrad and wasted; I beheld the corrupt of 
death succeed to the bloom cheek of life; I saw how the worm 
inherit the wonder of the eye and brain. I paused, examin and 
analys all the minutia of causation, as exemplifi in the chang 
from life to death, and death to life, until from the midst of thi 
dark a sudden light broke in upon me—a light so brilliant and 
wondrous, yet so simple, that while I becam dizzi with the immens 
of the prospect which it illustrated, I wa surpris that among so 
mani men of geniu who had direct their inquiri toward the same 
science, that I alon should be reserv to discov so astonish a 
secret. 

remember, I am not record the vision of a madman. the sun doe not 
more certainli shine in the heaven than that which I now affirm is 
true. some miracl might have produc it, yet the stage of the 
discoveri were distinct and probable. after day and night of 
incred labour and fatigue, I succeed in discov the caus of 
gener and life; nay, more, I becam myself capabl of bestow 
anim upon lifeless matter. 

the astonish which I had at first experienc on thi discoveri 
soon gave place to delight and rapture. after so much time spent in 
pain labour, to arriv at onc at the summit of my desir wa the 
most gratifi consumm of my toils. but thi discoveri wa so 
great and overwhelm that all the step by which I had been 
progress led to it were obliterated, and I beheld onli the result. 
what had been the studi and desir of the wisest men sinc the creation 
of the world wa now within my grasp. not that, like a magic scene, it 
all open upon me at once: the inform I had obtain wa of a 
natur rather to direct my endeavour so soon as I should point them 
toward the object of my search than to exhibit that object alreadi 
accomplished. I wa like the arabian who had been buri with the dead 
and found a passag to life, aid onli by one glimmer and seemingli 
ineffectu light. 

I see by your eager and the wonder and hope which your eye 
express, my friend, that you expect to be inform of the secret with 
which I am acquainted; that cannot be; listen patient until the end 
of my story, and you will easili perceiv whi I am reserv upon that 
subject. I will not lead you on, unguard and ardent as I then was, 
to your destruct and infal misery. learn from me, if not by my 
precepts, at least by my example, how danger is the acquir of 
knowledg and how much happier that man is who believ hi nativ town 
to be the world, than he who aspir to becom greater than hi natur 
will allow. 

when I found so astonish a power place within my hands, I hesit 
a long time concern the manner in which I should employ it. 
although I possess the capac of bestow animation, yet to 
prepar a frame for the recept of it, with all it intricaci of 
fibres, muscles, and veins, still remain a work of inconceiv 
difficulti and labour. I doubt at first whether I should attempt the 
creation of a be like myself, or one of simpler organization; but my 
imagin wa too much exalt by my first success to permit me to 
doubt of my abil to give life to an anim as complex and wonder 
as man. the materi at present within my command hardli appear 
adequ to so arduou an undertaking, but I doubt not that I should 
ultim succeed. I prepar myself for a multitud of reverses; my 
oper might be incessantli baffled, and at last my work be 
imperfect, yet when I consid the improv which everi day take 
place in scienc and mechanics, I wa encourag to hope my present 
attempt would at least lay the foundat of futur success. nor 
could I consid the magnitud and complex of my plan as ani 
argument of it impracticability. It wa with these feel that I 
began the creation of a human being. As the minut of the part 
form a great hindranc to my speed, I resolved, contrari to my first 
intention, to make the be of a gigant stature, that is to say, 
about eight feet in height, and proportion large. after have 
form thi determin and have spent some month in success 
collect and arrang my materials, I began. 

No one can conceiv the varieti of feel which bore me onwards, like 
a hurricane, in the first enthusiasm of success. life and death 
appear to me ideal bounds, which I should first break through, and 
pour a torrent of light into our dark world. A new speci would bless 
me as it creator and source; mani happi and excel natur would 
owe their be to me. No father could claim the gratitud of hi 
child so complet as I should deserv theirs. pursu these 
reflections, I thought that if I could bestow anim upon lifeless 
matter, I might in process of time (although I now found it impossible) 
renew life where death had appar devot the bodi to corruption. 

these thought support my spirits, while I pursu my undertak 
with unremit ardour. My cheek had grown pale with study, and my 
person had becom emaci with confinement. sometimes, on the veri 
brink of certainty, I failed; yet still I clung to the hope which the 
next day or the next hour might realise. one secret which I alon 
possess wa the hope to which I had dedic myself; and the moon 
gaze on my midnight labours, while, with unrelax and breathless 
eagerness, I pursu natur to her hiding-places. who shall conceiv 
the horror of my secret toil as I dabbl among the unhallow damp 
of the grave or tortur the live anim to anim the lifeless 
clay? My limb now tremble, and my eye swim with the remembrance; but 
then a resistless and almost frantic impuls urg me forward; I seem 
to have lost all soul or sensat but for thi one pursuit. It wa 
inde but a pass trance, that onli made me feel with renew 
acut so soon as, the unnatur stimulu ceas to operate, I had 
return to my old habits. I collect bone from charnel-hous and 
disturbed, with profan fingers, the tremend secret of the human 
frame. In a solitari chamber, or rather cell, at the top of the house, 
and separ from all the other apart by a galleri and staircase, 
I kept my workshop of filthi creation; my eyebal were start from 
their socket in attend to the detail of my employment. the 
dissect room and the slaughter-hous furnish mani of my materials; 
and often did my human natur turn with loath from my occupation, 
whilst, still urg on by an eager which perpetu increased, I 
brought my work near to a conclusion. 

the summer month pass while I wa thu engaged, heart and soul, in 
one pursuit. It wa a most beauti season; never did the field 
bestow a more plenti harvest or the vine yield a more luxuri 
vintage, but my eye were insens to the charm of nature. and the 
same feel which made me neglect the scene around me caus me also 
to forget those friend who were so mani mile absent, and whom I had 
not seen for so long a time. I knew my silenc disquiet them, and I 
well rememb the word of my father: “I know that while you are 
pleas with yourself you will think of us with affection, and we shall 
hear regularli from you. you must pardon me if I regard ani 
interrupt in your correspond as a proof that your other duti 
are equal neglected.” 

I knew well therefor what would be my father’ feelings, but I could 
not tear my thought from my employment, loathsom in itself, but which 
had taken an irresist hold of my imagination. I wished, as it 
were, to procrastin all that relat to my feel of affect 
until the great object, which swallow up everi habit of my nature, 
should be completed. 

I then thought that my father would be unjust if he ascrib my neglect 
to vice or faulti on my part, but I am now convinc that he wa 
justifi in conceiv that I should not be altogeth free from 
blame. A human be in perfect ought alway to preserv a calm and 
peac mind and never to allow passion or a transitori desir to 
disturb hi tranquillity. I do not think that the pursuit of knowledg 
is an except to thi rule. If the studi to which you appli yourself 
ha a tendenc to weaken your affect and to destroy your tast for 
those simpl pleasur in which no alloy can possibl mix, then that 
studi is certainli unlawful, that is to say, not befit the human 
mind. If thi rule were alway observed; if no man allow ani pursuit 
whatsoev to interfer with the tranquil of hi domest 
affections, greec had not been enslaved, cæsar would have spare hi 
country, america would have been discov more gradually, and the 
empir of mexico and peru had not been destroyed. 

but I forget that I am moral in the most interest part of my 
tale, and your look remind me to proceed. 

My father made no reproach in hi letter and onli took notic of my 
silenc by inquir into my occup more particularli than before. 
winter, spring, and summer pass away dure my labours; but I did not 
watch the blossom or the expand leaves—sight which befor alway 
yield me suprem delight—so deepli wa I engross in my 
occupation. the leav of that year had wither befor my work drew near 
to a close, and now everi day show me more plainli how well I had 
succeeded. but my enthusiasm wa check by my anxiety, and I appear 
rather like one doom by slaveri to toil in the mines, or ani other 
unwholesom trade than an artist occupi by hi favourit employment. 
everi night I wa oppress by a slow fever, and I becam nervou to a most 
pain degree; the fall of a leaf startl me, and I shun my fellow 
creatur as if I had been guilti of a crime. sometim I grew alarm at 
the wreck I perceiv that I had become; the energi of my purpos alon 
sustain me: my labour would soon end, and I believ that exercis and 
amus would then drive away incipi disease; and I promis myself 
both of these when my creation should be complete. 





chapter 5 

It wa on a dreari night of novemb that I beheld the accomplish 
of my toils. with an anxieti that almost amount to agony, I 
collect the instrument of life around me, that I might infus a 
spark of be into the lifeless thing that lay at my feet. It wa 
alreadi one in the morning; the rain patter dismal against the 
panes, and my candl wa nearli burnt out, when, by the glimmer of the 
half-extinguish light, I saw the dull yellow eye of the creatur 
open; it breath hard, and a convuls motion agit it limbs. 

how can I describ my emot at thi catastrophe, or how delin 
the wretch whom with such infinit pain and care I had endeavour to 
form? hi limb were in proportion, and I had select hi featur as 
beautiful. beautiful! great god! hi yellow skin scarc cover 
the work of muscl and arteri beneath; hi hair wa of a lustrou 
black, and flowing; hi teeth of a pearli whiteness; but these 
luxuri onli form a more horrid contrast with hi wateri eyes, 
that seem almost of the same colour as the dun-whit socket in which 
they were set, hi shrivel complexion and straight black lips. 

the differ accid of life are not so changeabl as the feel 
of human nature. I had work hard for nearli two years, for the sole 
purpos of infus life into an inanim body. for thi I had 
depriv myself of rest and health. I had desir it with an ardour 
that far exceed moderation; but now that I had finished, the beauti 
of the dream vanished, and breathless horror and disgust fill my 
heart. unabl to endur the aspect of the be I had created, I 
rush out of the room and continu a long time travers my 
bed-chamber, unabl to compos my mind to sleep. At length lassitud 
succeed to the tumult I had befor endured, and I threw myself on the 
bed in my clothes, endeavour to seek a few moment of forgetfulness. 
but it wa in vain; I slept, indeed, but I wa disturb by the wildest 
dreams. I thought I saw elizabeth, in the bloom of health, walk in 
the street of ingolstadt. delight and surprised, I embrac her, 
but as I imprint the first kiss on her lips, they becam livid with 
the hue of death; her featur appear to change, and I thought that I 
held the corps of my dead mother in my arms; a shroud envelop her 
form, and I saw the grave-worm crawl in the fold of the flannel. 
I start from my sleep with horror; a cold dew cover my forehead, my 
teeth chattered, and everi limb becam convulsed; when, by the dim and 
yellow light of the moon, as it forc it way through the window 
shutters, I beheld the wretch—th miser monster whom I had 
created. He held up the curtain of the bed; and hi eyes, if eye they 
may be called, were fix on me. hi jaw opened, and he mutter some 
inarticul sounds, while a grin wrinkl hi cheeks. He might have 
spoken, but I did not hear; one hand wa stretch out, seemingli to 
detain me, but I escap and rush downstairs. I took refug in the 
courtyard belong to the hous which I inhabited, where I remain 
dure the rest of the night, walk up and down in the greatest 
agitation, listen attentively, catch and fear each sound as if 
it were to announc the approach of the demoniac corps to which I 
had so miser given life. 

oh! No mortal could support the horror of that countenance. A mummi 
again endu with anim could not be so hideou as that wretch. I 
had gaze on him while unfinished; he wa ugli then, but when those 
muscl and joint were render capabl of motion, it becam a thing 
such as even dant could not have conceived. 

I pass the night wretchedly. sometim my puls beat so quickli and 
hardli that I felt the palpit of everi artery; at others, I nearli 
sank to the ground through languor and extrem weakness. mingl with 
thi horror, I felt the bitter of disappointment; dream that had 
been my food and pleasant rest for so long a space were now becom a 
hell to me; and the chang wa so rapid, the overthrow so complete! 

morning, dismal and wet, at length dawn and discov to my 
sleepless and ach eye the church of ingolstadt, it white steepl 
and clock, which indic the sixth hour. the porter open the gate 
of the court, which had that night been my asylum, and I issu into 
the streets, pace them with quick steps, as if I sought to avoid the 
wretch whom I fear everi turn of the street would present to my 
view. I did not dare return to the apart which I inhabited, but 
felt impel to hurri on, although drench by the rain which pour 
from a black and comfortless sky. 

I continu walk in thi manner for some time, endeavour by 
bodili exercis to eas the load that weigh upon my mind. I 
travers the street without ani clear concept of where I wa or 
what I wa doing. My heart palpit in the sick of fear, and I 
hurri on with irregular steps, not dare to look about me: 

like one who, on a lone road, 
doth walk in fear and dread, 
and, have onc turn round, walk on, 
and turn no more hi head; 
becaus he know a fright fiend 
doth close behind him tread. 

[coleridge’ “ancient mariner.”] 



continu thus, I came at length opposit to the inn at which the variou 
dilig and carriag usual stopped. here I paused, I knew not why; 
but I remain some minut with my eye fix on a coach that wa come 
toward me from the other end of the street. As it drew nearer I observ 
that it wa the swiss diligence; it stop just where I wa standing, and 
on the door be opened, I perceiv henri clerval, who, on see me, 
instantli sprung out. “mi dear frankenstein,” exclaim he, 
“how glad I am to see you! how fortun that you should be here at 
the veri moment of my alighting!” 

noth could equal my delight on see clerval; hi presenc brought back 
to my thought my father, elizabeth, and all those scene of home so dear 
to my recollection. I grasp hi hand, and in a moment forgot my horror 
and misfortune; I felt suddenly, and for the first time dure mani months, 
calm and seren joy. I welcom my friend, therefore, in the most cordial 
manner, and we walk toward my college. clerval continu talk for 
some time about our mutual friend and hi own good fortun in be 
permit to come to ingolstadt. “you may easili believe,” said 
he, “how great wa the difficulti to persuad my father that all 
necessari knowledg wa not compris in the nobl art of book-keeping; 
and, indeed, I believ I left him incredul to the last, for hi constant 
answer to my unweari entreati wa the same as that of the dutch 
schoolmast in the vicar of wakefield: ‘I have ten thousand florin 
a year without greek, I eat heartili without greek.’ but hi 
affect for me at length overcam hi dislik of learning, and he ha 
permit me to undertak a voyag of discoveri to the land of 
knowledge.” 

“it give me the greatest delight to see you; but tell me how you left 
my father, brothers, and elizabeth.” 

“veri well, and veri happy, onli a littl uneasi that they hear from 
you so seldom. By the by, I mean to lectur you a littl upon their 
account myself. but, my dear frankenstein,” continu he, stop 
short and gaze full in my face, “I did not befor remark how veri ill 
you appear; so thin and pale; you look as if you had been watch for 
sever nights.” 

“you have guess right; I have late been so deepli engag in one 
occup that I have not allow myself suffici rest, as you see; 
but I hope, I sincer hope, that all these employ are now at an 
end and that I am at length free.” 

I trembl excessively; I could not endur to think of, and far less to 
allud to, the occurr of the preced night. I walk with a 
quick pace, and we soon arriv at my college. I then reflected, and 
the thought made me shiver, that the creatur whom I had left in my 
apart might still be there, aliv and walk about. I dread to 
behold thi monster, but I fear still more that henri should see him. 
entreat him, therefore, to remain a few minut at the bottom of the 
stairs, I dart up toward my own room. My hand wa alreadi on the 
lock of the door befor I recollect myself. I then paused, and a 
cold shiver came over me. I threw the door forcibl open, as 
children are accustom to do when they expect a spectr to stand in 
wait for them on the other side; but noth appeared. I step 
fear in: the apart wa empty, and my bedroom wa also freed 
from it hideou guest. I could hardli believ that so great a good 
fortun could have befallen me, but when I becam assur that my enemi 
had inde fled, I clap my hand for joy and ran down to clerval. 

We ascend into my room, and the servant present brought breakfast; 
but I wa unabl to contain myself. It wa not joy onli that possess 
me; I felt my flesh tingl with excess of sensitiveness, and my puls 
beat rapidly. I wa unabl to remain for a singl instant in the same 
place; I jump over the chairs, clap my hands, and laugh aloud. 
clerval at first attribut my unusu spirit to joy on hi arrival, 
but when he observ me more attentively, he saw a wild in my eye 
for which he could not account, and my loud, unrestrained, heartless 
laughter frighten and astonish him. 

“mi dear victor,” cri he, “what, for god’ sake, 
is the matter? Do not laugh in that manner. how ill you are! what is the 
caus of all this?” 

“do not ask me,” cri I, put my hand befor my eyes, for I 
thought I saw the dread spectr glide into the room; “_he_ can 
tell. oh, save me! save me!” I imagin that the monster seiz me; 
I struggl furious and fell down in a fit. 

poor clerval! what must have been hi feelings? A meeting, which he 
anticip with such joy, so strang turn to bitterness. but I 
wa not the wit of hi grief, for I wa lifeless and did not 
recov my sens for a long, long time. 

thi wa the commenc of a nervou fever which confin me for 
sever months. dure all that time henri wa my onli nurse. I 
afterward learn that, know my father’ advanc age and unfit 
for so long a journey, and how wretch my sick would make 
elizabeth, he spare them thi grief by conceal the extent of my 
disorder. He knew that I could not have a more kind and attent 
nurs than himself; and, firm in the hope he felt of my recovery, he 
did not doubt that, instead of do harm, he perform the kindest 
action that he could toward them. 

but I wa in realiti veri ill, and sure noth but the unbound and 
unremit attent of my friend could have restor me to life. 
the form of the monster on whom I had bestow exist wa for ever 
befor my eyes, and I rave incessantli concern him. doubtless my 
word surpris henry; he at first believ them to be the wander 
of my disturb imagination, but the pertinac with which I 
continu recur to the same subject persuad him that my disord 
inde owe it origin to some uncommon and terribl event. 

By veri slow degrees, and with frequent relaps that alarm and 
griev my friend, I recovered. I rememb the first time I becam 
capabl of observ outward object with ani kind of pleasure, I 
perceiv that the fallen leav had disappear and that the young 
bud were shoot forth from the tree that shade my window. It wa 
a divin spring, and the season contribut greatli to my 
convalescence. I felt also sentiment of joy and affect reviv in 
my bosom; my gloom disappeared, and in a short time I becam as 
cheer as befor I wa attack by the fatal passion. 

“dearest clerval,” exclaim I, “how kind, how veri good 
you are to me. thi whole winter, instead of be spent in study, as you 
promis yourself, ha been consum in my sick room. how shall I ever 
repay you? I feel the greatest remors for the disappoint of which I 
have been the occasion, but you will forgiv me.” 

“you will repay me entir if you do not discompos yourself, but get 
well as fast as you can; and sinc you appear in such good spirits, I 
may speak to you on one subject, may I not?” 

I trembled. one subject! what could it be? could he allud to an object on 
whom I dare not even think? 

“compos yourself,” said clerval, who observ my chang of 
colour, “I will not mention it if it agit you; but your father 
and cousin would be veri happi if they receiv a letter from you in your 
own handwriting. they hardli know how ill you have been and are uneasi at 
your long silence.” 

“i that all, my dear henry? how could you suppos that my first 
thought would not fli toward those dear, dear friend whom I love and 
who are so deserv of my love?” 

“if thi is your present temper, my friend, you will perhap be glad 
to see a letter that ha been lie here some day for you; it is from 
your cousin, I believe.” 





chapter 6 

clerval then put the follow letter into my hands. It wa from my 
own elizabeth: 

“mi dearest cousin, 

“you have been ill, veri ill, and even the constant letter of dear 
kind henri are not suffici to reassur me on your account. you are 
forbidden to write—to hold a pen; yet one word from you, dear victor, 
is necessari to calm our apprehensions. for a long time I have thought 
that each post would bring thi line, and my persuas have 
restrain my uncl from undertak a journey to ingolstadt. I have 
prevent hi encount the inconveni and perhap danger of so 
long a journey, yet how often have I regret not be abl to 
perform it myself! I figur to myself that the task of attend on 
your sickb ha devolv on some mercenari old nurse, who could never 
guess your wish nor minist to them with the care and affect of 
your poor cousin. yet that is over now: clerval write that inde 
you are get better. I eagerli hope that you will confirm thi 
intellig soon in your own handwriting. 

“get well—and return to us. you will find a happy, cheer home and 
friend who love you dearly. your father’ health is vigorous, and he 
ask but to see you, but to be assur that you are well; and not a 
care will ever cloud hi benevol countenance. how pleas you would 
be to remark the improv of our ernest! He is now sixteen and full 
of activ and spirit. He is desir to be a true swiss and to enter 
into foreign service, but we cannot part with him, at least until hi 
elder brother return to us. My uncl is not pleas with the idea of 
a militari career in a distant country, but ernest never had your 
power of application. He look upon studi as an odiou fetter; hi 
time is spent in the open air, climb the hill or row on the 
lake. I fear that he will becom an idler unless we yield the point 
and permit him to enter on the profess which he ha selected. 

“littl alteration, except the growth of our dear children, ha taken 
place sinc you left us. the blue lake and snow-clad mountains—they 
never change; and I think our placid home and our content heart are 
regul by the same immut laws. My trifl occup take up 
my time and amus me, and I am reward for ani exert by see 
none but happy, kind face around me. sinc you left us, but one 
chang ha taken place in our littl household. Do you rememb on 
what occas justin moritz enter our family? probabl you do not; 
I will relat her history, therefor in a few words. madam moritz, 
her mother, wa a widow with four children, of whom justin wa the 
third. thi girl had alway been the favourit of her father, but 
through a strang perversity, her mother could not endur her, and 
after the death of M. moritz, treat her veri ill. My aunt observ 
this, and when justin wa twelv year of age, prevail on her mother 
to allow her to live at our house. the republican institut of our 
countri have produc simpler and happier manner than those which 
prevail in the great monarchi that surround it. henc there is less 
distinct between the sever class of it inhabitants; and the 
lower orders, be neither so poor nor so despised, their manner are 
more refin and moral. A servant in geneva doe not mean the same 
thing as a servant in franc and england. justine, thu receiv in 
our family, learn the duti of a servant, a condit which, in our 
fortun country, doe not includ the idea of ignor and a 
sacrific of the digniti of a human being. 

“justine, you may remember, wa a great favourit of yours; and I 
recollect you onc remark that if you were in an ill humour, one 
glanc from justin could dissip it, for the same reason that 
ariosto give concern the beauti of angelica—sh look so 
frank-heart and happy. My aunt conceiv a great attach for her, 
by which she wa induc to give her an educ superior to that 
which she had at first intended. thi benefit wa fulli repaid; 
justin wa the most grate littl creatur in the world: I do not 
mean that she made ani profess I never heard one pass her lips, but 
you could see by her eye that she almost ador her protectress. 
although her disposit wa gay and in mani respect inconsiderate, 
yet she paid the greatest attent to everi gestur of my aunt. she 
thought her the model of all excel and endeavour to imit her 
phraseolog and manners, so that even now she often remind me of her. 

“when my dearest aunt die everi one wa too much occupi in their own 
grief to notic poor justine, who had attend her dure her ill 
with the most anxiou affection. poor justin wa veri ill; but other 
trial were reserv for her. 

“one by one, her brother and sister died; and her mother, with the 
except of her neglect daughter, wa left childless. the 
conscienc of the woman wa troubled; she began to think that the 
death of her favourit wa a judgement from heaven to chastis her 
partiality. she wa a roman catholic; and I believ her confessor 
confirm the idea which she had conceived. accordingly, a few month 
after your departur for ingolstadt, justin wa call home by her 
repent mother. poor girl! she wept when she quit our house; she 
wa much alter sinc the death of my aunt; grief had given soft 
and a win mild to her manners, which had befor been remark 
for vivacity. nor wa her resid at her mother’ hous of a natur 
to restor her gaiety. the poor woman wa veri vacil in her 
repentance. she sometim beg justin to forgiv her unkindness, 
but much often accus her of have caus the death of her 
brother and sister. perpetu fret at length threw madam moritz 
into a decline, which at first increas her irritability, but she is 
now at peac for ever. she die on the first approach of cold weather, 
at the begin of thi last winter. justin ha just return to us; 
and I assur you I love her tenderly. she is veri clever and gentle, 
and extrem pretty; as I mention before, her mien and her 
express continu remind me of my dear aunt. 

“I must say also a few word to you, my dear cousin, of littl darl 
william. I wish you could see him; he is veri tall of hi age, with 
sweet laugh blue eyes, dark eyelashes, and curl hair. when he 
smiles, two littl dimpl appear on each cheek, which are rosi with 
health. He ha alreadi had one or two littl _wives,_ but louisa biron 
is hi favourite, a pretti littl girl of five year of age. 

“now, dear victor, I dare say you wish to be indulg in a littl 
gossip concern the good peopl of geneva. the pretti miss mansfield 
ha alreadi receiv the congratulatori visit on her approach 
marriag with a young englishman, john melbourne, esq. her ugli 
sister, manon, marri M. duvillard, the rich banker, last autumn. your 
favourit schoolfellow, loui manoir, ha suffer sever misfortun 
sinc the departur of clerval from geneva. but he ha alreadi 
recov hi spirits, and is report to be on the point of marri a 
live pretti frenchwoman, madam tavernier. she is a widow, and much 
older than manoir; but she is veri much admired, and a favourit with 
everybody. 

“I have written myself into better spirits, dear cousin; but my anxieti 
return upon me as I conclude. write, dearest victor,—on line—on 
word will be a bless to us. ten thousand thank to henri for hi 
kindness, hi affection, and hi mani letters; we are sincer 
grateful. adieu! my cousin; take care of yourself; and, I entreat 
you, write! 

“elizabeth lavenza. 


“geneva, march 18th, 17—.” 



“dear, dear elizabeth!” I exclaimed, when I had read her 
letter: “I will write instantli and reliev them from the anxieti 
they must feel.” I wrote, and thi exert greatli fatigu me; but 
my convalesc had commenced, and proceed regularly. In anoth 
fortnight I wa abl to leav my chamber. 

one of my first duti on my recoveri wa to introduc clerval to the 
sever professor of the university. In do this, I underw a 
kind of rough usage, ill befit the wound that my mind had 
sustained. ever sinc the fatal night, the end of my labours, and the 
begin of my misfortunes, I had conceiv a violent antipathi even 
to the name of natur philosophy. when I wa otherwis quit restor 
to health, the sight of a chemic instrument would renew all the agoni 
of my nervou symptoms. henri saw this, and had remov all my 
apparatu from my view. He had also chang my apartment; for he 
perceiv that I had acquir a dislik for the room which had 
previous been my laboratory. but these care of clerval were made of 
no avail when I visit the professors. M. waldman inflict tortur 
when he praised, with kind and warmth, the astonish progress I 
had made in the sciences. He soon perceiv that I dislik the 
subject; but not guess the real cause, he attribut my feel to 
modesty, and chang the subject from my improvement, to the scienc 
itself, with a desire, as I evid saw, of draw me out. what 
could I do? He meant to please, and he torment me. I felt as if he 
had place carefully, one by one, in my view those instrument which 
were to be afterward use in put me to a slow and cruel death. I 
writh under hi words, yet dare not exhibit the pain I felt. 
clerval, whose eye and feel were alway quick in discern the 
sensat of others, declin the subject, alleging, in excuse, hi 
total ignorance; and the convers took a more gener turn. I 
thank my friend from my heart, but I did not speak. I saw plainli 
that he wa surprised, but he never attempt to draw my secret from 
me; and although I love him with a mixtur of affect and rever 
that knew no bounds, yet I could never persuad myself to confid in 
him that event which wa so often present to my recollection, but which 
I fear the detail to anoth would onli impress more deeply. 

M. kremp wa not equal docile; and in my condit at that time, of 
almost insupport sensitiveness, hi harsh blunt encomium gave me even 
more pain than the benevol approb of M. waldman. “d—n 
the fellow!” cri he; “why, M. clerval, I assur you he ha 
outstript us all. ay, stare if you please; but it is nevertheless true. A 
youngster who, but a few year ago, believ in corneliu agrippa as firmli 
as in the gospel, ha now set himself at the head of the university; and if 
he is not soon pull down, we shall all be out of countenance.—ay, 
ay,” continu he, observ my face express of suffering, 
“m. frankenstein is modest; an excel qualiti in a young man. 
young men should be diffid of themselves, you know, M. clerval: I wa 
myself when young; but that wear out in a veri short time.” 

M. kremp had now commenc an eulog on himself, which happili turn 
the convers from a subject that wa so annoy to me. 

clerval had never sympathis in my tast for natur science; and hi 
literari pursuit differ wholli from those which had occupi me. He 
came to the univers with the design of make himself complet 
master of the orient languages, and thu he should open a field for 
the plan of life he had mark out for himself. resolv to pursu no 
inglori career, he turn hi eye toward the east, as afford 
scope for hi spirit of enterprise. the persian, arabic, and sanskrit 
languag engag hi attention, and I wa easili induc to enter on 
the same studies. idl had ever been irksom to me, and now that I 
wish to fli from reflection, and hate my former studies, I felt 
great relief in be the fellow-pupil with my friend, and found not 
onli instruct but consol in the work of the orientalists. I 
did not, like him, attempt a critic knowledg of their dialects, for 
I did not contempl make ani other use of them than temporari 
amusement. I read mere to understand their meaning, and they well 
repaid my labours. their melancholi is soothing, and their joy 
elevating, to a degre I never experienc in studi the author of 
ani other country. when you read their writings, life appear to 
consist in a warm sun and a garden of roses,—in the smile and frown 
of a fair enemy, and the fire that consum your own heart. how 
differ from the manli and heroic poetri of greec and rome! 

summer pass away in these occupations, and my return to geneva wa 
fix for the latter end of autumn; but be delay by sever 
accidents, winter and snow arrived, the road were deem impassable, 
and my journey wa retard until the ensu spring. I felt thi 
delay veri bitterly; for I long to see my nativ town and my belov 
friends. My return had onli been delay so long, from an 
unwilling to leav clerval in a strang place, befor he had becom 
acquaint with ani of it inhabitants. the winter, however, wa spent 
cheerfully; and although the spring wa uncommonli late, when it came 
it beauti compens for it dilatoriness. 

the month of may had alreadi commenced, and I expect the letter daili 
which wa to fix the date of my departure, when henri propos a 
pedestrian tour in the environ of ingolstadt, that I might bid a 
person farewel to the countri I had so long inhabited. I acced 
with pleasur to thi proposition: I wa fond of exercise, and clerval 
had alway been my favourit companion in the rambl of thi natur 
that I had taken among the scene of my nativ country. 

We pass a fortnight in these perambulations: my health and spirit 
had long been restored, and they gain addit strength from the 
salubri air I breathed, the natur incid of our progress, and 
the convers of my friend. studi had befor seclud me from the 
intercours of my fellow-creatures, and render me unsocial; but 
clerval call forth the better feel of my heart; he again taught 
me to love the aspect of nature, and the cheer face of children. 
excel friend! how sincer you did love me, and endeavour to 
elev my mind until it wa on a level with your own. A selfish 
pursuit had cramp and narrow me, until your gentl and 
affect warm and open my senses; I becam the same happi creatur 
who, a few year ago, love and belov by all, had no sorrow or care. 
when happy, inanim natur had the power of bestow on me the most 
delight sensations. A seren sky and verdant field fill me with 
ecstasy. the present season wa inde divine; the flower of spring 
bloom in the hedges, while those of summer were alreadi in bud. I 
wa undisturb by thought which dure the preced year had press 
upon me, notwithstand my endeavour to throw them off, with an 
invinc burden. 

henri rejoic in my gaiety, and sincer sympathis in my feelings: he 
exert himself to amus me, while he express the sensat that fill 
hi soul. the resourc of hi mind on thi occas were truli 
astonishing: hi convers wa full of imagination; and veri often, in 
imit of the persian and arab writers, he invent tale of wonder 
fanci and passion. At other time he repeat my favourit poems, or drew 
me out into arguments, which he support with great ingenuity. 

We return to our colleg on a sunday afternoon: the peasant were 
dancing, and everi one we met appear gay and happy. My own spirit were 
high, and I bound along with feel of unbridl joy and hilarity. 





chapter 7 

On my return, I found the follow letter from my father:— 

“mi dear victor, 

“you have probabl wait impati for a letter to fix the date of 
your return to us; and I wa at first tempt to write onli a few 
lines, mere mention the day on which I should expect you. but 
that would be a cruel kindness, and I dare not do it. what would be 
your surprise, my son, when you expect a happi and glad welcome, to 
behold, on the contrary, tear and wretchedness? and how, victor, can 
I relat our misfortune? absenc cannot have render you callou to 
our joy and griefs; and how shall I inflict pain on my long absent 
son? I wish to prepar you for the woeful news, but I know it is 
impossible; even now your eye skim over the page to seek the word 
which are to convey to you the horribl tidings. 

“william is dead!—that sweet child, whose smile delight and warm 
my heart, who wa so gentle, yet so gay! victor, he is murdered! 

“I will not attempt to consol you; but will simpli relat the 
circumst of the transaction. 

“last thursday (may 7th), I, my niece, and your two brothers, went to 
walk in plainpalais. the even wa warm and serene, and we prolong 
our walk farther than usual. It wa alreadi dusk befor we thought of 
returning; and then we discov that william and ernest, who had gone 
on before, were not to be found. We accordingli rest on a seat until 
they should return. present ernest came, and enquir if we had seen 
hi brother; he said, that he had been play with him, that william 
had run away to hide himself, and that he vainli sought for him, and 
afterward wait for a long time, but that he did not return. 

“thi account rather alarm us, and we continu to search for him 
until night fell, when elizabeth conjectur that he might have 
return to the house. He wa not there. We return again, with 
torches; for I could not rest, when I thought that my sweet boy had 
lost himself, and wa expos to all the damp and dew of night; 
elizabeth also suffer extrem anguish. about five in the morn I 
discov my love boy, whom the night befor I had seen bloom and 
activ in health, stretch on the grass livid and motionless; the 
print of the murder’ finger wa on hi neck. 

“he wa convey home, and the anguish that wa visibl in my 
counten betray the secret to elizabeth. she wa veri earnest to 
see the corpse. At first I attempt to prevent her but she persisted, 
and enter the room where it lay, hastili examin the neck of the 
victim, and clasp her hand exclaimed, ‘O god! I have murder my 
darl child!’ 

“she fainted, and wa restor with extrem difficulty. when she again 
lived, it wa onli to weep and sigh. she told me, that that same 
even william had teas her to let him wear a veri valuabl 
miniatur that she possess of your mother. thi pictur is gone, and 
wa doubtless the temptat which urg the murder to the deed. We 
have no trace of him at present, although our exert to discov him 
are unremitted; but they will not restor my belov william! 

“come, dearest victor; you alon can consol elizabeth. she weep 
continually, and accus herself unjustli as the caus of hi death; 
her word pierc my heart. We are all unhappy; but will not that be an 
addit motiv for you, my son, to return and be our comforter? 
your dear mother! alas, victor! I now say, thank god she did not live 
to wit the cruel, miser death of her youngest darling! 

“come, victor; not brood thought of vengeanc against the assassin, 
but with feel of peac and gentleness, that will heal, instead of 
festering, the wound of our minds. enter the hous of mourning, my 
friend, but with kind and affect for those who love you, and not 
with hatr for your enemies. 

“your affection and afflict father, 

“alphons frankenstein. 



“geneva, may 12th, 17—.” 



clerval, who had watch my counten as I read thi letter, wa 
surpris to observ the despair that succeed the joy I at first 
express on receiv new from my friends. I threw the letter on the 
table, and cover my face with my hands. 

“mi dear frankenstein,” exclaim henry, when he perceiv me 
weep with bitterness, “are you alway to be unhappy? My dear friend, 
what ha happened?” 

I motion him to take up the letter, while I walk up and down the 
room in the extremest agitation. tear also gush from the eye of 
clerval, as he read the account of my misfortune. 

“I can offer you no consolation, my friend,” said he; 
“your disast is irreparable. what do you intend to do?” 

“to go instantli to geneva: come with me, henry, to order the horses.” 

dure our walk, clerval endeavour to say a few word of consolation; 
he could onli express hi heartfelt sympathy. “poor william!” said he, 
“dear love child, he now sleep with hi angel mother! who that had 
seen him bright and joyou in hi young beauty, but must weep over hi 
untim loss! To die so miserably; to feel the murderer’ grasp! how 
much more a murder that could destroy radiant innocence! poor littl 
fellow! one onli consol have we; hi friend mourn and weep, but 
he is at rest. the pang is over, hi suffer are at an end for ever. 
A sod cover hi gentl form, and he know no pain. He can no longer 
be a subject for pity; we must reserv that for hi miser 
survivors.” 

clerval spoke thu as we hurri through the streets; the word 
impress themselv on my mind and I rememb them afterward in 
solitude. but now, as soon as the hors arrived, I hurri into a 
cabriolet, and bade farewel to my friend. 

My journey wa veri melancholy. At first I wish to hurri on, for I long 
to consol and sympathis with my love and sorrow friends; but when I 
drew near my nativ town, I slacken my progress. I could hardli sustain 
the multitud of feel that crowd into my mind. I pass through 
scene familiar to my youth, but which I had not seen for nearli six years. 
how alter everi thing might be dure that time! one sudden and 
desol chang had taken place; but a thousand littl circumst 
might have by degre work other alterations, which, although they were 
done more tranquilly, might not be the less decisive. fear overcam me; I 
dare no advance, dread a thousand nameless evil that made me tremble, 
although I wa unabl to defin them. 

I remain two day at lausanne, in thi pain state of mind. I 
contempl the lake: the water were placid; all around wa calm; and the 
snowi mountains, “the palac of nature,” were not changed. By 
degre the calm and heavenli scene restor me, and I continu my journey 
toward geneva. 

the road ran by the side of the lake, which becam narrow as I 
approach my nativ town. I discov more distinctli the black 
side of jura, and the bright summit of mont blanc. I wept like a 
child. “dear mountains! my own beauti lake! how do you welcom your 
wanderer? your summit are clear; the sky and lake are blue and 
placid. Is thi to prognost peace, or to mock at my unhappiness?” 

I fear, my friend, that I shall render myself tediou by dwell on 
these preliminari circumstances; but they were day of compar 
happiness, and I think of them with pleasure. My country, my belov 
country! who but a nativ can tell the delight I took in again 
behold thi streams, thi mountains, and, more than all, thi love 
lake! 

yet, as I drew nearer home, grief and fear again overcam me. night also 
close around; and when I could hardli see the dark mountains, I felt still 
more gloomily. the pictur appear a vast and dim scene of evil, and I 
foresaw obscur that I wa destin to becom the most wretch of human 
beings. alas! I prophesi truly, and fail onli in one singl 
circumstance, that in all the miseri I imagin and dreaded, I did not 
conceiv the hundredth part of the anguish I wa destin to endure. 

It wa complet dark when I arriv in the environ of geneva; the gate 
of the town were alreadi shut; and I wa oblig to pass the night at 
secheron, a villag at the distanc of half a leagu from the city. the sky 
wa serene; and, as I wa unabl to rest, I resolv to visit the spot 
where my poor william had been murdered. As I could not pass through the 
town, I wa oblig to cross the lake in a boat to arriv at plainpalais. 
dure thi short voyag I saw the lightn play on the summit of mont 
blanc in the most beauti figures. the storm appear to approach 
rapidly, and, on landing, I ascend a low hill, that I might observ it 
progress. It advanced; the heaven were clouded, and I soon felt the rain 
come slowli in larg drops, but it violenc quickli increased. 

I quit my seat, and walk on, although the dark and storm 
increas everi minute, and the thunder burst with a terrif crash 
over my head. It wa echo from salêve, the juras, and the alp of 
savoy; vivid flash of lightn dazzl my eyes, illumin the 
lake, make it appear like a vast sheet of fire; then for an instant 
everi thing seem of a pitchi darkness, until the eye recov itself 
from the preced flash. the storm, as is often the case in 
switzerland, appear at onc in variou part of the heavens. the 
most violent storm hung exactli north of the town, over the part of the 
lake which lie between the promontori of belriv and the villag of 
copêt. anoth storm enlighten jura with faint flashes; and anoth 
darken and sometim disclos the môle, a peak mountain to the 
east of the lake. 

while I watch the tempest, so beauti yet terrific, I wander on with 
a hasti step. thi nobl war in the sky elev my spirits; I clasp my 
hands, and exclaim aloud, “william, dear angel! thi is thi 
funeral, thi thi dirge!” As I said these words, I perceiv in the 
gloom a figur which stole from behind a clump of tree near me; I stood 
fixed, gaze intently: I could not be mistaken. A flash of lightn 
illumin the object, and discov it shape plainli to me; it 
gigant stature, and the deform of it aspect more hideou than belong 
to humanity, instantli inform me that it wa the wretch, the filthi 
dæmon, to whom I had given life. what did he there? could he be (I 
shudder at the conception) the murder of my brother? No sooner did that 
idea cross my imagination, than I becam convinc of it truth; my teeth 
chattered, and I wa forc to lean against a tree for support. the figur 
pass me quickly, and I lost it in the gloom. noth in human shape could 
have destroy the fair child. _he_ wa the murderer! I could not 
doubt it. the mere presenc of the idea wa an irresist proof of the 
fact. I thought of pursu the devil; but it would have been in vain, for 
anoth flash discov him to me hang among the rock of the nearli 
perpendicular ascent of mont salêve, a hill that bound plainpalai on the 
south. He soon reach the summit, and disappeared. 

I remain motionless. the thunder ceased; but the rain still 
continued, and the scene wa envelop in an impenetr darkness. I 
revolv in my mind the event which I had until now sought to forget: 
the whole train of my progress toward the creation; the appear of 
the work of my own hand at my bedside; it departure. two year had 
now nearli elaps sinc the night on which he first receiv life; and 
wa thi hi first crime? alas! I had turn loos into the world a 
deprav wretch, whose delight wa in carnag and misery; had he not 
murder my brother? 

No one can conceiv the anguish I suffer dure the remaind of the 
night, which I spent, cold and wet, in the open air. but I did not 
feel the inconveni of the weather; my imagin wa busi in 
scene of evil and despair. I consid the be whom I had cast 
among mankind, and endow with the will and power to effect purpos 
of horror, such as the deed which he had now done, nearli in the light 
of my own vampire, my own spirit let loos from the grave, and forc 
to destroy all that wa dear to me. 

day dawned; and I direct my step toward the town. the gate were 
open, and I hasten to my father’ house. My first thought wa to 
discov what I knew of the murderer, and caus instant pursuit to be 
made. but I paus when I reflect on the stori that I had to tell. A 
be whom I myself had formed, and endu with life, had met me at 
midnight among the precipic of an inaccess mountain. I 
rememb also the nervou fever with which I had been seiz just at 
the time that I date my creation, and which would give an air of 
delirium to a tale otherwis so utterli improbable. I well knew that 
if ani other had commun such a relat to me, I should have 
look upon it as the rave of insanity. besides, the strang natur 
of the anim would elud all pursuit, even if I were so far credit 
as to persuad my rel to commenc it. and then of what use would 
be pursuit? who could arrest a creatur capabl of scale the 
overhang side of mont salêve? these reflect determin me, and 
I resolv to remain silent. 

It wa about five in the morn when I enter my father’ house. I 
told the servant not to disturb the family, and went into the librari 
to attend their usual hour of rising. 

six year had elapsed, pass in a dream but for one indel trace, and I 
stood in the same place where I had last embrac my father befor my 
departur for ingolstadt. belov and vener parent! He still remain 
to me. I gaze on the pictur of my mother, which stood over the 
mantel-piece. It wa an histor subject, paint at my father’ 
desire, and repres carolin beaufort in an agoni of despair, kneel 
by the coffin of her dead father. her garb wa rustic, and her cheek pale; 
but there wa an air of digniti and beauty, that hardli permit the 
sentiment of pity. below thi pictur wa a miniatur of william; and my 
tear flow when I look upon it. while I wa thu engaged, ernest 
entered: he had heard me arrive, and hasten to welcom me: 
“welcome, my dearest victor,” said he. “ah! I wish you 
had come three month ago, and then you would have found us all joyou and 
delighted. you come to us now to share a miseri which noth can 
alleviate; yet your presenc will, I hope, reviv our father, who seem 
sink under hi misfortune; and your persuas will induc poor 
elizabeth to ceas her vain and torment self-accusations.—poor 
william! he wa our darl and our pride!” 

tears, unrestrained, fell from my brother’ eyes; a sens of mortal 
agoni crept over my frame. before, I had onli imagin the 
wretched of my desol home; the realiti came on me as a new, and 
a not less terrible, disaster. I tri to calm ernest; I enquir more 
minut concern my father, and here I name my cousin. 

“she most of all,” said ernest, “requir consolation; she accus 
herself of have caus the death of my brother, and that made her 
veri wretched. but sinc the murder ha been discovered—” 

“the murder discovered! good god! how can that be? who could attempt 
to pursu him? It is impossible; one might as well tri to overtak the 
winds, or confin a mountain-stream with a straw. I saw him too; he 
wa free last night!” 

“I do not know what you mean,” repli my brother, in accent of 
wonder, “but to us the discoveri we have made complet our misery. No 
one would believ it at first; and even now elizabeth will not be 
convinced, notwithstand all the evidence. indeed, who would credit 
that justin moritz, who wa so amiable, and fond of all the family, 
could suddenli becom so capabl of so frightful, so appal a crime?” 

“justin moritz! poor, poor girl, is she the accused? but it is 
wrongfully; everi one know that; no one believ it, surely, ernest?” 

“no one did at first; but sever circumst came out, that have 
almost forc convict upon us; and her own behaviour ha been so 
confused, as to add to the evid of fact a weight that, I fear, 
leav no hope for doubt. but she will be tri today, and you will 
then hear all.” 

He then relat that, the morn on which the murder of poor william 
had been discovered, justin had been taken ill, and confin to her 
bed for sever days. dure thi interval, one of the servants, 
happen to examin the apparel she had worn on the night of the 
murder, had discov in her pocket the pictur of my mother, which 
had been judg to be the temptat of the murderer. the servant 
instantli show it to one of the others, who, without say a word to 
ani of the family, went to a magistrate; and, upon their deposition, 
justin wa apprehended. On be charg with the fact, the poor girl 
confirm the suspicion in a great measur by her extrem confus of 
manner. 

thi wa a strang tale, but it did not shake my faith; and I repli 
earnestly, “you are all mistaken; I know the murderer. justine, poor, 
good justine, is innocent.” 

At that instant my father entered. I saw unhappi deepli impress 
on hi countenance, but he endeavour to welcom me cheerfully; and, 
after we had exchang our mourn greeting, would have introduc 
some other topic than that of our disaster, had not ernest exclaimed, 
“good god, papa! victor say that he know who wa the murder of 
poor william.” 

“we do also, unfortunately,” repli my father, “for inde I had 
rather have been for ever ignor than have discov so much 
deprav and ungratitud in one I valu so highly.” 

“mi dear father, you are mistaken; justin is innocent.” 

“if she is, god forbid that she should suffer as guilty. she is to be 
tri today, and I hope, I sincer hope, that she will be acquitted.” 

thi speech calm me. I wa firmli convinc in my own mind that 
justine, and inde everi human being, wa guiltless of thi murder. I 
had no fear, therefore, that ani circumstanti evid could be 
brought forward strong enough to convict her. My tale wa not one to 
announc publicly; it astound horror would be look upon as 
mad by the vulgar. did ani one inde exist, except I, the 
creator, who would believe, unless hi sens convinc him, in the 
exist of the live monument of presumpt and rash ignor 
which I had let loos upon the world? 

We were soon join by elizabeth. time had alter her sinc I last 
beheld her; it had endow her with loveli surpass the beauti of 
her childish years. there wa the same candour, the same vivacity, but 
it wa alli to an express more full of sensibl and intellect. 
she welcom me with the greatest affection. “your arrival, my dear 
cousin,” said she, “fill me with hope. you perhap will find some 
mean to justifi my poor guiltless justine. alas! who is safe, if she 
be convict of crime? I reli on her innoc as certainli as I do 
upon my own. our misfortun is doubli hard to us; we have not onli 
lost that love darl boy, but thi poor girl, whom I sincer 
love, is to be torn away by even a wors fate. If she is condemned, I 
never shall know joy more. but she will not, I am sure she will not; 
and then I shall be happi again, even after the sad death of my littl 
william.” 

“she is innocent, my elizabeth,” said I, “and that shall 
be proved; fear nothing, but let your spirit be cheer by the assur 
of her acquittal.” 

“how kind and gener you are! everi one els believ in her guilt, 
and that made me wretched, for I knew that it wa impossible: and to 
see everi one els prejud in so deadli a manner render me 
hopeless and despairing.” she wept. 

“dearest niece,” said my father, “dri your tears. If she 
is, as you believe, innocent, reli on the justic of our laws, and the 
activ with which I shall prevent the slightest shadow of 
partiality.” 





chapter 8 

We pass a few sad hour until eleven o’clock, when the trial wa to 
commence. My father and the rest of the famili be oblig to attend 
as witnesses, I accompani them to the court. dure the whole of 
thi wretch mockeri of justic I suffer live torture. It wa to 
be decid whether the result of my curios and lawless devic would 
caus the death of two of my fellow beings: one a smile babe full of 
innoc and joy, the other far more dread murdered, with everi 
aggrav of infami that could make the murder memor in horror. 
justin also wa a girl of merit and possess qualiti which promis 
to render her life happy; now all wa to be obliter in an 
ignomini grave, and I the cause! A thousand time rather would I 
have confess myself guilti of the crime ascrib to justine, but I 
wa absent when it wa committed, and such a declar would have 
been consid as the rave of a madman and would not have 
exculp her who suffer through me. 

the appear of justin wa calm. she wa dress in mourning, and 
her countenance, alway engaging, wa rendered, by the solemn of her 
feelings, exquisit beautiful. yet she appear confid in 
innoc and did not tremble, although gaze on and execr by 
thousands, for all the kind which her beauti might otherwis have 
excit wa obliter in the mind of the spectat by the 
imagin of the enorm she wa suppos to have committed. she 
wa tranquil, yet her tranquil wa evid constrained; and as 
her confus had befor been adduc as a proof of her guilt, she 
work up her mind to an appear of courage. when she enter the 
court she threw her eye round it and quickli discov where we were 
seated. A tear seem to dim her eye when she saw us, but she quickli 
recov herself, and a look of sorrow affect seem to attest 
her utter guiltlessness. 

the trial began, and after the advoc against her had state the 
charge, sever wit were called. sever strang fact combin 
against her, which might have stagger anyon who had not such proof 
of her innoc as I had. she had been out the whole of the night on 
which the murder had been commit and toward morn had been 
perceiv by a market-woman not far from the spot where the bodi of the 
murder child had been afterward found. the woman ask her what she 
did there, but she look veri strang and onli return a confus 
and unintellig answer. she return to the hous about eight 
o’clock, and when one inquir where she had pass the night, she 
repli that she had been look for the child and demand earnestli 
if anyth had been heard concern him. when shown the body, she 
fell into violent hyster and kept her bed for sever days. the 
pictur wa then produc which the servant had found in her pocket; 
and when elizabeth, in a falter voice, prove that it wa the same 
which, an hour befor the child had been missed, she had place round 
hi neck, a murmur of horror and indign fill the court. 

justin wa call on for her defence. As the trial had proceeded, her 
counten had altered. surprise, horror, and miseri were strongli 
expressed. sometim she struggl with her tears, but when she wa 
desir to plead, she collect her power and spoke in an audibl 
although variabl voice. 

“god knows,” she said, “how entir I am innocent. but I 
do not pretend that my protest should acquit me; I rest my innoc 
on a plain and simpl explan of the fact which have been adduc 
against me, and I hope the charact I have alway born will inclin my 
judg to a favour interpret where ani circumst appear 
doubt or suspicious.” 

she then relat that, by the permiss of elizabeth, she had pass 
the even of the night on which the murder had been commit at the 
hous of an aunt at chêne, a villag situat at about a leagu from 
geneva. On her return, at about nine o’clock, she met a man who ask 
her if she had seen anyth of the child who wa lost. she wa 
alarm by thi account and pass sever hour in look for him, 
when the gate of geneva were shut, and she wa forc to remain 
sever hour of the night in a barn belong to a cottage, be 
unwil to call up the inhabitants, to whom she wa well known. most 
of the night she spent here watching; toward morn she believ that 
she slept for a few minutes; some step disturb her, and she awoke. 
It wa dawn, and she quit her asylum, that she might again endeavour 
to find my brother. If she had gone near the spot where hi bodi lay, 
it wa without her knowledge. that she had been bewild when 
question by the market-woman wa not surprising, sinc she had pass 
a sleepless night and the fate of poor william wa yet uncertain. 
concern the pictur she could give no account. 

“I know,” continu the unhappi victim, “how heavili and 
fatal thi one circumst weigh against me, but I have no power of 
explain it; and when I have express my utter ignorance, I am onli left 
to conjectur concern the probabl by which it might have been 
place in my pocket. but here also I am checked. I believ that I have no 
enemi on earth, and none sure would have been so wick as to destroy me 
wantonly. did the murder place it there? I know of no opportun 
afford him for so doing; or, if I had, whi should he have stolen the 
jewel, to part with it again so soon? 

“I commit my caus to the justic of my judges, yet I see no room for 
hope. I beg permiss to have a few wit examin concern my 
character, and if their testimoni shall not overweigh my suppos 
guilt, I must be condemned, although I would pledg my salvat on my 
innocence.” 

sever wit were call who had known her for mani years, and 
they spoke well of her; but fear and hatr of the crime of which they 
suppos her guilti render them timor and unwil to come 
forward. elizabeth saw even thi last resource, her excel 
disposit and irreproach conduct, about to fail the accused, 
when, although violent agitated, she desir permiss to address 
the court. 

“I am,” said she, “the cousin of the unhappi child who 
wa murdered, or rather hi sister, for I wa educ by and have live 
with hi parent ever sinc and even long befor hi birth. It may 
therefor be judg indec in me to come forward on thi occasion, but 
when I see a fellow creatur about to perish through the cowardic of her 
pretend friends, I wish to be allow to speak, that I may say what I 
know of her character. I am well acquaint with the accused. I have live 
in the same hous with her, at one time for five and at anoth for nearli 
two years. dure all that period she appear to me the most amiabl and 
benevol of human creatures. she nurs madam frankenstein, my aunt, in 
her last illness, with the greatest affect and care and afterward 
attend her own mother dure a tediou illness, in a manner that excit 
the admir of all who knew her, after which she again live in my 
uncle’ house, where she wa belov by all the family. she wa 
warmli attach to the child who is now dead and act toward him like a 
most affection mother. for my own part, I do not hesit to say that, 
notwithstand all the evid produc against her, I believ and reli 
on her perfect innocence. she had no temptat for such an action; as to 
the baubl on which the chief proof rests, if she had earnestli desir it, 
I should have willingli given it to her, so much do I esteem and valu 
her.” 

A murmur of approb follow elizabeth’ simpl and power 
appeal, but it wa excit by her gener interference, and not in 
favour of poor justine, on whom the public indign wa turn with 
renew violence, charg her with the blackest ingratitude. she 
herself wept as elizabeth spoke, but she did not answer. My own 
agit and anguish wa extrem dure the whole trial. I believ 
in her innocence; I knew it. could the dæmon who had (I did not for a 
minut doubt) murder my brother also in hi hellish sport have 
betray the innoc to death and ignominy? I could not sustain the 
horror of my situation, and when I perceiv that the popular voic and 
the counten of the judg had alreadi condemn my unhappi victim, 
I rush out of the court in agony. the tortur of the accus did 
not equal mine; she wa sustain by innocence, but the fang of 
remors tore my bosom and would not forgo their hold. 

I pass a night of unmingl wretchedness. In the morn I went to 
the court; my lip and throat were parched. I dare not ask the fatal 
question, but I wa known, and the offic guess the caus of my 
visit. the ballot had been thrown; they were all black, and justin 
wa condemned. 

I cannot pretend to describ what I then felt. I had befor 
experienc sensat of horror, and I have endeavour to bestow upon 
them adequ expressions, but word cannot convey an idea of the 
heart-sicken despair that I then endured. the person to whom I 
address myself ad that justin had alreadi confess her guilt. 
“that evidence,” he observed, “wa hardli requir in so glare a 
case, but I am glad of it, and, indeed, none of our judg like to 
condemn a crimin upon circumstanti evidence, be it ever so 
decisive.” 

thi wa strang and unexpect intelligence; what could it mean? had 
my eye deceiv me? and wa I realli as mad as the whole world would 
believ me to be if I disclos the object of my suspicions? I 
hasten to return home, and elizabeth eagerli demand the result. 

“mi cousin,” repli I, “it is decid as you may have expected; all 
judg had rather that ten innoc should suffer than that one guilti 
should escape. but she ha confessed.” 

thi wa a dire blow to poor elizabeth, who had reli with firm upon 
justine’ innocence. “alas!” said she. “how shall I 
ever again believ in human goodness? justine, whom I love and esteem as 
my sister, how could she put on those smile of innoc onli to betray? 
her mild eye seem incap of ani sever or guile, and yet she ha 
commit a murder.” 

soon after we heard that the poor victim had express a desir to see my 
cousin. My father wish her not to go but said that he left it to her own 
judgment and feel to decide. “yes,” said elizabeth, 
“I will go, although she is guilty; and you, victor, shall accompani 
me; I cannot go alone.” the idea of thi visit wa tortur to me, yet 
I could not refuse. 

We enter the gloomi prison chamber and beheld justin sit on some 
straw at the farther end; her hand were manacled, and her head rest on 
her knees. she rose on see us enter, and when we were left alon with 
her, she threw herself at the feet of elizabeth, weep bitterly. My 
cousin wept also. 

“oh, justine!” said she. “whi did you rob me of my last consolation? 
I reli on your innocence, and although I wa then veri wretched, I 
wa not so miser as I am now.” 

“and do you also believ that I am so very, veri wicked? Do you also 
join with my enemi to crush me, to condemn me as a murderer?” her 
voic wa suffoc with sobs. 

“rise, my poor girl,” said elizabeth; “whi do you kneel, 
if you are innocent? I am not one of your enemies, I believ you 
guiltless, notwithstand everi evidence, until I heard that you had 
yourself declar your guilt. that report, you say, is false; and be 
assured, dear justine, that noth can shake my confid in you for a 
moment, but your own confession.” 

“I did confess, but I confess a lie. I confessed, that I might 
obtain absolution; but now that falsehood lie heavier at my heart than 
all my other sins. the god of heaven forgiv me! ever sinc I wa 
condemned, my confessor ha besieg me; he threaten and menaced, 
until I almost began to think that I wa the monster that he said I 
was. He threaten excommun and hell fire in my last moment if 
I continu obdurate. dear lady, I had none to support me; all look 
on me as a wretch doom to ignomini and perdition. what could I do? 
In an evil hour I subscrib to a lie; and now onli am I truli 
miserable.” 

she paused, weeping, and then continued, “I thought with horror, my 
sweet lady, that you should believ your justine, whom your bless 
aunt had so highli honoured, and whom you loved, wa a creatur capabl 
of a crime which none but the devil himself could have perpetrated. 
dear william! dearest bless child! I soon shall see you again in 
heaven, where we shall all be happy; and that consol me, go as I 
am to suffer ignomini and death.” 

“oh, justine! forgiv me for have for one moment distrust you. 
whi did you confess? but do not mourn, dear girl. Do not fear. I 
will proclaim, I will prove your innocence. I will melt the stoni 
heart of your enemi by my tear and prayers. you shall not die! 
you, my playfellow, my companion, my sister, perish on the scaffold! 
no! no! I never could surviv so horribl a misfortune.” 

justin shook her head mournfully. “I do not fear to die,” she said; 
“that pang is past. god rais my weak and give me courag to 
endur the worst. I leav a sad and bitter world; and if you rememb 
me and think of me as of one unjustli condemned, I am resign to the 
fate await me. learn from me, dear lady, to submit in patienc to 
the will of heaven!” 

dure thi convers I had retir to a corner of the prison room, 
where I could conceal the horrid anguish that possess me. despair! 
who dare talk of that? the poor victim, who on the morrow wa to pass 
the aw boundari between life and death, felt not, as I did, such 
deep and bitter agony. I gnash my teeth and ground them together, 
utter a groan that came from my inmost soul. justin started. when 
she saw who it was, she approach me and said, “dear sir, you are veri 
kind to visit me; you, I hope, do not believ that I am guilty?” 

I could not answer. “no, justine,” said elizabeth; “he is more 
convinc of your innoc than I was, for even when he heard that you 
had confessed, he did not credit it.” 

“I truli thank him. In these last moment I feel the sincerest 
gratitud toward those who think of me with kindness. how sweet is 
the affect of other to such a wretch as I am! It remov more than 
half my misfortune, and I feel as if I could die in peac now that my 
innoc is acknowledg by you, dear lady, and your cousin.” 

thu the poor suffer tri to comfort other and herself. she inde 
gain the resign she desired. but I, the true murderer, felt the 
never-di worm aliv in my bosom, which allow of no hope or 
consolation. elizabeth also wept and wa unhappy, but her also wa 
the miseri of innocence, which, like a cloud that pass over the fair 
moon, for a while hide but cannot tarnish it brightness. anguish and 
despair had penetr into the core of my heart; I bore a hell within 
me which noth could extinguish. We stay sever hour with 
justine, and it wa with great difficulti that elizabeth could tear 
herself away. “I wish,” cri she, “that I were to die with you; I 
cannot live in thi world of misery.” 

justin assum an air of cheerfulness, while she with difficulti 
repress her bitter tears. she embrac elizabeth and said in a voic 
of half-suppress emotion, “farewell, sweet lady, dearest elizabeth, 
my belov and onli friend; may heaven, in it bounty, bless and 
preserv you; may thi be the last misfortun that you will ever 
suffer! live, and be happy, and make other so.” 

and on the morrow justin died. elizabeth’ heart-rend eloqu 
fail to move the judg from their settl convict in the 
crimin of the saintli sufferer. My passion and indign 
appeal were lost upon them. and when I receiv their cold answer 
and heard the harsh, unfeel reason of these men, my purpos 
avow die away on my lips. thu I might proclaim myself a madman, 
but not revok the sentenc pass upon my wretch victim. she 
perish on the scaffold as a murderess! 

from the tortur of my own heart, I turn to contempl the deep and 
voiceless grief of my elizabeth. thi also wa my doing! and my 
father’ woe, and the desol of that late so smile home all wa 
the work of my thrice-accurs hands! Ye weep, unhappi ones, but these 
are not your last tears! again shall you rais the funer wail, and 
the sound of your lament shall again and again be heard! 
frankenstein, your son, your kinsman, your early, much-lov friend; he 
who would spend each vital drop of blood for your sakes, who ha no 
thought nor sens of joy except as it is mirror also in your dear 
countenances, who would fill the air with bless and spend hi life 
in serv you—h bid you weep, to shed countless tears; happi beyond 
hi hopes, if thu inexor fate be satisfied, and if the destruct 
paus befor the peac of the grave have succeed to your sad torments! 

thu spoke my prophet soul, as, torn by remorse, horror, and despair, 
I beheld those I love spend vain sorrow upon the grave of william and 
justine, the first hapless victim to my unhallow arts. 





chapter 9 

noth is more pain to the human mind than, after the feel have 
been work up by a quick success of events, the dead calm of 
inact and certainti which follow and depriv the soul both of hope 
and fear. justin died, she rested, and I wa alive. the blood flow 
freeli in my veins, but a weight of despair and remors press on my 
heart which noth could remove. sleep fled from my eyes; I wander 
like an evil spirit, for I had commit deed of mischief beyond 
descript horrible, and more, much more (I persuad myself) wa yet 
behind. yet my heart overflow with kind and the love of virtue. 
I had begun life with benevol intent and thirst for the moment 
when I should put them in practic and make myself use to my fellow 
beings. now all wa blasted; instead of that seren of conscienc 
which allow me to look back upon the past with self-satisfaction, and 
from thenc to gather promis of new hopes, I wa seiz by remors and 
the sens of guilt, which hurri me away to a hell of intens tortur 
such as no languag can describe. 

thi state of mind prey upon my health, which had perhap never 
entir recov from the first shock it had sustained. I shun 
the face of man; all sound of joy or complac wa tortur to me; 
solitud wa my onli consolation—deep, dark, deathlik solitude. 

My father observ with pain the alter percept in my disposit 
and habit and endeavour by argument deduc from the feel of hi 
seren conscienc and guiltless life to inspir me with fortitud and 
awaken in me the courag to dispel the dark cloud which brood over me. 
“do you think, victor,” said he, “that I do not suffer 
also? No one could love a child more than I love your 
brother”—tear came into hi eye as he spoke—“but 
is it not a duti to the survivor that we should refrain from augment 
their unhappi by an appear of immoder grief? It is also a duti 
owe to yourself, for excess sorrow prevent improv or enjoyment, 
or even the discharg of daili usefulness, without which no man is fit for 
society.” 

thi advice, although good, wa total inapplic to my case; I 
should have been the first to hide my grief and consol my friend if 
remors had not mingl it bitterness, and terror it alarm, with my 
other sensations. now I could onli answer my father with a look of 
despair and endeavour to hide myself from hi view. 

about thi time we retir to our hous at belrive. thi chang wa 
particularli agreeabl to me. the shut of the gate regularli at 
ten o’clock and the imposs of remain on the lake after that 
hour had render our resid within the wall of geneva veri irksom 
to me. I wa now free. often, after the rest of the famili had 
retir for the night, I took the boat and pass mani hour upon the 
water. sometimes, with my sail set, I wa carri by the wind; and 
sometimes, after row into the middl of the lake, I left the boat to 
pursu it own cours and gave way to my own miser reflections. I 
wa often tempted, when all wa at peac around me, and I the onli 
unquiet thing that wander restless in a scene so beauti and 
heavenly—if I except some bat, or the frogs, whose harsh and 
interrupt croak wa heard onli when I approach the shore—often, 
I say, I wa tempt to plung into the silent lake, that the water 
might close over me and my calam for ever. but I wa restrained, 
when I thought of the heroic and suffer elizabeth, whom I tenderli 
loved, and whose exist wa bound up in mine. I thought also of my 
father and surviv brother; should I by my base desert leav them 
expos and unprotect to the malic of the fiend whom I had let loos 
among them? 

At these moment I wept bitterli and wish that peac would revisit my 
mind onli that I might afford them consol and happiness. but that 
could not be. remors extinguish everi hope. I had been the author of 
unalter evils, and I live in daili fear lest the monster whom I had 
creat should perpetr some new wickedness. I had an obscur feel 
that all wa not over and that he would still commit some signal crime, 
which by it enorm should almost effac the recollect of the past. 
there wa alway scope for fear so long as anyth I love remain 
behind. My abhorr of thi fiend cannot be conceived. when I thought of 
him I gnash my teeth, my eye becam inflamed, and I ardent wish to 
extinguish that life which I had so thoughtlessli bestowed. when I 
reflect on hi crime and malice, my hatr and reveng burst all bound 
of moderation. I would have made a pilgrimag to the highest peak of the 
andes, could I, when there, have precipit him to their base. I wish 
to see him again, that I might wreak the utmost extent of abhorr on hi 
head and aveng the death of william and justine. 

our hous wa the hous of mourning. My father’ health wa deepli 
shaken by the horror of the recent events. elizabeth wa sad and 
desponding; she no longer took delight in her ordinari occupations; all 
pleasur seem to her sacrileg toward the dead; etern woe and tear she 
then thought wa the just tribut she should pay to innoc so blast 
and destroyed. she wa no longer that happi creatur who in earlier youth 
wander with me on the bank of the lake and talk with ecstasi of our 
futur prospects. the first of those sorrow which are sent to wean us from 
the earth had visit her, and it dim influenc quench her dearest 
smiles. 

“when I reflect, my dear cousin,” said she, “on the miser death of 
justin moritz, I no longer see the world and it work as they befor 
appear to me. before, I look upon the account of vice and 
injustic that I read in book or heard from other as tale of ancient 
day or imaginari evils; at least they were remot and more familiar to 
reason than to the imagination; but now miseri ha come home, and men 
appear to me as monster thirst for each other’ blood. yet I am 
certainli unjust. everybodi believ that poor girl to be guilty; and 
if she could have commit the crime for which she suffered, assuredli 
she would have been the most deprav of human creatures. for the sake 
of a few jewels, to have murder the son of her benefactor and friend, 
a child whom she had nurs from it birth, and appear to love as if 
it had been her own! I could not consent to the death of ani human 
being, but certainli I should have thought such a creatur unfit to 
remain in the societi of men. but she wa innocent. I know, I feel 
she wa innocent; you are of the same opinion, and that confirm me. 
alas! victor, when falsehood can look so like the truth, who can 
assur themselv of certain happiness? I feel as if I were walk on 
the edg of a precipice, toward which thousand are crowd and 
endeavour to plung me into the abyss. william and justin were 
assassinated, and the murder escapes; he walk about the world free, 
and perhap respected. but even if I were condemn to suffer on the 
scaffold for the same crimes, I would not chang place with such a 
wretch.” 

I listen to thi discours with the extremest agony. I, not in deed, 
but in effect, wa the true murderer. elizabeth read my anguish in my 
countenance, and kindli take my hand, said, “mi dearest friend, you 
must calm yourself. these event have affect me, god know how 
deeply; but I am not so wretch as you are. there is an express of 
despair, and sometim of revenge, in your counten that make me 
tremble. dear victor, banish these dark passions. rememb the 
friend around you, who centr all their hope in you. have we lost 
the power of render you happy? ah! while we love, while we are 
true to each other, here in thi land of peac and beauty, your nativ 
country, we may reap everi tranquil blessing—what can disturb our 
peace?” 

and could not such word from her whom I fondli prize befor everi 
other gift of fortun suffic to chase away the fiend that lurk in my 
heart? even as she spoke I drew near to her, as if in terror, lest at 
that veri moment the destroy had been near to rob me of her. 

thu not the tender of friendship, nor the beauti of earth, nor of 
heaven, could redeem my soul from woe; the veri accent of love were 
ineffectual. I wa encompass by a cloud which no benefici 
influenc could penetrate. the wound deer drag it faint 
limb to some untrodden brake, there to gaze upon the arrow which had 
pierc it, and to die, wa but a type of me. 

sometim I could cope with the sullen despair that overwhelm me, but 
sometim the whirlwind passion of my soul drove me to seek, by bodili 
exercis and by chang of place, some relief from my intoler 
sensations. It wa dure an access of thi kind that I suddenli left 
my home, and bend my step toward the near alpin valleys, sought 
in the magnificence, the etern of such scenes, to forget myself and 
my ephemeral, becaus human, sorrows. My wander were direct 
toward the valley of chamounix. I had visit it frequent dure my 
boyhood. six year had pass sinc then: _i_ wa a wreck, but nought 
had chang in those savag and endur scenes. 

I perform the first part of my journey on horseback. I afterward 
hire a mule, as the more sure-foot and least liabl to receiv 
injuri on these rug roads. the weather wa fine; it wa about the 
middl of the month of august, nearli two month after the death of 
justine, that miser epoch from which I date all my woe. the 
weight upon my spirit wa sensibl lighten as I plung yet deeper in 
the ravin of arve. the immens mountain and precipic that overhung 
me on everi side, the sound of the river rage among the rocks, and 
the dash of the waterfal around spoke of a power mighti as 
omnipotence—and I ceas to fear or to bend befor ani be less 
almighti than that which had creat and rule the elements, here 
display in their most terrif guise. still, as I ascend higher, 
the valley assum a more magnific and astonish character. 
ruin castl hang on the precipic of pini mountains, the 
impetu arve, and cottag everi here and there peep forth from 
among the tree form a scene of singular beauty. but it wa 
augment and render sublim by the mighti alps, whose white and 
shine pyramid and dome tower abov all, as belong to anoth 
earth, the habit of anoth race of beings. 

I pass the bridg of pélissier, where the ravine, which the river 
forms, open befor me, and I began to ascend the mountain that 
overhang it. soon after, I enter the valley of chamounix. thi 
valley is more wonder and sublime, but not so beauti and 
picturesqu as that of servox, through which I had just passed. the 
high and snowi mountain were it immedi boundaries, but I saw no 
more ruin castl and fertil fields. immens glacier approach 
the road; I heard the rumbl thunder of the fall avalanch and 
mark the smoke of it passage. mont blanc, the suprem and 
magnific mont blanc, rais itself from the surround _aiguilles_, 
and it tremend _dôme_ overlook the valley. 

A tingl long-lost sens of pleasur often came across me dure thi 
journey. some turn in the road, some new object suddenli perceiv and 
recognised, remind me of day gone by, and were associ with the 
lightheart gaieti of boyhood. the veri wind whisper in sooth 
accents, and matern natur bade me weep no more. then again the 
kindli influenc ceas to act—i found myself fetter again to grief 
and indulg in all the miseri of reflection. then I spur on my 
animal, strive so to forget the world, my fears, and more than all, 
myself—or, in a more desper fashion, I alight and threw myself on 
the grass, weigh down by horror and despair. 

At length I arriv at the villag of chamounix. exhaust succeed 
to the extrem fatigu both of bodi and of mind which I had endured. 
for a short space of time I remain at the window watch the pallid 
lightn that play abov mont blanc and listen to the rush of 
the arve, which pursu it noisi way beneath. the same lull sound 
act as a lullabi to my too keen sensations; when I place my head 
upon my pillow, sleep crept over me; I felt it as it came and bless 
the giver of oblivion. 





chapter 10 

I spent the follow day roam through the valley. I stood besid 
the sourc of the arveiron, which take their rise in a glacier, that 
with slow pace is advanc down from the summit of the hill to 
barricad the valley. the abrupt side of vast mountain were befor 
me; the ici wall of the glacier overhung me; a few shatter pine were 
scatter around; and the solemn silenc of thi gloriou 
presence-chamb of imperi natur wa broken onli by the brawl 
wave or the fall of some vast fragment, the thunder sound of the 
avalanch or the cracking, reverber along the mountains, of the 
accumul ice, which, through the silent work of immut laws, 
wa ever and anon rent and torn, as if it had been but a playth in 
their hands. these sublim and magnific scene afford me the 
greatest consol that I wa capabl of receiving. they elev me 
from all littl of feeling, and although they did not remov my 
grief, they subdu and tranquillis it. In some degree, also, they 
divert my mind from the thought over which it had brood for the 
last month. I retir to rest at night; my slumbers, as it were, 
wait on and minist to by the assembl of grand shape which I 
had contempl dure the day. they congreg round me; the 
unstain snowi mountain-top, the glitter pinnacle, the pine woods, 
and rag bare ravine, the eagle, soar amidst the clouds—they all 
gather round me and bade me be at peace. 

where had they fled when the next morn I awoke? all of 
soul-inspirit fled with sleep, and dark melancholi cloud everi 
thought. the rain wa pour in torrents, and thick mist hid the 
summit of the mountains, so that I even saw not the face of those 
mighti friends. still I would penetr their misti veil and seek them 
in their cloudi retreats. what were rain and storm to me? My mule wa 
brought to the door, and I resolv to ascend to the summit of 
montanvert. I rememb the effect that the view of the tremend 
and ever-mov glacier had produc upon my mind when I first saw it. 
It had then fill me with a sublim ecstasi that gave wing to the 
soul and allow it to soar from the obscur world to light and joy. 
the sight of the aw and majest in natur had inde alway the 
effect of solemnis my mind and caus me to forget the pass 
care of life. I determin to go without a guide, for I wa well 
acquaint with the path, and the presenc of anoth would destroy the 
solitari grandeur of the scene. 

the ascent is precipitous, but the path is cut into continu and short 
windings, which enabl you to surmount the perpendicular of the 
mountain. It is a scene terrif desolate. In a thousand spot 
the trace of the winter avalanch may be perceived, where tree lie 
broken and strew on the ground, some entir destroyed, other bent, 
lean upon the jut rock of the mountain or transvers upon 
other trees. the path, as you ascend higher, is intersect by ravin 
of snow, down which stone continu roll from above; one of them is 
particularli dangerous, as the slightest sound, such as even speak 
in a loud voice, produc a concuss of air suffici to draw 
destruct upon the head of the speaker. the pine are not tall or 
luxuriant, but they are sombr and add an air of sever to the scene. 
I look on the valley beneath; vast mist were rise from the river 
which ran through it and curl in thick wreath around the opposit 
mountains, whose summit were hid in the uniform clouds, while rain 
pour from the dark sky and ad to the melancholi impress I 
receiv from the object around me. alas! whi doe man boast of 
sensibl superior to those appar in the brute; it onli render 
them more necessari beings. If our impuls were confin to hunger, 
thirst, and desire, we might be nearli free; but now we are move by 
everi wind that blow and a chanc word or scene that that word may 
convey to us. 

We rest; a dream ha power to poison sleep. 
We rise; one wand’r thought pollut the day. 
We feel, conceive, or reason; laugh or weep, 
embrac fond woe, or cast our care away; 
It is the same: for, be it joy or sorrow, 
the path of it departur still is free. 
man’ yesterday may ne’er be like hi morrow; 
nought may endur but mutability! 



It wa nearli noon when I arriv at the top of the ascent. for some 
time I sat upon the rock that overlook the sea of ice. A mist cover 
both that and the surround mountains. present a breez dissip 
the cloud, and I descend upon the glacier. the surfac is veri 
uneven, rise like the wave of a troubl sea, descend low, and 
interspers by rift that sink deep. the field of ice is almost a 
leagu in width, but I spent nearli two hour in cross it. the 
opposit mountain is a bare perpendicular rock. from the side where I 
now stood montanvert wa exactli opposite, at the distanc of a league; 
and abov it rose mont blanc, in aw majesty. I remain in a recess 
of the rock, gaze on thi wonder and stupend scene. the sea, 
or rather the vast river of ice, wound among it depend mountains, 
whose aerial summit hung over it recesses. their ici and glitter 
peak shone in the sunlight over the clouds. My heart, which wa 
befor sorrowful, now swell with someth like joy; I exclaimed, 
“wander spirits, if inde ye wander, and do not rest in your narrow 
beds, allow me thi faint happiness, or take me, as your companion, 
away from the joy of life.” 

As I said thi I suddenli beheld the figur of a man, at some distance, 
advanc toward me with superhuman speed. He bound over the 
crevic in the ice, among which I had walk with caution; hi 
stature, also, as he approached, seem to exceed that of man. I wa 
troubled; a mist came over my eyes, and I felt a faint seiz me, 
but I wa quickli restor by the cold gale of the mountains. I 
perceived, as the shape came nearer (sight tremend and abhorred!) 
that it wa the wretch whom I had created. I trembl with rage and 
horror, resolv to wait hi approach and then close with him in 
mortal combat. He approached; hi counten bespok bitter anguish, 
combin with disdain and malignity, while it unearthli ugli 
render it almost too horribl for human eyes. but I scarc 
observ this; rage and hatr had at first depriv me of utterance, 
and I recov onli to overwhelm him with word express of furiou 
detest and contempt. 

“devil,” I exclaimed, “do you dare approach me? and do 
not you fear the fierc vengeanc of my arm wreak on your miser head? 
begone, vile insect! Or rather, stay, that I may trampl you to dust! and, 
oh! that I could, with the extinct of your miser existence, restor 
those victim whom you have so diabol murdered!” 

“I expect thi reception,” said the dæmon. “all men hate the 
wretched; how, then, must I be hated, who am miser beyond all 
live things! yet you, my creator, detest and spurn me, thi creature, 
to whom thou art bound by tie onli dissolubl by the annihil of 
one of us. you purpos to kill me. how dare you sport thu with life? 
Do your duti toward me, and I will do mine toward you and the rest of 
mankind. If you will compli with my conditions, I will leav them and 
you at peace; but if you refuse, I will glut the maw of death, until it 
be satiat with the blood of your remain friends.” 

“abhor monster! fiend that thou art! the tortur of hell are too 
mild a vengeanc for thi crimes. wretch devil! you reproach me with 
your creation, come on, then, that I may extinguish the spark which I 
so neglig bestowed.” 

My rage wa without bounds; I sprang on him, impel by all the 
feel which can arm one be against the exist of another. 

He easili elud me and said, 

“be calm! I entreat you to hear me befor you give vent to your hatr 
on my devot head. have I not suffer enough, that you seek to 
increas my misery? life, although it may onli be an accumul of 
anguish, is dear to me, and I will defend it. remember, thou hast made 
me more power than thyself; my height is superior to thine, my 
joint more supple. but I will not be tempt to set myself in 
opposit to thee. I am thi creature, and I will be even mild and 
docil to my natur lord and king if thou wilt also perform thi part, 
the which thou owest me. oh, frankenstein, be not equit to everi 
other and trampl upon me alone, to whom thi justice, and even thi 
clemenc and affection, is most due. rememb that I am thi creature; 
I ought to be thi adam, but I am rather the fallen angel, whom thou 
drivest from joy for no misdeed. everywher I see bliss, from which I 
alon am irrevoc excluded. I wa benevol and good; miseri made 
me a fiend. make me happy, and I shall again be virtuous.” 

“begone! I will not hear you. there can be no commun between you 
and me; we are enemies. begone, or let us tri our strength in a fight, 
in which one must fall.” 

“how can I move thee? will no entreati caus thee to turn a 
favour eye upon thi creature, who implor thi good and 
compassion? believ me, frankenstein, I wa benevolent; my soul glow 
with love and humanity; but am I not alone, miser alone? you, my 
creator, abhor me; what hope can I gather from your fellow creatures, 
who owe me nothing? they spurn and hate me. the desert mountain and 
dreari glacier are my refuge. I have wander here mani days; the 
cave of ice, which I onli do not fear, are a dwell to me, and the 
onli one which man doe not grudge. these bleak sky I hail, for they 
are kinder to me than your fellow beings. If the multitud of mankind 
knew of my existence, they would do as you do, and arm themselv for 
my destruction. shall I not then hate them who abhor me? I will keep 
no term with my enemies. I am miserable, and they shall share my 
wretchedness. yet it is in your power to recompens me, and deliv 
them from an evil which it onli remain for you to make so great, that 
not onli you and your family, but thousand of others, shall be 
swallow up in the whirlwind of it rage. let your compass be 
moved, and do not disdain me. listen to my tale; when you have heard 
that, abandon or commiser me, as you shall judg that I deserve. 
but hear me. the guilti are allowed, by human laws, bloodi as they 
are, to speak in their own defenc befor they are condemned. listen 
to me, frankenstein. you accus me of murder, and yet you would, with 
a satisfi conscience, destroy your own creature. oh, prais the 
etern justic of man! yet I ask you not to spare me; listen to me, 
and then, if you can, and if you will, destroy the work of your hands.” 

“whi do you call to my remembrance,” I rejoined, “circumst of 
which I shudder to reflect, that I have been the miser origin and 
author? curs be the day, abhor devil, in which you first saw 
light! curs (although I curs myself) be the hand that form you! 
you have made me wretch beyond expression. you have left me no power 
to consid whether I am just to you or not. begone! reliev me from 
the sight of your detest form.” 

“thu I reliev thee, my creator,” he said, and place hi hate hand 
befor my eyes, which I flung from me with violence; “thu I take from 
thee a sight which you abhor. still thou canst listen to me and grant 
me thi compassion. By the virtu that I onc possessed, I demand thi 
from you. hear my tale; it is long and strange, and the temperatur of 
thi place is not fit to your fine sensations; come to the hut upon 
the mountain. the sun is yet high in the heavens; befor it descend 
to hide itself behind your snowi precipic and illumin anoth 
world, you will have heard my stori and can decide. On you it rests, 
whether I quit for ever the neighbourhood of man and lead a harmless 
life, or becom the scourg of your fellow creatur and the author of 
your own speedi ruin.” 

As he said thi he led the way across the ice; I followed. My heart 
wa full, and I did not answer him, but as I proceeded, I weigh the 
variou argument that he had use and determin at least to listen to 
hi tale. I wa partli urg by curiosity, and compass confirm my 
resolution. I had hitherto suppos him to be the murder of my 
brother, and I eagerli sought a confirm or denial of thi opinion. 
for the first time, also, I felt what the duti of a creator toward 
hi creatur were, and that I ought to render him happi befor I 
complain of hi wickedness. these motiv urg me to compli with 
hi demand. We cross the ice, therefore, and ascend the opposit 
rock. the air wa cold, and the rain again began to descend; we 
enter the hut, the fiend with an air of exultation, I with a heavi 
heart and depress spirits. but I consent to listen, and seat 
myself by the fire which my odiou companion had lighted, he thu began 
hi tale. 





chapter 11 

“it is with consider difficulti that I rememb the origin era of 
my being; all the event of that period appear confus and indistinct. 
A strang multipl of sensat seiz me, and I saw, felt, heard, 
and smelt at the same time; and it was, indeed, a long time befor I 
learn to distinguish between the oper of my variou senses. By 
degrees, I remember, a stronger light press upon my nerves, so that I 
wa oblig to shut my eyes. dark then came over me and troubl 
me, but hardli had I felt thi when, by open my eyes, as I now 
suppose, the light pour in upon me again. I walk and, I believe, 
descended, but I present found a great alter in my sensations. 
before, dark and opaqu bodi had surround me, impervi to my 
touch or sight; but I now found that I could wander on at liberty, with 
no obstacl which I could not either surmount or avoid. the light 
becam more and more oppress to me, and the heat weari me as I 
walked, I sought a place where I could receiv shade. thi wa the 
forest near ingolstadt; and here I lay by the side of a brook rest 
from my fatigue, until I felt torment by hunger and thirst. thi 
rous me from my nearli dormant state, and I ate some berri which I 
found hang on the tree or lie on the ground. I slake my thirst 
at the brook, and then lie down, wa overcom by sleep. 

“it wa dark when I awoke; I felt cold also, and half frightened, as it 
were, instinctively, find myself so desolate. befor I had quit 
your apartment, on a sensat of cold, I had cover myself with some 
clothes, but these were insuffici to secur me from the dew of 
night. I wa a poor, helpless, miser wretch; I knew, and could 
distinguish, nothing; but feel pain invad me on all sides, I sat 
down and wept. 

“soon a gentl light stole over the heaven and gave me a sensat of 
pleasure. I start up and beheld a radiant form rise from among the 
trees. [the moon] I gaze with a kind of wonder. It move slowly, 
but it enlighten my path, and I again went out in search of berries. 
I wa still cold when under one of the tree I found a huge cloak, with 
which I cover myself, and sat down upon the ground. No distinct 
idea occupi my mind; all wa confused. I felt light, and hunger, 
and thirst, and darkness; innumer sound rang in my ears, and on 
all side variou scent salut me; the onli object that I could 
distinguish wa the bright moon, and I fix my eye on that with 
pleasure. 

“sever chang of day and night passed, and the orb of night had 
greatli lessened, when I began to distinguish my sensat from each 
other. I gradual saw plainli the clear stream that suppli me with 
drink and the tree that shade me with their foliage. I wa delight 
when I first discov that a pleasant sound, which often salut my 
ears, proceed from the throat of the littl wing anim who had 
often intercept the light from my eyes. I began also to observe, 
with greater accuracy, the form that surround me and to perceiv the 
boundari of the radiant roof of light which canopi me. sometim I 
tri to imit the pleasant song of the bird but wa unable. 
sometim I wish to express my sensat in my own mode, but the 
uncouth and inarticul sound which broke from me frighten me into 
silenc again. 

“the moon had disappear from the night, and again, with a lessen 
form, show itself, while I still remain in the forest. My 
sensat had by thi time becom distinct, and my mind receiv everi 
day addit ideas. My eye becam accustom to the light and to 
perceiv object in their right forms; I distinguish the insect from 
the herb, and by degrees, one herb from another. I found that the 
sparrow utter none but harsh notes, whilst those of the blackbird and 
thrush were sweet and enticing. 

“one day, when I wa oppress by cold, I found a fire which had been 
left by some wander beggars, and wa overcom with delight at the 
warmth I experienc from it. In my joy I thrust my hand into the live 
embers, but quickli drew it out again with a cri of pain. how strange, 
I thought, that the same caus should produc such opposit effects! I 
examin the materi of the fire, and to my joy found it to be 
compos of wood. I quickli collect some branches, but they were wet 
and would not burn. I wa pain at thi and sat still watch the 
oper of the fire. the wet wood which I had place near the heat 
dri and itself becam inflamed. I reflect on this, and by touch 
the variou branches, I discov the caus and busi myself in 
collect a great quantiti of wood, that I might dri it and have a 
plenti suppli of fire. when night came on and brought sleep with 
it, I wa in the greatest fear lest my fire should be extinguished. I 
cover it care with dri wood and leav and place wet branch 
upon it; and then, spread my cloak, I lay on the ground and sank 
into sleep. 

“it wa morn when I awoke, and my first care wa to visit the fire. 
I uncov it, and a gentl breez quickli fan it into a flame. I 
observ thi also and contriv a fan of branches, which rous the 
ember when they were nearli extinguished. when night came again I 
found, with pleasure, that the fire gave light as well as heat and that 
the discoveri of thi element wa use to me in my food, for I found 
some of the offal that the travel had left had been roasted, and 
tast much more savouri than the berri I gather from the trees. I 
tried, therefore, to dress my food in the same manner, place it on 
the live embers. I found that the berri were spoil by thi 
operation, and the nut and root much improved. 

“food, however, becam scarce, and I often spent the whole day 
search in vain for a few acorn to assuag the pang of hunger. when 
I found this, I resolv to quit the place that I had hitherto 
inhabited, to seek for one where the few want I experienc would be 
more easili satisfied. In thi emigr I exceedingli lament the 
loss of the fire which I had obtain through accid and knew not how 
to reproduc it. I gave sever hour to the seriou consider of 
thi difficulty, but I wa oblig to relinquish all attempt to suppli 
it, and wrap myself up in my cloak, I struck across the wood 
toward the set sun. I pass three day in these rambl and at 
length discov the open country. A great fall of snow had taken 
place the night before, and the field were of one uniform white; the 
appear wa disconsolate, and I found my feet chill by the cold 
damp substanc that cover the ground. 

“it wa about seven in the morning, and I long to obtain food and 
shelter; at length I perceiv a small hut, on a rise ground, which 
had doubtless been built for the conveni of some shepherd. thi 
wa a new sight to me, and I examin the structur with great 
curiosity. find the door open, I entered. An old man sat in it, 
near a fire, over which he wa prepar hi breakfast. He turn on 
hear a noise, and perceiv me, shriek loudly, and quit the 
hut, ran across the field with a speed of which hi debilit form 
hardli appear capable. hi appearance, differ from ani I had ever 
befor seen, and hi flight somewhat surpris me. but I wa enchant 
by the appear of the hut; here the snow and rain could not 
penetrate; the ground wa dry; and it present to me then as exquisit 
and divin a retreat as pandæmonium appear to the dæmon of hell 
after their suffer in the lake of fire. I greedili devour the 
remnant of the shepherd’ breakfast, which consist of bread, cheese, 
milk, and wine; the latter, however, I did not like. then, overcom by 
fatigue, I lay down among some straw and fell asleep. 

“it wa noon when I awoke, and allur by the warmth of the sun, which 
shone brightli on the white ground, I determin to recomm my 
travels; and, deposit the remain of the peasant’ breakfast in a 
wallet I found, I proceed across the field for sever hours, until 
at sunset I arriv at a village. how miracul did thi appear! the 
huts, the neater cottages, and state hous engag my admir by 
turns. the veget in the gardens, the milk and chees that I saw 
place at the window of some of the cottages, allur my appetite. one 
of the best of these I entered, but I had hardli place my foot within 
the door befor the children shrieked, and one of the women fainted. 
the whole villag wa roused; some fled, some attack me, until, 
grievous bruis by stone and mani other kind of missil weapons, I 
escap to the open countri and fear took refug in a low hovel, 
quit bare, and make a wretch appear after the palac I had 
beheld in the village. thi hovel however, join a cottag of a neat 
and pleasant appearance, but after my late dearli bought experience, I 
dare not enter it. My place of refug wa construct of wood, but so 
low that I could with difficulti sit upright in it. No wood, however, 
wa place on the earth, which form the floor, but it wa dry; and 
although the wind enter it by innumer chinks, I found it an 
agreeabl asylum from the snow and rain. 

“here, then, I retreat and lay down happi to have found a shelter, 
howev miserable, from the inclem of the season, and still more 
from the barbar of man. As soon as morn dawn I crept from my 
kennel, that I might view the adjac cottag and discov if I could 
remain in the habit I had found. It wa situat against the back 
of the cottag and surround on the side which were expos by a pig 
sti and a clear pool of water. one part wa open, and by that I had 
crept in; but now I cover everi crevic by which I might be perceiv 
with stone and wood, yet in such a manner that I might move them on 
occas to pass out; all the light I enjoy came through the sty, and 
that wa suffici for me. 

“have thu arrang my dwell and carpet it with clean straw, I 
retired, for I saw the figur of a man at a distance, and I rememb 
too well my treatment the night befor to trust myself in hi power. I 
had first, however, provid for my susten for that day by a loaf 
of coars bread, which I purloined, and a cup with which I could drink 
more conveni than from my hand of the pure water which flow by 
my retreat. the floor wa a littl raised, so that it wa kept 
perfectli dry, and by it vicin to the chimney of the cottag it wa 
toler warm. 

“be thu provided, I resolv to resid in thi hovel until 
someth should occur which might alter my determination. It wa 
inde a paradis compar to the bleak forest, my former residence, 
the rain-drop branches, and dank earth. I ate my breakfast with 
pleasur and wa about to remov a plank to procur myself a littl 
water when I heard a step, and look through a small chink, I beheld 
a young creature, with a pail on her head, pass befor my hovel. the 
girl wa young and of gentl demeanour, unlik what I have sinc found 
cottag and farmhous servant to be. yet she wa meanli dressed, a 
coars blue petticoat and a linen jacket be her onli garb; her fair 
hair wa plait but not adorned: she look patient yet sad. I lost 
sight of her, and in about a quarter of an hour she return bear 
the pail, which wa now partli fill with milk. As she walk along, 
seemingli incommod by the burden, a young man met her, whose 
counten express a deeper despondence. utter a few sound with 
an air of melancholy, he took the pail from her head and bore it to the 
cottag himself. she followed, and they disappeared. present I saw 
the young man again, with some tool in hi hand, cross the field 
behind the cottage; and the girl wa also busied, sometim in the 
hous and sometim in the yard. 

“on examin my dwelling, I found that one of the window of the 
cottag had formerli occupi a part of it, but the pane had been 
fill up with wood. In one of these wa a small and almost 
impercept chink through which the eye could just penetrate. 
through thi crevic a small room wa visible, whitewash and clean 
but veri bare of furniture. In one corner, near a small fire, sat an 
old man, lean hi head on hi hand in a disconsol attitude. the 
young girl wa occupi in arrang the cottage; but present she 
took someth out of a drawer, which employ her hands, and she sat 
down besid the old man, who, take up an instrument, began to play 
and to produc sound sweeter than the voic of the thrush or the 
nightingale. It wa a love sight, even to me, poor wretch who had 
never beheld aught beauti before. the silver hair and benevol 
counten of the age cottag won my reverence, while the gentl 
manner of the girl entic my love. He play a sweet mourn air 
which I perceiv drew tear from the eye of hi amiabl companion, of 
which the old man took no notice, until she sob audibly; he then 
pronounc a few sounds, and the fair creature, leav her work, knelt 
at hi feet. He rais her and smile with such kind and affect 
that I felt sensat of a peculiar and overpow nature; they were 
a mixtur of pain and pleasure, such as I had never befor experienced, 
either from hunger or cold, warmth or food; and I withdrew from the 
window, unabl to bear these emotions. 

“soon after thi the young man returned, bear on hi shoulder a 
load of wood. the girl met him at the door, help to reliev him of 
hi burden, and take some of the fuel into the cottage, place it on 
the fire; then she and the youth went apart into a nook of the cottage, 
and he show her a larg loaf and a piec of cheese. she seem 
pleas and went into the garden for some root and plants, which she 
place in water, and then upon the fire. she afterward continu her 
work, whilst the young man went into the garden and appear busili 
employ in dig and pull up roots. after he had been employ 
thu about an hour, the young woman join him and they enter the 
cottag together. 

“the old man had, in the meantime, been pensive, but on the appear 
of hi companion he assum a more cheer air, and they sat down to 
eat. the meal wa quickli dispatched. the young woman wa again 
occupi in arrang the cottage, the old man walk befor the 
cottag in the sun for a few minutes, lean on the arm of the youth. 
noth could exceed in beauti the contrast between these two excel 
creatures. one wa old, with silver hair and a counten beam 
with benevol and love; the younger wa slight and grace in hi 
figure, and hi featur were mould with the finest symmetry, yet hi 
eye and attitud express the utmost sad and despondency. the 
old man return to the cottage, and the youth, with tool differ 
from those he had use in the morning, direct hi step across the 
fields. 

“night quickli shut in, but to my extrem wonder, I found that the 
cottag had a mean of prolong light by the use of tapers, and wa 
delight to find that the set of the sun did not put an end to the 
pleasur I experienc in watch my human neighbours. In the even 
the young girl and her companion were employ in variou occup 
which I did not understand; and the old man again took up the 
instrument which produc the divin sound that had enchant me in 
the morning. So soon as he had finished, the youth began, not to play, 
but to utter sound that were monotonous, and neither resembl the 
harmoni of the old man’ instrument nor the song of the birds; I sinc 
found that he read aloud, but at that time I knew noth of the 
scienc of word or letters. 

“the family, after have been thu occupi for a short time, 
extinguish their light and retired, as I conjectured, to rest.” 





chapter 12 

“I lay on my straw, but I could not sleep. I thought of the 
occurr of the day. what chiefli struck me wa the gentl manner 
of these people, and I long to join them, but dare not. I 
rememb too well the treatment I had suffer the night befor from 
the barbar villagers, and resolved, whatev cours of conduct I 
might hereaft think it right to pursue, that for the present I would 
remain quietli in my hovel, watch and endeavour to discov the 
motiv which influenc their actions. 

“the cottag aros the next morn befor the sun. the young woman 
arrang the cottag and prepar the food, and the youth depart 
after the first meal. 

“thi day wa pass in the same routin as that which preced it. 
the young man wa constantli employ out of doors, and the girl in 
variou labori occup within. the old man, whom I soon 
perceiv to be blind, employ hi leisur hour on hi instrument or 
in contemplation. noth could exceed the love and respect which the 
younger cottag exhibit toward their vener companion. they 
perform toward him everi littl offic of affect and duti with 
gentleness, and he reward them by hi benevol smiles. 

“they were not entir happy. the young man and hi companion often 
went apart and appear to weep. I saw no caus for their unhappiness, 
but I wa deepli affect by it. If such love creatur were 
miserable, it wa less strang that I, an imperfect and solitari being, 
should be wretched. yet whi were these gentl be unhappy? they 
possess a delight hous (for such it wa in my eyes) and everi 
luxury; they had a fire to warm them when chill and delici viand 
when hungry; they were dress in excel clothes; and, still more, 
they enjoy one another’ compani and speech, interchang each day 
look of affect and kindness. what did their tear imply? did they 
realli express pain? I wa at first unabl to solv these questions, 
but perpetu attent and time explain to me mani appear which 
were at first enigmatic. 

“A consider period elaps befor I discov one of the caus of 
the uneasi of thi amiabl family: it wa poverty, and they 
suffer that evil in a veri distress degree. their nourish 
consist entir of the veget of their garden and the milk of 
one cow, which gave veri littl dure the winter, when it master 
could scarc procur food to support it. they often, I believe, 
suffer the pang of hunger veri poignantly, especi the two 
younger cottagers, for sever time they place food befor the old 
man when they reserv none for themselves. 

“thi trait of kind move me sensibly. I had been accustomed, 
dure the night, to steal a part of their store for my own 
consumption, but when I found that in do thi I inflict pain on 
the cottagers, I abstain and satisfi myself with berries, nuts, and 
root which I gather from a neighbour wood. 

“I discov also anoth mean through which I wa enabl to assist 
their labours. I found that the youth spent a great part of each day 
in collect wood for the famili fire, and dure the night I often 
took hi tools, the use of which I quickli discovered, and brought home 
fire suffici for the consumpt of sever days. 

“I remember, the first time that I did this, the young woman, when she 
open the door in the morning, appear greatli astonish on see a great 
pile of wood on the outside. she utter some word in a loud voice, and the 
youth join her, who also express surprise. I observed, with pleasure, 
that he did not go to the forest that day, but spent it in repair the 
cottag and cultiv the garden. 

“bi degre I made a discoveri of still greater moment. I found that 
these peopl possess a method of commun their experi and 
feel to one anoth by articul sounds. I perceiv that the word 
they spoke sometim produc pleasur or pain, smile or sadness, in the 
mind and counten of the hearers. thi wa inde a godlik science, 
and I ardent desir to becom acquaint with it. but I wa baffl in 
everi attempt I made for thi purpose. their pronunci wa quick, and 
the word they uttered, not have ani appar connect with visibl 
objects, I wa unabl to discov ani clue by which I could unravel the 
mysteri of their reference. By great application, however, and after have 
remain dure the space of sever revolut of the moon in my hovel, I 
discov the name that were given to some of the most familiar object of 
discourse; I learn and appli the words, _fire, milk, bread,_ and 
_wood._ I learn also the name of the cottag themselves. the youth 
and hi companion had each of them sever names, but the old man had onli 
one, which wa _father._ the girl wa call _sister_ or 
_agatha,_ and the youth _felix, brother,_ or _son_. I cannot 
describ the delight I felt when I learn the idea appropri to each of 
these sound and wa abl to pronounc them. I distinguish sever other 
word without be abl as yet to understand or appli them, such as _good, 
dearest, unhappy._ 

“I spent the winter in thi manner. the gentl manner and beauti of 
the cottag greatli endear them to me; when they were unhappy, I 
felt depressed; when they rejoiced, I sympathis in their joys. I saw 
few human be besid them, and if ani other happen to enter the 
cottage, their harsh manner and rude gait onli enhanc to me the 
superior accomplish of my friends. the old man, I could perceive, 
often endeavour to encourag hi children, as sometim I found that 
he call them, to cast off their melancholy. He would talk in a 
cheer accent, with an express of good that bestow pleasur 
even upon me. agatha listen with respect, her eye sometim fill 
with tears, which she endeavour to wipe away unperceived; but I 
gener found that her counten and tone were more cheer after 
have listen to the exhort of her father. It wa not thu 
with felix. He wa alway the saddest of the group, and even to my 
unpractis senses, he appear to have suffer more deepli than hi 
friends. but if hi counten wa more sorrowful, hi voic wa more 
cheer than that of hi sister, especi when he address the old 
man. 

“I could mention innumer instanc which, although slight, mark 
the disposit of these amiabl cottagers. In the midst of poverti 
and want, felix carri with pleasur to hi sister the first littl 
white flower that peep out from beneath the snowi ground. earli in 
the morning, befor she had risen, he clear away the snow that 
obstruct her path to the milk-house, drew water from the well, and 
brought the wood from the outhouse, where, to hi perpetu 
astonishment, he found hi store alway replenish by an invis 
hand. In the day, I believe, he work sometim for a neighbour 
farmer, becaus he often went forth and did not return until dinner, 
yet brought no wood with him. At other time he work in the garden, 
but as there wa littl to do in the frosti season, he read to the old 
man and agatha. 

“thi read had puzzl me extrem at first, but by degre I 
discov that he utter mani of the same sound when he read as when 
he talked. I conjectured, therefore, that he found on the paper sign 
for speech which he understood, and I ardent long to comprehend 
these also; but how wa that possibl when I did not even understand 
the sound for which they stood as signs? I improved, however, 
sensibl in thi science, but not suffici to follow up ani kind of 
conversation, although I appli my whole mind to the endeavour, for I 
easili perceiv that, although I eagerli long to discov myself to 
the cottagers, I ought not to make the attempt until I had first becom 
master of their language, which knowledg might enabl me to make them 
overlook the deform of my figure, for with thi also the contrast 
perpetu present to my eye had made me acquainted. 

“I had admir the perfect form of my cottagers—their grace, beauty, 
and delic complexions; but how wa I terrifi when I view myself 
in a transpar pool! At first I start back, unabl to believ that 
it wa inde I who wa reflect in the mirror; and when I becam 
fulli convinc that I wa in realiti the monster that I am, I wa 
fill with the bitterest sensat of despond and mortification. 
alas! I did not yet entir know the fatal effect of thi miser 
deformity. 

“a the sun becam warmer and the light of day longer, the snow 
vanished, and I beheld the bare tree and the black earth. from thi 
time felix wa more employed, and the heart-mov indic of 
impend famin disappeared. their food, as I afterward found, wa 
coarse, but it wa wholesome; and they procur a suffici of it. 
sever new kind of plant sprang up in the garden, which they 
dressed; and these sign of comfort increas daili as the season 
advanced. 

“the old man, lean on hi son, walk each day at noon, when it did 
not rain, as I found it wa call when the heaven pour forth it 
waters. thi frequent took place, but a high wind quickli dri the 
earth, and the season becam far more pleasant than it had been. 

“mi mode of life in my hovel wa uniform. dure the morn I 
attend the motion of the cottagers, and when they were dispers in 
variou occupations, I slept; the remaind of the day wa spent in 
observ my friends. when they had retir to rest, if there wa ani 
moon or the night wa star-light, I went into the wood and collect 
my own food and fuel for the cottage. when I returned, as often as it 
wa necessary, I clear their path from the snow and perform those 
offic that I had seen done by felix. I afterward found that these 
labours, perform by an invis hand, greatli astonish them; and 
onc or twice I heard them, on these occasions, utter the word _good 
spirit, wonderful_; but I did not then understand the signif 
of these terms. 

“mi thought now becam more active, and I long to discov the 
motiv and feel of these love creatures; I wa inquisit to 
know whi felix appear so miser and agatha so sad. I thought 
(foolish wretch!) that it might be in my power to restor happi to 
these deserv people. when I slept or wa absent, the form of the 
vener blind father, the gentl agatha, and the excel felix 
flit befor me. I look upon them as superior be who would be 
the arbit of my futur destiny. I form in my imagin a 
thousand pictur of present myself to them, and their recept of 
me. I imagin that they would be disgusted, until, by my gentl 
demeanour and concili words, I should first win their favour and 
afterward their love. 

“these thought exhilar me and led me to appli with fresh ardour to 
the acquir the art of language. My organ were inde harsh, but 
supple; and although my voic wa veri unlik the soft music of their 
tones, yet I pronounc such word as I understood with toler ease. 
It wa as the ass and the lap-dog; yet sure the gentl ass whose 
intent were affectionate, although hi manner were rude, deserv 
better treatment than blow and execration. 

“the pleasant shower and genial warmth of spring greatli alter the 
aspect of the earth. men who befor thi chang seem to have been 
hid in cave dispers themselv and were employ in variou art of 
cultivation. the bird sang in more cheer notes, and the leav 
began to bud forth on the trees. happy, happi earth! fit habit 
for gods, which, so short a time before, wa bleak, damp, and 
unwholesome. My spirit were elev by the enchant appear of 
nature; the past wa blot from my memory, the present wa tranquil, 
and the futur gild by bright ray of hope and anticip of joy.” 





chapter 13 

“I now hasten to the more move part of my story. I shall relat 
event that impress me with feel which, from what I had been, 
have made me what I am. 

“spring advanc rapidly; the weather becam fine and the sky 
cloudless. It surpris me that what befor wa desert and gloomi 
should now bloom with the most beauti flower and verdure. My 
sens were gratifi and refresh by a thousand scent of delight and 
a thousand sight of beauty. 

“it wa on one of these days, when my cottag period rest 
from labour—th old man play on hi guitar, and the children 
listen to him—that I observ the counten of felix wa 
melancholi beyond expression; he sigh frequently, and onc hi father 
paus in hi music, and I conjectur by hi manner that he inquir 
the caus of hi son’ sorrow. felix repli in a cheer accent, and 
the old man wa recommenc hi music when someon tap at the door. 

“it wa a ladi on horseback, accompani by a country-man as a guide. 
the ladi wa dress in a dark suit and cover with a thick black 
veil. agatha ask a question, to which the stranger onli repli by 
pronouncing, in a sweet accent, the name of felix. her voic wa 
music but unlik that of either of my friends. On hear thi word, 
felix came up hastili to the lady, who, when she saw him, threw up her 
veil, and I beheld a counten of angel beauti and expression. her 
hair of a shine raven black, and curious braided; her eye were 
dark, but gentle, although animated; her featur of a regular 
proportion, and her complexion wondrous fair, each cheek ting with 
a love pink. 

“felix seem ravish with delight when he saw her, everi trait of 
sorrow vanish from hi face, and it instantli express a degre of 
ecstat joy, of which I could hardli have believ it capable; hi 
eye sparkled, as hi cheek flush with pleasure; and at that moment I 
thought him as beauti as the stranger. she appear affect by 
differ feelings; wipe a few tear from her love eyes, she held 
out her hand to felix, who kiss it raptur and call her, as 
well as I could distinguish, hi sweet arabian. she did not appear to 
understand him, but smiled. He assist her to dismount, and 
dismiss her guide, conduct her into the cottage. some 
convers took place between him and hi father, and the young 
stranger knelt at the old man’ feet and would have kiss hi hand, 
but he rais her and embrac her affectionately. 

“I soon perceiv that although the stranger utter articul sound 
and appear to have a languag of her own, she wa neither understood 
by nor herself understood the cottagers. they made mani sign which I 
did not comprehend, but I saw that her presenc diffus glad 
through the cottage, dispel their sorrow as the sun dissip the 
morn mists. felix seem peculiarli happi and with smile of 
delight welcom hi arabian. agatha, the ever-gentl agatha, kiss 
the hand of the love stranger, and point to her brother, made 
sign which appear to me to mean that he had been sorrow until she 
came. some hour pass thus, while they, by their countenances, 
express joy, the caus of which I did not comprehend. present I 
found, by the frequent recurr of some sound which the stranger 
repeat after them, that she wa endeavour to learn their language; 
and the idea instantli occur to me that I should make use of the 
same instruct to the same end. the stranger learn about twenti 
word at the first lesson; most of them, indeed, were those which I had 
befor understood, but I profit by the others. 

“a night came on, agatha and the arabian retir early. when they 
separ felix kiss the hand of the stranger and said, ‘good night 
sweet safie.’ He sat up much longer, convers with hi father, and 
by the frequent repetit of her name I conjectur that their love 
guest wa the subject of their conversation. I ardent desir to 
understand them, and bent everi faculti toward that purpose, but found 
it utterli impossible. 

“the next morn felix went out to hi work, and after the usual 
occup of agatha were finished, the arabian sat at the feet of the 
old man, and take hi guitar, play some air so entrancingli 
beauti that they at onc drew tear of sorrow and delight from my 
eyes. she sang, and her voic flow in a rich cadence, swell or 
die away like a nightingal of the woods. 

“when she had finished, she gave the guitar to agatha, who at first 
declin it. she play a simpl air, and her voic accompani it in 
sweet accents, but unlik the wondrou strain of the stranger. the old 
man appear enraptur and said some word which agatha endeavour to 
explain to safie, and by which he appear to wish to express that she 
bestow on him the greatest delight by her music. 

“the day now pass as peaceabl as before, with the sole alter 
that joy had taken place of sad in the counten of my friends. 
safi wa alway gay and happy; she and I improv rapidli in the 
knowledg of language, so that in two month I began to comprehend most 
of the word utter by my protectors. 

“in the meanwhil also the black ground wa cover with herbage, and 
the green bank interspers with innumer flowers, sweet to the 
scent and the eyes, star of pale radianc among the moonlight woods; 
the sun becam warmer, the night clear and balmy; and my nocturn 
rambl were an extrem pleasur to me, although they were consider 
shorten by the late set and earli rise of the sun, for I never 
ventur abroad dure daylight, fear of meet with the same 
treatment I had formerli endur in the first villag which I entered. 

“mi day were spent in close attention, that I might more speedili 
master the language; and I may boast that I improv more rapidli than 
the arabian, who understood veri littl and convers in broken 
accents, whilst I comprehend and could imit almost everi word that 
wa spoken. 

“while I improv in speech, I also learn the scienc of letter as 
it wa taught to the stranger, and thi open befor me a wide field 
for wonder and delight. 

“the book from which felix instruct safi wa volney’ _ruin 
of empires_. I should not have understood the purport of thi book had not 
felix, in read it, given veri minut explanations. He had chosen thi 
work, he said, becaus the declamatori style wa frame in imit of the 
eastern authors. through thi work I obtain a cursori knowledg of histori 
and a view of the sever empir at present exist in the world; it gave 
me an insight into the manners, governments, and religion of the differ 
nation of the earth. I heard of the sloth asiatics, of the stupend 
geniu and mental activ of the grecians, of the war and wonder virtu 
of the earli romans—of their subsequ degenerating—of the 
declin of that mighti empire, of chivalry, christianity, and kings. I heard 
of the discoveri of the american hemispher and wept with safi over the 
hapless fate of it origin inhabitants. 

“these wonder narrat inspir me with strang feelings. wa 
man, indeed, at onc so powerful, so virtuou and magnificent, yet so 
viciou and base? He appear at one time a mere scion of the evil 
principl and at anoth as all that can be conceiv of nobl and 
godlike. To be a great and virtuou man appear the highest honour 
that can befal a sensit being; to be base and vicious, as mani on 
record have been, appear the lowest degradation, a condit more 
abject than that of the blind mole or harmless worm. for a long time I 
could not conceiv how one man could go forth to murder hi fellow, or 
even whi there were law and governments; but when I heard detail of 
vice and bloodshed, my wonder ceas and I turn away with disgust and 
loathing. 

“everi convers of the cottag now open new wonder to me. 
while I listen to the instruct which felix bestow upon the 
arabian, the strang system of human societi wa explain to me. I 
heard of the divis of property, of immens wealth and squalid 
poverty, of rank, descent, and nobl blood. 

“the word induc me to turn toward myself. I learn that the 
possess most esteem by your fellow creatur were high and 
unsulli descent unit with riches. A man might be respect with 
onli one of these advantages, but without either he wa considered, 
except in veri rare instances, as a vagabond and a slave, doom to 
wast hi power for the profit of the chosen few! and what wa I? Of 
my creation and creator I wa absolut ignorant, but I knew that I 
possess no money, no friends, no kind of property. I was, besides, 
endu with a figur hideous deform and loathsome; I wa not even 
of the same natur as man. I wa more agil than they and could 
subsist upon coarser diet; I bore the extrem of heat and cold with 
less injuri to my frame; my statur far exceed theirs. when I look 
around I saw and heard of none like me. wa I, then, a monster, a blot 
upon the earth, from which all men fled and whom all men disowned? 

“I cannot describ to you the agoni that these reflect inflict 
upon me; I tri to dispel them, but sorrow onli increas with 
knowledge. oh, that I had for ever remain in my nativ wood, nor 
known nor felt beyond the sensat of hunger, thirst, and heat! 

“of what a strang natur is knowledge! It cling to the mind when it 
ha onc seiz on it like a lichen on the rock. I wish sometim to 
shake off all thought and feeling, but I learn that there wa but one 
mean to overcom the sensat of pain, and that wa death—a state 
which I fear yet did not understand. I admir virtu and good 
feel and love the gentl manner and amiabl qualiti of my 
cottagers, but I wa shut out from intercours with them, except 
through mean which I obtain by stealth, when I wa unseen and 
unknown, and which rather increas than satisfi the desir I had of 
becom one among my fellows. the gentl word of agatha and the 
anim smile of the charm arabian were not for me. the mild 
exhort of the old man and the live convers of the love 
felix were not for me. miserable, unhappi wretch! 

“other lesson were impress upon me even more deeply. I heard of the 
differ of sexes, and the birth and growth of children, how the 
father dote on the smile of the infant, and the live salli of the 
older child, how all the life and care of the mother were wrap up 
in the preciou charge, how the mind of youth expand and gain 
knowledge, of brother, sister, and all the variou relationship which 
bind one human be to anoth in mutual bonds. 

“but where were my friend and relations? No father had watch my 
infant days, no mother had bless me with smile and caresses; or if 
they had, all my past life wa now a blot, a blind vacanc in which I 
distinguish nothing. from my earliest remembr I had been as I 
then wa in height and proportion. I had never yet seen a be 
resembl me or who claim ani intercours with me. what wa I? the 
question again recurred, to be answer onli with groans. 

“I will soon explain to what these feel tended, but allow me now to 
return to the cottagers, whose stori excit in me such variou 
feel of indignation, delight, and wonder, but which all termin 
in addit love and rever for my protector (for so I loved, in 
an innocent, half-pain self-deceit, to call them).” 





chapter 14 

“some time elaps befor I learn the histori of my friends. It wa 
one which could not fail to impress itself deepli on my mind, unfold 
as it did a number of circumstances, each interest and wonder to 
one so utterli inexperienc as I was. 

“the name of the old man wa De lacey. He wa descend from a good 
famili in france, where he had live for mani year in affluence, 
respect by hi superior and belov by hi equals. hi son wa bred 
in the servic of hi country, and agatha had rank with ladi of the 
highest distinction. A few month befor my arriv they had live in 
a larg and luxuri citi call paris, surround by friend and 
possess of everi enjoy which virtue, refin of intellect, or 
taste, accompani by a moder fortune, could afford. 

“the father of safi had been the caus of their ruin. He wa a 
turkish merchant and had inhabit pari for mani years, when, for some 
reason which I could not learn, he becam obnoxi to the government. 
He wa seiz and cast into prison the veri day that safi arriv from 
constantinopl to join him. He wa tri and condemn to death. the 
injustic of hi sentenc wa veri flagrant; all pari wa indignant; 
and it wa judg that hi religion and wealth rather than the crime 
alleg against him had been the caus of hi condemnation. 

“felix had accident been present at the trial; hi horror and 
indign were uncontrol when he heard the decis of the 
court. He made, at that moment, a solemn vow to deliv him and then 
look around for the means. after mani fruitless attempt to gain 
admitt to the prison, he found a strongli grate window in an 
unguard part of the building, which light the dungeon of the 
unfortun muhammadan, who, load with chains, wait in despair the 
execut of the barbar sentence. felix visit the grate at night 
and made known to the prison hi intent in hi favour. the turk, 
amaz and delighted, endeavour to kindl the zeal of hi deliver 
by promis of reward and wealth. felix reject hi offer with 
contempt, yet when he saw the love safie, who wa allow to visit 
her father and who by her gestur express her live gratitude, the 
youth could not help own to hi own mind that the captiv possess 
a treasur which would fulli reward hi toil and hazard. 

“the turk quickli perceiv the impress that hi daughter had made 
on the heart of felix and endeavour to secur him more entir in 
hi interest by the promis of her hand in marriag so soon as he 
should be convey to a place of safety. felix wa too delic to 
accept thi offer, yet he look forward to the probabl of the 
event as to the consumm of hi happiness. 

“dure the ensu days, while the prepar were go forward for 
the escap of the merchant, the zeal of felix wa warm by sever 
letter that he receiv from thi love girl, who found mean to 
express her thought in the languag of her lover by the aid of an old 
man, a servant of her father who understood french. she thank him in 
the most ardent term for hi intend servic toward her parent, and 
at the same time she gentli deplor her own fate. 

“I have copi of these letters, for I found means, dure my resid 
in the hovel, to procur the implement of writing; and the letter 
were often in the hand of felix or agatha. befor I depart I will 
give them to you; they will prove the truth of my tale; but at present, 
as the sun is alreadi far declined, I shall onli have time to repeat 
the substanc of them to you. 

“safi relat that her mother wa a christian arab, seiz and made a 
slave by the turks; recommend by her beauty, she had won the heart of 
the father of safie, who marri her. the young girl spoke in high and 
enthusiast term of her mother, who, born in freedom, spurn the 
bondag to which she wa now reduced. she instruct her daughter in 
the tenet of her religion and taught her to aspir to higher power of 
intellect and an independ of spirit forbidden to the femal 
follow of muhammad. thi ladi died, but her lesson were indel 
impress on the mind of safie, who sicken at the prospect of again 
return to asia and be immur within the wall of a harem, 
allow onli to occupi herself with infantil amusements, ill-suit to 
the temper of her soul, now accustom to grand idea and a nobl 
emul for virtue. the prospect of marri a christian and 
remain in a countri where women were allow to take a rank in 
societi wa enchant to her. 

“the day for the execut of the turk wa fixed, but on the night 
previou to it he quit hi prison and befor morn wa distant 
mani leagu from paris. felix had procur passport in the name of 
hi father, sister, and himself. He had previous commun hi 
plan to the former, who aid the deceit by quit hi house, under 
the pretenc of a journey and conceal himself, with hi daughter, in 
an obscur part of paris. 

“felix conduct the fugit through franc to lyon and across mont 
ceni to leghorn, where the merchant had decid to wait a favour 
opportun of pass into some part of the turkish dominions. 

“safi resolv to remain with her father until the moment of hi 
departure, befor which time the turk renew hi promis that she 
should be unit to hi deliverer; and felix remain with them in 
expect of that event; and in the meantim he enjoy the societi 
of the arabian, who exhibit toward him the simplest and tenderest 
affection. they convers with one anoth through the mean of an 
interpreter, and sometim with the interpret of looks; and safi 
sang to him the divin air of her nativ country. 

“the turk allow thi intimaci to take place and encourag the hope 
of the youth lovers, while in hi heart he had form far other 
plans. He loath the idea that hi daughter should be unit to a 
christian, but he fear the resent of felix if he should appear 
lukewarm, for he knew that he wa still in the power of hi deliver 
if he should choos to betray him to the italian state which they 
inhabited. He revolv a thousand plan by which he should be enabl 
to prolong the deceit until it might be no longer necessary, and 
secretli to take hi daughter with him when he departed. hi plan 
were facilit by the news which arriv from paris. 

“the govern of franc were greatli enrag at the escap of their 
victim and spare no pain to detect and punish hi deliverer. the 
plot of felix wa quickli discovered, and De lacey and agatha were 
thrown into prison. the news reach felix and rous him from hi 
dream of pleasure. hi blind and age father and hi gentl sister lay 
in a noisom dungeon while he enjoy the free air and the societi of 
her whom he loved. thi idea wa tortur to him. He quickli arrang 
with the turk that if the latter should find a favour opportun 
for escap befor felix could return to italy, safi should remain as a 
boarder at a convent at leghorn; and then, quit the love arabian, 
he hasten to pari and deliv himself up to the vengeanc of the 
law, hope to free De lacey and agatha by thi proceeding. 

“he did not succeed. they remain confin for five month befor the 
trial took place, the result of which depriv them of their fortun 
and condemn them to a perpetu exil from their nativ country. 

“they found a miser asylum in the cottag in germany, where I 
discov them. felix soon learn that the treacher turk, for 
whom he and hi famili endur such unheard-of oppression, on 
discov that hi deliver wa thu reduc to poverti and ruin, 
becam a traitor to good feel and honour and had quit itali with 
hi daughter, insultingli send felix a pittanc of money to aid him, 
as he said, in some plan of futur maintenance. 

“such were the event that prey on the heart of felix and render 
him, when I first saw him, the most miser of hi family. He could 
have endur poverty, and while thi distress had been the meed of hi 
virtue, he glori in it; but the ingratitud of the turk and the loss 
of hi belov safi were misfortun more bitter and irreparable. the 
arriv of the arabian now infus new life into hi soul. 

“when the news reach leghorn that felix wa depriv of hi wealth 
and rank, the merchant command hi daughter to think no more of her 
lover, but to prepar to return to her nativ country. the gener 
natur of safi wa outrag by thi command; she attempt to 
expostul with her father, but he left her angrily, reiter hi 
tyrann mandate. 

“A few day after, the turk enter hi daughter’ apart and told 
her hastili that he had reason to believ that hi resid at leghorn 
had been divulg and that he should speedili be deliv up to the 
french government; he had consequ hire a vessel to convey him to 
constantinople, for which citi he should sail in a few hours. He 
intend to leav hi daughter under the care of a confidenti 
servant, to follow at her leisur with the greater part of hi 
property, which had not yet arriv at leghorn. 

“when alone, safi resolv in her own mind the plan of conduct that it 
would becom her to pursu in thi emergency. A resid in turkey 
wa abhorr to her; her religion and her feel were alik avers 
to it. By some paper of her father which fell into her hand she 
heard of the exil of her lover and learnt the name of the spot where 
he then resided. she hesit some time, but at length she form her 
determination. take with her some jewel that belong to her and a 
sum of money, she quit itali with an attendant, a nativ of leghorn, 
but who understood the common languag of turkey, and depart for 
germany. 

“she arriv in safeti at a town about twenti leagu from the cottag 
of De lacey, when her attend fell danger ill. safi nurs her 
with the most devot affection, but the poor girl died, and the 
arabian wa left alone, unacquaint with the languag of the countri 
and utterli ignor of the custom of the world. she fell, however, 
into good hands. the italian had mention the name of the spot for 
which they were bound, and after her death the woman of the hous in 
which they had live took care that safi should arriv in safeti at 
the cottag of her lover.” 





chapter 15 

“such wa the histori of my belov cottagers. It impress me deeply. 
I learned, from the view of social life which it developed, to admir 
their virtu and to deprec the vice of mankind. 

“a yet I look upon crime as a distant evil, benevol and 
generos were ever present befor me, incit within me a desir to 
becom an actor in the busi scene where so mani admir qualiti 
were call forth and displayed. but in give an account of the 
progress of my intellect, I must not omit a circumst which occur 
in the begin of the month of august of the same year. 

“one night dure my accustom visit to the neighbour wood where I 
collect my own food and brought home fire for my protectors, I found on 
the ground a leathern portmanteau contain sever articl of dress and 
some books. I eagerli seiz the prize and return with it to my hovel. 
fortun the book were written in the language, the element of which I 
had acquir at the cottage; they consist of _paradis lost_, a volum 
of _plutarch’ lives_, and the _sorrow of werter_. the 
possess of these treasur gave me extrem delight; I now continu 
studi and exercis my mind upon these histories, whilst my friend were 
employ in their ordinari occupations. 

“I can hardli describ to you the effect of these books. they produc 
in me an infin of new imag and feelings, that sometim rais me 
to ecstasy, but more frequent sunk me into the lowest dejection. In 
the _sorrow of werter_, besid the interest of it simpl and affect 
story, so mani opinion are canvass and so mani light thrown upon 
what had hitherto been to me obscur subject that I found in it a 
never-end sourc of specul and astonishment. the gentl and 
domest manner it described, combin with lofti sentiment and 
feelings, which had for their object someth out of self, accord 
well with my experi among my protector and with the want which 
were for ever aliv in my own bosom. but I thought werter himself a 
more divin be than I had ever beheld or imagined; hi charact 
contain no pretension, but it sank deep. the disquisit upon 
death and suicid were calcul to fill me with wonder. I did not 
pretend to enter into the merit of the case, yet I inclin toward 
the opinion of the hero, whose extinct I wept, without precis 
understand it. 

“a I read, however, I appli much person to my own feel and 
condition. I found myself similar yet at the same time strang 
unlik to the be concern whom I read and to whose convers I 
wa a listener. I sympathis with and partli understood them, but I 
wa unform in mind; I wa depend on none and relat to none. 
‘the path of my departur wa free,’ and there wa none to lament my 
annihilation. My person wa hideou and my statur gigantic. what did 
thi mean? who wa I? what wa I? whenc did I come? what wa my 
destination? these question continu recurred, but I wa unabl to 
solv them. 

“the volum of _plutarch’ lives_ which I possess contain the 
histori of the first founder of the ancient republics. thi book 
had a far differ effect upon me from the _sorrow of werter_. I 
learn from werter’ imagin despond and gloom, but plutarch 
taught me high thoughts; he elev me abov the wretch sphere of my 
own reflections, to admir and love the hero of past ages. mani 
thing I read surpass my understand and experience. I had a veri 
confus knowledg of kingdoms, wide extent of country, mighti rivers, 
and boundless seas. but I wa perfectli unacquaint with town and 
larg assemblag of men. the cottag of my protector had been the 
onli school in which I had studi human nature, but thi book 
develop new and mightier scene of action. I read of men concern 
in public affairs, govern or massacr their species. I felt the 
greatest ardour for virtu rise within me, and abhorr for vice, as 
far as I understood the signif of those terms, rel as they 
were, as I appli them, to pleasur and pain alone. induc by these 
feelings, I wa of cours led to admir peaceabl lawgivers, numa, 
solon, and lycurgus, in prefer to romulu and theseus. the 
patriarch live of my protector caus these impress to take a 
firm hold on my mind; perhaps, if my first introduct to human had 
been made by a young soldier, burn for glori and slaughter, I should 
have been imbu with differ sensations. 

“but _paradis lost_ excit differ and far deeper emotions. I read 
it, as I had read the other volum which had fallen into my hands, as 
a true history. It move everi feel of wonder and awe that the 
pictur of an omnipot god war with hi creatur wa capabl of 
exciting. I often refer the sever situations, as their similar 
struck me, to my own. like adam, I wa appar unit by no link to 
ani other be in existence; but hi state wa far differ from mine 
in everi other respect. He had come forth from the hand of god a 
perfect creature, happi and prosperous, guard by the especi care of 
hi creator; he wa allow to convers with and acquir knowledg from 
be of a superior nature, but I wa wretched, helpless, and alone. 
mani time I consid satan as the fitter emblem of my condition, for 
often, like him, when I view the bliss of my protectors, the bitter 
gall of envi rose within me. 

“anoth circumst strengthen and confirm these feelings. soon 
after my arriv in the hovel I discov some paper in the pocket of 
the dress which I had taken from your laboratory. At first I had 
neglect them, but now that I wa abl to deciph the charact in 
which they were written, I began to studi them with diligence. It wa 
your journal of the four month that preced my creation. you 
minut describ in these paper everi step you took in the progress 
of your work; thi histori wa mingl with account of domest 
occurrences. you doubtless recollect these papers. here they are. 
everyth is relat in them which bear refer to my accurs 
origin; the whole detail of that seri of disgust circumst 
which produc it is set in view; the minutest descript of my odiou 
and loathsom person is given, in languag which paint your own 
horror and render mine indelible. I sicken as I read. ‘hate 
day when I receiv life!’ I exclaim in agony. ‘accurs creator! 
whi did you form a monster so hideou that even _you_ turn from me in 
disgust? god, in pity, made man beauti and alluring, after hi own 
image; but my form is a filthi type of yours, more horrid even from the 
veri resemblance. satan had hi companions, fellow devils, to admir 
and encourag him, but I am solitari and abhorred.’ 

“these were the reflect of my hour of despond and solitude; 
but when I contempl the virtu of the cottagers, their amiabl and 
benevol dispositions, I persuad myself that when they should 
becom acquaint with my admir of their virtu they would 
compassion me and overlook my person deformity. could they turn 
from their door one, howev monstrous, who solicit their compass 
and friendship? I resolved, at least, not to despair, but in everi way 
to fit myself for an interview with them which would decid my fate. I 
postpon thi attempt for some month longer, for the import 
attach to it success inspir me with a dread lest I should fail. 
besides, I found that my understand improv so much with everi 
day’ experi that I wa unwil to commenc thi undertak 
until a few more month should have ad to my sagacity. 

“sever changes, in the meantime, took place in the cottage. the 
presenc of safi diffus happi among it inhabitants, and I also 
found that a greater degre of plenti reign there. felix and agatha 
spent more time in amus and conversation, and were assist in 
their labour by servants. they did not appear rich, but they were 
content and happy; their feel were seren and peaceful, while 
mine becam everi day more tumultuous. increas of knowledg onli 
discov to me more clearli what a wretch outcast I was. I 
cherish hope, it is true, but it vanish when I beheld my person 
reflect in water or my shadow in the moonshine, even as that frail 
imag and that inconst shade. 

“I endeavour to crush these fear and to fortifi myself for the trial 
which in a few month I resolv to undergo; and sometim I allow my 
thoughts, uncheck by reason, to rambl in the field of paradise, and 
dare to fanci amiabl and love creatur sympathis with my 
feel and cheer my gloom; their angel counten breath 
smile of consolation. but it wa all a dream; no eve sooth my 
sorrow nor share my thoughts; I wa alone. I rememb adam’ 
supplic to hi creator. but where wa mine? He had abandon me, 
and in the bitter of my heart I curs him. 

“autumn pass thus. I saw, with surpris and grief, the leav decay 
and fall, and natur again assum the barren and bleak appear it 
had worn when I first beheld the wood and the love moon. yet I did 
not heed the bleak of the weather; I wa better fit by my 
conform for the endur of cold than heat. but my chief 
delight were the sight of the flowers, the birds, and all the gay 
apparel of summer; when those desert me, I turn with more attent 
toward the cottagers. their happi wa not decreas by the 
absenc of summer. they love and sympathis with one another; and 
their joys, depend on each other, were not interrupt by the 
casualti that took place around them. the more I saw of them, the 
greater becam my desir to claim their protect and kindness; my 
heart yearn to be known and love by these amiabl creatures; to see 
their sweet look direct toward me with affect wa the utmost 
limit of my ambition. I dare not think that they would turn them from 
me with disdain and horror. the poor that stop at their door were 
never driven away. I asked, it is true, for greater treasur than a 
littl food or rest: I requir kind and sympathy; but I did not 
believ myself utterli unworthi of it. 

“the winter advanced, and an entir revolut of the season had taken 
place sinc I awok into life. My attent at thi time wa sole 
direct toward my plan of introduc myself into the cottag of my 
protectors. I revolv mani projects, but that on which I final 
fix wa to enter the dwell when the blind old man should be alone. 
I had sagac enough to discov that the unnatur hideous of my 
person wa the chief object of horror with those who had formerli 
beheld me. My voice, although harsh, had noth terribl in it; I 
thought, therefore, that if in the absenc of hi children I could gain 
the good will and mediat of the old De lacey, I might by hi mean 
be toler by my younger protectors. 

“one day, when the sun shone on the red leav that strew the ground 
and diffus cheerfulness, although it deni warmth, safie, agatha, 
and felix depart on a long countri walk, and the old man, at hi own 
desire, wa left alon in the cottage. when hi children had departed, 
he took up hi guitar and play sever mourn but sweet airs, more 
sweet and mourn than I had ever heard him play before. At first hi 
counten wa illumin with pleasure, but as he continued, 
thought and sad succeeded; at length, lay asid the 
instrument, he sat absorb in reflection. 

“mi heart beat quick; thi wa the hour and moment of trial, which 
would decid my hope or realis my fears. the servant were gone to a 
neighbour fair. all wa silent in and around the cottage; it wa an 
excel opportunity; yet, when I proceed to execut my plan, my 
limb fail me and I sank to the ground. again I rose, and exert 
all the firm of which I wa master, remov the plank which I had 
place befor my hovel to conceal my retreat. the fresh air reviv 
me, and with renew determin I approach the door of their 
cottage. 

“I knocked. ‘who is there?’ said the old man. ‘come in.’ 

“I entered. ‘pardon thi intrusion,’ said I; ‘I am 
a travel in want of a littl rest; you would greatli oblig me if you 
would allow me to remain a few minut befor the fire.’ 

“‘enter,’ said De lacey, ‘and I will tri in what 
manner I can to reliev your wants; but, unfortunately, my children are 
from home, and as I am blind, I am afraid I shall find it difficult to 
procur food for you.’ 

“‘do not troubl yourself, my kind host; I have food; it is 
warmth and rest onli that I need.’ 

“I sat down, and a silenc ensued. I knew that everi minut wa 
preciou to me, yet I remain irresolut in what manner to commenc 
the interview, when the old man address me. 

‘bi your language, stranger, I suppos you are my countryman; are you 
french?’ 

“‘no; but I wa educ by a french famili and understand that 
languag only. I am now go to claim the protect of some friends, 
whom I sincer love, and of whose favour I have some hopes.’ 

“‘are they germans?’ 

“‘no, they are french. but let us chang the subject. I am an 
unfortun and desert creature, I look around and I have no relat 
or friend upon earth. these amiabl peopl to whom I go have never 
seen me and know littl of me. I am full of fears, for if I fail 
there, I am an outcast in the world for ever.’ 

“‘do not despair. To be friendless is inde to be unfortunate, but 
the heart of men, when unprejud by ani obviou self-interest, are 
full of brotherli love and charity. rely, therefore, on your hopes; 
and if these friend are good and amiable, do not despair.’ 

“‘they are kind—they are the most excel creatur in the world; 
but, unfortunately, they are prejud against me. I have good 
dispositions; my life ha been hitherto harmless and in some degre 
beneficial; but a fatal prejudic cloud their eyes, and where they 
ought to see a feel and kind friend, they behold onli a detest 
monster.’ 

“‘that is inde unfortunate; but if you are realli blameless, cannot 
you undec them?’ 

“‘i am about to undertak that task; and it is on that account that I 
feel so mani overwhelm terrors. I tenderli love these friends; I 
have, unknown to them, been for mani month in the habit of daili 
kind toward them; but they believ that I wish to injur them, and 
it is that prejudic which I wish to overcome.’ 

“‘where do these friend reside?’ 

“‘near thi spot.’ 

“the old man paus and then continued, ‘if you will unreservedli 
confid to me the particular of your tale, I perhap may be of use in 
undeceiv them. I am blind and cannot judg of your countenance, but 
there is someth in your word which persuad me that you are 
sincere. I am poor and an exile, but it will afford me true pleasur 
to be in ani way servic to a human creature.’ 

“‘excel man! I thank you and accept your gener offer. you 
rais me from the dust by thi kindness; and I trust that, by your aid, 
I shall not be driven from the societi and sympathi of your fellow 
creatures.’ 

“‘heaven forbid! even if you were realli criminal, for that can onli 
drive you to desperation, and not instig you to virtue. I also am 
unfortunate; I and my famili have been condemned, although innocent; 
judge, therefore, if I do not feel for your misfortunes.’ 

“‘how can I thank you, my best and onli benefactor? from your lip 
first have I heard the voic of kind direct toward me; I shall 
be for ever grateful; and your present human assur me of success 
with those friend whom I am on the point of meeting.’ 

“‘may I know the name and resid of those friends?’ 

“I paused. this, I thought, wa the moment of decision, which wa to 
rob me of or bestow happi on me for ever. I struggl vainli for 
firm suffici to answer him, but the effort destroy all my 
remain strength; I sank on the chair and sob aloud. At that 
moment I heard the step of my younger protectors. I had not a moment 
to lose, but seiz the hand of the old man, I cried, ‘now is the 
time! save and protect me! you and your famili are the friend whom I 
seek. Do not you desert me in the hour of trial!’ 

“‘great god!’ exclaim the old man. ‘who are you?’ 

“at that instant the cottag door wa opened, and felix, safie, and 
agatha entered. who can describ their horror and constern on 
behold me? agatha fainted, and safie, unabl to attend to her 
friend, rush out of the cottage. felix dart forward, and with 
supernatur forc tore me from hi father, to whose knee I clung, in 
a transport of fury, he dash me to the ground and struck me violent 
with a stick. I could have torn him limb from limb, as the lion rend 
the antelope. but my heart sank within me as with bitter sickness, and 
I refrained. I saw him on the point of repeat hi blow, when, 
overcom by pain and anguish, I quit the cottage, and in the gener 
tumult escap unperceiv to my hovel.” 





chapter 16 

“cursed, curs creator! whi did I live? why, in that instant, did I 
not extinguish the spark of exist which you had so wantonli 
bestowed? I know not; despair had not yet taken possess of me; my 
feel were those of rage and revenge. I could with pleasur have 
destroy the cottag and it inhabit and have glut myself with 
their shriek and misery. 

“when night came I quit my retreat and wander in the wood; and 
now, no longer restrain by the fear of discovery, I gave vent to my 
anguish in fear howlings. I wa like a wild beast that had broken 
the toils, destroy the object that obstruct me and rang 
through the wood with a stag-lik swiftness. oh! what a miser 
night I passed! the cold star shone in mockery, and the bare tree 
wave their branch abov me; now and then the sweet voic of a bird 
burst forth amidst the univers stillness. all, save I, were at rest 
or in enjoyment; I, like the arch-fiend, bore a hell within me, and 
find myself unsympathis with, wish to tear up the trees, spread 
havoc and destruct around me, and then to have sat down and enjoy 
the ruin. 

“but thi wa a luxuri of sensat that could not endure; I becam 
fatigu with excess of bodili exert and sank on the damp grass in 
the sick impot of despair. there wa none among the myriad of men 
that exist who would piti or assist me; and should I feel kind 
toward my enemies? no; from that moment I declar everlast war 
against the species, and more than all, against him who had form me 
and sent me forth to thi insupport misery. 

“the sun rose; I heard the voic of men and knew that it wa 
imposs to return to my retreat dure that day. accordingli I hid 
myself in some thick underwood, determin to devot the ensu hour 
to reflect on my situation. 

“the pleasant sunshin and the pure air of day restor me to some 
degre of tranquillity; and when I consid what had pass at the 
cottage, I could not help believ that I had been too hasti in my 
conclusions. I had certainli act imprudently. It wa appar that 
my convers had interest the father in my behalf, and I wa a 
fool in have expos my person to the horror of hi children. I 
ought to have familiaris the old De lacey to me, and by degre to 
have discov myself to the rest of hi family, when they should have 
been prepar for my approach. but I did not believ my error to be 
irretrievable, and after much consider I resolv to return to the 
cottage, seek the old man, and by my represent win him to my 
party. 

“these thought calm me, and in the afternoon I sank into a profound 
sleep; but the fever of my blood did not allow me to be visit by 
peac dreams. the horribl scene of the preced day wa for ever 
act befor my eyes; the femal were fli and the enrag felix 
tear me from hi father’ feet. I awok exhausted, and find that 
it wa alreadi night, I crept forth from my hiding-place, and went in 
search of food. 

“when my hunger wa appeased, I direct my step toward the 
well-known path that conduct to the cottage. all there wa at peace. 
I crept into my hovel and remain in silent expect of the 
accustom hour when the famili arose. that hour passed, the sun 
mount high in the heavens, but the cottag did not appear. I 
trembl violently, apprehend some dread misfortune. the insid 
of the cottag wa dark, and I heard no motion; I cannot describ the 
agoni of thi suspense. 

“present two countrymen pass by, but paus near the cottage, they 
enter into conversation, use violent gesticulations; but I did not 
understand what they said, as they spoke the languag of the country, 
which differ from that of my protectors. soon after, however, felix 
approach with anoth man; I wa surprised, as I knew that he had not 
quit the cottag that morning, and wait anxious to discov from 
hi discours the mean of these unusu appearances. 

“‘do you consider,’ said hi companion to him, 
‘that you will be oblig to pay three months’ rent and to lose 
the produc of your garden? I do not wish to take ani unfair advantage, and 
I beg therefor that you will take some day to consid of your 
determination.’ 

“‘it is utterli useless,’ repli felix; ‘we can 
never again inhabit your cottage. the life of my father is in the greatest 
danger, owe to the dread circumst that I have related. My wife and 
my sister will never recov from their horror. I entreat you not to reason 
with me ani more. take possess of your tenement and let me fli from thi 
place.’ 

“felix trembl violent as he said this. He and hi companion 
enter the cottage, in which they remain for a few minutes, and then 
departed. I never saw ani of the famili of De lacey more. 

“I continu for the remaind of the day in my hovel in a state of 
utter and stupid despair. My protector had depart and had broken 
the onli link that held me to the world. for the first time the 
feel of reveng and hatr fill my bosom, and I did not strive to 
control them, but allow myself to be born away by the stream, I 
bent my mind toward injuri and death. when I thought of my friends, 
of the mild voic of De lacey, the gentl eye of agatha, and the 
exquisit beauti of the arabian, these thought vanish and a gush of 
tear somewhat sooth me. but again when I reflect that they had 
spurn and desert me, anger returned, a rage of anger, and unabl to 
injur anyth human, I turn my furi toward inanim objects. As 
night advanced, I place a varieti of combust around the cottage, 
and after have destroy everi vestig of cultiv in the garden, 
I wait with forc impati until the moon had sunk to commenc my 
operations. 

“a the night advanced, a fierc wind aros from the wood and quickli 
dispers the cloud that had loiter in the heavens; the blast tore 
along like a mighti avalanch and produc a kind of insan in my 
spirit that burst all bound of reason and reflection. I light the 
dri branch of a tree and danc with furi around the devot cottage, 
my eye still fix on the western horizon, the edg of which the moon 
nearli touched. A part of it orb wa at length hid, and I wave my 
brand; it sank, and with a loud scream I fire the straw, and heath, 
and bushes, which I had collected. the wind fan the fire, and the 
cottag wa quickli envelop by the flames, which clung to it and 
lick it with their fork and destroy tongues. 

“a soon as I wa convinc that no assist could save ani part of 
the habitation, I quit the scene and sought for refug in the woods. 

“and now, with the world befor me, whither should I bend my steps? I 
resolv to fli far from the scene of my misfortunes; but to me, hate 
and despised, everi countri must be equal horrible. At length the 
thought of you cross my mind. I learn from your paper that you 
were my father, my creator; and to whom could I appli with more fit 
than to him who had given me life? among the lesson that felix had 
bestow upon safie, geographi had not been omitted; I had learn from 
these the rel situat of the differ countri of the earth. 
you had mention geneva as the name of your nativ town, and toward 
thi place I resolv to proceed. 

“but how wa I to direct myself? I knew that I must travel in a 
southwesterli direct to reach my destination, but the sun wa my 
onli guide. I did not know the name of the town that I wa to pass 
through, nor could I ask inform from a singl human being; but I 
did not despair. from you onli could I hope for succour, although 
toward you I felt no sentiment but that of hatred. unfeeling, 
heartless creator! you had endow me with percept and passion 
and then cast me abroad an object for the scorn and horror of mankind. 
but on you onli had I ani claim for piti and redress, and from you I 
determin to seek that justic which I vainli attempt to gain from 
ani other be that wore the human form. 

“mi travel were long and the suffer I endur intense. It wa 
late in autumn when I quit the district where I had so long resided. 
I travel onli at night, fear of encount the visag of a 
human being. natur decay around me, and the sun becam heatless; 
rain and snow pour around me; mighti river were frozen; the surfac 
of the earth wa hard and chill, and bare, and I found no shelter. oh, 
earth! how often did I imprec curs on the caus of my being! the 
mild of my natur had fled, and all within me wa turn to gall 
and bitterness. the nearer I approach to your habitation, the more 
deepli did I feel the spirit of reveng enkindl in my heart. snow 
fell, and the water were hardened, but I rest not. A few incid 
now and then direct me, and I possess a map of the country; but I 
often wander wide from my path. the agoni of my feel allow me 
no respite; no incid occur from which my rage and miseri could 
not extract it food; but a circumst that happen when I arriv 
on the confin of switzerland, when the sun had recov it warmth 
and the earth again began to look green, confirm in an especi 
manner the bitter and horror of my feelings. 

“I gener rest dure the day and travel onli when I wa 
secur by night from the view of man. one morning, however, find 
that my path lay through a deep wood, I ventur to continu my journey 
after the sun had risen; the day, which wa one of the first of spring, 
cheer even me by the loveli of it sunshin and the balmi of 
the air. I felt emot of gentl and pleasure, that had long 
appear dead, reviv within me. half surpris by the novelti of 
these sensations, I allow myself to be born away by them, and 
forget my solitud and deformity, dare to be happy. soft tear 
again bedew my cheeks, and I even rais my humid eye with 
thank toward the bless sun, which bestow such joy upon me. 

“I continu to wind among the path of the wood, until I came to it 
boundary, which wa skirt by a deep and rapid river, into which mani 
of the tree bent their branches, now bud with the fresh spring. 
here I paused, not exactli know what path to pursue, when I heard 
the sound of voices, that induc me to conceal myself under the shade 
of a cypress. I wa scarc hid when a young girl came run 
toward the spot where I wa concealed, laughing, as if she ran from 
someon in sport. she continu her cours along the precipit side 
of the river, when suddenli her foot slipped, and she fell into the 
rapid stream. I rush from my hiding-plac and with extrem labour, 
from the forc of the current, save her and drag her to shore. she 
wa senseless, and I endeavour by everi mean in my power to restor 
animation, when I wa suddenli interrupt by the approach of a rustic, 
who wa probabl the person from whom she had play fled. On 
see me, he dart toward me, and tear the girl from my arms, 
hasten toward the deeper part of the wood. I follow speedily, I 
hardli knew why; but when the man saw me draw near, he aim a gun, 
which he carried, at my bodi and fired. I sank to the ground, and my 
injurer, with increas swiftness, escap into the wood. 

“thi wa then the reward of my benevolence! I had save a human be 
from destruction, and as a recompens I now writh under the miser 
pain of a wound which shatter the flesh and bone. the feel of 
kind and gentl which I had entertain but a few moment 
befor gave place to hellish rage and gnash of teeth. inflam by 
pain, I vow etern hatr and vengeanc to all mankind. but the 
agoni of my wound overcam me; my puls paused, and I fainted. 

“for some week I led a miser life in the woods, endeavour to 
cure the wound which I had received. the ball had enter my shoulder, 
and I knew not whether it had remain there or pass through; at ani 
rate I had no mean of extract it. My suffer were augment 
also by the oppress sens of the injustic and ingratitud of their 
infliction. My daili vow rose for revenge—a deep and deadli revenge, 
such as would alon compens for the outrag and anguish I had 
endured. 

“after some week my wound healed, and I continu my journey. the 
labour I endur were no longer to be allevi by the bright sun or 
gentl breez of spring; all joy wa but a mockeri which insult my 
desol state and made me feel more pain that I wa not made for 
the enjoy of pleasure. 

“but my toil now drew near a close, and in two month from thi time I 
reach the environ of geneva. 

“it wa even when I arrived, and I retir to a hiding-plac among 
the field that surround it to medit in what manner I should appli 
to you. I wa oppress by fatigu and hunger and far too unhappi to 
enjoy the gentl breez of even or the prospect of the sun set 
behind the stupend mountain of jura. 

“at thi time a slight sleep reliev me from the pain of reflection, 
which wa disturb by the approach of a beauti child, who came 
run into the recess I had chosen, with all the sportiv of 
infancy. suddenly, as I gaze on him, an idea seiz me that thi 
littl creatur wa unprejud and had live too short a time to have 
imbib a horror of deformity. if, therefore, I could seiz him and 
educ him as my companion and friend, I should not be so desol in 
thi peopl earth. 

“urg by thi impulse, I seiz on the boy as he pass and drew him 
toward me. As soon as he beheld my form, he place hi hand befor 
hi eye and utter a shrill scream; I drew hi hand forcibl from hi 
face and said, ‘child, what is the mean of this? I do not intend to 
hurt you; listen to me.’ 

“he struggl violently. ‘let me go,’ he cried; 
‘monster! ugli wretch! you wish to eat me and tear me to pieces. you 
are an ogre. let me go, or I will tell my papa.’ 

“‘boy, you will never see your father again; you must come with me.’ 

“‘hideou monster! let me go. My papa is a syndic—h is M. 
frankenstein—h will punish you. you dare not keep me.’ 

“‘frankenstein! you belong then to my enemy—to him toward whom I have 
sworn etern revenge; you shall be my first victim.’ 

“the child still struggl and load me with epithet which carri 
despair to my heart; I grasp hi throat to silenc him, and in a 
moment he lay dead at my feet. 

“I gaze on my victim, and my heart swell with exult and hellish 
triumph; clap my hands, I exclaimed, ‘I too can creat desolation; 
my enemi is not invulnerable; thi death will carri despair to him, and 
a thousand other miseri shall torment and destroy him.’ 

“a I fix my eye on the child, I saw someth glitter on hi 
breast. I took it; it wa a portrait of a most love woman. In spite 
of my malignity, it soften and attract me. for a few moment I 
gaze with delight on her dark eyes, fring by deep lashes, and her 
love lips; but present my rage returned; I rememb that I wa 
for ever depriv of the delight that such beauti creatur could 
bestow and that she whose resembl I contempl would, in 
regard me, have chang that air of divin benign to one 
express of disgust and affright. 

“can you wonder that such thought transport me with rage? I onli 
wonder that at that moment, instead of vent my sensat in 
exclam and agony, I did not rush among mankind and perish in the 
attempt to destroy them. 

“while I wa overcom by these feelings, I left the spot where I had 
commit the murder, and seek a more seclud hiding-place, I 
enter a barn which had appear to me to be empty. A woman wa 
sleep on some straw; she wa young, not inde so beauti as her 
whose portrait I held, but of an agreeabl aspect and bloom in the 
loveli of youth and health. here, I thought, is one of those whose 
joy-impart smile are bestow on all but me. and then I bent over 
her and whispered, ‘awake, fairest, thi lover is near—h who would 
give hi life but to obtain one look of affect from thine eyes; my 
beloved, awake!’ 

“the sleeper stirred; a thrill of terror ran through me. should she 
inde awake, and see me, and curs me, and denounc the murderer? thu 
would she assuredli act if her darken eye open and she beheld me. 
the thought wa madness; it stir the fiend within me—not I, but 
she, shall suffer; the murder I have commit becaus I am for ever 
rob of all that she could give me, she shall atone. the crime had 
it sourc in her; be her the punishment! thank to the lesson of 
felix and the sanguinari law of man, I had learn now to work 
mischief. I bent over her and place the portrait secur in one of 
the fold of her dress. she move again, and I fled. 

“for some day I haunt the spot where these scene had taken place, 
sometim wish to see you, sometim resolv to quit the world and 
it miseri for ever. At length I wander toward these mountains, 
and have rang through their immens recesses, consum by a burn 
passion which you alon can gratify. We may not part until you have 
promis to compli with my requisition. I am alon and miserable; man 
will not associ with me; but one as deform and horribl as myself 
would not deni herself to me. My companion must be of the same speci 
and have the same defects. thi be you must create.” 





chapter 17 

the be finish speak and fix hi look upon me in the 
expect of a reply. but I wa bewildered, perplexed, and unabl to 
arrang my idea suffici to understand the full extent of hi 
proposition. He continued, 

“you must creat a femal for me with whom I can live in the 
interchang of those sympathi necessari for my being. thi you alon 
can do, and I demand it of you as a right which you must not refus to 
concede.” 

the latter part of hi tale had kindl anew in me the anger that had 
die away while he narrat hi peac life among the cottagers, and 
as he said thi I could no longer suppress the rage that burn within 
me. 

“I do refus it,” I replied; “and no tortur shall ever extort a 
consent from me. you may render me the most miser of men, but you 
shall never make me base in my own eyes. shall I creat anoth like 
yourself, whose joint wicked might desol the world. begone! I 
have answer you; you may tortur me, but I will never consent.” 

“you are in the wrong,” repli the fiend; “and instead 
of threatening, I am content to reason with you. I am malici becaus I 
am miserable. Am I not shun and hate by all mankind? you, my creator, 
would tear me to piec and triumph; rememb that, and tell me whi I 
should piti man more than he piti me? you would not call it murder if you 
could precipit me into one of those ice-rift and destroy my frame, the 
work of your own hands. shall I respect man when he condemn me? let him 
live with me in the interchang of kindness, and instead of injuri I would 
bestow everi benefit upon him with tear of gratitud at hi acceptance. 
but that cannot be; the human sens are insurmount barrier to our 
union. yet mine shall not be the submiss of abject slavery. I will 
reveng my injuries; if I cannot inspir love, I will caus fear, and 
chiefli toward you my arch-enemy, becaus my creator, do I swear 
inextinguish hatred. have a care; I will work at your destruction, nor 
finish until I desol your heart, so that you shall curs the hour of 
your birth.” 

A fiendish rage anim him as he said this; hi face wa wrinkl 
into contort too horribl for human eye to behold; but present 
he calm himself and proceeded— 

“I intend to reason. thi passion is detriment to me, for you do 
not reflect that _you_ are the caus of it excess. If ani be felt 
emot of benevol toward me, I should return them a hundr and a 
hundredfold; for that one creature’ sake I would make peac with the 
whole kind! but I now indulg in dream of bliss that cannot be realised. 
what I ask of you is reason and moderate; I demand a creatur of 
anoth sex, but as hideou as myself; the gratif is small, but it 
is all that I can receive, and it shall content me. It is true, we shall be 
monsters, cut off from all the world; but on that account we shall be more 
attach to one another. our live will not be happy, but they will be 
harmless and free from the miseri I now feel. oh! My creator, make me 
happy; let me feel gratitud toward you for one benefit! let me see that I 
excit the sympathi of some exist thing; do not deni me my 
request!” 

I wa moved. I shudder when I thought of the possibl consequ 
of my consent, but I felt that there wa some justic in hi argument. 
hi tale and the feel he now express prove him to be a creatur 
of fine sensations, and did I not as hi maker owe him all the portion 
of happi that it wa in my power to bestow? He saw my chang of 
feel and continued, 

“if you consent, neither you nor ani other human be shall ever see 
us again; I will go to the vast wild of south america. My food is not 
that of man; I do not destroy the lamb and the kid to glut my appetite; 
acorn and berri afford me suffici nourishment. My companion will 
be of the same natur as myself and will be content with the same fare. 
We shall make our bed of dri leaves; the sun will shine on us as on 
man and will ripen our food. the pictur I present to you is peac 
and human, and you must feel that you could deni it onli in the 
wanton of power and cruelty. pitiless as you have been toward me, 
I now see compass in your eyes; let me seiz the favour moment 
and persuad you to promis what I so ardent desire.” 

“you propose,” repli I, “to fli from the habit of 
man, to dwell in those wild where the beast of the field will be your 
onli companions. how can you, who long for the love and sympathi of man, 
persever in thi exile? you will return and again seek their kindness, and 
you will meet with their detestation; your evil passion will be renewed, 
and you will then have a companion to aid you in the task of destruction. 
thi may not be; ceas to argu the point, for I cannot consent.” 

“how inconst are your feelings! but a moment ago you were move by 
my representations, and whi do you again harden yourself to my complaints? 
I swear to you, by the earth which I inhabit, and by you that made me, that 
with the companion you bestow, I will quit the neighbourhood of man and 
dwell, as it may chance, in the most savag of places. My evil passion 
will have fled, for I shall meet with sympathy! My life will flow quietli 
away, and in my die moment I shall not curs my maker.” 

hi word had a strang effect upon me. I compassion him and 
sometim felt a wish to consol him, but when I look upon him, when 
I saw the filthi mass that move and talked, my heart sicken and my 
feel were alter to those of horror and hatred. I tri to stifl 
these sensations; I thought that as I could not sympathis with him, I 
had no right to withhold from him the small portion of happi which 
wa yet in my power to bestow. 

“you swear,” I said, “to be harmless; but have you not 
alreadi shown a degre of malic that should reason make me distrust 
you? may not even thi be a feint that will increas your triumph by 
afford a wider scope for your revenge?” 

“how is this? I must not be trifl with, and I demand an answer. If 
I have no tie and no affections, hatr and vice must be my portion; 
the love of anoth will destroy the caus of my crimes, and I shall 
becom a thing of whose exist everyon will be ignorant. My vice 
are the children of a forc solitud that I abhor, and my virtu will 
necessarili aris when I live in communion with an equal. I shall feel 
the affect of a sensit be and becom link to the chain of 
exist and event from which I am now excluded.” 

I paus some time to reflect on all he had relat and the variou 
argument which he had employed. I thought of the promis of virtu which 
he had display on the open of hi exist and the subsequ blight 
of all kindli feel by the loath and scorn which hi protector had 
manifest toward him. hi power and threat were not omit in my 
calculations; a creatur who could exist in the ice-cav of the glacier 
and hide himself from pursuit among the ridg of inaccess precipic 
wa a be possess faculti it would be vain to cope with. after a 
long paus of reflect I conclud that the justic due both to him and 
my fellow creatur demand of me that I should compli with hi request. 
turn to him, therefore, I said, 

“I consent to your demand, on your solemn oath to quit europ for ever, 
and everi other place in the neighbourhood of man, as soon as I shall 
deliv into your hand a femal who will accompani you in your exile.” 

“I swear,” he cried, “bi the sun, and by the blue sky of 
heaven, and by the fire of love that burn my heart, that if you grant my 
prayer, while they exist you shall never behold me again. depart to your 
home and commenc your labours; I shall watch their progress with 
unutter anxiety; and fear not but that when you are readi I shall 
appear.” 

say this, he suddenli quit me, fearful, perhaps, of ani chang in 
my sentiments. I saw him descend the mountain with greater speed than 
the flight of an eagle, and quickli lost among the undul of the 
sea of ice. 

hi tale had occupi the whole day, and the sun wa upon the verg of 
the horizon when he departed. I knew that I ought to hasten my descent 
toward the valley, as I should soon be encompass in darkness; but my 
heart wa heavy, and my step slow. the labour of wind among the 
littl path of the mountain and fix my feet firmli as I advanc 
perplex me, occupi as I wa by the emot which the occurr 
of the day had produced. night wa far advanc when I came to the 
halfway resting-plac and seat myself besid the fountain. the star 
shone at interv as the cloud pass from over them; the dark pine 
rose befor me, and everi here and there a broken tree lay on the 
ground; it wa a scene of wonder solemn and stir strang 
thought within me. I wept bitterly, and clasp my hand in agony, I 
exclaimed, “oh! star and cloud and winds, ye are all about to mock 
me; if ye realli piti me, crush sensat and memory; let me becom as 
nought; but if not, depart, depart, and leav me in darkness.” 

these were wild and miser thoughts, but I cannot describ to you 
how the etern twinkl of the star weigh upon me and how I 
listen to everi blast of wind as if it were a dull ugli siroc on it 
way to consum me. 

morn dawn befor I arriv at the villag of chamounix; I took no 
rest, but return immedi to geneva. even in my own heart I could 
give no express to my sensations—they weigh on me with a 
mountain’ weight and their excess destroy my agoni beneath them. 
thu I return home, and enter the house, present myself to the 
family. My haggard and wild appear awok intens alarm, but I 
answer no question, scarc did I speak. I felt as if I were place 
under a ban—a if I had no right to claim their sympathies—a if 
never more might I enjoy companionship with them. yet even thu I 
love them to adoration; and to save them, I resolv to dedic 
myself to my most abhor task. the prospect of such an occup 
made everi other circumst of exist pass befor me like a dream, 
and that thought onli had to me the realiti of life. 





chapter 18 

day after day, week after week, pass away on my return to geneva; and 
I could not collect the courag to recomm my work. I fear the 
vengeanc of the disappoint fiend, yet I wa unabl to overcom my 
repugn to the task which wa enjoin me. I found that I could not 
compos a femal without again devot sever month to profound 
studi and labori disquisition. I had heard of some discoveri 
have been made by an english philosopher, the knowledg of which wa 
materi to my success, and I sometim thought of obtain my 
father’ consent to visit england for thi purpose; but I clung to 
everi pretenc of delay and shrank from take the first step in an 
undertak whose immedi necess began to appear less absolut to 
me. A chang inde had taken place in me; my health, which had 
hitherto declined, wa now much restored; and my spirits, when 
uncheck by the memori of my unhappi promise, rose proportionably. My 
father saw thi chang with pleasure, and he turn hi thought 
toward the best method of erad the remain of my melancholy, 
which everi now and then would return by fits, and with a devour 
black overcast the approach sunshine. At these moment I took 
refug in the most perfect solitude. I pass whole day on the lake 
alon in a littl boat, watch the cloud and listen to the 
rippl of the waves, silent and listless. but the fresh air and 
bright sun seldom fail to restor me to some degre of composure, and 
on my return I met the salut of my friend with a readier smile 
and a more cheer heart. 

It wa after my return from one of these rambl that my father, 
call me aside, thu address me, 

“I am happi to remark, my dear son, that you have resum your former 
pleasur and seem to be return to yourself. and yet you are still 
unhappi and still avoid our society. for some time I wa lost in 
conjectur as to the caus of this, but yesterday an idea struck me, 
and if it is well founded, I conjur you to avow it. reserv on such a 
point would be not onli useless, but draw down trebl miseri on us all.” 

I trembl violent at hi exordium, and my father continued— 

“I confess, my son, that I have alway look forward to your 
marriag with our dear elizabeth as the tie of our domest comfort and the 
stay of my declin years. you were attach to each other from your 
earliest infancy; you studi together, and appeared, in disposit and 
tastes, entir suit to one another. but so blind is the experi of 
man that what I conceiv to be the best assist to my plan may have 
entir destroy it. you, perhaps, regard her as your sister, without ani 
wish that she might becom your wife. nay, you may have met with anoth 
whom you may love; and consid yourself as bound in honour to 
elizabeth, thi struggl may occas the poignant miseri which you appear 
to feel.” 

“mi dear father, reassur yourself. I love my cousin tenderli and 
sincerely. I never saw ani woman who excited, as elizabeth does, my 
warmest admir and affection. My futur hope and prospect are 
entir bound up in the expect of our union.” 

“the express of your sentiment of thi subject, my dear victor, 
give me more pleasur than I have for some time experienced. If you 
feel thus, we shall assuredli be happy, howev present event may cast 
a gloom over us. but it is thi gloom which appear to have taken so 
strong a hold of your mind that I wish to dissipate. tell me, 
therefore, whether you object to an immedi solemnis of the 
marriage. We have been unfortunate, and recent event have drawn us 
from that everyday tranquil befit my year and infirmities. you 
are younger; yet I do not suppose, possess as you are of a compet 
fortune, that an earli marriag would at all interfer with ani futur 
plan of honour and util that you may have formed. Do not suppose, 
however, that I wish to dictat happi to you or that a delay on 
your part would caus me ani seriou uneasiness. interpret my word 
with candour and answer me, I conjur you, with confid and 
sincerity.” 

I listen to my father in silenc and remain for some time incap 
of offer ani reply. I revolv rapidli in my mind a multitud of 
thought and endeavour to arriv at some conclusion. alas! To me 
the idea of an immedi union with my elizabeth wa one of horror and 
dismay. I wa bound by a solemn promis which I had not yet fulfil 
and dare not break, or if I did, what manifold miseri might not 
impend over me and my devot family! could I enter into a festiv 
with thi deadli weight yet hang round my neck and bow me to the 
ground? I must perform my engag and let the monster depart with 
hi mate befor I allow myself to enjoy the delight of a union from 
which I expect peace. 

I rememb also the necess impos upon me of either journey to 
england or enter into a long correspond with those philosoph 
of that countri whose knowledg and discoveri were of indispens 
use to me in my present undertaking. the latter method of obtain 
the desir intellig wa dilatori and unsatisfactory; besides, I 
had an insurmount avers to the idea of engag myself in my 
loathsom task in my father’ hous while in habit of familiar 
intercours with those I loved. I knew that a thousand fear 
accid might occur, the slightest of which would disclos a tale to 
thrill all connect with me with horror. I wa awar also that I 
should often lose all self-command, all capac of hide the 
harrow sensat that would possess me dure the progress of my 
unearthli occupation. I must absent myself from all I love while thu 
employed. onc commenced, it would quickli be achieved, and I might be 
restor to my famili in peac and happiness. My promis fulfilled, 
the monster would depart for ever. Or (so my fond fanci imaged) some 
accid might meanwhil occur to destroy him and put an end to my 
slaveri for ever. 

these feel dictat my answer to my father. I express a wish to 
visit england, but conceal the true reason of thi request, I 
cloth my desir under a guis which excit no suspicion, while I 
urg my desir with an earnest that easili induc my father to 
comply. after so long a period of an absorb melancholi that 
resembl mad in it intens and effects, he wa glad to find 
that I wa capabl of take pleasur in the idea of such a journey, 
and he hope that chang of scene and vari amus would, befor my 
return, have restor me entir to myself. 

the durat of my absenc wa left to my own choice; a few months, or 
at most a year, wa the period contemplated. one patern kind 
precaut he had taken to ensur my have a companion. without 
previous commun with me, he had, in concert with elizabeth, 
arrang that clerval should join me at strasburgh. thi interf 
with the solitud I covet for the prosecut of my task; yet at the 
commenc of my journey the presenc of my friend could in no way be 
an impediment, and truli I rejoic that thu I should be save mani 
hour of lonely, madden reflection. nay, henri might stand between 
me and the intrus of my foe. If I were alone, would he not at time 
forc hi abhor presenc on me to remind me of my task or to 
contempl it progress? 

To england, therefore, I wa bound, and it wa understood that my union 
with elizabeth should take place immedi on my return. My father’ 
age render him extrem avers to delay. for myself, there wa one 
reward I promis myself from my detest toils—on consol for my 
unparallel sufferings; it wa the prospect of that day when, 
enfranchis from my miser slavery, I might claim elizabeth and 
forget the past in my union with her. 

I now made arrang for my journey, but one feel haunt me 
which fill me with fear and agitation. dure my absenc I should 
leav my friend unconsci of the exist of their enemi and 
unprotect from hi attacks, exasper as he might be by my 
departure. but he had promis to follow me wherev I might go, and 
would he not accompani me to england? thi imagin wa dread in 
itself, but sooth inasmuch as it suppos the safeti of my friends. 
I wa agonis with the idea of the possibl that the revers of 
thi might happen. but through the whole period dure which I wa the 
slave of my creatur I allow myself to be govern by the impuls of 
the moment; and my present sensat strongli intim that the fiend 
would follow me and exempt my famili from the danger of hi 
machinations. 

It wa in the latter end of septemb that I again quit my nativ 
country. My journey had been my own suggestion, and elizabeth 
therefor acquiesced, but she wa fill with disquiet at the idea of 
my suffering, away from her, the inroad of miseri and grief. It had 
been her care which provid me a companion in clerval—and yet a man 
is blind to a thousand minut circumst which call forth a woman’ 
sedul attention. she long to bid me hasten my return; a thousand 
conflict emot render her mute as she bade me a tearful, silent 
farewell. 

I threw myself into the carriag that wa to convey me away, hardli 
know whither I wa going, and careless of what wa pass around. 
I rememb only, and it wa with a bitter anguish that I reflect on 
it, to order that my chemic instrument should be pack to go with 
me. fill with dreari imaginations, I pass through mani beauti 
and majest scenes, but my eye were fix and unobserving. I could 
onli think of the bourn of my travel and the work which wa to occupi 
me whilst they endured. 

after some day spent in listless indolence, dure which I travers 
mani leagues, I arriv at strasburgh, where I wait two day for 
clerval. He came. alas, how great wa the contrast between us! He 
wa aliv to everi new scene, joy when he saw the beauti of the 
set sun, and more happi when he beheld it rise and recomm a new 
day. He point out to me the shift colour of the landscap and 
the appear of the sky. “thi is what it is to live,” he cried; 
“now I enjoy existence! but you, my dear frankenstein, wherefor are 
you despond and sorrowful!” In truth, I wa occupi by gloomi 
thought and neither saw the descent of the even star nor the golden 
sunris reflect in the rhine. and you, my friend, would be far more 
amus with the journal of clerval, who observ the sceneri with an 
eye of feel and delight, than in listen to my reflections. I, a 
miser wretch, haunt by a curs that shut up everi avenu to 
enjoyment. 

We had agre to descend the rhine in a boat from strasburgh to 
rotterdam, whenc we might take ship for london. dure thi 
voyag we pass mani willowi island and saw sever beauti towns. 
We stay a day at mannheim, and on the fifth from our departur from 
strasburgh, arriv at mainz. the cours of the rhine below mainz 
becom much more picturesque. the river descend rapidli and wind 
between hills, not high, but steep, and of beauti forms. We saw 
mani ruin castl stand on the edg of precipices, surround by 
black woods, high and inaccessible. thi part of the rhine, indeed, 
present a singularli varieg landscape. In one spot you view 
rug hills, ruin castl overlook tremend precipices, with 
the dark rhine rush beneath; and on the sudden turn of a promontory, 
flourish vineyard with green slope bank and a meander river 
and popul town occupi the scene. 

We travel at the time of the vintag and heard the song of the labour 
as we glide down the stream. even I, depress in mind, and my spirit 
continu agit by gloomi feelings, even I wa pleased. I lay at the 
bottom of the boat, and as I gaze on the cloudless blue sky, I seem to 
drink in a tranquil to which I had long been a stranger. and if these 
were my sensations, who can describ those of henry? He felt as if he had 
been transport to fairy-land and enjoy a happi seldom tast by 
man. “I have seen,” he said, “the most beauti scene 
of my own country; I have visit the lake of lucern and uri, where the 
snowi mountain descend almost perpendicularli to the water, cast black 
and impenetr shades, which would caus a gloomi and mourn appear 
were it not for the most verdant island that reliev the eye by their gay 
appearance; I have seen thi lake agit by a tempest, when the wind tore 
up whirlwind of water and gave you an idea of what the water-spout must be 
on the great ocean; and the wave dash with furi the base of the mountain, 
where the priest and hi mistress were overwhelm by an avalanch and 
where their die voic are still said to be heard amid the paus of the 
nightli wind; I have seen the mountain of La valais, and the pay de vaud; 
but thi country, victor, pleas me more than all those wonders. the 
mountain of switzerland are more majest and strange, but there is a 
charm in the bank of thi divin river that I never befor saw equalled. 
look at that castl which overhang yon precipice; and that also on the 
island, almost conceal amongst the foliag of those love trees; and now 
that group of labour come from among their vines; and that villag 
half hid in the recess of the mountain. oh, sure the spirit that inhabit 
and guard thi place ha a soul more in harmoni with man than those who 
pile the glacier or retir to the inaccess peak of the mountain of 
our own country.” 

clerval! belov friend! even now it delight me to record your word and 
to dwell on the prais of which you are so emin deserving. He wa a 
be form in the “veri poetri of nature.” hi wild and 
enthusiast imagin wa chasten by the sensibl of hi heart. hi 
soul overflow with ardent affections, and hi friendship wa of that 
devot and wondrou natur that the worldly-mind teach us to look for onli 
in the imagination. but even human sympathi were not suffici to 
satisfi hi eager mind. the sceneri of extern nature, which other regard 
onli with admiration, he love with ardour:— 

——the sound cataract 
haunt him like a passion: the tall rock, 
the mountain, and the deep and gloomi wood, 
their colour and their forms, were then to him 
An appetite; a feeling, and a love, 
that had no need of a remot charm, 
By thought supplied, or ani interest 
unborrow’d from the eye. 

[wordsworth’ “tintern abbey”.] 



and where doe he now exist? Is thi gentl and love be lost 
for ever? ha thi mind, so replet with ideas, imagin fanci 
and magnificent, which form a world, whose exist depend on the 
life of it creator;—ha thi mind perished? doe it now onli exist 
in my memory? no, it is not thus; your form so divin wrought, and 
beam with beauty, ha decayed, but your spirit still visit and 
consol your unhappi friend. 

pardon thi gush of sorrow; these ineffectu word are but a slight 
tribut to the unexampl worth of henry, but they sooth my heart, 
overflow with the anguish which hi remembr creates. I will 
proceed with my tale. 

beyond cologn we descend to the plain of holland; and we resolv to 
post the remaind of our way, for the wind wa contrari and the stream of 
the river wa too gentl to aid us. 

our journey here lost the interest aris from beauti scenery, but we 
arriv in a few day at rotterdam, whenc we proceed by sea to england. 
It wa on a clear morning, in the latter day of december, that I first saw 
the white cliff of britain. the bank of the thame present a new scene; 
they were flat but fertile, and almost everi town wa mark by the 
remembr of some story. We saw tilburi fort and rememb the spanish 
armada, gravesend, woolwich, and greenwich—plac which I had heard 
of even in my country. 

At length we saw the numer steepl of london, st. paul’ tower 
abov all, and the tower fame in english history. 





chapter 19 

london wa our present point of rest; we determin to remain sever 
month in thi wonder and celebr city. clerval desir the 
intercours of the men of geniu and talent who flourish at thi 
time, but thi wa with me a secondari object; I wa princip 
occupi with the mean of obtain the inform necessari for the 
complet of my promis and quickli avail myself of the letter of 
introduct that I had brought with me, address to the most 
distinguish natur philosophers. 

If thi journey had taken place dure my day of studi and happiness, 
it would have afford me inexpress pleasure. but a blight had 
come over my existence, and I onli visit these peopl for the sake of 
the inform they might give me on the subject in which my interest 
wa so terribl profound. compani wa irksom to me; when alone, I 
could fill my mind with the sight of heaven and earth; the voic of 
henri sooth me, and I could thu cheat myself into a transitori 
peace. but busy, uninteresting, joyou face brought back despair to 
my heart. I saw an insurmount barrier place between me and my 
fellow men; thi barrier wa seal with the blood of william and 
justine, and to reflect on the event connect with those name fill 
my soul with anguish. 

but in clerval I saw the imag of my former self; he wa inquisit 
and anxiou to gain experi and instruction. the differ of 
manner which he observ wa to him an inexhaust sourc of 
instruct and amusement. He wa also pursu an object he had long 
had in view. hi design wa to visit india, in the belief that he had 
in hi knowledg of it variou languages, and in the view he had 
taken of it society, the mean of materi assist the progress of 
european colon and trade. In britain onli could he further the 
execut of hi plan. He wa for ever busy, and the onli check to hi 
enjoy wa my sorrow and deject mind. I tri to conceal thi 
as much as possible, that I might not debar him from the pleasur 
natur to one who wa enter on a new scene of life, undisturb by 
ani care or bitter recollection. I often refus to accompani him, 
alleg anoth engagement, that I might remain alone. I now also 
began to collect the materi necessari for my new creation, and thi 
wa to me like the tortur of singl drop of water continu fall 
on the head. everi thought that wa devot to it wa an extrem 
anguish, and everi word that I spoke in allus to it caus my lip 
to quiver, and my heart to palpitate. 

after pass some month in london, we receiv a letter from a person in 
scotland who had formerli been our visitor at geneva. He mention the 
beauti of hi nativ countri and ask us if those were not suffici 
allur to induc us to prolong our journey as far north as perth, 
where he resided. clerval eagerli desir to accept thi invitation, and I, 
although I abhor society, wish to view again mountain and stream and 
all the wondrou work with which natur adorn her chosen dwelling-places. 

We had arriv in england at the begin of october, and it wa now 
february. We accordingli determin to commenc our journey toward the 
north at the expir of anoth month. In thi expedit we did not 
intend to follow the great road to edinburgh, but to visit windsor, oxford, 
matlock, and the cumberland lakes, resolv to arriv at the complet of 
thi tour about the end of july. I pack up my chemic instrument and 
the materi I had collected, resolv to finish my labour in some 
obscur nook in the northern highland of scotland. 

We quit london on the 27th of march and remain a few day at 
windsor, rambl in it beauti forest. thi wa a new scene to us 
mountaineers; the majest oaks, the quantiti of game, and the herd of 
state deer were all novelti to us. 

from thenc we proceed to oxford. As we enter thi city, our mind 
were fill with the remembr of the event that had been transact 
there more than a centuri and a half before. It wa here that charl 
I. had collect hi forces. thi citi had remain faith to him, 
after the whole nation had forsaken hi caus to join the standard of 
parliament and liberty. the memori of that unfortun king and hi 
companions, the amiabl falkland, the insol goring, hi queen, and 
son, gave a peculiar interest to everi part of the citi which they 
might be suppos to have inhabited. the spirit of elder day found a 
dwell here, and we delight to trace it footsteps. If these 
feel had not found an imaginari gratification, the appear of 
the citi had yet in itself suffici beauti to obtain our admiration. 
the colleg are ancient and picturesque; the street are almost 
magnificent; and the love isis, which flow besid it through meadow 
of exquisit verdure, is spread forth into a placid expans of waters, 
which reflect it majest assemblag of towers, and spires, and 
domes, embosom among age trees. 

I enjoy thi scene, and yet my enjoy wa embitt both by the 
memori of the past and the anticip of the future. I wa form 
for peac happiness. dure my youth day discont never 
visit my mind, and if I wa ever overcom by _ennui_, the sight of what 
is beauti in natur or the studi of what is excel and sublim in 
the product of man could alway interest my heart and commun 
elast to my spirits. but I am a blast tree; the bolt ha 
enter my soul; and I felt then that I should surviv to exhibit what 
I shall soon ceas to be—a miser spectacl of wreck humanity, 
pitiabl to other and intoler to myself. 

We pass a consider period at oxford, rambl among it environ 
and endeavour to identifi everi spot which might relat to the most 
anim epoch of english history. our littl voyag of discoveri 
were often prolong by the success object that present 
themselves. We visit the tomb of the illustri hampden and the 
field on which that patriot fell. for a moment my soul wa elev 
from it debas and miser fear to contempl the divin idea 
of liberti and self-sacrific of which these sight were the monument 
and the remembrancers. for an instant I dare to shake off my chain 
and look around me with a free and lofti spirit, but the iron had eaten 
into my flesh, and I sank again, trembl and hopeless, into my 
miser self. 

We left oxford with regret and proceed to matlock, which wa our next 
place of rest. the countri in the neighbourhood of thi villag 
resembled, to a greater degree, the sceneri of switzerland; but 
everyth is on a lower scale, and the green hill want the crown of 
distant white alp which alway attend on the pini mountain of my 
nativ country. We visit the wondrou cave and the littl cabinet 
of natur history, where the curios are dispos in the same 
manner as in the collect at servox and chamounix. the latter name 
made me trembl when pronounc by henry, and I hasten to quit 
matlock, with which that terribl scene wa thu associated. 

from derby, still journey northwards, we pass two month in 
cumberland and westmorland. I could now almost fanci myself among the 
swiss mountains. the littl patch of snow which yet linger on the 
northern side of the mountains, the lakes, and the dash of the 
rocki stream were all familiar and dear sight to me. here also we 
made some acquaintances, who almost contriv to cheat me into 
happiness. the delight of clerval wa proportion greater than 
mine; hi mind expand in the compani of men of talent, and he found 
in hi own natur greater capac and resourc than he could have 
imagin himself to have possess while he associ with hi 
inferiors. “I could pass my life here,” said he to me; “and among 
these mountain I should scarc regret switzerland and the rhine.” 

but he found that a traveller’ life is one that includ much pain 
amidst it enjoyments. hi feel are for ever on the stretch; and 
when he begin to sink into repose, he find himself oblig to quit 
that on which he rest in pleasur for someth new, which again 
engag hi attention, and which also he forsak for other novelties. 

We had scarc visit the variou lake of cumberland and westmorland 
and conceiv an affect for some of the inhabit when the period 
of our appoint with our scotch friend approached, and we left them 
to travel on. for my own part I wa not sorry. I had now neglect my 
promis for some time, and I fear the effect of the dæmon’ 
disappointment. He might remain in switzerland and wreak hi vengeanc 
on my relatives. thi idea pursu me and torment me at everi moment 
from which I might otherwis have snatch repos and peace. I wait 
for my letter with feverish impatience; if they were delay I wa 
miser and overcom by a thousand fears; and when they arriv and I 
saw the superscript of elizabeth or my father, I hardli dare to 
read and ascertain my fate. sometim I thought that the fiend 
follow me and might expedit my remiss by murder my companion. 
when these thought possess me, I would not quit henri for a moment, 
but follow him as hi shadow, to protect him from the fanci rage of 
hi destroyer. I felt as if I had commit some great crime, the 
conscious of which haunt me. I wa guiltless, but I had inde 
drawn down a horribl curs upon my head, as mortal as that of crime. 

I visit edinburgh with languid eye and mind; and yet that citi might 
have interest the most unfortun being. clerval did not like it so well 
as oxford, for the antiqu of the latter citi wa more pleas to him. 
but the beauti and regular of the new town of edinburgh, it romant 
castl and it environs, the most delight in the world, arthur’ 
seat, st. bernard’ well, and the pentland hills, compens him for 
the chang and fill him with cheer and admiration. but I wa 
impati to arriv at the termin of my journey. 

We left edinburgh in a week, pass through coupar, st. andrew’s, and 
along the bank of the tay, to perth, where our friend expect us. 
but I wa in no mood to laugh and talk with stranger or enter into 
their feel or plan with the good humour expect from a guest; and 
accordingli I told clerval that I wish to make the tour of scotland 
alone. “do you,” said I, “enjoy yourself, and let thi be our 
rendezvous. I may be absent a month or two; but do not interfer with 
my motions, I entreat you; leav me to peac and solitud for a short 
time; and when I return, I hope it will be with a lighter heart, more 
congeni to your own temper.” 

henri wish to dissuad me, but see me bent on thi plan, ceas to 
remonstrate. He entreat me to write often. “I had rather be with 
you,” he said, “in your solitari rambles, than with these scotch 
people, whom I do not know; hasten, then, my dear friend, to return, 
that I may again feel myself somewhat at home, which I cannot do in 
your absence.” 

have part from my friend, I determin to visit some remot spot of 
scotland and finish my work in solitude. I did not doubt but that the 
monster follow me and would discov himself to me when I should have 
finished, that he might receiv hi companion. 

with thi resolut I travers the northern highland and fix on one of 
the remotest of the orkney as the scene of my labours. It wa a place 
fit for such a work, be hardli more than a rock whose high side were 
continu beaten upon by the waves. the soil wa barren, scarc 
afford pastur for a few miser cows, and oatmeal for it 
inhabitants, which consist of five persons, whose gaunt and scraggi limb 
gave token of their miser fare. veget and bread, when they 
indulg in such luxuries, and even fresh water, wa to be procur from 
the mainland, which wa about five mile distant. 

On the whole island there were but three miser huts, and one of 
these wa vacant when I arrived. thi I hired. It contain but two 
rooms, and these exhibit all the squalid of the most miser 
penury. the thatch had fallen in, the wall were unplastered, and the 
door wa off it hinges. I order it to be repaired, bought some 
furniture, and took possession, an incid which would doubtless have 
occas some surpris had not all the sens of the cottag been 
benumb by want and squalid poverty. As it was, I live ungaz at 
and unmolested, hardli thank for the pittanc of food and cloth 
which I gave, so much doe suffer blunt even the coarsest sensat 
of men. 

In thi retreat I devot the morn to labour; but in the evening, 
when the weather permitted, I walk on the stoni beach of the sea to 
listen to the wave as they roar and dash at my feet. It wa a 
monoton yet ever-chang scene. I thought of switzerland; it wa 
far differ from thi desol and appal landscape. it hill 
are cover with vines, and it cottag are scatter thickli in the 
plains. it fair lake reflect a blue and gentl sky, and when 
troubl by the winds, their tumult is but as the play of a live 
infant when compar to the roar of the giant ocean. 

In thi manner I distribut my occup when I first arrived, but 
as I proceed in my labour, it becam everi day more horribl and 
irksom to me. sometim I could not prevail on myself to enter my 
laboratori for sever days, and at other time I toil day and night 
in order to complet my work. It was, indeed, a filthi process in 
which I wa engaged. dure my first experiment, a kind of 
enthusiast frenzi had blind me to the horror of my employment; my 
mind wa intent fix on the consumm of my labour, and my eye 
were shut to the horror of my proceedings. but now I went to it in 
cold blood, and my heart often sicken at the work of my hands. 

thu situated, employ in the most detest occupation, immers in 
a solitud where noth could for an instant call my attent from 
the actual scene in which I wa engaged, my spirit becam unequal; I 
grew restless and nervous. everi moment I fear to meet my 
persecutor. sometim I sat with my eye fix on the ground, fear 
to rais them lest they should encount the object which I so much 
dread to behold. I fear to wander from the sight of my fellow 
creatur lest when alon he should come to claim hi companion. 

In the mean time I work on, and my labour wa alreadi consider 
advanced. I look toward it complet with a tremul and eager 
hope, which I dare not trust myself to question but which wa 
intermix with obscur forebod of evil that made my heart sicken 
in my bosom. 





chapter 20 

I sat one even in my laboratory; the sun had set, and the moon wa just 
rise from the sea; I had not suffici light for my employment, and I 
remain idle, in a paus of consider of whether I should leav my 
labour for the night or hasten it conclus by an unremit attent 
to it. As I sat, a train of reflect occur to me which led me to 
consid the effect of what I wa now doing. three year before, I wa 
engag in the same manner and had creat a fiend whose unparallel 
barbar had desol my heart and fill it for ever with the bitterest 
remorse. I wa now about to form anoth be of whose disposit I wa 
alik ignorant; she might becom ten thousand time more malign than her 
mate and delight, for it own sake, in murder and wretchedness. He had 
sworn to quit the neighbourhood of man and hide himself in deserts, but she 
had not; and she, who in all probabl wa to becom a think and 
reason animal, might refus to compli with a compact made befor her 
creation. they might even hate each other; the creatur who alreadi live 
loath hi own deformity, and might he not conceiv a greater abhorr 
for it when it came befor hi eye in the femal form? she also might turn 
with disgust from him to the superior beauti of man; she might quit him, 
and he be again alone, exasper by the fresh provoc of be 
desert by one of hi own species. 

even if they were to leav europ and inhabit the desert of the new world, 
yet one of the first result of those sympathi for which the dæmon 
thirst would be children, and a race of devil would be propag upon 
the earth who might make the veri exist of the speci of man a 
condit precari and full of terror. had I right, for my own benefit, 
to inflict thi curs upon everlast generations? I had befor been move 
by the sophism of the be I had created; I had been struck senseless by 
hi fiendish threats; but now, for the first time, the wicked of my 
promis burst upon me; I shudder to think that futur age might curs me 
as their pest, whose selfish had not hesit to buy it own peac at 
the price, perhaps, of the exist of the whole human race. 

I trembl and my heart fail within me, when, on look up, I saw by 
the light of the moon the dæmon at the casement. A ghastli grin 
wrinkl hi lip as he gaze on me, where I sat fulfil the task 
which he had allot to me. yes, he had follow me in my travels; he 
had loiter in forests, hid himself in caves, or taken refug in wide 
and desert heaths; and he now came to mark my progress and claim the 
fulfil of my promise. 

As I look on him, hi counten express the utmost extent of 
malic and treachery. I thought with a sensat of mad on my 
promis of creat anoth like to him, and trembl with passion, 
tore to piec the thing on which I wa engaged. the wretch saw me 
destroy the creatur on whose futur exist he depend for 
happiness, and with a howl of devilish despair and revenge, withdrew. 

I left the room, and lock the door, made a solemn vow in my own 
heart never to resum my labours; and then, with trembl steps, I 
sought my own apartment. I wa alone; none were near me to dissip 
the gloom and reliev me from the sicken oppress of the most 
terribl reveries. 

sever hour passed, and I remain near my window gaze on the sea; 
it wa almost motionless, for the wind were hushed, and all natur 
repos under the eye of the quiet moon. A few fish vessel alon 
speck the water, and now and then the gentl breez waft the sound 
of voic as the fishermen call to one another. I felt the silence, 
although I wa hardli consciou of it extrem profundity, until my ear 
wa suddenli arrest by the paddl of oar near the shore, and a 
person land close to my house. 

In a few minut after, I heard the creak of my door, as if some one 
endeavour to open it softly. I trembl from head to foot; I felt a 
presenti of who it wa and wish to rous one of the peasant who 
dwelt in a cottag not far from mine; but I wa overcom by the sensat 
of helplessness, so often felt in fright dreams, when you in vain 
endeavour to fli from an impend danger, and wa root to the spot. 

present I heard the sound of footstep along the passage; the door 
opened, and the wretch whom I dread appeared. shut the door, he 
approach me and said in a smother voice, 

“you have destroy the work which you began; what is it that you 
intend? Do you dare to break your promise? I have endur toil and misery; 
I left switzerland with you; I crept along the shore of the rhine, among 
it willow island and over the summit of it hills. I have dwelt mani 
month in the heath of england and among the desert of scotland. I have 
endur incalcul fatigue, and cold, and hunger; do you dare destroy my 
hopes?” 

“begone! I do break my promise; never will I creat anoth like 
yourself, equal in deform and wickedness.” 

“slave, I befor reason with you, but you have prove yourself 
unworthi of my condescension. rememb that I have power; you believ 
yourself miserable, but I can make you so wretch that the light of 
day will be hate to you. you are my creator, but I am your master; 
obey!” 

“the hour of my irresolut is past, and the period of your power is 
arrived. your threat cannot move me to do an act of wickedness; but 
they confirm me in a determin of not creat you a companion in 
vice. shall I, in cool blood, set loos upon the earth a dæmon whose 
delight is in death and wretchedness? begone! I am firm, and your 
word will onli exasper my rage.” 

the monster saw my determin in my face and gnash hi teeth in the 
impot of anger. “shall each man,” cri he, “find a 
wife for hi bosom, and each beast have hi mate, and I be alone? I had 
feel of affection, and they were requit by detest and scorn. 
man! you may hate, but beware! your hour will pass in dread and misery, 
and soon the bolt will fall which must ravish from you your happi for 
ever. are you to be happi while I grovel in the intens of my 
wretchedness? you can blast my other passions, but reveng 
remains—revenge, henceforth dearer than light or food! I may die, but 
first you, my tyrant and tormentor, shall curs the sun that gaze on your 
misery. beware, for I am fearless and therefor powerful. I will watch with 
the wili of a snake, that I may sting with it venom. man, you shall 
repent of the injuri you inflict.” 

“devil, cease; and do not poison the air with these sound of malice. 
I have declar my resolut to you, and I am no coward to bend 
beneath words. leav me; I am inexorable.” 

“it is well. I go; but remember, I shall be with you on your 
wedding-night.” 

I start forward and exclaimed, “villain! befor you sign my 
death-warrant, be sure that you are yourself safe.” 

I would have seiz him, but he elud me and quit the hous with 
precipitation. In a few moment I saw him in hi boat, which shot 
across the water with an arrowi swift and wa soon lost amidst the 
waves. 

all wa again silent, but hi word rang in my ears. I burn with rage to 
pursu the murder of my peac and precipit him into the ocean. I 
walk up and down my room hastili and perturbed, while my imagin 
conjur up a thousand imag to torment and sting me. whi had I not 
follow him and close with him in mortal strife? but I had suffer him 
to depart, and he had direct hi cours toward the mainland. I shudder 
to think who might be the next victim sacrif to hi insati revenge. 
and then I thought again of hi words—“_i will be with you on 
your wedding-night._” that, then, wa the period fix for the 
fulfil of my destiny. In that hour I should die and at onc satisfi and 
extinguish hi malice. the prospect did not move me to fear; yet when I 
thought of my belov elizabeth, of her tear and endless sorrow, when she 
should find her lover so barbar snatch from her, tears, the first I 
had shed for mani months, stream from my eyes, and I resolv not to fall 
befor my enemi without a bitter struggle. 

the night pass away, and the sun rose from the ocean; my feel becam 
calmer, if it may be call calm when the violenc of rage sink into 
the depth of despair. I left the house, the horrid scene of the last 
night’ contention, and walk on the beach of the sea, which I 
almost regard as an insuper barrier between me and my fellow 
creatures; nay, a wish that such should prove the fact stole across me. I 
desir that I might pass my life on that barren rock, wearily, it is true, 
but uninterrupt by ani sudden shock of misery. If I returned, it wa to 
be sacrif or to see those whom I most love die under the grasp of a 
dæmon whom I had myself created. 

I walk about the isl like a restless spectre, separ from all it 
love and miser in the separation. when it becam noon, and the 
sun rose higher, I lay down on the grass and wa overpow by a deep 
sleep. I had been awak the whole of the preced night, my nerv 
were agitated, and my eye inflam by watch and misery. the sleep 
into which I now sank refresh me; and when I awoke, I again felt as 
if I belong to a race of human be like myself, and I began to 
reflect upon what had pass with greater composure; yet still the 
word of the fiend rang in my ear like a death-knell; they appear 
like a dream, yet distinct and oppress as a reality. 

the sun had far descended, and I still sat on the shore, satisfi my 
appetite, which had becom ravenous, with an oaten cake, when I saw a 
fishing-boat land close to me, and one of the men brought me a packet; 
it contain letter from geneva, and one from clerval entreat me to 
join him. He said that he wa wear away hi time fruitlessli where 
he was, that letter from the friend he had form in london desir 
hi return to complet the negoti they had enter into for hi 
indian enterprise. He could not ani longer delay hi departure; but as 
hi journey to london might be followed, even sooner than he now 
conjectured, by hi longer voyage, he entreat me to bestow as much of 
my societi on him as I could spare. He besought me, therefore, to 
leav my solitari isl and to meet him at perth, that we might proceed 
southward together. thi letter in a degre recal me to life, and 
I determin to quit my island at the expir of two days. 

yet, befor I departed, there wa a task to perform, on which I shudder 
to reflect; I must pack up my chemic instruments, and for that purpos I 
must enter the room which had been the scene of my odiou work, and I must 
handl those utensil the sight of which wa sicken to me. the next 
morning, at daybreak, I summon suffici courag and unlock the door 
of my laboratory. the remain of the half-finish creature, whom I had 
destroyed, lay scatter on the floor, and I almost felt as if I had 
mangl the live flesh of a human being. I paus to collect myself and 
then enter the chamber. with trembl hand I convey the instrument 
out of the room, but I reflect that I ought not to leav the relic of my 
work to excit the horror and suspicion of the peasants; and I accordingli 
put them into a basket, with a great quantiti of stones, and lay them 
up, determin to throw them into the sea that veri night; and in the 
meantim I sat upon the beach, employ in clean and arrang my 
chemic apparatus. 

noth could be more complet than the alter that had taken place 
in my feel sinc the night of the appear of the dæmon. I had 
befor regard my promis with a gloomi despair as a thing that, with 
whatev consequences, must be fulfilled; but I now felt as if a film 
had been taken from befor my eye and that I for the first time saw 
clearly. the idea of renew my labour did not for one instant occur 
to me; the threat I had heard weigh on my thoughts, but I did not 
reflect that a voluntari act of mine could avert it. I had resolv in 
my own mind that to creat anoth like the fiend I had first made 
would be an act of the basest and most atroci selfishness, and I 
banish from my mind everi thought that could lead to a differ 
conclusion. 

between two and three in the morn the moon rose; and I then, put my 
basket aboard a littl skiff, sail out about four mile from the shore. 
the scene wa perfectli solitary; a few boat were return toward land, 
but I sail away from them. I felt as if I wa about the commiss of a 
dread crime and avoid with shudder anxieti ani encount with my 
fellow creatures. At one time the moon, which had befor been clear, wa 
suddenli overspread by a thick cloud, and I took advantag of the moment of 
dark and cast my basket into the sea; I listen to the gurgl sound 
as it sank and then sail away from the spot. the sky becam clouded, but 
the air wa pure, although chill by the northeast breez that wa then 
rising. but it refresh me and fill me with such agreeabl sensat 
that I resolv to prolong my stay on the water, and fix the rudder in a 
direct position, stretch myself at the bottom of the boat. cloud hid the 
moon, everyth wa obscure, and I heard onli the sound of the boat as it 
keel cut through the waves; the murmur lull me, and in a short time I 
slept soundly. 

I do not know how long I remain in thi situation, but when I awok I 
found that the sun had alreadi mount considerably. the wind wa high, and 
the wave continu threaten the safeti of my littl skiff. I found 
that the wind wa northeast and must have driven me far from the coast from 
which I had embarked. I endeavour to chang my cours but quickli found 
that if I again made the attempt the boat would be instantli fill with 
water. thu situated, my onli resourc wa to drive befor the wind. I 
confess that I felt a few sensat of terror. I had no compass with me 
and wa so slenderli acquaint with the geographi of thi part of the 
world that the sun wa of littl benefit to me. I might be driven into the 
wide atlant and feel all the tortur of starvat or be swallow up in 
the immeasur water that roar and buffet around me. I had alreadi 
been out mani hour and felt the torment of a burn thirst, a prelud to 
my other sufferings. I look on the heavens, which were cover by cloud 
that flew befor the wind, onli to be replac by others; I look upon the 
sea; it wa to be my grave. “fiend,” I exclaimed, “your 
task is alreadi fulfilled!” I thought of elizabeth, of my father, and 
of clerval—al left behind, on whom the monster might satisfi hi 
sanguinari and merciless passions. thi idea plung me into a reveri so 
despair and fright that even now, when the scene is on the point of 
close befor me for ever, I shudder to reflect on it. 

some hour pass thus; but by degrees, as the sun declin toward the 
horizon, the wind die away into a gentl breez and the sea becam 
free from breakers. but these gave place to a heavi swell; I felt sick 
and hardli abl to hold the rudder, when suddenli I saw a line of high 
land toward the south. 

almost spent, as I was, by fatigu and the dread suspens I endur 
for sever hours, thi sudden certainti of life rush like a flood of 
warm joy to my heart, and tear gush from my eyes. 

how mutabl are our feelings, and how strang is that cling love we have 
of life even in the excess of misery! I construct anoth sail with a 
part of my dress and eagerli steer my cours toward the land. It had a 
wild and rocki appearance, but as I approach nearer I easili perceiv 
the trace of cultivation. I saw vessel near the shore and found myself 
suddenli transport back to the neighbourhood of civilis man. I 
care trace the wind of the land and hail a steepl which I at 
length saw issu from behind a small promontory. As I wa in a state of 
extrem debility, I resolv to sail directli toward the town, as a place 
where I could most easili procur nourishment. fortun I had money with 
me. As I turn the promontori I perceiv a small neat town and a good 
harbour, which I entered, my heart bound with joy at my unexpect 
escape. 

As I wa occupi in fix the boat and arrang the sails, sever 
peopl crowd toward the spot. they seem much surpris at my 
appearance, but instead of offer me ani assistance, whisper 
togeth with gestur that at ani other time might have produc in me 
a slight sensat of alarm. As it was, I mere remark that they 
spoke english, and I therefor address them in that language. “mi 
good friends,” said I, “will you be so kind as to tell me the name of 
thi town and inform me where I am?” 

“you will know that soon enough,” repli a man with a hoars voice. 
“mayb you are come to a place that will not prove much to your taste, 
but you will not be consult as to your quarters, I promis you.” 

I wa exceedingli surpris on receiv so rude an answer from a 
stranger, and I wa also disconcert on perceiv the frown and 
angri counten of hi companions. “whi do you answer me so 
roughly?” I replied. “sure it is not the custom of englishmen to 
receiv stranger so inhospitably.” 

“I do not know,” said the man, “what the custom of the 
english may be, but it is the custom of the irish to hate villains.” 

while thi strang dialogu continued, I perceiv the crowd rapidli 
increase. their face express a mixtur of curios and anger, which 
annoy and in some degre alarm me. I inquir the way to the inn, but 
no one replied. I then move forward, and a murmur sound aros from the 
crowd as they follow and surround me, when an ill-look man 
approach tap me on the shoulder and said, “come, sir, you must 
follow me to mr. kirwin’ to give an account of yourself.” 

“who is mr. kirwin? whi am I to give an account of myself? Is not 
thi a free country?” 

“ay, sir, free enough for honest folks. mr. kirwin is a magistrate, 
and you are to give an account of the death of a gentleman who wa 
found murder here last night.” 

thi answer startl me, but I present recov myself. I wa innocent; 
that could easili be proved; accordingli I follow my conductor in silenc 
and wa led to one of the best hous in the town. I wa readi to sink from 
fatigu and hunger, but be surround by a crowd, I thought it polit 
to rous all my strength, that no physic debil might be constru into 
apprehens or consciou guilt. littl did I then expect the calam that 
wa in a few moment to overwhelm me and extinguish in horror and despair 
all fear of ignomini or death. 

I must paus here, for it requir all my fortitud to recal the memori of 
the fright event which I am about to relate, in proper detail, to my 
recollection. 





chapter 21 

I wa soon introduc into the presenc of the magistrate, an old 
benevol man with calm and mild manners. He look upon me, however, 
with some degre of severity, and then, turn toward my conductors, 
he ask who appear as wit on thi occasion. 

about half a dozen men came forward; and, one be select by the 
magistrate, he depos that he had been out fish the night befor with 
hi son and brother-in-law, daniel nugent, when, about ten o’clock, 
they observ a strong northerli blast rising, and they accordingli put in 
for port. It wa a veri dark night, as the moon had not yet risen; they did 
not land at the harbour, but, as they had been accustomed, at a creek about 
two mile below. He walk on first, carri a part of the fish tackle, 
and hi companion follow him at some distance. As he wa proceed 
along the sands, he struck hi foot against someth and fell at hi 
length on the ground. hi companion came up to assist him, and by the 
light of their lantern they found that he had fallen on the bodi of a man, 
who wa to all appear dead. their first supposit wa that it wa the 
corps of some person who had been drown and wa thrown on shore by the 
waves, but on examin they found that the cloth were not wet and even 
that the bodi wa not then cold. they instantli carri it to the cottag 
of an old woman near the spot and endeavoured, but in vain, to restor it 
to life. It appear to be a handsom young man, about five and twenti 
year of age. He had appar been strangled, for there wa no sign of 
ani violenc except the black mark of finger on hi neck. 

the first part of thi deposit did not in the least interest me, but 
when the mark of the finger wa mention I rememb the murder of 
my brother and felt myself extrem agitated; my limb trembled, and a 
mist came over my eyes, which oblig me to lean on a chair for 
support. the magistr observ me with a keen eye and of cours drew 
an unfavour auguri from my manner. 

the son confirm hi father’ account, but when daniel nugent wa 
call he swore posit that just befor the fall of hi companion, he 
saw a boat, with a singl man in it, at a short distanc from the shore; 
and as far as he could judg by the light of a few stars, it wa the same 
boat in which I had just landed. 

A woman depos that she live near the beach and wa stand at the door 
of her cottage, wait for the return of the fishermen, about an hour 
befor she heard of the discoveri of the body, when she saw a boat with 
onli one man in it push off from that part of the shore where the corps 
wa afterward found. 

anoth woman confirm the account of the fishermen have brought the 
bodi into her house; it wa not cold. they put it into a bed and 
rub it, and daniel went to the town for an apothecary, but life wa 
quit gone. 

sever other men were examin concern my landing, and they agre 
that, with the strong north wind that had arisen dure the night, it 
wa veri probabl that I had beaten about for mani hour and had been 
oblig to return nearli to the same spot from which I had departed. 
besides, they observ that it appear that I had brought the bodi 
from anoth place, and it wa like that as I did not appear to know 
the shore, I might have put into the harbour ignor of the distanc 
of the town of —— from the place where I had deposit the corpse. 

mr. kirwin, on hear thi evidence, desir that I should be taken into 
the room where the bodi lay for interment, that it might be observ what 
effect the sight of it would produc upon me. thi idea wa probabl 
suggest by the extrem agit I had exhibit when the mode of the 
murder had been described. I wa accordingli conducted, by the magistr 
and sever other persons, to the inn. I could not help be struck by the 
strang coincid that had taken place dure thi event night; but, 
know that I had been convers with sever person in the island I had 
inhabit about the time that the bodi had been found, I wa perfectli 
tranquil as to the consequ of the affair. 

I enter the room where the corps lay and wa led up to the coffin. how 
can I describ my sensat on behold it? I feel yet parch with 
horror, nor can I reflect on that terribl moment without shudder and 
agony. the examination, the presenc of the magistr and witnesses, 
pass like a dream from my memori when I saw the lifeless form of henri 
clerval stretch befor me. I gasp for breath, and throw myself on 
the body, I exclaimed, “have my murder machin depriv you 
also, my dearest henry, of life? two I have alreadi destroyed; other 
victim await their destiny; but you, clerval, my friend, my 
benefactor—” 

the human frame could no longer support the agoni that I endured, and 
I wa carri out of the room in strong convulsions. 

A fever succeed to this. I lay for two month on the point of death; my 
ravings, as I afterward heard, were frightful; I call myself the 
murder of william, of justine, and of clerval. sometim I entreat my 
attend to assist me in the destruct of the fiend by whom I wa 
tormented; and at other I felt the finger of the monster alreadi grasp 
my neck, and scream aloud with agoni and terror. fortunately, as I spoke 
my nativ language, mr. kirwin alon understood me; but my gestur and 
bitter cri were suffici to affright the other witnesses. 

whi did I not die? more miser than man ever wa before, whi did I not 
sink into forget and rest? death snatch away mani bloom 
children, the onli hope of their dote parents; how mani bride and 
youth lover have been one day in the bloom of health and hope, and the 
next a prey for worm and the decay of the tomb! Of what materi wa I 
made that I could thu resist so mani shocks, which, like the turn of 
the wheel, continu renew the torture? 

but I wa doom to live and in two month found myself as awak from 
a dream, in a prison, stretch on a wretch bed, surround by 
gaolers, turnkeys, bolts, and all the miser apparatu of a dungeon. 
It wa morning, I remember, when I thu awok to understanding; I had 
forgotten the particular of what had happen and onli felt as if some 
great misfortun had suddenli overwhelm me; but when I look around 
and saw the bar window and the squalid of the room in which I 
was, all flash across my memori and I groan bitterly. 

thi sound disturb an old woman who wa sleep in a chair besid 
me. she wa a hire nurse, the wife of one of the turnkeys, and her 
counten express all those bad qualiti which often characteris 
that class. the line of her face were hard and rude, like that of 
person accustom to see without sympathis in sight of misery. her 
tone express her entir indifference; she address me in english, 
and the voic struck me as one that I had heard dure my sufferings. 

“are you better now, sir?” said she. 

I repli in the same language, with a feebl voice, “I believ I am; 
but if it be all true, if inde I did not dream, I am sorri that I am 
still aliv to feel thi miseri and horror.” 

“for that matter,” repli the old woman, “if you mean about the 
gentleman you murdered, I believ that it were better for you if you 
were dead, for I fanci it will go hard with you! however, that’ none 
of my business; I am sent to nurs you and get you well; I do my duti 
with a safe conscience; it were well if everybodi did the same.” 

I turn with loath from the woman who could utter so unfeel a 
speech to a person just saved, on the veri edg of death; but I felt 
languid and unabl to reflect on all that had passed. the whole seri 
of my life appear to me as a dream; I sometim doubt if inde it 
were all true, for it never present itself to my mind with the forc 
of reality. 

As the imag that float befor me becam more distinct, I grew 
feverish; a dark press around me; no one wa near me who sooth 
me with the gentl voic of love; no dear hand support me. the 
physician came and prescrib medicines, and the old woman prepar 
them for me; but utter careless wa visibl in the first, and the 
express of brutal wa strongli mark in the visag of the 
second. who could be interest in the fate of a murder but the 
hangman who would gain hi fee? 

these were my first reflections, but I soon learn that mr. kirwin had 
shown me extrem kindness. He had caus the best room in the prison 
to be prepar for me (wretch inde wa the best); and it wa he who 
had provid a physician and a nurse. It is true, he seldom came to 
see me, for although he ardent desir to reliev the suffer of 
everi human creature, he did not wish to be present at the agoni and 
miser rave of a murderer. He came, therefore, sometim to see 
that I wa not neglected, but hi visit were short and with long 
intervals. 

one day, while I wa gradual recovering, I wa seat in a chair, my eye 
half open and my cheek livid like those in death. I wa overcom by gloom 
and miseri and often reflect I had better seek death than desir to 
remain in a world which to me wa replet with wretchedness. At one time I 
consid whether I should not declar myself guilti and suffer the 
penalti of the law, less innoc than poor justin had been. such were my 
thought when the door of my apart wa open and mr. kirwin entered. 
hi counten express sympathi and compassion; he drew a chair close to 
mine and address me in french, 

“I fear that thi place is veri shock to you; can I do anyth to 
make you more comfortable?” 

“I thank you, but all that you mention is noth to me; on the whole 
earth there is no comfort which I am capabl of receiving.” 

“I know that the sympathi of a stranger can be but of littl relief to 
one born down as you are by so strang a misfortune. but you will, I 
hope, soon quit thi melancholi abode, for doubtless evid can 
easili be brought to free you from the crimin charge.” 

“that is my least concern; I am, by a cours of strang events, becom 
the most miser of mortals. persecut and tortur as I am and 
have been, can death be ani evil to me?” 

“noth inde could be more unfortun and agonis than the 
strang chanc that have late occurred. you were thrown, by some 
surpris accident, on thi shore, renown for it hospitality, 
seiz immediately, and charg with murder. the first sight that wa 
present to your eye wa the bodi of your friend, murder in so 
unaccount a manner and placed, as it were, by some fiend across 
your path.” 

As mr. kirwin said this, notwithstand the agit I endur on 
thi retrospect of my sufferings, I also felt consider surpris at 
the knowledg he seem to possess concern me. I suppos some 
astonish wa exhibit in my countenance, for mr. kirwin hasten 
to say, 

“immedi upon your be taken ill, all the paper that were on 
your person were brought me, and I examin them that I might discov some 
trace by which I could send to your relat an account of your misfortun 
and illness. I found sever letters, and, among others, one which I 
discov from it commenc to be from your father. I instantli wrote 
to geneva; nearli two month have elaps sinc the departur of my letter. 
but you are ill; even now you tremble; you are unfit for agit of ani 
kind.” 

“thi suspens is a thousand time wors than the most horribl event; 
tell me what new scene of death ha been acted, and whose murder I am 
now to lament?” 

“your famili is perfectli well,” said mr. kirwin with 
gentleness; “and someone, a friend, is come to visit you.” 

I know not by what chain of thought the idea present itself, but it 
instantli dart into my mind that the murder had come to mock at my 
miseri and taunt me with the death of clerval, as a new incit for 
me to compli with hi hellish desires. I put my hand befor my eyes, 
and cri out in agony, 

“oh! take him away! I cannot see him; for god’ sake, do not 
let him enter!” 

mr. kirwin regard me with a troubl countenance. He could not help 
regard my exclam as a presumpt of my guilt and said in 
rather a sever tone, 

“I should have thought, young man, that the presenc of your father 
would have been welcom instead of inspir such violent repugnance.” 

“mi father!” cri I, while everi featur and everi muscl wa relax 
from anguish to pleasure. “i my father inde come? how kind, how 
veri kind! but where is he, whi doe he not hasten to me?” 

My chang of manner surpris and pleas the magistrate; perhap he 
thought that my former exclam wa a momentari return of delirium, 
and now he instantli resum hi former benevolence. He rose and 
quit the room with my nurse, and in a moment my father enter it. 

nothing, at thi moment, could have given me greater pleasur than the 
arriv of my father. I stretch out my hand to him and cried, 

“are you then safe—and elizabeth—and ernest?” 

My father calm me with assur of their welfar and endeavoured, by 
dwell on these subject so interest to my heart, to rais my 
despond spirits; but he soon felt that a prison cannot be the abod of 
cheerfulness. “what a place is thi that you inhabit, my son!” 
said he, look mourn at the bar window and wretch appear 
of the room. “you travel to seek happiness, but a fatal seem 
to pursu you. and poor clerval—” 

the name of my unfortun and murder friend wa an agit too 
great to be endur in my weak state; I shed tears. 

“alas! yes, my father,” repli I; “some destini of the 
most horribl kind hang over me, and I must live to fulfil it, or sure I 
should have die on the coffin of henry.” 

We were not allow to convers for ani length of time, for the 
precari state of my health render everi precaut necessari that 
could ensur tranquillity. mr. kirwin came in and insist that my 
strength should not be exhaust by too much exertion. but the 
appear of my father wa to me like that of my good angel, and I 
gradual recov my health. 

As my sick quit me, I wa absorb by a gloomi and black 
melancholi that noth could dissipate. the imag of clerval wa 
for ever befor me, ghastli and murdered. more than onc the agit 
into which these reflect threw me made my friend dread a danger 
relapse. alas! whi did they preserv so miser and detest a 
life? It wa sure that I might fulfil my destiny, which is now 
draw to a close. soon, oh, veri soon, will death extinguish these 
throb and reliev me from the mighti weight of anguish that bear 
me to the dust; and, in execut the award of justice, I shall also 
sink to rest. then the appear of death wa distant, although the 
wish wa ever present to my thoughts; and I often sat for hour 
motionless and speechless, wish for some mighti revolut that 
might buri me and my destroy in it ruins. 

the season of the assiz approached. I had alreadi been three month 
in prison, and although I wa still weak and in continu danger of a 
relapse, I wa oblig to travel nearli a hundr mile to the countri 
town where the court wa held. mr. kirwin charg himself with everi 
care of collect wit and arrang my defence. I wa spare 
the disgrac of appear publicli as a criminal, as the case wa not 
brought befor the court that decid on life and death. the grand 
juri reject the bill, on it be prove that I wa on the orkney 
island at the hour the bodi of my friend wa found; and a fortnight 
after my remov I wa liber from prison. 

My father wa enraptur on find me freed from the vexat of a 
crimin charge, that I wa again allow to breath the fresh 
atmospher and permit to return to my nativ country. I did not 
particip in these feelings, for to me the wall of a dungeon or a 
palac were alik hateful. the cup of life wa poison for ever, and 
although the sun shone upon me, as upon the happi and gay of heart, I 
saw around me noth but a dens and fright darkness, penetr by 
no light but the glimmer of two eye that glare upon me. sometim 
they were the express eye of henry, languish in death, the dark 
orb nearli cover by the lid and the long black lash that fring 
them; sometim it wa the watery, cloud eye of the monster, as I 
first saw them in my chamber at ingolstadt. 

My father tri to awaken in me the feel of affection. He talk 
of geneva, which I should soon visit, of elizabeth and ernest; but 
these word onli drew deep groan from me. sometimes, indeed, I felt a 
wish for happi and thought with melancholi delight of my belov 
cousin or longed, with a devour _maladi du pays_, to see onc more 
the blue lake and rapid rhone, that had been so dear to me in earli 
childhood; but my gener state of feel wa a torpor in which a 
prison wa as welcom a resid as the divinest scene in nature; and 
these fit were seldom interrupt but by paroxysm of anguish and 
despair. At these moment I often endeavour to put an end to the 
exist I loathed, and it requir unceas attend and vigil 
to restrain me from commit some dread act of violence. 

yet one duti remain to me, the recollect of which final 
triumph over my selfish despair. It wa necessari that I should 
return without delay to geneva, there to watch over the live of those 
I so fondli love and to lie in wait for the murderer, that if ani 
chanc led me to the place of hi concealment, or if he dare again to 
blast me by hi presence, I might, with unfail aim, put an end to 
the exist of the monstrou imag which I had endu with the 
mockeri of a soul still more monstrous. My father still desir to 
delay our departure, fear that I could not sustain the fatigu of a 
journey, for I wa a shatter wreck—th shadow of a human being. My 
strength wa gone. I wa a mere skeleton, and fever night and day 
prey upon my wast frame. 

still, as I urg our leav ireland with such inquietud and impatience, 
my father thought it best to yield. We took our passag on board a vessel 
bound for havre-de-grac and sail with a fair wind from the irish shores. 
It wa midnight. I lay on the deck look at the star and listen to 
the dash of the waves. I hail the dark that shut ireland from my 
sight, and my puls beat with a feverish joy when I reflect that I should 
soon see geneva. the past appear to me in the light of a fright dream; 
yet the vessel in which I was, the wind that blew me from the detest 
shore of ireland, and the sea which surround me, told me too forcibl 
that I wa deceiv by no vision and that clerval, my friend and dearest 
companion, had fallen a victim to me and the monster of my creation. I 
repassed, in my memory, my whole life; my quiet happi while resid 
with my famili in geneva, the death of my mother, and my departur for 
ingolstadt. I remembered, shuddering, the mad enthusiasm that hurri me on 
to the creation of my hideou enemy, and I call to mind the night in 
which he first lived. I wa unabl to pursu the train of thought; a 
thousand feel press upon me, and I wept bitterly. 

ever sinc my recoveri from the fever, I had been in the custom of take 
everi night a small quantiti of laudanum, for it wa by mean of thi drug 
onli that I wa enabl to gain the rest necessari for the preserv of 
life. oppress by the recollect of my variou misfortunes, I now 
swallow doubl my usual quantiti and soon slept profoundly. but sleep did 
not afford me respit from thought and misery; my dream present a 
thousand object that scare me. toward morn I wa possess by a kind 
of nightmare; I felt the fiend’ grasp in my neck and could not free 
myself from it; groan and cri rang in my ears. My father, who wa 
watch over me, perceiv my restlessness, awok me; the dash wave 
were around, the cloudi sky above, the fiend wa not here: a sens of 
security, a feel that a truce wa establish between the present hour 
and the irresistible, disastr futur impart to me a kind of calm 
forgetfulness, of which the human mind is by it structur peculiarli 
susceptible. 





chapter 22 

the voyag came to an end. We landed, and proceed to paris. I soon 
found that I had overtax my strength and that I must repos befor I 
could continu my journey. My father’ care and attent were 
indefatigable, but he did not know the origin of my suffer and 
sought erron method to remedi the incur ill. He wish me to 
seek amus in society. I abhor the face of man. oh, not 
abhorred! they were my brethren, my fellow beings, and I felt 
attract even to the most repuls among them, as to creatur of an 
angel natur and celesti mechanism. but I felt that I had no right 
to share their intercourse. I had unchain an enemi among them whose 
joy it wa to shed their blood and to revel in their groans. how they 
would, each and all, abhor me and hunt me from the world, did they know 
my unhallow act and the crime which had their sourc in me! 

My father yield at length to my desir to avoid societi and strove by 
variou argument to banish my despair. sometim he thought that I 
felt deepli the degrad of be oblig to answer a charg of 
murder, and he endeavour to prove to me the futil of pride. 

“alas! My father,” said I, “how littl do you know me. 
human beings, their feel and passions, would inde be degrad if such 
a wretch as I felt pride. justine, poor unhappi justine, wa as innoc 
as I, and she suffer the same charge; she die for it; and I am the caus 
of this—i murder her. william, justine, and henry—they all 
die by my hands.” 

My father had often, dure my imprisonment, heard me make the same 
assertion; when I thu accus myself, he sometim seem to desir an 
explanation, and at other he appear to consid it as the offspr of 
delirium, and that, dure my illness, some idea of thi kind had present 
itself to my imagination, the remembr of which I preserv in my 
convalescence. I avoid explan and maintain a continu silenc 
concern the wretch I had created. I had a persuas that I should be 
suppos mad, and thi in itself would for ever have chain my tongue. but, 
besides, I could not bring myself to disclos a secret which would fill my 
hearer with constern and make fear and unnatur horror the inmat of 
hi breast. I checked, therefore, my impati thirst for sympathi and wa 
silent when I would have given the world to have confid the fatal secret. 
yet, still, word like those I have record would burst uncontrol 
from me. I could offer no explan of them, but their truth in part 
reliev the burden of my mysteri woe. 

upon thi occas my father said, with an express of unbound wonder, 
“mi dearest victor, what infatu is this? My dear son, I entreat 
you never to make such an assert again.” 

“I am not mad,” I cri energetically; “the sun and the heavens, who 
have view my operations, can bear wit of my truth. I am the 
assassin of those most innoc victims; they die by my machinations. 
A thousand time would I have shed my own blood, drop by drop, to have 
save their lives; but I could not, my father, inde I could not 
sacrific the whole human race.” 

the conclus of thi speech convinc my father that my idea were 
deranged, and he instantli chang the subject of our convers and 
endeavour to alter the cours of my thoughts. He wish as much as 
possibl to obliter the memori of the scene that had taken place in 
ireland and never allud to them or suffer me to speak of my 
misfortunes. 

As time pass away I becam more calm; miseri had her dwell in my 
heart, but I no longer talk in the same incoher manner of my own 
crimes; suffici for me wa the conscious of them. By the utmost 
self-viol I curb the imperi voic of wretchedness, which 
sometim desir to declar itself to the whole world, and my manner 
were calmer and more compos than they had ever been sinc my journey 
to the sea of ice. 

A few day befor we left pari on our way to switzerland, I receiv the 
follow letter from elizabeth: 

“mi dear friend, 

“it gave me the greatest pleasur to receiv a letter from my uncl 
date at paris; you are no longer at a formid distance, and I may 
hope to see you in less than a fortnight. My poor cousin, how much you 
must have suffered! I expect to see you look even more ill than 
when you quit geneva. thi winter ha been pass most miserably, 
tortur as I have been by anxiou suspense; yet I hope to see peac in 
your counten and to find that your heart is not total void of 
comfort and tranquillity. 

“yet I fear that the same feel now exist that made you so miser 
a year ago, even perhap augment by time. I would not disturb you at 
thi period, when so mani misfortun weigh upon you, but a 
convers that I had with my uncl previou to hi departur render 
some explan necessari befor we meet. 

explanation! you may possibl say, what can elizabeth have to explain? If 
you realli say this, my question are answer and all my doubt satisfied. 
but you are distant from me, and it is possibl that you may dread and yet 
be pleas with thi explanation; and in a probabl of thi be the 
case, I dare not ani longer postpon write what, dure your absence, I 
have often wish to express to you but have never had the courag to begin. 

“you well know, victor, that our union had been the favourit plan of 
your parent ever sinc our infancy. We were told thi when young, and 
taught to look forward to it as an event that would certainli take 
place. We were affection playfellow dure childhood, and, I 
believe, dear and valu friend to one anoth as we grew older. but 
as brother and sister often entertain a live affect toward each 
other without desir a more intim union, may not such also be our 
case? tell me, dearest victor. answer me, I conjur you by our mutual 
happiness, with simpl truth—do you not love another? 

“you have travelled; you have spent sever year of your life at 
ingolstadt; and I confess to you, my friend, that when I saw you last 
autumn so unhappy, fli to solitud from the societi of everi 
creature, I could not help suppos that you might regret our 
connect and believ yourself bound in honour to fulfil the wish of 
your parents, although they oppos themselv to your inclinations. 
but thi is fals reasoning. I confess to you, my friend, that I love 
you and that in my airi dream of futur you have been my constant 
friend and companion. but it is your happi I desir as well as my 
own when I declar to you that our marriag would render me etern 
miser unless it were the dictat of your own free choice. even now 
I weep to think that, born down as you are by the cruellest 
misfortunes, you may stifle, by the word _honour_, all hope of that 
love and happi which would alon restor you to yourself. I, who 
have so disinterest an affect for you, may increas your miseri 
tenfold by be an obstacl to your wishes. ah! victor, be assur 
that your cousin and playmat ha too sincer a love for you not to be 
made miser by thi supposition. Be happy, my friend; and if you 
obey me in thi one request, remain satisfi that noth on earth 
will have the power to interrupt my tranquillity. 

“do not let thi letter disturb you; do not answer tomorrow, or the 
next day, or even until you come, if it will give you pain. My uncl 
will send me news of your health, and if I see but one smile on your 
lip when we meet, occas by thi or ani other exert of mine, I 
shall need no other happiness. 

“elizabeth lavenza. 



“geneva, may 18th, 17—” 



thi letter reviv in my memori what I had befor forgotten, the threat of 
the fiend—“_i will be with you on your 
wedding-night!_” such wa my sentence, and on that night would the 
dæmon employ everi art to destroy me and tear me from the glimps of 
happi which promis partli to consol my sufferings. On that night he 
had determin to consumm hi crime by my death. well, be it so; a 
deadli struggl would then assuredli take place, in which if he were 
victori I should be at peac and hi power over me be at an end. If he 
were vanquished, I should be a free man. alas! what freedom? such as the 
peasant enjoy when hi famili have been massacr befor hi eyes, hi 
cottag burnt, hi land laid waste, and he is turn adrift, homeless, 
penniless, and alone, but free. such would be my liberti except that in my 
elizabeth I possess a treasure, alas, balanc by those horror of 
remors and guilt which would pursu me until death. 

sweet and belov elizabeth! I read and reread her letter, and some 
soften feel stole into my heart and dare to whisper paradisiac 
dream of love and joy; but the appl wa alreadi eaten, and the 
angel’ arm bare to drive me from all hope. yet I would die to make 
her happy. If the monster execut hi threat, death wa inevitable; yet, 
again, I consid whether my marriag would hasten my fate. My 
destruct might inde arriv a few month sooner, but if my tortur 
should suspect that I postpon it, influenc by hi menaces, he would 
sure find other and perhap more dread mean of revenge. He had vow 
_to be with me on my wedding-night_, yet he did not consid that 
threat as bind him to peac in the meantime, for as if to show me that 
he wa not yet satiat with blood, he had murder clerval immedi 
after the enunci of hi threats. I resolved, therefore, that if my 
immedi union with my cousin would conduc either to her or my 
father’ happiness, my adversary’ design against my life 
should not retard it a singl hour. 

In thi state of mind I wrote to elizabeth. My letter wa calm and 
affectionate. “I fear, my belov girl,” I said, “littl happi 
remain for us on earth; yet all that I may one day enjoy is centr in 
you. chase away your idl fears; to you alon do I consecr my life 
and my endeavour for contentment. I have one secret, elizabeth, a 
dread one; when reveal to you, it will chill your frame with 
horror, and then, far from be surpris at my misery, you will onli 
wonder that I surviv what I have endured. I will confid thi tale of 
miseri and terror to you the day after our marriag shall take place, 
for, my sweet cousin, there must be perfect confid between us. but 
until then, I conjur you, do not mention or allud to it. thi I most 
earnestli entreat, and I know you will comply.” 

In about a week after the arriv of elizabeth’ letter we return 
to geneva. the sweet girl welcom me with warm affection, yet tear were 
in her eye as she beheld my emaci frame and feverish cheeks. I saw a 
chang in her also. she wa thinner and had lost much of that heavenli 
vivac that had befor charm me; but her gentl and soft look of 
compass made her a more fit companion for one blast and miser as I 
was. 

the tranquil which I now enjoy did not endure. memori brought mad 
with it, and when I thought of what had passed, a real insan possess 
me; sometim I wa furiou and burnt with rage, sometim low and 
despondent. I neither spoke nor look at anyone, but sat motionless, 
bewild by the multitud of miseri that overcam me. 

elizabeth alon had the power to draw me from these fits; her gentl voic 
would sooth me when transport by passion and inspir me with human 
feel when sunk in torpor. she wept with me and for me. when reason 
returned, she would remonstr and endeavour to inspir me with 
resignation. ah! It is well for the unfortun to be resigned, but for the 
guilti there is no peace. the agoni of remors poison the luxuri there is 
otherwis sometim found in indulg the excess of grief. 

soon after my arriv my father spoke of my immedi marriag with 
elizabeth. I remain silent. 

“have you, then, some other attachment?” 

“none on earth. I love elizabeth and look forward to our union with 
delight. let the day therefor be fixed; and on it I will consecr 
myself, in life or death, to the happi of my cousin.” 

“mi dear victor, do not speak thus. heavi misfortun have befallen 
us, but let us onli cling closer to what remain and transfer our love 
for those whom we have lost to those who yet live. our circl will be 
small but bound close by the tie of affect and mutual misfortune. 
and when time shall have soften your despair, new and dear object of 
care will be born to replac those of whom we have been so cruelli 
deprived.” 

such were the lesson of my father. but to me the remembr of the 
threat returned; nor can you wonder that, omnipot as the fiend had 
yet been in hi deed of blood, I should almost regard him as 
invincible, and that when he had pronounc the word “_i shall be with 
you on your wedding-night_,” I should regard the threaten fate as 
unavoidable. but death wa no evil to me if the loss of elizabeth were 
balanc with it, and I therefore, with a content and even cheer 
countenance, agre with my father that if my cousin would consent, the 
ceremoni should take place in ten days, and thu put, as I imagined, 
the seal to my fate. 

great god! If for one instant I had thought what might be the hellish 
intent of my fiendish adversary, I would rather have banish myself 
for ever from my nativ countri and wander a friendless outcast over 
the earth than have consent to thi miser marriage. but, as if 
possess of magic powers, the monster had blind me to hi real 
intentions; and when I thought that I had prepar onli my own death, I 
hasten that of a far dearer victim. 

As the period fix for our marriag drew nearer, whether from cowardic or 
a prophet feeling, I felt my heart sink within me. but I conceal my 
feel by an appear of hilar that brought smile and joy to the 
counten of my father, but hardli deceiv the ever-watch and nicer 
eye of elizabeth. she look forward to our union with placid contentment, 
not unmingl with a littl fear, which past misfortun had impressed, 
that what now appear certain and tangibl happi might soon dissip 
into an airi dream and leav no trace but deep and everlast regret. 

prepar were made for the event, congratulatori visit were received, 
and all wore a smile appearance. I shut up, as well as I could, in my own 
heart the anxieti that prey there and enter with seem earnest 
into the plan of my father, although they might onli serv as the 
decor of my tragedy. through my father’ exert a part of 
the inherit of elizabeth had been restor to her by the austrian 
government. A small possess on the shore of como belong to her. It 
wa agre that, immedi after our union, we should proceed to villa 
lavenza and spend our first day of happi besid the beauti lake 
near which it stood. 

In the meantim I took everi precaut to defend my person in case the 
fiend should openli attack me. I carri pistol and a dagger 
constantli about me and wa ever on the watch to prevent artifice, and 
by these mean gain a greater degre of tranquillity. indeed, as the 
period approached, the threat appear more as a delusion, not to be 
regard as worthi to disturb my peace, while the happi I hope for 
in my marriag wore a greater appear of certainti as the day fix 
for it solemnis drew nearer and I heard it continu spoken of 
as an occurr which no accid could possibl prevent. 

elizabeth seem happy; my tranquil demeanour contribut greatli to 
calm her mind. but on the day that wa to fulfil my wish and my 
destiny, she wa melancholy, and a presenti of evil pervad her; 
and perhap also she thought of the dread secret which I had 
promis to reveal to her on the follow day. My father wa in the 
meantim overjoyed, and, in the bustl of preparation, onli recognis in 
the melancholi of hi niec the diffid of a bride. 

after the ceremoni wa perform a larg parti assembl at my 
father’s, but it wa agre that elizabeth and I should commenc our 
journey by water, sleep that night at evian and continu our 
voyag on the follow day. the day wa fair, the wind favourable; 
all smile on our nuptial embarkation. 

those were the last moment of my life dure which I enjoy the 
feel of happiness. We pass rapidli along; the sun wa hot, but we 
were shelter from it ray by a kind of canopi while we enjoy the 
beauti of the scene, sometim on one side of the lake, where we saw 
mont salêve, the pleasant bank of montalègre, and at a distance, 
surmount all, the beauti mont blanc, and the assemblag of snowi 
mountain that in vain endeavour to emul her; sometim coast the 
opposit banks, we saw the mighti jura oppos it dark side to the 
ambit that would quit it nativ country, and an almost 
insurmount barrier to the invad who should wish to enslav it. 

I took the hand of elizabeth. “you are sorrowful, my love. ah! If 
you knew what I have suffer and what I may yet endure, you would 
endeavour to let me tast the quiet and freedom from despair that thi 
one day at least permit me to enjoy.” 

“be happy, my dear victor,” repli elizabeth; “there is, I hope, 
noth to distress you; and be assur that if a live joy is not 
paint in my face, my heart is contented. someth whisper to me 
not to depend too much on the prospect that is open befor us, but I 
will not listen to such a sinist voice. observ how fast we move 
along and how the clouds, which sometim obscur and sometim rise 
abov the dome of mont blanc, render thi scene of beauti still more 
interesting. look also at the innumer fish that are swim in 
the clear waters, where we can distinguish everi pebbl that lie at 
the bottom. what a divin day! how happi and seren all natur 
appears!” 

thu elizabeth endeavour to divert her thought and mine from all 
reflect upon melancholi subjects. but her temper wa fluctuating; 
joy for a few instant shone in her eyes, but it continu gave place 
to distract and reverie. 

the sun sank lower in the heavens; we pass the river dranc and 
observ it path through the chasm of the higher and the glen of the 
lower hills. the alp here come closer to the lake, and we approach 
the amphitheatr of mountain which form it eastern boundary. the 
spire of evian shone under the wood that surround it and the rang 
of mountain abov mountain by which it wa overhung. 

the wind, which had hitherto carri us along with amaz rapidity, 
sank at sunset to a light breeze; the soft air just ruffl the water 
and caus a pleasant motion among the tree as we approach the 
shore, from which it waft the most delight scent of flower and 
hay. the sun sank beneath the horizon as we landed, and as I touch 
the shore I felt those care and fear reviv which soon were to clasp 
me and cling to me for ever. 





chapter 23 

It wa eight o’clock when we landed; we walk for a short time on the 
shore, enjoy the transitori light, and then retir to the inn and 
contempl the love scene of waters, woods, and mountains, obscur 
in darkness, yet still display their black outlines. 

the wind, which had fallen in the south, now rose with great violenc 
in the west. the moon had reach her summit in the heaven and wa 
begin to descend; the cloud swept across it swifter than the 
flight of the vultur and dim her rays, while the lake reflect the 
scene of the busi heavens, render still busier by the restless wave 
that were begin to rise. suddenli a heavi storm of rain descended. 

I had been calm dure the day, but so soon as night obscur the 
shape of objects, a thousand fear aros in my mind. I wa anxiou 
and watchful, while my right hand grasp a pistol which wa hidden in 
my bosom; everi sound terrifi me, but I resolv that I would sell my 
life dearli and not shrink from the conflict until my own life or that 
of my adversari wa extinguished. 

elizabeth observ my agit for some time in timid and fear silence, 
but there wa someth in my glanc which commun terror to her, and 
trembling, she asked, “what is it that agit you, my dear victor? 
what is it you fear?” 

“oh! peace, peace, my love,” repli I; “thi night, and 
all will be safe; but thi night is dreadful, veri dreadful.” 

I pass an hour in thi state of mind, when suddenli I reflect how 
fear the combat which I momentarili expect would be to my wife, 
and I earnestli entreat her to retire, resolv not to join her 
until I had obtain some knowledg as to the situat of my enemy. 

she left me, and I continu some time walk up and down the passag 
of the hous and inspect everi corner that might afford a retreat to 
my adversary. but I discov no trace of him and wa begin to 
conjectur that some fortun chanc had interven to prevent the 
execut of hi menac when suddenli I heard a shrill and dread 
scream. It came from the room into which elizabeth had retired. As I 
heard it, the whole truth rush into my mind, my arm dropped, the 
motion of everi muscl and fibr wa suspended; I could feel the blood 
trickl in my vein and tingl in the extrem of my limbs. thi 
state last but for an instant; the scream wa repeated, and I rush 
into the room. 

great god! whi did I not then expire! whi am I here to relat the 
destruct of the best hope and the purest creatur on earth? she wa 
there, lifeless and inanimate, thrown across the bed, her head hang down 
and her pale and distort featur half cover by her hair. everywher I 
turn I see the same figure—h bloodless arm and relax form flung 
by the murder on it bridal bier. could I behold thi and live? alas! 
life is obstin and cling closest where it is most hated. for a moment 
onli did I lose recollection; I fell senseless on the ground. 

when I recov I found myself surround by the peopl of the inn; their 
counten express a breathless terror, but the horror of other 
appear onli as a mockery, a shadow of the feel that oppress me. I 
escap from them to the room where lay the bodi of elizabeth, my love, my 
wife, so late living, so dear, so worthy. she had been move from the 
postur in which I had first beheld her, and now, as she lay, her head upon 
her arm and a handkerchief thrown across her face and neck, I might have 
suppos her asleep. I rush toward her and embrac her with ardour, but 
the deadli languor and cold of the limb told me that what I now held 
in my arm had ceas to be the elizabeth whom I had love and cherished. 
the murder mark of the fiend’ grasp wa on her neck, and the 
breath had ceas to issu from her lips. 

while I still hung over her in the agoni of despair, I happen to look up. 
the window of the room had befor been darkened, and I felt a kind of 
panic on see the pale yellow light of the moon illumin the chamber. 
the shutter had been thrown back, and with a sensat of horror not to be 
described, I saw at the open window a figur the most hideou and abhorred. 
A grin wa on the face of the monster; he seem to jeer, as with hi 
fiendish finger he point toward the corps of my wife. I rush toward 
the window, and draw a pistol from my bosom, fired; but he elud me, 
leap from hi station, and run with the swift of lightning, 
plung into the lake. 

the report of the pistol brought a crowd into the room. I point to 
the spot where he had disappeared, and we follow the track with 
boats; net were cast, but in vain. after pass sever hours, we 
return hopeless, most of my companion believ it to have been a 
form conjur up by my fancy. after have landed, they proceed to 
search the country, parti go in differ direct among the 
wood and vines. 

I attempt to accompani them and proceed a short distanc from the 
house, but my head whirl round, my step were like those of a drunken 
man, I fell at last in a state of utter exhaustion; a film cover my 
eyes, and my skin wa parch with the heat of fever. In thi state I 
wa carri back and place on a bed, hardli consciou of what had 
happened; my eye wander round the room as if to seek someth that 
I had lost. 

after an interv I arose, and as if by instinct, crawl into the room 
where the corps of my belov lay. there were women weep around; I 
hung over it and join my sad tear to theirs; all thi time no 
distinct idea present itself to my mind, but my thought rambl to 
variou subjects, reflect confusedli on my misfortun and their 
cause. I wa bewildered, in a cloud of wonder and horror. the death 
of william, the execut of justine, the murder of clerval, and lastli 
of my wife; even at that moment I knew not that my onli remain 
friend were safe from the malign of the fiend; my father even now 
might be writh under hi grasp, and ernest might be dead at hi 
feet. thi idea made me shudder and recal me to action. I start 
up and resolv to return to geneva with all possibl speed. 

there were no hors to be procured, and I must return by the lake; but the 
wind wa unfavourable, and the rain fell in torrents. however, it wa 
hardli morning, and I might reason hope to arriv by night. I hire men 
to row and took an oar myself, for I had alway experienc relief from 
mental torment in bodili exercise. but the overflow miseri I now felt, 
and the excess of agit that I endur render me incap of ani 
exertion. I threw down the oar, and lean my head upon my hands, gave way 
to everi gloomi idea that arose. If I look up, I saw scene which were 
familiar to me in my happier time and which I had contempl but the day 
befor in the compani of her who wa now but a shadow and a recollection. 
tear stream from my eyes. the rain had ceas for a moment, and I saw 
the fish play in the water as they had done a few hour before; they had 
then been observ by elizabeth. noth is so pain to the human mind as 
a great and sudden change. the sun might shine or the cloud might lower, 
but noth could appear to me as it had done the day before. A fiend had 
snatch from me everi hope of futur happiness; no creatur had ever been 
so miser as I was; so fright an event is singl in the histori of 
man. 

but whi should I dwell upon the incid that follow thi last 
overwhelm event? mine ha been a tale of horrors; I have reach their 
_acme_, and what I must now relat can but be tediou to you. know 
that, one by one, my friend were snatch away; I wa left desolate. My 
own strength is exhausted, and I must tell, in a few words, what remain of 
my hideou narration. 

I arriv at geneva. My father and ernest yet lived, but the former sunk 
under the tide that I bore. I see him now, excel and vener old 
man! hi eye wander in vacancy, for they had lost their charm and their 
delight—hi elizabeth, hi more than daughter, whom he dote on with 
all that affect which a man feels, who in the declin of life, have 
few affections, cling more earnestli to those that remain. cursed, curs 
be the fiend that brought miseri on hi grey hair and doom him to wast 
in wretchedness! He could not live under the horror that were accumul 
around him; the spring of exist suddenli gave way; he wa unabl to 
rise from hi bed, and in a few day he die in my arms. 

what then becam of me? I know not; I lost sensation, and chain and 
dark were the onli object that press upon me. sometimes, 
indeed, I dreamt that I wander in floweri meadow and pleasant vale 
with the friend of my youth, but I awok and found myself in a 
dungeon. melancholi followed, but by degre I gain a clear 
concept of my miseri and situat and wa then releas from my 
prison. for they had call me mad, and dure mani months, as I 
understood, a solitari cell had been my habitation. 

liberty, however, had been a useless gift to me, had I not, as I 
awaken to reason, at the same time awaken to revenge. As the 
memori of past misfortun press upon me, I began to reflect on their 
cause—th monster whom I had created, the miser dæmon whom I had 
sent abroad into the world for my destruction. I wa possess by a 
madden rage when I thought of him, and desir and ardent pray 
that I might have him within my grasp to wreak a great and signal 
reveng on hi curs head. 

nor did my hate long confin itself to useless wishes; I began to 
reflect on the best mean of secur him; and for thi purpose, about 
a month after my release, I repair to a crimin judg in the town 
and told him that I had an accus to make, that I knew the 
destroy of my family, and that I requir him to exert hi whole 
author for the apprehens of the murderer. 

the magistr listen to me with attent and kindness. “be 
assured, sir,” said he, “no pain or exert on my part shall 
be spare to discov the villain.” 

“I thank you,” repli I; “listen, therefore, to the 
deposit that I have to make. It is inde a tale so strang that I 
should fear you would not credit it were there not someth in truth 
which, howev wonderful, forc conviction. the stori is too connect to 
be mistaken for a dream, and I have no motiv for falsehood.” My 
manner as I thu address him wa impress but calm; I had form in my 
own heart a resolut to pursu my destroy to death, and thi purpos 
quiet my agoni and for an interv reconcil me to life. I now relat 
my histori briefli but with firm and precision, mark the date with 
accuraci and never deviat into invect or exclamation. 

the magistr appear at first perfectli incredulous, but as I continu 
he becam more attent and interested; I saw him sometim shudder with 
horror; at other a live surprise, unmingl with disbelief, wa paint 
on hi countenance. 

when I had conclud my narration, I said, “thi is the be whom I 
accus and for whose seizur and punish I call upon you to exert your 
whole power. It is your duti as a magistrate, and I believ and hope that 
your feel as a man will not revolt from the execut of those 
function on thi occasion.” 

thi address caus a consider chang in the physiognomi of my own 
auditor. He had heard my stori with that half kind of belief that is given 
to a tale of spirit and supernatur events; but when he wa call upon 
to act offici in consequence, the whole tide of hi incredul 
returned. he, however, answer mildly, “I would willingli afford you 
everi aid in your pursuit, but the creatur of whom you speak appear to 
have power which would put all my exert to defiance. who can follow an 
anim which can travers the sea of ice and inhabit cave and den where 
no man would ventur to intrude? besides, some month have elaps sinc 
the commiss of hi crimes, and no one can conjectur to what place he 
ha wander or what region he may now inhabit.” 

“I do not doubt that he hover near the spot which I inhabit, and if 
he ha inde taken refug in the alps, he may be hunt like the chamoi 
and destroy as a beast of prey. but I perceiv your thoughts; you do not 
credit my narr and do not intend to pursu my enemi with the 
punish which is hi desert.” 

As I spoke, rage sparkl in my eyes; the magistr wa intimidated. 
“you are mistaken,” said he. “I will exert myself, and if 
it is in my power to seiz the monster, be assur that he shall suffer 
punish proportion to hi crimes. but I fear, from what you have 
yourself describ to be hi properties, that thi will prove 
impracticable; and thus, while everi proper measur is pursued, you should 
make up your mind to disappointment.” 

“that cannot be; but all that I can say will be of littl avail. My 
reveng is of no moment to you; yet, while I allow it to be a vice, I 
confess that it is the devour and onli passion of my soul. My rage 
is unspeak when I reflect that the murderer, whom I have turn 
loos upon society, still exists. you refus my just demand; I have 
but one resource, and I devot myself, either in my life or death, to 
hi destruction.” 

I trembl with excess of agit as I said this; there wa a frenzi 
in my manner, and something, I doubt not, of that haughti fierc 
which the martyr of old are said to have possessed. but to a genevan 
magistrate, whose mind wa occupi by far other idea than those of 
devot and heroism, thi elev of mind had much the appear of 
madness. He endeavour to sooth me as a nurs doe a child and 
revert to my tale as the effect of delirium. 

“man,” I cried, “how ignor art thou in thi pride of 
wisdom! cease; you know not what it is you say.” 

I broke from the hous angri and disturb and retir to medit on 
some other mode of action. 





chapter 24 

My present situat wa one in which all voluntari thought wa 
swallow up and lost. I wa hurri away by fury; reveng alon 
endow me with strength and composure; it mould my feel and 
allow me to be calcul and calm at period when otherwis 
delirium or death would have been my portion. 

My first resolut wa to quit geneva for ever; my country, which, when I 
wa happi and beloved, wa dear to me, now, in my adversity, becam 
hateful. I provid myself with a sum of money, togeth with a few jewel 
which had belong to my mother, and departed. 

and now my wander began which are to ceas but with life. I have 
travers a vast portion of the earth and have endur all the hardship 
which travel in desert and barbar countri are wont to meet. how I 
have live I hardli know; mani time have I stretch my fail limb upon 
the sandi plain and pray for death. but reveng kept me alive; I dare 
not die and leav my adversari in being. 

when I quit geneva my first labour wa to gain some clue by which I 
might trace the step of my fiendish enemy. but my plan wa unsettled, 
and I wander mani hour round the confin of the town, uncertain 
what path I should pursue. As night approach I found myself at the 
entranc of the cemeteri where william, elizabeth, and my father 
reposed. I enter it and approach the tomb which mark their 
graves. everyth wa silent except the leav of the trees, which 
were gentli agit by the wind; the night wa nearli dark, and the 
scene would have been solemn and affect even to an uninterest 
observer. the spirit of the depart seem to flit around and to 
cast a shadow, which wa felt but not seen, around the head of the 
mourner. 

the deep grief which thi scene had at first excit quickli gave way to 
rage and despair. they were dead, and I lived; their murder also lived, 
and to destroy him I must drag out my weari existence. I knelt on the grass 
and kiss the earth and with quiver lip exclaimed, “bi the 
sacr earth on which I kneel, by the shade that wander near me, by the 
deep and etern grief that I feel, I swear; and by thee, O night, and the 
spirit that presid over thee, to pursu the dæmon who caus thi misery, 
until he or I shall perish in mortal conflict. for thi purpos I will 
preserv my life; to execut thi dear reveng will I again behold the sun 
and tread the green herbag of earth, which otherwis should vanish from my 
eye for ever. and I call on you, spirit of the dead, and on you, wander 
minist of vengeance, to aid and conduct me in my work. let the curs 
and hellish monster drink deep of agony; let him feel the despair that now 
torment me.” 

I had begun my adjur with solemn and an awe which almost assur me 
that the shade of my murder friend heard and approv my devotion, but 
the furi possess me as I concluded, and rage choke my utterance. 

I wa answer through the still of night by a loud and fiendish 
laugh. It rang on my ear long and heavily; the mountain re-echo 
it, and I felt as if all hell surround me with mockeri and laughter. 
sure in that moment I should have been possess by frenzi and have 
destroy my miser exist but that my vow wa heard and that I 
wa reserv for vengeance. the laughter die away, when a well-known 
and abhor voice, appar close to my ear, address me in an 
audibl whisper, “I am satisfied, miser wretch! you have 
determin to live, and I am satisfied.” 

I dart toward the spot from which the sound proceeded, but the devil 
elud my grasp. suddenli the broad disk of the moon aros and shone 
full upon hi ghastli and distort shape as he fled with more than 
mortal speed. 

I pursu him, and for mani month thi ha been my task. guid by a 
slight clue, I follow the wind of the rhone, but vainly. the 
blue mediterranean appeared, and by a strang chance, I saw the fiend 
enter by night and hide himself in a vessel bound for the black sea. I 
took my passag in the same ship, but he escaped, I know not how. 

amidst the wild of tartari and russia, although he still evad me, I 
have ever follow in hi track. sometim the peasants, scare by 
thi horrid apparition, inform me of hi path; sometim he himself, 
who fear that if I lost all trace of him I should despair and die, 
left some mark to guid me. the snow descend on my head, and I saw 
the print of hi huge step on the white plain. To you first enter 
on life, to whom care is new and agoni unknown, how can you understand 
what I have felt and still feel? cold, want, and fatigu were the 
least pain which I wa destin to endure; I wa curs by some devil 
and carri about with me my etern hell; yet still a spirit of good 
follow and direct my step and when I most murmur would suddenli 
extric me from seemingli insurmount difficulties. sometimes, 
when nature, overcom by hunger, sank under the exhaustion, a repast 
wa prepar for me in the desert that restor and inspirit me. the 
fare was, indeed, coarse, such as the peasant of the countri ate, but 
I will not doubt that it wa set there by the spirit that I had 
invok to aid me. often, when all wa dry, the heaven cloudless, and 
I wa parch by thirst, a slight cloud would bedim the sky, shed the 
few drop that reviv me, and vanish. 

I followed, when I could, the cours of the rivers; but the dæmon 
gener avoid these, as it wa here that the popul of the 
countri chiefli collected. In other place human be were seldom 
seen, and I gener subsist on the wild anim that cross my 
path. I had money with me and gain the friendship of the villag 
by distribut it; or I brought with me some food that I had killed, 
which, after take a small part, I alway present to those who had 
provid me with fire and utensil for cooking. 

My life, as it pass thus, wa inde hate to me, and it wa dure 
sleep alon that I could tast joy. O bless sleep! often, when most 
miserable, I sank to repose, and my dream lull me even to rapture. the 
spirit that guard me had provid these moments, or rather hours, of 
happi that I might retain strength to fulfil my pilgrimage. depriv of 
thi respite, I should have sunk under my hardships. dure the day I wa 
sustain and inspirit by the hope of night, for in sleep I saw my 
friends, my wife, and my belov country; again I saw the benevol 
counten of my father, heard the silver tone of my elizabeth’ 
voice, and beheld clerval enjoy health and youth. often, when weari by 
a toilsom march, I persuad myself that I wa dream until night should 
come and that I should then enjoy realiti in the arm of my dearest 
friends. what agonis fond did I feel for them! how did I cling to 
their dear forms, as sometim they haunt even my wake hours, and 
persuad myself that they still lived! At such moment vengeance, that 
burn within me, die in my heart, and I pursu my path toward the 
destruct of the dæmon more as a task enjoin by heaven, as the 
mechan impuls of some power of which I wa unconscious, than as the 
ardent desir of my soul. 

what hi feel were whom I pursu I cannot know. sometimes, indeed, he 
left mark in write on the bark of the tree or cut in stone that guid 
me and instig my fury. “mi reign is not yet 
over”—thes word were legibl in one of these 
inscriptions—“y live, and my power is complete. follow me; I 
seek the everlast ice of the north, where you will feel the miseri of 
cold and frost, to which I am impassive. you will find near thi place, if 
you follow not too tardily, a dead hare; eat and be refreshed. come on, my 
enemy; we have yet to wrestl for our lives, but mani hard and miser 
hour must you endur until that period shall arrive.” 

scof devil! again do I vow vengeance; again do I devot thee, 
miser fiend, to tortur and death. never will I give up my search 
until he or I perish; and then with what ecstasi shall I join my 
elizabeth and my depart friends, who even now prepar for me the 
reward of my tediou toil and horribl pilgrimage! 

As I still pursu my journey to the northward, the snow thicken and the 
cold increas in a degre almost too sever to support. the peasant were 
shut up in their hovels, and onli a few of the most hardi ventur forth to 
seiz the anim whom starvat had forc from their hiding-plac to 
seek for prey. the river were cover with ice, and no fish could be 
procured; and thu I wa cut off from my chief articl of maintenance. 

the triumph of my enemi increas with the difficulti of my labours. one 
inscript that he left wa in these words: “prepare! your toil 
onli begin; wrap yourself in fur and provid food, for we shall soon enter 
upon a journey where your suffer will satisfi my everlast 
hatred.” 

My courag and persever were invigor by these scof words; I 
resolv not to fail in my purpose, and call on heaven to support 
me, I continu with unab fervour to travers immens deserts, 
until the ocean appear at a distanc and form the utmost boundari 
of the horizon. oh! how unlik it wa to the blue season of the 
south! cover with ice, it wa onli to be distinguish from land by 
it superior wild and ruggedness. the greek wept for joy when 
they beheld the mediterranean from the hill of asia, and hail with 
raptur the boundari of their toils. I did not weep, but I knelt down 
and with a full heart thank my guid spirit for conduct me in 
safeti to the place where I hoped, notwithstand my adversary’ gibe, 
to meet and grappl with him. 

some week befor thi period I had procur a sledg and dog and thu 
travers the snow with inconceiv speed. I know not whether the 
fiend possess the same advantages, but I found that, as befor I had 
daili lost ground in the pursuit, I now gain on him, so much so that 
when I first saw the ocean he wa but one day’ journey in advance, and 
I hope to intercept him befor he should reach the beach. with new 
courage, therefore, I press on, and in two day arriv at a wretch 
hamlet on the seashore. I inquir of the inhabit concern the 
fiend and gain accur information. A gigant monster, they said, 
had arriv the night before, arm with a gun and mani pistols, 
put to flight the inhabit of a solitari cottag through fear of 
hi terrif appearance. He had carri off their store of winter 
food, and place it in a sledge, to draw which he had seiz on a 
numer drove of train dogs, he had har them, and the same 
night, to the joy of the horror-struck villagers, had pursu hi 
journey across the sea in a direct that led to no land; and they 
conjectur that he must speedili be destroy by the break of the 
ice or frozen by the etern frosts. 

On hear thi inform I suffer a temporari access of despair. 
He had escap me, and I must commenc a destruct and almost endless 
journey across the mountain ice of the ocean, amidst cold that few 
of the inhabit could long endur and which I, the nativ of a 
genial and sunni climate, could not hope to survive. yet at the idea 
that the fiend should live and be triumphant, my rage and vengeanc 
returned, and like a mighti tide, overwhelm everi other feeling. 
after a slight repose, dure which the spirit of the dead hover 
round and instig me to toil and revenge, I prepar for my journey. 

I exchang my land-sledg for one fashion for the inequ of 
the frozen ocean, and purchas a plenti stock of provisions, I 
depart from land. 

I cannot guess how mani day have pass sinc then, but I have endur 
miseri which noth but the etern sentiment of a just retribut 
burn within my heart could have enabl me to support. immens and 
rug mountain of ice often bar up my passage, and I often heard 
the thunder of the ground sea, which threaten my destruction. but 
again the frost came and made the path of the sea secure. 

By the quantiti of provis which I had consumed, I should guess that 
I had pass three week in thi journey; and the continu protract 
of hope, return back upon the heart, often wrung bitter drop of 
despond and grief from my eyes. despair had inde almost secur 
her prey, and I should soon have sunk beneath thi misery. once, after 
the poor anim that convey me had with incred toil gain the 
summit of a slope ice mountain, and one, sink under hi fatigue, 
died, I view the expans befor me with anguish, when suddenli my eye 
caught a dark speck upon the duski plain. I strain my sight to 
discov what it could be and utter a wild cri of ecstasi when I 
distinguish a sledg and the distort proport of a well-known 
form within. oh! with what a burn gush did hope revisit my heart! 
warm tear fill my eyes, which I hastili wipe away, that they might 
not intercept the view I had of the dæmon; but still my sight wa 
dim by the burn drops, until, give way to the emot that 
oppress me, I wept aloud. 

but thi wa not the time for delay; I disencumb the dog of their 
dead companion, gave them a plenti portion of food, and after an 
hour’ rest, which wa absolut necessary, and yet which wa bitterli 
irksom to me, I continu my route. the sledg wa still visible, nor 
did I again lose sight of it except at the moment when for a short 
time some ice-rock conceal it with it interven crags. I inde 
percept gain on it, and when, after nearli two days’ journey, I 
beheld my enemi at no more than a mile distant, my heart bound within 
me. 

but now, when I appear almost within grasp of my foe, my hope were 
suddenli extinguished, and I lost all trace of him more utterli than I had 
ever done before. A ground sea wa heard; the thunder of it progress, as 
the water roll and swell beneath me, becam everi moment more omin 
and terrific. I press on, but in vain. the wind arose; the sea roared; 
and, as with the mighti shock of an earthquake, it split and crack with a 
tremend and overwhelm sound. the work wa soon finished; in a few 
minut a tumultu sea roll between me and my enemy, and I wa left 
drift on a scatter piec of ice that wa continu lessen and 
thu prepar for me a hideou death. 

In thi manner mani appal hour passed; sever of my dog died, and I 
myself wa about to sink under the accumul of distress when I saw your 
vessel ride at anchor and hold forth to me hope of succour and life. 
I had no concept that vessel ever came so far north and wa astound 
at the sight. I quickli destroy part of my sledg to construct oars, and 
by these mean wa enabled, with infinit fatigue, to move my ice raft in 
the direct of your ship. I had determined, if you were go southwards, 
still to trust myself to the merci of the sea rather than abandon my 
purpose. I hope to induc you to grant me a boat with which I could pursu 
my enemy. but your direct wa northwards. you took me on board when my 
vigour wa exhausted, and I should soon have sunk under my multipli 
hardship into a death which I still dread, for my task is unfulfilled. 

oh! when will my guid spirit, in conduct me to the dæmon, allow 
me the rest I so much desire; or must I die, and he yet live? If I do, 
swear to me, walton, that he shall not escape, that you will seek him 
and satisfi my vengeanc in hi death. and do I dare to ask of you to 
undertak my pilgrimage, to endur the hardship that I have undergone? 
no; I am not so selfish. yet, when I am dead, if he should appear, if 
the minist of vengeanc should conduct him to you, swear that he 
shall not live—swear that he shall not triumph over my accumul 
woe and surviv to add to the list of hi dark crimes. He is eloqu 
and persuasive, and onc hi word had even power over my heart; but 
trust him not. hi soul is as hellish as hi form, full of treacheri 
and fiend-lik malice. hear him not; call on the name of william, 
justine, clerval, elizabeth, my father, and of the wretch victor, and 
thrust your sword into hi heart. I will hover near and direct the 
steel aright. 

walton, _in continuation._ 


august 26th, 17—. 


you have read thi strang and terrif story, margaret; and do you not 
feel your blood congeal with horror, like that which even now curdl 
mine? sometimes, seiz with sudden agony, he could not continu hi 
tale; at others, hi voic broken, yet piercing, utter with 
difficulti the word so replet with anguish. hi fine and love eye 
were now light up with indignation, now subdu to downcast sorrow 
and quench in infinit wretchedness. sometim he command hi 
counten and tone and relat the most horribl incid with a 
tranquil voice, suppress everi mark of agitation; then, like a 
volcano burst forth, hi face would suddenli chang to an express 
of the wildest rage as he shriek out imprec on hi persecutor. 

hi tale is connect and told with an appear of the simplest truth, 
yet I own to you that the letter of felix and safie, which he show me, 
and the apparit of the monster seen from our ship, brought to me a 
greater convict of the truth of hi narr than hi asseverations, 
howev earnest and connected. such a monster has, then, realli existence! 
I cannot doubt it, yet I am lost in surpris and admiration. sometim I 
endeavour to gain from frankenstein the particular of hi 
creature’ formation, but on thi point he wa impenetrable. 

“are you mad, my friend?” said he. “or whither doe your 
senseless curios lead you? would you also creat for yourself and the 
world a demoniac enemy? peace, peace! learn my miseri and do not seek 
to increas your own.” 

frankenstein discov that I made note concern hi history; he ask 
to see them and then himself correct and augment them in mani places, 
but princip in give the life and spirit to the convers he held 
with hi enemy. “sinc you have preserv my narration,” said 
he, “I would not that a mutil one should go down to 
posterity.” 

thu ha a week pass away, while I have listen to the strangest 
tale that ever imagin formed. My thought and everi feel of my 
soul have been drunk up by the interest for my guest which thi tale 
and hi own elev and gentl manner have created. I wish to sooth 
him, yet can I counsel one so infinit miserable, so destitut of 
everi hope of consolation, to live? oh, no! the onli joy that he can 
now know will be when he compos hi shatter spirit to peac and 
death. yet he enjoy one comfort, the offspr of solitud and 
delirium; he believ that when in dream he hold convers with hi 
friend and deriv from that communion consol for hi miseri or 
excit to hi vengeance, that they are not the creation of hi 
fancy, but the be themselv who visit him from the region of a 
remot world. thi faith give a solemn to hi reveri that render 
them to me almost as impos and interest as truth. 

our convers are not alway confin to hi own histori and 
misfortunes. On everi point of gener literatur he display 
unbound knowledg and a quick and pierc apprehension. hi 
eloqu is forcibl and touching; nor can I hear him, when he relat 
a pathet incid or endeavour to move the passion of piti or love, 
without tears. what a gloriou creatur must he have been in the day 
of hi prosperity, when he is thu nobl and godlik in ruin! He seem 
to feel hi own worth and the great of hi fall. 

“when younger,” said he, “I believ myself destin for 
some great enterprise. My feel are profound, but I possess a cool 
of judgment that fit me for illustri achievements. thi sentiment of 
the worth of my natur support me when other would have been oppressed, 
for I deem it crimin to throw away in useless grief those talent that 
might be use to my fellow creatures. when I reflect on the work I had 
completed, no less a one than the creation of a sensit and ration 
animal, I could not rank myself with the herd of common projectors. but 
thi thought, which support me in the commenc of my career, now 
serv onli to plung me lower in the dust. all my specul and hope 
are as nothing, and like the archangel who aspir to omnipotence, I am 
chain in an etern hell. My imagin wa vivid, yet my power of 
analysi and applic were intense; by the union of these qualiti I 
conceiv the idea and execut the creation of a man. even now I cannot 
recollect without passion my reveri while the work wa incomplete. I trod 
heaven in my thoughts, now exult in my powers, now burn with the idea 
of their effects. from my infanc I wa imbu with high hope and a lofti 
ambition; but how am I sunk! oh! My friend, if you had known me as I onc 
was, you would not recognis me in thi state of degradation. despond 
rare visit my heart; a high destini seem to bear me on, until I fell, 
never, never again to rise.” 

must I then lose thi admir being? I have long for a friend; I have 
sought one who would sympathis with and love me. behold, on these desert 
sea I have found such a one, but I fear I have gain him onli to know hi 
valu and lose him. I would reconcil him to life, but he repuls the idea. 

“I thank you, walton,” he said, “for your kind intent toward so 
miser a wretch; but when you speak of new tie and fresh 
affections, think you that ani can replac those who are gone? can ani 
man be to me as clerval was, or ani woman anoth elizabeth? even 
where the affect are not strongli move by ani superior excellence, 
the companion of our childhood alway possess a certain power over our 
mind which hardli ani later friend can obtain. they know our 
infantin dispositions, which, howev they may be afterward modified, 
are never eradicated; and they can judg of our action with more 
certain conclus as to the integr of our motives. A sister or a 
brother can never, unless inde such symptom have been shown early, 
suspect the other of fraud or fals dealing, when anoth friend, 
howev strongli he may be attached, may, in spite of himself, be 
contempl with suspicion. but I enjoy friends, dear not onli 
through habit and association, but from their own merits; and wherev 
I am, the sooth voic of my elizabeth and the convers of 
clerval will be ever whisper in my ear. they are dead, and but one 
feel in such a solitud can persuad me to preserv my life. If I 
were engag in ani high undertak or design, fraught with extens 
util to my fellow creatures, then could I live to fulfil it. but 
such is not my destiny; I must pursu and destroy the be to whom I 
gave existence; then my lot on earth will be fulfil and I may die.” 

My belov sister, 

septemb 2d. 


I write to you, encompass by peril and ignor whether I am ever 
doom to see again dear england and the dearer friend that inhabit 
it. I am surround by mountain of ice which admit of no escap and 
threaten everi moment to crush my vessel. the brave fellow whom I 
have persuad to be my companion look toward me for aid, but I have 
none to bestow. there is someth terribl appal in our 
situation, yet my courag and hope do not desert me. yet it is 
terribl to reflect that the live of all these men are endang 
through me. If we are lost, my mad scheme are the cause. 

and what, margaret, will be the state of your mind? you will not hear of my 
destruction, and you will anxious await my return. year will pass, and 
you will have visit of despair and yet be tortur by hope. oh! My 
belov sister, the sicken fail of your heart-felt expect is, 
in prospect, more terribl to me than my own death. but you have a husband 
and love children; you may be happy. heaven bless you and make you so! 

My unfortun guest regard me with the tenderest compassion. He 
endeavour to fill me with hope and talk as if life were a possess 
which he valued. He remind me how often the same accid have 
happen to other navig who have attempt thi sea, and in spite 
of myself, he fill me with cheer auguries. even the sailor feel 
the power of hi eloquence; when he speaks, they no longer despair; he 
rous their energies, and while they hear hi voic they believ these 
vast mountain of ice are mole-hil which will vanish befor the 
resolut of man. these feel are transitory; each day of 
expect delay fill them with fear, and I almost dread a mutini 
caus by thi despair. 

septemb 5th. 


A scene ha just pass of such uncommon interest that, although it is 
highli probabl that these paper may never reach you, yet I cannot 
forbear record it. 

We are still surround by mountain of ice, still in immin danger 
of be crush in their conflict. the cold is excessive, and mani of 
my unfortun comrad have alreadi found a grave amidst thi scene of 
desolation. frankenstein ha daili declin in health; a feverish fire 
still glimmer in hi eyes, but he is exhausted, and when suddenli 
rous to ani exertion, he speedili sink again into appar 
lifelessness. 

I mention in my last letter the fear I entertain of a mutiny. 
thi morning, as I sat watch the wan counten of my friend—hi 
eye half close and hi limb hang listlessly—i wa rous by half 
a dozen of the sailors, who demand admiss into the cabin. they 
entered, and their leader address me. He told me that he and hi 
companion had been chosen by the other sailor to come in deput 
to me to make me a requisit which, in justice, I could not refuse. 
We were immur in ice and should probabl never escape, but they 
fear that if, as wa possible, the ice should dissip and a free 
passag be opened, I should be rash enough to continu my voyag and 
lead them into fresh dangers, after they might happili have surmount 
this. they insisted, therefore, that I should engag with a solemn 
promis that if the vessel should be freed I would instantli direct my 
cours southwards. 

thi speech troubl me. I had not despaired, nor had I yet conceiv 
the idea of return if set free. yet could I, in justice, or even in 
possibility, refus thi demand? I hesit befor I answered, when 
frankenstein, who had at first been silent, and inde appear hardli 
to have forc enough to attend, now rous himself; hi eye sparkled, 
and hi cheek flush with momentari vigour. turn toward the men, 
he said, 

“what do you mean? what do you demand of your captain? are you, then, 
so easili turn from your design? did you not call thi a gloriou 
expedition? “and wherefor wa it glorious? not becaus the way wa 
smooth and placid as a southern sea, but becaus it wa full of danger and 
terror, becaus at everi new incid your fortitud wa to be call forth 
and your courag exhibited, becaus danger and death surround it, and 
these you were to brave and overcome. for thi wa it a glorious, for thi 
wa it an honour undertaking. you were hereaft to be hail as the 
benefactor of your species, your name ador as belong to brave men 
who encount death for honour and the benefit of mankind. and now, 
behold, with the first imagin of danger, or, if you will, the first 
mighti and terrif trial of your courage, you shrink away and are content 
to be hand down as men who had not strength enough to endur cold and 
peril; and so, poor souls, they were chilli and return to their warm 
firesides. why, that requir not thi preparation; ye need not have come 
thu far and drag your captain to the shame of a defeat mere to prove 
yourselv cowards. oh! Be men, or be more than men. Be steadi to your 
purpos and firm as a rock. thi ice is not made of such stuff as your 
heart may be; it is mutabl and cannot withstand you if you say that it 
shall not. Do not return to your famili with the stigma of disgrac 
mark on your brows. return as hero who have fought and conquer and 
who know not what it is to turn their back on the foe.” 

He spoke thi with a voic so modul to the differ feel express 
in hi speech, with an eye so full of lofti design and heroism, that can 
you wonder that these men were moved? they look at one anoth and were 
unabl to reply. I spoke; I told them to retir and consid of what had 
been said, that I would not lead them farther north if they strenuous 
desir the contrary, but that I hope that, with reflection, their courag 
would return. 

they retir and I turn toward my friend, but he wa sunk in languor and 
almost depriv of life. 

how all thi will terminate, I know not, but I had rather die than 
return shamefully, my purpos unfulfilled. yet I fear such will be my 
fate; the men, unsupport by idea of glori and honour, can never 
willingli continu to endur their present hardships. 

septemb 7th. 


the die is cast; I have consent to return if we are not destroyed. 
thu are my hope blast by cowardic and indecision; I come back 
ignor and disappointed. It requir more philosophi than I possess 
to bear thi injustic with patience. 

septemb 12th. 


It is past; I am return to england. I have lost my hope of util 
and glory; I have lost my friend. but I will endeavour to detail these 
bitter circumst to you, my dear sister; and while I am waft 
toward england and toward you, I will not despond. 

septemb 9th, the ice began to move, and roar like thunder were heard 
at a distanc as the island split and crack in everi direction. We were 
in the most immin peril, but as we could onli remain passive, my chief 
attent wa occupi by my unfortun guest whose ill increas in 
such a degre that he wa entir confin to hi bed. the ice crack 
behind us and wa driven with forc toward the north; a breez sprang from 
the west, and on the 11th the passag toward the south becam perfectli 
free. when the sailor saw thi and that their return to their nativ 
countri wa appar assured, a shout of tumultu joy broke from them, 
loud and long-continued. frankenstein, who wa dozing, awok and ask the 
caus of the tumult. “they shout,” I said, “becaus they 
will soon return to england.” 

“do you, then, realli return?” 

“alas! yes; I cannot withstand their demands. I cannot lead them 
unwillingli to danger, and I must return.” 

“do so, if you will; but I will not. you may give up your purpose, but 
mine is assign to me by heaven, and I dare not. I am weak, but 
sure the spirit who assist my vengeanc will endow me with 
suffici strength.” say this, he endeavour to spring from the 
bed, but the exert wa too great for him; he fell back and fainted. 

It wa long befor he wa restored, and I often thought that life wa 
entir extinct. At length he open hi eyes; he breath with 
difficulti and wa unabl to speak. the surgeon gave him a compos 
draught and order us to leav him undisturbed. In the meantim he 
told me that my friend had certainli not mani hour to live. 

hi sentenc wa pronounced, and I could onli griev and be patient. I sat 
by hi bed, watch him; hi eye were closed, and I thought he slept; but 
present he call to me in a feebl voice, and bid me come near, 
said, “alas! the strength I reli on is gone; I feel that I shall 
soon die, and he, my enemi and persecutor, may still be in being. think 
not, walton, that in the last moment of my exist I feel that burn 
hatr and ardent desir of reveng I onc expressed; but I feel myself 
justifi in desir the death of my adversary. dure these last day I 
have been occupi in examin my past conduct; nor do I find it blamable. 
In a fit of enthusiast mad I creat a ration creatur and wa 
bound toward him to assure, as far as wa in my power, hi happi and 
well-being. thi wa my duty, but there wa anoth still paramount to 
that. My duti toward the be of my own speci had greater claim to 
my attent becaus they includ a greater proport of happi or 
misery. urg by thi view, I refused, and I did right in refusing, to 
creat a companion for the first creature. He show unparallel malign 
and selfish in evil; he destroy my friends; he devot to destruct 
be who possess exquisit sensations, happiness, and wisdom; nor do I 
know where thi thirst for vengeanc may end. miser himself that he may 
render no other wretched, he ought to die. the task of hi destruct wa 
mine, but I have failed. when actuat by selfish and viciou motives, I 
ask you to undertak my unfinish work, and I renew thi request now, 
when I am onli induc by reason and virtue. 

“yet I cannot ask you to renounc your countri and friend to fulfil 
thi task; and now that you are return to england, you will have 
littl chanc of meet with him. but the consider of these 
points, and the well balanc of what you may esteem your duties, I 
leav to you; my judgment and idea are alreadi disturb by the near 
approach of death. I dare not ask you to do what I think right, for I 
may still be misl by passion. 

“that he should live to be an instrument of mischief disturb me; in 
other respects, thi hour, when I momentarili expect my release, is the 
onli happi one which I have enjoy for sever years. the form of 
the belov dead flit befor me, and I hasten to their arms. farewell, 
walton! seek happi in tranquil and avoid ambition, even if it 
be onli the appar innoc one of distinguish yourself in 
scienc and discoveries. yet whi do I say this? I have myself been 
blast in these hopes, yet anoth may succeed.” 

hi voic becam fainter as he spoke, and at length, exhaust by hi 
effort, he sank into silence. about half an hour afterward he 
attempt again to speak but wa unable; he press my hand feebly, and 
hi eye close for ever, while the irradi of a gentl smile pass 
away from hi lips. 

margaret, what comment can I make on the untim extinct of thi 
gloriou spirit? what can I say that will enabl you to understand the 
depth of my sorrow? all that I should express would be inadequ and 
feeble. My tear flow; my mind is overshadow by a cloud of 
disappointment. but I journey toward england, and I may there find 
consolation. 

I am interrupted. what do these sound portend? It is midnight; the 
breez blow fairly, and the watch on deck scarc stir. again there 
is a sound as of a human voice, but hoarser; it come from the cabin 
where the remain of frankenstein still lie. I must aris and examine. 
good night, my sister. 

great god! what a scene ha just taken place! I am yet dizzi with the 
remembr of it. I hardli know whether I shall have the power to detail 
it; yet the tale which I have record would be incomplet without thi 
final and wonder catastrophe. 

I enter the cabin where lay the remain of my ill-fat and admir 
friend. over him hung a form which I cannot find word to 
describe—gigant in stature, yet uncouth and distort in it 
proportions. As he hung over the coffin, hi face wa conceal by long 
lock of rag hair; but one vast hand wa extended, in colour and 
appar textur like that of a mummy. when he heard the sound of my 
approach, he ceas to utter exclam of grief and horror and sprung 
toward the window. never did I behold a vision so horribl as hi face, of 
such loathsom yet appal hideousness. I shut my eye involuntarili and 
endeavour to recollect what were my duti with regard to thi destroyer. 
I call on him to stay. 

He paused, look on me with wonder, and again turn toward the 
lifeless form of hi creator, he seem to forget my presence, and 
everi featur and gestur seem instig by the wildest rage of some 
uncontrol passion. 

“that is also my victim!” he exclaimed. “in hi murder my 
crime are consummated; the miser seri of my be is wound to it 
close! oh, frankenstein! gener and self-devot being! what doe it 
avail that I now ask thee to pardon me? I, who irretriev destroy thee 
by destroy all thou lovedst. alas! He is cold, he cannot answer 
me.” 

hi voic seem suffocated, and my first impulses, which had suggest to 
me the duti of obey the die request of my friend in destroy hi 
enemy, were now suspend by a mixtur of curios and compassion. I 
approach thi tremend being; I dare not again rais my eye to hi 
face, there wa someth so scare and unearthli in hi ugliness. I 
attempt to speak, but the word die away on my lips. the monster 
continu to utter wild and incoher self-reproaches. At length I 
gather resolut to address him in a paus of the tempest of hi passion. 

“your repentance,” I said, “i now superfluous. If you 
had listen to the voic of conscienc and heed the sting of remors 
befor you had urg your diabol vengeanc to thi extremity, 
frankenstein would yet have lived.” 

“and do you dream?” said the dæmon. “do you think that I wa then 
dead to agoni and remorse? he,” he continued, point to the corpse, 
“he suffer not in the consumm of the deed. oh! not the 
ten-thousandth portion of the anguish that wa mine dure the 
linger detail of it execution. A fright selfish hurri me 
on, while my heart wa poison with remorse. think you that the 
groan of clerval were music to my ears? My heart wa fashion to be 
suscept of love and sympathy, and when wrench by miseri to vice 
and hatred, it did not endur the violenc of the chang without 
tortur such as you cannot even imagine. 

“after the murder of clerval I return to switzerland, heart-broken 
and overcome. I piti frankenstein; my piti amount to horror; I 
abhor myself. but when I discov that he, the author at onc of 
my exist and of it unspeak torments, dare to hope for 
happiness, that while he accumul wretched and despair upon me 
he sought hi own enjoy in feel and passion from the 
indulg of which I wa for ever barred, then impot envi and bitter 
indign fill me with an insati thirst for vengeance. I 
recollect my threat and resolv that it should be accomplished. I 
knew that I wa prepar for myself a deadli torture, but I wa the 
slave, not the master, of an impuls which I detest yet could not 
disobey. yet when she died! nay, then I wa not miserable. I had 
cast off all feeling, subdu all anguish, to riot in the excess of my 
despair. evil thenceforth becam my good. urg thu far, I had no 
choic but to adapt my natur to an element which I had willingli 
chosen. the complet of my demoniac design becam an insati 
passion. and now it is ended; there is my last victim!” 

I wa at first touch by the express of hi misery; yet, when I call 
to mind what frankenstein had said of hi power of eloqu and 
persuasion, and when I again cast my eye on the lifeless form of my 
friend, indign wa rekindl within me. “wretch!” I said. 
“it is well that you come here to whine over the desol that you 
have made. you throw a torch into a pile of buildings, and when they are 
consumed, you sit among the ruin and lament the fall. hypocrit fiend! 
If he whom you mourn still lived, still would he be the object, again would 
he becom the prey, of your accurs vengeance. It is not piti that you 
feel; you lament onli becaus the victim of your malign is withdrawn 
from your power.” 

“oh, it is not thus—not thus,” interrupt the being. 
“yet such must be the impress convey to you by what appear to 
be the purport of my actions. yet I seek not a fellow feel in my misery. 
No sympathi may I ever find. when I first sought it, it wa the love of 
virtue, the feel of happi and affect with which my whole be 
overflowed, that I wish to be participated. but now that virtu ha 
becom to me a shadow, and that happi and affect are turn into 
bitter and loath despair, in what should I seek for sympathy? I am 
content to suffer alon while my suffer shall endure; when I die, I am 
well satisfi that abhorr and opprobrium should load my memory. onc 
my fanci wa sooth with dream of virtue, of fame, and of enjoyment. onc 
I fals hope to meet with be who, pardon my outward form, would 
love me for the excel qualiti which I wa capabl of unfolding. I wa 
nourish with high thought of honour and devotion. but now crime ha 
degrad me beneath the meanest animal. No guilt, no mischief, no 
malignity, no misery, can be found compar to mine. when I run over the 
fright catalogu of my sins, I cannot believ that I am the same 
creatur whose thought were onc fill with sublim and transcend 
vision of the beauti and the majesti of goodness. but it is even so; the 
fallen angel becom a malign devil. yet even that enemi of god and man 
had friend and associ in hi desolation; I am alone. 

“you, who call frankenstein your friend, seem to have a knowledg of my 
crime and hi misfortunes. but in the detail which he gave you of them 
he could not sum up the hour and month of miseri which I endur 
wast in impot passions. for while I destroy hi hopes, I did 
not satisfi my own desires. they were for ever ardent and craving; still 
I desir love and fellowship, and I wa still spurned. wa there no 
injustic in this? Am I to be thought the onli criminal, when all 
humankind sin against me? whi do you not hate felix, who drove hi 
friend from hi door with contumely? whi do you not execr the rustic 
who sought to destroy the saviour of hi child? nay, these are virtuou 
and immacul beings! I, the miser and the abandoned, am an 
abortion, to be spurn at, and kicked, and trampl on. even now my 
blood boil at the recollect of thi injustice. 

“but it is true that I am a wretch. I have murder the love and 
the helpless; I have strangl the innoc as they slept and grasp to 
death hi throat who never injur me or ani other live thing. I have 
devot my creator, the select specimen of all that is worthi of love and 
admir among men, to misery; I have pursu him even to that 
irremedi ruin. there he lies, white and cold in death. you hate me, but 
your abhorr cannot equal that with which I regard myself. I look on the 
hand which execut the deed; I think on the heart in which the 
imagin of it wa conceiv and long for the moment when these hand 
will meet my eyes, when that imagin will haunt my thought no more. 

“fear not that I shall be the instrument of futur mischief. My work 
is nearli complete. neither your nor ani man’ death is need to 
consumm the seri of my be and accomplish that which must be done, 
but it requir my own. Do not think that I shall be slow to perform thi 
sacrifice. I shall quit your vessel on the ice raft which brought me 
thither and shall seek the most northern extrem of the globe; I shall 
collect my funer pile and consum to ash thi miser frame, that it 
remain may afford no light to ani curiou and unhallow wretch who would 
creat such anoth as I have been. I shall die. I shall no longer feel the 
agoni which now consum me or be the prey of feel unsatisfied, yet 
unquenched. He is dead who call me into being; and when I shall be no 
more, the veri remembr of us both will speedili vanish. I shall no 
longer see the sun or star or feel the wind play on my cheeks. light, 
feeling, and sens will pass away; and in thi condit must I find my 
happiness. some year ago, when the imag which thi world afford first 
open upon me, when I felt the cheer warmth of summer and heard the 
rustl of the leav and the warbl of the birds, and these were all to 
me, I should have wept to die; now it is my onli consolation. pollut by 
crime and torn by the bitterest remorse, where can I find rest but in 
death? 

“farewell! I leav you, and in you the last of humankind whom these 
eye will ever behold. farewell, frankenstein! If thou wert yet aliv 
and yet cherish a desir of reveng against me, it would be better 
satiat in my life than in my destruction. but it wa not so; thou 
didst seek my extinction, that I might not caus greater wretchedness; 
and if yet, in some mode unknown to me, thou hadst not ceas to think 
and feel, thou wouldst not desir against me a vengeanc greater than 
that which I feel. blast as thou wert, my agoni wa still superior to 
thine, for the bitter sting of remors will not ceas to rankl in my 
wound until death shall close them for ever. 

“but soon,” he cri with sad and solemn enthusiasm, “I 
shall die, and what I now feel be no longer felt. soon these burn 
miseri will be extinct. I shall ascend my funer pile triumphantli and 
exult in the agoni of the tortur flames. the light of that conflagr 
will fade away; my ash will be swept into the sea by the winds. My spirit 
will sleep in peace, or if it thinks, it will not sure think thus. 
farewell.” 

He sprang from the cabin-window as he said this, upon the ice raft 
which lay close to the vessel. He wa soon born away by the wave and 
lost in dark and distance. 




end of the project gutenberg ebook of frankenstein, by 
mari wollstonecraft (godwin) shelley 

*** end OF thi project gutenberg ebook frankenstein *** 

***** thi file should be name 84-0.txt or 84-0.zip ***** 
thi and all associ file of variou format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/8/84/ 

produc by judith boss, christi phillips, lynn hanninen, 
and david meltzer. html version by Al haines. 
further correct by menno de leeuw. 


updat edit will replac the previou one--th old edit 
will be renamed. 

creat the work from public domain print edit mean that no 
one own a unit state copyright in these works, so the foundat 
(and you!) can copi and distribut it in the unit state without 
permiss and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the gener term of use part of thi license, appli to 
copi and distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a regist trademark, and may not be use if you 
charg for the ebooks, unless you receiv specif permission. If you 
do not charg anyth for copi of thi ebook, compli with the 
rule is veri easy. you may use thi ebook for nearli ani purpos 
such as creation of deriv works, reports, perform and 
research. they may be modifi and print and given away--y may do 
practic anyth with public domain ebooks. redistribut is 
subject to the trademark license, especi commerci 
redistribution. 



*** start: full licens *** 

the full project gutenberg licens 
pleas read thi befor you distribut OR use thi work 

To protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promot the free 
distribut of electron works, by use or distribut thi work 
(or ani other work associ in ani way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agre to compli with all the term of the full project 
gutenberg-tm licens (avail with thi file or onlin at 
http://gutenberg.net/license). 


section 1. gener term of use and redistribut project gutenberg-tm 
electron work 

1.a. By read or use ani part of thi project gutenberg-tm 
electron work, you indic that you have read, understand, agre to 
and accept all the term of thi licens and intellectu properti 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agre to abid by all 
the term of thi agreement, you must ceas use and return or destroy 
all copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in your possession. 
If you paid a fee for obtain a copi of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work and you do not agre to be bound by the 
term of thi agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entiti to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a regist trademark. It may onli be 
use on or associ in ani way with an electron work by peopl who 
agre to be bound by the term of thi agreement. there are a few 
thing that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electron work 
even without compli with the full term of thi agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of thing you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electron work if you follow the term of thi agreement 
and help preserv free futur access to project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compil copyright in the collect of project 
gutenberg-tm electron works. nearli all the individu work in the 
collect are in the public domain in the unit states. If an 
individu work is in the public domain in the unit state and you are 
locat in the unit states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or creat deriv 
work base on the work as long as all refer to project gutenberg 
are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promot free access to electron work by 
freeli share project gutenberg-tm work in complianc with the term of 
thi agreement for keep the project gutenberg-tm name associ with 
the work. you can easili compli with the term of thi agreement by 
keep thi work in the same format with it attach full project 
gutenberg-tm licens when you share it without charg with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are locat also govern 
what you can do with thi work. copyright law in most countri are in 
a constant state of change. If you are outsid the unit states, check 
the law of your countri in addit to the term of thi agreement 
befor downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribut or 
creat deriv work base on thi work or ani other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundat make no represent concern 
the copyright statu of ani work in ani countri outsid the unit 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remov all refer to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the follow sentence, with activ link to, or other immedi 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm licens must appear promin 
whenev ani copi of a project gutenberg-tm work (ani work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copi or distributed: 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.net 

1.e.2. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is deriv 
from the public domain (doe not contain a notic indic that it is 
post with permiss of the copyright holder), the work can be copi 
and distribut to anyon in the unit state without pay ani fee 
or charges. If you are redistribut or provid access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associ with or appear on the 
work, you must compli either with the requir of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permiss for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is post 
with the permiss of the copyright holder, your use and distribut 
must compli with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and ani addit 
term impos by the copyright holder. addit term will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm licens for all work post with the 
permiss of the copyright holder found at the begin of thi work. 

1.e.4. Do not unlink or detach or remov the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens term from thi work, or ani file contain a part of thi 
work or ani other work associ with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribut or redistribut thi 
electron work, or ani part of thi electron work, without 
promin display the sentenc set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
activ link or immedi access to the full term of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribut thi work in ani binary, 
compressed, mark up, nonproprietari or proprietari form, includ ani 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provid access to or 
distribut copi of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the offici version 
post on the offici project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net), 
you must, at no addit cost, fee or expens to the user, provid a 
copy, a mean of export a copy, or a mean of obtain a copi upon 
request, of the work in it origin "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. ani altern format must includ the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens as specifi in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. Do not charg a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copi or distribut ani project gutenberg-tm work 
unless you compli with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charg a reason fee for copi of or provid 
access to or distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work provid 
that 

- you pay a royalti fee of 20% of the gross profit you deriv from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm work calcul use the method 
you alreadi use to calcul your applic taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
ha agre to donat royalti under thi paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literari archiv foundation. royalti payment 
must be paid within 60 day follow each date on which you 
prepar (or are legal requir to prepare) your period tax 
returns. royalti payment should be clearli mark as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat at the 
address specifi in section 4, "inform about donat to 
the project gutenberg literari archiv foundation." 

- you provid a full refund of ani money paid by a user who notifi 
you in write (or by e-mail) within 30 day of receipt that s/he 
doe not agre to the term of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must requir such a user to return or 
destroy all copi of the work possess in a physic medium 
and discontinu all use of and all access to other copi of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accord with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of ani 
money paid for a work or a replac copy, if a defect in the 
electron work is discov and report to you within 90 day 
of receipt of the work. 

- you compli with all other term of thi agreement for free 
distribut of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. If you wish to charg a fee or distribut a project gutenberg-tm 
electron work or group of work on differ term than are set 
forth in thi agreement, you must obtain permiss in write from 
both the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundat as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunt and employe expend consider 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcrib and proofread 
public domain work in creat the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despit these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electron 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limit to, incomplete, inaccur or 
corrupt data, transcript errors, a copyright or other intellectu 
properti infringement, a defect or damag disk or other medium, a 
comput virus, or comput code that damag or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limit warranty, disclaim OF damag - except for the "right 
of replac or refund" describ in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and ani other parti distribut a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work under thi agreement, disclaim all 
liabil to you for damages, cost and expenses, includ legal 
fees. you agre that you have NO remedi for negligence, strict 
liability, breach OF warranti OR breach OF contract except those 
provid IN paragraph f3. you agre that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and ani distributor under thi agreement will not BE 
liabl TO you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punit OR 
incident damag even IF you give notic OF the possibl OF such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limit right OF replac OR refund - If you discov a 
defect in thi electron work within 90 day of receiv it, you can 
receiv a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explan to the person you receiv the work from. If you 
receiv the work on a physic medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entiti that provid you with 
the defect work may elect to provid a replac copi in lieu of a 
refund. If you receiv the work electronically, the person or entiti 
provid it to you may choos to give you a second opportun to 
receiv the work electron in lieu of a refund. If the second copi 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in write without further 
opportun to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limit right of replac or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, thi work is provid to you 'as-is' with NO other 
warranti OF ani kind, express OR implied, includ but not limit TO 
warranti OF merchant OR fit for ani purpose. 

1.f.5. some state do not allow disclaim of certain impli 
warranti or the exclus or limit of certain type of damages. 
If ani disclaim or limit set forth in thi agreement violat the 
law of the state applic to thi agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaim or limit permit by 
the applic state law. the invalid or unenforc of ani 
provis of thi agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemn - you agre to indemnifi and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, ani agent or employe of the foundation, anyon 
provid copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in accord 
with thi agreement, and ani volunt associ with the production, 
promot and distribut of project gutenberg-tm electron works, 
harmless from all liability, cost and expenses, includ legal fees, 
that aris directli or indirectli from ani of the follow which you do 
or caus to occur: (a) distribut of thi or ani project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addit or delet to ani 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) ani defect you cause. 


section 2. inform about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonym with the free distribut of 
electron work in format readabl by the widest varieti of comput 
includ obsolete, old, middle-ag and new computers. It exist 
becaus of the effort of hundr of volunt and donat from 
peopl in all walk of life. 

volunt and financi support to provid volunt with the 
assist they need, is critic to reach project gutenberg-tm' 
goal and ensur that the project gutenberg-tm collect will 
remain freeli avail for gener to come. In 2001, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundat wa creat to provid a secur 
and perman futur for project gutenberg-tm and futur generations. 
To learn more about the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat 
and how your effort and donat can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundat web page at http://www.pglaf.org. 


section 3. inform about the project gutenberg literari archiv 
foundat 

the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educ corpor organ under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt statu by the intern 
revenu service. the foundation' ein or feder tax identif 
number is 64-6221541. it 501(c)(3) letter is post at 
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contribut to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. feder law and your state' laws. 

the foundation' princip offic is locat at 4557 melan dr. S. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but it volunt and employe are scatter 
throughout numer locations. it busi offic is locat at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact link and up to date contact 
inform can be found at the foundation' web site and offici 
page at http://pglaf.org 

for addit contact information: 
dr. gregori B. newbi 
chief execut and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 


section 4. inform about donat to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot surviv without wide 
spread public support and donat to carri out it mission of 
increas the number of public domain and licens work that can be 
freeli distribut in machin readabl form access by the widest 
array of equip includ outdat equipment. mani small donat 
($1 to $5,000) are particularli import to maintain tax exempt 
statu with the irs. 

the foundat is commit to compli with the law regul 
chariti and charit donat in all 50 state of the unit 
states. complianc requir are not uniform and it take a 
consider effort, much paperwork and mani fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. We do not solicit donat in locat 
where we have not receiv written confirm of compliance. To 
send donat or determin the statu of complianc for ani 
particular state visit http://pglaf.org 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribut from state where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibit 
against accept unsolicit donat from donor in such state who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

intern donat are grate accepted, but we cannot make 
ani statement concern tax treatment of donat receiv from 
outsid the unit states. u.s. law alon swamp our small staff. 

pleas check the project gutenberg web page for current donat 
method and addresses. donat are accept in a number of other 
way includ includ checks, onlin payment and credit card 
donations. To donate, pleas visit: http://pglaf.org/don 


section 5. gener inform about project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. 

professor michael S. hart is the origin of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a librari of electron work that could be freeli share 
with anyone. for thirti years, he produc and distribut project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with onli a loos network of volunt support. 


project gutenberg-tm ebook are often creat from sever print 
editions, all of which are confirm as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notic is included. thus, we do not necessarili 
keep ebook in complianc with ani particular paper edition. 


most peopl start at our web site which ha the main PG search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.net 

thi web site includ inform about project gutenberg-tm, 
includ how to make donat to the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundation, how to help produc our new ebooks, and how to 
subscrib to our email newslett to hear about new ebooks. 













