the project gutenberg ebook of dracula, by bram stoker 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.org/licens 


title: dracula 

author: bram stoker 

releas date: august 16, 2013 [ebook #345] 

language: english 


*** start OF thi project gutenberg ebook dracula *** 




produc by chuck greif and the onlin distribut 
proofread team at http://www.pgdp.net (thi file wa 
produc from imag gener made avail by the 
internet archive) 







dracula 





dracula 

_by_ 

bram stoker 

[illustration: colophon] 

new york 

grosset & dunlap 

_publishers_ 

copyright, 1897, in the unit state of america, accord 
to act of congress, by bram stoker 

[_all right reserved._] 

print IN the unit state 
AT 
the countri life press, garden city, n.y. 




TO 

MY dear friend 

hommy-beg 




content 


chapter I 
page 

jonathan harker' journal 1 

chapter II 

jonathan harker' journal 14 

chapter iii 

jonathan harker' journal 26 

chapter IV 

jonathan harker' journal 38 

chapter V 

letters--luci and mina 51 

chapter VI 

mina murray' journal 59 

chapter vii 

cut from "the dailygraph," 8 august 71 

chapter viii 

mina murray' journal 84 

chapter IX 

mina murray' journal 98 

chapter X 

mina murray' journal 111 

chapter XI 

luci westenra' diari 124 

chapter xii 

dr. seward' diari 136 

chapter xiii 

dr. seward' diari 152 

chapter xiv 

mina harker' journal 167 

chapter XV 

dr. seward' diari 181 

chapter xvi 

dr. seward' diari 194 

chapter xvii 

dr. seward' diari 204 

chapter xviii 

dr. seward' diari 216 

chapter xix 

jonathan harker' journal 231 

chapter XX 

jonathan harker' journal 243 

chapter xxi 

dr. seward' diari 256 

chapter xxii 

jonathan harker' journal 269 

chapter xxiii 

dr. seward' diari 281 

chapter xxiv 

dr. seward' phonograph diary, spoken by van hels 294 

chapter xxv 

dr. seward' diari 308 

chapter xxvi 

dr. seward' diari 322 

chapter xxvii 

mina harker' journal 338 




dracula 




chapter I 
prefac 
jonathan harker' journal 

(_kept in shorthand._) 


_3 may. bistritz._--left munich at 8:35 P. m., on 1st may, arriv at 
vienna earli next morning; should have arriv at 6:46, but train wa an 
hour late. buda-pesth seem a wonder place, from the glimps which I 
got of it from the train and the littl I could walk through the 
streets. I fear to go veri far from the station, as we had arriv 
late and would start as near the correct time as possible. the 
impress I had wa that we were leav the west and enter the 
east; the most western of splendid bridg over the danube, which is 
here of nobl width and depth, took us among the tradit of turkish 
rule. 

We left in pretti good time, and came after nightfal to klausenburgh. 
here I stop for the night at the hotel royale. I had for dinner, or 
rather supper, a chicken done up some way with red pepper, which wa 
veri good but thirsty. (_mem._, get recip for mina.) I ask the 
waiter, and he said it wa call "paprika hendl," and that, as it wa a 
nation dish, I should be abl to get it anywher along the 
carpathians. I found my smatter of german veri use here; indeed, I 
don't know how I should be abl to get on without it. 

have had some time at my dispos when in london, I had visit the 
british museum, and made search among the book and map in the librari 
regard transylvania; it had struck me that some foreknowledg of the 
countri could hardli fail to have some import in deal with a 
nobleman of that country. I find that the district he name is in the 
extrem east of the country, just on the border of three states, 
transylvania, moldavia and bukovina, in the midst of the carpathian 
mountains; one of the wildest and least known portion of europe. I wa 
not abl to light on ani map or work give the exact local of the 
castl dracula, as there are no map of thi countri as yet to compar 
with our own ordnanc survey maps; but I found that bistritz, the post 
town name by count dracula, is a fairli well-known place. I shall enter 
here some of my notes, as they may refresh my memori when I talk over my 
travel with mina. 

In the popul of transylvania there are four distinct nationalities: 
saxon in the south, and mix with them the wallachs, who are the 
descend of the dacians; magyar in the west, and szeke in the 
east and north. I am go among the latter, who claim to be descend 
from attila and the huns. thi may be so, for when the magyar conquer 
the countri in the eleventh centuri they found the hun settl in it. I 
read that everi known superstit in the world is gather into the 
horsesho of the carpathians, as if it were the centr of some sort of 
imagin whirlpool; if so my stay may be veri interesting. (_mem._, I 
must ask the count all about them.) 

I did not sleep well, though my bed wa comfort enough, for I had 
all sort of queer dreams. there wa a dog howl all night under my 
window, which may have had someth to do with it; or it may have been 
the paprika, for I had to drink up all the water in my carafe, and wa 
still thirsty. toward morn I slept and wa waken by the continu 
knock at my door, so I guess I must have been sleep soundli then. 
I had for breakfast more paprika, and a sort of porridg of maiz flour 
which they said wa "mamaliga," and egg-plant stuf with forcemeat, a 
veri excel dish, which they call "impletata." (_mem._, get recip 
for thi also.) I had to hurri breakfast, for the train start a littl 
befor eight, or rather it ought to have done so, for after rush to 
the station at 7:30 I had to sit in the carriag for more than an hour 
befor we began to move. It seem to me that the further east you go the 
more unpunctu are the trains. what ought they to be in china? 

all day long we seem to dawdl through a countri which wa full of 
beauti of everi kind. sometim we saw littl town or castl on the 
top of steep hill such as we see in old missals; sometim we ran by 
river and stream which seem from the wide stoni margin on each side 
of them to be subject to great floods. It take a lot of water, and 
run strong, to sweep the outsid edg of a river clear. At everi 
station there were group of people, sometim crowds, and in all sort 
of attire. some of them were just like the peasant at home or those I 
saw come through franc and germany, with short jacket and round hat 
and home-mad trousers; but other were veri picturesque. the women 
look pretty, except when you got near them, but they were veri clumsi 
about the waist. they had all full white sleev of some kind or other, 
and most of them had big belt with a lot of strip of someth 
flutter from them like the dress in a ballet, but of cours there 
were petticoat under them. the strangest figur we saw were the 
slovaks, who were more barbarian than the rest, with their big cow-boy 
hats, great baggi dirty-whit trousers, white linen shirts, and enorm 
heavi leather belts, nearli a foot wide, all stud over with brass 
nails. they wore high boots, with their trouser tuck into them, and 
had long black hair and heavi black moustaches. they are veri 
picturesque, but do not look prepossessing. On the stage they would be 
set down at onc as some old orient band of brigands. they are, 
however, I am told, veri harmless and rather want in natur 
self-assertion. 

It wa on the dark side of twilight when we got to bistritz, which is a 
veri interest old place. be practic on the frontier--for the 
borgo pass lead from it into bukovina--it ha had a veri stormi 
existence, and it certainli show mark of it. fifti year ago a seri 
of great fire took place, which made terribl havoc on five separ 
occasions. At the veri begin of the seventeenth centuri it underw 
a sieg of three week and lost 13,000 people, the casualti of war 
proper be assist by famin and disease. 

count dracula had direct me to go to the golden krone hotel, which I 
found, to my great delight, to be thoroughli old-fashioned, for of 
cours I want to see all I could of the way of the country. I wa 
evid expected, for when I got near the door I face a 
cheery-look elderli woman in the usual peasant dress--whit 
undergar with long doubl apron, front, and back, of colour stuff 
fit almost too tight for modesty. when I came close she bow and 
said, "the herr englishman?" "yes," I said, "jonathan harker." she 
smiled, and gave some messag to an elderli man in white shirt-sleeves, 
who had follow her to the door. He went, but immedi return with 
a letter:-- 

"mi friend.--welcom to the carpathians. I am anxious expect 
you. sleep well to-night. At three to-morrow the dilig will 
start for bukovina; a place on it is kept for you. At the borgo 
pass my carriag will await you and will bring you to me. I trust 
that your journey from london ha been a happi one, and that you 
will enjoy your stay in my beauti land. 

"your friend, 

"dracula." 


_4 may._--i found that my landlord had got a letter from the count, 
direct him to secur the best place on the coach for me; but on 
make inquiri as to detail he seem somewhat reticent, and 
pretend that he could not understand my german. thi could not be 
true, becaus up to then he had understood it perfectly; at least, he 
answer my question exactli as if he did. He and hi wife, the old 
ladi who had receiv me, look at each other in a frighten sort of 
way. He mumbl out that the money had been sent in a letter, and that 
wa all he knew. when I ask him if he knew count dracula, and could 
tell me anyth of hi castle, both he and hi wife cross themselves, 
and, say that they knew noth at all, simpli refus to speak 
further. It wa so near the time of start that I had no time to ask 
ani one else, for it wa all veri mysteri and not by ani mean 
comforting. 

just befor I wa leaving, the old ladi came up to my room and said in a 
veri hyster way: 

"must you go? oh! young herr, must you go?" she wa in such an excit 
state that she seem to have lost her grip of what german she knew, and 
mix it all up with some other languag which I did not know at all. I 
wa just abl to follow her by ask mani questions. when I told her 
that I must go at once, and that I wa engag on import business, 
she ask again: 

"do you know what day it is?" I answer that it wa the fourth of may. 
she shook her head as she said again: 

"oh, yes! I know that! I know that, but do you know what day it is?" On 
my say that I did not understand, she went on: 

"it is the eve of st. george' day. Do you not know that to-night, when 
the clock strike midnight, all the evil thing in the world will have 
full sway? Do you know where you are going, and what you are go to?" 
she wa in such evid distress that I tri to comfort her, but 
without effect. final she went down on her knee and implor me not 
to go; at least to wait a day or two befor starting. It wa all veri 
ridicul but I did not feel comfortable. however, there wa busi 
to be done, and I could allow noth to interfer with it. I therefor 
tri to rais her up, and said, as grave as I could, that I thank 
her, but my duti wa imperative, and that I must go. she then rose and 
dri her eyes, and take a crucifix from her neck offer it to me. I 
did not know what to do, for, as an english churchman, I have been 
taught to regard such thing as in some measur idolatrous, and yet it 
seem so ungraci to refus an old ladi mean so well and in such a 
state of mind. she saw, I suppose, the doubt in my face, for she put the 
rosari round my neck, and said, "for your mother' sake," and went out 
of the room. I am write up thi part of the diari whilst I am wait 
for the coach, which is, of course, late; and the crucifix is still 
round my neck. whether it is the old lady' fear, or the mani ghostli 
tradit of thi place, or the crucifix itself, I do not know, but I 
am not feel nearli as easi in my mind as usual. If thi book should 
ever reach mina befor I do, let it bring my good-bye. here come the 
coach! 

* * * * * 

_5 may. the castle._--th grey of the morn ha passed, and the sun is 
high over the distant horizon, which seem jagged, whether with tree or 
hill I know not, for it is so far off that big thing and littl are 
mixed. I am not sleepy, and, as I am not to be call till I awake, 
natur I write till sleep comes. there are mani odd thing to put 
down, and, lest who read them may fanci that I dine too well befor I 
left bistritz, let me put down my dinner exactly. I dine on what they 
call "robber steak"--bit of bacon, onion, and beef, season with red 
pepper, and strung on stick and roast over the fire, in the simpl 
style of the london cat' meat! the wine wa golden mediasch, which 
produc a queer sting on the tongue, which is, however, not 
disagreeable. I had onli a coupl of glass of this, and noth else. 

when I got on the coach the driver had not taken hi seat, and I saw him 
talk with the landlady. they were evid talk of me, for everi 
now and then they look at me, and some of the peopl who were sit 
on the bench outsid the door--which they call by a name mean 
"word-bearer"--cam and listened, and then look at me, most of them 
pityingly. I could hear a lot of word often repeated, queer words, for 
there were mani nation in the crowd; so I quietli got my polyglot 
dictionari from my bag and look them out. I must say they were not 
cheer to me, for amongst them were "ordog"--satan, "pokol"--hell, 
"stregoica"--witch, "vrolok" and "vlkoslak"--both of which mean the same 
thing, one be slovak and the other servian for someth that is 
either were-wolf or vampire. (_mem._, I must ask the count about these 
superstitions) 

when we started, the crowd round the inn door, which had by thi time 
swell to a consider size, all made the sign of the cross and 
point two finger toward me. with some difficulti I got a 
fellow-passeng to tell me what they meant; he would not answer at 
first, but on learn that I wa english, he explain that it wa a 
charm or guard against the evil eye. thi wa not veri pleasant for me, 
just start for an unknown place to meet an unknown man; but everi one 
seem so kind-hearted, and so sorrowful, and so sympathet that I 
could not but be touched. I shall never forget the last glimps which I 
had of the inn-yard and it crowd of picturesqu figures, all cross 
themselves, as they stood round the wide archway, with it background of 
rich foliag of oleand and orang tree in green tub cluster in the 
centr of the yard. then our driver, whose wide linen drawer cover 
the whole front of the box-seat--"gotza" they call them--crack hi big 
whip over hi four small horses, which ran abreast, and we set off on 
our journey. 

I soon lost sight and recollect of ghostli fear in the beauti of the 
scene as we drove along, although had I known the language, or rather 
languages, which my fellow-passeng were speaking, I might not have 
been abl to throw them off so easily. befor us lay a green slope 
land full of forest and woods, with here and there steep hills, crown 
with clump of tree or with farmhouses, the blank gabl end to the 
road. there wa everywher a bewild mass of fruit blossom--apple, 
plum, pear, cherry; and as we drove by I could see the green grass under 
the tree spangl with the fallen petals. In and out amongst these 
green hill of what they call here the "mittel land" ran the road, 
lose itself as it swept round the grassi curve, or wa shut out by the 
straggl end of pine woods, which here and there ran down the 
hillsid like tongu of flame. the road wa rugged, but still we 
seem to fli over it with a feverish haste. I could not understand then 
what the hast meant, but the driver wa evid bent on lose no 
time in reach borgo prund. I wa told that thi road is in summertim 
excellent, but that it had not yet been put in order after the winter 
snows. In thi respect it is differ from the gener run of road in 
the carpathians, for it is an old tradit that they are not to be kept 
in too good order. Of old the hospadar would not repair them, lest the 
turk should think that they were prepar to bring in foreign troops, 
and so hasten the war which wa alway realli at load point. 

beyond the green swell hill of the mittel land rose mighti slope 
of forest up to the lofti steep of the carpathian themselves. right 
and left of us they towered, with the afternoon sun fall full upon 
them and bring out all the gloriou colour of thi beauti range, 
deep blue and purpl in the shadow of the peaks, green and brown where 
grass and rock mingled, and an endless perspect of jag rock and 
point crags, till these were themselv lost in the distance, where 
the snowi peak rose grandly. here and there seem mighti rift in the 
mountains, through which, as the sun began to sink, we saw now and again 
the white gleam of fall water. one of my companion touch my arm as 
we swept round the base of a hill and open up the lofty, snow-cov 
peak of a mountain, which seemed, as we wound on our serpentin way, to 
be right befor us:-- 

"look! isten szek!"--"god' seat!"--and he cross himself reverently. 

As we wound on our endless way, and the sun sank lower and lower behind 
us, the shadow of the even began to creep round us. thi wa 
emphasis by the fact that the snowi mountain-top still held the 
sunset, and seem to glow out with a delic cool pink. here and there 
we pass cszek and slovaks, all in picturesqu attire, but I notic 
that goitr wa pain prevalent. By the roadsid were mani crosses, 
and as we swept by, my companion all cross themselves. here and there 
wa a peasant man or woman kneel befor a shrine, who did not even 
turn round as we approached, but seem in the self-surrend of 
devot to have neither eye nor ear for the outer world. there were 
mani thing new to me: for instance, hay-rick in the trees, and here 
and there veri beauti mass of weep birch, their white stem 
shine like silver through the delic green of the leaves. now and 
again we pass a leiter-wagon--th ordinari peasant' cart--with it 
long, snake-lik vertebra, calcul to suit the inequ of the 
road. On thi were sure to be seat quit a group of home-com 
peasants, the cszek with their white, and the slovak with their 
coloured, sheepskins, the latter carri lance-fashion their long 
staves, with axe at end. As the even fell it began to get veri cold, 
and the grow twilight seem to merg into one dark misti the 
gloom of the trees, oak, beech, and pine, though in the valley which 
ran deep between the spur of the hills, as we ascend through the 
pass, the dark fir stood out here and there against the background of 
late-li snow. sometimes, as the road wa cut through the pine wood 
that seem in the dark to be close down upon us, great mass of 
greyness, which here and there bestrew the trees, produc a 
peculiarli weird and solemn effect, which carri on the thought and 
grim fanci engend earlier in the evening, when the fall sunset 
threw into strang relief the ghost-lik cloud which amongst the 
carpathian seem to wind ceaselessli through the valleys. sometim the 
hill were so steep that, despit our driver' haste, the hors could 
onli go slowly. I wish to get down and walk up them, as we do at home, 
but the driver would not hear of it. "no, no," he said; "you must not 
walk here; the dog are too fierce"; and then he added, with what he 
evid meant for grim pleasantry--for he look round to catch the 
approv smile of the rest--"and you may have enough of such matter 
befor you go to sleep." the onli stop he would make wa a moment' 
paus to light hi lamps. 

when it grew dark there seem to be some excit amongst the 
passengers, and they kept speak to him, one after the other, as 
though urg him to further speed. He lash the hors unmerci 
with hi long whip, and with wild cri of encourag urg them on 
to further exertions. then through the dark I could see a sort of 
patch of grey light ahead of us, as though there were a cleft in the 
hills. the excit of the passeng grew greater; the crazi coach 
rock on it great leather springs, and sway like a boat toss on a 
stormi sea. I had to hold on. the road grew more level, and we appear 
to fli along. then the mountain seem to come nearer to us on each 
side and to frown down upon us; we were enter on the borgo pass. one 
by one sever of the passeng offer me gifts, which they press 
upon me with an earnest which would take no denial; these were 
certainli of an odd and vari kind, but each wa given in simpl good 
faith, with a kindli word, and a blessing, and that strang mixtur of 
fear-mean movement which I had seen outsid the hotel at 
bistritz--th sign of the cross and the guard against the evil eye. 
then, as we flew along, the driver lean forward, and on each side the 
passengers, crane over the edg of the coach, peer eagerli into the 
darkness. It wa evid that someth veri excit wa either 
happen or expected, but though I ask each passenger, no one would 
give me the slightest explanation. thi state of excit kept on for 
some littl time; and at last we saw befor us the pass open out on 
the eastern side. there were dark, roll cloud overhead, and in the 
air the heavy, oppress sens of thunder. It seem as though the 
mountain rang had separ two atmospheres, and that now we had got 
into the thunder one. I wa now myself look out for the convey 
which wa to take me to the count. each moment I expect to see the 
glare of lamp through the blackness; but all wa dark. the onli light 
wa the flicker ray of our own lamps, in which the steam from our 
hard-driven hors rose in a white cloud. We could see now the sandi 
road lie white befor us, but there wa on it no sign of a vehicle. 
the passeng drew back with a sigh of gladness, which seem to mock 
my own disappointment. I wa alreadi think what I had best do, when 
the driver, look at hi watch, said to the other someth which I 
could hardli hear, it wa spoken so quietli and in so low a tone; I 
thought it wa "an hour less than the time." then turn to me, he said 
in german wors than my own:-- 

"there is no carriag here. the herr is not expect after all. He will 
now come on to bukovina, and return to-morrow or the next day; better 
the next day." whilst he wa speak the hors began to neigh and 
snort and plung wildly, so that the driver had to hold them up. then, 
amongst a choru of scream from the peasant and a univers cross 
of themselves, a calèche, with four horses, drove up behind us, overtook 
us, and drew up besid the coach. I could see from the flash of our 
lamps, as the ray fell on them, that the hors were coal-black and 
splendid animals. they were driven by a tall man, with a long brown 
beard and a great black hat, which seem to hide hi face from us. I 
could onli see the gleam of a pair of veri bright eyes, which seem red 
in the lamplight, as he turn to us. He said to the driver:-- 

"you are earli to-night, my friend." the man stammer in reply:-- 

"the english herr wa in a hurry," to which the stranger replied:-- 

"that is why, I suppose, you wish him to go on to bukovina. you cannot 
deceiv me, my friend; I know too much, and my hors are swift." As he 
spoke he smiled, and the lamplight fell on a hard-look mouth, with 
veri red lip and sharp-look teeth, as white as ivory. one of my 
companion whisper to anoth the line from burger' "lenore":-- 

"denn die todten reiten schnell"-- 
("for the dead travel fast.") 

the strang driver evid heard the words, for he look up with a 
gleam smile. the passeng turn hi face away, at the same time 
put out hi two finger and cross himself. "give me the herr' 
luggage," said the driver; and with exceed alacr my bag were 
hand out and put in the calèche. then I descend from the side of the 
coach, as the calèch wa close alongside, the driver help me with a 
hand which caught my arm in a grip of steel; hi strength must have been 
prodigious. without a word he shook hi reins, the hors turned, and we 
swept into the dark of the pass. As I look back I saw the steam 
from the hors of the coach by the light of the lamps, and project 
against it the figur of my late companion cross themselves. then 
the driver crack hi whip and call to hi horses, and off they swept 
on their way to bukovina. As they sank into the dark I felt a 
strang chill, and a lone feel came over me; but a cloak wa thrown 
over my shoulders, and a rug across my knees, and the driver said in 
excel german:-- 

"the night is chill, mein herr, and my master the count bade me take all 
care of you. there is a flask of slivovitz (the plum brandi of the 
country) underneath the seat, if you should requir it." I did not take 
any, but it wa a comfort to know it wa there all the same. I felt a 
littl strangely, and not a littl frightened. I think had there been 
ani altern I should have taken it, instead of prosecut that 
unknown night journey. the carriag went at a hard pace straight along, 
then we made a complet turn and went along anoth straight road. It 
seem to me that we were simpli go over and over the same ground 
again; and so I took note of some salient point, and found that thi wa 
so. I would have like to have ask the driver what thi all meant, but 
I realli fear to do so, for I thought that, place as I was, ani 
protest would have had no effect in case there had been an intent to 
delay. by-and-by, however, as I wa curiou to know how time wa 
passing, I struck a match, and by it flame look at my watch; it wa 
within a few minut of midnight. thi gave me a sort of shock, for I 
suppos the gener superstit about midnight wa increas by my 
recent experiences. I wait with a sick feel of suspense. 

then a dog began to howl somewher in a farmhous far down the road--a 
long, agonis wailing, as if from fear. the sound wa taken up by 
anoth dog, and then anoth and another, till, born on the wind which 
now sigh softli through the pass, a wild howl began, which seem 
to come from all over the country, as far as the imagin could grasp 
it through the gloom of the night. At the first howl the hors began to 
strain and rear, but the driver spoke to them soothingly, and they 
quiet down, but shiver and sweat as though after a runaway from 
sudden fright. then, far off in the distance, from the mountain on each 
side of us began a louder and a sharper howling--that of wolves--which 
affect both the hors and myself in the same way--for I wa mind to 
jump from the calèch and run, whilst they rear again and plung 
madly, so that the driver had to use all hi great strength to keep them 
from bolting. In a few minutes, however, my own ear got accustom to 
the sound, and the hors so far becam quiet that the driver wa abl 
to descend and to stand befor them. He pet and sooth them, and 
whisper someth in their ears, as I have heard of horse-tam 
doing, and with extraordinari effect, for under hi caress they becam 
quit manag again, though they still trembled. the driver again 
took hi seat, and shake hi reins, start off at a great pace. thi 
time, after go to the far side of the pass, he suddenli turn down a 
narrow roadway which ran sharpli to the right. 

soon we were hem in with trees, which in place arch right over the 
roadway till we pass as through a tunnel; and again great frown 
rock guard us boldli on either side. though we were in shelter, we 
could hear the rise wind, for it moan and whistl through the 
rocks, and the branch of the tree crash togeth as we swept along. 
It grew colder and colder still, and fine, powderi snow began to fall, 
so that soon we and all around us were cover with a white blanket. the 
keen wind still carri the howl of the dogs, though thi grew 
fainter as we went on our way. the bay of the wolv sound nearer 
and nearer, as though they were close round on us from everi side. I 
grew dread afraid, and the hors share my fear. the driver, 
however, wa not in the least disturbed; he kept turn hi head to 
left and right, but I could not see anyth through the darkness. 

suddenly, away on our left, I saw a faint flicker blue flame. the 
driver saw it at the same moment; he at onc check the horses, and, 
jump to the ground, disappear into the darkness. I did not know 
what to do, the less as the howl of the wolv grew closer; but while 
I wonder the driver suddenli appear again, and without a word took 
hi seat, and we resum our journey. I think I must have fallen asleep 
and kept dream of the incident, for it seem to be repeat 
endlessly, and now look back, it is like a sort of aw nightmare. 
onc the flame appear so near the road, that even in the dark 
around us I could watch the driver' motions. He went rapidli to where 
the blue flame arose--it must have been veri faint, for it did not seem 
to illumin the place around it at all--and gather a few stones, 
form them into some device. onc there appear a strang optic 
effect: when he stood between me and the flame he did not obstruct it, 
for I could see it ghostli flicker all the same. thi startl me, but 
as the effect wa onli momentary, I took it that my eye deceiv me 
strain through the darkness. then for a time there were no blue 
flames, and we sped onward through the gloom, with the howl of the 
wolv around us, as though they were follow in a move circle. 

At last there came a time when the driver went further afield than he 
had yet gone, and dure hi absence, the hors began to trembl wors 
than ever and to snort and scream with fright. I could not see ani caus 
for it, for the howl of the wolv had ceas altogether; but just 
then the moon, sail through the black clouds, appear behind the 
jag crest of a beetling, pine-clad rock, and by it light I saw 
around us a ring of wolves, with white teeth and loll red tongues, 
with long, sinewi limb and shaggi hair. they were a hundr time more 
terribl in the grim silenc which held them than even when they howled. 
for myself, I felt a sort of paralysi of fear. It is onli when a man 
feel himself face to face with such horror that he can understand 
their true import. 

all at onc the wolv began to howl as though the moonlight had had 
some peculiar effect on them. the hors jump about and reared, and 
look helplessli round with eye that roll in a way pain to see; 
but the live ring of terror encompass them on everi side; and they 
had perforc to remain within it. I call to the coachman to come, for 
it seem to me that our onli chanc wa to tri to break out through the 
ring and to aid hi approach. I shout and beat the side of the 
calèche, hope by the nois to scare the wolv from that side, so as 
to give him a chanc of reach the trap. how he came there, I know 
not, but I heard hi voic rais in a tone of imperi command, and 
look toward the sound, saw him stand in the roadway. As he swept hi 
long arms, as though brush asid some impalp obstacle, the wolv 
fell back and back further still. just then a heavi cloud pass across 
the face of the moon, so that we were again in darkness. 

when I could see again the driver wa climb into the calèche, and the 
wolv had disappeared. thi wa all so strang and uncanni that a 
dread fear came upon me, and I wa afraid to speak or move. the time 
seem intermin as we swept on our way, now in almost complet 
darkness, for the roll cloud obscur the moon. We kept on 
ascending, with occasion period of quick descent, but in the main 
alway ascending. suddenly, I becam consciou of the fact that the 
driver wa in the act of pull up the hors in the courtyard of a 
vast ruin castle, from whose tall black window came no ray of light, 
and whose broken battlement show a jag line against the moonlit 
sky. 




chapter II 

jonathan harker' journal--_continued_ 


_5 may._--i must have been asleep, for certainli if I had been fulli 
awak I must have notic the approach of such a remark place. In 
the gloom the courtyard look of consider size, and as sever dark 
way led from it under great round arches, it perhap seem bigger than 
it realli is. I have not yet been abl to see it by daylight. 

when the calèch stopped, the driver jump down and held out hi hand 
to assist me to alight. again I could not but notic hi prodigi 
strength. hi hand actual seem like a steel vice that could have 
crush mine if he had chosen. then he took out my traps, and place 
them on the ground besid me as I stood close to a great door, old and 
stud with larg iron nails, and set in a project doorway of 
massiv stone. I could see even in the dim light that the stone wa 
massiv carved, but that the carv had been much worn by time and 
weather. As I stood, the driver jump again into hi seat and shook the 
reins; the hors start forward, and trap and all disappear down one 
of the dark openings. 

I stood in silenc where I was, for I did not know what to do. Of bell 
or knocker there wa no sign; through these frown wall and dark 
window open it wa not like that my voic could penetrate. the 
time I wait seem endless, and I felt doubt and fear crowd upon 
me. what sort of place had I come to, and among what kind of people? 
what sort of grim adventur wa it on which I had embarked? wa thi a 
customari incid in the life of a solicitor' clerk sent out to 
explain the purchas of a london estat to a foreigner? solicitor' 
clerk! mina would not like that. solicitor--for just befor leav 
london I got word that my examin wa successful; and I am now a 
full-blown solicitor! I began to rub my eye and pinch myself to see if 
I were awake. It all seem like a horribl nightmar to me, and I 
expect that I should suddenli awake, and find myself at home, with 
the dawn struggl in through the windows, as I had now and again felt 
in the morn after a day of overwork. but my flesh answer the 
pinch test, and my eye were not to be deceived. I wa inde awak 
and among the carpathians. all I could do now wa to be patient, and to 
wait the come of the morning. 

just as I had come to thi conclus I heard a heavi step approach 
behind the great door, and saw through the chink the gleam of a come 
light. then there wa the sound of rattl chain and the clank of 
massiv bolt drawn back. A key wa turn with the loud grate nois 
of long disuse, and the great door swung back. 

within, stood a tall old man, clean shaven save for a long white 
moustache, and clad in black from head to foot, without a singl speck 
of colour about him anywhere. He held in hi hand an antiqu silver 
lamp, in which the flame burn without chimney or globe of ani kind, 
throw long quiver shadow as it flicker in the draught of the 
open door. the old man motion me in with hi right hand with a courtli 
gesture, say in excel english, but with a strang intonation:-- 

"welcom to my house! enter freeli and of your own will!" He made no 
motion of step to meet me, but stood like a statue, as though hi 
gestur of welcom had fix him into stone. the instant, however, that 
I had step over the threshold, he move impuls forward, and 
hold out hi hand grasp mine with a strength which made me wince, 
an effect which wa not lessen by the fact that it seem as cold as 
ice--mor like the hand of a dead than a live man. again he said:-- 

"welcom to my house. come freely. Go safely; and leav someth of the 
happi you bring!" the strength of the handshak wa so much akin to 
that which I had notic in the driver, whose face I had not seen, that 
for a moment I doubt if it were not the same person to whom I wa 
speaking; so to make sure, I said interrogatively:-- 

"count dracula?" He bow in a courtli way as he replied:-- 

"I am dracula; and I bid you welcome, mr. harker, to my house. come in; 
the night air is chill, and you must need to eat and rest." As he wa 
speaking, he put the lamp on a bracket on the wall, and step out, 
took my luggage; he had carri it in befor I could forestal him. I 
protest but he insisted:-- 

"nay, sir, you are my guest. It is late, and my peopl are not 
available. let me see to your comfort myself." He insist on carri 
my trap along the passage, and then up a great wind stair, and 
along anoth great passage, on whose stone floor our step rang 
heavily. At the end of thi he threw open a heavi door, and I rejoic 
to see within a well-lit room in which a tabl wa spread for supper, 
and on whose mighti hearth a great fire of logs, freshli replenished, 
flame and flared. 

the count halted, put down my bags, close the door, and cross 
the room, open anoth door, which led into a small octagon room lit 
by a singl lamp, and seemingli without a window of ani sort. pass 
through this, he open anoth door, and motion me to enter. It wa a 
welcom sight; for here wa a great bedroom well light and warm with 
anoth log fire,--also ad to but lately, for the top log were 
fresh--which sent a hollow roar up the wide chimney. the count himself 
left my luggag insid and withdrew, saying, befor he close the 
door:-- 

"you will need, after your journey, to refresh yourself by make your 
toilet. I trust you will find all you wish. when you are ready, come 
into the other room, where you will find your supper prepared." 

the light and warmth and the count' courteou welcom seem to have 
dissip all my doubt and fears. have then reach my normal state, 
I discov that I wa half famish with hunger; so make a hasti 
toilet, I went into the other room. 

I found supper alreadi laid out. My host, who stood on one side of the 
great fireplace, lean against the stonework, made a grace wave of 
hi hand to the table, and said:-- 

"I pray you, be seat and sup how you please. you will, I trust, excus 
me that I do not join you; but I have dine already, and I do not sup." 

I hand to him the seal letter which mr. hawkin had entrust to me. 
He open it and read it gravely; then, with a charm smile, he hand 
it to me to read. one passag of it, at least, gave me a thrill of 
pleasure. 

"I must regret that an attack of gout, from which maladi I am a constant 
sufferer, forbid absolut ani travel on my part for some time to 
come; but I am happi to say I can send a suffici substitute, one in 
whom I have everi possibl confidence. He is a young man, full of energi 
and talent in hi own way, and of a veri faith disposition. He is 
discreet and silent, and ha grown into manhood in my service. He shall 
be readi to attend on you when you will dure hi stay, and shall take 
your instruct in all matters." 

the count himself came forward and took off the cover of a dish, and I 
fell to at onc on an excel roast chicken. this, with some chees 
and a salad and a bottl of old tokay, of which I had two glasses, wa 
my supper. dure the time I wa eat it the count ask me mani 
question as to my journey, and I told him by degre all I had 
experienced. 

By thi time I had finish my supper, and by my host' desir had drawn 
up a chair by the fire and begun to smoke a cigar which he offer me, 
at the same time excus himself that he did not smoke. I had now an 
opportun of observ him, and found him of a veri mark 
physiognomy. 

hi face wa a strong--a veri strong--aquiline, with high bridg of the 
thin nose and peculiarli arch nostrils; with lofti dome forehead, and 
hair grow scantili round the templ but profus elsewhere. hi 
eyebrow were veri massive, almost meet over the nose, and with bushi 
hair that seem to curl in it own profusion. the mouth, so far as I 
could see it under the heavi moustache, wa fix and rather 
cruel-looking, with peculiarli sharp white teeth; these protrud over 
the lips, whose remark ruddi show astonish vital in a 
man of hi years. for the rest, hi ear were pale, and at the top 
extrem pointed; the chin wa broad and strong, and the cheek firm 
though thin. the gener effect wa one of extraordinari pallor. 

hitherto I had notic the back of hi hand as they lay on hi knee 
in the firelight, and they had seem rather white and fine; but see 
them now close to me, I could not but notic that they were rather 
coarse--broad, with squat fingers. strang to say, there were hair in 
the centr of the palm. the nail were long and fine, and cut to a sharp 
point. As the count lean over me and hi hand touch me, I could not 
repress a shudder. It may have been that hi breath wa rank, but a 
horribl feel of nausea came over me, which, do what I would, I could 
not conceal. the count, evid notic it, drew back; and with a 
grim sort of smile, which show more than he had yet done hi 
protuber teeth, sat himself down again on hi own side of the 
fireplace. We were both silent for a while; and as I look toward the 
window I saw the first dim streak of the come dawn. there seem a 
strang still over everything; but as I listen I heard as if from 
down below in the valley the howl of mani wolves. the count' eye 
gleamed, and he said:-- 

"listen to them--th children of the night. what music they make!" 
seeing, I suppose, some express in my face strang to him, he 
added:-- 

"ah, sir, you dweller in the citi cannot enter into the feel of the 
hunter." then he rose and said:-- 

"but you must be tired. your bedroom is all ready, and to-morrow you 
shall sleep as late as you will. I have to be away till the afternoon; 
so sleep well and dream well!" with a courteou bow, he open for me 
himself the door to the octagon room, and I enter my bedroom.... 

I am all in a sea of wonders. I doubt; I fear; I think strang things, 
which I dare not confess to my own soul. god keep me, if onli for the 
sake of those dear to me! 

* * * * * 

_7 may._--it is again earli morning, but I have rest and enjoy the 
last twenty-four hours. I slept till late in the day, and awok of my 
own accord. when I had dress myself I went into the room where we had 
supped, and found a cold breakfast laid out, with coffe kept hot by the 
pot be place on the hearth. there wa a card on the table, on which 
wa written:-- 

"I have to be absent for a while. Do not wait for me.--d." I set to and 
enjoy a hearti meal. when I had done, I look for a bell, so that I 
might let the servant know I had finished; but I could not find one. 
there are certainli odd defici in the house, consid the 
extraordinari evid of wealth which are round me. the tabl servic 
is of gold, and so beauti wrought that it must be of immens value. 
the curtain and upholsteri of the chair and sofa and the hang of 
my bed are of the costliest and most beauti fabrics, and must have 
been of fabul valu when they were made, for they are centuri old, 
though in excel order. I saw someth like them in hampton court, 
but there they were worn and fray and moth-eaten. but still in none of 
the room is there a mirror. there is not even a toilet glass on my 
table, and I had to get the littl shave glass from my bag befor I 
could either shave or brush my hair. I have not yet seen a servant 
anywhere, or heard a sound near the castl except the howl of wolves. 
some time after I had finish my meal--i do not know whether to call it 
breakfast or dinner, for it wa between five and six o'clock when I had 
it--i look about for someth to read, for I did not like to go about 
the castl until I had ask the count' permission. there wa 
absolut noth in the room, book, newspaper, or even write 
materials; so I open anoth door in the room and found a sort of 
library. the door opposit mine I tried, but found it locked. 

In the librari I found, to my great delight, a vast number of english 
books, whole shelv full of them, and bound volum of magazin and 
newspapers. A tabl in the centr wa litter with english magazin 
and newspapers, though none of them were of veri recent date. the book 
were of the most vari kind--history, geography, politics, polit 
economy, botany, geology, law--al relat to england and english life 
and custom and manners. there were even such book of refer as the 
london directory, the "red" and "blue" books, whitaker' almanac, the 
armi and navi lists, and--it somehow gladden my heart to see it--th 
law list. 

whilst I wa look at the books, the door opened, and the count 
entered. He salut me in a hearti way, and hope that I had had a good 
night' rest. then he went on:-- 

"I am glad you found your way in here, for I am sure there is much that 
will interest you. these companions"--and he laid hi hand on some of 
the books--"hav been good friend to me, and for some year past, ever 
sinc I had the idea of go to london, have given me many, mani hour 
of pleasure. through them I have come to know your great england; and to 
know her is to love her. I long to go through the crowd street of 
your mighti london, to be in the midst of the whirl and rush of 
humanity, to share it life, it change, it death, and all that make 
it what it is. but alas! as yet I onli know your tongu through books. 
To you, my friend, I look that I know it to speak." 

"but, count," I said, "you know and speak english thoroughly!" He bow 
gravely. 

"I thank you, my friend, for your all too-flatt estimate, but yet I 
fear that I am but a littl way on the road I would travel. true, I know 
the grammar and the words, but yet I know not how to speak them." 

"indeed," I said, "you speak excellently." 

"not so," he answered. "well, I know that, did I move and speak in your 
london, none there are who would not know me for a stranger. that is not 
enough for me. here I am noble; I am _boyar_; the common peopl know me, 
and I am master. but a stranger in a strang land, he is no one; men 
know him not--and to know not is to care not for. I am content if I am 
like the rest, so that no man stop if he see me, or paus in hi 
speak if he hear my words, 'ha, ha! a stranger!' I have been so long 
master that I would be master still--or at least that none other should 
be master of me. you come to me not alon as agent of my friend peter 
hawkins, of exeter, to tell me all about my new estat in london. you 
shall, I trust, rest here with me awhile, so that by our talk I may 
learn the english intonation; and I would that you tell me when I make 
error, even of the smallest, in my speaking. I am sorri that I had to be 
away so long to-day; but you will, I know, forgiv one who ha so mani 
import affair in hand." 

Of cours I said all I could about be willing, and ask if I might 
come into that room when I chose. He answered: "yes, certainly," and 
added:-- 

"you may go anywher you wish in the castle, except where the door are 
locked, where of cours you will not wish to go. there is reason that 
all thing are as they are, and did you see with my eye and know with 
my knowledge, you would perhap better understand." I said I wa sure of 
this, and then he went on:-- 

"we are in transylvania; and transylvania is not england. our way are 
not your ways, and there shall be to you mani strang things. nay, from 
what you have told me of your experi already, you know someth of 
what strang thing there may be." 

thi led to much conversation; and as it wa evid that he want to 
talk, if onli for talking' sake, I ask him mani question regard 
thing that had alreadi happen to me or come within my notice. 
sometim he sheer off the subject, or turn the convers by 
pretend not to understand; but gener he answer all I ask most 
frankly. then as time went on, and I had got somewhat bolder, I ask 
him of some of the strang thing of the preced night, as, for 
instance, whi the coachman went to the place where he had seen the blue 
flames. He then explain to me that it wa commonli believ that on a 
certain night of the year--last night, in fact, when all evil spirit 
are suppos to have uncheck sway--a blue flame is seen over ani place 
where treasur ha been concealed. "that treasur ha been hidden," he 
went on, "in the region through which you came last night, there can be 
but littl doubt; for it wa the ground fought over for centuri by the 
wallachian, the saxon, and the turk. why, there is hardli a foot of soil 
in all thi region that ha not been enrich by the blood of men, 
patriot or invaders. In old day there were stir times, when the 
austrian and the hungarian came up in hordes, and the patriot went out 
to meet them--men and women, the age and the children too--and wait 
their come on the rock abov the passes, that they might sweep 
destruct on them with their artifici avalanches. when the invad 
wa triumphant he found but little, for whatev there wa had been 
shelter in the friendli soil." 

"but how," said I, "can it have remain so long undiscovered, when 
there is a sure index to it if men will but take the troubl to look?" 
the count smiled, and as hi lip ran back over hi gums, the long, 
sharp, canin teeth show out strangely; he answered:-- 

"becaus your peasant is at heart a coward and a fool! those flame onli 
appear on one night; and on that night no man of thi land will, if he 
can help it, stir without hi doors. and, dear sir, even if he did he 
would not know what to do. why, even the peasant that you tell me of who 
mark the place of the flame would not know where to look in daylight 
even for hi own work. even you would not, I dare be sworn, be abl to 
find these place again?" 

"there you are right," I said. "I know no more than the dead where even 
to look for them." then we drift into other matters. 

"come," he said at last, "tell me of london and of the hous which you 
have procur for me." with an apolog for my remissness, I went into my 
own room to get the paper from my bag. whilst I wa place them in 
order I heard a rattl of china and silver in the next room, and as I 
pass through, notic that the tabl had been clear and the lamp 
lit, for it wa by thi time deep into the dark. the lamp were also lit 
in the studi or library, and I found the count lie on the sofa, 
reading, of all thing in the world, an english bradshaw' guide. when I 
came in he clear the book and paper from the table; and with him I 
went into plan and deed and figur of all sorts. He wa interest in 
everything, and ask me a myriad question about the place and it 
surroundings. He clearli had studi beforehand all he could get on the 
subject of the neighbourhood, for he evid at the end knew veri much 
more than I did. when I remark this, he answered:-- 

"well, but, my friend, is it not need that I should? when I go there 
I shall be all alone, and my friend harker jonathan--nay, pardon me, I 
fall into my country' habit of put your patronym first--mi friend 
jonathan harker will not be by my side to correct and aid me. He will be 
in exeter, mile away, probabl work at paper of the law with my 
other friend, peter hawkins. so!" 

We went thoroughli into the busi of the purchas of the estat at 
purfleet. when I had told him the fact and got hi signatur to the 
necessari papers, and had written a letter with them readi to post to 
mr. hawkins, he began to ask me how I had come across so suitabl a 
place. I read to him the note which I had made at the time, and which I 
inscrib here:-- 

"at purfleet, on a by-road, I came across just such a place as seem to 
be required, and where wa display a dilapid notic that the place 
wa for sale. It is surround by a high wall, of ancient structure, 
built of heavi stones, and ha not been repair for a larg number of 
years. the close gate are of heavi old oak and iron, all eaten with 
rust. 

"the estat is call carfax, no doubt a corrupt of the old _quatr 
face_, as the hous is four-sided, agre with the cardin point of 
the compass. It contain in all some twenti acres, quit surround by 
the solid stone wall abov mentioned. there are mani tree on it, which 
make it in place gloomy, and there is a deep, dark-look pond or 
small lake, evid fed by some springs, as the water is clear and 
flow away in a fair-siz stream. the hous is veri larg and of all 
period back, I should say, to mediæv times, for one part is of stone 
immens thick, with onli a few window high up and heavili bar with 
iron. It look like part of a keep, and is close to an old chapel or 
church. I could not enter it, as I had not the key of the door lead 
to it from the house, but I have taken with my kodak view of it from 
variou points. the hous ha been ad to, but in a veri straggl 
way, and I can onli guess at the amount of ground it covers, which must 
be veri great. there are but few hous close at hand, one be a veri 
larg hous onli recent ad to and form into a privat lunat 
asylum. It is not, however, visibl from the grounds." 

when I had finished, he said:-- 

"I am glad that it is old and big. I myself am of an old family, and to 
live in a new hous would kill me. A hous cannot be made habit in a 
day; and, after all, how few day go to make up a century. I rejoic 
also that there is a chapel of old times. We transylvanian nobl love 
not to think that our bone may lie amongst the common dead. I seek not 
gaieti nor mirth, not the bright voluptu of much sunshin and 
sparkl water which pleas the young and gay. I am no longer young; 
and my heart, through weari year of mourn over the dead, is not 
attun to mirth. moreover, the wall of my castl are broken; the 
shadow are many, and the wind breath cold through the broken 
battlement and casements. I love the shade and the shadow, and would 
be alon with my thought when I may." somehow hi word and hi look 
did not seem to accord, or els it wa that hi cast of face made hi 
smile look malign and saturnine. 

presently, with an excuse, he left me, ask me to put all my paper 
together. He wa some littl time away, and I began to look at some of 
the book around me. one wa an atlas, which I found open natur at 
england, as if that map had been much used. On look at it I found in 
certain place littl ring marked, and on examin these I notic 
that one wa near london on the east side, manifestli where hi new 
estat wa situated; the other two were exeter, and whitbi on the 
yorkshir coast. 

It wa the better part of an hour when the count returned. "aha!" he 
said; "still at your books? good! but you must not work always. come; I 
am inform that your supper is ready." He took my arm, and we went into 
the next room, where I found an excel supper readi on the table. the 
count again excus himself, as he had dine out on hi be away from 
home. but he sat as on the previou night, and chat whilst I ate. 
after supper I smoked, as on the last evening, and the count stay with 
me, chat and ask question on everi conceiv subject, hour 
after hour. I felt that it wa get veri late indeed, but I did not 
say anything, for I felt under oblig to meet my host' wish in 
everi way. I wa not sleepy, as the long sleep yesterday had fortifi 
me; but I could not help experienc that chill which come over one at 
the come of the dawn, which is like, in it way, the turn of the tide. 
they say that peopl who are near death die gener at the chang to 
the dawn or at the turn of the tide; ani one who ha when tired, and 
tie as it were to hi post, experienc thi chang in the atmospher 
can well believ it. all at onc we heard the crow of a cock come up 
with preternatur shrill through the clear morn air; count 
dracula, jump to hi feet, said:-- 

"why, there is the morn again! how remiss I am to let you stay up so 
long. you must make your convers regard my dear new countri of 
england less interesting, so that I may not forget how time fli by 
us," and, with a courtli bow, he quickli left me. 

I went into my own room and drew the curtains, but there wa littl to 
notice; my window open into the courtyard, all I could see wa the 
warm grey of quicken sky. So I pull the curtain again, and have 
written of thi day. 

* * * * * 

_8 may._--i began to fear as I wrote in thi book that I wa get too 
diffuse; but now I am glad that I went into detail from the first, for 
there is someth so strang about thi place and all in it that I 
cannot but feel uneasy. I wish I were safe out of it, or that I had 
never come. It may be that thi strang night-exist is tell on 
me; but would that that were all! If there were ani one to talk to I 
could bear it, but there is no one. I have onli the count to speak with, 
and he!--i fear I am myself the onli live soul within the place. let 
me be prosaic so far as fact can be; it will help me to bear up, and 
imagin must not run riot with me. If it doe I am lost. let me say 
at onc how I stand--or seem to. 

I onli slept a few hour when I went to bed, and feel that I could 
not sleep ani more, got up. I had hung my shave glass by the window, 
and wa just begin to shave. suddenli I felt a hand on my shoulder, 
and heard the count' voic say to me, "good-morning." I started, for 
it amaz me that I had not seen him, sinc the reflect of the glass 
cover the whole room behind me. In start I had cut myself slightly, 
but did not notic it at the moment. have answer the count' 
salutation, I turn to the glass again to see how I had been mistaken. 
thi time there could be no error, for the man wa close to me, and I 
could see him over my shoulder. but there wa no reflect of him in 
the mirror! the whole room behind me wa displayed; but there wa no 
sign of a man in it, except myself. thi wa startling, and, come on 
the top of so mani strang things, wa begin to increas that vagu 
feel of uneasi which I alway have when the count is near; but at 
the instant I saw that the cut had bled a little, and the blood wa 
trickl over my chin. I laid down the razor, turn as I did so half 
round to look for some stick plaster. when the count saw my face, hi 
eye blaze with a sort of demoniac fury, and he suddenli made a grab at 
my throat. I drew away, and hi hand touch the string of bead which 
held the crucifix. It made an instant chang in him, for the furi pass 
so quickli that I could hardli believ that it wa ever there. 

"take care," he said, "take care how you cut yourself. It is more 
danger than you think in thi country." then seiz the shave 
glass, he went on: "and thi is the wretch thing that ha done the 
mischief. It is a foul baubl of man' vanity. away with it!" and 
open the heavi window with one wrench of hi terribl hand, he flung 
out the glass, which wa shatter into a thousand piec on the stone 
of the courtyard far below. then he withdrew without a word. It is veri 
annoying, for I do not see how I am to shave, unless in my watch-cas or 
the bottom of the shaving-pot, which is fortun of metal. 

when I went into the dining-room, breakfast wa prepared; but I could 
not find the count anywhere. So I breakfast alone. It is strang that 
as yet I have not seen the count eat or drink. He must be a veri 
peculiar man! after breakfast I did a littl explor in the castle. I 
went out on the stairs, and found a room look toward the south. the 
view wa magnificent, and from where I stood there wa everi opportun 
of see it. the castl is on the veri edg of a terribl precipice. A 
stone fall from the window would fall a thousand feet without 
touch anything! As far as the eye can reach is a sea of green tree 
tops, with occasion a deep rift where there is a chasm. here and 
there are silver thread where the river wind in deep gorg through 
the forests. 

but I am not in heart to describ beauty, for when I had seen the view I 
explor further; doors, doors, door everywhere, and all lock and 
bolted. In no place save from the window in the castl wall is there 
an avail exit. 

the castl is a verit prison, and I am a prisoner! 




chapter iii 

jonathan harker' journal--_continued_ 


when I found that I wa a prison a sort of wild feel came over me. 
I rush up and down the stairs, tri everi door and peer out of 
everi window I could find; but after a littl the convict of my 
helpless overpow all other feelings. when I look back after a 
few hour I think I must have been mad for the time, for I behav much 
as a rat doe in a trap. when, however, the convict had come to me 
that I wa helpless I sat down quietly--a quietli as I have ever done 
anyth in my life--and began to think over what wa best to be done. I 
am think still, and as yet have come to no definit conclusion. Of 
one thing onli am I certain; that it is no use make my idea known to 
the count. He know well that I am imprisoned; and as he ha done it 
himself, and ha doubtless hi own motiv for it, he would onli deceiv 
me if I trust him fulli with the facts. So far as I can see, my onli 
plan will be to keep my knowledg and my fear to myself, and my eye 
open. I am, I know, either be deceived, like a baby, by my own fears, 
or els I am in desper straits; and if the latter be so, I need, and 
shall need, all my brain to get through. 

I had hardli come to thi conclus when I heard the great door below 
shut, and knew that the count had returned. He did not come at onc into 
the library, so I went cautious to my own room and found him make 
the bed. thi wa odd, but onli confirm what I had all along 
thought--that there were no servant in the house. when later I saw him 
through the chink of the hing of the door lay the tabl in the 
dining-room, I wa assur of it; for if he doe himself all these 
menial offices, sure it is proof that there is no one els to do them. 
thi gave me a fright, for if there is no one els in the castle, it 
must have been the count himself who wa the driver of the coach that 
brought me here. thi is a terribl thought; for if so, what doe it 
mean that he could control the wolves, as he did, by onli hold up hi 
hand in silence. how wa it that all the peopl at bistritz and on the 
coach had some terribl fear for me? what meant the give of the 
crucifix, of the garlic, of the wild rose, of the mountain ash? bless 
that good, good woman who hung the crucifix round my neck! for it is a 
comfort and a strength to me whenev I touch it. It is odd that a thing 
which I have been taught to regard with disfavour and as idolatr 
should in a time of loneli and troubl be of help. Is it that there 
is someth in the essenc of the thing itself, or that it is a medium, 
a tangibl help, in convey memori of sympathi and comfort? some 
time, if it may be, I must examin thi matter and tri to make up my 
mind about it. In the meantim I must find out all I can about count 
dracula, as it may help me to understand. to-night he may talk of 
himself, if I turn the convers that way. I must be veri careful, 
however, not to awak hi suspicion. 

* * * * * 

_midnight._--i have had a long talk with the count. I ask him a few 
question on transylvania history, and he warm up to the subject 
wonderfully. In hi speak of thing and people, and especi of 
battles, he spoke as if he had been present at them all. thi he 
afterward explain by say that to a _boyar_ the pride of hi hous 
and name is hi own pride, that their glori is hi glory, that their 
fate is hi fate. whenev he spoke of hi hous he alway said "we," 
and spoke almost in the plural, like a king speaking. I wish I could put 
down all he said exactli as he said it, for to me it wa most 
fascinating. It seem to have in it a whole histori of the country. He 
grew excit as he spoke, and walk about the room pull hi great 
white moustach and grasp anyth on which he laid hi hand as 
though he would crush it by main strength. one thing he said which I 
shall put down as nearli as I can; for it tell in it way the stori of 
hi race:-- 

"we szeke have a right to be proud, for in our vein flow the blood 
of mani brave race who fought as the lion fights, for lordship. here, 
in the whirlpool of european races, the ugric tribe bore down from 
iceland the fight spirit which thor and wodin gave them, which their 
berserk display to such fell intent on the seaboard of europe, ay, 
and of asia and africa too, till the peopl thought that the 
were-wolv themselv had come. here, too, when they came, they found 
the huns, whose warlik furi had swept the earth like a live flame, 
till the die peopl held that in their vein ran the blood of those 
old witches, who, expel from scythia had mate with the devil in the 
desert. fools, fools! what devil or what witch wa ever so great as 
attila, whose blood is in these veins?" He held up hi arms. "i it a 
wonder that we were a conquer race; that we were proud; that when the 
magyar, the lombard, the avar, the bulgar, or the turk pour hi 
thousand on our frontiers, we drove them back? Is it strang that when 
arpad and hi legion swept through the hungarian fatherland he found us 
here when he reach the frontier; that the honfoglala wa complet 
there? and when the hungarian flood swept eastward, the szeke were 
claim as kindr by the victori magyars, and to us for centuri 
wa trust the guard of the frontier of turkey-land; ay, and more 
than that, endless duti of the frontier guard, for, as the turk say, 
'water sleeps, and enemi is sleepless.' who more gladli than we 
throughout the four nation receiv the 'bloodi sword,' or at it 
warlik call flock quicker to the standard of the king? when wa 
redeem that great shame of my nation, the shame of cassova, when the 
flag of the wallach and the magyar went down beneath the crescent? who 
wa it but one of my own race who as voivod cross the danub and beat 
the turk on hi own ground? thi wa a dracula indeed! woe wa it that 
hi own unworthi brother, when he had fallen, sold hi peopl to the 
turk and brought the shame of slaveri on them! wa it not thi dracula, 
indeed, who inspir that other of hi race who in a later age again and 
again brought hi forc over the great river into turkey-land; who, 
when he wa beaten back, came again, and again, and again, though he had 
to come alon from the bloodi field where hi troop were be 
slaughtered, sinc he knew that he alon could ultim triumph! they 
said that he thought onli of himself. bah! what good are peasant 
without a leader? where end the war without a brain and heart to 
conduct it? again, when, after the battl of mohács, we threw off the 
hungarian yoke, we of the dracula blood were amongst their leaders, for 
our spirit would not brook that we were not free. ah, young sir, the 
szekelys--and the dracula as their heart' blood, their brains, and 
their swords--can boast a record that mushroom growth like the 
hapsburg and the romanoff can never reach. the warlik day are over. 
blood is too preciou a thing in these day of dishonour peace; and 
the glori of the great race are as a tale that is told." 

It wa by thi time close on morning, and we went to bed. (_mem._, thi 
diari seem horribl like the begin of the "arabian nights," for 
everyth ha to break off at cockcrow--or like the ghost of hamlet' 
father.) 

* * * * * 

_12 may._--let me begin with facts--bare, meagr facts, verifi by 
book and figures, and of which there can be no doubt. I must not 
confus them with experi which will have to rest on my own 
observation, or my memori of them. last even when the count came from 
hi room he began by ask me question on legal matter and on the 
do of certain kind of business. I had spent the day wearili over 
books, and, simpli to keep my mind occupied, went over some of the 
matter I had been examin in at lincoln' inn. there wa a certain 
method in the count' inquiries, so I shall tri to put them down in 
sequence; the knowledg may somehow or some time be use to me. 

first, he ask if a man in england might have two solicitor or more. I 
told him he might have a dozen if he wished, but that it would not be 
wise to have more than one solicitor engag in one transaction, as onli 
one could act at a time, and that to chang would be certain to milit 
against hi interest. He seem thoroughli to understand, and went on to 
ask if there would be ani practic difficulti in have one man to 
attend, say, to banking, and anoth to look after shipping, in case 
local help were need in a place far from the home of the bank 
solicitor. I ask him to explain more fully, so that I might not by ani 
chanc mislead him, so he said:-- 

"I shall illustrate. your friend and mine, mr. peter hawkins, from under 
the shadow of your beauti cathedr at exeter, which is far from 
london, buy for me through your good self my place at london. good! now 
here let me say frankly, lest you should think it strang that I have 
sought the servic of one so far off from london instead of some one 
resid there, that my motiv wa that no local interest might be 
serv save my wish only; and as one of london resid might, perhaps, 
have some purpos of himself or friend to serve, I went thu afield to 
seek my agent, whose labour should be onli to my interest. now, suppos 
I, who have much of affairs, wish to ship goods, say, to newcastle, or 
durham, or harwich, or dover, might it not be that it could with more 
eas be done by consign to one in these ports?" I answer that 
certainli it would be most easy, but that we solicitor had a system of 
agenc one for the other, so that local work could be done local on 
instruct from ani solicitor, so that the client, simpli place 
himself in the hand of one man, could have hi wish carri out by 
him without further trouble. 

"but," said he, "I could be at liberti to direct myself. Is it not so?" 

"of course," I replied; and "such is often done by men of business, who 
do not like the whole of their affair to be known by ani one person." 

"good!" he said, and then went on to ask about the mean of make 
consign and the form to be gone through, and of all sort of 
difficulti which might arise, but by forethought could be guard 
against. I explain all these thing to him to the best of my ability, 
and he certainli left me under the impress that he would have made a 
wonder solicitor, for there wa noth that he did not think of or 
foresee. for a man who wa never in the country, and who did not 
evid do much in the way of business, hi knowledg and acumen were 
wonderful. when he had satisfi himself on these point of which he had 
spoken, and I had verifi all as well as I could by the book 
available, he suddenli stood up and said:-- 

"have you written sinc your first letter to our friend mr. peter 
hawkins, or to ani other?" It wa with some bitter in my heart that 
I answer that I had not, that as yet I had not seen ani opportun of 
send letter to anybody. 

"then write now, my young friend," he said, lay a heavi hand on my 
shoulder: "write to our friend and to ani other; and say, if it will 
pleas you, that you shall stay with me until a month from now." 

"do you wish me to stay so long?" I asked, for my heart grew cold at the 
thought. 

"I desir it much; nay, I will take no refusal. when your master, 
employer, what you will, engag that someon should come on hi behalf, 
it wa understood that my need onli were to be consulted. I have not 
stinted. Is it not so?" 

what could I do but bow acceptance? It wa mr. hawkins' interest, not 
mine, and I had to think of him, not myself; and besides, while count 
dracula wa speaking, there wa that in hi eye and in hi bear 
which made me rememb that I wa a prisoner, and that if I wish it I 
could have no choice. the count saw hi victori in my bow, and hi 
masteri in the troubl of my face, for he began at onc to use them, but 
in hi own smooth, resistless way:-- 

"I pray you, my good young friend, that you will not discours of thing 
other than busi in your letters. It will doubtless pleas your 
friend to know that you are well, and that you look forward to get 
home to them. Is it not so?" As he spoke he hand me three sheet of 
note-pap and three envelopes. they were all of the thinnest foreign 
post, and look at them, then at him, and notic hi quiet smile, 
with the sharp, canin teeth lie over the red underlip, I understood 
as well as if he had spoken that I should be care what I wrote, for 
he would be abl to read it. So I determin to write onli formal note 
now, but to write fulli to mr. hawkin in secret, and also to mina, for 
to her I could write in shorthand, which would puzzl the count, if he 
did see it. when I had written my two letter I sat quiet, read a 
book whilst the count wrote sever notes, refer as he wrote them to 
some book on hi table. then he took up my two and place them with hi 
own, and put by hi write materials, after which, the instant the door 
had close behind him, I lean over and look at the letters, which 
were face down on the table. I felt no compunct in do so, for 
under the circumst I felt that I should protect myself in everi way 
I could. 

one of the letter wa direct to samuel F. billington, no. 7, the 
crescent, whitby, anoth to herr leutner, varna; the third wa to 
coutt & co., london, and the fourth to herren klopstock & billreuth, 
bankers, buda-pesth. the second and fourth were unsealed. I wa just 
about to look at them when I saw the door-handl move. I sank back in my 
seat, have just had time to replac the letter as they had been and 
to resum my book befor the count, hold still anoth letter in hi 
hand, enter the room. He took up the letter on the tabl and stamp 
them carefully, and then turn to me, said:-- 

"I trust you will forgiv me, but I have much work to do in privat thi 
evening. you will, I hope, find all thing as you wish." At the door he 
turned, and after a moment' paus said:-- 

"let me advis you, my dear young friend--nay, let me warn you with all 
seriousness, that should you leav these room you will not by ani 
chanc go to sleep in ani other part of the castle. It is old, and ha 
mani memories, and there are bad dream for those who sleep unwisely. Be 
warned! should sleep now or ever overcom you, or be like to do, then 
hast to your own chamber or to these rooms, for your rest will then be 
safe. but if you be not care in thi respect, then"--h finish hi 
speech in a gruesom way, for he motion with hi hand as if he were 
wash them. I quit understood; my onli doubt wa as to whether ani 
dream could be more terribl than the unnatural, horribl net of gloom 
and mysteri which seem close around me. 

* * * * * 

_later._--i endors the last word written, but thi time there is no 
doubt in question. I shall not fear to sleep in ani place where he is 
not. I have place the crucifix over the head of my bed--i imagin that 
my rest is thu freer from dreams; and there it shall remain. 

when he left me I went to my room. after a littl while, not hear ani 
sound, I came out and went up the stone stair to where I could look out 
toward the south. there wa some sens of freedom in the vast expanse, 
inaccess though it wa to me, as compar with the narrow dark 
of the courtyard. look out on this, I felt that I wa inde in 
prison, and I seem to want a breath of fresh air, though it were of 
the night. I am begin to feel thi nocturn exist tell on me. 
It is destroy my nerve. I start at my own shadow, and am full of all 
sort of horribl imaginings. god know that there is ground for my 
terribl fear in thi accurs place! I look out over the beauti 
expanse, bath in soft yellow moonlight till it wa almost as light as 
day. In the soft light the distant hill becam melted, and the shadow 
in the valley and gorg of velveti blackness. the mere beauti seem 
to cheer me; there wa peac and comfort in everi breath I drew. As I 
lean from the window my eye wa caught by someth move a storey 
below me, and somewhat to my left, where I imagined, from the order of 
the rooms, that the window of the count' own room would look out. the 
window at which I stood wa tall and deep, stone-mullioned, and though 
weatherworn, wa still complete; but it wa evid mani a day sinc 
the case had been there. I drew back behind the stonework, and look 
care out. 

what I saw wa the count' head come out from the window. I did not 
see the face, but I knew the man by the neck and the movement of hi 
back and arms. In ani case I could not mistak the hand which I had had 
so mani opportun of studying. I wa at first interest and 
somewhat amused, for it is wonder how small a matter will interest 
and amus a man when he is a prisoner. but my veri feel chang to 
repuls and terror when I saw the whole man slowli emerg from the 
window and begin to crawl down the castl wall over that dread abyss, 
_face down_ with hi cloak spread out around him like great wings. At 
first I could not believ my eyes. I thought it wa some trick of the 
moonlight, some weird effect of shadow; but I kept looking, and it could 
be no delusion. I saw the finger and toe grasp the corner of the 
stones, worn clear of the mortar by the stress of years, and by thu 
use everi project and inequ move downward with consider 
speed, just as a lizard move along a wall. 

what manner of man is this, or what manner of creatur is it in the 
semblanc of man? I feel the dread of thi horribl place overpow 
me; I am in fear--in aw fear--and there is no escap for me; I am 
encompass about with terror that I dare not think of.... 

* * * * * 

_15 may._--onc more have I seen the count go out in hi lizard fashion. 
He move downward in a sidelong way, some hundr feet down, and a good 
deal to the left. He vanish into some hole or window. when hi head 
had disappeared, I lean out to tri and see more, but without 
avail--th distanc wa too great to allow a proper angl of sight. I 
knew he had left the castl now, and thought to use the opportun to 
explor more than I had dare to do as yet. I went back to the room, and 
take a lamp, tri all the doors. they were all locked, as I had 
expected, and the lock were compar new; but I went down the 
stone stair to the hall where I had enter originally. I found I could 
pull back the bolt easili enough and unhook the great chains; but the 
door wa locked, and the key wa gone! that key must be in the count' 
room; I must watch should hi door be unlocked, so that I may get it and 
escape. I went on to make a thorough examin of the variou stair 
and passages, and to tri the door that open from them. one or two 
small room near the hall were open, but there wa noth to see in 
them except old furniture, dusti with age and moth-eaten. At last, 
however, I found one door at the top of the stairway which, though it 
seem to be locked, gave a littl under pressure. I tri it harder, 
and found that it wa not realli locked, but that the resist came 
from the fact that the hing had fallen somewhat, and the heavi door 
rest on the floor. here wa an opportun which I might not have 
again, so I exert myself, and with mani effort forc it back so that 
I could enter. I wa now in a wing of the castl further to the right 
than the room I knew and a storey lower down. from the window I could 
see that the suit of room lay along to the south of the castle, the 
window of the end room look out both west and south. On the latter 
side, as well as to the former, there wa a great precipice. the castl 
wa built on the corner of a great rock, so that on three side it wa 
quit impregnable, and great window were place here where sling, or 
bow, or culverin could not reach, and consequ light and comfort, 
imposs to a posit which had to be guarded, were secured. To the 
west wa a great valley, and then, rise far away, great jag 
mountain fastnesses, rise peak on peak, the sheer rock stud with 
mountain ash and thorn, whose root clung in crack and crevic and 
cranni of the stone. thi wa evid the portion of the castl 
occupi by the ladi in bygon days, for the furnitur had more air of 
comfort than ani I had seen. the window were curtainless, and the 
yellow moonlight, flood in through the diamond panes, enabl one to 
see even colours, whilst it soften the wealth of dust which lay over 
all and disguis in some measur the ravag of time and the moth. My 
lamp seem to be of littl effect in the brilliant moonlight, but I wa 
glad to have it with me, for there wa a dread loneli in the place 
which chill my heart and made my nerv tremble. still, it wa better 
than live alon in the room which I had come to hate from the 
presenc of the count, and after tri a littl to school my nerves, I 
found a soft quietud come over me. here I am, sit at a littl oak 
tabl where in old time possibl some fair ladi sat to pen, with much 
thought and mani blushes, her ill-spelt love-letter, and write in my 
diari in shorthand all that ha happen sinc I close it last. It is 
nineteenth centuri up-to-d with a vengeance. and yet, unless my 
sens deceiv me, the old centuri had, and have, power of their own 
which mere "modernity" cannot kill. 

* * * * * 

_later: the morn of 16 may._--god preserv my sanity, for to thi I 
am reduced. safeti and the assur of safeti are thing of the past. 
whilst I live on here there is but one thing to hope for, that I may not 
go mad, if, indeed, I be not mad already. If I be sane, then sure it 
is madden to think that of all the foul thing that lurk in thi 
hate place the count is the least dread to me; that to him alon I 
can look for safety, even though thi be onli whilst I can serv hi 
purpose. great god! merci god! let me be calm, for out of that way 
lie mad indeed. I begin to get new light on certain thing which 
have puzzl me. Up to now I never quit knew what shakespear meant 
when he made hamlet say:-- 

"mi tablets! quick, my tablets! 
'ti meet that I put it down," etc., 

for now, feel as though my own brain were unhing or as if the shock 
had come which must end in it undoing, I turn to my diari for repose. 
the habit of enter accur must help to sooth me. 

the count' mysteri warn frighten me at the time; it frighten 
me more now when I think of it, for in futur he ha a fear hold upon 
me. I shall fear to doubt what he may say! 

when I had written in my diari and had fortun replac the book and 
pen in my pocket I felt sleepy. the count' warn came into my mind, 
but I took a pleasur in disobey it. the sens of sleep wa upon me, 
and with it the obstinaci which sleep bring as outrider. the soft 
moonlight soothed, and the wide expans without gave a sens of freedom 
which refresh me. I determin not to return to-night to the 
gloom-haunt rooms, but to sleep here, where, of old, ladi had sat 
and sung and live sweet live whilst their gentl breast were sad for 
their menfolk away in the midst of remorseless wars. I drew a great 
couch out of it place near the corner, so that as I lay, I could look 
at the love view to east and south, and unthink of and uncar for 
the dust, compos myself for sleep. I suppos I must have fallen 
asleep; I hope so, but I fear, for all that follow wa startlingli 
real--so real that now sit here in the broad, full sunlight of the 
morning, I cannot in the least believ that it wa all sleep. 

I wa not alone. the room wa the same, unchang in ani way sinc I 
came into it; I could see along the floor, in the brilliant moonlight, 
my own footstep mark where I had disturb the long accumul of 
dust. In the moonlight opposit me were three young women, ladi by 
their dress and manner. I thought at the time that I must be dream 
when I saw them, for, though the moonlight wa behind them, they threw 
no shadow on the floor. they came close to me, and look at me for some 
time, and then whisper together. two were dark, and had high aquilin 
noses, like the count, and great dark, pierc eye that seem to be 
almost red when contrast with the pale yellow moon. the other wa 
fair, as fair as can be, with great wavi mass of golden hair and eye 
like pale sapphires. I seem somehow to know her face, and to know it 
in connect with some dreami fear, but I could not recollect at the 
moment how or where. all three had brilliant white teeth that shone like 
pearl against the rubi of their voluptu lips. there wa someth 
about them that made me uneasy, some long and at the same time some 
deadli fear. I felt in my heart a wicked, burn desir that they would 
kiss me with those red lips. It is not good to note thi down, lest some 
day it should meet mina' eye and caus her pain; but it is the truth. 
they whisper together, and then they all three laughed--such a 
silvery, music laugh, but as hard as though the sound never could have 
come through the soft of human lips. It wa like the intolerable, 
tingl sweet of water-glass when play on by a cun hand. 
the fair girl shook her head coquettishly, and the other two urg her 
on. one said:-- 

"go on! you are first, and we shall follow; your is the right to 
begin." the other added:-- 

"he is young and strong; there are kiss for us all." I lay quiet, 
look out under my eyelash in an agoni of delight anticipation. 
the fair girl advanc and bent over me till I could feel the movement 
of her breath upon me. sweet it wa in one sense, honey-sweet, and sent 
the same tingl through the nerv as her voice, but with a bitter 
underli the sweet, a bitter offensiveness, as one smell in blood. 

I wa afraid to rais my eyelids, but look out and saw perfectli under 
the lashes. the girl went on her knees, and bent over me, simpli 
gloating. there wa a deliber voluptu which wa both thrill 
and repulsive, and as she arch her neck she actual lick her lip 
like an animal, till I could see in the moonlight the moistur shine 
on the scarlet lip and on the red tongu as it lap the white sharp 
teeth. lower and lower went her head as the lip went below the rang of 
my mouth and chin and seem about to fasten on my throat. then she 
paused, and I could hear the churn sound of her tongu as it lick 
her teeth and lips, and could feel the hot breath on my neck. then the 
skin of my throat began to tingl as one' flesh doe when the hand that 
is to tickl it approach nearer--nearer. I could feel the soft, 
shiver touch of the lip on the super-sensit skin of my throat, 
and the hard dent of two sharp teeth, just touch and paus there. 
I close my eye in a languor ecstasi and waited--wait with beat 
heart. 

but at that instant, anoth sensat swept through me as quick as 
lightning. I wa consciou of the presenc of the count, and of hi 
be as if lap in a storm of fury. As my eye open involuntarili I 
saw hi strong hand grasp the slender neck of the fair woman and with 
giant' power draw it back, the blue eye transform with fury, the 
white teeth champ with rage, and the fair cheek blaze red with 
passion. but the count! never did I imagin such wrath and fury, even to 
the demon of the pit. hi eye were posit blazing. the red light 
in them wa lurid, as if the flame of hell-fir blaze behind them. hi 
face wa deathli pale, and the line of it were hard like drawn wires; 
the thick eyebrow that met over the nose now seem like a heav bar 
of white-hot metal. with a fierc sweep of hi arm, he hurl the woman 
from him, and then motion to the others, as though he were beat 
them back; it wa the same imperi gestur that I had seen use to the 
wolves. In a voic which, though low and almost in a whisper seem to 
cut through the air and then ring round the room he said:-- 

"how dare you touch him, ani of you? how dare you cast eye on him when 
I had forbidden it? back, I tell you all! thi man belong to me! bewar 
how you meddl with him, or you'll have to deal with me." the fair girl, 
with a laugh of ribald coquetry, turn to answer him:-- 

"you yourself never loved; you never love!" On thi the other women 
joined, and such a mirthless, hard, soulless laughter rang through the 
room that it almost made me faint to hear; it seem like the pleasur 
of fiends. then the count turned, after look at my face attentively, 
and said in a soft whisper:-- 

"yes, I too can love; you yourselv can tell it from the past. Is it 
not so? well, now I promis you that when I am done with him you shall 
kiss him at your will. now go! go! I must awaken him, for there is work 
to be done." 

"are we to have noth to-night?" said one of them, with a low laugh, 
as she point to the bag which he had thrown upon the floor, and which 
move as though there were some live thing within it. for answer he 
nod hi head. one of the women jump forward and open it. If my 
ear did not deceiv me there wa a gasp and a low wail, as of a 
half-smoth child. the women close round, whilst I wa aghast with 
horror; but as I look they disappeared, and with them the dread 
bag. there wa no door near them, and they could not have pass me 
without my noticing. they simpli seem to fade into the ray of the 
moonlight and pass out through the window, for I could see outsid the 
dim, shadowi form for a moment befor they entir fade away. 

then the horror overcam me, and I sank down unconscious. 




chapter IV 

jonathan harker' journal--_continued_ 


I awok in my own bed. If it be that I had not dreamt, the count must 
have carri me here. I tri to satisfi myself on the subject, but 
could not arriv at ani unquestion result. To be sure, there were 
certain small evidences, such as that my cloth were fold and laid by 
in a manner which wa not my habit. My watch wa still unwound, and I am 
rigor accustom to wind it the last thing befor go to bed, and 
mani such details. but these thing are no proof, for they may have been 
evid that my mind wa not as usual, and, from some caus or 
another, I had certainli been much upset. I must watch for proof. Of one 
thing I am glad: if it wa that the count carri me here and undress 
me, he must have been hurri in hi task, for my pocket are intact. I 
am sure thi diari would have been a mysteri to him which he would not 
have brooked. He would have taken or destroy it. As I look round thi 
room, although it ha been to me so full of fear, it is now a sort of 
sanctuary, for noth can be more dread than those aw women, who 
were--who _are_--wait to suck my blood. 

* * * * * 

_18 may._--i have been down to look at that room again in daylight, for 
I _must_ know the truth. when I got to the doorway at the top of the 
stair I found it closed. It had been so forcibl driven against the 
jamb that part of the woodwork wa splintered. I could see that the bolt 
of the lock had not been shot, but the door is fasten from the inside. 
I fear it wa no dream, and must act on thi surmise. 

* * * * * 

_19 may._--i am sure in the toils. last night the count ask me in 
the suavest tone to write three letters, one say that my work here 
wa nearli done, and that I should start for home within a few days, 
anoth that I wa start on the next morn from the time of the 
letter, and the third that I had left the castl and arriv at 
bistritz. I would fain have rebelled, but felt that in the present state 
of thing it would be mad to quarrel openli with the count whilst I 
am so absolut in hi power; and to refus would be to excit hi 
suspicion and to arous hi anger. He know that I know too much, and 
that I must not live, lest I be danger to him; my onli chanc is to 
prolong my opportunities. someth may occur which will give me a 
chanc to escape. I saw in hi eye someth of that gather wrath 
which wa manifest when he hurl that fair woman from him. He explain 
to me that post were few and uncertain, and that my write now would 
ensur eas of mind to my friends; and he assur me with so much 
impress that he would countermand the later letters, which would 
be held over at bistritz until due time in case chanc would admit of my 
prolong my stay, that to oppos him would have been to creat new 
suspicion. I therefor pretend to fall in with hi views, and ask 
him what date I should put on the letters. He calcul a minute, and 
then said:-- 

"the first should be june 12, the second june 19, and the third june 
29." 

I know now the span of my life. god help me! 

* * * * * 

_28 may._--ther is a chanc of escape, or at ani rate of be abl to 
send word home. A band of szgani have come to the castle, and are 
encamp in the courtyard. these szgani are gipsies; I have note of 
them in my book. they are peculiar to thi part of the world, though 
alli to the ordinari gipsi all the world over. there are thousand 
of them in hungari and transylvania, who are almost outsid all law. 
they attach themselv as a rule to some great nobl or _boyar_, and 
call themselv by hi name. they are fearless and without religion, 
save superstition, and they talk onli their own varieti of the romani 
tongue. 

I shall write some letter home, and shall tri to get them to have them 
posted. I have alreadi spoken them through my window to begin 
acquaintanceship. they took their hat off and made obeis and mani 
signs, which, however, I could not understand ani more than I could 
their spoken language.... 

* * * * * 

I have written the letters. mina' is in shorthand, and I simpli ask mr. 
hawkin to commun with her. To her I have explain my situation, 
but without the horror which I may onli surmise. It would shock and 
frighten her to death were I to expos my heart to her. should the 
letter not carry, then the count shall not yet know my secret or the 
extent of my knowledge.... 

* * * * * 

I have given the letters; I threw them through the bar of my window 
with a gold piece, and made what sign I could to have them posted. the 
man who took them press them to hi heart and bowed, and then put them 
in hi cap. I could do no more. I stole back to the study, and began to 
read. As the count did not come in, I have written here.... 

* * * * * 

the count ha come. He sat down besid me, and said in hi smoothest 
voic as he open two letters:-- 

"the szgani ha given me these, of which, though I know not whenc they 
come, I shall, of course, take care. see!"--h must have look at 
it--"on is from you, and to my friend peter hawkins; the other"--her 
he caught sight of the strang symbol as he open the envelope, and 
the dark look came into hi face, and hi eye blaze wickedly--"th 
other is a vile thing, an outrag upon friendship and hospitality! It is 
not signed. well! so it cannot matter to us." and he calmli held letter 
and envelop in the flame of the lamp till they were consumed. then he 
went on:-- 

"the letter to hawkins--that I shall, of course, send on, sinc it is 
yours. your letter are sacr to me. your pardon, my friend, that 
unknowingli I did break the seal. will you not cover it again?" He held 
out the letter to me, and with a courteou bow hand me a clean 
envelope. I could onli redirect it and hand it to him in silence. when 
he went out of the room I could hear the key turn softly. A minut later 
I went over and tri it, and the door wa locked. 

when, an hour or two after, the count came quietli into the room, hi 
come awaken me, for I had gone to sleep on the sofa. He wa veri 
courteou and veri cheeri in hi manner, and see that I had been 
sleeping, he said:-- 

"so, my friend, you are tired? get to bed. there is the surest rest. I 
may not have the pleasur to talk to-night, sinc there are mani labour 
to me; but you will sleep, I pray." I pass to my room and went to bed, 
and, strang to say, slept without dreaming. despair ha it own calms. 

* * * * * 

_31 may._--thi morn when I woke I thought I would provid myself 
with some paper and envelop from my bag and keep them in my pocket, so 
that I might write in case I should get an opportunity, but again a 
surprise, again a shock! 

everi scrap of paper wa gone, and with it all my notes, my memoranda, 
relat to railway and travel, my letter of credit, in fact all that 
might be use to me were I onc outsid the castle. I sat and ponder 
awhile, and then some thought occur to me, and I made search of my 
portmanteau and in the wardrob where I had place my clothes. 

the suit in which I had travel wa gone, and also my overcoat and 
rug; I could find no trace of them anywhere. thi look like some new 
scheme of villainy.... 

* * * * * 

_17 june._--thi morning, as I wa sit on the edg of my bed 
cudgel my brains, I heard without a crack of whip and pound 
and scrape of horses' feet up the rocki path beyond the courtyard. 
with joy I hurri to the window, and saw drive into the yard two great 
leiter-wagons, each drawn by eight sturdi horses, and at the head of 
each pair a slovak, with hi wide hat, great nail-stud belt, dirti 
sheepskin, and high boots. they had also their long stave in hand. I 
ran to the door, intend to descend and tri and join them through the 
main hall, as I thought that way might be open for them. again a 
shock: my door wa fasten on the outside. 

then I ran to the window and cri to them. they look up at me 
stupidli and pointed, but just then the "hetman" of the szgani came out, 
and see them point to my window, said something, at which they 
laughed. henceforth no effort of mine, no piteou cri or agonis 
entreaty, would make them even look at me. they resolut turn away. 
the leiter-wagon contain great, squar boxes, with handl of thick 
rope; these were evid empti by the eas with which the slovak 
handl them, and by their reson as they were roughli moved. when 
they were all unload and pack in a great heap in one corner of the 
yard, the slovak were given some money by the szgany, and spit on 
it for luck, lazili went each to hi horse' head. shortli afterwards, I 
heard the crack of their whip die away in the distance. 

* * * * * 

_24 june, befor morning._--last night the count left me early, and 
lock himself into hi own room. As soon as I dare I ran up the 
wind stair, and look out of the window, which open south. I 
thought I would watch for the count, for there is someth go on. 
the szgani are quarter somewher in the castl and are do work of 
some kind. I know it, for now and then I hear a far-away muffl sound 
as of mattock and spade, and, whatev it is, it must be the end of some 
ruthless villainy. 

I had been at the window somewhat less than half an hour, when I saw 
someth come out of the count' window. I drew back and watch 
carefully, and saw the whole man emerge. It wa a new shock to me to 
find that he had on the suit of cloth which I had worn whilst 
travel here, and slung over hi shoulder the terribl bag which I 
had seen the women take away. there could be no doubt as to hi quest, 
and in my garb, too! this, then, is hi new scheme of evil: that he will 
allow other to see me, as they think, so that he may both leav 
evid that I have been seen in the town or villag post my own 
letters, and that ani wicked which he may do shall by the local 
peopl be attribut to me. 

It make me rage to think that thi can go on, and whilst I am shut up 
here, a verit prisoner, but without that protect of the law which 
is even a criminal' right and consolation. 

I thought I would watch for the count' return, and for a long time sat 
doggedli at the window. then I began to notic that there were some 
quaint littl speck float in the ray of the moonlight. they were 
like the tiniest grain of dust, and they whirl round and gather in 
cluster in a nebul sort of way. I watch them with a sens of 
soothing, and a sort of calm stole over me. I lean back in the 
embrasur in a more comfort position, so that I could enjoy more 
fulli the aërial gambolling. 

someth made me start up, a low, piteou howl of dog somewher far 
below in the valley, which wa hidden from my sight. louder it seem to 
ring in my ears, and the float mote of dust to take new shape to 
the sound as they danc in the moonlight. I felt myself struggl to 
awak to some call of my instincts; nay, my veri soul wa struggling, 
and my half-rememb sensibl were strive to answer the call. I 
wa becom hypnotised! quicker and quicker danc the dust; the 
moonbeam seem to quiver as they went by me into the mass of gloom 
beyond. more and more they gather till they seem to take dim phantom 
shapes. and then I started, broad awak and in full possess of my 
senses, and ran scream from the place. the phantom shapes, which were 
becom gradual materialis from the moonbeams, were those of the 
three ghostli women to whom I wa doomed. I fled, and felt somewhat 
safer in my own room, where there wa no moonlight and where the lamp 
wa burn brightly. 

when a coupl of hour had pass I heard someth stir in the 
count' room, someth like a sharp wail quickli suppressed; and then 
there wa silence, deep, aw silence, which chill me. with a 
beat heart, I tri the door; but I wa lock in my prison, and 
could do nothing. I sat down and simpli cried. 

As I sat I heard a sound in the courtyard without--th agonis cri of a 
woman. I rush to the window, and throw it up, peer out between 
the bars. there, indeed, wa a woman with dishevel hair, hold her 
hand over her heart as one distress with running. she wa lean 
against a corner of the gateway. when she saw my face at the window she 
threw herself forward, and shout in a voic laden with menace:-- 

"monster, give me my child!" 

she threw herself on her knees, and rais up her hands, cri the same 
word in tone which wrung my heart. then she tore her hair and beat her 
breast, and abandon herself to all the violenc of extravag 
emotion. finally, she threw herself forward, and, though I could not see 
her, I could hear the beat of her nake hand against the door. 

somewher high overhead, probabl on the tower, I heard the voic of the 
count call in hi harsh, metal whisper. hi call seem to be 
answer from far and wide by the howl of wolves. befor mani minut 
had pass a pack of them poured, like a pent-up dam when liberated, 
through the wide entranc into the courtyard. 

there wa no cri from the woman, and the howl of the wolv wa but 
short. befor long they stream away singly, lick their lips. 

I could not piti her, for I knew now what had becom of her child, and 
she wa better dead. 

what shall I do? what can I do? how can I escap from thi dread 
thing of night and gloom and fear? 

* * * * * 

_25 june, morning._--no man know till he ha suffer from the night 
how sweet and how dear to hi heart and eye the morn can be. when the 
sun grew so high thi morn that it struck the top of the great 
gateway opposit my window, the high spot which it touch seem to me 
as if the dove from the ark had light there. My fear fell from me as 
if it had been a vapor garment which dissolv in the warmth. I must 
take action of some sort whilst the courag of the day is upon me. last 
night one of my post-dat letter went to post, the first of that fatal 
seri which is to blot out the veri trace of my exist from the 
earth. 

let me not think of it. action! 

It ha alway been at night-tim that I have been molest or 
threatened, or in some way in danger or in fear. I have not yet seen the 
count in the daylight. can it be that he sleep when other wake, that 
he may be awak whilst they sleep? If I could onli get into hi room! 
but there is no possibl way. the door is alway locked, no way for me. 

yes, there is a way, if one dare to take it. where hi bodi ha gone 
whi may not anoth bodi go? I have seen him myself crawl from hi 
window. whi should not I imit him, and go in by hi window? the 
chanc are desperate, but my need is more desper still. I shall risk 
it. At the worst it can onli be death; and a man' death is not a 
calf's, and the dread hereaft may still be open to me. god help me 
in my task! good-bye, mina, if I fail; good-bye, my faith friend and 
second father; good-bye, all, and last of all mina! 

* * * * * 

_same day, later._--i have made the effort, and god, help me, have 
come safe back to thi room. I must put down everi detail in order. I 
went whilst my courag wa fresh straight to the window on the south 
side, and at onc got outsid on the narrow ledg of stone which run 
around the build on thi side. the stone are big and roughli cut, 
and the mortar ha by process of time been wash away between them. I 
took off my boots, and ventur out on the desper way. I look down 
once, so as to make sure that a sudden glimps of the aw depth would 
not overcom me, but after that kept my eye away from it. I knew pretti 
well the direct and distanc of the count' window, and made for it 
as well as I could, have regard to the opportun available. I did 
not feel dizzy--i suppos I wa too excited--and the time seem 
ridicul short till I found myself stand on the window-sil and 
tri to rais up the sash. I wa fill with agitation, however, when 
I bent down and slid feet foremost in through the window. then I look 
around for the count, but, with surpris and gladness, made a discovery. 
the room wa empty! It wa bare furnish with odd things, which 
seem to have never been used; the furnitur wa someth the same 
style as that in the south rooms, and wa cover with dust. I look 
for the key, but it wa not in the lock, and I could not find it 
anywhere. the onli thing I found wa a great heap of gold in one 
corner--gold of all kinds, roman, and british, and austrian, and 
hungarian, and greek and turkish money, cover with a film of dust, as 
though it had lain long in the ground. none of it that I notic wa 
less than three hundr year old. there were also chain and ornaments, 
some jewelled, but all of them old and stained. 

At one corner of the room wa a heavi door. I tri it, for, sinc I 
could not find the key of the room or the key of the outer door, which 
wa the main object of my search, I must make further examination, or 
all my effort would be in vain. It wa open, and led through a stone 
passag to a circular stairway, which went steepli down. I descended, 
mind care where I went, for the stair were dark, be onli lit 
by loophol in the heavi masonry. At the bottom there wa a dark, 
tunnel-lik passage, through which came a deathly, sickli odour, the 
odour of old earth newli turned. As I went through the passag the smell 
grew closer and heavier. At last I pull open a heavi door which stood 
ajar, and found myself in an old, ruin chapel, which had evid 
been use as a graveyard. the roof wa broken, and in two place were 
step lead to vaults, but the ground had recent been dug over, and 
the earth place in great wooden boxes, manifestli those which had been 
brought by the slovaks. there wa nobodi about, and I made search for 
ani further outlet, but there wa none. then I went over everi inch of 
the ground, so as not to lose a chance. I went down even into the 
vaults, where the dim light struggled, although to do so wa a dread to 
my veri soul. into two of these I went, but saw noth except fragment 
of old coffin and pile of dust; in the third, however, I made a 
discovery. 

there, in one of the great boxes, of which there were fifti in all, on a 
pile of newli dug earth, lay the count! He wa either dead or asleep, I 
could not say which--for the eye were open and stony, but without the 
glassi of death--and the cheek had the warmth of life through all 
their pallor; the lip were as red as ever. but there wa no sign of 
movement, no pulse, no breath, no beat of the heart. I bent over him, 
and tri to find ani sign of life, but in vain. He could not have lain 
there long, for the earthi smell would have pass away in a few hours. 
By the side of the box wa it cover, pierc with hole here and there. 
I thought he might have the key on him, but when I went to search I saw 
the dead eyes, and in them, dead though they were, such a look of hate, 
though unconsci of me or my presence, that I fled from the place, and 
leav the count' room by the window, crawl again up the castl 
wall. regain my room, I threw myself pant upon the bed and tri 
to think.... 

* * * * * 

_29 june._--to-day is the date of my last letter, and the count ha 
taken step to prove that it wa genuine, for again I saw him leav the 
castl by the same window, and in my clothes. As he went down the wall, 
lizard fashion, I wish I had a gun or some lethal weapon, that I might 
destroy him; but I fear that no weapon wrought alon by man' hand would 
have ani effect on him. I dare not wait to see him return, for I fear 
to see those weird sisters. I came back to the library, and read there 
till I fell asleep. 

I wa awaken by the count, who look at me as grimli as a man can 
look as he said:-- 

"to-morrow, my friend, we must part. you return to your beauti 
england, I to some work which may have such an end that we may never 
meet. your letter home ha been despatched; to-morrow I shall not be 
here, but all shall be readi for your journey. In the morn come the 
szgany, who have some labour of their own here, and also come some 
slovaks. when they have gone, my carriag shall come for you, and shall 
bear you to the borgo pass to meet the dilig from bukovina to 
bistritz. but I am in hope that I shall see more of you at castl 
dracula." I suspect him, and determin to test hi sincerity. 
sincerity! It seem like a profan of the word to write it in 
connect with such a monster, so ask him point-blank:-- 

"whi may I not go to-night?" 

"because, dear sir, my coachman and hors are away on a mission." 

"but I would walk with pleasure. I want to get away at once." He smiled, 
such a soft, smooth, diabol smile that I knew there wa some trick 
behind hi smoothness. He said:-- 

"and your baggage?" 

"I do not care about it. I can send for it some other time." 

the count stood up, and said, with a sweet courtesi which made me rub my 
eyes, it seem so real:-- 

"you english have a say which is close to my heart, for it spirit is 
that which rule our _boyars_: 'welcom the coming; speed the part 
guest.' come with me, my dear young friend. not an hour shall you wait 
in my hous against your will, though sad am I at your going, and that 
you so suddenli desir it. come!" with a state gravity, he, with the 
lamp, preced me down the stair and along the hall. suddenli he 
stopped. 

"hark!" 

close at hand came the howl of mani wolves. It wa almost as if the 
sound sprang up at the rise of hi hand, just as the music of a great 
orchestra seem to leap under the bâton of the conductor. after a paus 
of a moment, he proceeded, in hi state way, to the door, drew back 
the ponder bolts, unhook the heavi chains, and began to draw it 
open. 

To my intens astonish I saw that it wa unlocked. suspiciously, I 
look all round, but could see no key of ani kind. 

As the door began to open, the howl of the wolv without grew louder 
and angrier; their red jaws, with champ teeth, and their blunt-claw 
feet as they leaped, came in through the open door. I knew then that 
to struggl at the moment against the count wa useless. with such 
alli as these at hi command, I could do nothing. but still the door 
continu slowli to open, and onli the count' bodi stood in the gap. 
suddenli it struck me that thi might be the moment and mean of my 
doom; I wa to be given to the wolves, and at my own instigation. there 
wa a diabol wicked in the idea great enough for the count, and 
as a last chanc I cri out:-- 

"shut the door; I shall wait till morning!" and cover my face with my 
hand to hide my tear of bitter disappointment. with one sweep of hi 
power arm, the count threw the door shut, and the great bolt clang 
and echo through the hall as they shot back into their places. 

In silenc we return to the library, and after a minut or two I went 
to my own room. the last I saw of count dracula wa hi kiss hi hand 
to me; with a red light of triumph in hi eyes, and with a smile that 
juda in hell might be proud of. 

when I wa in my room and about to lie down, I thought I heard a 
whisper at my door. I went to it softli and listened. unless my ear 
deceiv me, I heard the voic of the count:-- 

"back, back, to your own place! your time is not yet come. wait! have 
patience! to-night is mine. to-morrow night is yours!" there wa a low, 
sweet rippl of laughter, and in a rage I threw open the door, and saw 
without the three terribl women lick their lips. As I appear they 
all join in a horribl laugh, and ran away. 

I came back to my room and threw myself on my knees. It is then so near 
the end? to-morrow! to-morrow! lord, help me, and those to whom I am 
dear! 

* * * * * 

_30 june, morning._--thes may be the last word I ever write in thi 
diary. I slept till just befor the dawn, and when I woke threw myself 
on my knees, for I determin that if death came he should find me 
ready. 

At last I felt that subtl chang in the air, and knew that the morn 
had come. then came the welcom cock-crow, and I felt that I wa safe. 
with a glad heart, I open my door and ran down to the hall. I had seen 
that the door wa unlocked, and now escap wa befor me. with hand 
that trembl with eagerness, I unhook the chain and drew back the 
massiv bolts. 

but the door would not move. despair seiz me. I pulled, and pulled, at 
the door, and shook it till, massiv as it was, it rattl in it 
casement. I could see the bolt shot. It had been lock after I left the 
count. 

then a wild desir took me to obtain that key at ani risk, and I 
determin then and there to scale the wall again and gain the count' 
room. He might kill me, but death now seem the happier choic of 
evils. without a paus I rush up to the east window, and scrambl 
down the wall, as before, into the count' room. It wa empty, but that 
wa as I expected. I could not see a key anywhere, but the heap of gold 
remained. I went through the door in the corner and down the wind 
stair and along the dark passag to the old chapel. I knew now well 
enough where to find the monster I sought. 

the great box wa in the same place, close against the wall, but the lid 
wa laid on it, not fasten down, but with the nail readi in their 
place to be hammer home. I knew I must reach the bodi for the key, so 
I rais the lid, and laid it back against the wall; and then I saw 
someth which fill my veri soul with horror. there lay the count, 
but look as if hi youth had been half renewed, for the white hair 
and moustach were chang to dark iron-grey; the cheek were fuller, 
and the white skin seem ruby-r underneath; the mouth wa redder than 
ever, for on the lip were gout of fresh blood, which trickl from the 
corner of the mouth and ran over the chin and neck. even the deep, 
burn eye seem set amongst swollen flesh, for the lid and pouch 
underneath were bloated. It seem as if the whole aw creatur were 
simpli gorg with blood. He lay like a filthi leech, exhaust with hi 
repletion. I shudder as I bent over to touch him, and everi sens in 
me revolt at the contact; but I had to search, or I wa lost. the 
come night might see my own bodi a banquet in a similar way to those 
horrid three. I felt all over the body, but no sign could I find of the 
key. then I stop and look at the count. there wa a mock smile 
on the bloat face which seem to drive me mad. thi wa the be I 
wa help to transfer to london, where, perhaps, for centuri to come 
he might, amongst it teem millions, satiat hi lust for blood, and 
creat a new and ever-widen circl of semi-demon to batten on the 
helpless. the veri thought drove me mad. A terribl desir came upon me 
to rid the world of such a monster. there wa no lethal weapon at hand, 
but I seiz a shovel which the workmen had been use to fill the 
cases, and lift it high, struck, with the edg downward, at the 
hate face. but as I did so the head turned, and the eye fell full 
upon me, with all their blaze of basilisk horror. the sight seem to 
paralys me, and the shovel turn in my hand and glanc from the face, 
mere make a deep gash abov the forehead. the shovel fell from my 
hand across the box, and as I pull it away the flang of the blade 
caught the edg of the lid which fell over again, and hid the horrid 
thing from my sight. the last glimps I had wa of the bloat face, 
blood-stain and fix with a grin of malic which would have held it 
own in the nethermost hell. 

I thought and thought what should be my next move, but my brain seem 
on fire, and I wait with a despair feel grow over me. As I 
wait I heard in the distanc a gipsi song sung by merri voic come 
closer, and through their song the roll of heavi wheel and the 
crack of whips; the szgani and the slovak of whom the count had 
spoken were coming. with a last look around and at the box which 
contain the vile body, I ran from the place and gain the count' 
room, determin to rush out at the moment the door should be opened. 
with strain ears, I listened, and heard downstair the grind of the 
key in the great lock and the fall back of the heavi door. there must 
have been some other mean of entry, or some one had a key for one of 
the lock doors. then there came the sound of mani feet tramp and 
die away in some passag which sent up a clang echo. I turn to 
run down again toward the vault, where I might find the new entrance; 
but at the moment there seem to come a violent puff of wind, and the 
door to the wind stair blew to with a shock that set the dust from 
the lintel flying. when I ran to push it open, I found that it wa 
hopelessli fast. I wa again a prisoner, and the net of doom wa close 
round me more closely. 

As I write there is in the passag below a sound of mani tramp feet 
and the crash of weight be set down heavily, doubtless the boxes, 
with their freight of earth. there is a sound of hammering; it is the 
box be nail down. now I can hear the heavi feet tramp again 
along the hall, with mani other idl feet come behind them. 

the door is shut, and the chain rattle; there is a grind of the key 
in the lock; I can hear the key withdraw: then anoth door open and 
shuts; I hear the creak of lock and bolt. 

hark! in the courtyard and down the rocki way the roll of heavi wheels, 
the crack of whips, and the choru of the szgani as they pass into the 
distance. 

I am alon in the castl with those aw women. faugh! mina is a woman, 
and there is nought in common. they are devil of the pit! 

I shall not remain alon with them; I shall tri to scale the castl wall 
farther than I have yet attempted. I shall take some of the gold with 
me, lest I want it later. I may find a way from thi dread place. 

and then away for home! away to the quickest and nearest train! away 
from thi curs spot, from thi curs land, where the devil and hi 
children still walk with earthli feet! 

At least god' merci is better than that of these monsters, and the 
precipic is steep and high. At it foot a man may sleep--a a man. 
good-bye, all! mina! 




chapter V 

_letter from miss mina murray to miss luci westenra._ 


"_9 may._ 

"mi dearest lucy,-- 

"forgiv my long delay in writing, but I have been simpli overwhelm 
with work. the life of an assist schoolmistress is sometim trying. 
I am long to be with you, and by the sea, where we can talk togeth 
freeli and build our castl in the air. I have been work veri hard 
lately, becaus I want to keep up with jonathan' studies, and I have 
been practis shorthand veri assiduously. when we are marri I shall 
be abl to be use to jonathan, and if I can stenograph well enough I 
can take down what he want to say in thi way and write it out for 
him on the typewriter, at which also I am practis veri hard. He 
and I sometim write letter in shorthand, and he is keep a 
stenograph journal of hi travel abroad. when I am with you I 
shall keep a diari in the same way. I don't mean one of those 
two-pages-to-the-week-with-sunday-squeezed-in-a-corn diaries, but a 
sort of journal which I can write in whenev I feel inclined. I do not 
suppos there will be much of interest to other people; but it is not 
intend for them. I may show it to jonathan some day if there is in it 
anyth worth sharing, but it is realli an exercis book. I shall tri 
to do what I see ladi journalist do: interview and write 
descript and tri to rememb conversations. I am told that, with 
a littl practice, one can rememb all that goe on or that one hear 
said dure a day. however, we shall see. I will tell you of my littl 
plan when we meet. I have just had a few hurri line from jonathan 
from transylvania. He is well, and will be return in about a week. I 
am long to hear all hi news. It must be so nice to see strang 
countries. I wonder if we--i mean jonathan and i--shal ever see them 
together. there is the ten o'clock bell ringing. good-bye. 

"your love 

"mina. 

"tell me all the news when you write. you have not told me anyth for 
a long time. I hear rumours, and especi of a tall, handsome, 
curly-hair man???" 


_letter, luci westenra to mina murray_. 

"_17, chatham street_, 

"_wednesday_. 

"mi dearest mina,-- 

"I must say you tax me _very_ unfairli with be a bad correspondent. I 
wrote to you _twice_ sinc we parted, and your last letter wa onli your 
_second_. besides, I have noth to tell you. there is realli noth 
to interest you. town is veri pleasant just now, and we go a good deal 
to picture-galleri and for walk and ride in the park. As to the 
tall, curly-hair man, I suppos it wa the one who wa with me at the 
last pop. some one ha evid been tell tales. that wa mr. 
holmwood. He often come to see us, and he and mamma get on veri well 
together; they have so mani thing to talk about in common. We met some 
time ago a man that would just _do for you_, if you were not alreadi 
engag to jonathan. He is an excel _parti_, be handsome, well 
off, and of good birth. He is a doctor and realli clever. just fancy! He 
is onli nine-and-twenty, and he ha an immens lunat asylum all under 
hi own care. mr. holmwood introduc him to me, and he call here to 
see us, and often come now. I think he is one of the most resolut men 
I ever saw, and yet the most calm. He seem absolut imperturbable. I 
can fanci what a wonder power he must have over hi patients. He ha 
a curiou habit of look one straight in the face, as if tri to 
read one' thoughts. He tri thi on veri much with me, but I flatter 
myself he ha got a tough nut to crack. I know that from my glass. Do 
you ever tri to read your own face? _I do_, and I can tell you it is not 
a bad study, and give you more troubl than you can well fanci if you 
have never tri it. He say that I afford him a curiou psycholog 
study, and I humbl think I do. I do not, as you know, take suffici 
interest in dress to be abl to describ the new fashions. dress is a 
bore. that is slang again, but never mind; arthur say that everi day. 
there, it is all out. mina, we have told all our secret to each other 
sinc we were _children_; we have slept togeth and eaten together, and 
laugh and cri together; and now, though I have spoken, I would like 
to speak more. oh, mina, couldn't you guess? I love him. I am blush 
as I write, for although I _think_ he love me, he ha not told me so in 
words. but oh, mina, I love him; I love him; I love him! there, that 
doe me good. I wish I were with you, dear, sit by the fire 
undressing, as we use to sit; and I would tri to tell you what I feel. 
I do not know how I am write thi even to you. I am afraid to stop, 
or I should tear up the letter, and I don't want to stop, for I _do_ so 
want to tell you all. let me hear from you _at once_, and tell me all 
that you think about it. mina, I must stop. good-night. bless me in your 
prayers; and, mina, pray for my happiness. 

"lucy. 

"p.s.--i need not tell you thi is a secret. good-night again. 

"l." 

_letter, luci westenra to mina murray_. 

"_24 may_. 

"mi dearest mina,-- 

"thanks, and thanks, and thank again for your sweet letter. It wa so 
nice to be abl to tell you and to have your sympathy. 

"mi dear, it never rain but it pours. how true the old proverb are. 
here am I, who shall be twenti in september, and yet I never had a 
propos till to-day, not a real proposal, and to-day I have had three. 
just fancy! three propos in one day! isn't it awful! I feel sorry, 
realli and truli sorry, for two of the poor fellows. oh, mina, I am so 
happi that I don't know what to do with myself. and three proposals! 
but, for goodness' sake, don't tell ani of the girls, or they would be 
get all sort of extravag idea and imagin themselv injur 
and slight if in their veri first day at home they did not get six at 
least. some girl are so vain! you and I, mina dear, who are engag and 
are go to settl down soon soberli into old marri women, can 
despis vanity. well, I must tell you about the three, but you must keep 
it a secret, dear, from _everi one_, except, of course, jonathan. you 
will tell him, becaus I would, if I were in your place, certainli tell 
arthur. A woman ought to tell her husband everything--don't you think 
so, dear?--and I must be fair. men like women, certainli their wives, to 
be quit as fair as they are; and women, I am afraid, are not alway 
quit as fair as they should be. well, my dear, number one came just 
befor lunch. I told you of him, dr. john seward, the lunatic-asylum 
man, with the strong jaw and the good forehead. He wa veri cool 
outwardly, but wa nervou all the same. He had evid been school 
himself as to all sort of littl things, and rememb them; but he 
almost manag to sit down on hi silk hat, which men don't gener do 
when they are cool, and then when he want to appear at eas he kept 
play with a lancet in a way that made me nearli scream. He spoke to 
me, mina, veri straightforwardly. He told me how dear I wa to him, 
though he had known me so little, and what hi life would be with me to 
help and cheer him. He wa go to tell me how unhappi he would be if I 
did not care for him, but when he saw me cri he said that he wa a brute 
and would not add to my present trouble. then he broke off and ask if 
I could love him in time; and when I shook my head hi hand trembled, 
and then with some hesit he ask me if I care alreadi for ani one 
else. He put it veri nicely, say that he did not want to wring my 
confid from me, but onli to know, becaus if a woman' heart wa 
free a man might have hope. and then, mina, I felt a sort of duti to 
tell him that there wa some one. I onli told him that much, and then he 
stood up, and he look veri strong and veri grave as he took both my 
hand in hi and said he hope I would be happy, and that if I ever 
want a friend I must count him one of my best. oh, mina dear, I can't 
help crying: and you must excus thi letter be all blotted. be 
propos to is all veri nice and all that sort of thing, but it isn't at 
all a happi thing when you have to see a poor fellow, whom you know 
love you honestly, go away and look all broken-hearted, and to 
know that, no matter what he may say at the moment, you are pass 
quit out of hi life. My dear, I must stop here at present, I feel so 
miserable, though I am so happy. 

"_evening._ 

"arthur ha just gone, and I feel in better spirit than when I left 
off, so I can go on tell you about the day. well, my dear, number two 
came after lunch. He is such a nice fellow, an american from texas, and 
he look so young and so fresh that it seem almost imposs that he 
ha been to so mani place and ha had such adventures. I sympathis 
with poor desdemona when she had such a danger stream pour in her 
ear, even by a black man. I suppos that we women are such coward that 
we think a man will save us from fears, and we marri him. I know now 
what I would do if I were a man and want to make a girl love me. no, I 
don't, for there wa mr. morri tell us hi stories, and arthur never 
told any, and yet---- My dear, I am somewhat previous. mr. quincey P. 
morri found me alone. It seem that a man alway doe find a girl 
alone. no, he doesn't, for arthur tri twice to _make_ a chance, and I 
help him all I could; I am not asham to say it now. I must tell you 
beforehand that mr. morri doesn't alway speak slang--that is to say, 
he never doe so to stranger or befor them, for he is realli well 
educ and ha exquisit manners--but he found out that it amus me 
to hear him talk american slang, and whenev I wa present, and there 
wa no one to be shocked, he said such funni things. I am afraid, my 
dear, he ha to invent it all, for it fit exactli into whatev els he 
ha to say. but thi is a way slang has. I do not know myself if I shall 
ever speak slang; I do not know if arthur like it, as I have never 
heard him use ani as yet. well, mr. morri sat down besid me and look 
as happi and jolli as he could, but I could see all the same that he wa 
veri nervous. He took my hand in his, and said ever so sweetly:-- 

"'miss lucy, I know I ain't good enough to regul the fixin' of your 
littl shoes, but I guess if you wait till you find a man that is you 
will go join them seven young women with the lamp when you quit. won't 
you just hitch up alongsid of me and let us go down the long road 
together, drive in doubl harness?' 

"well, he did look so good-humour and so jolli that it didn't seem 
half so hard to refus him as it did poor dr. seward; so I said, as 
lightli as I could, that I did not know anyth of hitching, and that I 
wasn't broken to har at all yet. then he said that he had spoken in 
a light manner, and he hope that if he had made a mistak in do so 
on so grave, so momentous, an occas for him, I would forgiv him. He 
realli did look seriou when he wa say it, and I couldn't help 
feel a bit seriou too--i know, mina, you will think me a horrid 
flirt--though I couldn't help feel a sort of exult that he wa 
number two in one day. and then, my dear, befor I could say a word he 
began pour out a perfect torrent of love-making, lay hi veri 
heart and soul at my feet. He look so earnest over it that I shall 
never again think that a man must be play always, and never earnest, 
becaus he is merri at times. I suppos he saw someth in my face 
which check him, for he suddenli stopped, and said with a sort of 
manli fervour that I could have love him for if I had been free:-- 

"'lucy, you are an honest-heart girl, I know. I should not be here 
speak to you as I am now if I did not believ you clean grit, right 
through to the veri depth of your soul. tell me, like one good fellow 
to another, is there ani one els that you care for? and if there is 
i'll never troubl you a hair' breadth again, but will be, if you will 
let me, a veri faith friend.' 

"mi dear mina, whi are men so nobl when we women are so littl worthi 
of them? here wa I almost make fun of thi great-hearted, true 
gentleman. I burst into tears--i am afraid, my dear, you will think 
thi a veri sloppi letter in more way than one--and I realli felt veri 
badly. whi can't they let a girl marri three men, or as mani as want 
her, and save all thi trouble? but thi is heresy, and I must not say 
it. I am glad to say that, though I wa crying, I wa abl to look into 
mr. morris' brave eyes, and I told him out straight:-- 

"'yes, there is some one I love, though he ha not told me yet that he 
even love me.' I wa right to speak to him so frankly, for quit a 
light came into hi face, and he put out both hi hand and took mine--i 
think I put them into his--and said in a hearti way:-- 

"'that' my brave girl. it' better worth be late for a chanc of 
win you than be in time for ani other girl in the world. don't 
cry, my dear. If it' for me, i'm a hard nut to crack; and I take it 
stand up. If that other fellow doesn't know hi happiness, well, he'd 
better look for it soon, or he'll have to deal with me. littl girl, 
your honesti and pluck have made me a friend, and that' rarer than a 
lover; it' more unselfish anyhow. My dear, i'm go to have a pretti 
lone walk between thi and kingdom come. won't you give me one kiss? 
it'll be someth to keep off the dark now and then. you can, you 
know, if you like, for that other good fellow--h must be a good fellow, 
my dear, and a fine fellow, or you could not love him--hasn't spoken 
yet.' that quit won me, mina, for it _was_ brave and sweet of him, and 
noble, too, to a rival--wasn't it?--and he so sad; so I leant over and 
kiss him. He stood up with my two hand in his, and as he look down 
into my face--i am afraid I wa blush veri much--h said:-- 

"'littl girl, I hold your hand, and you'v kiss me, and if these 
thing don't make us friend noth ever will. thank you for your sweet 
honesti to me, and good-bye.' He wrung my hand, and take up hi hat, 
went straight out of the room without look back, without a tear or a 
quiver or a pause; and I am cri like a baby. oh, whi must a man like 
that be made unhappi when there are lot of girl about who would 
worship the veri ground he trod on? I know I would if I were free--onli 
I don't want to be free. My dear, thi quit upset me, and I feel I 
cannot write of happi just at once, after tell you of it; and I 
don't wish to tell of the number three until it can be all happy. 

"ever your love 

"lucy. 

"p.s.--oh, about number three--i needn't tell you of number three, need 
I? besides, it wa all so confused; it seem onli a moment from hi 
come into the room till both hi arm were round me, and he wa 
kiss me. I am very, veri happy, and I don't know what I have done to 
deserv it. I must onli tri in the futur to show that I am not 
ungrat to god for all hi good to me in send to me such a 
lover, such a husband, and such a friend. 

"good-bye." 


_dr. seward' diary._ 

(kept in phonograph) 

_25 may._--ebb tide in appetit to-day. cannot eat, cannot rest, so 
diari instead. sinc my rebuff of yesterday I have a sort of empti 
feeling; noth in the world seem of suffici import to be worth 
the doing.... As I knew that the onli cure for thi sort of thing wa 
work, I went down amongst the patients. I pick out one who ha 
afford me a studi of much interest. He is so quaint that I am 
determin to understand him as well as I can. to-day I seem to get 
nearer than ever befor to the heart of hi mystery. 

I question him more fulli than I had ever done, with a view to make 
myself master of the fact of hi hallucination. In my manner of do 
it there was, I now see, someth of cruelty. I seem to wish to keep 
him to the point of hi madness--a thing which I avoid with the patient 
as I would the mouth of hell. 

(_mem._, under what circumst would I _not_ avoid the pit of hell?) 
_omnia romæ venalia sunt._ hell ha it price! _verb. sap._ If there be 
anyth behind thi instinct it will be valuabl to trace it afterward 
_accurately_, so I had better commenc to do so, therefore-- 

R. M. renfield, ætat 59.--sanguin temperament; great physic strength; 
morbidli excitable; period of gloom, end in some fix idea which I 
cannot make out. I presum that the sanguin tempera itself and the 
disturb influenc end in a mentally-accomplish finish; a possibl 
danger man, probabl danger if unselfish. In selfish men caution 
is as secur an armour for their foe as for themselves. what I think of 
on thi point is, when self is the fix point the centripet forc is 
balanc with the centrifugal; when duty, a cause, etc., is the fix 
point, the latter forc is paramount, and onli accid or a seri of 
accid can balanc it. 


_letter, quincey P. morri to hon. arthur holmwood._ 

"_25 may._ 

"mi dear art,-- 

"we'v told yarn by the camp-fir in the prairies; and dress one 
another' wound after tri a land at the marquesas; and drunk 
health on the shore of titicaca. there are more yarn to be told, and 
other wound to be healed, and anoth health to be drunk. won't you let 
thi be at my camp-fir to-morrow night? I have no hesit in ask 
you, as I know a certain ladi is engag to a certain dinner-party, and 
that you are free. there will onli be one other, our old pal at the 
korea, jack seward. he' coming, too, and we both want to mingl our 
weep over the wine-cup, and to drink a health with all our heart to 
the happiest man in all the wide world, who ha won the noblest heart 
that god ha made and the best worth winning. We promis you a hearti 
welcome, and a love greeting, and a health as true as your own right 
hand. We shall both swear to leav you at home if you drink too deep to 
a certain pair of eyes. come! 

"yours, as ever and always, 

"quincey P. morris." 


_telegram from arthur holmwood to quincey P. morris._ 

"_26 may._ 

"count me in everi time. I bear messag which will make both your ear 
tingle. 

"art." 




chapter VI 

mina murray' journal 


_24 july. whitby._--luci met me at the station, look sweeter and 
loveli than ever, and we drove up to the hous at the crescent in 
which they have rooms. thi is a love place. the littl river, the 
esk, run through a deep valley, which broaden out as it come near the 
harbour. A great viaduct run across, with high piers, through which the 
view seem somehow further away than it realli is. the valley is 
beauti green, and it is so steep that when you are on the high land 
on either side you look right across it, unless you are near enough to 
see down. the hous of the old town--th side away from us--ar all 
red-roofed, and seem pile up one over the other anyhow, like the 
pictur we see of nuremberg. right over the town is the ruin of whitbi 
abbey, which wa sack by the danes, and which is the scene of part of 
"marmion," where the girl wa built up in the wall. It is a most nobl 
ruin, of immens size, and full of beauti and romant bits; there is 
a legend that a white ladi is seen in one of the windows. between it and 
the town there is anoth church, the parish one, round which is a big 
graveyard, all full of tombstones. thi is to my mind the nicest spot in 
whitby, for it lie right over the town, and ha a full view of the 
harbour and all up the bay to where the headland call kettl 
stretch out into the sea. It descend so steepli over the harbour that 
part of the bank ha fallen away, and some of the grave have been 
destroyed. In one place part of the stonework of the grave stretch 
out over the sandi pathway far below. there are walks, with seat besid 
them, through the churchyard; and peopl go and sit there all day long 
look at the beauti view and enjoy the breeze. I shall come and 
sit here veri often myself and work. indeed, I am write now, with my 
book on my knee, and listen to the talk of three old men who are 
sit besid me. they seem to do noth all day but sit up here and 
talk. 

the harbour lie below me, with, on the far side, one long granit wall 
stretch out into the sea, with a curv outward at the end of it, in 
the middl of which is a lighthouse. A heavi sea-wal run along outsid 
of it. On the near side, the sea-wal make an elbow crook inversely, 
and it end too ha a lighthouse. between the two pier there is a 
narrow open into the harbour, which then suddenli widens. 

It is nice at high water; but when the tide is out it shoal away to 
nothing, and there is mere the stream of the esk, run between 
bank of sand, with rock here and there. outsid the harbour on thi 
side there rise for about half a mile a great reef, the sharp edg of 
which run straight out from behind the south lighthouse. At the end of 
it is a buoy with a bell, which swing in bad weather, and send in a 
mourn sound on the wind. they have a legend here that when a ship is 
lost bell are heard out at sea. I must ask the old man about this; he 
is come thi way.... 

He is a funni old man. He must be aw old, for hi face is all 
gnarl and twist like the bark of a tree. He tell me that he is 
nearli a hundred, and that he wa a sailor in the greenland fish 
fleet when waterloo wa fought. He is, I am afraid, a veri sceptic 
person, for when I ask him about the bell at sea and the white ladi 
at the abbey he said veri brusquely:-- 

"I wouldn't fash masel' about them, miss. them thing be all wore out. 
mind, I don't say that they never was, but I do say that they wasn't in 
my time. they be all veri well for comer and trippers, an' the like, 
but not for a nice young ladi like you. them feet-folk from york and 
leed that be alway eatin' cure herrin' an' drinkin' tea an' lookin' 
out to buy cheap jet would creed aught. I wonder masel' who'd be 
bother tellin' lie to them--even the newspapers, which is full of 
fool-talk." I thought he would be a good person to learn interest 
thing from, so I ask him if he would mind tell me someth about 
the whale-fish in the old days. He wa just settl himself to begin 
when the clock struck six, whereupon he labour to get up, and said:-- 

"I must gang ageeanward home now, miss. My grand-daught doesn't like 
to be kept waitin' when the tea is ready, for it take me time to 
cramml aboon the grees, for there be a mani of 'em; an', miss, I lack 
belly-timb sairli by the clock." 

He hobbl away, and I could see him hurrying, as well as he could, down 
the steps. the step are a great featur on the place. they lead from 
the town up to the church, there are hundr of them--i do not know how 
many--and they wind up in a delic curve; the slope is so gentl that 
a hors could easili walk up and down them. I think they must origin 
have had someth to do with the abbey. I shall go home too. luci went 
out visit with her mother, and as they were onli duti calls, I did 
not go. they will be home by this. 

* * * * * 

_1 august._--i came up here an hour ago with lucy, and we had a most 
interest talk with my old friend and the two other who alway come 
and join him. He is evid the sir oracl of them, and I should think 
must have been in hi time a most dictatori person. He will not admit 
anything, and downfac everybody. If he can't out-argu them he bulli 
them, and then take their silenc for agreement with hi views. luci 
wa look sweetli pretti in her white lawn frock; she ha got a 
beauti colour sinc she ha been here. I notic that the old men did 
not lose ani time in come up and sit near her when we sat down. 
she is so sweet with old people; I think they all fell in love with her 
on the spot. even my old man succumb and did not contradict her, but 
gave me doubl share instead. I got him on the subject of the legends, 
and he went off at onc into a sort of sermon. I must tri to rememb it 
and put it down:-- 

"it be all fool-talk, lock, stock, and barrel; that' what it be, an' 
nowt else. these ban an' waft an' boh-ghost an' barguest an' bogl 
an' all anent them is onli fit to set bairn an' dizzi women 
a-belderin'. they be nowt but air-blebs. they, an' all grim an' sign 
an' warnin's, be all invent by parson an' illsom beuk-bodi an' 
railway touter to skeer an' scunner hafflin's, an' to get folk to do 
somethin' that they don't other inclin to. It make me ire to think 
o' them. why, it' them that, not content with printin' lie on paper 
an' preachin' them out of pulpits, doe want to be cuttin' them on the 
tombstones. look here all around you in what airt ye will; all them 
steans, holdin' up their head as well as they can out of their pride, 
is acant--simpli tumblin' down with the weight o' the lie wrote on 
them, 'here lie the body' or 'sacr to the memory' wrote on all of 
them, an' yet in nigh half of them there bean't no bodi at all; an' 
the memori of them bean't care a pinch of snuff about, much less 
sacred. lie all of them, nothin' but lie of one kind or another! My 
gog, but it'll be a quar scowder at the day of judgment when they 
come tumblin' up in their death-sarks, all joup togeth an' tryin' to 
drag their tombstean with them to prove how good they was; some of them 
trimmlin' and ditherin', with their hand that dozzen an' slippi from 
lyin' in the sea that they can't even keep their grup o' them." 

I could see from the old fellow' self-satisfi air and the way in 
which he look round for the approv of hi croni that he wa 
"show off," so I put in a word to keep him going:-- 

"oh, mr. swales, you can't be serious. sure these tombston are not 
all wrong?" 

"yabblins! there may be a poorish few not wrong, savin' where they make 
out the peopl too good; for there be folk that do think a balm-bowl be 
like the sea, if onli it be their own. the whole thing be onli lies. now 
look you here; you come here a stranger, an' you see thi kirk-garth." I 
nodded, for I thought it better to assent, though I did not quit 
understand hi dialect. I knew it had someth to do with the church. 
He went on: "and you consat that all these stean be aboon folk that be 
hap here, snod an' snog?" I assent again. "then that be just where 
the lie come in. why, there be score of these lay-b that be toom as 
old dun' 'bacca-box on friday night." He nudg one of hi companions, 
and they all laughed. "and my gog! how could they be otherwise? look at 
that one, the aftest abaft the bier-bank: read it!" I went over and 
read:-- 

"edward spencelagh, master mariner, murder by pirat off the coast of 
andres, april, 1854, æt. 30." when I came back mr. swale went on:-- 

"who brought him home, I wonder, to hap him here? murder off the coast 
of andres! an' you consat hi bodi lay under! why, I could name ye a 
dozen whose bone lie in the greenland sea above"--h point 
northwards--"or where the current may have drift them. there be the 
stean around ye. Ye can, with your young eyes, read the small-print of 
the lie from here. thi braithwait lowrey--i knew hi father, lost in 
the _lively_ off greenland in '20; or andrew woodhouse, drown in the 
same sea in 1777; or john paxton, drown off cape farewel a year 
later; or old john rawlings, whose grandfath sail with me, drown 
in the gulf of finland in '50. Do ye think that all these men will have 
to make a rush to whitbi when the trumpet sounds? I have me antherum 
aboot it! I tell ye that when they got here they'd be jommlin' an' 
jostlin' one anoth that way that it 'ud be like a fight up on the ice 
in the old days, when we'd be at one anoth from daylight to dark, an' 
tryin' to tie up our cut by the light of the aurora borealis." thi wa 
evid local pleasantry, for the old man cackl over it, and hi 
croni join in with gusto. 

"but," I said, "sure you are not quit correct, for you start on the 
assumpt that all the poor people, or their spirits, will have to 
take their tombston with them on the day of judgment. Do you think 
that will be realli necessary?" 

"well, what els be they tombston for? answer me that, miss!" 

"to pleas their relatives, I suppose." 

"to pleas their relatives, you suppose!" thi he said with intens 
scorn. "how will it pleasur their rel to know that lie is wrote 
over them, and that everybodi in the place know that they be lies?" He 
point to a stone at our feet which had been laid down as a slab, on 
which the seat wa rested, close to the edg of the cliff. "read the 
lie on that thruff-stean," he said. the letter were upsid down to me 
from where I sat, but luci wa more opposit to them, so she leant over 
and read:-- 

"sacr to the memori of georg canon, who died, in the hope of a 
gloriou resurrection, on july, 29, 1873, fall from the rock at 
kettleness. thi tomb wa erect by hi sorrow mother to her dearli 
belov son. 'he wa the onli son of hi mother, and she wa a widow.' 
really, mr. swales, I don't see anyth veri funni in that!" she spoke 
her comment veri grave and somewhat severely. 

"ye don't see aught funny! ha! ha! but that' becaus ye don't gawm the 
sorrowin' mother wa a hell-cat that hate him becaus he wa 
acrewk'd--a regular lamit he was--an' he hate her so that he 
commit suicid in order that she mightn't get an insur she put on 
hi life. He blew nigh the top of hi head off with an old musket that 
they had for scarin' the crow with. 'twarn't for crow then, for it 
brought the cleg and the dowp to him. that' the way he fell off the 
rocks. and, as to hope of a gloriou resurrection, i'v often heard him 
say masel' that he hope he'd go to hell, for hi mother wa so piou 
that she'd be sure to go to heaven, an' he didn't want to addl where 
she was. now isn't that stean at ani rate"--h hammer it with hi 
stick as he spoke--"a pack of lies? and won't it make gabriel keckl 
when geordi come pantin' up the gree with the tombstean balanc on 
hi hump, and ask it to be took as evidence!" 

I did not know what to say, but luci turn the convers as she 
said, rise up:-- 

"oh, whi did you tell us of this? It is my favourit seat, and I cannot 
leav it; and now I find I must go on sit over the grave of a 
suicide." 

"that won't harm ye, my pretty; an' it may make poor geordi gladsom to 
have so trim a lass sittin' on hi lap. that won't hurt ye. why, i'v 
sat here off an' on for nigh twenti year past, an' it hasn't done me 
no harm. don't ye fash about them as lie under ye, or that doesn' lie 
there either! it'll be time for ye to be get scart when ye see the 
tombstean all run away with, and the place as bare as a stubble-field. 
there' the clock, an' I must gang. My servic to ye, ladies!" and off 
he hobbled. 

luci and I sat awhile, and it wa all so beauti befor us that we 
took hand as we sat; and she told me all over again about arthur and 
their come marriage. that made me just a littl heart-sick, for I 
haven't heard from jonathan for a whole month. 

* * * * * 

_the same day._ I came up here alone, for I am veri sad. there wa no 
letter for me. I hope there cannot be anyth the matter with jonathan. 
the clock ha just struck nine. I see the light scatter all over the 
town, sometim in row where the street are, and sometim singly; 
they run right up the esk and die away in the curv of the valley. To my 
left the view is cut off by a black line of roof of the old hous next 
the abbey. the sheep and lamb are bleat in the field away behind 
me, and there is a clatter of a donkey' hoof up the pave road below. 
the band on the pier is play a harsh waltz in good time, and further 
along the quay there is a salvat armi meet in a back street. 
neither of the band hear the other, but up here I hear and see them 
both. I wonder where jonathan is and if he is think of me! I wish he 
were here. 


_dr. seward' diary._ 

_5 june._--th case of renfield grow more interest the more I get to 
understand the man. He ha certain qualiti veri larg developed; 
selfishness, secrecy, and purpose. I wish I could get at what is the 
object of the latter. He seem to have some settl scheme of hi own, 
but what it is I do not yet know. hi redeem qualiti is a love of 
animals, though, indeed, he ha such curiou turn in it that I 
sometim imagin he is onli abnorm cruel. hi pet are of odd 
sorts. just now hi hobbi is catch flies. He ha at present such a 
quantiti that I have had myself to expostulate. To my astonishment, he 
did not break out into a fury, as I expected, but took the matter in 
simpl seriousness. He thought for a moment, and then said: "may I have 
three days? I shall clear them away." Of course, I said that would do. I 
must watch him. 

* * * * * 

_18 june._--h ha turn hi mind now to spiders, and ha got sever 
veri big fellow in a box. He keep feed them with hi flies, and 
the number of the latter is becom sensibl diminished, although he 
ha use half hi food in attract more fli from outsid to hi 
room. 

* * * * * 

_1 july._--hi spider are now becom as great a nuisanc as hi 
flies, and to-day I told him that he must get rid of them. He look 
veri sad at this, so I said that he must clear out some of them, at all 
events. He cheer acquiesc in this, and I gave him the same time 
as befor for reduction. He disgust me much while with him, for when a 
horrid blow-fly, bloat with some carrion food, buzz into the room, 
he caught it, held it exultantli for a few moment between hi finger 
and thumb, and, befor I knew what he wa go to do, put it in hi 
mouth and ate it. I scold him for it, but he argu quietli that it 
wa veri good and veri wholesome; that it wa life, strong life, and 
gave life to him. thi gave me an idea, or the rudiment of one. I must 
watch how he get rid of hi spiders. He ha evid some deep problem 
in hi mind, for he keep a littl note-book in which he is alway 
jot down something. whole page of it are fill with mass of 
figures, gener singl number ad up in batches, and then the 
total ad in batch again, as though he were "focussing" some 
account, as the auditor put it. 

* * * * * 

_8 july._--ther is a method in hi madness, and the rudimentari idea in 
my mind is growing. It will be a whole idea soon, and then, oh, 
unconsci cerebration! you will have to give the wall to your 
consciou brother. I kept away from my friend for a few days, so that I 
might notic if there were ani change. thing remain as they were except 
that he ha part with some of hi pet and got a new one. He ha 
manag to get a sparrow, and ha alreadi partial tame it. hi mean 
of tame is simple, for alreadi the spider have diminished. those that 
do remain, however, are well fed, for he still bring in the fli by 
tempt them with hi food. 

* * * * * 

_19 july._--w are progressing. My friend ha now a whole coloni of 
sparrows, and hi fli and spider are almost obliterated. when I came 
in he ran to me and said he want to ask me a great favour--a very, 
veri great favour; and as he spoke he fawn on me like a dog. I ask 
him what it was, and he said, with a sort of raptur in hi voic and 
bearing:-- 

"A kitten, a nice little, sleek play kitten, that I can play with, 
and teach, and feed--and feed--and feed!" I wa not unprepar for thi 
request, for I had notic how hi pet went on increas in size and 
vivacity, but I did not care that hi pretti famili of tame sparrow 
should be wipe out in the same manner as the fli and the spiders; so 
I said I would see about it, and ask him if he would not rather have a 
cat than a kitten. hi eager betray him as he answered:-- 

"oh, yes, I would like a cat! I onli ask for a kitten lest you should 
refus me a cat. No one would refus me a kitten, would they?" I shook 
my head, and said that at present I fear it would not be possible, but 
that I would see about it. hi face fell, and I could see a warn of 
danger in it, for there wa a sudden fierce, sidelong look which meant 
killing. the man is an undevelop homicid maniac. I shall test him 
with hi present crave and see how it will work out; then I shall know 
more. 

* * * * * 

_10 p. m._--i have visit him again and found him sit in a corner 
brooding. when I came in he threw himself on hi knee befor me and 
implor me to let him have a cat; that hi salvat depend upon it. 
I wa firm, however, and told him that he could not have it, whereupon 
he went without a word, and sat down, gnaw hi fingers, in the corner 
where I had found him. I shall see him in the morn early. 

* * * * * 

_20 july._--visit renfield veri early, befor the attend went hi 
rounds. found him up and hum a tune. He wa spread out hi sugar, 
which he had saved, in the window, and wa manifestli begin hi 
fly-catch again; and begin it cheer and with a good grace. I 
look around for hi birds, and not see them, ask him where they 
were. He replied, without turn round, that they had all flown away. 
there were a few feather about the room and on hi pillow a drop of 
blood. I said nothing, but went and told the keeper to report to me if 
there were anyth odd about him dure the day. 

* * * * * 

_11 a. m._--the attend ha just been to me to say that renfield ha 
been veri sick and ha disgorg a whole lot of feathers. "mi belief is, 
doctor," he said, "that he ha eaten hi birds, and that he just took 
and ate them raw!" 

* * * * * 

_11 p. m._--i gave renfield a strong opiat to-night, enough to make 
even him sleep, and took away hi pocket-book to look at it. the thought 
that ha been buzz about my brain late is complete, and the theori 
proved. My homicid maniac is of a peculiar kind. I shall have to 
invent a new classif for him, and call him a zoöphag 
(life-eating) maniac; what he desir is to absorb as mani live as he 
can, and he ha laid himself out to achiev it in a cumul way. He 
gave mani fli to one spider and mani spider to one bird, and then 
want a cat to eat the mani birds. what would have been hi later 
steps? It would almost be worth while to complet the experiment. It 
might be done if there were onli a suffici cause. men sneer at 
vivisection, and yet look at it result to-day! whi not advanc scienc 
in it most difficult and vital aspect--th knowledg of the brain? had 
I even the secret of one such mind--did I hold the key to the fanci of 
even one lunatic--i might advanc my own branch of scienc to a pitch 
compar with which burdon-sanderson' physiolog or ferrier' 
brain-knowledg would be as nothing. If onli there were a suffici 
cause! I must not think too much of this, or I may be tempted; a good 
caus might turn the scale with me, for may not I too be of an 
except brain, congenitally? 

how well the man reasoned; lunat alway do within their own scope. I 
wonder at how mani live he valu a man, or if at onli one. He ha 
close the account most accurately, and to-day begun a new record. how 
mani of us begin a new record with each day of our lives? 

To me it seem onli yesterday that my whole life end with my new hope, 
and that truli I began a new record. So it will be until the great 
record sum me up and close my ledger account with a balanc to 
profit or loss. oh, lucy, lucy, I cannot be angri with you, nor can I be 
angri with my friend whose happi is yours; but I must onli wait on 
hopeless and work. work! work! 

If I onli could have as strong a caus as my poor mad friend there--a 
good, unselfish caus to make me work--that would be inde happiness. 


_mina murray' journal._ 

_26 july._--i am anxious, and it sooth me to express myself here; it 
is like whisper to one' self and listen at the same time. and 
there is also someth about the shorthand symbol that make it 
differ from writing. I am unhappi about luci and about jonathan. I 
had not heard from jonathan for some time, and wa veri concerned; but 
yesterday dear mr. hawkins, who is alway so kind, sent me a letter from 
him. I had written ask him if he had heard, and he said the enclos 
had just been received. It is onli a line date from castl dracula, 
and say that he is just start for home. that is not like jonathan; 
I do not understand it, and it make me uneasy. then, too, lucy, 
although she is so well, ha late taken to her old habit of walk in 
her sleep. her mother ha spoken to me about it, and we have decid 
that I am to lock the door of our room everi night. mrs. westenra ha 
got an idea that sleep-walk alway go out on roof of hous and 
along the edg of cliff and then get suddenli waken and fall over 
with a despair cri that echo all over the place. poor dear, she is 
natur anxiou about lucy, and she tell me that her husband, lucy' 
father, had the same habit; that he would get up in the night and dress 
himself and go out, if he were not stopped. luci is to be marri in the 
autumn, and she is alreadi plan out her dress and how her hous is 
to be arranged. I sympathis with her, for I do the same, onli jonathan 
and I will start in life in a veri simpl way, and shall have to tri to 
make both end meet. mr. holmwood--h is the hon. arthur holmwood, onli 
son of lord godalming--i come up here veri shortly--a soon as he can 
leav town, for hi father is not veri well, and I think dear luci is 
count the moment till he comes. she want to take him up to the seat 
on the churchyard cliff and show him the beauti of whitby. I daresay it 
is the wait which disturb her; she will be all right when he 
arrives. 

* * * * * 

_27 july._--no news from jonathan. I am get quit uneasi about him, 
though whi I should I do not know; but I do wish that he would write, if 
it were onli a singl line. luci walk more than ever, and each night I 
am awaken by her move about the room. fortunately, the weather is so 
hot that she cannot get cold; but still the anxieti and the perpetu 
be waken is begin to tell on me, and I am get nervou and 
wake myself. thank god, lucy' health keep up. mr. holmwood ha been 
suddenli call to ring to see hi father, who ha been taken serious 
ill. luci fret at the postpon of see him, but it doe not touch 
her looks; she is a trifl stouter, and her cheek are a love 
rose-pink. she ha lost that anæmic look which she had. I pray it will 
all last. 

* * * * * 

_3 august._--anoth week gone, and no news from jonathan, not even to 
mr. hawkins, from whom I have heard. oh, I do hope he is not ill. He 
sure would have written. I look at that last letter of his, but 
somehow it doe not satisfi me. It doe not read like him, and yet it is 
hi writing. there is no mistak of that. luci ha not walk much in 
her sleep the last week, but there is an odd concentr about her 
which I do not understand; even in her sleep she seem to be watch 
me. she tri the door, and find it locked, goe about the room 
search for the key. 

_6 august._--anoth three days, and no news. thi suspens is get 
dreadful. If I onli knew where to write to or where to go to, I should 
feel easier; but no one ha heard a word of jonathan sinc that last 
letter. I must onli pray to god for patience. luci is more excit 
than ever, but is otherwis well. last night wa veri threatening, and 
the fishermen say that we are in for a storm. I must tri to watch it and 
learn the weather signs. to-day is a grey day, and the sun as I write is 
hidden in thick clouds, high over kettleness. everyth is grey--except 
the green grass, which seem like emerald amongst it; grey earthi rock; 
grey clouds, ting with the sunburst at the far edge, hang over the 
grey sea, into which the sand-point stretch like grey fingers. the sea 
is tumbl in over the shallow and the sandi flat with a roar, 
muffl in the sea-mist drift inland. the horizon is lost in a grey 
mist. all is vastness; the cloud are pile up like giant rocks, and 
there is a "brool" over the sea that sound like some presag of doom. 
dark figur are on the beach here and there, sometim half shroud in 
the mist, and seem "men like tree walking." the fishing-boat are 
race for home, and rise and dip in the ground swell as they sweep into 
the harbour, bend to the scuppers. here come old mr. swales. He is 
make straight for me, and I can see, by the way he lift hi hat, that 
he want to talk.... 

I have been quit touch by the chang in the poor old man. when he sat 
down besid me, he said in a veri gentl way:-- 

"I want to say someth to you, miss." I could see he wa not at ease, 
so I took hi poor old wrinkl hand in mine and ask him to speak 
fully; so he said, leav hi hand in mine:-- 

"i'm afraid, my deary, that I must have shock you by all the wick 
thing i'v been sayin' about the dead, and such like, for week past; 
but I didn't mean them, and I want ye to rememb that when i'm gone. We 
aud folk that be daffled, and with one foot abaft the krok-hooal, don't 
altogeth like to think of it, and we don't want to feel scart of it; 
an' that' whi i'v took to makin' light of it, so that i'd cheer up my 
own heart a bit. but, lord love ye, miss, I ain't afraid of dyin', not a 
bit; onli I don't want to die if I can help it. My time must be nigh at 
hand now, for I be aud, and a hundr year is too much for ani man to 
expect; and i'm so nigh it that the aud man is alreadi whettin' hi 
scythe. Ye see, I can't get out o' the habit of caffin' about it all at 
once; the chaft will wag as they be use to. some day soon the angel of 
death will sound hi trumpet for me. but don't ye dooal an' greet, my 
deary!"--for he saw that I wa crying--"if he should come thi veri 
night i'd not refus to answer hi call. for life be, after all, onli a 
waitin' for somethin' els than what we'r doin'; and death be all that 
we can rightli depend on. but i'm content, for it' comin' to me, my 
deary, and comin' quick. It may be comin' while we be lookin' and 
wonderin'. mayb it' in that wind out over the sea that' bringin' with 
it loss and wreck, and sore distress, and sad hearts. look! look!" he 
cri suddenly. "there' someth in that wind and in the hoast beyont 
that sounds, and looks, and tastes, and smell like death. it' in the 
air; I feel it comin'. lord, make me answer cheer when my call 
comes!" He held up hi arm devoutly, and rais hi hat. hi mouth 
move as though he were praying. after a few minutes' silence, he got 
up, shook hand with me, and bless me, and said good-bye, and hobbl 
off. It all touch me, and upset me veri much. 

I wa glad when the coastguard came along, with hi spy-glass under hi 
arm. He stop to talk with me, as he alway does, but all the time 
kept look at a strang ship. 

"I can't make her out," he said; "she' a russian, by the look of her; 
but she' knock about in the queerest way. she doesn't know her mind 
a bit; she seem to see the storm coming, but can't decid whether to 
run up north in the open, or to put in here. look there again! she is 
steer mighti strangely, for she doesn't mind the hand on the wheel; 
chang about with everi puff of wind. we'll hear more of her befor 
thi time to-morrow." 




chapter vii 

cut from "the dailygraph," 8 august 


(_past in mina murray' journal._) 

from a correspondent. 

_whitby_. 

one of the greatest and suddenest storm on record ha just been 
experienc here, with result both strang and unique. the weather had 
been somewhat sultry, but not to ani degre uncommon in the month of 
august. saturday even wa as fine as wa ever known, and the great 
bodi of holiday-mak laid out yesterday for visit to mulgrav woods, 
robin hood' bay, rig mill, runswick, staithes, and the variou trip in 
the neighbourhood of whitby. the steamer _emma_ and _scarborough_ made 
trip up and down the coast, and there wa an unusu amount of 
"tripping" both to and from whitby. the day wa unusu fine till the 
afternoon, when some of the gossip who frequent the east cliff 
churchyard, and from that command emin watch the wide sweep of 
sea visibl to the north and east, call attent to a sudden show of 
"mares'-tails" high in the sky to the north-west. the wind wa then 
blow from the south-west in the mild degre which in barometr 
languag is rank "no. 2: light breeze." the coastguard on duti at onc 
made report, and one old fisherman, who for more than half a centuri ha 
kept watch on weather sign from the east cliff, foretold in an emphat 
manner the come of a sudden storm. the approach of sunset wa so veri 
beautiful, so grand in it mass of splendidly-colour clouds, that 
there wa quit an assemblag on the walk along the cliff in the old 
churchyard to enjoy the beauty. befor the sun dip below the black 
mass of kettleness, stand boldli athwart the western sky, it 
downward way wa mark by myriad cloud of everi sunset-colour--flame, 
purple, pink, green, violet, and all the tint of gold; with here and 
there mass not large, but of seemingli absolut blackness, in all 
sort of shapes, as well outlin as coloss silhouettes. the 
experi wa not lost on the painters, and doubtless some of the 
sketch of the "prelud to the great storm" will grace the R. A. and R. 
I. wall in may next. more than one captain made up hi mind then and 
there that hi "cobble" or hi "mule," as they term the differ 
class of boats, would remain in the harbour till the storm had passed. 
the wind fell away entir dure the evening, and at midnight there 
wa a dead calm, a sultri heat, and that prevail intens which, on 
the approach of thunder, affect person of a sensit nature. there 
were but few light in sight at sea, for even the coast steamers, 
which usual "hug" the shore so closely, kept well to seaward, and but 
few fishing-boat were in sight. the onli sail notic wa a foreign 
schooner with all sail set, which wa seemingli go westwards. the 
foolhardi or ignor of her offic wa a prolif theme for 
comment whilst she remain in sight, and effort were made to signal 
her to reduc sail in face of her danger. befor the night shut down she 
wa seen with sail idli flap as she gentli roll on the undul 
swell of the sea, 

"a idl as a paint ship upon a paint ocean." 

shortli befor ten o'clock the still of the air grew quit 
oppressive, and the silenc wa so mark that the bleat of a sheep 
inland or the bark of a dog in the town wa distinctli heard, and the 
band on the pier, with it live french air, wa like a discord in the 
great harmoni of nature' silence. A littl after midnight came a 
strang sound from over the sea, and high overhead the air began to 
carri a strange, faint, hollow booming. 

then without warn the tempest broke. with a rapid which, at the 
time, seem incredible, and even afterward is imposs to realize, 
the whole aspect of natur at onc becam convulsed. the wave rose in 
grow fury, each overtop it fellow, till in a veri few minut 
the late glassi sea wa like a roar and devour monster. 
white-crest wave beat madli on the level sand and rush up the 
shelv cliffs; other broke over the piers, and with their spume swept 
the lanthorn of the lighthous which rise from the end of either pier 
of whitbi harbour. the wind roar like thunder, and blew with such 
forc that it wa with difficulti that even strong men kept their feet, 
or clung with grim clasp to the iron stanchions. It wa found necessari 
to clear the entir pier from the mass of onlookers, or els the 
fatal of the night would have been increas manifold. To add to 
the difficulti and danger of the time, mass of sea-fog came 
drift inland--white, wet clouds, which swept by in ghostli fashion, 
so dank and damp and cold that it need but littl effort of 
imagin to think that the spirit of those lost at sea were 
touch their live brethren with the clammi hand of death, and mani 
a one shudder as the wreath of sea-mist swept by. At time the mist 
cleared, and the sea for some distanc could be seen in the glare of the 
lightning, which now came thick and fast, follow by such sudden peal 
of thunder that the whole sky overhead seem trembl under the shock 
of the footstep of the storm. 

some of the scene thu reveal were of immeasur grandeur and of 
absorb interest--th sea, run mountain high, threw skyward with 
each wave mighti mass of white foam, which the tempest seem to 
snatch at and whirl away into space; here and there a fishing-boat, with 
a rag of sail, run madli for shelter befor the blast; now and again 
the white wing of a storm-toss sea-bird. On the summit of the east 
cliff the new searchlight wa readi for experiment, but had not yet been 
tried. the offic in charg of it got it into work order, and in 
the paus of the inrush mist swept with it the surfac of the sea. 
onc or twice it servic wa most effective, as when a fishing-boat, 
with gunwal under water, rush into the harbour, able, by the guidanc 
of the shelter light, to avoid the danger of dash against the 
piers. As each boat achiev the safeti of the port there wa a shout of 
joy from the mass of peopl on shore, a shout which for a moment seem 
to cleav the gale and wa then swept away in it rush. 

befor long the searchlight discov some distanc away a schooner 
with all sail set, appar the same vessel which had been notic 
earlier in the evening. the wind had by thi time back to the east, 
and there wa a shudder amongst the watcher on the cliff as they 
realiz the terribl danger in which she now was. between her and the 
port lay the great flat reef on which so mani good ship have from time 
to time suffered, and, with the wind blow from it present quarter, 
it would be quit imposs that she should fetch the entranc of the 
harbour. It wa now nearli the hour of high tide, but the wave were so 
great that in their trough the shallow of the shore were almost 
visible, and the schooner, with all sail set, wa rush with such 
speed that, in the word of one old salt, "she must fetch up somewhere, 
if it wa onli in hell." then came anoth rush of sea-fog, greater than 
ani hitherto--a mass of dank mist, which seem to close on all thing 
like a grey pall, and left avail to men onli the organ of hearing, 
for the roar of the tempest, and the crash of the thunder, and the 
boom of the mighti billow came through the damp oblivion even louder 
than before. the ray of the searchlight were kept fix on the harbour 
mouth across the east pier, where the shock wa expected, and men wait 
breathless. the wind suddenli shift to the north-east, and the remnant 
of the sea-fog melt in the blast; and then, _mirabil dictu_, between 
the piers, leap from wave to wave as it rush at headlong speed, 
swept the strang schooner befor the blast, with all sail set, and 
gain the safeti of the harbour. the searchlight follow her, and a 
shudder ran through all who saw her, for lash to the helm wa a 
corpse, with droop head, which swung horribl to and fro at each 
motion of the ship. No other form could be seen on deck at all. A great 
awe came on all as they realis that the ship, as if by a miracle, had 
found the harbour, unsteer save by the hand of a dead man! however, 
all took place more quickli than it take to write these words. the 
schooner paus not, but rush across the harbour, pitch herself on 
that accumul of sand and gravel wash by mani tide and mani 
storm into the south-east corner of the pier jut under the east 
cliff, known local as tate hill pier. 

there wa of cours a consider concuss as the vessel drove up on 
the sand heap. everi spar, rope, and stay wa strained, and some of the 
"top-hammer" came crash down. but, strangest of all, the veri instant 
the shore wa touched, an immens dog sprang up on deck from below, as 
if shot up by the concussion, and run forward, jump from the bow 
on the sand. make straight for the steep cliff, where the churchyard 
hang over the laneway to the east pier so steepli that some of the flat 
tombstones--"thruff-steans" or "through-stones," as they call them in 
the whitbi vernacular--actu project over where the sustain cliff 
ha fallen away, it disappear in the darkness, which seem 
intensifi just beyond the focu of the searchlight. 

It so happen that there wa no one at the moment on tate hill pier, as 
all those whose hous are in close proxim were either in bed or were 
out on the height above. thu the coastguard on duti on the eastern 
side of the harbour, who at onc ran down to the littl pier, wa the 
first to climb on board. the men work the searchlight, after scour 
the entranc of the harbour without see anything, then turn the 
light on the derelict and kept it there. the coastguard ran aft, and 
when he came besid the wheel, bent over to examin it, and recoil at 
onc as though under some sudden emotion. thi seem to piqu gener 
curiosity, and quit a number of peopl began to run. It is a good way 
round from the west cliff by the drawbridg to tate hill pier, but your 
correspond is a fairli good runner, and came well ahead of the crowd. 
when I arrived, however, I found alreadi assembl on the pier a crowd, 
whom the coastguard and polic refus to allow to come on board. By the 
courtesi of the chief boatman, I was, as your correspondent, permit 
to climb on deck, and wa one of a small group who saw the dead seaman 
whilst actual lash to the wheel. 

It wa no wonder that the coastguard wa surprised, or even awed, for 
not often can such a sight have been seen. the man wa simpli fasten 
by hi hands, tie one over the other, to a spoke of the wheel. between 
the inner hand and the wood wa a crucifix, the set of bead on which it 
wa fasten be around both wrist and wheel, and all kept fast by 
the bind cords. the poor fellow may have been seat at one time, but 
the flap and buffet of the sail had work through the rudder of 
the wheel and drag him to and fro, so that the cord with which he 
wa tie had cut the flesh to the bone. accur note wa made of the 
state of things, and a doctor--surgeon J. M. caffyn, of 33, east elliot 
place--who came immedi after me, declared, after make 
examination, that the man must have been dead for quit two days. In hi 
pocket wa a bottle, care corked, empti save for a littl roll of 
paper, which prove to be the addendum to the log. the coastguard said 
the man must have tie up hi own hands, fasten the knot with hi 
teeth. the fact that a coastguard wa the first on board may save some 
complications, later on, in the admiralti court; for coastguard cannot 
claim the salvag which is the right of the first civilian enter on a 
derelict. already, however, the legal tongu are wagging, and one young 
law student is loudli assert that the right of the owner are alreadi 
complet sacrificed, hi properti be held in contravent of the 
statut of mortmain, sinc the tiller, as emblemship, if not proof, of 
deleg possession, is held in a _dead hand_. It is needless to say 
that the dead steersman ha been rever remov from the place where 
he held hi honour watch and ward till death--a steadfast as 
nobl as that of the young casabianca--and place in the mortuari to 
await inquest. 

alreadi the sudden storm is passing, and it fierc is abating; 
crowd are scatter homeward, and the sky is begin to redden over 
the yorkshir wolds. I shall send, in time for your next issue, further 
detail of the derelict ship which found her way so miracul into 
harbour in the storm. 

_whitby_ 

_9 august._--th sequel to the strang arriv of the derelict in the 
storm last night is almost more startl than the thing itself. It 
turn out that the schooner is a russian from varna, and is call the 
_demeter_. she is almost entir in ballast of silver sand, with onli a 
small amount of cargo--a number of great wooden box fill with mould. 
thi cargo wa consign to a whitbi solicitor, mr. S. F. billington, of 
7, the crescent, who thi morn went aboard and formal took 
possess of the good consign to him. the russian consul, too, 
act for the charter-party, took formal possess of the ship, and 
paid all harbour dues, etc. noth is talk about here to-day except 
the strang coincidence; the offici of the board of trade have been 
most exact in see that everi complianc ha been made with 
exist regulations. As the matter is to be a "nine days' wonder," they 
are evid determin that there shall be no caus of after 
complaint. A good deal of interest wa abroad concern the dog which 
land when the ship struck, and more than a few of the member of the 
S. P. C. a., which is veri strong in whitby, have tri to befriend the 
animal. To the gener disappointment, however, it wa not to be found; 
it seem to have disappear entir from the town. It may be that it 
wa frighten and made it way on to the moors, where it is still 
hide in terror. there are some who look with dread on such a 
possibility, lest later on it should in itself becom a danger, for it 
is evid a fierc brute. earli thi morn a larg dog, a half-br 
mastiff belong to a coal merchant close to tate hill pier, wa found 
dead in the roadway opposit to it master' yard. It had been fighting, 
and manifestli had had a savag opponent, for it throat wa torn away, 
and it belli wa slit open as if with a savag claw. 

* * * * * 

_later._--bi the kind of the board of trade inspector, I have been 
permit to look over the log-book of the _demeter_, which wa in order 
up to within three days, but contain noth of special interest 
except as to fact of miss men. the greatest interest, however, is 
with regard to the paper found in the bottle, which wa to-day produc 
at the inquest; and a more strang narr than the two between them 
unfold it ha not been my lot to come across. As there is no motiv for 
concealment, I am permit to use them, and accordingli send you a 
rescript, simpli omit technic detail of seamanship and 
supercargo. It almost seem as though the captain had been seiz with 
some kind of mania befor he had got well into blue water, and that 
thi had develop persist throughout the voyage. Of cours my 
statement must be taken _cum grano_, sinc I am write from the 
dictat of a clerk of the russian consul, who kindli translat for 
me, time be short. 

log OF the "demeter." 


_varna to whitby._ 

_written 18 july, thing so strang happening, that I shall keep 
accur note henceforth till we land._ 

* * * * * 

On 6 juli we finish take in cargo, silver sand and box of earth. 
At noon set sail. east wind, fresh. crew, five hand ... two mates, 
cook, and myself (captain). 

* * * * * 

On 11 juli at dawn enter bosphorus. board by turkish custom 
officers. backsheesh. all correct. under way at 4 p. m. 

* * * * * 

On 12 juli through dardanelles. more custom offic and flagboat of 
guard squadron. backsheesh again. work of offic thorough, but 
quick. want us off soon. At dark pass into archipelago. 

* * * * * 

On 13 juli pass cape matapan. crew dissatisfi about something. 
seem scared, but would not speak out. 

* * * * * 

On 14 juli wa somewhat anxiou about crew. men all steadi fellows, who 
sail with me before. mate could not make out what wa wrong; they onli 
told him there wa _something_, and cross themselves. mate lost temper 
with one of them that day and struck him. expect fierc quarrel, but 
all wa quiet. 

* * * * * 

On 16 juli mate report in the morn that one of crew, petrofsky, wa 
missing. could not account for it. took larboard watch eight bell last 
night; wa reliev by abramoff, but did not go to bunk. men more 
downcast than ever. all said they expect someth of the kind, but 
would not say more than there wa _something_ aboard. mate get veri 
impati with them; fear some troubl ahead. 

* * * * * 

On 17 july, yesterday, one of the men, olgaren, came to my cabin, and in 
an awestruck way confid to me that he thought there wa a strang man 
aboard the ship. He said that in hi watch he had been shelter 
behind the deck-house, as there wa a rain-storm, when he saw a tall, 
thin man, who wa not like ani of the crew, come up the companion-way, 
and go along the deck forward, and disappear. He follow cautiously, 
but when he got to bow found no one, and the hatchway were all closed. 
He wa in a panic of superstiti fear, and I am afraid the panic may 
spread. To allay it, I shall to-day search entir ship care from 
stem to stern. 

* * * * * 

later in the day I got togeth the whole crew, and told them, as they 
evid thought there wa some one in the ship, we would search from 
stem to stern. first mate angry; said it wa folly, and to yield to such 
foolish idea would demoralis the men; said he would engag to keep 
them out of troubl with a handspike. I let him take the helm, while the 
rest began thorough search, all keep abreast, with lanterns: we left 
no corner unsearched. As there were onli the big wooden boxes, there 
were no odd corner where a man could hide. men much reliev when 
search over, and went back to work cheerfully. first mate scowled, but 
said nothing. 

* * * * * 

_22 july_.--rough weather last three days, and all hand busi with 
sails--no time to be frightened. men seem to have forgotten their dread. 
mate cheer again, and all on good terms. prais men for work in bad 
weather. pass gibralt and out through straits. all well. 

* * * * * 

_24 july_.--ther seem some doom over thi ship. alreadi a hand short, 
and enter on the bay of biscay with wild weather ahead, and yet last 
night anoth man lost--disappeared. like the first, he came off hi 
watch and wa not seen again. men all in a panic of fear; sent a round 
robin, ask to have doubl watch, as they fear to be alone. mate 
angry. fear there will be some trouble, as either he or the men will do 
some violence. 

* * * * * 

_28 july_.--four day in hell, knock about in a sort of maelstrom, 
and the wind a tempest. No sleep for ani one. men all worn out. hardli 
know how to set a watch, sinc no one fit to go on. second mate 
volunt to steer and watch, and let men snatch a few hours' sleep. 
wind abating; sea still terrific, but feel them less, as ship is 
steadier. 

* * * * * 

_29 july_.--anoth tragedy. had singl watch to-night, as crew too 
tire to double. when morn watch came on deck could find no one 
except steersman. rais outcry, and all came on deck. thorough search, 
but no one found. are now without second mate, and crew in a panic. mate 
and I agre to go arm henceforth and wait for ani sign of cause. 

* * * * * 

_30 july_.--last night. rejoic we are near england. weather fine, 
all sail set. retir worn out; slept soundly; awak by mate tell 
me that both man of watch and steersman missing. onli self and mate and 
two hand left to work ship. 

* * * * * 

_1 august_.--two day of fog, and not a sail sighted. had hope when in 
the english channel to be abl to signal for help or get in somewhere. 
not have power to work sails, have to run befor wind. dare not lower, 
as could not rais them again. We seem to be drift to some terribl 
doom. mate now more demoralis than either of men. hi stronger natur 
seem to have work inwardli against himself. men are beyond fear, 
work stolidli and patiently, with mind made up to worst. they are 
russian, he roumanian. 

* * * * * 

_2 august, midnight_.--wok up from few minutes' sleep by hear a cry, 
seemingli outsid my port. could see noth in fog. rush on deck, and 
ran against mate. tell me heard cri and ran, but no sign of man on 
watch. one more gone. lord, help us! mate say we must be past strait 
of dover, as in a moment of fog lift he saw north foreland, just as 
he heard the man cri out. If so we are now off in the north sea, and 
onli god can guid us in the fog, which seem to move with us; and god 
seem to have desert us. 

* * * * * 

_3 august_.--at midnight I went to reliev the man at the wheel, and 
when I got to it found no one there. the wind wa steady, and as we ran 
befor it there wa no yawing. I dare not leav it, so shout for the 
mate. after a few second he rush up on deck in hi flannels. He 
look wild-ey and haggard, and I greatli fear hi reason ha given 
way. He came close to me and whisper hoarsely, with hi mouth to my 
ear, as though fear the veri air might hear: "_it_ is here; I know 
it, now. On the watch last night I saw it, like a man, tall and thin, 
and ghastli pale. It wa in the bows, and look out. I crept behind 
it, and gave It my knife; but the knife went through it, empti as the 
air." and as he spoke he took hi knife and drove it savag into 
space. then he went on: "but It is here, and i'll find it. It is in the 
hold, perhap in one of those boxes. i'll unscrew them one by one and 
see. you work the helm." and, with a warn look and hi finger on hi 
lip, he went below. there wa spring up a choppi wind, and I could 
not leav the helm. I saw him come out on deck again with a tool-chest 
and a lantern, and go down the forward hatchway. He is mad, stark, 
rave mad, and it' no use my tri to stop him. He can't hurt those 
big boxes: they are invoic as "clay," and to pull them about is as 
harmless a thing as he can do. So here I stay, and mind the helm, and 
write these notes. I can onli trust in god and wait till the fog clears. 
then, if I can't steer to ani harbour with the wind that is, I shall cut 
down sail and lie by, and signal for help.... 

* * * * * 

It is nearli all over now. just as I wa begin to hope that the mate 
would come out calmer--for I heard him knock away at someth in the 
hold, and work is good for him--ther came up the hatchway a sudden, 
startl scream, which made my blood run cold, and up on the deck he 
came as if shot from a gun--a rage madman, with hi eye roll and 
hi face convuls with fear. "save me! save me!" he cried, and then 
look round on the blanket of fog. hi horror turn to despair, and in 
a steadi voic he said: "you had better come too, captain, befor it is 
too late. _he_ is there. I know the secret now. the sea will save me 
from him, and it is all that is left!" befor I could say a word, or 
move forward to seiz him, he sprang on the bulwark and deliber 
threw himself into the sea. I suppos I know the secret too, now. It wa 
thi madman who had got rid of the men one by one, and now he ha 
follow them himself. god help me! how am I to account for all these 
horror when I get to port? _when_ I get to port! will that ever be? 

* * * * * 

_4 august._--stil fog, which the sunris cannot pierce. I know there is 
sunris becaus I am a sailor, whi els I know not. I dare not go 
below, I dare not leav the helm; so here all night I stayed, and in 
the dim of the night I saw it--him! god forgiv me, but the mate wa 
right to jump overboard. It wa better to die like a man; to die like a 
sailor in blue water no man can object. but I am captain, and I must not 
leav my ship. but I shall baffl thi fiend or monster, for I shall tie 
my hand to the wheel when my strength begin to fail, and along with 
them I shall tie that which he--it!--dar not touch; and then, come good 
wind or foul, I shall save my soul, and my honour as a captain. I am 
grow weaker, and the night is come on. If He can look me in the 
face again, I may not have time to act.... If we are wrecked, mayhap 
thi bottl may be found, and those who find it may understand; if not, 
... well, then all men shall know that I have been true to my trust. god 
and the bless virgin and the saint help a poor ignor soul tri 
to do hi duty.... 

* * * * * 

Of cours the verdict wa an open one. there is no evid to adduce; 
and whether or not the man himself commit the murder there is now 
none to say. the folk here hold almost univers that the captain is 
simpli a hero, and he is to be given a public funeral. alreadi it is 
arrang that hi bodi is to be taken with a train of boat up the esk 
for a piec and then brought back to tate hill pier and up the abbey 
steps; for he is to be buri in the churchyard on the cliff. the owner 
of more than a hundr boat have alreadi given in their name as 
wish to follow him to the grave. 

No trace ha ever been found of the great dog; at which there is much 
mourning, for, with public opinion in it present state, he would, I 
believe, be adopt by the town. to-morrow will see the funeral; and so 
will end thi one more "mysteri of the sea." 


_mina murray' journal._ 

_8 august._--luci wa veri restless all night, and I, too, could not 
sleep. the storm wa fearful, and as it boom loudli among the 
chimney-pots, it made me shudder. when a sharp puff came it seem to be 
like a distant gun. strang enough, luci did not wake; but she got up 
twice and dress herself. fortunately, each time I awok in time and 
manag to undress her without wake her, and got her back to bed. It 
is a veri strang thing, thi sleep-walking, for as soon as her will is 
thwart in ani physic way, her intention, if there be any, 
disappears, and she yield herself almost exactli to the routin of her 
life. 

earli in the morn we both got up and went down to the harbour to see 
if anyth had happen in the night. there were veri few peopl about, 
and though the sun wa bright, and the air clear and fresh, the big, 
grim-look waves, that seem dark themselv becaus the foam that 
top them wa like snow, forc themselv in through the narrow mouth 
of the harbour--lik a bulli man go through a crowd. somehow I 
felt glad that jonathan wa not on the sea last night, but on land. but, 
oh, is he on land or sea? where is he, and how? I am get fear 
anxiou about him. If I onli knew what to do, and could do anything! 

* * * * * 

_10 august._--th funer of the poor sea-captain to-day wa most 
touching. everi boat in the harbour seem to be there, and the coffin 
wa carri by captain all the way from tate hill pier up to the 
churchyard. luci came with me, and we went earli to our old seat, whilst 
the cortèg of boat went up the river to the viaduct and came down 
again. We had a love view, and saw the process nearli all the way. 
the poor fellow wa laid to rest quit near our seat so that we stood on 
it when the time came and saw everything. poor luci seem much upset. 
she wa restless and uneasi all the time, and I cannot but think that 
her dream at night is tell on her. she is quit odd in one thing: 
she will not admit to me that there is ani caus for restlessness; or if 
there be, she doe not understand it herself. there is an addit 
caus in that poor old mr. swale wa found dead thi morn on our 
seat, hi neck be broken. He had evidently, as the doctor said, 
fallen back in the seat in some sort of fright, for there wa a look of 
fear and horror on hi face that the men said made them shudder. poor 
dear old man! perhap he had seen death with hi die eyes! luci is so 
sweet and sensit that she feel influenc more acut than other 
peopl do. just now she wa quit upset by a littl thing which I did 
not much heed, though I am myself veri fond of animals. one of the men 
who came up here often to look for the boat wa follow by hi dog. 
the dog is alway with him. they are both quiet persons, and I never saw 
the man angry, nor heard the dog bark. dure the servic the dog would 
not come to it master, who wa on the seat with us, but kept a few 
yard off, bark and howling. it master spoke to it gently, and then 
harshly, and then angrily; but it would neither come nor ceas to make a 
noise. It wa in a sort of fury, with it eye savage, and all it hair 
bristl out like a cat' tail when puss is on the war-path. final 
the man, too, got angry, and jump down and kick the dog, and then 
took it by the scruff of the neck and half drag and half threw it on 
the tombston on which the seat is fixed. the moment it touch the 
stone the poor thing becam quiet and fell all into a tremble. It did 
not tri to get away, but crouch down, quiver and cowering, and wa 
in such a pitiabl state of terror that I tried, though without effect, 
to comfort it. luci wa full of pity, too, but she did not attempt to 
touch the dog, but look at it in an agonis sort of way. I greatli 
fear that she is of too super-sensit a natur to go through the world 
without trouble. she will be dream of thi to-night, I am sure. the 
whole agglomer of things--th ship steer into port by a dead 
man; hi attitude, tie to the wheel with a crucifix and beads; the 
touch funeral; the dog, now furiou and now in terror--wil all 
afford materi for her dreams. 

I think it will be best for her to go to bed tire out physically, so I 
shall take her for a long walk by the cliff to robin hood' bay and 
back. she ought not to have much inclin for sleep-walk then. 




chapter viii 

mina murray' journal 


_same day, 11 o'clock p. m._--oh, but I am tired! If it were not that I 
had made my diari a duti I should not open it to-night. We had a love 
walk. lucy, after a while, wa in gay spirits, owing, I think, to some 
dear cow who came nose toward us in a field close to the lighthouse, 
and frighten the wit out of us. I believ we forgot everyth 
except, of course, person fear, and it seem to wipe the slate clean 
and give us a fresh start. We had a capit "sever tea" at robin hood' 
bay in a sweet littl old-fashion inn, with a bow-window right over 
the seaweed-cov rock of the strand. I believ we should have 
shock the "new woman" with our appetites. men are more tolerant, bless 
them! then we walk home with some, or rather many, stoppag to rest, 
and with our heart full of a constant dread of wild bulls. luci wa 
realli tired, and we intend to creep off to bed as soon as we could. 
the young curat came in, however, and mrs. westenra ask him to stay 
for supper. luci and I had both a fight for it with the dusti miller; I 
know it wa a hard fight on my part, and I am quit heroic. I think that 
some day the bishop must get togeth and see about breed up a new 
class of curates, who don't take supper, no matter how they may be 
press to, and who will know when girl are tired. luci is asleep and 
breath softly. she ha more colour in her cheek than usual, and 
looks, oh, so sweet. If mr. holmwood fell in love with her see her 
onli in the drawing-room, I wonder what he would say if he saw her now. 
some of the "new women" writer will some day start an idea that men and 
women should be allow to see each other asleep befor propos or 
accepting. but I suppos the new woman won't condescend in futur to 
accept; she will do the propos herself. and a nice job she will make 
of it, too! there' some consol in that. I am so happi to-night, 
becaus dear luci seem better. I realli believ she ha turn the 
corner, and that we are over her troubl with dreaming. I should be 
quit happi if I onli knew if jonathan.... god bless and keep him. 

* * * * * 

_11 august, 3 a. m._--diari again. No sleep now, so I may as well write. 
I am too agit to sleep. We have had such an adventure, such an 
agonis experience. I fell asleep as soon as I had close my diary.... 
suddenli I becam broad awake, and sat up, with a horribl sens of fear 
upon me, and of some feel of empti around me. the room wa dark, 
so I could not see lucy' bed; I stole across and felt for her. the bed 
wa empty. I lit a match and found that she wa not in the room. the 
door wa shut, but not locked, as I had left it. I fear to wake her 
mother, who ha been more than usual ill lately, so threw on some 
cloth and got readi to look for her. As I wa leav the room it 
struck me that the cloth she wore might give me some clue to her 
dream intention. dressing-gown would mean house; dress, outside. 
dressing-gown and dress were both in their places. "thank god," I said 
to myself, "she cannot be far, as she is onli in her nightdress." I ran 
downstair and look in the sitting-room. not there! then I look in 
all the other open room of the house, with an ever-grow fear 
chill my heart. final I came to the hall door and found it open. It 
wa not wide open, but the catch of the lock had not caught. the peopl 
of the hous are care to lock the door everi night, so I fear that 
luci must have gone out as she was. there wa no time to think of what 
might happen; a vague, overmast fear obscur all details. I took a 
big, heavi shawl and ran out. the clock wa strike one as I wa in the 
crescent, and there wa not a soul in sight. I ran along the north 
terrace, but could see no sign of the white figur which I expected. At 
the edg of the west cliff abov the pier I look across the harbour to 
the east cliff, in the hope or fear--i don't know which--of see luci 
in our favourit seat. there wa a bright full moon, with heavi black, 
drive clouds, which threw the whole scene into a fleet diorama of 
light and shade as they sail across. for a moment or two I could see 
nothing, as the shadow of a cloud obscur st. mary' church and all 
around it. then as the cloud pass I could see the ruin of the abbey 
come into view; and as the edg of a narrow band of light as sharp as 
a sword-cut move along, the church and the churchyard becam gradual 
visible. whatev my expect was, it wa not disappointed, for 
there, on our favourit seat, the silver light of the moon struck a 
half-reclin figure, snowi white. the come of the cloud wa too 
quick for me to see much, for shadow shut down on light almost 
immediately; but it seem to me as though someth dark stood behind 
the seat where the white figur shone, and bent over it. what it was, 
whether man or beast, I could not tell; I did not wait to catch anoth 
glance, but flew down the steep step to the pier and along by the 
fish-market to the bridge, which wa the onli way to reach the east 
cliff. the town seem as dead, for not a soul did I see; I rejoic 
that it wa so, for I want no wit of poor lucy' condition. the 
time and distanc seem endless, and my knee trembl and my breath 
came labour as I toil up the endless step to the abbey. I must have 
gone fast, and yet it seem to me as if my feet were weight with 
lead, and as though everi joint in my bodi were rusty. when I got almost 
to the top I could see the seat and the white figure, for I wa now 
close enough to distinguish it even through the spell of shadow. there 
wa undoubtedli something, long and black, bend over the 
half-reclin white figure. I call in fright, "lucy! lucy!" and 
someth rais a head, and from where I wa I could see a white face 
and red, gleam eyes. luci did not answer, and I ran on to the 
entranc of the churchyard. As I entered, the church wa between me and 
the seat, and for a minut or so I lost sight of her. when I came in 
view again the cloud had passed, and the moonlight struck so brilliantli 
that I could see luci half reclin with her head lie over the back 
of the seat. she wa quit alone, and there wa not a sign of ani live 
thing about. 

when I bent over her I could see that she wa still asleep. her lip 
were parted, and she wa breathing--not softli as usual with her, but in 
long, heavi gasps, as though strive to get her lung full at everi 
breath. As I came close, she put up her hand in her sleep and pull the 
collar of her nightdress close around her throat. whilst she did so 
there came a littl shudder through her, as though she felt the cold. I 
flung the warm shawl over her, and drew the edg tight round her neck, 
for I dread lest she should get some deadli chill from the night air, 
unclad as she was. I fear to wake her all at once, so, in order to 
have my hand free that I might help her, I fasten the shawl at her 
throat with a big safety-pin; but I must have been clumsi in my anxieti 
and pinch or prick her with it, for by-and-by, when her breath 
becam quieter, she put her hand to her throat again and moaned. when I 
had her care wrap up I put my shoe on her feet and then began 
veri gentli to wake her. At first she did not respond; but gradual she 
becam more and more uneasi in her sleep, moan and sigh 
occasionally. At last, as time wa pass fast, and, for mani other 
reasons, I wish to get her home at once, I shook her more forcibly, 
till final she open her eye and awoke. she did not seem surpris 
to see me, as, of course, she did not realis all at onc where she was. 
luci alway wake prettily, and even at such a time, when her bodi must 
have been chill with cold, and her mind somewhat appal at wake 
unclad in a churchyard at night, she did not lose her grace. she 
trembl a little, and clung to me; when I told her to come at onc with 
me home she rose without a word, with the obedi of a child. As we 
pass along, the gravel hurt my feet, and luci notic me wince. she 
stop and want to insist upon my take my shoes; but I would not. 
however, when we got to the pathway outsid the churchyard, where there 
wa a puddl of water, remain from the storm, I daub my feet with 
mud, use each foot in turn on the other, so that as we went home, no 
one, in case we should meet ani one, should notic my bare feet. 

fortun favour us, and we got home without meet a soul. onc we saw 
a man, who seem not quit sober, pass along a street in front of 
us; but we hid in a door till he had disappear up an open such as 
there are here, steep littl closes, or "wynds," as they call them in 
scotland. My heart beat so loud all the time that sometim I thought I 
should faint. I wa fill with anxieti about lucy, not onli for her 
health, lest she should suffer from the exposure, but for her reput 
in case the stori should get wind. when we got in, and had wash our 
feet, and had said a prayer of thank together, I tuck her into 
bed. befor fall asleep she asked--even implored--m not to say a 
word to ani one, even her mother, about her sleep-walk adventure. I 
hesit at first to promise; but on think of the state of her 
mother' health, and how the knowledg of such a thing would fret her, 
and thinking, too, of how such a stori might becom distorted--nay, 
infal would--in case it should leak out, I thought it wiser to do 
so. I hope I did right. I have lock the door, and the key is tie to 
my wrist, so perhap I shall not be again disturbed. luci is sleep 
soundly; the reflex of the dawn is high and far over the sea.... 

* * * * * 

_same day, noon._--al goe well. luci slept till I woke her and seem 
not to have even chang her side. the adventur of the night doe not 
seem to have harm her; on the contrary, it ha benefit her, for she 
look better thi morn than she ha done for weeks. I wa sorri to 
notic that my clumsi with the safety-pin hurt her. indeed, it might 
have been serious, for the skin of her throat wa pierced. I must have 
pinch up a piec of loos skin and have transfix it, for there are 
two littl red point like pin-pricks, and on the band of her nightdress 
wa a drop of blood. when I apologis and wa concern about it, she 
laugh and pet me, and said she did not even feel it. fortun it 
cannot leav a scar, as it is so tiny. 

* * * * * 

_same day, night._--w pass a happi day. the air wa clear, and the 
sun bright, and there wa a cool breeze. We took our lunch to mulgrav 
woods, mrs. westenra drive by the road and luci and I walk by the 
cliff-path and join her at the gate. I felt a littl sad myself, for 
I could not but feel how _absolutely_ happi it would have been had 
jonathan been with me. but there! I must onli be patient. In the even 
we stroll in the casino terrace, and heard some good music by spohr 
and mackenzie, and went to bed early. luci seem more rest than she 
ha been for some time, and fell asleep at once. I shall lock the door 
and secur the key the same as before, though I do not expect ani 
troubl to-night. 

* * * * * 

_12 august._--mi expect were wrong, for twice dure the night I 
wa waken by luci tri to get out. she seemed, even in her sleep, to 
be a littl impati at find the door shut, and went back to bed 
under a sort of protest. I woke with the dawn, and heard the bird 
chirp outsid of the window. luci woke, too, and, I wa glad to see, 
wa even better than on the previou morning. all her old gaieti of 
manner seem to have come back, and she came and snuggl in besid me 
and told me all about arthur. I told her how anxiou I wa about 
jonathan, and then she tri to comfort me. well, she succeed 
somewhat, for, though sympathi can't alter facts, it can help to make 
them more bearable. 

* * * * * 

_13 august._--anoth quiet day, and to bed with the key on my wrist as 
before. again I awok in the night, and found luci sit up in bed, 
still asleep, point to the window. I got up quietly, and pull 
asid the blind, look out. It wa brilliant moonlight, and the soft 
effect of the light over the sea and sky--merg togeth in one great, 
silent mystery--wa beauti beyond words. between me and the moonlight 
flit a great bat, come and go in great whirl circles. onc or 
twice it came quit close, but was, I suppose, frighten at see me, 
and flit away across the harbour toward the abbey. when I came back 
from the window luci had lain down again, and wa sleep peacefully. 
she did not stir again all night. 

* * * * * 

_14 august._--on the east cliff, read and write all day. luci seem 
to have becom as much in love with the spot as I am, and it is hard to 
get her away from it when it is time to come home for lunch or tea or 
dinner. thi afternoon she made a funni remark. We were come home for 
dinner, and had come to the top of the step up from the west pier and 
stop to look at the view, as we gener do. the set sun, low 
down in the sky, wa just drop behind kettleness; the red light wa 
thrown over on the east cliff and the old abbey, and seem to bath 
everyth in a beauti rosi glow. We were silent for a while, and 
suddenli luci murmur as if to herself:-- 

"hi red eye again! they are just the same." It wa such an odd 
expression, come _apropos_ of nothing, that it quit startl me. I 
slew round a little, so as to see luci well without seem to stare 
at her, and saw that she wa in a half-dreami state, with an odd look on 
her face that I could not quit make out; so I said nothing, but 
follow her eyes. she appear to be look over at our own seat, 
whereon wa a dark figur seat alone. I wa a littl startl myself, 
for it seem for an instant as if the stranger had great eye like 
burn flames; but a second look dispel the illusion. the red 
sunlight wa shine on the window of st. mary' church behind our 
seat, and as the sun dip there wa just suffici chang in the 
refract and reflect to make it appear as if the light moved. I 
call lucy' attent to the peculiar effect, and she becam herself 
with a start, but she look sad all the same; it may have been that she 
wa think of that terribl night up there. We never refer to it; so I 
said nothing, and we went home to dinner. luci had a headach and went 
earli to bed. I saw her asleep, and went out for a littl stroll myself; 
I walk along the cliff to the westward, and wa full of sweet 
sadness, for I wa think of jonathan. when come home--it wa then 
bright moonlight, so bright that, though the front of our part of the 
crescent wa in shadow, everyth could be well seen--i threw a glanc 
up at our window, and saw lucy' head lean out. I thought that 
perhap she wa look out for me, so I open my handkerchief and 
wave it. she did not notic or make ani movement whatever. just then, 
the moonlight crept round an angl of the building, and the light fell 
on the window. there distinctli wa luci with her head lie up against 
the side of the window-sil and her eye shut. she wa fast asleep, and 
by her, seat on the window-sill, wa someth that look like a 
good-siz bird. I wa afraid she might get a chill, so I ran upstairs, 
but as I came into the room she wa move back to her bed, fast 
asleep, and breath heavily; she wa hold her hand to her throat, 
as though to protect it from cold. 

I did not wake her, but tuck her up warmly; I have taken care that the 
door is lock and the window secur fastened. 

she look so sweet as she sleeps; but she is paler than is her wont, and 
there is a drawn, haggard look under her eye which I do not like. I 
fear she is fret about something. I wish I could find out what it 
is. 

* * * * * 

_15 august._--ros later than usual. luci wa languid and tired, and 
slept on after we had been called. We had a happi surpris at breakfast. 
arthur' father is better, and want the marriag to come off soon. luci 
is full of quiet joy, and her mother is glad and sorri at once. later on 
in the day she told me the cause. she is griev to lose luci as her 
veri own, but she is rejoic that she is soon to have some one to 
protect her. poor dear, sweet lady! she confid to me that she ha got 
her death-warrant. she ha not told lucy, and made me promis secrecy; 
her doctor told her that within a few months, at most, she must die, for 
her heart is weakening. At ani time, even now, a sudden shock would be 
almost sure to kill her. ah, we were wise to keep from her the affair of 
the dread night of lucy' sleep-walking. 

* * * * * 

_17 august._--no diari for two whole days. I have not had the heart to 
write. some sort of shadowi pall seem to be come over our happiness. 
No news from jonathan, and luci seem to be grow weaker, whilst her 
mother' hour are number to a close. I do not understand lucy' 
fade away as she is doing. she eat well and sleep well, and enjoy 
the fresh air; but all the time the rose in her cheek are fading, and 
she get weaker and more languid day by day; at night I hear her gasp 
as if for air. I keep the key of our door alway fasten to my wrist at 
night, but she get up and walk about the room, and sit at the open 
window. last night I found her lean out when I woke up, and when I 
tri to wake her I could not; she wa in a faint. when I manag to 
restor her she wa as weak as water, and cri silent between long, 
pain struggl for breath. when I ask her how she came to be at the 
window she shook her head and turn away. I trust her feel ill may 
not be from that unlucki prick of the safety-pin. I look at her throat 
just now as she lay asleep, and the tini wound seem not to have healed. 
they are still open, and, if anything, larger than before, and the 
edg of them are faintli white. they are like littl white dot with 
red centres. unless they heal within a day or two, I shall insist on the 
doctor see about them. 


_letter, samuel F. billington & son, solicitors, whitby, to messrs. 
carter, paterson & co., london._ 

"_17 august._ 

"dear sirs,-- 

"herewith pleas receiv invoic of good sent by great northern 
railway. same are to be deliv at carfax, near purfleet, immedi 
on receipt at good station king' cross. the hous is at present empty, 
but enclos pleas find keys, all of which are labelled. 

"you will pleas deposit the boxes, fifti in number, which form the 
consignment, in the partial ruin build form part of the hous 
and mark 'a' on rough diagram enclosed. your agent will easili 
recognis the locality, as it is the ancient chapel of the mansion. the 
good leav by the train at 9:30 to-night, and will be due at king' 
cross at 4:30 to-morrow afternoon. As our client wish the deliveri 
made as soon as possible, we shall be oblig by your have team readi 
at king' cross at the time name and forthwith convey the good to 
destination. In order to obviat ani delay possibl through ani routin 
requir as to payment in your departments, we enclos chequ 
herewith for ten pound (£10), receipt of which pleas acknowledge. 
should the charg be less than thi amount, you can return balance; if 
greater, we shall at onc send chequ for differ on hear from 
you. you are to leav the key on come away in the main hall of the 
house, where the proprietor may get them on hi enter the hous by 
mean of hi duplic key. 

"pray do not take us as exceed the bound of busi courtesi in 
press you in all way to use the utmost expedition. 

_"we are, dear sirs, 

"faith yours, 

"samuel F. billington & son."_ 


_letter, messrs. carter, paterson & co., london, to messrs. billington & 
son, whitby._ 

"_21 august._ 

"dear sirs,-- 

"we beg to acknowledg £10 receiv and to return chequ £1 17s. 9d, 
amount of overplus, as shown in receipt account herewith. good are 
deliv in exact accord with instructions, and key left in parcel 
in main hall, as directed. 

"we are, dear sirs, 

"your respectfully. 

"_pro_ carter, paterson & co." 


_mina murray' journal._ 

_18 august._--i am happi to-day, and write sit on the seat in the 
churchyard. luci is ever so much better. last night she slept well all 
night, and did not disturb me once. the rose seem come back alreadi 
to her cheeks, though she is still sadli pale and wan-looking. If she 
were in ani way anæmic I could understand it, but she is not. she is in 
gay spirit and full of life and cheerfulness. all the morbid retic 
seem to have pass from her, and she ha just remind me, as if I 
need ani reminding, of _that_ night, and that it wa here, on thi 
veri seat, I found her asleep. As she told me she tap play with 
the heel of her boot on the stone slab and said:-- 

"mi poor littl feet didn't make much nois then! I daresay poor old mr. 
swale would have told me that it wa becaus I didn't want to wake up 
geordie." As she wa in such a commun humour, I ask her if she 
had dream at all that night. befor she answered, that sweet, pucker 
look came into her forehead, which arthur--i call him arthur from her 
habit--say he loves; and, indeed, I don't wonder that he does. then she 
went on in a half-dream kind of way, as if tri to recal it to 
herself:-- 

"I didn't quit dream; but it all seem to be real. I onli want to be 
here in thi spot--i don't know why, for I wa afraid of something--i 
don't know what. I remember, though I suppos I wa asleep, pass 
through the street and over the bridge. A fish leap as I went by, and 
I lean over to look at it, and I heard a lot of dog howling--th 
whole town seem as if it must be full of dog all howl at once--a 
I went up the steps. then I had a vagu memori of someth long and 
dark with red eyes, just as we saw in the sunset, and someth veri 
sweet and veri bitter all around me at once; and then I seem sink 
into deep green water, and there wa a sing in my ears, as I have 
heard there is to drown men; and then everyth seem pass away 
from me; my soul seem to go out from my bodi and float about the air. 
I seem to rememb that onc the west lighthous wa right under me, 
and then there wa a sort of agonis feeling, as if I were in an 
earthquake, and I came back and found you shake my body. I saw you do 
it befor I felt you." 

then she began to laugh. It seem a littl uncanni to me, and I 
listen to her breathlessly. I did not quit like it, and thought it 
better not to keep her mind on the subject, so we drift on to other 
subjects, and luci wa like her old self again. when we got home the 
fresh breez had brace her up, and her pale cheek were realli more 
rosy. her mother rejoic when she saw her, and we all spent a veri 
happi even together. 

* * * * * 

_19 august._--joy, joy, joy! although not all joy. At last, news of 
jonathan. the dear fellow ha been ill; that is whi he did not write. I 
am not afraid to think it or say it, now that I know. mr. hawkin sent 
me on the letter, and wrote himself, oh, so kindly. I am to leav in the 
morn and go over to jonathan, and to help to nurs him if necessary, 
and to bring him home. mr. hawkin say it would not be a bad thing if 
we were to be marri out there. I have cri over the good sister' 
letter till I can feel it wet against my bosom, where it lies. It is of 
jonathan, and must be next my heart, for he is _in_ my heart. My journey 
is all map out, and my luggag ready. I am onli take one chang of 
dress; luci will bring my trunk to london and keep it till I send for 
it, for it may be that ... I must write no more; I must keep it to say 
to jonathan, my husband. the letter that he ha seen and touch must 
comfort me till we meet. 


_letter, sister agatha, hospit of st. joseph and ste. mary, 
buda-pesth, to miss wilhelmina murray._ 

"_12 august._ 

"dear madam,-- 

"I write by desir of mr. jonathan harker, who is himself not strong 
enough to write, though progress well, thank to god and st. joseph 
and ste. mary. He ha been under our care for nearli six weeks, 
suffer from a violent brain fever. He wish me to convey hi love, 
and to say that by thi post I write for him to mr. peter hawkins, 
exeter, to say, with hi duti respects, that he is sorri for hi 
delay, and that all of hi work is completed. He will requir some few 
weeks' rest in our sanatorium in the hills, but will then return. He 
wish me to say that he ha not suffici money with him, and that he 
would like to pay for hi stay here, so that other who need shall 
not be want for help. 

"believ me, 

"yours, with sympathi and all blessings, 

"sister agatha. 

"p. s.--mi patient be asleep, I open thi to let you know someth 
more. He ha told me all about you, and that you are shortli to be hi 
wife. all bless to you both! He ha had some fear shock--so say 
our doctor--and in hi delirium hi rave have been dreadful; of 
wolv and poison and blood; of ghost and demons; and I fear to say of 
what. Be care with him alway that there may be noth to excit him 
of thi kind for a long time to come; the trace of such an ill as 
hi do not lightli die away. We should have written long ago, but we 
knew noth of hi friends, and there wa on him noth that ani one 
could understand. He came in the train from klausenburg, and the guard 
wa told by the station-mast there that he rush into the station 
shout for a ticket for home. see from hi violent demeanour that 
he wa english, they gave him a ticket for the furthest station on the 
way thither that the train reached. 

"be assur that he is well care for. He ha won all heart by hi 
sweet and gentleness. He is truli get on well, and I have no 
doubt will in a few week be all himself. but be care of him for 
safety' sake. there are, I pray god and st. joseph and ste. mary, many, 
many, happi year for you both." 


_dr. seward' diary._ 

_19 august._--strang and sudden chang in renfield last night. about 
eight o'clock he began to get excit and sniff about as a dog doe when 
setting. the attend wa struck by hi manner, and know my interest 
in him, encourag him to talk. He is usual respect to the 
attend and at time servile; but to-night, the man tell me, he wa 
quit haughty. would not condescend to talk with him at all. all he 
would say was:-- 

"I don't want to talk to you: you don't count now; the master is at 
hand." 

the attend think it is some sudden form of religi mania which ha 
seiz him. If so, we must look out for squalls, for a strong man with 
homicid and religi mania at onc might be dangerous. the 
combin is a dread one. At nine o'clock I visit him myself. hi 
attitud to me wa the same as that to the attendant; in hi sublim 
self-feel the differ between myself and attend seem to him 
as nothing. It look like religi mania, and he will soon think that 
he himself is god. these infinitesim distinct between man and man 
are too paltri for an omnipot being. how these madmen give themselv 
away! the real god taketh heed lest a sparrow fall; but the god creat 
from human vaniti see no differ between an eagl and a sparrow. oh, 
if men onli knew! 

for half an hour or more renfield kept get excit in greater and 
greater degree. I did not pretend to be watch him, but I kept strict 
observ all the same. all at onc that shifti look came into hi 
eye which we alway see when a madman ha seiz an idea, and with it 
the shifti movement of the head and back which asylum attend come to 
know so well. He becam quit quiet, and went and sat on the edg of hi 
bed resignedly, and look into space with lack-lustr eyes. I thought I 
would find out if hi apathi were real or onli assumed, and tri to 
lead him to talk of hi pets, a theme which had never fail to excit 
hi attention. At first he made no reply, but at length said testily:-- 

"bother them all! I don't care a pin about them." 

"what?" I said. "you don't mean to tell me you don't care about 
spiders?" (spider at present are hi hobbi and the note-book is fill 
up with column of small figures.) To thi he answer enigmatically:-- 

"the bride-maiden rejoic the eye that wait the come of the bride; 
but when the bride draweth nigh, then the maiden shine not to the eye 
that are filled." 

He would not explain himself, but remain obstin seat on hi bed 
all the time I remain with him. 

I am weari to-night and low in spirits. I cannot but think of lucy, and 
how differ thing might have been. If I don't sleep at once, chloral, 
the modern morpheus--c_{2}hcl_{3}o. h_{2}o! I must be care not to let 
it grow into a habit. no, I shall take none to-night! I have thought of 
lucy, and I shall not dishonour her by mix the two. If need be, 
to-night shall be sleepless.... 

* * * * * 

_later._--glad I made the resolution; gladder that I kept to it. I had 
lain toss about, and had heard the clock strike onli twice, when the 
night-watchman came to me, sent up from the ward, to say that renfield 
had escaped. I threw on my cloth and ran down at once; my patient is 
too danger a person to be roam about. those idea of hi might 
work out danger with strangers. the attend wa wait for me. 
He said he had seen him not ten minut before, seemingli asleep in hi 
bed, when he had look through the observation-trap in the door. hi 
attent wa call by the sound of the window be wrench out. He 
ran back and saw hi feet disappear through the window, and had at onc 
sent up for me. He wa onli in hi night-gear, and cannot be far off. 
the attend thought it would be more use to watch where he should 
go than to follow him, as he might lose sight of him whilst get out 
of the build by the door. He is a bulki man, and couldn't get through 
the window. I am thin, so, with hi aid, I got out, but feet foremost, 
and, as we were onli a few feet abov ground, land unhurt. the 
attend told me the patient had gone to the left, and had taken a 
straight line, so I ran as quickli as I could. As I got through the belt 
of tree I saw a white figur scale the high wall which separ our 
ground from those of the desert house. 

I ran back at once, told the watchman to get three or four men 
immedi and follow me into the ground of carfax, in case our friend 
might be dangerous. I got a ladder myself, and cross the wall, 
drop down on the other side. I could see renfield' figur just 
disappear behind the angl of the house, so I ran after him. On the 
far side of the hous I found him press close against the old 
ironbound oak door of the chapel. He wa talking, appar to some 
one, but I wa afraid to go near enough to hear what he wa saying, lest 
I might frighten him, and he should run off. chase an errant swarm of 
bee is noth to follow a nake lunatic, when the fit of escap 
is upon him! after a few minutes, however, I could see that he did not 
take note of anyth around him, and so ventur to draw nearer to 
him--th more so as my men had now cross the wall and were close him 
in. I heard him say:-- 

"I am here to do your bidding, master. I am your slave, and you will 
reward me, for I shall be faithful. I have worship you long and afar 
off. now that you are near, I await your commands, and you will not pass 
me by, will you, dear master, in your distribut of good things?" 

He _is_ a selfish old beggar anyhow. He think of the loav and fish 
even when he believ he is in a real presence. hi mania make a 
startl combination. when we close in on him he fought like a tiger. 
He is immens strong, for he wa more like a wild beast than a man. I 
never saw a lunat in such a paroxysm of rage before; and I hope I 
shall not again. It is a merci that we have found out hi strength and 
hi danger in good time. with strength and determin like his, he 
might have done wild work befor he wa caged. He is safe now at ani 
rate. jack sheppard himself couldn't get free from the strait-waistcoat 
that keep him restrained, and he' chain to the wall in the pad 
room. hi cri are at time awful, but the silenc that follow are 
more deadli still, for he mean murder in everi turn and movement. 

just now he spoke coher word for the first time:-- 

"I shall be patient, master. It is coming--coming--coming!" 

So I took the hint, and came too. I wa too excit to sleep, but thi 
diari ha quiet me, and I feel I shall get some sleep to-night. 




chapter IX 


_letter, mina harker to luci westenra._ 

"_buda-pesth, 24 august._ 

"mi dearest lucy,-- 

"I know you will be anxiou to hear all that ha happen sinc we 
part at the railway station at whitby. well, my dear, I got to hull 
all right, and caught the boat to hamburg, and then the train on here. I 
feel that I can hardli recal anyth of the journey, except that I 
knew I wa come to jonathan, and, that as I should have to do some 
nursing, I had better get all the sleep I could.... I found my dear one, 
oh, so thin and pale and weak-looking. all the resolut ha gone out 
of hi dear eyes, and that quiet digniti which I told you wa in hi 
face ha vanished. He is onli a wreck of himself, and he doe not 
rememb anyth that ha happen to him for a long time past. At 
least, he want me to believ so, and I shall never ask. He ha had some 
terribl shock, and I fear it might tax hi poor brain if he were to tri 
to recal it. sister agatha, who is a good creatur and a born nurse, 
tell me that he rave of dread thing whilst he wa off hi head. I 
want her to tell me what they were; but she would onli cross herself, 
and say she would never tell; that the rave of the sick were the 
secret of god, and that if a nurs through her vocat should hear 
them, she should respect her trust. she is a sweet, good soul, and the 
next day, when she saw I wa troubled, she open up the subject again, 
and after say that she could never mention what my poor dear rave 
about, added: 'I can tell you thi much, my dear: that it wa not about 
anyth which he ha done wrong himself; and you, as hi wife to be, 
have no caus to be concerned. He ha not forgotten you or what he owe 
to you. hi fear wa of great and terribl things, which no mortal can 
treat of.' I do believ the dear soul thought I might be jealou lest my 
poor dear should have fallen in love with ani other girl. the idea of 
_my_ be jealou about jonathan! and yet, my dear, let me whisper, I 
felt a thrill of joy through me when I _knew_ that no other woman wa a 
caus of trouble. I am now sit by hi bedside, where I can see hi 
face while he sleeps. He is waking!... 

"when he woke he ask me for hi coat, as he want to get someth 
from the pocket; I ask sister agatha, and she brought all hi things. 
I saw that amongst them wa hi note-book, and wa go to ask him to 
let me look at it--for I knew then that I might find some clue to hi 
trouble--but I suppos he must have seen my wish in my eyes, for he sent 
me over to the window, say he want to be quit alon for a moment. 
then he call me back, and when I came he had hi hand over the 
note-book, and he said to me veri solemnly:-- 

"'wilhelmina'--i knew then that he wa in deadli earnest, for he ha 
never call me by that name sinc he ask me to marri him--'you know, 
dear, my idea of the trust between husband and wife: there should be no 
secret, no concealment. I have had a great shock, and when I tri to 
think of what it is I feel my head spin round, and I do not know if it 
wa all real or the dream of a madman. you know I have had brain 
fever, and that is to be mad. the secret is here, and I do not want to 
know it. I want to take up my life here, with our marriage.' for, my 
dear, we had decid to be marri as soon as the formal are 
complete. 'are you willing, wilhelmina, to share my ignorance? here is 
the book. take it and keep it, read it if you will, but never let me 
know; unless, indeed, some solemn duti should come upon me to go back to 
the bitter hours, asleep or awake, sane or mad, record here.' He fell 
back exhausted, and I put the book under hi pillow, and kiss him. I 
have ask sister agatha to beg the superior to let our wed be thi 
afternoon, and am wait her reply.... 

* * * * * 

"she ha come and told me that the chaplain of the english mission 
church ha been sent for. We are to be marri in an hour, or as soon 
after as jonathan awakes.... 

* * * * * 

"lucy, the time ha come and gone. I feel veri solemn, but very, veri 
happy. jonathan woke a littl after the hour, and all wa ready, and he 
sat up in bed, prop up with pillows. He answer hi 'I will' firmli 
and strongly. I could hardli speak; my heart wa so full that even those 
word seem to choke me. the dear sister were so kind. pleas god, I 
shall never, never forget them, nor the grave and sweet respons 
I have taken upon me. I must tell you of my wed present. when the 
chaplain and the sister had left me alon with my husband--oh, lucy, it 
is the first time I have written the word 'mi husband'--left me alon 
with my husband, I took the book from under hi pillow, and wrap it 
up in white paper, and tie it with a littl bit of pale blue ribbon 
which wa round my neck, and seal it over the knot with sealing-wax, 
and for my seal I use my wed ring. then I kiss it and show it 
to my husband, and told him that I would keep it so, and then it would 
be an outward and visibl sign for us all our live that we trust each 
other; that I would never open it unless it were for hi own dear sake 
or for the sake of some stern duty. then he took my hand in his, and oh, 
lucy, it wa the first time he took _hi wife's_ hand, and said that it 
wa the dearest thing in all the wide world, and that he would go 
through all the past again to win it, if need be. the poor dear meant to 
have said a part of the past, but he cannot think of time yet, and I 
shall not wonder if at first he mix up not onli the month, but the 
year. 

"well, my dear, what could I say? I could onli tell him that I wa the 
happiest woman in all the wide world, and that I had noth to give him 
except myself, my life, and my trust, and that with these went my love 
and duti for all the day of my life. and, my dear, when he kiss me, 
and drew me to him with hi poor weak hands, it wa like a veri solemn 
pledg between us.... 

"luci dear, do you know whi I tell you all this? It is not onli becaus 
it is all sweet to me, but becaus you have been, and are, veri dear to 
me. It wa my privileg to be your friend and guid when you came from 
the schoolroom to prepar for the world of life. I want you to see now, 
and with the eye of a veri happi wife, whither duti ha led me; so that 
in your own marri life you too may be all happi as I am. My dear, 
pleas almighti god, your life may be all it promises: a long day of 
sunshine, with no harsh wind, no forget duty, no distrust. I must 
not wish you no pain, for that can never be; but I do hope you will be 
_always_ as happi as I am _now_. good-bye, my dear. I shall post thi at 
once, and, perhaps, write you veri soon again. I must stop, for jonathan 
is waking--i must attend to my husband! 

"your ever-lov 

"mina harker." 


_letter, luci westenra to mina harker._ 

"_whitby, 30 august._ 

"mi dearest mina,-- 

"ocean of love and million of kisses, and may you soon be in your own 
home with your husband. I wish you could be come home soon enough to 
stay with us here. the strong air would soon restor jonathan; it ha 
quit restor me. I have an appetit like a cormorant, am full of 
life, and sleep well. you will be glad to know that I have quit given 
up walk in my sleep. I think I have not stir out of my bed for a 
week, that is when I onc got into it at night. arthur say I am get 
fat. By the way, I forgot to tell you that arthur is here. We have such 
walk and drives, and rides, and rowing, and tennis, and fish 
together; and I love him more than ever. He _tells_ me that he love me 
more, but I doubt that, for at first he told me that he couldn't love me 
more than he did then. but thi is nonsense. there he is, call to me. 
So no more just at present from your love 

"lucy. 

"p. s.--mother send her love. she seem better, poor dear. "p. P. 
s.--we are to be marri on 28 september." 


_dr. seward' diary._ 

_20 august._--th case of renfield grow even more interesting. He ha 
now so far quiet that there are spell of cessat from hi passion. 
for the first week after hi attack he wa perpetu violent. then one 
night, just as the moon rose, he grew quiet, and kept murmur to 
himself: "now I can wait; now I can wait." the attend came to tell 
me, so I ran down at onc to have a look at him. He wa still in the 
strait-waistcoat and in the pad room, but the suffus look had gone 
from hi face, and hi eye had someth of their old pleading--i might 
almost say, "cringing"--softness. I wa satisfi with hi present 
condition, and direct him to be relieved. the attend hesitated, 
but final carri out my wish without protest. It wa a strang 
thing that the patient had humour enough to see their distrust, for, 
come close to me, he said in a whisper, all the while look 
furtiv at them:-- 

"they think I could hurt you! fanci _me_ hurt _you_! the fools!" 

It wa soothing, somehow, to the feel to find myself dissoci 
even in the mind of thi poor madman from the others; but all the same I 
do not follow hi thought. Am I to take it that I have anyth in 
common with him, so that we are, as it were, to stand together; or ha 
he to gain from me some good so stupend that my well-b is need 
to him? I must find out later on. to-night he will not speak. even the 
offer of a kitten or even a full-grown cat will not tempt him. He will 
onli say: "I don't take ani stock in cats. I have more to think of now, 
and I can wait; I can wait." 

after a while I left him. the attend tell me that he wa quiet 
until just befor dawn, and that then he began to get uneasy, and at 
length violent, until at last he fell into a paroxysm which exhaust 
him so that he swoon into a sort of coma. 

* * * * * 

... three night ha the same thing happened--viol all day then quiet 
from moonris to sunrise. I wish I could get some clue to the cause. It 
would almost seem as if there wa some influenc which came and went. 
happi thought! We shall to-night play sane wit against mad ones. He 
escap befor without our help; to-night he shall escap with it. We 
shall give him a chance, and have the men readi to follow in case they 
are required.... 

* * * * * 

_23 august._--"th unexpect alway happens." how well disra knew 
life. our bird when he found the cage open would not fly, so all our 
subtl arrang were for nought. At ani rate, we have prove one 
thing; that the spell of quiet last a reason time. We shall in 
futur be abl to eas hi bond for a few hour each day. I have given 
order to the night attend mere to shut him in the pad room, 
when onc he is quiet, until an hour befor sunrise. the poor soul' 
bodi will enjoy the relief even if hi mind cannot appreci it. hark! 
the unexpect again! I am called; the patient ha onc more escaped. 

* * * * * 

_later._--anoth night adventure. renfield art wait until the 
attend wa enter the room to inspect. then he dash out past him 
and flew down the passage. I sent word for the attend to follow. 
again he went into the ground of the desert house, and we found him 
in the same place, press against the old chapel door. when he saw me 
he becam furious, and had not the attend seiz him in time, he 
would have tri to kill me. As we were hold him a strang thing 
happened. He suddenli redoubl hi efforts, and then as suddenli grew 
calm. I look round instinctively, but could see nothing. then I caught 
the patient' eye and follow it, but could trace noth as it look 
into the moonlit sky except a big bat, which wa flap it silent and 
ghostli way to the west. bat usual wheel and flit about, but thi one 
seem to go straight on, as if it knew where it wa bound for or had 
some intent of it own. the patient grew calmer everi instant, and 
present said:-- 

"you needn't tie me; I shall go quietly!" without troubl we came back 
to the house. I feel there is someth omin in hi calm, and shall 
not forget thi night.... 


_luci westenra' diary_ 

_hillingham, 24 august._--i must imit mina, and keep write thing 
down. then we can have long talk when we do meet. I wonder when it will 
be. I wish she were with me again, for I feel so unhappy. last night I 
seem to be dream again just as I wa at whitby. perhap it is the 
chang of air, or get home again. It is all dark and horrid to me, 
for I can rememb nothing; but I am full of vagu fear, and I feel so 
weak and worn out. when arthur came to lunch he look quit griev 
when he saw me, and I hadn't the spirit to tri to be cheerful. I wonder 
if I could sleep in mother' room to-night. I shall make an excus and 
try. 

* * * * * 

_25 august._--anoth bad night. mother did not seem to take to my 
proposal. she seem not too well herself, and doubtless she fear to 
worri me. I tri to keep awake, and succeed for a while; but when the 
clock struck twelv it wake me from a doze, so I must have been fall 
asleep. there wa a sort of scratch or flap at the window, but I 
did not mind it, and as I rememb no more, I suppos I must then have 
fallen asleep. more bad dreams. I wish I could rememb them. thi 
morn I am horribl weak. My face is ghastli pale, and my throat pain 
me. It must be someth wrong with my lungs, for I don't seem ever to 
get air enough. I shall tri to cheer up when arthur comes, or els I 
know he will be miser to see me so. 


_letter, arthur holmwood to dr. seward._ 

"_albemarl hotel, 31 august._ 

"mi dear jack,-- 

"I want you to do me a favour. luci is ill; that is, she ha no special 
disease, but she look awful, and is get wors everi day. I have 
ask her if there is ani cause; I do not dare to ask her mother, for to 
disturb the poor lady' mind about her daughter in her present state of 
health would be fatal. mrs. westenra ha confid to me that her doom is 
spoken--diseas of the heart--though poor luci doe not know it yet. I 
am sure that there is someth prey on my dear girl' mind. I am 
almost distract when I think of her; to look at her give me a pang. I 
told her I should ask you to see her, and though she demur at 
first--i know why, old fellow--sh final consented. It will be a 
pain task for you, I know, old friend, but it is for _her_ sake, and 
I must not hesit to ask, or you to act. you are to come to lunch at 
hillingham to-morrow, two o'clock, so as not to arous ani suspicion in 
mrs. westenra, and after lunch luci will take an opportun of be 
alon with you. I shall come in for tea, and we can go away together; I 
am fill with anxiety, and want to consult with you alon as soon as I 
can after you have seen her. Do not fail! 

"arthur." 


_telegram, arthur holmwood to seward._ 

"_1 september._ 

"am summon to see my father, who is worse. Am writing. write me fulli 
by to-night' post to ring. wire me if necessary." 


_letter from dr. seward to arthur holmwood._ 

"_2 september._ 

"mi dear old fellow,-- 

"with regard to miss westenra' health I hasten to let you know at onc 
that in my opinion there is not ani function disturb or ani maladi 
that I know of. At the same time, I am not by ani mean satisfi with 
her appearance; she is woefulli differ from what she wa when I saw 
her last. Of cours you must bear in mind that I did not have full 
opportun of examin such as I should wish; our veri friendship 
make a littl difficulti which not even medic scienc or custom can 
bridg over. I had better tell you exactli what happened, leav you to 
draw, in a measure, your own conclusions. I shall then say what I have 
done and propos doing. 

"I found miss westenra in seemingli gay spirits. her mother wa present, 
and in a few second I made up my mind that she wa tri all she knew 
to mislead her mother and prevent her from be anxious. I have no 
doubt she guesses, if she doe not know, what need of caution there is. 
We lunch alone, and as we all exert ourselv to be cheerful, we 
got, as some kind of reward for our labours, some real cheer 
amongst us. then mrs. westenra went to lie down, and luci wa left with 
me. We went into her boudoir, and till we got there her gaieti remained, 
for the servant were come and going. As soon as the door wa closed, 
however, the mask fell from her face, and she sank down into a chair 
with a great sigh, and hid her eye with her hand. when I saw that her 
high spirit had failed, I at onc took advantag of her reaction to 
make a diagnosis. she said to me veri sweetly:-- 

"'i cannot tell you how I loath talk about myself.' I remind her 
that a doctor' confid wa sacred, but that you were grievous 
anxiou about her. she caught on to my mean at once, and settl that 
matter in a word. 'tell arthur everyth you choose. I do not care for 
myself, but all for him!' So I am quit free. 

"I could easili see that she is somewhat bloodless, but I could not see 
the usual anæmic signs, and by a chanc I wa actual abl to test the 
qualiti of her blood, for in open a window which wa stiff a cord 
gave way, and she cut her hand slightli with broken glass. It wa a 
slight matter in itself, but it gave me an evid chance, and I secur 
a few drop of the blood and have analys them. the qualit 
analysi give a quit normal condition, and shows, I should infer, in 
itself a vigor state of health. In other physic matter I wa quit 
satisfi that there is no need for anxiety; but as there must be a 
caus somewhere, I have come to the conclus that it must be someth 
mental. she complain of difficulti in breath satisfactorili at 
times, and of heavy, letharg sleep, with dream that frighten her, but 
regard which she can rememb nothing. she say that as a child she 
use to walk in her sleep, and that when in whitbi the habit came back, 
and that onc she walk out in the night and went to east cliff, where 
miss murray found her; but she assur me that of late the habit ha not 
returned. I am in doubt, and so have done the best thing I know of; I 
have written to my old friend and master, professor van helsing, of 
amsterdam, who know as much about obscur diseas as ani one in the 
world. I have ask him to come over, and as you told me that all thing 
were to be at your charge, I have mention to him who you are and your 
relat to miss westenra. this, my dear fellow, is in obedi to 
your wishes, for I am onli too proud and happi to do anyth I can for 
her. van hels would, I know, do anyth for me for a person 
reason, so, no matter on what ground he comes, we must accept hi 
wishes. He is a seemingli arbitrari man, but thi is becaus he know 
what he is talk about better than ani one else. He is a philosoph 
and a metaphysician, and one of the most advanc scientist of hi day; 
and he has, I believe, an absolut open mind. this, with an iron 
nerve, a temper of the ice-brook, an indomit resolution, 
self-command, and toler exalt from virtu to blessings, and the 
kindliest and truest heart that beats--thes form hi equip for the 
nobl work that he is do for mankind--work both in theori and 
practice, for hi view are as wide as hi all-embrac sympathy. I 
tell you these fact that you may know whi I have such confid in 
him. I have ask him to come at once. I shall see miss westenra 
to-morrow again. she is to meet me at the stores, so that I may not 
alarm her mother by too earli a repetit of my call. 

"your always, 

"john seward." 


_letter, abraham van helsing, M. d., D. ph., D. lit., etc., etc., to dr. 
seward._ 

"_2 september._ 

"mi good friend,-- 

"when I have receiv your letter I am alreadi come to you. By good 
fortun I can leav just at once, without wrong to ani of those who have 
trust me. were fortun other, then it were bad for those who have 
trusted, for I come to my friend when he call me to aid those he hold 
dear. tell your friend that when that time you suck from my wound so 
swiftli the poison of the gangren from that knife that our other 
friend, too nervous, let slip, you did more for him when he want my 
aid and you call for them than all hi great fortun could do. but it 
is pleasur ad to do for him, your friend; it is to you that I come. 
have then room for me at the great eastern hotel, so that I may be near 
to hand, and pleas it so arrang that we may see the young ladi not too 
late on to-morrow, for it is like that I may have to return here that 
night. but if need be I shall come again in three days, and stay longer 
if it must. till then good-bye, my friend john. 

"van helsing." 


_letter, dr. seward to hon. arthur holmwood._ 

"_3 september._ 

"mi dear art,-- 

"van hels ha come and gone. He came on with me to hillingham, and 
found that, by lucy' discretion, her mother wa lunch out, so that 
we were alon with her. van hels made a veri care examin of 
the patient. He is to report to me, and I shall advis you, for of 
cours I wa not present all the time. He is, I fear, much concerned, 
but say he must think. when I told him of our friendship and how you 
trust to me in the matter, he said: 'you must tell him all you think. 
tell him what I think, if you can guess it, if you will. nay, I am not 
jesting. thi is no jest, but life and death, perhap more.' I ask 
what he meant by that, for he wa veri serious. thi wa when we had 
come back to town, and he wa have a cup of tea befor start on hi 
return to amsterdam. He would not give me ani further clue. you must not 
be angri with me, art, becaus hi veri retic mean that all hi 
brain are work for her good. He will speak plainli enough when the 
time comes, be sure. So I told him I would simpli write an account of 
our visit, just as if I were do a descript special articl for 
_the daili telegraph_. He seem not to notice, but remark that the 
smut in london were not quit so bad as they use to be when he wa a 
student here. I am to get hi report to-morrow if he can possibl make 
it. In ani case I am to have a letter. 

"well, as to the visit. luci wa more cheer than on the day I first 
saw her, and certainli look better. she had lost someth of the 
ghastli look that so upset you, and her breath wa normal. she wa 
veri sweet to the professor (a she alway is), and tri to make him 
feel at ease; though I could see that the poor girl wa make a hard 
struggl for it. I believ van hels saw it, too, for I saw the quick 
look under hi bushi brow that I knew of old. then he began to chat of 
all thing except ourselv and diseas and with such an infinit 
genial that I could see poor lucy' pretens of anim merg into 
reality. then, without ani seem change, he brought the convers 
gentli round to hi visit, and suav said:-- 

"'mi dear young miss, I have the so great pleasur becaus you are so 
much beloved. that is much, my dear, ever were there that which I do not 
see. they told me you were down in the spirit, and that you were of a 
ghastli pale. To them I say: "pouf!"' and he snap hi finger at me 
and went on: 'but you and I shall show them how wrong they are. how can 
he'--and he point at me with the same look and gestur as that with 
which onc he point me out to hi class, on, or rather after, a 
particular occas which he never fail to remind me of--'know anyth 
of a young ladies? He ha hi madam to play with, and to bring them 
back to happiness, and to those that love them. It is much to do, and, 
oh, but there are rewards, in that we can bestow such happiness. but the 
young ladies! He ha no wife nor daughter, and the young do not tell 
themselv to the young, but to the old, like me, who have known so mani 
sorrow and the caus of them. so, my dear, we will send him away to 
smoke the cigarett in the garden, while you and I have littl talk all 
to ourselves.' I took the hint, and stroll about, and present the 
professor came to the window and call me in. He look grave, but 
said: 'I have made care examination, but there is no function 
cause. with you I agre that there ha been much blood lost; it ha 
been, but is not. but the condit of her are in no way anæmic. I have 
ask her to send me her maid, that I may ask just one or two question, 
that so I may not chanc to miss nothing. I know well what she will say. 
and yet there is cause; there is alway caus for everything. I must go 
back home and think. you must send to me the telegram everi day; and if 
there be caus I shall come again. the disease--for not to be all well 
is a disease--interest me, and the sweet young dear, she interest me 
too. she charm me, and for her, if not for you or disease, I come.' 

"a I tell you, he would not say a word more, even when we were alone. 
and so now, art, you know all I know. I shall keep stern watch. I trust 
your poor father is rallying. It must be a terribl thing to you, my 
dear old fellow, to be place in such a posit between two peopl who 
are both so dear to you. I know your idea of duti to your father, and 
you are right to stick to it; but, if need be, I shall send you word to 
come at onc to lucy; so do not be over-anxi unless you hear from 
me." 


_dr. seward' diary._ 

_4 september._--zoöphag patient still keep up our interest in him. 
He had onli one outburst and that wa yesterday at an unusu time. just 
befor the stroke of noon he began to grow restless. the attend knew 
the symptoms, and at onc summon aid. fortun the men came at a 
run, and were just in time, for at the stroke of noon he becam so 
violent that it took all their strength to hold him. In about five 
minutes, however, he began to get more and more quiet, and final sank 
into a sort of melancholy, in which state he ha remain up to now. the 
attend tell me that hi scream whilst in the paroxysm were realli 
appalling; I found my hand full when I got in, attend to some of the 
other patient who were frighten by him. indeed, I can quit 
understand the effect, for the sound disturb even me, though I wa 
some distanc away. It is now after the dinner-hour of the asylum, and 
as yet my patient sit in a corner brooding, with a dull, sullen, 
woe-begon look in hi face, which seem rather to indic than to show 
someth directly. I cannot quit understand it. 

* * * * * 

_later._--anoth chang in my patient. At five o'clock I look in on 
him, and found him seemingli as happi and content as he use to be. He 
wa catch fli and eat them, and wa keep note of hi captur 
by make nail-mark on the edg of the door between the ridg of 
padding. when he saw me, he came over and apologis for hi bad 
conduct, and ask me in a veri humble, cring way to be led back to 
hi own room and to have hi note-book again. I thought it well to 
humour him: so he is back in hi room with the window open. He ha the 
sugar of hi tea spread out on the window-sill, and is reap quit a 
harvest of flies. He is not now eat them, but put them into a 
box, as of old, and is alreadi examin the corner of hi room to find 
a spider. I tri to get him to talk about the past few days, for ani 
clue to hi thought would be of immens help to me; but he would not 
rise. for a moment or two he look veri sad, and said in a sort of 
far-away voice, as though say it rather to himself than to me:-- 

"all over! all over! He ha desert me. No hope for me now unless I do 
it for myself!" then suddenli turn to me in a resolut way, he said: 
"doctor, won't you be veri good to me and let me have a littl more 
sugar? I think it would be good for me." 

"and the flies?" I said. 

"yes! the fli like it, too, and I like the flies; therefor I like 
it." and there are peopl who know so littl as to think that madmen do 
not argue. I procur him a doubl supply, and left him as happi a man 
as, I suppose, ani in the world. I wish I could fathom hi mind. 

* * * * * 

_midnight._--anoth chang in him. I had been to see miss westenra, 
whom I found much better, and had just returned, and wa stand at our 
own gate look at the sunset, when onc more I heard him yelling. As 
hi room is on thi side of the house, I could hear it better than in 
the morning. It wa a shock to me to turn from the wonder smoki 
beauti of a sunset over london, with it lurid light and inki shadow 
and all the marvel tint that come on foul cloud even as on foul 
water, and to realis all the grim stern of my own cold stone 
building, with it wealth of breath misery, and my own desol heart 
to endur it all. I reach him just as the sun wa go down, and from 
hi window saw the red disc sink. As it sank he becam less and less 
frenzied; and just as it dip he slid from the hand that held him, an 
inert mass, on the floor. It is wonderful, however, what intellectu 
recup power lunat have, for within a few minut he stood up 
quit calmli and look around him. I signal to the attend not to 
hold him, for I wa anxiou to see what he would do. He went straight 
over to the window and brush out the crumb of sugar; then he took hi 
fly-box, and empti it outside, and threw away the box; then he shut 
the window, and cross over, sat down on hi bed. all thi surpris 
me, so I ask him: "are you not go to keep fli ani more?" 

"no," said he; "I am sick of all that rubbish!" He certainli is a 
wonder interest study. I wish I could get some glimps of hi 
mind or of the caus of hi sudden passion. stop; there may be a clue 
after all, if we can find whi to-day hi paroxysm came on at high noon 
and at sunset. can it be that there is a malign influenc of the sun at 
period which affect certain natures--a at time the moon doe others? 
We shall see. 


_telegram, seward, london, to van helsing, amsterdam._ 

"_4 september._--pati still better to-day." 


_telegram, seward, london, to van helsing, amsterdam._ 

"_5 september._--pati greatli improved. good appetite; sleep 
naturally; good spirits; colour come back." 


_telegram, seward, london, to van helsing, amsterdam._ 

"_6 september._--terr chang for the worse. come at once; do not 
lose an hour. I hold over telegram to holmwood till have seen you." 




chapter X 


_letter, dr. seward to hon. arthur holmwood._ 

"_6 september._ 

"mi dear art,-- 

"mi news to-day is not so good. luci thi morn had gone back a bit. 
there is, however, one good thing which ha arisen from it; mrs. 
westenra wa natur anxiou concern lucy, and ha consult me 
profession about her. I took advantag of the opportunity, and told 
her that my old master, van helsing, the great specialist, wa come to 
stay with me, and that I would put her in hi charg conjointli with 
myself; so now we can come and go without alarm her unduly, for a 
shock to her would mean sudden death, and this, in lucy' weak 
condition, might be disastr to her. We are hedg in with 
difficulties, all of us, my poor old fellow; but, pleas god, we shall 
come through them all right. If ani need I shall write, so that, if you 
do not hear from me, take it for grant that I am simpli wait for 
news. In hast 

your ever, 

"john seward." 


_dr. seward' diary._ 

_7 september._--th first thing van hels said to me when we met at 
liverpool street was:-- 

"have you said anyth to our young friend the lover of her?" 

"no," I said. "I wait till I had seen you, as I said in my telegram. I 
wrote him a letter simpli tell him that you were coming, as miss 
westenra wa not so well, and that I should let him know if need be." 

"right, my friend," he said, "quit right! better he not know as yet; 
perhap he shall never know. I pray so; but if it be needed, then he 
shall know all. and, my good friend john, let me caution you. you deal 
with the madmen. all men are mad in some way or the other; and inasmuch 
as you deal discreetli with your madmen, so deal with god' madmen, 
too--th rest of the world. you tell not your madmen what you do nor whi 
you do it; you tell them not what you think. So you shall keep knowledg 
in it place, where it may rest--wher it may gather it kind around it 
and breed. you and I shall keep as yet what we know here, and here." He 
touch me on the heart and on the forehead, and then touch himself 
the same way. "I have for myself thought at the present. later I shall 
unfold to you." 

"whi not now?" I asked. "it may do some good; we may arriv at some 
decision." He stop and look at me, and said:-- 

"mi friend john, when the corn is grown, even befor it ha 
ripened--whil the milk of it mother-earth is in him, and the sunshin 
ha not yet begun to paint him with hi gold, the husbandman he pull the 
ear and rub him between hi rough hands, and blow away the green chaff, 
and say to you: 'look! he' good corn; he will make good crop when the 
time comes.'" I did not see the application, and told him so. for repli 
he reach over and took my ear in hi hand and pull it playfully, as 
he use long ago to do at lectures, and said: "the good husbandman tell 
you so then becaus he knows, but not till then. but you do not find the 
good husbandman dig up hi plant corn to see if he grow; that is for 
the children who play at husbandry, and not for those who take it as of 
the work of their life. see you now, friend john? I have sown my corn, 
and natur ha her work to do in make it sprout; if he sprout at all, 
there' some promise; and I wait till the ear begin to swell." He broke 
off, for he evid saw that I understood. then he went on, and veri 
gravely:-- 

"you were alway a care student, and your case-book wa ever more 
full than the rest. you were onli student then; now you are master, and 
I trust that good habit have not fail. remember, my friend, that 
knowledg is stronger than memory, and we should not trust the weaker. 
even if you have not kept the good practise, let me tell you that thi 
case of our dear miss is one that may be--mind, I say _may be_--of such 
interest to us and other that all the rest may not make him kick the 
beam, as your peopl say. take then good note of it. noth is too 
small. I counsel you, put down in record even your doubt and surmises. 
hereaft it may be of interest to you to see how true you guess. We 
learn from failure, not from success!" 

when I describ lucy' symptoms--th same as before, but infinit 
more marked--h look veri grave, but said nothing. He took with him a 
bag in which were mani instrument and drugs, "the ghastli paraphernalia 
of our benefici trade," as he onc called, in one of hi lectures, the 
equip of a professor of the heal craft. when we were shown in, 
mrs. westenra met us. she wa alarmed, but not nearli so much as I 
expect to find her. natur in one of her benefic mood ha ordain 
that even death ha some antidot to it own terrors. here, in a case 
where ani shock may prove fatal, matter are so order that, from some 
caus or other, the thing not personal--even the terribl chang in her 
daughter to whom she is so attached--do not seem to reach her. It is 
someth like the way dame natur gather round a foreign bodi an 
envelop of some insensit tissu which can protect from evil that 
which it would otherwis harm by contact. If thi be an order 
selfishness, then we should paus befor we condemn ani one for the vice 
of egoism, for there may be deeper root for it caus than we have 
knowledg of. 

I use my knowledg of thi phase of spiritu pathology, and laid down 
a rule that she should not be present with luci or think of her ill 
more than wa absolut required. she assent readily, so readili that 
I saw again the hand of natur fight for life. van hels and I were 
shown up to lucy' room. If I wa shock when I saw her yesterday, I 
wa horrifi when I saw her to-day. she wa ghastly, chalkili pale; the 
red seem to have gone even from her lip and gums, and the bone of 
her face stood out prominently; her breath wa pain to see or 
hear. van helsing' face grew set as marble, and hi eyebrow converg 
till they almost touch over hi nose. luci lay motionless, and did not 
seem to have strength to speak, so for a while we were all silent. then 
van hels beckon to me, and we went gentli out of the room. the 
instant we had close the door he step quickli along the passag to 
the next door, which wa open. then he pull me quickli in with him and 
close the door. "mi god!" he said; "thi is dreadful. there is no time 
to be lost. she will die for sheer want of blood to keep the heart' 
action as it should be. there must be transfus of blood at once. Is 
it you or me?" 

"I am younger and stronger, professor. It must be me." 

"then get readi at once. I will bring up my bag. I am prepared." 

I went downstair with him, and as we were go there wa a knock at 
the hall-door. when we reach the hall the maid had just open the 
door, and arthur wa step quickli in. He rush up to me, say in 
an eager whisper:-- 

"jack, I wa so anxious. I read between the line of your letter, and 
have been in an agony. the dad wa better, so I ran down here to see for 
myself. Is not that gentleman dr. van helsing? I am so thank to you, 
sir, for coming." when first the professor' eye had lit upon him he had 
been angri at hi interrupt at such a time; but now, as he took in 
hi stalwart proport and recognis the strong young manhood which 
seem to eman from him, hi eye gleamed. without a paus he said to 
him grave as he held out hi hand:-- 

"sir, you have come in time. you are the lover of our dear miss. she is 
bad, very, veri bad. nay, my child, do not go like that." for he 
suddenli grew pale and sat down in a chair almost fainting. "you are to 
help her. you can do more than ani that live, and your courag is your 
best help." 

"what can I do?" ask arthur hoarsely. "tell me, and I shall do it. My 
life is hers, and I would give the last drop of blood in my bodi for 
her." the professor ha a strongli humor side, and I could from old 
knowledg detect a trace of it origin in hi answer:-- 

"mi young sir, I do not ask so much as that--not the last!" 

"what shall I do?" there wa fire in hi eyes, and hi open nostril 
quiver with intent. van hels slap him on the shoulder. "come!" 
he said. "you are a man, and it is a man we want. you are better than 
me, better than my friend john." arthur look bewildered, and the 
professor went on by explain in a kindli way:-- 

"young miss is bad, veri bad. she want blood, and blood she must have 
or die. My friend john and I have consulted; and we are about to perform 
what we call transfus of blood--to transfer from full vein of one to 
the empti vein which pine for him. john wa to give hi blood, as he is 
the more young and strong than me"--her arthur took my hand and wrung 
it hard in silence--"but, now you are here, you are more good than us, 
old or young, who toil much in the world of thought. our nerv are not 
so calm and our blood not so bright than yours!" arthur turn to him 
and said:-- 

"if you onli knew how gladli I would die for her you would 
understand----" 

He stopped, with a sort of choke in hi voice. 

"good boy!" said van helsing. "in the not-so-far-off you will be happi 
that you have done all for her you love. come now and be silent. you 
shall kiss her onc befor it is done, but then you must go; and you 
must leav at my sign. say no word to madame; you know how it is with 
her! there must be no shock; ani knowledg of thi would be one. come!" 

We all went up to lucy' room. arthur by direct remain outside. 
luci turn her head and look at us, but said nothing. she wa not 
asleep, but she wa simpli too weak to make the effort. her eye spoke 
to us; that wa all. van hels took some thing from hi bag and laid 
them on a littl tabl out of sight. then he mix a narcotic, and 
come over to the bed, said cheerily:-- 

"now, littl miss, here is your medicine. drink it off, like a good 
child. see, I lift you so that to swallow is easy. yes." she had made 
the effort with success. 

It astonish me how long the drug took to act. this, in fact, mark 
the extent of her weakness. the time seem endless until sleep began to 
flicker in her eyelids. At last, however, the narcot began to manifest 
it potency; and she fell into a deep sleep. when the professor wa 
satisfi he call arthur into the room, and bade him strip off hi 
coat. then he added: "you may take that one littl kiss while I bring 
over the table. friend john, help to me!" So neither of us look whilst 
he bent over her. 

van hels turn to me, said: 

"he is so young and strong and of blood so pure that we need not 
defibrin it." 

then with swiftness, but with absolut method, van hels perform the 
operation. As the transfus went on someth like life seem to come 
back to poor lucy' cheeks, and through arthur' grow pallor the joy 
of hi face seem absolut to shine. after a bit I began to grow 
anxious, for the loss of blood wa tell on arthur, strong man as he 
was. It gave me an idea of what a terribl strain lucy' system must 
have undergon that what weaken arthur onli partial restor her. 
but the professor' face wa set, and he stood watch in hand and with 
hi eye fix now on the patient and now on arthur. I could hear my own 
heart beat. present he said in a soft voice: "do not stir an instant. 
It is enough. you attend him; I will look to her." when all wa over I 
could see how much arthur wa weakened. I dress the wound and took hi 
arm to bring him away, when van hels spoke without turn round--th 
man seem to have eye in the back of hi head:-- 

"the brave lover, I think, deserv anoth kiss, which he shall have 
presently." and as he had now finish hi operation, he adjust the 
pillow to the patient' head. As he did so the narrow black velvet band 
which she seem alway to wear round her throat, buckl with an old 
diamond buckl which her lover had given her, wa drag a littl up, 
and show a red mark on her throat. arthur did not notic it, but I 
could hear the deep hiss of indrawn breath which is one of van helsing' 
way of betray emotion. He said noth at the moment, but turn to 
me, saying: "now take down our brave young lover, give him of the port 
wine, and let him lie down a while. He must then go home and rest, sleep 
much and eat much, that he may be recruit of what he ha so given to 
hi love. He must not stay here. hold! a moment. I may take it, sir, 
that you are anxiou of result. then bring it with you that in all way 
the oper is successful. you have save her life thi time, and you 
can go home and rest easi in mind that all that can be is. I shall tell 
her all when she is well; she shall love you none the less for what you 
have done. good-bye." 

when arthur had gone I went back to the room. luci wa sleep gently, 
but her breath wa stronger; I could see the counterpan move as her 
breast heaved. By the bedsid sat van helsing, look at her intently. 
the velvet band again cover the red mark. I ask the professor in a 
whisper:-- 

"what do you make of that mark on her throat?" 

"what do you make of it?" 

"I have not examin it yet," I answered, and then and there proceed 
to loos the band. just over the extern jugular vein there were two 
punctures, not large, but not wholesome-looking. there wa no sign of 
disease, but the edg were white and worn-looking, as if by some 
trituration. It at onc occur to me that thi wound, or whatev it 
was, might be the mean of that manifest loss of blood; but I abandon 
the idea as soon as formed, for such a thing could not be. the whole bed 
would have been drench to a scarlet with the blood which the girl must 
have lost to leav such a pallor as she had befor the transfusion. 

"well?" said van helsing. 

"well," said I, "I can make noth of it." the professor stood up. "I 
must go back to amsterdam to-night," he said. "there are book and 
thing there which I want. you must remain here all the night, and you 
must not let your sight pass from her." 

"shall I have a nurse?" I asked. 

"we are the best nurses, you and I. you keep watch all night; see that 
she is well fed, and that noth disturb her. you must not sleep all 
the night. later on we can sleep, you and I. I shall be back as soon as 
possible. and then we may begin." 

"may begin?" I said. "what on earth do you mean?" 

"we shall see!" he answered, as he hurri out. He came back a moment 
later and put hi head insid the door and said with warn finger held 
up:-- 

"remember, she is your charge. If you leav her, and harm befall, you 
shall not sleep easi hereafter!" 


_dr. seward' diary--continued._ 

_8 september._--i sat up all night with lucy. the opiat work itself 
off toward dusk, and she wake naturally; she look a differ be 
from what she had been befor the operation. her spirit even were good, 
and she wa full of a happi vivacity, but I could see evid of the 
absolut prostrat which she had undergone. when I told mrs. westenra 
that dr. van hels had direct that I should sit up with her she 
almost pooh-pooh the idea, point out her daughter' renew 
strength and excel spirits. I wa firm, however, and made 
prepar for my long vigil. when her maid had prepar her for the 
night I came in, have in the meantim had supper, and took a seat by 
the bedside. she did not in ani way make objection, but look at me 
grate whenev I caught her eye. after a long spell she seem 
sink off to sleep, but with an effort seem to pull herself togeth 
and shook it off. thi wa repeat sever times, with greater effort 
and with shorter paus as the time move on. It wa appar that she 
did not want to sleep, so I tackl the subject at once:-- 

"you do not want to go to sleep?" 

"no; I am afraid." 

"afraid to go to sleep! whi so? It is the boon we all crave for." 

"ah, not if you were like me--if sleep wa to you a presag of horror!" 

"A presag of horror! what on earth do you mean?" 

"I don't know; oh, I don't know. and that is what is so terrible. all 
thi weak come to me in sleep; until I dread the veri thought." 

"but, my dear girl, you may sleep to-night. I am here watch you, and 
I can promis that noth will happen." 

"ah, I can trust you!" I seiz the opportunity, and said: "I promis 
you that if I see ani evid of bad dream I will wake you at once." 

"you will? oh, will you really? how good you are to me. then I will 
sleep!" and almost at the word she gave a deep sigh of relief, and sank 
back, asleep. 

all night long I watch by her. she never stirred, but slept on and on 
in a deep, tranquil, life-giving, health-giv sleep. her lip were 
slightli parted, and her breast rose and fell with the regular of a 
pendulum. there wa a smile on her face, and it wa evid that no bad 
dream had come to disturb her peac of mind. 

In the earli morn her maid came, and I left her in her care and took 
myself back home, for I wa anxiou about mani things. I sent a short 
wire to van hels and to arthur, tell them of the excel result 
of the operation. My own work, with it manifold arrears, took me all 
day to clear off; it wa dark when I wa abl to inquir about my 
zoöphag patient. the report wa good; he had been quit quiet for the 
past day and night. A telegram came from van hels at amsterdam whilst 
I wa at dinner, suggest that I should be at hillingham to-night, as 
it might be well to be at hand, and state that he wa leav by the 
night mail and would join me earli in the morning. 

* * * * * 

_9 september_.--i wa pretti tire and worn out when I got to 
hillingham. for two night I had hardli had a wink of sleep, and my 
brain wa begin to feel that numb which mark cerebr 
exhaustion. luci wa up and in cheer spirits. when she shook hand 
with me she look sharpli in my face and said:-- 

"no sit up to-night for you. you are worn out. I am quit well 
again; indeed, I am; and if there is to be ani sit up, it is I who 
will sit up with you." I would not argu the point, but went and had my 
supper. luci came with me, and, enliven by her charm presence, I 
made an excel meal, and had a coupl of glass of the more than 
excel port. then luci took me upstairs, and show me a room next 
her own, where a cozi fire wa burning. "now," she said, "you must stay 
here. I shall leav thi door open and my door too. you can lie on the 
sofa for I know that noth would induc ani of you doctor to go to 
bed whilst there is a patient abov the horizon. If I want anyth I 
shall call out, and you can come to me at once." I could not but 
acquiesce, for I wa "dog-tired," and could not have sat up had I tried. 
so, on her renew her promis to call me if she should want anything, 
I lay on the sofa, and forgot all about everything. 


_luci westenra' diary._ 

_9 september._--i feel so happi to-night. I have been so miser weak, 
that to be abl to think and move about is like feel sunshin after 
a long spell of east wind out of a steel sky. somehow arthur feel very, 
veri close to me. I seem to feel hi presenc warm about me. I suppos 
it is that sick and weak are selfish thing and turn our inner 
eye and sympathi on ourselves, whilst health and strength give love 
rein, and in thought and feel he can wander where he wills. I know 
where my thought are. If arthur onli knew! My dear, my dear, your ear 
must tingl as you sleep, as mine do waking. oh, the bliss rest of 
last night! how I slept, with that dear, good dr. seward watch me. 
and to-night I shall not fear to sleep, sinc he is close at hand and 
within call. thank everybodi for be so good to me! thank god! 
good-night, arthur. 


_dr. seward' diary._ 

_10 september._--i wa consciou of the professor' hand on my head, and 
start awak all in a second. that is one of the thing that we learn 
in an asylum, at ani rate. 

"and how is our patient?" 

"well, when I left her, or rather when she left me," I answered. 

"come, let us see," he said. and togeth we went into the room. 

the blind wa down, and I went over to rais it gently, whilst van 
hels stepped, with hi soft, cat-lik tread, over to the bed. 

As I rais the blind, and the morn sunlight flood the room, I 
heard the professor' low hiss of inspiration, and know it rarity, a 
deadli fear shot through my heart. As I pass over he move back, and 
hi exclam of horror, "gott in himmel!" need no enforc from 
hi agonis face. He rais hi hand and point to the bed, and hi 
iron face wa drawn and ashen white. I felt my knee begin to tremble. 

there on the bed, seemingli in a swoon, lay poor lucy, more horribl 
white and wan-look than ever. even the lip were white, and the gum 
seem to have shrunken back from the teeth, as we sometim see in a 
corps after a prolong illness. van hels rais hi foot to stamp 
in anger, but the instinct of hi life and all the long year of habit 
stood to him, and he put it down again softly. "quick!" he said. "bring 
the brandy." I flew to the dining-room, and return with the decanter. 
He wet the poor white lip with it, and togeth we rub palm and 
wrist and heart. He felt her heart, and after a few moment of agonis 
suspens said:-- 

"it is not too late. It beats, though but feebly. all our work is 
undone; we must begin again. there is no young arthur here now; I have 
to call on you yourself thi time, friend john." As he spoke, he wa 
dip into hi bag and produc the instrument for transfusion; I 
had taken off my coat and roll up my shirt-sleeve. there wa no 
possibl of an opiat just at present, and no need of one; and so, 
without a moment' delay, we began the operation. after a time--it did 
not seem a short time either, for the drain away of one' blood, no 
matter how willingli it be given, is a terribl feeling--van hels 
held up a warn finger. "do not stir," he said, "but I fear that with 
grow strength she may wake; and that would make danger, oh, so much 
danger. but I shall precaut take. I shall give hypoderm inject 
of morphia." He proceed then, swiftli and deftly, to carri out hi 
intent. the effect on luci wa not bad, for the faint seem to merg 
subtli into the narcot sleep. It wa with a feel of person pride 
that I could see a faint ting of colour steal back into the pallid 
cheek and lips. No man knows, till he experi it, what it is to 
feel hi own life-blood drawn away into the vein of the woman he loves. 

the professor watch me critically. "that will do," he said. "already?" 
I remonstrated. "you took a great deal more from art." To which he 
smile a sad sort of smile as he replied:-- 

"he is her lover, her _fiancé_. you have work, much work, to do for her 
and for others; and the present will suffice." 

when we stop the operation, he attend to lucy, whilst I appli 
digit pressur to my own incision. I laid down, whilst I wait hi 
leisur to attend to me, for I felt faint and a littl sick. by-and-bi 
he bound up my wound, and sent me downstair to get a glass of wine for 
myself. As I wa leav the room, he came after me, and half 
whispered:-- 

"mind, noth must be said of this. If our young lover should turn up 
unexpected, as before, no word to him. It would at onc frighten him and 
enjeal him, too. there must be none. so!" 

when I came back he look at me carefully, and then said:-- 

"you are not much the worse. Go into the room, and lie on your sofa, and 
rest awhile; then have much breakfast, and come here to me." 

I follow out hi orders, for I knew how right and wise they were. I 
had done my part, and now my next duti wa to keep up my strength. I 
felt veri weak, and in the weak lost someth of the amaz at 
what had occurred. I fell asleep on the sofa, however, wonder over 
and over again how luci had made such a retrograd movement, and how 
she could have been drain of so much blood with no sign anywher to 
show for it. I think I must have continu my wonder in my dreams, for, 
sleep and waking, my thought alway came back to the littl 
punctur in her throat and the ragged, exhaust appear of their 
edges--tini though they were. 

luci slept well into the day, and when she woke she wa fairli well and 
strong, though not nearli so much so as the day before. when van hels 
had seen her, he went out for a walk, leav me in charge, with strict 
injunct that I wa not to leav her for a moment. I could hear hi 
voic in the hall, ask the way to the nearest telegraph office. 

luci chat with me freely, and seem quit unconsci that anyth 
had happened. I tri to keep her amus and interested. when her mother 
came up to see her, she did not seem to notic ani chang whatever, but 
said to me gratefully:-- 

"we owe you so much, dr. seward, for all you have done, but you realli 
must now take care not to overwork yourself. you are look pale 
yourself. you want a wife to nurs and look after you a bit; that you 
do!" As she spoke, luci turn crimson, though it wa onli momentarily, 
for her poor wast vein could not stand for long such an unwont 
drain to the head. the reaction came in excess pallor as she turn 
implor eye on me. I smile and nodded, and laid my finger on my 
lips; with a sigh, she sank back amid her pillows. 

van hels return in a coupl of hours, and present said to me: 
"now you go home, and eat much and drink enough. make yourself strong. I 
stay here to-night, and I shall sit up with littl miss myself. you and 
I must watch the case, and we must have none other to know. I have grave 
reasons. no, do not ask them; think what you will. Do not fear to think 
even the most not-probable. good-night." 

In the hall two of the maid came to me, and ask if they or either of 
them might not sit up with miss lucy. they implor me to let them; and 
when I said it wa dr. van helsing' wish that either he or I should sit 
up, they ask me quit piteous to interced with the "foreign 
gentleman." I wa much touch by their kindness. perhap it is becaus 
I am weak at present, and perhap becaus it wa on lucy' account, that 
their devot wa manifested; for over and over again have I seen 
similar instanc of woman' kindness. I got back here in time for a 
late dinner; went my rounds--al well; and set thi down whilst wait 
for sleep. It is coming. 

* * * * * 

_11 september._--thi afternoon I went over to hillingham. found van 
hels in excel spirits, and luci much better. shortli after I had 
arrived, a big parcel from abroad came for the professor. He open it 
with much impressment--assumed, of course--and show a great bundl of 
white flowers. 

"these are for you, miss lucy," he said. 

"for me? oh, dr. van helsing!" 

"yes, my dear, but not for you to play with. these are medicines." here 
luci made a wri face. "nay, but they are not to take in a decoct or 
in nauseou form, so you need not snub that so charm nose, or I shall 
point out to my friend arthur what woe he may have to endur in see 
so much beauti that he so love so much distort. aha, my pretti miss, 
that bring the so nice nose all straight again. thi is medicinal, but 
you do not know how. I put him in your window, I make pretti wreath, and 
hang him round your neck, so that you sleep well. Oh yes! they, like the 
lotu flower, make your troubl forgotten. It smell so like the water 
of lethe, and of that fountain of youth that the conquistador sought 
for in the floridas, and find him all too late." 

whilst he wa speaking, luci had been examin the flower and smell 
them. now she threw them down, saying, with half-laughter, and 
half-disgust:-- 

"oh, professor, I believ you are onli put up a joke on me. why, 
these flower are onli common garlic." 

To my surprise, van hels rose up and said with all hi sternness, hi 
iron jaw set and hi bushi eyebrow meeting:-- 

"no trifl with me! I never jest! there is grim purpos in all I do; 
and I warn you that you do not thwart me. take care, for the sake of 
other if not for your own." then see poor luci scared, as she might 
well be, he went on more gently: "oh, littl miss, my dear, do not fear 
me. I onli do for your good; but there is much virtu to you in those so 
common flowers. see, I place them myself in your room. I make myself the 
wreath that you are to wear. but hush! no tell to other that make so 
inquisit questions. We must obey, and silenc is a part of obedience; 
and obedi is to bring you strong and well into love arm that wait 
for you. now sit still awhile. come with me, friend john, and you shall 
help me deck the room with my garlic, which is all the way from haarlem, 
where my friend vanderpool rais herb in hi glass-hous all the year. 
I had to telegraph yesterday, or they would not have been here." 

We went into the room, take the flower with us. the professor' 
action were certainli odd and not to be found in ani pharmacopoeia 
that I ever heard of. first he fasten up the window and latch them 
securely; next, take a hand of the flowers, he rub them all over 
the sashes, as though to ensur that everi whiff of air that might get 
in would be laden with the garlic smell. then with the wisp he rub 
all over the jamb of the door, above, below, and at each side, and round 
the fireplac in the same way. It all seem grotesqu to me, and 
present I said:-- 

"well, professor, I know you alway have a reason for what you do, but 
thi certainli puzzl me. It is well we have no sceptic here, or he 
would say that you were work some spell to keep out an evil spirit." 

"perhap I am!" he answer quietli as he began to make the wreath which 
luci wa to wear round her neck. 

We then wait whilst luci made her toilet for the night, and when she 
wa in bed he came and himself fix the wreath of garlic round her 
neck. the last word he said to her were:-- 

"take care you do not disturb it; and even if the room feel close, do 
not to-night open the window or the door." 

"I promise," said lucy, "and thank you both a thousand time for all 
your kind to me! oh, what have I done to be bless with such 
friends?" 

As we left the hous in my fly, which wa waiting, van hels said:-- 

"to-night I can sleep in peace, and sleep I want--two night of travel, 
much read in the day between, and much anxieti on the day to follow, 
and a night to sit up, without to wink. to-morrow in the morn earli 
you call for me, and we come togeth to see our pretti miss, so much 
more strong for my 'spell' which I have work. ho! ho!" 

He seem so confid that I, rememb my own confid two night 
befor and with the bane result, felt awe and vagu terror. It must 
have been my weak that made me hesit to tell it to my friend, but 
I felt it all the more, like unsh tears. 




chapter XI 

_luci westenra' diary._ 


_12 september._--how good they all are to me. I quit love that dear dr. 
van helsing. I wonder whi he wa so anxiou about these flowers. He 
posit frighten me, he wa so fierce. and yet he must have been 
right, for I feel comfort from them already. somehow, I do not dread 
be alon to-night, and I can go to sleep without fear. I shall not 
mind ani flap outsid the window. oh, the terribl struggl that I 
have had against sleep so often of late; the pain of the sleeplessness, 
or the pain of the fear of sleep, with such unknown horror as it ha 
for me! how bless are some people, whose live have no fears, no 
dreads; to whom sleep is a bless that come nightly, and bring 
noth but sweet dreams. well, here I am to-night, hope for sleep, 
and lie like ophelia in the play, with "virgin crant and maiden 
strewments." I never like garlic before, but to-night it is delightful! 
there is peac in it smell; I feel sleep come already. good-night, 
everybody. 


_dr. seward' diary._ 

_13 september._--cal at the berkeley and found van helsing, as usual, 
up to time. the carriag order from the hotel wa waiting. the 
professor took hi bag, which he alway bring with him now. 

let all be put down exactly. van hels and I arriv at hillingham at 
eight o'clock. It wa a love morning; the bright sunshin and all the 
fresh feel of earli autumn seem like the complet of nature' 
annual work. the leav were turn to all kind of beauti colours, 
but had not yet begun to drop from the trees. when we enter we met 
mrs. westenra come out of the morn room. she is alway an earli 
riser. she greet us warmli and said:-- 

"you will be glad to know that luci is better. the dear child is still 
asleep. I look into her room and saw her, but did not go in, lest I 
should disturb her." the professor smiled, and look quit jubilant. He 
rub hi hand together, and said:-- 

"aha! I thought I had diagnos the case. My treatment is working," to 
which she answered:-- 

"you must not take all the credit to yourself, doctor. lucy' state thi 
morn is due in part to me." 

"how you do mean, ma'am?" ask the professor. 

"well, I wa anxiou about the dear child in the night, and went into 
her room. she wa sleep soundly--so soundli that even my come did 
not wake her. but the room wa aw stuffy. there were a lot of those 
horrible, strong-smel flower about everywhere, and she had actual 
a bunch of them round her neck. I fear that the heavi odour would be 
too much for the dear child in her weak state, so I took them all away 
and open a bit of the window to let in a littl fresh air. you will be 
pleas with her, I am sure." 

she move off into her boudoir, where she usual breakfast early. As 
she had spoken, I watch the professor' face, and saw it turn ashen 
grey. He had been abl to retain hi self-command whilst the poor ladi 
wa present, for he knew her state and how mischiev a shock would be; 
he actual smile on her as he held open the door for her to pass into 
her room. but the instant she had disappear he pull me, suddenli and 
forcibly, into the dining-room and close the door. 

then, for the first time in my life, I saw van hels break down. He 
rais hi hand over hi head in a sort of mute despair, and then beat 
hi palm togeth in a helpless way; final he sat down on a chair, 
and put hi hand befor hi face, began to sob, with loud, dri sob 
that seem to come from the veri rack of hi heart. then he rais 
hi arm again, as though appeal to the whole universe. "god! god! 
god!" he said. "what have we done, what ha thi poor thing done, that 
we are so sore beset? Is there fate amongst us still, sent down from the 
pagan world of old, that such thing must be, and in such way? thi poor 
mother, all unknowing, and all for the best as she think, doe such 
thing as lose her daughter bodi and soul; and we must not tell her, we 
must not even warn her, or she die, and then both die. oh, how we are 
beset! how are all the power of the devil against us!" suddenli he 
jump to hi feet. "come," he said, "come, we must see and act. devil 
or no devils, or all the devil at once, it matter not; we fight him 
all the same." He went to the hall-door for hi bag; and togeth we 
went up to lucy' room. 

onc again I drew up the blind, whilst van hels went toward the bed. 
thi time he did not start as he look on the poor face with the same 
awful, waxen pallor as before. He wore a look of stern sad and 
infinit pity. 

"a I expected," he murmured, with that hiss inspir of hi which 
meant so much. without a word he went and lock the door, and then 
began to set out on the littl tabl the instrument for yet anoth 
oper of transfus of blood. I had long ago recognis the 
necessity, and begun to take off my coat, but he stop me with a 
warn hand. "no!" he said. "to-day you must operate. I shall provide. 
you are weaken already." As he spoke he took off hi coat and roll 
up hi shirt-sleeve. 

again the operation; again the narcotic; again some return of colour to 
the ashi cheeks, and the regular breath of healthi sleep. thi time I 
watch whilst van hels recruit himself and rested. 

present he took an opportun of tell mrs. westenra that she must 
not remov anyth from lucy' room without consult him; that the 
flower were of medicin value, and that the breath of their odour 
wa a part of the system of cure. then he took over the care of the case 
himself, say that he would watch thi night and the next and would 
send me word when to come. 

after anoth hour luci wake from her sleep, fresh and bright and 
seemingli not much the wors for her terribl ordeal. 

what doe it all mean? I am begin to wonder if my long habit of life 
amongst the insan is begin to tell upon my own brain. 


_luci westenra' diary._ 

_17 september._--four day and night of peace. I am get so strong 
again that I hardli know myself. It is as if I had pass through some 
long nightmare, and had just awaken to see the beauti sunshin and 
feel the fresh air of the morn around me. I have a dim 
half-remembr of long, anxiou time of wait and fearing; dark 
in which there wa not even the pain of hope to make present distress 
more poignant: and then long spell of oblivion, and the rise back to 
life as a diver come up through a great press of water. since, 
however, dr. van hels ha been with me, all thi bad dream seem 
to have pass away; the nois that use to frighten me out of my 
wits--th flap against the windows, the distant voic which seem 
so close to me, the harsh sound that came from I know not where and 
command me to do I know not what--hav all ceased. I go to bed now 
without ani fear of sleep. I do not even tri to keep awake. I have grown 
quit fond of the garlic, and a box arriv for me everi day from 
haarlem. to-night dr. van hels is go away, as he ha to be for a 
day in amsterdam. but I need not be watched; I am well enough to be left 
alone. thank god for mother' sake, and dear arthur's, and for all our 
friend who have been so kind! I shall not even feel the change, for 
last night dr. van hels slept in hi chair a lot of the time. I found 
him asleep twice when I awoke; but I did not fear to go to sleep again, 
although the bough or bat or someth nap almost angrili against 
the window-panes. 


_"the pall mall gazette," 18 september._ 

the escap wolf. 

peril adventur OF our interviewer. 

_interview with the keeper in the zoölog gardens._ 

after mani inquiri and almost as mani refusals, and perpetu use 
the word "pall mall gazette" as a sort of talisman, I manag to find 
the keeper of the section of the zoölog garden in which the wolf 
depart is included. thoma bilder live in one of the cottag in 
the enclosur behind the elephant-house, and wa just sit down to 
hi tea when I found him. thoma and hi wife are hospit folk, 
elderly, and without children, and if the specimen I enjoy of their 
hospit be of the averag kind, their live must be pretti 
comfortable. the keeper would not enter on what he call "business" 
until the supper wa over, and we were all satisfied. then when the 
tabl wa cleared, and he had lit hi pipe, he said:-- 

"now, sir, you can go on and arsk me what you want. you'll excoos me 
refoosin' to talk of perfeshun subject afor meals. I give the 
wolv and the jackal and the hyena in all our section their tea afor 
I begin to arsk them questions." 

"how do you mean, ask them questions?" I queried, wish to get him 
into a talk humour. 

"'ittin' of them over the 'ead with a pole is one way; scratchin' of 
their hear is another, when gent as is flush want a bit of a show-orf 
to their gals. I don't so much mind the fust--th 'ittin' with a pole 
afor I chuck in their dinner; but I wait till they'v 'ad their 
sherri and kawffee, so to speak, afor I tri on with the 
ear-scratchin'. mind you," he ad philosophically, "there' a deal of 
the same natur in us as in them theer animiles. here' you a-comin' and 
arskin' of me question about my business, and I that grumpy-lik that 
onli for your bloomin' 'arf-quid i'd 'a' seen you blow fust 'fore i'd 
answer. not even when you arsk me sarcastic-lik if i'd like you to 
arsk the superintend if you might arsk me questions. without offenc 
did I tell yer to go to 'ell?" 

"you did." 

"an' when you said you'd report me for usin' of obscen languag that 
wa 'ittin' me over the 'ead; but the 'arf-quid made that all right. I 
weren't a-goin' to fight, so I wait for the food, and did with my 'owl 
as the wolves, and lions, and tiger does. but, lor' love yer 'art, now 
that the old 'ooman ha stuck a chunk of her tea-cak in me, an' rins 
me out with her bloomin' old teapot, and i'v lit hup, you may scratch 
my ear for all you'r worth, and won't git even a growl out of me. 
drive along with your questions. I know what yer a-comin' at, that 'ere 
escap wolf." 

"exactly. I want you to give me your view of it. just tell me how it 
happened; and when I know the fact i'll get you to say what you 
consid wa the caus of it, and how you think the whole affair will 
end." 

"all right, guv'nor. thi 'ere is about the 'ole story. that 'ere wolf 
what we call bersick wa one of three grey one that came from 
norway to jamrach's, which we bought off him four year ago. He wa a 
nice well-behav wolf, that never gave no troubl to talk of. i'm more 
surpris at 'im for wantin' to get out nor ani other animil in the 
place. but, there, you can't trust wolv no more nor women." 

"don't you mind him, sir!" broke in mrs. tom, with a cheeri laugh. "'e' 
got mindin' the animil so long that blest if he ain't like a old wolf 
'isself! but there ain't no 'arm in 'im." 

"well, sir, it wa about two hour after feedin' yesterday when I first 
hear my disturbance. I wa makin' up a litter in the monkey-hous for a 
young puma which is ill; but when I heard the yelpin' and 'owlin' I kem 
away straight. there wa bersick a-tearin' like a mad thing at the 
bar as if he want to get out. there wasn't much peopl about that 
day, and close at hand wa onli one man, a tall, thin chap, with a 'ook 
nose and a point beard, with a few white hair runnin' through it. He 
had a 'ard, cold look and red eyes, and I took a sort of mislik to him, 
for it seem as if it wa 'im as they wa hirrit at. He 'ad white 
kid glove on 'i 'ands, and he point out the animil to me and says: 
'keeper, these wolv seem upset at something.' 

"'mayb it' you,' say I, for I did not like the air as he give 
'isself. He didn't git angry, as I 'ope he would, but he smile a kind 
of insol smile, with a mouth full of white, sharp teeth. 'oh no, they 
wouldn't like me,' 'e says. 

"'ow yes, they would,' say I, a-imitatin' of him. 'they alway like a 
bone or two to clean their teeth on about tea-time, which you 'a a 
bagful.' 

"well, it wa a odd thing, but when the animil see us a-talkin' they 
lay down, and when I went over to bersick he let me stroke hi ear 
same as ever. that there man kem over, and bless but if he didn't put 
in hi hand and stroke the old wolf' ear too! 

"'tyke care,' say I. 'bersick is quick.' 

"'never mind,' he says. 'i'm use to 'em!' 

"'are you in the busi yourself?' I says, tyke off my 'at, for a 
man what trade in wolves, anceterer, is a good friend to keepers. 

"'no' say he, 'not exactli in the business, but I 'ave made pet of 
several.' and with that he lift hi 'at as perlit as a lord, and walk 
away. old bersick kep' a-lookin' arter 'im till 'e wa out of sight, 
and then went and lay down in a corner and wouldn't come hout the 'ole 
hevening. well, larst night, so soon as the moon wa hup, the wolv 
here all began a-'owling. there warn't noth for them to 'owl at. 
there warn't no one near, except some one that wa evid a-callin' a 
dog somewher out back of the gard in the park road. onc or twice 
I went out to see that all wa right, and it was, and then the 'owl 
stopped. just befor twelv o'clock I just took a look round afor 
turnin' in, an', bust me, but when I kem opposit to old bersicker' 
cage I see the rail broken and twist about and the cage empty. and 
that' all I know for certing." 

"did ani one els see anything?" 

"one of our gard'ner wa a-comin' 'ome about that time from a 'armony, 
when he see a big grey dog comin' out through the gard 'edges. At 
least, so he says, but I don't give much for it myself, for if he did 'e 
never said a word about it to hi missi when 'e got 'ome, and it wa 
onli after the escap of the wolf wa made known, and we had been up all 
night-a-huntin' of the park for bersicker, that he rememb seein' 
anything. My own belief wa that the 'armoni 'ad got into hi 'ead." 

"now, mr. bilder, can you account in ani way for the escap of the 
wolf?" 

"well, sir," he said, with a suspici sort of modesty, "I think I can; 
but I don't know as 'ow you'd be satisfi with the theory." 

"certainli I shall. If a man like you, who know the anim from 
experience, can't hazard a good guess at ani rate, who is even to try?" 

"well then, sir, I account for it thi way; it seem to me that 'ere 
wolf escaped--simpli becaus he want to get out." 

from the hearti way that both thoma and hi wife laugh at the joke I 
could see that it had done servic before, and that the whole 
explan wa simpli an elabor sell. I couldn't cope in badinag 
with the worthi thomas, but I thought I knew a surer way to hi heart, 
so I said:-- 

"now, mr. bilder, we'll consid that first half-sovereign work off, 
and thi brother of hi is wait to be claim when you'v told me 
what you think will happen." 

"right y'are, sir," he said briskly. "ye'll excoos me, I know, for 
a-chaffin' of ye, but the old woman here wink at me, which wa as much 
as tell me to go on." 

"well, I never!" said the old lady. 

"mi opinion is this: that 'ere wolf is a-'idin' of, somewheres. the 
gard'ner wot didn't rememb said he wa a-gallopin' northward faster 
than a hors could go; but I don't believ him, for, yer see, sir, 
wolv don't gallop no more nor dog does, they not bein' built that 
way. wolv is fine thing in a storybook, and I dessay when they get 
in pack and doe be chivyin' somethin' that' more afear than they is 
they can make a devil of a nois and chop it up, whatev it is. but, 
lor' bless you, in real life a wolf is onli a low creature, not half so 
clever or bold as a good dog; and not half a quarter so much fight in 
'im. thi one ain't been use to fightin' or even to providin' for 
hisself, and more like he' somewher round the park a-'idin' an' 
a-shiverin' of, and, if he think at all, wonderin' where he is to get 
hi breakfast from; or mayb he' got down some area and is in a 
coal-cellar. My eye, won't some cook get a rum start when she see hi 
green eye a-shin at her out of the dark! If he can't get food he' 
bound to look for it, and mayhap he may chanc to light on a butcher' 
shop in time. If he doesn't, and some nursemaid goe a-walkin' orf with 
a soldier, leavin' of the hinfant in the perambulator--well, then I 
shouldn't be surpris if the censu is one babbi the less. that' 
all." 

I wa hand him the half-sovereign, when someth came bob up 
against the window, and mr. bilder' face doubl it natur length 
with surprise. 

"god bless me!" he said. "if there ain't old bersick come back by 
'isself!" 

He went to the door and open it; a most unnecessari proceed it 
seem to me. I have alway thought that a wild anim never look so 
well as when some obstacl of pronounc durabl is between us; a 
person experi ha intensifi rather than diminish that idea. 

after all, however, there is noth like custom, for neither bilder nor 
hi wife thought ani more of the wolf than I should of a dog. the anim 
itself wa as peac and well-behav as that father of all 
picture-wolves--r ride hood' quondam friend, whilst move her 
confid in masquerade. 

the whole scene wa an unutter mixtur of comedi and pathos. the 
wick wolf that for half a day had paralys london and set all the 
children in the town shiver in their shoes, wa there in a sort of 
penit mood, and wa receiv and pet like a sort of vulpin 
prodig son. old bilder examin him all over with most tender 
solicitude, and when he had finish with hi penit said:-- 

"there, I knew the poor old chap would get into some kind of trouble; 
didn't I say it all along? here' hi head all cut and full of broken 
glass. 'e' been a-gettin' over some bloomin' wall or other. it' a 
shyme that peopl are allow to top their wall with broken bottles. 
thi 'ere' what come of it. come along, bersicker." 

He took the wolf and lock him up in a cage, with a piec of meat that 
satisfied, in quantiti at ani rate, the elementari condit of the 
fat calf, and went off to report. 

I came off, too, to report the onli exclus inform that is given 
to-day regard the strang escapad at the zoo. 


_dr. seward' diary._ 

_17 september._--i wa engag after dinner in my studi post up my 
books, which, through press of other work and the mani visit to lucy, 
had fallen sadli into arrear. suddenli the door wa burst open, and in 
rush my patient, with hi face distort with passion. I wa 
thunderstruck, for such a thing as a patient get of hi own accord 
into the superintendent' studi is almost unknown. without an instant' 
paus he made straight at me. He had a dinner-knif in hi hand, and, 
as I saw he wa dangerous, I tri to keep the tabl between us. He wa 
too quick and too strong for me, however; for befor I could get my 
balanc he had struck at me and cut my left wrist rather severely. 
befor he could strike again, however, I got in my right and he wa 
sprawl on hi back on the floor. My wrist bled freely, and quit a 
littl pool trickl on to the carpet. I saw that my friend wa not 
intent on further effort, and occupi myself bind up my wrist, 
keep a wari eye on the prostrat figur all the time. when the 
attend rush in, and we turn our attent to him, hi employ 
posit sicken me. He wa lie on hi belli on the floor lick 
up, like a dog, the blood which had fallen from my wound wrist. He wa 
easili secured, and, to my surprise, went with the attend quit 
placidly, simpli repeat over and over again: "the blood is the life! 
the blood is the life!" 

I cannot afford to lose blood just at present; I have lost too much of 
late for my physic good, and then the prolong strain of lucy' 
ill and it horribl phase is tell on me. I am over-excit and 
weary, and I need rest, rest, rest. happili van hels ha not summon 
me, so I need not forego my sleep; to-night I could not well do without 
it. 


_telegram, van helsing, antwerp, to seward, carfax._ 

(sent to carfax, sussex, as no counti given; deliv late by 
twenty-two hours.) 

"_17 september._--do not fail to be at hillingham to-night. If not 
watch all the time frequently, visit and see that flower are as 
placed; veri important; do not fail. shall be with you as soon as 
possibl after arrival." 


_dr. seward' diary._ 

_18 september._--just off for train to london. the arriv of van 
helsing' telegram fill me with dismay. A whole night lost, and I know 
by bitter experi what may happen in a night. Of cours it is 
possibl that all may be well, but what _may_ have happened? sure 
there is some horribl doom hang over us that everi possibl accid 
should thwart us in all we tri to do. I shall take thi cylind with 
me, and then I can complet my entri on lucy' phonograph. 


_memorandum left by luci westenra._ 

_17 september. night._--i write thi and leav it to be seen, so that no 
one may by ani chanc get into troubl through me. thi is an exact 
record of what took place to-night. I feel I am die of weakness, and 
have bare strength to write, but it must be done if I die in the 
doing. 

I went to bed as usual, take care that the flower were place as dr. 
van hels directed, and soon fell asleep. 

I wa wake by the flap at the window, which had begun after that 
sleep-walk on the cliff at whitbi when mina save me, and which now I 
know so well. I wa not afraid, but I did wish that dr. seward wa in 
the next room--a dr. van hels said he would be--so that I might have 
call him. I tri to go to sleep, but could not. then there came to me 
the old fear of sleep, and I determin to keep awake. pervers sleep 
would tri to come then when I did not want it; so, as I fear to be 
alone, I open my door and call out: "i there anybodi there?" there 
wa no answer. I wa afraid to wake mother, and so close my door again. 
then outsid in the shrubberi I heard a sort of howl like a dog's, but 
more fierc and deeper. I went to the window and look out, but could 
see nothing, except a big bat, which had evid been buffet it 
wing against the window. So I went back to bed again, but determin 
not to go to sleep. present the door opened, and mother look in; 
see by my move that I wa not asleep, came in, and sat by me. she 
said to me even more sweetli and softli than her wont:-- 

"I wa uneasi about you, darling, and came in to see that you were all 
right." 

I fear she might catch cold sit there, and ask her to come in 
and sleep with me, so she came into bed, and lay down besid me; she did 
not take off her dress gown, for she said she would onli stay a while 
and then go back to her own bed. As she lay there in my arms, and I in 
hers, the flap and buffet came to the window again. she wa 
startl and a littl frightened, and cri out: "what is that?" I tri 
to pacifi her, and at last succeeded, and she lay quiet; but I could 
hear her poor dear heart still beat terribly. after a while there wa 
the low howl again out in the shrubbery, and shortli after there wa a 
crash at the window, and a lot of broken glass wa hurl on the floor. 
the window blind blew back with the wind that rush in, and in the 
apertur of the broken pane there wa the head of a great, gaunt grey 
wolf. mother cri out in a fright, and struggl up into a sit 
posture, and clutch wildli at anyth that would help her. amongst 
other things, she clutch the wreath of flower that dr. van hels 
insist on my wear round my neck, and tore it away from me. for a 
second or two she sat up, point at the wolf, and there wa a strang 
and horribl gurgl in her throat; then she fell over--a if struck 
with lightning, and her head hit my forehead and made me dizzi for a 
moment or two. the room and all round seem to spin round. I kept my 
eye fix on the window, but the wolf drew hi head back, and a whole 
myriad of littl speck seem to come blow in through the broken 
window, and wheel and circl round like the pillar of dust that 
travel describ when there is a simoon in the desert. I tri to 
stir, but there wa some spell upon me, and dear mother' poor body, 
which seem to grow cold already--for her dear heart had ceas to 
beat--weigh me down; and I rememb no more for a while. 

the time did not seem long, but very, veri awful, till I recov 
conscious again. somewher near, a pass bell wa tolling; the 
dog all round the neighbourhood were howling; and in our shrubbery, 
seemingli just outside, a nightingal wa singing. I wa daze and 
stupid with pain and terror and weakness, but the sound of the 
nightingal seem like the voic of my dead mother come back to comfort 
me. the sound seem to have awaken the maids, too, for I could hear 
their bare feet patter outsid my door. I call to them, and they 
came in, and when they saw what had happened, and what it wa that lay 
over me on the bed, they scream out. the wind rush in through the 
broken window, and the door slam to. they lift off the bodi of my 
dear mother, and laid her, cover up with a sheet, on the bed after I 
had got up. they were all so frighten and nervou that I direct them 
to go to the dining-room and have each a glass of wine. the door flew 
open for an instant and close again. the maid shrieked, and then went 
in a bodi to the dining-room; and I laid what flower I had on my dear 
mother' breast. when they were there I rememb what dr. van hels 
had told me, but I didn't like to remov them, and, besides, I would 
have some of the servant to sit up with me now. I wa surpris that 
the maid did not come back. I call them, but got no answer, so I went 
to the dining-room to look for them. 

My heart sank when I saw what had happened. they all four lay helpless 
on the floor, breath heavily. the decant of sherri wa on the tabl 
half full, but there wa a queer, acrid smell about. I wa suspicious, 
and examin the decanter. It smelt of laudanum, and look on the 
sideboard, I found that the bottl which mother' doctor use for 
her--oh! did use--wa empty. what am I to do? what am I to do? I am back 
in the room with mother. I cannot leav her, and I am alone, save for 
the sleep servants, whom some one ha drugged. alon with the dead! I 
dare not go out, for I can hear the low howl of the wolf through the 
broken window. 

the air seem full of specks, float and circl in the draught from 
the window, and the light burn blue and dim. what am I to do? god 
shield me from harm thi night! I shall hide thi paper in my breast, 
where they shall find it when they come to lay me out. My dear mother 
gone! It is time that I go too. good-bye, dear arthur, if I should not 
surviv thi night. god keep you, dear, and god help me! 




chapter xii 

dr. seward' diari 


_18 september._--i drove at onc to hillingham and arriv early. 
keep my cab at the gate, I went up the avenu alone. I knock gentli 
and rang as quietli as possible, for I fear to disturb luci or her 
mother, and hope to onli bring a servant to the door. after a while, 
find no response, I knock and rang again; still no answer. I curs 
the lazi of the servant that they should lie abe at such an 
hour--for it wa now ten o'clock--and so rang and knock again, but 
more impatiently, but still without response. hitherto I had blame onli 
the servants, but now a terribl fear began to assail me. wa thi 
desol but anoth link in the chain of doom which seem draw 
tight around us? wa it inde a hous of death to which I had come, too 
late? I knew that minutes, even second of delay, might mean hour of 
danger to lucy, if she had had again one of those fright relapses; 
and I went round the hous to tri if I could find by chanc an entri 
anywhere. 

I could find no mean of ingress. everi window and door wa fasten and 
locked, and I return baffl to the porch. As I did so, I heard the 
rapid pit-pat of a swiftli driven horse' feet. they stop at the 
gate, and a few second later I met van hels run up the avenue. 
when he saw me, he gasp out:-- 

"then it wa you, and just arrived. how is she? are we too late? did you 
not get my telegram?" 

I answer as quickli and coher as I could that I had onli got hi 
telegram earli in the morning, and had not lost a minut in come here, 
and that I could not make ani one in the hous hear me. He paus and 
rais hi hat as he said solemnly:-- 

"then I fear we are too late. god' will be done!" with hi usual 
recup energy, he went on: "come. If there be no way open to get 
in, we must make one. time is all in all to us now." 

We went round to the back of the house, where there wa a kitchen 
window. the professor took a small surgic saw from hi case, and 
hand it to me, point to the iron bar which guard the window. I 
attack them at onc and had veri soon cut through three of them. then 
with a long, thin knife we push back the fasten of the sash and 
open the window. I help the professor in, and follow him. there 
wa no one in the kitchen or in the servants' rooms, which were close at 
hand. We tri all the room as we went along, and in the dining-room, 
dimli lit by ray of light through the shutters, found four 
servant-women lie on the floor. there wa no need to think them dead, 
for their stertor breath and the acrid smell of laudanum in the 
room left no doubt as to their condition. van hels and I look at 
each other, and as we move away he said: "we can attend to them later." 
then we ascend to lucy' room. for an instant or two we paus at the 
door to listen, but there wa no sound that we could hear. with white 
face and trembl hands, we open the door gently, and enter the 
room. 

how shall I describ what we saw? On the bed lay two women, luci and her 
mother. the latter lay farthest in, and she wa cover with a white 
sheet, the edg of which had been blown back by the draught through the 
broken window, show the drawn, white face, with a look of terror 
fix upon it. By her side lay lucy, with face white and still more 
drawn. the flower which had been round her neck we found upon her 
mother' bosom, and her throat wa bare, show the two littl wound 
which we had notic before, but look horribl white and mangled. 
without a word the professor bent over the bed, hi head almost touch 
poor lucy' breast; then he gave a quick turn of hi head, as of one who 
listens, and leap to hi feet, he cri out to me:-- 

"it is not yet too late! quick! quick! bring the brandy!" 

I flew downstair and return with it, take care to smell and tast 
it, lest it, too, were drug like the decant of sherri which I found 
on the table. the maid were still breathing, but more restlessly, and I 
fanci that the narcot wa wear off. I did not stay to make sure, 
but return to van helsing. He rub the brandy, as on anoth 
occasion, on her lip and gum and on her wrist and the palm of her 
hands. He said to me:-- 

"I can do this, all that can be at the present. you go wake those maids. 
flick them in the face with a wet towel, and flick them hard. make them 
get heat and fire and a warm bath. thi poor soul is nearli as cold as 
that besid her. she will need be heat befor we can do anyth 
more." 

I went at once, and found littl difficulti in wake three of the 
women. the fourth wa onli a young girl, and the drug had evid 
affect her more strongly, so I lift her on the sofa and let her 
sleep. the other were daze at first, but as remembr came back to 
them they cri and sob in a hyster manner. I wa stern with 
them, however, and would not let them talk. I told them that one life 
wa bad enough to lose, and that if they delay they would sacrific 
miss lucy. so, sob and crying, they went about their way, half clad 
as they were, and prepar fire and water. fortunately, the kitchen and 
boiler fire were still alive, and there wa no lack of hot water. We 
got a bath and carri luci out as she wa and place her in it. whilst 
we were busi chafe her limb there wa a knock at the hall door. one 
of the maid ran off, hurri on some more clothes, and open it. then 
she return and whisper to us that there wa a gentleman who had come 
with a messag from mr. holmwood. I bade her simpli tell him that he 
must wait, for we could see no one now. she went away with the message, 
and, engross with our work, I clean forgot all about him. 

I never saw in all my experi the professor work in such deadli 
earnest. I knew--a he knew--that it wa a stand-up fight with death, 
and in a paus told him so. He answer me in a way that I did not 
understand, but with the sternest look that hi face could wear:-- 

"if that were all, I would stop here where we are now, and let her fade 
away into peace, for I see no light in life over her horizon." He went 
on with hi work with, if possible, renew and more frenzi vigour. 

present we both began to be consciou that the heat wa begin to 
be of some effect. lucy' heart beat a trifl more audibl to the 
stethoscope, and her lung had a percept movement. van helsing' 
face almost beamed, and as we lift her from the bath and roll her in 
a hot sheet to dri her he said to me:-- 

"the first gain is ours! check to the king!" 

We took luci into anoth room, which had by now been prepared, and laid 
her in bed and forc a few drop of brandi down her throat. I notic 
that van hels tie a soft silk handkerchief round her throat. she wa 
still unconscious, and wa quit as bad as, if not wors than, we had 
ever seen her. 

van hels call in one of the women, and told her to stay with her 
and not to take her eye off her till we returned, and then beckon me 
out of the room. 

"we must consult as to what is to be done," he said as we descend the 
stairs. In the hall he open the dining-room door, and we pass in, he 
close the door care behind him. the shutter had been opened, but 
the blind were alreadi down, with that obedi to the etiquett of 
death which the british woman of the lower class alway rigidli 
observes. the room was, therefore, dimli dark. It was, however, light 
enough for our purposes. van helsing' stern wa somewhat reliev 
by a look of perplexity. He wa evid tortur hi mind about 
something, so I wait for an instant, and he spoke:-- 

"what are we to do now? where are we to turn for help? We must have 
anoth transfus of blood, and that soon, or that poor girl' life 
won't be worth an hour' purchase. you are exhaust already; I am 
exhaust too. I fear to trust those women, even if they would have 
courag to submit. what are we to do for some one who will open hi 
vein for her?" 

"what' the matter with me, anyhow?" 

the voic came from the sofa across the room, and it tone brought 
relief and joy to my heart, for they were those of quincey morris. van 
hels start angrili at the first sound, but hi face soften and a 
glad look came into hi eye as I cri out: "quincey morris!" and 
rush toward him with outstretch hands. 

"what brought you here?" I cri as our hand met. 

"I guess art is the cause." 

He hand me a telegram:-- 

"have not heard from seward for three days, and am terribl anxious. 
cannot leave. father still in same condition. send me word how luci is. 
Do not delay.--holmwood." 

"I think I came just in the nick of time. you know you have onli to tell 
me what to do." 

van hels strode forward, and took hi hand, look him straight in 
the eye as he said:-- 

"A brave man' blood is the best thing on thi earth when a woman is in 
trouble. you'r a man and no mistake. well, the devil may work against 
us for all he' worth, but god send us men when we want them." 

onc again we went through that ghastli operation. I have not the heart 
to go through with the details. luci had got a terribl shock and it 
told on her more than before, for though plenti of blood went into her 
veins, her bodi did not respond to the treatment as well as on the other 
occasions. her struggl back into life wa someth fright to see 
and hear. however, the action of both heart and lung improved, and van 
hels made a subcutan inject of morphia, as before, and with 
good effect. her faint becam a profound slumber. the professor watch 
whilst I went downstair with quincey morris, and sent one of the maid 
to pay off one of the cabmen who were waiting. I left quincey lie down 
after have a glass of wine, and told the cook to get readi a good 
breakfast. then a thought struck me, and I went back to the room where 
luci now was. when I came softli in, I found van hels with a sheet or 
two of note-pap in hi hand. He had evid read it, and wa 
think it over as he sat with hi hand to hi brow. there wa a look 
of grim satisfact in hi face, as of one who ha had a doubt solved. 
He hand me the paper say only: "it drop from lucy' breast when 
we carri her to the bath." 

when I had read it, I stood look at the professor, and after a paus 
ask him: "in god' name, what doe it all mean? wa she, or is she, 
mad; or what sort of horribl danger is it?" I wa so bewild that I 
did not know what to say more. van hels put out hi hand and took the 
paper, saying:-- 

"do not troubl about it now. forget it for the present. you shall know 
and understand it all in good time; but it will be later. and now what 
is it that you came to me to say?" thi brought me back to fact, and I 
wa all myself again. 

"I came to speak about the certif of death. If we do not act 
properli and wisely, there may be an inquest, and that paper would have 
to be produced. I am in hope that we need have no inquest, for if we 
had it would sure kill poor lucy, if noth els did. I know, and you 
know, and the other doctor who attend her knows, that mrs. westenra 
had diseas of the heart, and we can certifi that she die of it. let us 
fill up the certif at once, and I shall take it myself to the 
registrar and go on to the undertaker." 

"good, oh my friend john! well thought of! truli miss lucy, if she be 
sad in the foe that beset her, is at least happi in the friend that 
love her. one, two, three, all open their vein for her, besid one old 
man. Ah yes, I know, friend john; I am not blind! I love you all the 
more for it! now go." 

In the hall I met quincey morris, with a telegram for arthur tell him 
that mrs. westenra wa dead; that luci also had been ill, but wa now 
go on better; and that van hels and I were with her. I told him 
where I wa going, and he hurri me out, but as I wa go said:-- 

"when you come back, jack, may I have two word with you all to 
ourselves?" I nod in repli and went out. I found no difficulti about 
the registration, and arrang with the local undertak to come up in 
the even to measur for the coffin and to make arrangements. 

when I got back quincey wa wait for me. I told him I would see him 
as soon as I knew about lucy, and went up to her room. she wa still 
sleeping, and the professor seemingli had not move from hi seat at her 
side. from hi put hi finger to hi lips, I gather that he 
expect her to wake befor long and wa afraid of forestal nature. 
So I went down to quincey and took him into the breakfast-room, where 
the blind were not drawn down, and which wa a littl more cheerful, or 
rather less cheerless, than the other rooms. when we were alone, he said 
to me:-- 

"jack seward, I don't want to shove myself in anywher where i'v no 
right to be; but thi is no ordinari case. you know I love that girl 
and want to marri her; but, although that' all past and gone, I can't 
help feel anxiou about her all the same. what is it that' wrong 
with her? the dutchman--and a fine old fellow he is; I can see 
that--said, that time you two came into the room, that you must have 
_another_ transfus of blood, and that both you and he were exhausted. 
now I know well that you medic men speak _in camera_, and that a man 
must not expect to know what they consult about in private. but thi is 
no common matter, and, whatev it is, I have done my part. Is not that 
so?" 

"that' so," I said, and he went on:-- 

"I take it that both you and van hels had done alreadi what I did 
to-day. Is not that so?" 

"that' so." 

"and I guess art wa in it too. when I saw him four day ago down at hi 
own place he look queer. I have not seen anyth pull down so quick 
sinc I wa on the pampa and had a mare that I wa fond of go to grass 
all in a night. one of those big bat that they call vampir had got at 
her in the night, and what with hi gorg and the vein left open, there 
wasn't enough blood in her to let her stand up, and I had to put a 
bullet through her as she lay. jack, if you may tell me without 
betray confidence, arthur wa the first, is not that so?" As he spoke 
the poor fellow look terribl anxious. He wa in a tortur of suspens 
regard the woman he loved, and hi utter ignor of the terribl 
mysteri which seem to surround her intensifi hi pain. hi veri 
heart wa bleeding, and it took all the manhood of him--and there wa a 
royal lot of it, too--to keep him from break down. I paus befor 
answering, for I felt that I must not betray anyth which the 
professor wish kept secret; but alreadi he knew so much, and guess 
so much, that there could be no reason for not answering, so I answer 
in the same phrase: "that' so." 

"and how long ha thi been go on?" 

"about ten days." 

"ten days! then I guess, jack seward, that that poor pretti creatur 
that we all love ha had put into her vein within that time the blood 
of four strong men. man alive, her whole bodi wouldn't hold it." then, 
come close to me, he spoke in a fierc half-whisper: "what took it 
out?" 

I shook my head. "that," I said, "i the crux. van hels is simpli 
frantic about it, and I am at my wits' end. I can't even hazard a guess. 
there ha been a seri of littl circumst which have thrown out 
all our calcul as to luci be properli watched. but these shall 
not occur again. here we stay until all be well--or ill." quincey held 
out hi hand. "count me in," he said. "you and the dutchman will tell me 
what to do, and i'll do it." 

when she woke late in the afternoon, lucy' first movement wa to feel 
in her breast, and, to my surprise, produc the paper which van hels 
had given me to read. the care professor had replac it where it had 
come from, lest on wake she should be alarmed. her eye then lit on van 
hels and on me too, and gladdened. then she look around the room, 
and see where she was, shuddered; she gave a loud cry, and put her 
poor thin hand befor her pale face. We both understood what that 
meant--that she had realis to the full her mother' death; so we tri 
what we could to comfort her. doubtless sympathi eas her somewhat, but 
she wa veri low in thought and spirit, and wept silent and weakli for 
a long time. We told her that either or both of us would now remain with 
her all the time, and that seem to comfort her. toward dusk she fell 
into a doze. here a veri odd thing occurred. whilst still asleep she 
took the paper from her breast and tore it in two. van hels step 
over and took the piec from her. all the same, however, she went on 
with the action of tearing, as though the materi were still in her 
hands; final she lift her hand and open them as though scatter 
the fragments. van hels seem surprised, and hi brow gather as 
if in thought, but he said nothing. 

* * * * * 

_19 september._--al last night she slept fitfully, be alway afraid 
to sleep, and someth weaker when she woke from it. the professor and 
I took it in turn to watch, and we never left her for a moment 
unattended. quincey morri said noth about hi intention, but I knew 
that all night long he patrol round and round the house. 

when the day came, it search light show the ravag in poor lucy' 
strength. she wa hardli abl to turn her head, and the littl 
nourish which she could take seem to do her no good. At time she 
slept, and both van hels and I notic the differ in her, between 
sleep and waking. whilst asleep she look stronger, although more 
haggard, and her breath wa softer; her open mouth show the pale 
gum drawn back from the teeth, which thu look posit longer and 
sharper than usual; when she woke the soft of her eye evid 
chang the expression, for she look her own self, although a die 
one. In the afternoon she ask for arthur, and we telegraph for him. 
quincey went off to meet him at the station. 

when he arriv it wa nearli six o'clock, and the sun wa set full 
and warm, and the red light stream in through the window and gave more 
colour to the pale cheeks. when he saw her, arthur wa simpli choke 
with emotion, and none of us could speak. In the hour that had passed, 
the fit of sleep, or the comatos condit that pass for it, had 
grown more frequent, so that the paus when convers wa possibl 
were shortened. arthur' presence, however, seem to act as a 
stimulant; she ralli a little, and spoke to him more brightli than she 
had done sinc we arrived. He too pull himself together, and spoke as 
cheerili as he could, so that the best wa made of everything. 

It wa now nearli one o'clock, and he and van hels are sit with 
her. I am to reliev them in a quarter of an hour, and I am enter 
thi on lucy' phonograph. until six o'clock they are to tri to rest. I 
fear that to-morrow will end our watching, for the shock ha been too 
great; the poor child cannot rally. god help us all. 


_letter, mina harker to luci westenra._ 

(unopen by her.) 

"_17 september._ 

"mi dearest lucy,-- 

"it seem _an age_ sinc I heard from you, or inde sinc I wrote. you 
will pardon me, I know, for all my fault when you have read all my 
budget of news. well, I got my husband back all right; when we arriv 
at exet there wa a carriag wait for us, and in it, though he had 
an attack of gout, mr. hawkins. He took us to hi house, where there 
were room for us all nice and comfortable, and we dine together. after 
dinner mr. hawkin said:-- 

"'mi dears, I want to drink your health and prosperity; and may everi 
bless attend you both. I know you both from children, and have, with 
love and pride, seen you grow up. now I want you to make your home here 
with me. I have left to me neither chick nor child; all are gone, and in 
my will I have left you everything.' I cried, luci dear, as jonathan and 
the old man clasp hands. our even wa a very, veri happi one. 

"so here we are, instal in thi beauti old house, and from both my 
bedroom and the drawing-room I can see the great elm of the cathedr 
close, with their great black stem stand out against the old yellow 
stone of the cathedr and I can hear the rook overhead caw and 
caw and chatter and gossip all day, after the manner of 
rooks--and humans. I am busy, I need not tell you, arrang thing and 
housekeeping. jonathan and mr. hawkin are busi all day; for, now that 
jonathan is a partner, mr. hawkin want to tell him all about the 
clients. 

"how is your dear mother get on? I wish I could run up to town for a 
day or two to see you, dear, but I dare not go yet, with so much on my 
shoulders; and jonathan want look after still. He is begin to 
put some flesh on hi bone again, but he wa terribl weaken by the 
long illness; even now he sometim start out of hi sleep in a sudden 
way and awak all trembl until I can coax him back to hi usual 
placidity. however, thank god, these occas grow less frequent as the 
day go on, and they will in time pass away altogether, I trust. and now 
I have told you my news, let me ask yours. when are you to be married, 
and where, and who is to perform the ceremony, and what are you to wear, 
and is it to be a public or a privat wedding? tell me all about it, 
dear; tell me all about everything, for there is noth which interest 
you which will not be dear to me. jonathan ask me to send hi 
'respect duty,' but I do not think that is good enough from the 
junior partner of the import firm hawkin & harker; and so, as you 
love me, and he love me, and I love you with all the mood and tens 
of the verb, I send you simpli hi 'love' instead. good-bye, my dearest 
lucy, and all bless on you. 

"yours, 

"mina harker." 


_report from patrick hennessey, M. d., M. R. C. S. L. K. Q. C. P. i., 
etc., etc., to john seward, M. d._ 

"_20 september._ 

"mi dear sir,-- 

"in accord with your wishes, I enclos report of the condit of 
everyth left in my charge.... with regard to patient, renfield, there 
is more to say. He ha had anoth outbreak, which might have had a 
dread ending, but which, as it fortun happened, wa unattend 
with ani unhappi results. thi afternoon a carrier' cart with two men 
made a call at the empti hous whose ground abut on ours--th hous to 
which, you will remember, the patient twice ran away. the men stop at 
our gate to ask the porter their way, as they were strangers. I wa 
myself look out of the studi window, have a smoke after dinner, and 
saw one of them come up to the house. As he pass the window of 
renfield' room, the patient began to rate him from within, and call 
him all the foul name he could lay hi tongu to. the man, who seem a 
decent fellow enough, content himself by tell him to "shut up for a 
foul-mouth beggar," whereon our man accus him of rob him and 
want to murder him and said that he would hinder him if he were to 
swing for it. I open the window and sign to the man not to notice, 
so he content himself after look the place over and make up hi 
mind as to what kind of a place he had got to by saying: 'lor' bless 
yer, sir, I wouldn't mind what wa said to me in a bloomin' madhouse. I 
piti ye and the guv'nor for havin' to live in the hous with a wild 
beast like that.' then he ask hi way civilli enough, and I told him 
where the gate of the empti hous was; he went away, follow by threat 
and curs and revil from our man. I went down to see if I could 
make out ani caus for hi anger, sinc he is usual such a 
well-behav man, and except hi violent fit noth of the kind had 
ever occurred. I found him, to my astonishment, quit compos and most 
genial in hi manner. I tri to get him to talk of the incident, but he 
blandli ask me question as to what I meant, and led me to believ 
that he wa complet oblivi of the affair. It was, I am sorri to 
say, however, onli anoth instanc of hi cunning, for within half an 
hour I heard of him again. thi time he had broken out through the 
window of hi room, and wa run down the avenue. I call to the 
attend to follow me, and ran after him, for I fear he wa intent 
on some mischief. My fear wa justifi when I saw the same cart which 
had pass befor come down the road, have on it some great wooden 
boxes. the men were wipe their foreheads, and were flush in the 
face, as if with violent exercise. befor I could get up to him the 
patient rush at them, and pull one of them off the cart, began to 
knock hi head against the ground. If I had not seiz him just at the 
moment I believ he would have kill the man there and then. the other 
fellow jump down and struck him over the head with the butt-end of hi 
heavi whip. It wa a terribl blow; but he did not seem to mind it, but 
seiz him also, and struggl with the three of us, pull us to and 
fro as if we were kittens. you know I am no light weight, and the other 
were both burli men. At first he wa silent in hi fighting; but as we 
began to master him, and the attend were put a strait-waistcoat 
on him, he began to shout: 'i'll frustrat them! they shan't rob me! 
they shan't murder me by inches! i'll fight for my lord and master!' and 
all sort of similar incoher ravings. It wa with veri consider 
difficulti that they got him back to the hous and put him in the pad 
room. one of the attendants, hardy, had a finger broken. however, I set 
it all right; and he is go on well. 

"the two carrier were at first loud in their threat of action for 
damages, and promis to rain all the penalti of the law on us. their 
threat were, however, mingl with some sort of indirect apolog for 
the defeat of the two of them by a feebl madman. they said that if it 
had not been for the way their strength had been spent in carri and 
rais the heavi box to the cart they would have made short work of 
him. they gave as anoth reason for their defeat the extraordinari 
state of drouth to which they had been reduc by the dusti natur of 
their occup and the reprehens distanc from the scene of their 
labour of ani place of public entertainment. I quit understood their 
drift, and after a stiff glass of grog, or rather more of the same, and 
with each a sovereign in hand, they made light of the attack, and swore 
that they would encount a wors madman ani day for the pleasur of 
meet so 'bloomin' good a bloke' as your correspondent. I took their 
name and addresses, in case they might be needed. they are as 
follows:--jack smollet, of dudding' rents, king george' road, great 
walworth, and thoma snelling, peter farley' row, guid court, bethnal 
green. they are both in the employ of harri & sons, move and 
shipment company, orang master' yard, soho. 

"I shall report to you ani matter of interest occur here, and shall 
wire you at onc if there is anyth of importance. 

"believ me, dear sir, 

"your faithfully, 

"patrick hennessey." 


_letter, mina harker to luci westenra_. 

(unopen by her.) 

"_18 september._ 

"mi dearest lucy,-- 

"such a sad blow ha befallen us. mr. hawkin ha die veri suddenly. 
some may not think it so sad for us, but we had both come to so love him 
that it realli seem as though we had lost a father. I never knew either 
father or mother, so that the dear old man' death is a real blow to me. 
jonathan is greatli distressed. It is not onli that he feel sorrow, 
deep sorrow, for the dear, good man who ha befriend him all hi life, 
and now at the end ha treat him like hi own son and left him a 
fortun which to peopl of our modest bring up is wealth beyond the 
dream of avarice, but jonathan feel it on anoth account. He say the 
amount of respons which it put upon him make him nervous. He 
begin to doubt himself. I tri to cheer him up, and _my_ belief in _him_ 
help him to have a belief in himself. but it is here that the grave 
shock that he experienc tell upon him the most. oh, it is too hard 
that a sweet, simple, noble, strong natur such as his--a natur which 
enabl him by our dear, good friend' aid to rise from clerk to master 
in a few years--should be so injur that the veri essenc of it 
strength is gone. forgiv me, dear, if I worri you with my troubl in 
the midst of your own happiness; but, luci dear, I must tell some one, 
for the strain of keep up a brave and cheer appear to jonathan 
tri me, and I have no one here that I can confid in. I dread come 
up to london, as we must do the day after to-morrow; for poor mr. 
hawkin left in hi will that he wa to be buri in the grave with hi 
father. As there are no relat at all, jonathan will have to be chief 
mourner. I shall tri to run over to see you, dearest, if onli for a few 
minutes. forgiv me for troubl you. with all blessings, 

"your love 

"mina harker." 


_dr. seward' diary._ 

_20 september._--onli resolut and habit can let me make an entri 
to-night. I am too miserable, too low-spirited, too sick of the world 
and all in it, includ life itself, that I would not care if I heard 
thi moment the flap of the wing of the angel of death. and he ha 
been flap those grim wing to some purpos of late--lucy' mother 
and arthur' father, and now.... let me get on with my work. 

I duli reliev van hels in hi watch over lucy. We want arthur to 
go to rest also, but he refus at first. It wa onli when I told him 
that we should want him to help us dure the day, and that we must not 
all break down for want of rest, lest luci should suffer, that he agre 
to go. van hels wa veri kind to him. "come, my child," he said; 
"come with me. you are sick and weak, and have had much sorrow and much 
mental pain, as well as that tax on your strength that we know of. you 
must not be alone; for to be alon is to be full of fear and alarms. 
come to the drawing-room, where there is a big fire, and there are two 
sofas. you shall lie on one, and I on the other, and our sympathi will 
be comfort to each other, even though we do not speak, and even if we 
sleep." arthur went off with him, cast back a long look on lucy' 
face, which lay in her pillow, almost whiter than the lawn. she lay 
quit still, and I look round the room to see that all wa as it 
should be. I could see that the professor had carri out in thi room, 
as in the other, hi purpos of use the garlic; the whole of the 
window-sash reek with it, and round lucy' neck, over the silk 
handkerchief which van hels made her keep on, wa a rough chaplet of 
the same odor flowers. luci wa breath somewhat stertorously, and 
her face wa at it worst, for the open mouth show the pale gums. her 
teeth, in the dim, uncertain light, seem longer and sharper than they 
had been in the morning. In particular, by some trick of the light, the 
canin teeth look longer and sharper than the rest. I sat down by her, 
and present she move uneasily. At the same moment there came a sort 
of dull flap or buffet at the window. I went over to it softly, 
and peep out by the corner of the blind. there wa a full moonlight, 
and I could see that the nois wa made by a great bat, which wheel 
round--doubtless attract by the light, although so dim--and everi now 
and again struck the window with it wings. when I came back to my seat, 
I found that luci had move slightly, and had torn away the garlic 
flower from her throat. I replac them as well as I could, and sat 
watch her. 

present she woke, and I gave her food, as van hels had prescribed. 
she took but a little, and that languidly. there did not seem to be with 
her now the unconsci struggl for life and strength that had hitherto 
so mark her illness. It struck me as curiou that the moment she 
becam consciou she press the garlic flower close to her. It wa 
certainli odd that whenev she got into that letharg state, with the 
stertor breathing, she put the flower from her; but that when she 
wake she clutch them close. there wa no possibl of make ani 
mistak about this, for in the long hour that followed, she had mani 
spell of sleep and wake and repeat both action mani times. 

At six o'clock van hels came to reliev me. arthur had then fallen 
into a doze, and he merci let him sleep on. when he saw lucy' face 
I could hear the siss indraw of hi breath, and he said to me in a 
sharp whisper: "draw up the blind; I want light!" then he bent down, 
and, with hi face almost touch lucy's, examin her carefully. He 
remov the flower and lift the silk handkerchief from her throat. As 
he did so he start back, and I could hear hi ejaculation, "mein 
gott!" as it wa smother in hi throat. I bent over and looked, too, 
and as I notic some queer chill came over me. 

the wound on the throat had absolut disappeared. 

for fulli five minut van hels stood look at her, with hi face 
at it sternest. then he turn to me and said calmly:-- 

"she is dying. It will not be long now. It will be much difference, mark 
me, whether she die consciou or in her sleep. wake that poor boy, and 
let him come and see the last; he trust us, and we have promis him." 

I went to the dining-room and wake him. He wa daze for a moment, but 
when he saw the sunlight stream in through the edg of the shutter 
he thought he wa late, and express hi fear. I assur him that luci 
wa still asleep, but told him as gentli as I could that both van 
hels and I fear that the end wa near. He cover hi face with hi 
hands, and slid down on hi knee by the sofa, where he remained, 
perhap a minute, with hi head buried, praying, whilst hi shoulder 
shook with grief. I took him by the hand and rais him up. "come," I 
said, "mi dear old fellow, summon all your fortitude: it will be best 
and easiest for her." 

when we came into lucy' room I could see that van hels had, with 
hi usual forethought, been put matter straight and make 
everyth look as pleas as possible. He had even brush lucy' 
hair, so that it lay on the pillow in it usual sunni ripples. when we 
came into the room she open her eyes, and see him, whisper 
softly:-- 

"arthur! oh, my love, I am so glad you have come!" He wa stoop to 
kiss her, when van hels motion him back. "no," he whispered, "not 
yet! hold her hand; it will comfort her more." 

So arthur took her hand and knelt besid her, and she look her best, 
with all the soft line match the angel beauti of her eyes. then 
gradual her eye closed, and she sank to sleep. for a littl bit her 
breast heav softly, and her breath came and went like a tire child's. 

and then insens there came the strang chang which I had notic in 
the night. her breath grew stertorous, the mouth opened, and the pale 
gums, drawn back, made the teeth look longer and sharper than ever. In a 
sort of sleep-waking, vague, unconsci way she open her eyes, which 
were now dull and hard at once, and said in a soft, voluptu voice, 
such as I had never heard from her lips:-- 

"arthur! oh, my love, I am so glad you have come! kiss me!" arthur bent 
eagerli over to kiss her; but at that instant van helsing, who, like me, 
had been startl by her voice, swoop upon him, and catch him by 
the neck with both hands, drag him back with a furi of strength which 
I never thought he could have possessed, and actual hurl him almost 
across the room. 

"not for your life!" he said; "not for your live soul and hers!" and 
he stood between them like a lion at bay. 

arthur wa so taken aback that he did not for a moment know what to do 
or say; and befor ani impuls of violenc could seiz him he realis 
the place and the occasion, and stood silent, waiting. 

I kept my eye fix on lucy, as did van helsing, and we saw a spasm as 
of rage flit like a shadow over her face; the sharp teeth champ 
together. then her eye closed, and she breath heavily. 

veri shortli after she open her eye in all their softness, and 
put out her poor, pale, thin hand, took van helsing' great brown 
one; draw it to her, she kiss it. "mi true friend," she said, in a 
faint voice, but with untel pathos, "mi true friend, and his! oh, 
guard him, and give me peace!" 

"I swear it!" he said solemnly, kneel besid her and hold up hi 
hand, as one who regist an oath. then he turn to arthur, and said 
to him: "come, my child, take her hand in yours, and kiss her on the 
forehead, and onli once." 

their eye met instead of their lips; and so they parted. 

lucy' eye closed; and van helsing, who had been watch closely, took 
arthur' arm, and drew him away. 

and then lucy' breath becam stertor again, and all at onc it 
ceased. 

"it is all over," said van helsing. "she is dead!" 

I took arthur by the arm, and led him away to the drawing-room, where he 
sat down, and cover hi face with hi hands, sob in a way that 
nearli broke me down to see. 

I went back to the room, and found van hels look at poor lucy, and 
hi face wa sterner than ever. some chang had come over her body. 
death had given back part of her beauty, for her brow and cheek had 
recov some of their flow lines; even the lip had lost their 
deadli pallor. It wa as if the blood, no longer need for the work 
of the heart, had gone to make the harsh of death as littl rude as 
might be. 

"we thought her die whilst she slept, 
and sleep when she died." 

I stood besid van helsing, and said:-- 

"ah, well, poor girl, there is peac for her at last. It is the end!" 

He turn to me, and said with grave solemnity:-- 

"not so; alas! not so. It is onli the beginning!" 

when I ask him what he meant, he onli shook hi head and answered:-- 

"we can do noth as yet. wait and see." 




chapter xiii 

dr. seward' diary--_continued_. 


the funer wa arrang for the next succeed day, so that luci and 
her mother might be buri together. I attend to all the ghastli 
formalities, and the urban undertak prove that hi staff were 
afflicted--or blessed--with someth of hi own obsequi suavity. 
even the woman who perform the last offic for the dead remark to 
me, in a confidential, brother-profession way, when she had come out 
from the death-chamber:-- 

"she make a veri beauti corpse, sir. it' quit a privileg to 
attend on her. it' not too much to say that she will do credit to our 
establishment!" 

I notic that van hels never kept far away. thi wa possibl from 
the disord state of thing in the household. there were no rel 
at hand; and as arthur had to be back the next day to attend at hi 
father' funeral, we were unabl to notifi ani one who should have been 
bidden. under the circumstances, van hels and I took it upon 
ourselv to examin papers, etc. He insist upon look over lucy' 
paper himself. I ask him why, for I fear that he, be a 
foreigner, might not be quit awar of english legal requirements, and 
so might in ignor make some unnecessari trouble. He answer me:-- 

"I know; I know. you forget that I am a lawyer as well as a doctor. but 
thi is not altogeth for the law. you knew that, when you avoid the 
coroner. I have more than him to avoid. there may be paper more--such 
as this." 

As he spoke he took from hi pocket-book the memorandum which had been 
in lucy' breast, and which she had torn in her sleep. 

"when you find anyth of the solicitor who is for the late mrs. 
westenra, seal all her papers, and write him to-night. for me, I watch 
here in the room and in miss lucy' old room all night, and I myself 
search for what may be. It is not well that her veri thought go into 
the hand of strangers." 

I went on with my part of the work, and in anoth half hour had found 
the name and address of mrs. westenra' solicitor and had written to 
him. all the poor lady' paper were in order; explicit direct 
regard the place of burial were given. I had hardli seal the 
letter, when, to my surprise, van hels walk into the room, 
saying:-- 

"can I help you, friend john? I am free, and if I may, my servic is to 
you." 

"have you got what you look for?" I asked, to which he replied:-- 

"I did not look for ani specif thing. I onli hope to find, and find I 
have, all that there was--onli some letter and a few memoranda, and a 
diari new begun. but I have them here, and we shall for the present say 
noth of them. I shall see that poor lad to-morrow evening, and, with 
hi sanction, I shall use some." 

when we had finish the work in hand, he said to me:-- 

"and now, friend john, I think we may to bed. We want sleep, both you 
and I, and rest to recuperate. to-morrow we shall have much to do, but 
for the to-night there is no need of us. alas!" 

befor turn in we went to look at poor lucy. the undertak had 
certainli done hi work well, for the room wa turn into a small 
_chapel ardente_. there wa a wilder of beauti white flowers, 
and death wa made as littl repuls as might be. the end of the 
winding-sheet wa laid over the face; when the professor bent over and 
turn it gentli back, we both start at the beauti befor us, the tall 
wax candl show a suffici light to note it well. all lucy' 
loveli had come back to her in death, and the hour that had passed, 
instead of leav trace of "decay' effac fingers," had but 
restor the beauti of life, till posit I could not believ my eye 
that I wa look at a corpse. 

the professor look sternli grave. He had not love her as I had, and 
there wa no need for tear in hi eyes. He said to me: "remain till I 
return," and left the room. He came back with a hand of wild garlic 
from the box wait in the hall, but which had not been opened, and 
place the flower amongst the other on and around the bed. then he 
took from hi neck, insid hi collar, a littl gold crucifix, and 
place it over the mouth. He restor the sheet to it place, and we 
came away. 

I wa undress in my own room, when, with a premonitori tap at the 
door, he entered, and at onc began to speak:-- 

"to-morrow I want you to bring me, befor night, a set of post-mortem 
knives." 

"must we make an autopsy?" I asked. 

"ye and no. I want to operate, but not as you think. let me tell you 
now, but not a word to another. I want to cut off her head and take out 
her heart. ah! you a surgeon, and so shocked! you, whom I have seen with 
no trembl of hand or heart, do oper of life and death that make 
the rest shudder. oh, but I must not forget, my dear friend john, that 
you love her; and I have not forgotten it, for it is I that shall 
operate, and you must onli help. I would like to do it to-night, but for 
arthur I must not; he will be free after hi father' funer to-morrow, 
and he will want to see her--to see _it_. then, when she is coffin 
readi for the next day, you and I shall come when all sleep. We shall 
unscrew the coffin-lid, and shall do our operation: and then replac 
all, so that none know, save we alone." 

"but whi do it at all? the girl is dead. whi mutil her poor bodi 
without need? and if there is no necess for a post-mortem and noth 
to gain by it--no good to her, to us, to science, to human 
knowledge--whi do it? without such it is monstrous." 

for answer he put hi hand on my shoulder, and said, with infinit 
tenderness:-- 

"friend john, I piti your poor bleed heart; and I love you the more 
becaus it doe so bleed. If I could, I would take on myself the burden 
that you do bear. but there are thing that you know not, but that you 
shall know, and bless me for knowing, though they are not pleasant 
things. john, my child, you have been my friend now mani years, and yet 
did you ever know me to do ani without good cause? I may err--i am but 
man; but I believ in all I do. wa it not for these caus that you 
send for me when the great troubl came? yes! were you not amazed, nay 
horrified, when I would not let arthur kiss hi love--though she wa 
dying--and snatch him away by all my strength? yes! and yet you saw 
how she thank me, with her so beauti die eyes, her voice, too, so 
weak, and she kiss my rough old hand and bless me? yes! and did you not 
hear me swear promis to her, that so she close her eye grateful? yes! 

"well, I have good reason now for all I want to do. you have for mani 
year trust me; you have believ me week past, when there be thing so 
strang that you might have well doubt. believ me yet a little, friend 
john. If you trust me not, then I must tell what I think; and that is 
not perhap well. and if I work--a work I shall, no matter trust or no 
trust--without my friend trust in me, I work with heavi heart and feel, 
oh! so lone when I want all help and courag that may be!" He paus a 
moment and went on solemnly: "friend john, there are strang and 
terribl day befor us. let us not be two, but one, that so we work to 
a good end. will you not have faith in me?" 

I took hi hand, and promis him. I held my door open as he went away, 
and watch him go into hi room and close the door. As I stood without 
moving, I saw one of the maid pass silent along the passage--sh had 
her back toward me, so did not see me--and go into the room where luci 
lay. the sight touch me. devot is so rare, and we are so grate 
to those who show it unask to those we love. here wa a poor girl 
put asid the terror which she natur had of death to go watch 
alon by the bier of the mistress whom she loved, so that the poor clay 
might not be lone till laid to etern rest.... 

* * * * * 

I must have slept long and soundly, for it wa broad daylight when van 
hels wake me by come into my room. He came over to my bedsid and 
said:-- 

"you need not troubl about the knives; we shall not do it." 

"whi not?" I asked. for hi solemn of the night befor had greatli 
impress me. 

"because," he said sternly, "it is too late--or too early. see!" here he 
held up the littl golden crucifix. "thi wa stolen in the night." 

"how, stolen," I ask in wonder, "sinc you have it now?" 

"becaus I get it back from the worthless wretch who stole it, from the 
woman who rob the dead and the living. her punish will sure 
come, but not through me; she knew not altogeth what she did and thu 
unknowing, she onli stole. now we must wait." 

He went away on the word, leav me with a new mysteri to think of, a 
new puzzl to grappl with. 

the forenoon wa a dreari time, but at noon the solicitor came: mr. 
marquand, of wholeman, sons, marquand & lidderdale. He wa veri genial 
and veri appreci of what we had done, and took off our hand all 
care as to details. dure lunch he told us that mrs. westenra had for 
some time expect sudden death from her heart, and had put her affair 
in absolut order; he inform us that, with the except of a certain 
entail properti of lucy' father' which now, in default of direct 
issue, went back to a distant branch of the family, the whole estate, 
real and personal, wa left absolut to arthur holmwood. when he had 
told us so much he went on:-- 

"frankli we did our best to prevent such a testamentari disposition, and 
point out certain conting that might leav her daughter either 
penniless or not so free as she should be to act regard a matrimoni 
alliance. indeed, we press the matter so far that we almost came into 
collision, for she ask us if we were or were not prepar to carri out 
her wishes. Of course, we had then no altern but to accept. We were 
right in principle, and ninety-nin time out of a hundr we should 
have proved, by the logic of events, the accuraci of our judgment. 
frankly, however, I must admit that in thi case ani other form of 
disposit would have render imposs the carri out of her 
wishes. for by her predeceas her daughter the latter would have come 
into possess of the property, and, even had she onli surviv her 
mother by five minutes, her properti would, in case there were no 
will--and a will wa a practic imposs in such a case--hav been 
treat at her deceas as under intestacy. In which case lord godalming, 
though so dear a friend, would have had no claim in the world; and the 
inheritors, be remote, would not be like to abandon their just 
rights, for sentiment reason regard an entir stranger. I assur 
you, my dear sirs, I am rejoic at the result, perfectli rejoiced." 

He wa a good fellow, but hi rejoic at the one littl part--in which 
he wa offici interested--of so great a tragedy, wa an 
object-lesson in the limit of sympathet understanding. 

He did not remain long, but said he would look in later in the day and 
see lord godalming. hi coming, however, had been a certain comfort to 
us, sinc it assur us that we should not have to dread hostil 
critic as to ani of our acts. arthur wa expect at five o'clock, so 
a littl befor that time we visit the death-chamber. It wa so in 
veri truth, for now both mother and daughter lay in it. the undertaker, 
true to hi craft, had made the best display he could of hi goods, and 
there wa a mortuari air about the place that lower our spirit at 
once. van hels order the former arrang to be adher to, 
explain that, as lord godalm wa come veri soon, it would be 
less harrow to hi feel to see all that wa left of hi _fiancée_ 
quit alone. the undertak seem shock at hi own stupid and 
exert himself to restor thing to the condit in which we left them 
the night before, so that when arthur came such shock to hi feel 
as we could avoid were saved. 

poor fellow! He look desper sad and broken; even hi stalwart 
manhood seem to have shrunk somewhat under the strain of hi 
much-tri emotions. He had, I knew, been veri genuin and devotedli 
attach to hi father; and to lose him, and at such a time, wa a 
bitter blow to him. with me he wa warm as ever, and to van hels he 
wa sweetli courteous; but I could not help see that there wa some 
constraint with him. the professor notic it, too, and motion me to 
bring him upstairs. I did so, and left him at the door of the room, as I 
felt he would like to be quit alon with her, but he took my arm and 
led me in, say huskily:-- 

"you love her too, old fellow; she told me all about it, and there wa 
no friend had a closer place in her heart than you. I don't know how to 
thank you for all you have done for her. I can't think yet...." 

here he suddenli broke down, and threw hi arm round my shoulder and 
laid hi head on my breast, crying:-- 

"oh, jack! jack! what shall I do! the whole of life seem gone from me 
all at once, and there is noth in the wide world for me to live for." 

I comfort him as well as I could. In such case men do not need much 
expression. A grip of the hand, the tighten of an arm over the 
shoulder, a sob in unison, are express of sympathi dear to a man' 
heart. I stood still and silent till hi sob die away, and then I said 
softli to him:-- 

"come and look at her." 

togeth we move over to the bed, and I lift the lawn from her face. 
god! how beauti she was. everi hour seem to be enhanc her 
loveliness. It frighten and amaz me somewhat; and as for arthur, he 
fell a-trembling, and final wa shaken with doubt as with an ague. At 
last, after a long pause, he said to me in a faint whisper:-- 

"jack, is she realli dead?" 

I assur him sadli that it wa so, and went on to suggest--for I felt 
that such a horribl doubt should not have life for a moment longer than 
I could help--that it often happen that after death face becam 
soften and even resolv into their youth beauty; that thi wa 
especi so when death had been preced by ani acut or prolong 
suffering. It seem to quit do away with ani doubt, and, after 
kneel besid the couch for a while and look at her lovingli and 
long, he turn aside. I told him that that must be good-bye, as the 
coffin had to be prepared; so he went back and took her dead hand in hi 
and kiss it, and bent over and kiss her forehead. He came away, 
fondli look back over hi shoulder at her as he came. 

I left him in the drawing-room, and told van hels that he had said 
good-bye; so the latter went to the kitchen to tell the undertaker' men 
to proceed with the prepar and to screw up the coffin. when he 
came out of the room again I told him of arthur' question, and he 
replied:-- 

"I am not surprised. just now I doubt for a moment myself!" 

We all dine together, and I could see that poor art wa tri to make 
the best of things. van hels had been silent all dinner-time; but 
when we had lit our cigar he said-- 

"lord----"; but arthur interrupt him:-- 

"no, no, not that, for god' sake! not yet at ani rate. forgiv me, sir: 
I did not mean to speak offensively; it is onli becaus my loss is so 
recent." 

the professor answer veri sweetly:-- 

"I onli use that name becaus I wa in doubt. I must not call you 
'mr.,' and I have grown to love you--yes, my dear boy, to love you--a 
arthur." 

arthur held out hi hand, and took the old man' warmly. 

"call me what you will," he said. "I hope I may alway have the titl of 
a friend. and let me say that I am at a loss for word to thank you for 
your good to my poor dear." He paus a moment, and went on: "I know 
that she understood your good even better than I do; and if I wa 
rude or in ani way want at that time you act so--you remember"--th 
professor nodded--"y must forgiv me." 

He answer with a grave kindness:-- 

"I know it wa hard for you to quit trust me then, for to trust such 
violenc need to understand; and I take it that you do not--that you 
cannot--trust me now, for you do not yet understand. and there may be 
more time when I shall want you to trust when you cannot--and may 
not--and must not yet understand. but the time will come when your trust 
shall be whole and complet in me, and when you shall understand as 
though the sunlight himself shone through. then you shall bless me from 
first to last for your own sake, and for the sake of other and for her 
dear sake to whom I swore to protect." 

"and, indeed, indeed, sir," said arthur warmly, "I shall in all way 
trust you. I know and believ you have a veri nobl heart, and you are 
jack' friend, and you were hers. you shall do what you like." 

the professor clear hi throat a coupl of times, as though about to 
speak, and final said:-- 

"may I ask you someth now?" 

"certainly." 

"you know that mrs. westenra left you all her property?" 

"no, poor dear; I never thought of it." 

"and as it is all yours, you have a right to deal with it as you will. I 
want you to give me permiss to read all miss lucy' paper and 
letters. believ me, it is no idl curiosity. I have a motiv of which, 
be sure, she would have approved. I have them all here. I took them 
befor we knew that all wa yours, so that no strang hand might touch 
them--no strang eye look through word into her soul. I shall keep 
them, if I may; even you may not see them yet, but I shall keep them 
safe. No word shall be lost; and in the good time I shall give them back 
to you. it' a hard thing I ask, but you will do it, will you not, for 
lucy' sake?" 

arthur spoke out heartily, like hi old self:-- 

"dr. van helsing, you may do what you will. I feel that in say thi I 
am do what my dear one would have approved. I shall not troubl you 
with question till the time comes." 

the old professor stood up as he said solemnly:-- 

"and you are right. there will be pain for us all; but it will not be 
all pain, nor will thi pain be the last. We and you too--you most of 
all, my dear boy--wil have to pass through the bitter water befor we 
reach the sweet. but we must be brave of heart and unselfish, and do our 
duty, and all will be well!" 

I slept on a sofa in arthur' room that night. van hels did not go to 
bed at all. He went to and fro, as if patrol the house, and wa 
never out of sight of the room where luci lay in her coffin, strewn with 
the wild garlic flowers, which sent, through the odour of lili and rose, 
a heavy, overpow smell into the night. 


_mina harker' journal._ 

_22 september._--in the train to exeter. jonathan sleeping. 

It seem onli yesterday that the last entri wa made, and yet how much 
between then, in whitbi and all the world befor me, jonathan away and 
no news of him; and now, marri to jonathan, jonathan a solicitor, a 
partner, rich, master of hi business, mr. hawkin dead and buried, and 
jonathan with anoth attack that may harm him. some day he may ask me 
about it. down it all goes. I am rusti in my shorthand--se what 
unexpect prosper doe for us--so it may be as well to freshen it up 
again with an exercis anyhow.... 

the servic wa veri simpl and veri solemn. there were onli ourselv 
and the servant there, one or two old friend of hi from exeter, hi 
london agent, and a gentleman repres sir john paxton, the 
presid of the incorpor law society. jonathan and I stood hand in 
hand, and we felt that our best and dearest friend wa gone from us.... 

We came back to town quietly, take a 'bu to hyde park corner. 
jonathan thought it would interest me to go into the row for a while, so 
we sat down; but there were veri few peopl there, and it wa 
sad-look and desol to see so mani empti chairs. It made us think 
of the empti chair at home; so we got up and walk down piccadilly. 
jonathan wa hold me by the arm, the way he use to in old day 
befor I went to school. I felt it veri improper, for you can't go on 
for some year teach etiquett and decorum to other girl without the 
pedantri of it bite into yourself a bit; but it wa jonathan, and he 
wa my husband, and we didn't know anybodi who saw us--and we didn't 
care if they did--so on we walked. I wa look at a veri beauti 
girl, in a big cart-wheel hat, sit in a victoria outsid guiliano's, 
when I felt jonathan clutch my arm so tight that he hurt me, and he said 
under hi breath: "mi god!" I am alway anxiou about jonathan, for I 
fear that some nervou fit may upset him again; so I turn to him 
quickly, and ask him what it wa that disturb him. 

He wa veri pale, and hi eye seem bulg out as, half in terror and 
half in amazement, he gaze at a tall, thin man, with a beaki nose and 
black moustach and point beard, who wa also observ the pretti 
girl. He wa look at her so hard that he did not see either of us, 
and so I had a good view of him. hi face wa not a good face; it wa 
hard, and cruel, and sensual, and hi big white teeth, that look all 
the whiter becaus hi lip were so red, were point like an animal's. 
jonathan kept stare at him, till I wa afraid he would notice. I 
fear he might take it ill, he look so fierc and nasty. I ask 
jonathan whi he wa disturbed, and he answered, evid think that 
I knew as much about it as he did: "do you see who it is?" 

"no, dear," I said; "I don't know him; who is it?" hi answer seem to 
shock and thrill me, for it wa said as if he did not know that it wa 
to me, mina, to whom he wa speaking:-- 

"it is the man himself!" 

the poor dear wa evid terrifi at something--veri greatli 
terrified; I do believ that if he had not had me to lean on and to 
support him he would have sunk down. He kept staring; a man came out of 
the shop with a small parcel, and gave it to the lady, who then drove 
off. the dark man kept hi eye fix on her, and when the carriag 
move up piccadilli he follow in the same direction, and hail a 
hansom. jonathan kept look after him, and said, as if to himself:-- 

"I believ it is the count, but he ha grown young. My god, if thi be 
so! oh, my god! my god! If I onli knew! if I onli knew!" He wa 
distress himself so much that I fear to keep hi mind on the 
subject by ask him ani questions, so I remain silent. I drew him 
away quietly, and he, hold my arm, came easily. We walk a littl 
further, and then went in and sat for a while in the green park. It wa 
a hot day for autumn, and there wa a comfort seat in a shadi place. 
after a few minutes' stare at nothing, jonathan' eye closed, and he 
went quietli into a sleep, with hi head on my shoulder. I thought it 
wa the best thing for him, so did not disturb him. In about twenti 
minut he woke up, and said to me quit cheerfully:-- 

"why, mina, have I been asleep! oh, do forgiv me for be so rude. 
come, and we'll have a cup of tea somewhere." He had evid forgotten 
all about the dark stranger, as in hi ill he had forgotten all that 
thi episod had remind him of. I don't like thi laps into 
forgetfulness; it may make or continu some injuri to the brain. I must 
not ask him, for fear I shall do more harm than good; but I must somehow 
learn the fact of hi journey abroad. the time is come, I fear, when I 
must open that parcel, and know what is written. oh, jonathan, you will, 
I know, forgiv me if I do wrong, but it is for your own dear sake. 

* * * * * 

_later._--a sad home-com in everi way--th hous empti of the dear 
soul who wa so good to us; jonathan still pale and dizzi under a slight 
relaps of hi malady; and now a telegram from van helsing, whoever he 
may be:-- 

"you will be griev to hear that mrs. westenra die five day ago, and 
that luci die the day befor yesterday. they were both buri to-day." 

oh, what a wealth of sorrow in a few words! poor mrs. westenra! poor 
lucy! gone, gone, never to return to us! and poor, poor arthur, to have 
lost such sweet out of hi life! god help us all to bear our 
troubles. 


_dr. seward' diary._ 

_22 september._--it is all over. arthur ha gone back to ring, and ha 
taken quincey morri with him. what a fine fellow is quincey! I believ 
in my heart of heart that he suffer as much about lucy' death as ani 
of us; but he bore himself through it like a moral viking. If america 
can go on breed men like that, she will be a power in the world 
indeed. van hels is lie down, have a rest preparatori to hi 
journey. He goe over to amsterdam to-night, but say he return 
to-morrow night; that he onli want to make some arrang which can 
onli be made personally. He is to stop with me then, if he can; he say 
he ha work to do in london which may take him some time. poor old 
fellow! I fear that the strain of the past week ha broken down even hi 
iron strength. all the time of the burial he was, I could see, put 
some terribl restraint on himself. when it wa all over, we were 
stand besid arthur, who, poor fellow, wa speak of hi part in 
the oper where hi blood had been transfus to hi lucy' veins; I 
could see van helsing' face grow white and purpl by turns. arthur wa 
say that he felt sinc then as if they two had been realli marri 
and that she wa hi wife in the sight of god. none of us said a word of 
the other operations, and none of us ever shall. arthur and quincey went 
away togeth to the station, and van hels and I came on here. the 
moment we were alon in the carriag he gave way to a regular fit of 
hysterics. He ha deni to me sinc that it wa hysterics, and insist 
that it wa onli hi sens of humour assert itself under veri 
terribl conditions. He laugh till he cried, and I had to draw down 
the blind lest ani one should see us and misjudge; and then he cried, 
till he laugh again; and laugh and cri together, just as a woman 
does. I tri to be stern with him, as one is to a woman under the 
circumstances; but it had no effect. men and women are so differ in 
manifest of nervou strength or weakness! then when hi face grew 
grave and stern again I ask him whi hi mirth, and whi at such a time. 
hi repli wa in a way characterist of him, for it wa logic and 
forc and mysterious. He said:-- 

"ah, you don't comprehend, friend john. Do not think that I am not sad, 
though I laugh. see, I have cri even when the laugh did choke me. but 
no more think that I am all sorri when I cry, for the laugh he come 
just the same. keep it alway with you that laughter who knock at your 
door and say, 'may I come in?' is not the true laughter. no! he is a 
king, and he come when and how he like. He ask no person; he choos no 
time of suitability. He say, 'I am here.' behold, in exampl I griev my 
heart out for that so sweet young girl; I give my blood for her, though 
I am old and worn; I give my time, my skill, my sleep; I let my other 
suffer want that so she may have all. and yet I can laugh at her veri 
grave--laugh when the clay from the spade of the sexton drop upon her 
coffin and say 'thud! thud!' to my heart, till it send back the blood 
from my cheek. My heart bleed for that poor boy--that dear boy, so of 
the age of mine own boy had I been so bless that he live, and with hi 
hair and eye the same. there, you know now whi I love him so. and yet 
when he say thing that touch my husband-heart to the quick, and make my 
father-heart yearn to him as to no other man--not even to you, friend 
john, for we are more level in experi than father and son--yet even 
at such moment king laugh he come to me and shout and bellow in my ear, 
'here I am! here I am!' till the blood come danc back and bring some of 
the sunshin that he carri with him to my cheek. oh, friend john, it is 
a strang world, a sad world, a world full of miseries, and woes, and 
troubles; and yet when king laugh come he make them all danc to the 
tune he play. bleed hearts, and dri bone of the churchyard, and 
tear that burn as they fall--al danc togeth to the music that he 
make with that smileless mouth of him. and believ me, friend john, that 
he is good to come, and kind. ah, we men and women are like rope drawn 
tight with strain that pull us differ ways. then tear come; and, 
like the rain on the ropes, they brace us up, until perhap the strain 
becom too great, and we break. but king laugh he come like the 
sunshine, and he eas off the strain again; and we bear to go on with 
our labour, what it may be." 

I did not like to wound him by pretend not to see hi idea; but, as I 
did not yet understand the caus of hi laughter, I ask him. As he 
answer me hi face grew stern, and he said in quit a differ 
tone:-- 

"oh, it wa the grim ironi of it all--thi so love ladi garland with 
flowers, that look so fair as life, till one by one we wonder if she 
were truli dead; she laid in that so fine marbl hous in that lone 
churchyard, where rest so mani of her kin, laid there with the mother 
who love her, and whom she loved; and that sacr bell go 'toll! 
toll! toll!' so sad and slow; and those holi men, with the white 
garment of the angel, pretend to read books, and yet all the time 
their eye never on the page; and all of us with the bow head. and all 
for what? she is dead; so! Is it not?" 

"well, for the life of me, professor," I said, "I can't see anyth to 
laugh at in all that. why, your explan make it a harder puzzl 
than before. but even if the burial servic wa comic, what about poor 
art and hi trouble? why, hi heart wa simpli breaking." 

"just so. said he not that the transfus of hi blood to her vein had 
made her truli hi bride?" 

"yes, and it wa a sweet and comfort idea for him." 

"quit so. but there wa a difficulty, friend john. If so that, then 
what about the others? ho, ho! then thi so sweet maid is a polyandrist, 
and me, with my poor wife dead to me, but aliv by church' law, though 
no wits, all gone--even I, who am faith husband to thi now-no-wife, 
am bigamist." 

"I don't see where the joke come in there either!" I said; and I did 
not feel particularli pleas with him for say such things. He laid 
hi hand on my arm, and said:-- 

"friend john, forgiv me if I pain. I show not my feel to other 
when it would wound, but onli to you, my old friend, whom I can trust. 
If you could have look into my veri heart then when I want to laugh; 
if you could have done so when the laugh arrived; if you could do so 
now, when king laugh have pack up hi crown, and all that is to him--for 
he go far, far away from me, and for a long, long time--mayb you would 
perhap piti me the most of all." 

I wa touch by the tender of hi tone, and ask why. 

"becaus I know!" 

and now we are all scattered; and for mani a long day loneli will 
sit over our roof with brood wings. luci lie in the tomb of her 
kin, a lordli death-hous in a lone churchyard, away from teem 
london; where the air is fresh, and the sun rise over hampstead hill, 
and where wild flower grow of their own accord. 

So I can finish thi diary; and god onli know if I shall ever begin 
another. If I do, or if I even open thi again, it will be to deal with 
differ peopl and differ themes; for here at the end, where the 
romanc of my life is told, ere I go back to take up the thread of my 
life-work, I say sadli and without hope, 

"finis." 


_"the westminst gazette," 25 september._ 

A hampstead mystery. 


the neighbourhood of hampstead is just at present exercis with a 
seri of event which seem to run on line parallel to those of what 
wa known to the writer of headlin as "the kensington horror," or 
"the stab woman," or "the woman in black." dure the past two or 
three day sever case have occur of young children stray from 
home or neglect to return from their play on the heath. In all 
these case the children were too young to give ani properli 
intellig account of themselves, but the consensu of their excus 
is that they had been with a "bloofer lady." It ha alway been late in 
the even when they have been missed, and on two occas the 
children have not been found until earli in the follow morning. It is 
gener suppos in the neighbourhood that, as the first child miss 
gave as hi reason for be away that a "bloofer lady" had ask him to 
come for a walk, the other had pick up the phrase and use it as 
occas served. thi is the more natur as the favourit game of the 
littl one at present is lure each other away by wiles. A 
correspond write us that to see some of the tini tot pretend to 
be the "bloofer lady" is suprem funny. some of our caricaturist 
might, he says, take a lesson in the ironi of grotesqu by compar the 
realiti and the picture. It is onli in accord with gener 
principl of human natur that the "bloofer lady" should be the popular 
rôle at these _al fresco_ performances. our correspond naïv say 
that even ellen terri could not be so winningli attract as some of 
these grubby-fac littl children pretend--and even imagin 
themselves--to be. 

there is, however, possibl a seriou side to the question, for some of 
the children, inde all who have been miss at night, have been 
slightli torn or wound in the throat. the wound seem such as might be 
made by a rat or a small dog, and although of not much import 
individually, would tend to show that whatev anim inflict them ha 
a system or method of it own. the polic of the divis have been 
instruct to keep a sharp look-out for stray children, especi 
when veri young, in and around hampstead heath, and for ani stray dog 
which may be about. 


_"the westminst gazette," 25 september._ 

_extra special._ 

the hampstead horror. 

anoth child injured. 

_the "bloofer lady."_ 

We have just receiv intellig that anoth child, miss last 
night, wa onli discov late in the morn under a furz bush at the 
shooter' hill side of hampstead heath, which is, perhaps, less 
frequent than the other parts. It ha the same tini wound in the 
throat as ha been notic in other cases. It wa terribl weak, and 
look quit emaciated. It too, when partial restored, had the common 
stori to tell of be lure away by the "bloofer lady." 




chapter xiv 

mina harker' journal 


_23 september_.--jonathan is better after a bad night. I am so glad that 
he ha plenti of work to do, for that keep hi mind off the terribl 
things; and oh, I am rejoic that he is not now weigh down with the 
respons of hi new position. I knew he would be true to himself, 
and now how proud I am to see my jonathan rise to the height of hi 
advanc and keep pace in all way with the duti that come upon 
him. He will be away all day till late, for he said he could not lunch 
at home. My household work is done, so I shall take hi foreign journal, 
and lock myself up in my room and read it.... 


_24 september_.--i hadn't the heart to write last night; that terribl 
record of jonathan' upset me so. poor dear! how he must have suffered, 
whether it be true or onli imagination. I wonder if there is ani truth 
in it at all. did he get hi brain fever, and then write all those 
terribl things, or had he some caus for it all? I suppos I shall 
never know, for I dare not open the subject to him.... and yet that man 
we saw yesterday! He seem quit certain of him.... poor fellow! I 
suppos it wa the funer upset him and sent hi mind back on some 
train of thought.... He believ it all himself. I rememb how on our 
wedding-day he said: "unless some solemn duti come upon me to go back to 
the bitter hours, asleep or awake, mad or sane." there seem to be 
through it all some thread of continuity.... that fear count wa 
come to london.... If it should be, and he came to london, with hi 
teem millions.... there may be a solemn duty; and if it come we must 
not shrink from it.... I shall be prepared. I shall get my typewrit 
thi veri hour and begin transcribing. then we shall be readi for other 
eye if required. and if it be wanted; then, perhaps, if I am ready, 
poor jonathan may not be upset, for I can speak for him and never let 
him be troubl or worri with it at all. If ever jonathan quit get 
over the nervous he may want to tell me of it all, and I can ask him 
question and find out things, and see how I may comfort him. 


_letter, van hels to mrs. harker._ 

"_24 september._ 

(_confidence_) 

"dear madam,-- 

"I pray you to pardon my writing, in that I am so far friend as that I 
sent to you sad news of miss luci westenra' death. By the kind of 
lord godalming, I am empow to read her letter and papers, for I am 
deepli concern about certain matter vital important. In them I find 
some letter from you, which show how great friend you were and how you 
love her. oh, madam mina, by that love, I implor you, help me. It is 
for others' good that I ask--to redress great wrong, and to lift much 
and terribl troubles--that may be more great than you can know. may it 
be that I see you? you can trust me. I am friend of dr. john seward and 
of lord godalm (that wa arthur of miss lucy). I must keep it privat 
for the present from all. I should come to exet to see you at onc if 
you tell me I am privileg to come, and where and when. I implor your 
pardon, madam. I have read your letter to poor lucy, and know how good 
you are and how your husband suffer; so I pray you, if it may be, 
enlighten him not, lest it may harm. again your pardon, and forgiv me. 

"van helsing." 


_telegram, mrs. harker to van helsing._ 

"_25 september._--com to-day by quarter-past ten train if you can catch 
it. can see you ani time you call. 

"wilhelmina harker." 

mina harker' journal. 

_25 september._--i cannot help feel terribl excit as the time 
draw near for the visit of dr. van helsing, for somehow I expect that 
it will throw some light upon jonathan' sad experience; and as he 
attend poor dear luci in her last illness, he can tell me all about 
her. that is the reason of hi coming; it is concern luci and her 
sleep-walking, and not about jonathan. then I shall never know the real 
truth now! how silli I am. that aw journal get hold of my 
imagin and ting everyth with someth of it own colour. Of 
cours it is about lucy. that habit came back to the poor dear, and that 
aw night on the cliff must have made her ill. I had almost forgotten 
in my own affair how ill she wa afterwards. she must have told him 
of her sleep-walk adventur on the cliff, and that I knew all about 
it; and now he want me to tell him what she knows, so that he may 
understand. I hope I did right in not say anyth of it to mrs. 
westenra; I should never forgiv myself if ani act of mine, were it even 
a neg one, brought harm on poor dear lucy. I hope, too, dr. van 
hels will not blame me; I have had so much troubl and anxieti of 
late that I feel I cannot bear more just at present. 

I suppos a cri doe us all good at times--clear the air as other rain 
does. perhap it wa read the journal yesterday that upset me, and 
then jonathan went away thi morn to stay away from me a whole day 
and night, the first time we have been part sinc our marriage. I do 
hope the dear fellow will take care of himself, and that noth will 
occur to upset him. It is two o'clock, and the doctor will be here soon 
now. I shall say noth of jonathan' journal unless he ask me. I am 
so glad I have type-written out my own journal, so that, in case he ask 
about lucy, I can hand it to him; it will save much questioning. 

* * * * * 

_later._--h ha come and gone. oh, what a strang meeting, and how it 
all make my head whirl round! I feel like one in a dream. can it be all 
possible, or even a part of it? If I had not read jonathan' journal 
first, I should never have accept even a possibility. poor, poor, dear 
jonathan! how he must have suffered. pleas the good god, all thi may 
not upset him again. I shall tri to save him from it; but it may be even 
a consol and a help to him--terr though it be and aw in it 
consequences--to know for certain that hi eye and ear and brain did 
not deceiv him, and that it is all true. It may be that it is the doubt 
which haunt him; that when the doubt is removed, no matter 
which--wak or dreaming--may prove the truth, he will be more 
satisfi and better abl to bear the shock. dr. van hels must be a 
good man as well as a clever one if he is arthur' friend and dr. 
seward's, and if they brought him all the way from holland to look after 
lucy. I feel from have seen him that he _is_ good and kind and of a 
nobl nature. when he come to-morrow I shall ask him about jonathan; 
and then, pleas god, all thi sorrow and anxieti may lead to a good 
end. I use to think I would like to practis interviewing; jonathan' 
friend on "the exet news" told him that memori wa everyth in such 
work--that you must be abl to put down exactli almost everi word 
spoken, even if you had to refin some of it afterwards. here wa a rare 
interview; I shall tri to record it _verbatim_. 

It wa half-past two o'clock when the knock came. I took my courag _à 
deux mains_ and waited. In a few minut mari open the door, and 
announc "dr. van helsing." 

I rose and bowed, and he came toward me; a man of medium weight, 
strongli built, with hi shoulder set back over a broad, deep chest and 
a neck well balanc on the trunk as the head is on the neck. the pois 
of the head strike one at onc as indic of thought and power; the 
head is noble, well-sized, broad, and larg behind the ears. the face, 
clean-shaven, show a hard, squar chin, a large, resolute, mobil 
mouth, a good-siz nose, rather straight, but with quick, sensit 
nostrils, that seem to broaden as the big, bushi brow come down and the 
mouth tightens. the forehead is broad and fine, rise at first almost 
straight and then slope back abov two bump or ridg wide apart; 
such a forehead that the reddish hair cannot possibl tumbl over it, 
but fall natur back and to the sides. big, dark blue eye are set 
wide apart, and are quick and tender or stern with the man' moods. He 
said to me:-- 

"mrs. harker, is it not?" I bow assent. 

"that wa miss mina murray?" again I assented. 

"it is mina murray that I came to see that wa friend of that poor dear 
child luci westenra. madam mina, it is on account of the dead I come." 

"sir," I said, "you could have no better claim on me than that you were 
a friend and helper of luci westenra." and I held out my hand. He took 
it and said tenderly:-- 

"oh, madam mina, I knew that the friend of that poor lili girl must be 
good, but I had yet to learn----" He finish hi speech with a courtli 
bow. I ask him what it wa that he want to see me about, so he at 
onc began:-- 

"I have read your letter to miss lucy. forgiv me, but I had to begin 
to inquir somewhere, and there wa none to ask. I know that you were 
with her at whitby. she sometim kept a diary--y need not look 
surprised, madam mina; it wa begun after you had left, and wa in 
imit of you--and in that diari she trace by infer certain 
thing to a sleep-walk in which she put down that you save her. In 
great perplex then I come to you, and ask you out of your so much 
kind to tell me all of it that you can remember." 

"I can tell you, I think, dr. van helsing, all about it." 

"ah, then you have good memori for facts, for details? It is not alway 
so with young ladies." 

"no, doctor, but I wrote it all down at the time. I can show it to you 
if you like." 

"oh, madam mina, I will be grateful; you will do me much favour." I 
could not resist the temptat of mystifi him a bit--i suppos it is 
some of the tast of the origin appl that remain still in our 
mouths--so I hand him the shorthand diary. He took it with a grate 
bow, and said:-- 

"may I read it?" 

"if you wish," I answer as demur as I could. He open it, and for 
an instant hi face fell. then he stood up and bowed. 

"oh, you so clever woman!" he said. "I knew long that mr. jonathan wa a 
man of much thankfulness; but see, hi wife have all the good things. 
and will you not so much honour me and so help me as to read it for me? 
alas! I know not the shorthand." By thi time my littl joke wa over, 
and I wa almost ashamed; so I took the typewritten copi from my 
workbasket and hand it to him. 

"forgiv me," I said: "I could not help it; but I had been think that 
it wa of dear luci that you wish to ask, and so that you might not 
have time to wait--not on my account, but becaus I know your time must 
be precious--i have written it out on the typewrit for you." 

He took it and hi eye glistened. "you are so good," he said. "and may 
I read it now? I may want to ask you some thing when I have read." 

"bi all means," I said, "read it over whilst I order lunch; and then you 
can ask me question whilst we eat." He bow and settl himself in a 
chair with hi back to the light, and becam absorb in the papers, 
whilst I went to see after lunch chiefli in order that he might not be 
disturbed. when I came back, I found him walk hurriedli up and down 
the room, hi face all ablaz with excitement. He rush up to me and 
took me by both hands. 

"oh, madam mina," he said, "how can I say what I owe to you? thi paper 
is as sunshine. It open the gate to me. I am daze, I am dazzle, with so 
much light, and yet cloud roll in behind the light everi time. but that 
you do not, cannot, comprehend. oh, but I am grate to you, you so 
clever woman. madam"--h said thi veri solemnly--"if ever abraham van 
hels can do anyth for you or yours, I trust you will let me know. 
It will be pleasur and delight if I may serv you as a friend; as a 
friend, but all I have ever learned, all I can ever do, shall be for you 
and those you love. there are dark in life, and there are lights; 
you are one of the lights. you will have happi life and good life, and 
your husband will be bless in you." 

"but, doctor, you prais me too much, and--and you do not know me." 

"not know you--i, who am old, and who have studi all my life men and 
women; I, who have made my specialti the brain and all that belong to 
him and all that follow from him! and I have read your diari that you 
have so goodli written for me, and which breath out truth in everi 
line. I, who have read your so sweet letter to poor luci of your 
marriag and your trust, not know you! oh, madam mina, good women tell 
all their lives, and by day and by hour and by minute, such thing that 
angel can read; and we men who wish to know have in us someth of 
angels' eyes. your husband is nobl nature, and you are nobl too, for 
you trust, and trust cannot be where there is mean nature. and your 
husband--tel me of him. Is he quit well? Is all that fever gone, and 
is he strong and hearty?" I saw here an open to ask him about 
jonathan, so I said:-- 

"he wa almost recovered, but he ha been greatli upset by mr. hawkins' 
death." He interrupted:-- 

"oh, yes, I know, I know. I have read your last two letters." I went 
on:-- 

"I suppos thi upset him, for when we were in town on thursday last he 
had a sort of shock." 

"A shock, and after brain fever so soon! that wa not good. what kind of 
a shock wa it?" 

"he thought he saw some one who recal someth terrible, someth 
which led to hi brain fever." and here the whole thing seem to 
overwhelm me in a rush. the piti for jonathan, the horror which he 
experienced, the whole fear mysteri of hi diary, and the fear that 
ha been brood over me ever since, all came in a tumult. I suppos I 
wa hysterical, for I threw myself on my knee and held up my hand to 
him, and implor him to make my husband well again. He took my hand 
and rais me up, and made me sit on the sofa, and sat by me; he held my 
hand in his, and said to me with, oh, such infinit sweetness:-- 

"mi life is a barren and lone one, and so full of work that I have not 
had much time for friendships; but sinc I have been summon to here by 
my friend john seward I have known so mani good peopl and seen such 
nobil that I feel more than ever--and it ha grown with my advanc 
years--th loneli of my life. believe, me, then, that I come here 
full of respect for you, and you have given me hope--hope, not in what I 
am seek of, but that there are good women still left to make life 
happy--good women, whose live and whose truth may make good lesson for 
the children that are to be. I am glad, glad, that I may here be of some 
use to you; for if your husband suffer, he suffer within the rang of my 
studi and experience. I promis you that I will gladli do _all_ for him 
that I can--al to make hi life strong and manly, and your life a happi 
one. now you must eat. you are overwrought and perhap over-anxious. 
husband jonathan would not like to see you so pale; and what he like not 
where he love, is not to hi good. therefor for hi sake you must eat 
and smile. you have told me all about lucy, and so now we shall not 
speak of it, lest it distress. I shall stay in exet to-night, for I 
want to think much over what you have told me, and when I have thought I 
will ask you questions, if I may. and then, too, you will tell me of 
husband jonathan' troubl so far as you can, but not yet. you must eat 
now; afterward you shall tell me all." 

after lunch, when we went back to the drawing-room, he said to me:-- 

"and now tell me all about him." when it came to speak to thi great 
learn man, I began to fear that he would think me a weak fool, and 
jonathan a madman--that journal is all so strange--and I hesit to go 
on. but he wa so sweet and kind, and he had promis to help, and I 
trust him, so I said:-- 

"dr. van helsing, what I have to tell you is so queer that you must not 
laugh at me or at my husband. I have been sinc yesterday in a sort of 
fever of doubt; you must be kind to me, and not think me foolish that I 
have even half believ some veri strang things." He reassur me by 
hi manner as well as hi word when he said:-- 

"oh, my dear, if you onli know how strang is the matter regard which 
I am here, it is you who would laugh. I have learn not to think littl 
of ani one' belief, no matter how strang it be. I have tri to keep 
an open mind; and it is not the ordinari thing of life that could close 
it, but the strang things, the extraordinari things, the thing that 
make one doubt if they be mad or sane." 

"thank you, thank you, a thousand times! you have taken a weight off my 
mind. If you will let me, I shall give you a paper to read. It is long, 
but I have typewritten it out. It will tell you my troubl and 
jonathan's. It is the copi of hi journal when abroad, and all that 
happened. I dare not say anyth of it; you will read for yourself and 
judge. and then when I see you, perhaps, you will be veri kind and tell 
me what you think." 

"I promise," he said as I gave him the papers; "I shall in the morning, 
so soon as I can, come to see you and your husband, if I may." 

"jonathan will be here at half-past eleven, and you must come to lunch 
with us and see him then; you could catch the quick 3:34 train, which 
will leav you at paddington befor eight." He wa surpris at my 
knowledg of the train off-hand, but he doe not know that I have made 
up all the train to and from exeter, so that I may help jonathan in 
case he is in a hurry. 

So he took the paper with him and went away, and I sit here 
thinking--think I don't know what. 

* * * * * 

_letter (bi hand), van hels to mrs. harker._ 

"_25 september, 6 o'clock._ 

"dear madam mina,-- 

"I have read your husband' so wonder diary. you may sleep without 
doubt. strang and terribl as it is, it is _true_! I will pledg my 
life on it. It may be wors for others; but for him and you there is no 
dread. He is a nobl fellow; and let me tell you from experi of men, 
that one who would do as he did in go down that wall and to that 
room--ay, and go a second time--i not one to be injur in 
perman by a shock. hi brain and hi heart are all right; thi I 
swear, befor I have even seen him; so be at rest. I shall have much to 
ask him of other things. I am bless that to-day I come to see you, for 
I have learn all at onc so much that again I am dazzle--dazzl more 
than ever, and I must think. 

"your the most faithful, 

"abraham van helsing." 


_letter, mrs. harker to van helsing._ 

"_25 september, 6:30 p. m._ 

"mi dear dr. van helsing,-- 

"A thousand thank for your kind letter, which ha taken a great weight 
off my mind. and yet, if it be true, what terribl thing there are in 
the world, and what an aw thing if that man, that monster, be realli 
in london! I fear to think. I have thi moment, whilst writing, had a 
wire from jonathan, say that he leav by the 6:25 to-night from 
launceston and will be here at 10:18, so that I shall have no fear 
to-night. will you, therefore, instead of lunch with us, pleas come 
to breakfast at eight o'clock, if thi be not too earli for you? you can 
get away, if you are in a hurry, by the 10:30 train, which will bring 
you to paddington by 2:35. Do not answer this, as I shall take it that, 
if I do not hear, you will come to breakfast. 

"believ me, 

"your faith and grate friend, 

"mina harker." 


_jonathan harker' journal._ 

_26 september._--i thought never to write in thi diari again, but the 
time ha come. when I got home last night mina had supper ready, and 
when we had sup she told me of van helsing' visit, and of her have 
given him the two diari copi out, and of how anxiou she ha been 
about me. she show me in the doctor' letter that all I wrote down wa 
true. It seem to have made a new man of me. It wa the doubt as to the 
realiti of the whole thing that knock me over. I felt impotent, and in 
the dark, and distrustful. but, now that I _know_, I am not afraid, even 
of the count. He ha succeed after all, then, in hi design in get 
to london, and it wa he I saw. He ha got younger, and how? van hels 
is the man to unmask him and hunt him out, if he is anyth like what 
mina says. We sat late, and talk it all over. mina is dressing, and I 
shall call at the hotel in a few minut and bring him over.... 

He was, I think, surpris to see me. when I came into the room where he 
was, and introduc myself, he took me by the shoulder, and turn my 
face round to the light, and said, after a sharp scrutiny:-- 

"but madam mina told me you were ill, that you had had a shock." It wa 
so funni to hear my wife call "madam mina" by thi kindly, 
strong-fac old man. I smiled, and said:-- 

"I _was_ ill, I _have_ had a shock; but you have cure me already." 

"and how?" 

"bi your letter to mina last night. I wa in doubt, and then everyth 
took a hue of unreality, and I did not know what to trust, even the 
evid of my own senses. not know what to trust, I did not know 
what to do; and so had onli to keep on work in what had hitherto been 
the groov of my life. the groov ceas to avail me, and I mistrust 
myself. doctor, you don't know what it is to doubt everything, even 
yourself. no, you don't; you couldn't with eyebrow like yours." He 
seem pleased, and laugh as he said:-- 

"so! you are physiognomist. I learn more here with each hour. I am with 
so much pleasur come to you to breakfast; and, oh, sir, you will 
pardon prais from an old man, but you are bless in your wife." I 
would listen to him go on prais mina for a day, so I simpli nod 
and stood silent. 

"she is one of god' women, fashion by hi own hand to show us men and 
other women that there is a heaven where we can enter, and that it 
light can be here on earth. So true, so sweet, so noble, so littl an 
egoist--and that, let me tell you, is much in thi age, so sceptic and 
selfish. and you, sir--i have read all the letter to poor miss lucy, 
and some of them speak of you, so I know you sinc some day from the 
know of others; but I have seen your true self sinc last night. you 
will give me your hand, will you not? and let us be friend for all our 
lives." 

We shook hands, and he wa so earnest and so kind that it made me quit 
choky. 

"and now," he said, "may I ask you for some more help? I have a great 
task to do, and at the begin it is to know. you can help me here. 
can you tell me what went befor your go to transylvania? later on I 
may ask more help, and of a differ kind; but at first thi will do." 

"look here, sir," I said, "doe what you have to do concern the count?" 

"it does," he said solemnly. 

"then I am with you heart and soul. As you go by the 10:30 train, you 
will not have time to read them; but I shall get the bundl of papers. 
you can take them with you and read them in the train." 

after breakfast I saw him to the station. when we were part he 
said:-- 

"perhap you will come to town if I send to you, and take madam mina 
too." 

"we shall both come when you will," I said. 

I had got him the morn paper and the london paper of the previou 
night, and while we were talk at the carriag window, wait for the 
train to start, he wa turn them over. hi eye suddenli seem to 
catch someth in one of them, "the westminst gazette"--i knew it by 
the colour--and he grew quit white. He read someth intently, 
groan to himself: "mein gott! mein gott! So soon! so soon!" I do not 
think he rememb me at the moment. just then the whistl blew, and 
the train move off. thi recal him to himself, and he lean out of 
the window and wave hi hand, call out: "love to madam mina; I shall 
write so soon as ever I can." 


_dr. seward' diary._ 

_26 september._--truli there is no such thing as finality. not a week 
sinc I said "finis," and yet here I am start fresh again, or rather 
go on with the same record. until thi afternoon I had no caus to 
think of what is done. renfield had become, to all intents, as sane as 
he ever was. He wa alreadi well ahead with hi fli business; and he had 
just start in the spider line also; so he had not been of ani troubl 
to me. I had a letter from arthur, written on sunday, and from it I 
gather that he is bear up wonder well. quincey morri is with 
him, and that is much of a help, for he himself is a bubbl well of 
good spirits. quincey wrote me a line too, and from him I hear that 
arthur is begin to recov someth of hi old buoyancy; so as to 
them all my mind is at rest. As for myself, I wa settl down to my 
work with the enthusiasm which I use to have for it, so that I might 
fairli have said that the wound which poor luci left on me wa becom 
cicatrised. everyth is, however, now reopened; and what is to be the 
end god onli knows. I have an idea that van hels think he knows, 
too, but he will onli let out enough at a time to whet curiosity. He 
went to exet yesterday, and stay there all night. to-day he came 
back, and almost bound into the room at about half-past five o'clock, 
and thrust last night' "westminst gazette" into my hand. 

"what do you think of that?" he ask as he stood back and fold hi 
arms. 

I look over the paper, for I realli did not know what he meant; but he 
took it from me and point out a paragraph about children be decoy 
away at hampstead. It did not convey much to me, until I reach a 
passag where it describ small punctur wound on their throats. An 
idea struck me, and I look up. "well?" he said. 

"it is like poor lucy's." 

"and what do you make of it?" 

"simpli that there is some caus in common. whatev it wa that injur 
her ha injur them." I did not quit understand hi answer:-- 

"that is true indirectly, but not directly." 

"how do you mean, professor?" I asked. I wa a littl inclin to take 
hi serious lightly--for, after all, four day of rest and freedom 
from burning, harrow anxieti doe help to restor one' spirits--but 
when I saw hi face, it sober me. never, even in the midst of our 
despair about poor lucy, had he look more stern. 

"tell me!" I said. "I can hazard no opinion. I do not know what to 
think, and I have no data on which to found a conjecture." 

"do you mean to tell me, friend john, that you have no suspicion as to 
what poor luci die of; not after all the hint given, not onli by 
events, but by me?" 

"of nervou prostrat follow on great loss or wast of blood." 

"and how the blood lost or waste?" I shook my head. He step over and 
sat down besid me, and went on:-- 

"you are clever man, friend john; you reason well, and your wit is bold; 
but you are too prejudiced. you do not let your eye see nor your ear 
hear, and that which is outsid your daili life is not of account to 
you. Do you not think that there are thing which you cannot understand, 
and yet which are; that some peopl see thing that other cannot? but 
there are thing old and new which must not be contempl by men' 
eyes, becaus they know--or think they know--som thing which other men 
have told them. ah, it is the fault of our scienc that it want to 
explain all; and if it explain not, then it say there is noth to 
explain. but yet we see around us everi day the growth of new beliefs, 
which think themselv new; and which are yet but the old, which pretend 
to be young--lik the fine ladi at the opera. I suppos now you do not 
believ in corpor transference. no? nor in materialisation. no? nor 
in astral bodies. no? nor in the read of thought. no? nor in 
hypnotism----" 

"yes," I said. "charcot ha prove that pretti well." He smile as he 
went on: "then you are satisfi as to it. yes? and of cours then you 
understand how it act, and can follow the mind of the great 
charcot--ala that he is no more!--into the veri soul of the patient 
that he influence. no? then, friend john, am I to take it that you 
simpli accept fact, and are satisfi to let from premis to conclus 
be a blank? no? then tell me--for I am student of the brain--how you 
accept the hypnot and reject the thought reading. let me tell you, my 
friend, that there are thing done to-day in electr scienc which 
would have been deem unholi by the veri men who discov 
electricity--who would themselv not so long befor have been burn 
as wizards. there are alway mysteri in life. whi wa it that 
methuselah live nine hundr years, and 'old parr' one hundr and 
sixty-nine, and yet that poor lucy, with four men' blood in her poor 
veins, could not live even one day? for, had she live one more day, we 
could have save her. Do you know all the mysteri of life and death? Do 
you know the altogeth of compar anatomi and can say wherefor the 
qualiti of brute are in some men, and not in others? can you tell me 
why, when other spider die small and soon, that one great spider live 
for centuri in the tower of the old spanish church and grew and grew, 
till, on descending, he could drink the oil of all the church lamps? can 
you tell me whi in the pampas, ay and elsewhere, there are bat that 
come at night and open the vein of cattl and hors and suck dri their 
veins; how in some island of the western sea there are bat which hang 
on the tree all day, and those who have seen describ as like giant 
nut or pods, and that when the sailor sleep on the deck, becaus that 
it is hot, flit down on them, and then--and then in the morn are 
found dead men, white as even miss luci was?" 

"good god, professor!" I said, start up. "do you mean to tell me that 
luci wa bitten by such a bat; and that such a thing is here in london 
in the nineteenth century?" He wave hi hand for silence, and went 
on:-- 

"can you tell me whi the tortois live more long than gener of 
men; whi the eleph goe on and on till he have seen dynasties; and 
whi the parrot never die onli of bite of cat or dog or other complaint? 
can you tell me whi men believ in all age and place that there are 
some few who live on alway if they be permit; that there are men and 
women who cannot die? We all know--becaus scienc ha vouch for the 
fact--that there have been toad shut up in rock for thousand of 
years, shut in one so small hole that onli hold him sinc the youth of 
the world. can you tell me how the indian fakir can make himself to die 
and have been buried, and hi grave seal and corn sow on it, and the 
corn reap and be cut and sown and reap and cut again, and then men 
come and take away the unbroken seal and that there lie the indian 
fakir, not dead, but that rise up and walk amongst them as before?" here 
I interrupt him. I wa get bewildered; he so crowd on my mind 
hi list of nature' eccentr and possibl imposs that my 
imagin wa get fired. I had a dim idea that he wa teach me 
some lesson, as long ago he use to do in hi studi at amsterdam; but 
he use then to tell me the thing, so that I could have the object of 
thought in mind all the time. but now I wa without thi help, yet I 
want to follow him, so I said:-- 

"professor, let me be your pet student again. tell me the thesis, so 
that I may appli your knowledg as you go on. At present I am go in 
my mind from point to point as a mad man, and not a sane one, follow an 
idea. I feel like a novic lumber through a bog in a mist, jump 
from one tussock to anoth in the mere blind effort to move on without 
know where I am going." 

"that is good image," he said. "well, I shall tell you. My thesi is 
this: I want you to believe." 

"to believ what?" 

"to believ in thing that you cannot. let me illustrate. I heard onc 
of an american who so defin faith: 'that faculti which enabl us to 
believ thing which we know to be untrue.' for one, I follow that man. 
He meant that we shall have an open mind, and not let a littl bit of 
truth check the rush of a big truth, like a small rock doe a railway 
truck. We get the small truth first. good! We keep him, and we valu 
him; but all the same we must not let him think himself all the truth in 
the universe." 

"then you want me not to let some previou convict injur the 
recept of my mind with regard to some strang matter. Do I read 
your lesson aright?" 

"ah, you are my favourit pupil still. It is worth to teach you. now 
that you are will to understand, you have taken the first step to 
understand. you think then that those so small hole in the children' 
throat were made by the same that made the hole in miss lucy?" 

"I suppos so." He stood up and said solemnly:-- 

"then you are wrong. oh, would it were so! but alas! no. It is worse, 
far, far worse." 

"in god' name, professor van helsing, what do you mean?" I cried. 

He threw himself with a despair gestur into a chair, and place hi 
elbow on the table, cover hi face with hi hand as he spoke:-- 

"they were made by miss lucy!" 




chapter XV 

dr. seward' diary--_continued_. 


for a while sheer anger master me; it wa as if he had dure her life 
struck luci on the face. I smote the tabl hard and rose up as I said to 
him:-- 

"dr. van helsing, are you mad?" He rais hi head and look at me, and 
somehow the tender of hi face calm me at once. "would I were!" he 
said. "mad were easi to bear compar with truth like this. oh, my 
friend, why, think you, did I go so far round, whi take so long to tell 
you so simpl a thing? wa it becaus I hate you and have hate you all 
my life? wa it becaus I wish to give you pain? wa it that I wanted, 
now so late, reveng for that time when you save my life, and from a 
fear death? Ah no!" 

"forgiv me," said I. He went on:-- 

"mi friend, it wa becaus I wish to be gentl in the break to you, 
for I know you have love that so sweet lady. but even yet I do not 
expect you to believe. It is so hard to accept at onc ani abstract 
truth, that we may doubt such to be possibl when we have alway 
believ the 'no' of it; it is more hard still to accept so sad a 
concret truth, and of such a one as miss lucy. to-night I go to prove 
it. dare you come with me?" 

thi stagger me. A man doe not like to prove such a truth; byron 
except from the category, jealousy. 

"and prove the veri truth he most abhorred." 

He saw my hesitation, and spoke:-- 

"the logic is simple, no madman' logic thi time, jump from tussock 
to tussock in a misti bog. If it be not true, then proof will be relief; 
at worst it will not harm. If it be true! ah, there is the dread; yet 
veri dread should help my cause, for in it is some need of belief. come, 
I tell you what I propose: first, that we go off now and see that child 
in the hospital. dr. vincent, of the north hospital, where the paper 
say the child is, is friend of mine, and I think of your sinc you were 
in class at amsterdam. He will let two scientist see hi case, if he 
will not let two friends. We shall tell him nothing, but onli that we 
wish to learn. and then----" 

"and then?" He took a key from hi pocket and held it up. "and then we 
spend the night, you and I, in the churchyard where luci lies. thi is 
the key that lock the tomb. I had it from the coffin-man to give to 
arthur." My heart sank within me, for I felt that there wa some fear 
ordeal befor us. I could do nothing, however, so I pluck up what 
heart I could and said that we had better hasten, as the afternoon wa 
passing.... 

We found the child awake. It had had a sleep and taken some food, and 
altogeth wa go on well. dr. vincent took the bandag from it 
throat, and show us the punctures. there wa no mistak the 
similar to those which had been on lucy' throat. they were smaller, 
and the edg look fresher; that wa all. We ask vincent to what he 
attribut them, and he repli that it must have been a bite of some 
animal, perhap a rat; but, for hi own part, he wa inclin to think 
that it wa one of the bat which are so numer on the northern 
height of london. "out of so mani harmless ones," he said, "there may 
be some wild specimen from the south of a more malign species. some 
sailor may have brought one home, and it manag to escape; or even from 
the zoölog garden a young one may have got loose, or one be bred 
there from a vampire. these thing do occur, you know. onli ten day ago 
a wolf got out, and was, I believe, trace up in thi direction. for a 
week after, the children were play noth but red ride hood on the 
heath and in everi alley in the place until thi 'bloofer lady' scare 
came along, sinc when it ha been quit a gala-tim with them. even 
thi poor littl mite, when he woke up to-day, ask the nurs if he 
might go away. when she ask him whi he want to go, he said he want 
to play with the 'bloofer lady.'" 

"I hope," said van helsing, "that when you are send the child home 
you will caution it parent to keep strict watch over it. these fanci 
to stray are most dangerous; and if the child were to remain out anoth 
night, it would probabl be fatal. but in ani case I suppos you will 
not let it away for some days?" 

"certainli not, not for a week at least; longer if the wound is not 
healed." 

our visit to the hospit took more time than we had reckon on, and 
the sun had dip befor we came out. when van hels saw how dark it 
was, he said:-- 

"there is no hurry. It is more late than I thought. come, let us seek 
somewher that we may eat, and then we shall go on our way." 

We dine at "jack straw' castle" along with a littl crowd of 
bicyclist and other who were genial noisy. about ten o'clock we 
start from the inn. It wa then veri dark, and the scatter lamp 
made the dark greater when we were onc outsid their individu 
radius. the professor had evid note the road we were to go, for he 
went on unhesitatingly; but, as for me, I wa in quit a mixup as to 
locality. As we went further, we met fewer and fewer people, till at 
last we were somewhat surpris when we met even the patrol of hors 
polic go their usual suburban round. At last we reach the wall of 
the churchyard, which we climb over. with some littl difficulty--for 
it wa veri dark, and the whole place seem so strang to us--w found 
the westenra tomb. the professor took the key, open the creaki door, 
and stand back, politely, but quit unconsciously, motion me to 
preced him. there wa a delici ironi in the offer, in the 
courtli of give prefer on such a ghastli occasion. My 
companion follow me quickly, and cautious drew the door to, after 
care ascertain that the lock wa a falling, and not a spring, 
one. In the latter case we should have been in a bad plight. then he 
fumbl in hi bag, and take out a matchbox and a piec of candle, 
proceed to make a light. the tomb in the day-time, and when wreath 
with fresh flowers, had look grim and gruesom enough; but now, some 
day afterwards, when the flower hung lank and dead, their white 
turn to rust and their green to browns; when the spider and the 
beetl had resum their accustom dominance; when time-discolour 
stone, and dust-encrust mortar, and rusty, dank iron, and tarnish 
brass, and cloud silver-pl gave back the feebl glimmer of a 
candle, the effect wa more miser and sordid than could have been 
imagined. It convey irresist the idea that life--anim life--wa 
not the onli thing which could pass away. 

van hels went about hi work systematically. hold hi candl so 
that he could read the coffin plates, and so hold it that the sperm 
drop in white patch which congeal as they touch the metal, he 
made assur of lucy' coffin. anoth search in hi bag, and he took 
out a turnscrew. 

"what are you go to do?" I asked. 

"to open the coffin. you shall yet be convinced." straightway he began 
take out the screws, and final lift off the lid, show the 
case of lead beneath. the sight wa almost too much for me. It seem 
to be as much an affront to the dead as it would have been to have 
strip off her cloth in her sleep whilst living; I actual took 
hold of hi hand to stop him. He onli said: "you shall see," and again 
fumbl in hi bag, took out a tini fret-saw. strike the turnscrew 
through the lead with a swift downward stab, which made me wince, he 
made a small hole, which was, however, big enough to admit the point of 
the saw. I had expect a rush of ga from the week-old corpse. We 
doctors, who have had to studi our dangers, have to becom accustom to 
such things, and I drew back toward the door. but the professor never 
stop for a moment; he saw down a coupl of feet along one side of 
the lead coffin, and then across, and down the other side. take the 
edg of the loos flange, he bent it back toward the foot of the 
coffin, and hold up the candl into the aperture, motion to me to 
look. 

I drew near and looked. the coffin wa empty. 

It wa certainli a surpris to me, and gave me a consider shock, but 
van hels wa unmoved. He wa now more sure than ever of hi ground, 
and so embolden to proceed in hi task. "are you satisfi now, friend 
john?" he asked. 

I felt all the dog argument of my natur awak within me as 
I answer him:-- 

"I am satisfi that lucy' bodi is not in that coffin; but that onli 
prove one thing." 

"and what is that, friend john?" 

"that it is not there." 

"that is good logic," he said, "so far as it goes. but how do you--how 
can you--account for it not be there?" 

"perhap a body-snatcher," I suggested. "some of the undertaker' peopl 
may have stolen it." I felt that I wa speak folly, and yet it wa 
the onli real caus which I could suggest. the professor sighed. "ah 
well!" he said, "we must have more proof. come with me." 

He put on the coffin-lid again, gather up all hi thing and place 
them in the bag, blew out the light, and place the candl also in the 
bag. We open the door, and went out. behind us he close the door and 
lock it. He hand me the key, saying: "will you keep it? you had 
better be assured." I laughed--it wa not a veri cheer laugh, I am 
bound to say--a I motion him to keep it. "A key is nothing," I said; 
"there may be duplicates; and anyhow it is not difficult to pick a lock 
of that kind." He said nothing, but put the key in hi pocket. then he 
told me to watch at one side of the churchyard whilst he would watch at 
the other. I took up my place behind a yew-tree, and I saw hi dark 
figur move until the interven headston and tree hid it from my 
sight. 

It wa a lone vigil. just after I had taken my place I heard a distant 
clock strike twelve, and in time came one and two. I wa chill and 
unnerved, and angri with the professor for take me on such an errand 
and with myself for coming. I wa too cold and too sleepi to be keenli 
observant, and not sleepi enough to betray my trust so altogeth I had 
a dreary, miser time. 

suddenly, as I turn round, I thought I saw someth like a white 
streak, move between two dark yew-tre at the side of the churchyard 
farthest from the tomb; at the same time a dark mass move from the 
professor' side of the ground, and hurriedli went toward it. then I 
too moved; but I had to go round headston and railed-off tombs, and I 
stumbl over graves. the sky wa overcast, and somewher far off an 
earli cock crew. A littl way off, beyond a line of scatter 
juniper-trees, which mark the pathway to the church, a white, dim 
figur flit in the direct of the tomb. the tomb itself wa hidden 
by trees, and I could not see where the figur disappeared. I heard the 
rustl of actual movement where I had first seen the white figure, and 
come over, found the professor hold in hi arm a tini child. when 
he saw me he held it out to me, and said:-- 

"are you satisfi now?" 

"no," I said, in a way that I felt wa aggressive. 

"do you not see the child?" 

"yes, it is a child, but who brought it here? and is it wounded?" I 
asked. 

"we shall see," said the professor, and with one impuls we took our way 
out of the churchyard, he carri the sleep child. 

when we had got some littl distanc away, we went into a clump of 
trees, and struck a match, and look at the child' throat. It wa 
without a scratch or scar of ani kind. 

"wa I right?" I ask triumphantly. 

"we were just in time," said the professor thankfully. 

We had now to decid what we were to do with the child, and so consult 
about it. If we were to take it to a police-st we should have to 
give some account of our movement dure the night; at least, we should 
have had to make some statement as to how we had come to find the child. 
So final we decid that we would take it to the heath, and when we 
heard a policeman coming, would leav it where he could not fail to find 
it; we would then seek our way home as quickli as we could. all fell out 
well. At the edg of hampstead heath we heard a policeman' heavi 
tramp, and lay the child on the pathway, we wait and watch until 
he saw it as he flash hi lantern to and fro. We heard hi exclam 
of astonishment, and then we went away silently. By good chanc we got a 
cab near the "spaniards," and drove to town. 

I cannot sleep, so I make thi entry. but I must tri to get a few hours' 
sleep, as van hels is to call for me at noon. He insist that I shall 
go with him on anoth expedition. 

* * * * * 

_27 september._--it wa two o'clock befor we found a suitabl 
opportun for our attempt. the funer held at noon wa all completed, 
and the last straggler of the mourner had taken themselv lazili 
away, when, look care from behind a clump of alder-trees, we saw 
the sexton lock the gate after him. We knew then that we were safe till 
morn did we desir it; but the professor told me that we should not 
want more than an hour at most. again I felt that horrid sens of the 
realiti of things, in which ani effort of imagin seem out of 
place; and I realis distinctli the peril of the law which we were 
incur in our unhallow work. besides, I felt it wa all so useless. 
outrag as it wa to open a leaden coffin, to see if a woman dead 
nearli a week were realli dead, it now seem the height of folli to 
open the tomb again, when we knew, from the evid of our own 
eyesight, that the coffin wa empty. I shrug my shoulders, however, 
and rest silent, for van hels had a way of go on hi own road, 
no matter who remonstrated. He took the key, open the vault, and again 
courteous motion me to precede. the place wa not so gruesom as 
last night, but oh, how unutter mean-look when the sunshin 
stream in. van hels walk over to lucy' coffin, and I followed. 
He bent over and again forc back the leaden flange; and then a shock 
of surpris and dismay shot through me. 

there lay lucy, seemingli just as we had seen her the night befor her 
funeral. she was, if possible, more radiantli beauti than ever; and I 
could not believ that she wa dead. the lip were red, nay redder than 
before; and on the cheek wa a delic bloom. 

"i thi a juggle?" I said to him. 

"are you convinc now?" said the professor in response, and as he spoke 
he put over hi hand, and in a way that made me shudder, pull back the 
dead lip and show the white teeth. 

"see," he went on, "see, they are even sharper than before. with thi 
and this"--and he touch one of the canin teeth and that below 
it--"th littl children can be bitten. are you of belief now, friend 
john?" onc more, argument hostil woke within me. I _could_ not 
accept such an overwhelm idea as he suggested; so, with an attempt to 
argu of which I wa even at the moment ashamed, I said:-- 

"she may have been place here sinc last night." 

"indeed? that is so, and by whom?" 

"I do not know. some one ha done it." 

"and yet she ha been dead one week. most peopl in that time would not 
look so." I had no answer for this, so wa silent. van hels did not 
seem to notic my silence; at ani rate, he show neither chagrin nor 
triumph. He wa look intent at the face of the dead woman, rais 
the eyelid and look at the eyes, and onc more open the lip and 
examin the teeth. then he turn to me and said:-- 

"here, there is one thing which is differ from all recorded; here is 
some dual life that is not as the common. she wa bitten by the vampir 
when she wa in a trance, sleep-walking--oh, you start; you do not know 
that, friend john, but you shall know it all later--and in tranc could 
he best come to take more blood. In tranc she died, and in tranc she 
is un-dead, too. So it is that she differ from all other. usual when 
the un-dead sleep at home"--a he spoke he made a comprehens sweep of 
hi arm to design what to a vampir wa "home"--"their face show what 
they are, but thi so sweet that wa when she not un-dead she go back to 
the noth of the common dead. there is no malign there, see, and so 
it make hard that I must kill her in her sleep." thi turn my blood 
cold, and it began to dawn upon me that I wa accept van helsing' 
theories; but if she were realli dead, what wa there of terror in the 
idea of kill her? He look up at me, and evid saw the chang in 
my face, for he said almost joyously:-- 

"ah, you believ now?" 

I answered: "do not press me too hard all at once. I am will to 
accept. how will you do thi bloodi work?" 

"I shall cut off her head and fill her mouth with garlic, and I shall 
drive a stake through her body." It made me shudder to think of so 
mutil the bodi of the woman whom I had loved. and yet the feel 
wa not so strong as I had expected. I was, in fact, begin to 
shudder at the presenc of thi being, thi un-dead, as van hels 
call it, and to loath it. Is it possibl that love is all subjective, 
or all objective? 

I wait a consider time for van hels to begin, but he stood as 
if wrap in thought. present he close the catch of hi bag with a 
snap, and said:-- 

"I have been thinking, and have made up my mind as to what is best. If I 
did simpli follow my inclin I would do now, at thi moment, what is 
to be done; but there are other thing to follow, and thing that are 
thousand time more difficult in that them we do not know. thi is 
simple. she have yet no life taken, though that is of time; and to act 
now would be to take danger from her for ever. but then we may have to 
want arthur, and how shall we tell him of this? If you, who saw the 
wound on lucy' throat, and saw the wound so similar on the child' at 
the hospital; if you, who saw the coffin empti last night and full 
to-day with a woman who have not chang onli to be more rose and more 
beauti in a whole week, after she die--if you know of thi and know 
of the white figur last night that brought the child to the churchyard, 
and yet of your own sens you did not believe, how, then, can I expect 
arthur, who know none of those things, to believe? He doubt me when I 
took him from her kiss when she wa dying. I know he ha forgiven me 
becaus in some mistaken idea I have done thing that prevent him say 
good-by as he ought; and he may think that in some more mistaken idea 
thi woman wa buri alive; and that in most mistak of all we have 
kill her. He will then argu back that it is we, mistaken ones, that 
have kill her by our ideas; and so he will be much unhappi always. yet 
he never can be sure; and that is the worst of all. and he will 
sometim think that she he love wa buri alive, and that will paint 
hi dream with horror of what she must have suffered; and again, he 
will think that we may be right, and that hi so belov was, after all, 
an un-dead. no! I told him once, and sinc then I learn much. now, sinc 
I know it is all true, a hundr thousand time more do I know that he 
must pass through the bitter water to reach the sweet. he, poor fellow, 
must have one hour that will make the veri face of heaven grow black to 
him; then we can act for good all round and send him peace. My mind is 
made up. let us go. you return home for to-night to your asylum, and see 
that all be well. As for me, I shall spend the night here in thi 
churchyard in my own way. to-morrow night you will come to me to the 
berkeley hotel at ten of the clock. I shall send for arthur to come too, 
and also that so fine young man of america that gave hi blood. later we 
shall all have work to do. I come with you so far as piccadilli and 
there dine, for I must be back here befor the sun set." 

So we lock the tomb and came away, and got over the wall of the 
churchyard, which wa not much of a task, and drove back to piccadilly. 


_note left by van hels in hi portmanteau, berkeley hotel direct to 
john seward, M. d._ 

(not delivered.) 

"_27 september._ 

"friend john,-- 

"I write thi in case anyth should happen. I go alon to watch in 
that churchyard. It pleas me that the un-dead, miss lucy, shall not 
leav to-night, that so on the morrow night she may be more eager. 
therefor I shall fix some thing she like not--garl and a 
crucifix--and so seal up the door of the tomb. she is young as un-dead, 
and will heed. moreover, these are onli to prevent her come out; they 
may not prevail on her want to get in; for then the un-dead is 
desperate, and must find the line of least resistance, whatsoev it may 
be. I shall be at hand all the night from sunset till after the sunrise, 
and if there be aught that may be learn I shall learn it. for miss 
luci or from her, I have no fear; but that other to whom is there that 
she is un-dead, he have now the power to seek her tomb and find shelter. 
He is cunning, as I know from mr. jonathan and from the way that all 
along he have fool us when he play with us for miss lucy' life, and 
we lost; and in mani way the un-dead are strong. He have alway the 
strength in hi hand of twenti men; even we four who gave our strength 
to miss luci it also is all to him. besides, he can summon hi wolf and 
I know not what. So if it be that he come thither on thi night he shall 
find me; but none other shall--until it be too late. but it may be that 
he will not attempt the place. there is no reason whi he should; hi 
hunt ground is more full of game than the churchyard where the 
un-dead woman sleep, and the one old man watch. 

"therefor I write thi in case.... take the paper that are with this, 
the diari of harker and the rest, and read them, and then find thi 
great un-dead, and cut off hi head and burn hi heart or drive a stake 
through it, so that the world may rest from him. 

"if it be so, farewell. 

"van helsing." 



_dr. seward' diary._ 

_28 september._--it is wonder what a good night' sleep will do for 
one. yesterday I wa almost will to accept van helsing' monstrou 
ideas; but now they seem to start out lurid befor me as outrag on 
common sense. I have no doubt that he believ it all. I wonder if hi 
mind can have becom in ani way unhinged. sure there must be _some_ 
ration explan of all these mysteri things. Is it possibl that 
the professor can have done it himself? He is so abnorm clever that 
if he went off hi head he would carri out hi intent with regard to 
some fix idea in a wonder way. I am loath to think it, and inde 
it would be almost as great a marvel as the other to find that van 
hels wa mad; but anyhow I shall watch him carefully. I may get some 
light on the mystery. 

* * * * * 

_29 september, morning._.... last night, at a littl befor ten o'clock, 
arthur and quincey came into van helsing' room; he told us all that he 
want us to do, but especi address himself to arthur, as if all 
our will were centr in his. He began by say that he hope we would 
all come with him too, "for," he said, "there is a grave duti to be done 
there. you were doubtless surpris at my letter?" thi queri wa 
directli address to lord godalming. 

"I was. It rather upset me for a bit. there ha been so much troubl 
around my hous of late that I could do without ani more. I have been 
curious, too, as to what you mean. quincey and I talk it over; but the 
more we talked, the more puzzl we got, till now I can say for myself 
that i'm about up a tree as to ani mean about anything." 

"me too," said quincey morri laconically. 

"oh," said the professor, "then you are nearer the beginning, both of 
you, than friend john here, who ha to go a long way back befor he can 
even get so far as to begin." 

It wa evid that he recognis my return to my old doubt frame of 
mind without my say a word. then, turn to the other two, he said 
with intens gravity:-- 

"I want your permiss to do what I think good thi night. It is, I 
know, much to ask; and when you know what it is I propos to do you will 
know, and onli then, how much. therefor may I ask that you promis me 
in the dark, so that afterwards, though you may be angri with me for a 
time--i must not disguis from myself the possibl that such may 
be--you shall not blame yourselv for anything." 

"that' frank anyhow," broke in quincey. "i'll answer for the professor. 
I don't quit see hi drift, but I swear he' honest; and that' good 
enough for me." 

"I thank you, sir," said van hels proudly. "I have done myself the 
honour of count you one trust friend, and such endors is dear 
to me." He held out a hand, which quincey took. 

then arthur spoke out:-- 

"dr. van helsing, I don't quit like to 'buy a pig in a poke,' as they 
say in scotland, and if it be anyth in which my honour as a gentleman 
or my faith as a christian is concerned, I cannot make such a promise. 
If you can assur me that what you intend doe not violat either of 
these two, then I give my consent at once; though for the life of me, I 
cannot understand what you are drive at." 

"I accept your limitation," said van helsing, "and all I ask of you is 
that if you feel it necessari to condemn ani act of mine, you will first 
consid it well and be satisfi that it doe not violat your 
reservations." 

"agreed!" said arthur; "that is onli fair. and now that the 
_pourparlers_ are over, may I ask what it is we are to do?" 

"I want you to come with me, and to come in secret, to the churchyard at 
kingstead." 

arthur' face fell as he said in an amaz sort of way:-- 

"where poor luci is buried?" the professor bowed. arthur went on: "and 
when there?" 

"to enter the tomb!" arthur stood up. 

"professor, are you in earnest; or it is some monstrou joke? pardon me, 
I see that you are in earnest." He sat down again, but I could see that 
he sat firmli and proudly, as one who is on hi dignity. there wa 
silenc until he ask again:-- 

"and when in the tomb?" 

"to open the coffin." 

"thi is too much!" he said, angrili rise again. "I am will to be 
patient in all thing that are reasonable; but in this--thi desecr 
of the grave--of one who----" He fairli choke with indignation. the 
professor look pityingli at him. 

"if I could spare you one pang, my poor friend," he said, "god know I 
would. but thi night our feet must tread in thorni paths; or later, and 
for ever, the feet you love must walk in path of flame!" 

arthur look up with set white face and said:-- 

"take care, sir, take care!" 

"would it not be well to hear what I have to say?" said van helsing. 
"and then you will at least know the limit of my purpose. shall I go 
on?" 

"that' fair enough," broke in morris. 

after a paus van hels went on, evid with an effort:-- 

"miss luci is dead; is it not so? yes! then there can be no wrong to 
her. but if she be not dead----" 

arthur jump to hi feet. 

"good god!" he cried. "what do you mean? ha there been ani mistake; ha 
she been buri alive?" He groan in anguish that not even hope could 
soften. 

"I did not say she wa alive, my child; I did not think it. I go no 
further than to say that she might be un-dead." 

"un-dead! not alive! what do you mean? Is thi all a nightmare, or what 
is it?" 

"there are mysteri which men can onli guess at, which age by age they 
may solv onli in part. believ me, we are now on the verg of one. but 
I have not done. may I cut off the head of dead miss lucy?" 

"heaven and earth, no!" cri arthur in a storm of passion. "not for 
the wide world will I consent to ani mutil of her dead body. dr. 
van helsing, you tri me too far. what have I done to you that you should 
tortur me so? what did that poor, sweet girl do that you should want to 
cast such dishonour on her grave? are you mad that speak such things, or 
am I mad to listen to them? don't dare to think more of such a 
desecration; I shall not give my consent to anyth you do. I have a 
duti to do in protect her grave from outrage; and, by god, I shall do 
it!" 

van hels rose up from where he had all the time been seated, and 
said, grave and sternly:-- 

"mi lord godalming, I, too, have a duti to do, a duti to others, a duti 
to you, a duti to the dead; and, by god, I shall do it! all I ask you 
now is that you come with me, that you look and listen; and if when 
later I make the same request you do not be more eager for it 
fulfil even than I am, then--then I shall do my duty, whatev it 
may seem to me. and then, to follow of your lordship' wish I shall 
hold myself at your dispos to render an account to you, when and where 
you will." hi voic broke a little, and he went on with a voic full of 
pity:-- 

"but, I beseech you, do not go forth in anger with me. In a long life of 
act which were often not pleasant to do, and which sometim did wring 
my heart, I have never had so heavi a task as now. believ me that if 
the time come for you to chang your mind toward me, one look from 
you will wipe away all thi so sad hour, for I would do what a man can 
to save you from sorrow. just think. for whi should I give myself so 
much of labour and so much of sorrow? I have come here from my own land 
to do what I can of good; at the first to pleas my friend john, and 
then to help a sweet young lady, whom, too, I came to love. for her--i 
am asham to say so much, but I say it in kindness--i gave what you 
gave; the blood of my veins; I gave it, I, who wa not, like you, her 
lover, but onli her physician and her friend. I gave to her my night 
and days--befor death, after death; and if my death can do her good 
even now, when she is the dead un-dead, she shall have it freely." He 
said thi with a veri grave, sweet pride, and arthur wa much affect 
by it. He took the old man' hand and said in a broken voice:-- 

"oh, it is hard to think of it, and I cannot understand; but at least I 
shall go with you and wait." 




chapter xvi 

dr. seward' diary--_continued_ 


It wa just a quarter befor twelv o'clock when we got into the 
churchyard over the low wall. the night wa dark with occasion gleam 
of moonlight between the rent of the heavi cloud that scud across 
the sky. We all kept somehow close together, with van hels slightli 
in front as he led the way. when we had come close to the tomb I look 
well at arthur, for I fear that the proxim to a place laden with so 
sorrow a memori would upset him; but he bore himself well. I took it 
that the veri mysteri of the proceed wa in some way a counteract 
to hi grief. the professor unlock the door, and see a natur 
hesit amongst us for variou reasons, solv the difficulti by 
enter first himself. the rest of us followed, and he close the door. 
He then lit a dark lantern and point to the coffin. arthur step 
forward hesitatingly; van hels said to me:-- 

"you were with me here yesterday. wa the bodi of miss luci in that 
coffin?" 

"it was." the professor turn to the rest saying:-- 

"you hear; and yet there is no one who doe not believ with me." He 
took hi screwdriv and again took off the lid of the coffin. arthur 
look on, veri pale but silent; when the lid wa remov he step 
forward. He evid did not know that there wa a leaden coffin, or, 
at ani rate, had not thought of it. when he saw the rent in the lead, 
the blood rush to hi face for an instant, but as quickli fell away 
again, so that he remain of a ghastli whiteness; he wa still silent. 
van hels forc back the leaden flange, and we all look in and 
recoiled. 

the coffin wa empty! 

for sever minut no one spoke a word. the silenc wa broken by 
quincey morris:-- 

"professor, I answer for you. your word is all I want. I wouldn't ask 
such a thing ordinarily--i wouldn't so dishonour you as to impli a 
doubt; but thi is a mysteri that goe beyond ani honour or dishonour. 
Is thi your doing?" 

"I swear to you by all that I hold sacr that I have not remov nor 
touch her. what happen wa this: two night ago my friend seward and 
I came here--with good purpose, believ me. I open that coffin, which 
wa then seal up, and we found it, as now, empty. We then waited, and 
saw someth white come through the trees. the next day we came here in 
day-time, and she lay there. did she not, friend john?" 

"yes." 

"that night we were just in time. one more so small child wa missing, 
and we find it, thank god, unharm amongst the graves. yesterday I came 
here befor sundown, for at sundown the un-dead can move. I wait here 
all the night till the sun rose, but I saw nothing. It wa most probabl 
that it wa becaus I had laid over the clamp of those door garlic, 
which the un-dead cannot bear, and other thing which they shun. last 
night there wa no exodus, so to-night befor the sundown I took away my 
garlic and other things. and so it is we find thi coffin empty. but 
bear with me. So far there is much that is strange. wait you with me 
outside, unseen and unheard, and thing much stranger are yet to be. 
so"--her he shut the dark slide of hi lantern--"now to the outside." 
He open the door, and we file out, he come last and lock the 
door behind him. 

oh! but it seem fresh and pure in the night air after the terror of 
that vault. how sweet it wa to see the cloud race by, and the pass 
gleam of the moonlight between the scud cloud cross and 
passing--lik the glad and sorrow of a man' life; how sweet it wa 
to breath the fresh air, that had no taint of death and decay; how 
humanis to see the red light of the sky beyond the hill, and to 
hear far away the muffl roar that mark the life of a great city. each 
in hi own way wa solemn and overcome. arthur wa silent, and was, I 
could see, strive to grasp the purpos and the inner mean of the 
mystery. I wa myself toler patient, and half inclin again to 
throw asid doubt and to accept van helsing' conclusions. quincey 
morri wa phlegmat in the way of a man who accept all things, and 
accept them in the spirit of cool bravery, with hazard of all he ha to 
stake. not be abl to smoke, he cut himself a good-siz plug of 
tobacco and began to chew. As to van helsing, he wa employ in a 
definit way. first he took from hi bag a mass of what look like 
thin, wafer-lik biscuit, which wa care roll up in a white 
napkin; next he took out a double-hand of some whitish stuff, like 
dough or putty. He crumbl the wafer up fine and work it into the 
mass between hi hands. thi he then took, and roll it into thin 
strips, began to lay them into the crevic between the door and it 
set in the tomb. I wa somewhat puzzl at this, and be close, 
ask him what it wa that he wa doing. arthur and quincey drew near 
also, as they too were curious. He answered:-- 

"I am close the tomb, so that the un-dead may not enter." 

"and is that stuff you have put there go to do it?" ask quincey. 
"great scott! Is thi a game?" 

"it is." 

"what is that which you are using?" thi time the question wa by 
arthur. van hels rever lift hi hat as he answered:-- 

"the host. I brought it from amsterdam. I have an indulgence." It wa an 
answer that appal the most sceptic of us, and we felt individu 
that in the presenc of such earnest purpos as the professor's, a 
purpos which could thu use the to him most sacr of things, it wa 
imposs to distrust. In respect silenc we took the place 
assign to us close round the tomb, but hidden from the sight of ani 
one approaching. I piti the others, especi arthur. I had myself 
been apprent by my former visit to thi watch horror; and yet I, 
who had up to an hour ago repudi the proofs, felt my heart sink 
within me. never did tomb look so ghastli white; never did cypress, or 
yew, or junip so seem the embodi of funer gloom; never did tree 
or grass wave or rustl so ominously; never did bough creak so 
mysteriously; and never did the far-away howl of dog send such a 
woeful presag through the night. 

there wa a long spell of silence, a big, ach void, and then from the 
professor a keen "s-s-s-s!" He pointed; and far down the avenu of yew 
we saw a white figur advance--a dim white figure, which held someth 
dark at it breast. the figur stopped, and at the moment a ray of 
moonlight fell upon the mass of drive cloud and show in startl 
promin a dark-hair woman, dress in the cerement of the grave. 
We could not see the face, for it wa bent down over what we saw to be a 
fair-hair child. there wa a paus and a sharp littl cry, such as a 
child give in sleep, or a dog as it lie befor the fire and dreams. We 
were start forward, but the professor' warn hand, seen by us as 
he stood behind a yew-tree, kept us back; and then as we look the 
white figur move forward again. It wa now near enough for us to see 
clearly, and the moonlight still held. My own heart grew cold as ice, 
and I could hear the gasp of arthur, as we recognis the featur of 
luci westenra. luci westenra, but yet how changed. the sweet wa 
turn to adamantine, heartless cruelty, and the puriti to voluptu 
wantonness. van hels step out, and, obedi to hi gesture, we 
all advanc too; the four of us rang in a line befor the door of the 
tomb. van hels rais hi lantern and drew the slide; by the 
concentr light that fell on lucy' face we could see that the lip 
were crimson with fresh blood, and that the stream had trickl over her 
chin and stain the puriti of her lawn death-robe. 

We shudder with horror. I could see by the tremul light that even 
van helsing' iron nerv had failed. arthur wa next to me, and if I had 
not seiz hi arm and held him up, he would have fallen. 

when lucy--i call the thing that wa befor us luci becaus it bore her 
shape--saw us she drew back with an angri snarl, such as a cat give 
when taken unawares; then her eye rang over us. lucy' eye in form 
and colour; but lucy' eye unclean and full of hell-fire, instead of 
the pure, gentl orb we knew. At that moment the remnant of my love 
pass into hate and loathing; had she then to be killed, I could have 
done it with savag delight. As she looked, her eye blaze with unholi 
light, and the face becam wreath with a voluptu smile. oh, god, 
how it made me shudder to see it! with a careless motion, she flung to 
the ground, callou as a devil, the child that up to now she had 
clutch strenuous to her breast, growl over it as a dog growl 
over a bone. the child gave a sharp cry, and lay there moaning. there 
wa a cold-blooded in the act which wrung a groan from arthur; when 
she advanc to him with outstretch arm and a wanton smile he fell 
back and hid hi face in hi hands. 

she still advanced, however, and with a languorous, voluptu grace, 
said:-- 

"come to me, arthur. leav these other and come to me. My arm are 
hungri for you. come, and we can rest together. come, my husband, come!" 

there wa someth diabol sweet in her tones--someth of the 
tingl of glass when struck--which rang through the brain even of us 
who heard the word address to another. As for arthur, he seem under 
a spell; move hi hand from hi face, he open wide hi arms. she 
wa leap for them, when van hels sprang forward and held between 
them hi littl golden crucifix. she recoil from it, and, with a 
suddenli distort face, full of rage, dash past him as if to enter 
the tomb. 

when within a foot or two of the door, however, she stopped, as if 
arrest by some irresist force. then she turned, and her face wa 
shown in the clear burst of moonlight and by the lamp, which had now no 
quiver from van helsing' iron nerves. never did I see such baffl 
malic on a face; and never, I trust, shall such ever be seen again by 
mortal eyes. the beauti colour becam livid, the eye seem to throw 
out spark of hell-fire, the brow were wrinkl as though the fold of 
the flesh were the coil of medusa' snakes, and the lovely, 
blood-stain mouth grew to an open square, as in the passion mask of 
the greek and japanese. If ever a face meant death--if look could 
kill--w saw it at that moment. 

and so for full half a minute, which seem an eternity, she remain 
between the lift crucifix and the sacr close of her mean of 
entry. van hels broke the silenc by ask arthur:-- 

"answer me, oh my friend! Am I to proceed in my work?" 

arthur threw himself on hi knees, and hid hi face in hi hands, as he 
answered:-- 

"do as you will, friend; do as you will. there can be no horror like 
thi ever ani more;" and he groan in spirit. quincey and I 
simultan move toward him, and took hi arms. We could hear the 
click of the close lantern as van hels held it down; come close 
to the tomb, he began to remov from the chink some of the sacr 
emblem which he had place there. We all look on in horrifi 
amaz as we saw, when he stood back, the woman, with a corpor 
bodi as real at that moment as our own, pass in through the interstic 
where scarc a knife-blad could have gone. We all felt a glad sens of 
relief when we saw the professor calmli restor the string of putti 
to the edg of the door. 

when thi wa done, he lift the child and said: 

"come now, my friends; we can do no more till to-morrow. there is a 
funer at noon, so here we shall all come befor long after that. the 
friend of the dead will all be gone by two, and when the sexton lock 
the gate we shall remain. then there is more to do; but not like thi of 
to-night. As for thi littl one, he is not much harm, and by to-morrow 
night he shall be well. We shall leav him where the polic will find 
him, as on the other night; and then to home." come close to arthur, 
he said:-- 

"mi friend arthur, you have had a sore trial; but after, when you look 
back, you will see how it wa necessary. you are now in the bitter 
waters, my child. By thi time to-morrow you will, pleas god, have 
pass them, and have drunk of the sweet waters; so do not mourn 
overmuch. till then I shall not ask you to forgiv me." 

arthur and quincey came home with me, and we tri to cheer each other 
on the way. We had left the child in safety, and were tired; so we all 
slept with more or less realiti of sleep. 

* * * * * 

_29 september, night._--a littl befor twelv o'clock we three--arthur, 
quincey morris, and myself--cal for the professor. It wa odd to 
notic that by common consent we had all put on black clothes. Of 
course, arthur wore black, for he wa in deep mourning, but the rest of 
us wore it by instinct. We got to the churchyard by half-past one, and 
stroll about, keep out of offici observation, so that when the 
gravedigg had complet their task and the sexton under the belief 
that everi one had gone, had lock the gate, we had the place all to 
ourselves. van helsing, instead of hi littl black bag, had with him a 
long leather one, someth like a cricket bag; it wa manifestli of 
fair weight. 

when we were alon and had heard the last of the footstep die out up 
the road, we silently, and as if by order intention, follow the 
professor to the tomb. He unlock the door, and we entered, close it 
behind us. then he took from hi bag the lantern, which he lit, and also 
two wax candles, which, when lighted, he stuck, by melt their own 
ends, on other coffins, so that they might give light suffici to work 
by. when he again lift the lid off lucy' coffin we all looked--arthur 
trembl like an aspen--and saw that the bodi lay there in all it 
death-beauty. but there wa no love in my own heart, noth but 
loath for the foul thing which had taken lucy' shape without her 
soul. I could see even arthur' face grow hard as he looked. present 
he said to van helsing:-- 

"i thi realli lucy' body, or onli a demon in her shape?" 

"it is her body, and yet not it. but wait a while, and you all see her 
as she was, and is." 

she seem like a nightmar of luci as she lay there; the point teeth, 
the bloodstained, voluptu mouth--which it made one shudder to 
see--th whole carnal and unspiritu appearance, seem like a 
devilish mockeri of lucy' sweet purity. van helsing, with hi usual 
methodicalness, began take the variou content from hi bag and 
place them readi for use. first he took out a solder iron and some 
plumb solder, and then a small oil-lamp, which gave out, when lit in 
a corner of the tomb, ga which burn at fierc heat with a blue 
flame; then hi oper knives, which he place to hand; and last a 
round wooden stake, some two and a half or three inch thick and about 
three feet long. one end of it wa harden by char in the fire, and 
wa sharpen to a fine point. with thi stake came a heavi hammer, such 
as in household is use in the coal-cellar for break the lumps. To 
me, a doctor' prepar for work of ani kind are stimul and 
bracing, but the effect of these thing on both arthur and quincey wa 
to caus them a sort of consternation. they both, however, kept their 
courage, and remain silent and quiet. 

when all wa ready, van hels said:-- 

"befor we do anything, let me tell you this; it is out of the lore and 
experi of the ancient and of all those who have studi the power 
of the un-dead. when they becom such, there come with the chang the 
curs of immortality; they cannot die, but must go on age after age 
ad new victim and multipli the evil of the world; for all that 
die from the prey of the un-dead becom themselv un-dead, and prey 
on their kind. and so the circl goe on ever widening, like as the 
rippl from a stone thrown in the water. friend arthur, if you had met 
that kiss which you know of befor poor luci die; or again, last night 
when you open your arm to her, you would in time, when you had died, 
have becom _nosferatu_, as they call it in eastern europe, and would 
all time make more of those un-dead that so have fill us with horror. 
the career of thi so unhappi dear ladi is but just begun. those 
children whose blood she suck are not as yet so much the worse; but if 
she live on, un-dead, more and more they lose their blood and by her 
power over them they come to her; and so she draw their blood with that 
so wick mouth. but if she die in truth, then all cease; the tini 
wound of the throat disappear, and they go back to their play 
unknow ever of what ha been. but of the most bless of all, when 
thi now un-dead be made to rest as true dead, then the soul of the poor 
ladi whom we love shall again be free. instead of work wicked by 
night and grow more debas in the assimil of it by day, she 
shall take her place with the other angels. So that, my friend, it will 
be a bless hand for her that shall strike the blow that set her free. 
To thi I am willing; but is there none amongst us who ha a better 
right? will it be no joy to think of hereaft in the silenc of the 
night when sleep is not: 'it wa my hand that sent her to the stars; it 
wa the hand of him that love her best; the hand that of all she would 
herself have chosen, had it been to her to choose?' tell me if there be 
such a one amongst us?" 

We all look at arthur. He saw, too, what we all did, the infinit 
kind which suggest that hi should be the hand which would restor 
luci to us as a holy, and not an unholy, memory; he step forward and 
said bravely, though hi hand trembled, and hi face wa as pale as 
snow:-- 

"mi true friend, from the bottom of my broken heart I thank you. tell me 
what I am to do, and I shall not falter!" van hels laid a hand on hi 
shoulder, and said:-- 

"brave lad! A moment' courage, and it is done. thi stake must be 
driven through her. It will be a fear ordeal--b not deceiv in 
that--but it will be onli a short time, and you will then rejoic more 
than your pain wa great; from thi grim tomb you will emerg as though 
you tread on air. but you must not falter when onc you have begun. onli 
think that we, your true friends, are round you, and that we pray for 
you all the time." 

"go on," said arthur hoarsely. "tell me what I am to do." 

"take thi stake in your left hand, readi to place the point over the 
heart, and the hammer in your right. then when we begin our prayer for 
the dead--i shall read him, I have here the book, and the other shall 
follow--strik in god' name, that so all may be well with the dead that 
we love and that the un-dead pass away." 

arthur took the stake and the hammer, and when onc hi mind wa set on 
action hi hand never trembl nor even quivered. van hels open 
hi missal and began to read, and quincey and I follow as well as we 
could. arthur place the point over the heart, and as I look I could 
see it dint in the white flesh. then he struck with all hi might. 

the thing in the coffin writhed; and a hideous, blood-curdl screech 
came from the open red lips. the bodi shook and quiver and twist 
in wild contortions; the sharp white teeth champ togeth till the 
lip were cut, and the mouth wa smear with a crimson foam. but arthur 
never faltered. He look like a figur of thor as hi untrembl arm 
rose and fell, drive deeper and deeper the mercy-bear stake, whilst 
the blood from the pierc heart well and spurt up around it. hi 
face wa set, and high duti seem to shine through it; the sight of it 
gave us courag so that our voic seem to ring through the littl 
vault. 

and then the writh and quiver of the bodi becam less, and the 
teeth seem to champ, and the face to quiver. final it lay still. the 
terribl task wa over. 

the hammer fell from arthur' hand. He reel and would have fallen had 
we not caught him. the great drop of sweat sprang from hi forehead, 
and hi breath came in broken gasps. It had inde been an aw strain 
on him; and had he not been forc to hi task by more than human 
consider he could never have gone through with it. for a few 
minut we were so taken up with him that we did not look toward the 
coffin. when we did, however, a murmur of startl surpris ran from one 
to the other of us. We gaze so eagerli that arthur rose, for he had 
been seat on the ground, and came and look too; and then a glad, 
strang light broke over hi face and dispel altogeth the gloom of 
horror that lay upon it. 

there, in the coffin lay no longer the foul thing that we had so dread 
and grown to hate that the work of her destruct wa yield as a 
privileg to the one best entitl to it, but luci as we had seen her in 
her life, with her face of unequal sweet and purity. true that 
there were there, as we had seen them in life, the trace of care and 
pain and waste; but these were all dear to us, for they mark her truth 
to what we knew. one and all we felt that the holi calm that lay like 
sunshin over the wast face and form wa onli an earthli token and 
symbol of the calm that wa to reign for ever. 

van hels came and laid hi hand on arthur' shoulder, and said to 
him:-- 

"and now, arthur my friend, dear lad, am I not forgiven?" 

the reaction of the terribl strain came as he took the old man' hand 
in his, and rais it to hi lips, press it, and said:-- 

"forgiven! god bless you that you have given my dear one her soul again, 
and me peace." He put hi hand on the professor' shoulder, and lay 
hi head on hi breast, cri for a while silently, whilst we stood 
unmoving. when he rais hi head van hels said to him:-- 

"and now, my child, you may kiss her. kiss her dead lip if you will, as 
she would have you to, if for her to choose. for she is not a grin 
devil now--not ani more a foul thing for all eternity. No longer she is 
the devil' un-dead. she is god' true dead, whose soul is with him!" 

arthur bent and kiss her, and then we sent him and quincey out of the 
tomb; the professor and I saw the top off the stake, leav the point 
of it in the body. then we cut off the head and fill the mouth with 
garlic. We solder up the leaden coffin, screw on the coffin-lid, 
and gather up our belongings, came away. when the professor lock 
the door he gave the key to arthur. 

outsid the air wa sweet, the sun shone, and the bird sang, and it 
seem as if all natur were tune to a differ pitch. there wa 
glad and mirth and peac everywhere, for we were at rest ourselv 
on one account, and we were glad, though it wa with a temper joy. 

befor we move away van hels said:-- 

"now, my friends, one step of our work is done, one the most harrow 
to ourselves. but there remain a greater task: to find out the author 
of all thi our sorrow and to stamp him out. I have clue which we can 
follow; but it is a long task, and a difficult, and there is danger in 
it, and pain. shall you not all help me? We have learn to believe, all 
of us--i it not so? and sinc so, do we not see our duty? yes! and do 
we not promis to go on to the bitter end?" 

each in turn, we took hi hand, and the promis wa made. then said the 
professor as we move off:-- 

"two night henc you shall meet with me and dine togeth at seven of 
the clock with friend john. I shall entreat two others, two that you 
know not as yet; and I shall be readi to all our work show and our plan 
unfold. friend john, you come with me home, for I have much to consult 
about, and you can help me. to-night I leav for amsterdam, but shall 
return to-morrow night. and then begin our great quest. but first I 
shall have much to say, so that you may know what is to do and to dread. 
then our promis shall be made to each other anew; for there is a 
terribl task befor us, and onc our feet are on the ploughshar we 
must not draw back." 




chapter xvii 

dr. seward' diary--_continued_ 


when we arriv at the berkeley hotel, van hels found a telegram 
wait for him:-- 

"am come up by train. jonathan at whitby. import news.--mina 
harker." 

the professor wa delighted. "ah, that wonder madam mina," he said, 
"pearl among women! she arrive, but I cannot stay. she must go to your 
house, friend john. you must meet her at the station. telegraph her _en 
route_, so that she may be prepared." 

when the wire wa despatch he had a cup of tea; over it he told me of 
a diari kept by jonathan harker when abroad, and gave me a typewritten 
copi of it, as also of mrs. harker' diari at whitby. "take these," he 
said, "and studi them well. when I have return you will be master of 
all the facts, and we can then better enter on our inquisition. keep 
them safe, for there is in them much of treasure. you will need all your 
faith, even you who have had such an experi as that of to-day. what 
is here told," he laid hi hand heavili and grave on the packet of 
paper as he spoke, "may be the begin of the end to you and me and 
mani another; or it may sound the knell of the un-dead who walk the 
earth. read all, I pray you, with the open mind; and if you can add in 
ani way to the stori here told do so, for it is all-important. you have 
kept diari of all these so strang things; is it not so? yes! then we 
shall go through all these togeth when we meet." He then made readi 
for hi departure, and shortli after drove off to liverpool street. I 
took my way to paddington, where I arriv about fifteen minut befor 
the train came in. 

the crowd melt away, after the bustl fashion common to arriv 
platforms; and I wa begin to feel uneasy, lest I might miss my 
guest, when a sweet-faced, dainty-look girl step up to me, and, 
after a quick glance, said: "dr. seward, is it not?" 

"and you are mrs. harker!" I answer at once; whereupon she held out 
her hand. 

"I knew you from the descript of poor dear lucy; but----" she stop 
suddenly, and a quick blush overspread her face. 

the blush that rose to my own cheek somehow set us both at ease, for it 
wa a tacit answer to her own. I got her luggage, which includ a 
typewriter, and we took the underground to fenchurch street, after I had 
sent a wire to my housekeep to have a sitting-room and bedroom 
prepar at onc for mrs. harker. 

In due time we arrived. she knew, of course, that the place wa a 
lunat asylum, but I could see that she wa unabl to repress a shudder 
when we entered. 

she told me that, if she might, she would come present to my study, as 
she had much to say. So here I am finish my entri in my phonograph 
diari whilst I await her. As yet I have not had the chanc of look at 
the paper which van hels left with me, though they lie open befor 
me. I must get her interest in something, so that I may have an 
opportun of read them. she doe not know how preciou time is, or 
what a task we have in hand. I must be care not to frighten her. here 
she is! 


_mina harker' journal._ 

_29 september._--aft I had tidi myself, I went down to dr. seward' 
study. At the door I paus a moment, for I thought I heard him talk 
with some one. as, however, he had press me to be quick, I knock at 
the door, and on hi call out, "come in," I entered. 

To my intens surprise, there wa no one with him. He wa quit alone, 
and on the tabl opposit him wa what I knew at onc from the 
descript to be a phonograph. I had never seen one, and wa much 
interested. 

"I hope I did not keep you waiting," I said; "but I stay at the door 
as I heard you talking, and thought there wa some one with you." 

"oh," he repli with a smile, "I wa onli enter my diary." 

"your diary?" I ask him in surprise. 

"yes," he answered. "I keep it in this." As he spoke he laid hi hand on 
the phonograph. I felt quit excit over it, and blurt out:-- 

"why, thi beat even shorthand! may I hear it say something?" 

"certainly," he repli with alacrity, and stood up to put it in train 
for speaking. then he paused, and a troubl look overspread hi face. 

"the fact is," he began awkwardly, "I onli keep my diari in it; and as 
it is entirely--almost entirely--about my cases, it may be awkward--that 
is, I mean----" He stopped, and I tri to help him out of hi 
embarrassment:-- 

"you help to attend dear luci at the end. let me hear how she died; 
for all that I know of her, I shall be veri grateful. she wa very, veri 
dear to me." 

To my surprise, he answered, with a horrorstruck look in hi face:-- 

"tell you of her death? not for the wide world!" 

"whi not?" I asked, for some grave, terribl feel wa come over me. 
again he paused, and I could see that he wa tri to invent an excuse. 
At length he stammer out:-- 

"you see, I do not know how to pick out ani particular part of the 
diary." even while he wa speak an idea dawn upon him, and he said 
with unconsci simplicity, in a differ voice, and with the naïveté 
of a child: "that' quit true, upon my honour. honest indian!" I could 
not but smile, at which he grimaced. "I gave myself away that time!" he 
said. "but do you know that, although I have kept the diari for month 
past, it never onc struck me how I wa go to find ani particular 
part of it in case I want to look it up?" By thi time my mind wa 
made up that the diari of a doctor who attend luci might have 
someth to add to the sum of our knowledg of that terribl being, and 
I said boldly:-- 

"then, dr. seward, you had better let me copi it out for you on my 
typewriter." He grew to a posit deathli pallor as he said:-- 

"no! no! no! for all the world, I wouldn't let you know that terribl 
story!" 

then it wa terrible; my intuit wa right! for a moment I thought, 
and as my eye rang the room, unconsci look for someth or 
some opportun to aid me, they lit on a great batch of typewrit on 
the table. hi eye caught the look in mine, and, without hi thinking, 
follow their direction. As they saw the parcel he realis my meaning. 

"you do not know me," I said. "when you have read those papers--mi own 
diari and my husband' also, which I have typed--y will know me 
better. I have not falter in give everi thought of my own heart in 
thi cause; but, of course, you do not know me--yet; and I must not 
expect you to trust me so far." 

He is certainli a man of nobl nature; poor dear luci wa right about 
him. He stood up and open a larg drawer, in which were arrang in 
order a number of hollow cylind of metal cover with dark wax, and 
said:-- 

"you are quit right. I did not trust you becaus I did not know you. 
but I know you now; and let me say that I should have known you long 
ago. I know that luci told you of me; she told me of you too. may I make 
the onli aton in my power? take the cylind and hear them--th 
first half-dozen of them are person to me, and they will not horrifi 
you; then you will know me better. dinner will by then be ready. In the 
meantim I shall read over some of these documents, and shall be better 
abl to understand certain things." He carri the phonograph himself up 
to my sitting-room and adjust it for me. now I shall learn someth 
pleasant, I am sure; for it will tell me the other side of a true love 
episod of which I know one side already.... 


_dr. seward' diary._ 

_29 september._--i wa so absorb in that wonder diari of jonathan 
harker and that other of hi wife that I let the time run on without 
thinking. mrs. harker wa not down when the maid came to announc 
dinner, so I said: "she is possibl tired; let dinner wait an hour," and 
I went on with my work. I had just finish mrs. harker' diary, when 
she came in. she look sweetli pretty, but veri sad, and her eye were 
flush with crying. thi somehow move me much. Of late I have had 
caus for tears, god knows! but the relief of them wa deni me; and 
now the sight of those sweet eyes, brighten with recent tears, went 
straight to my heart. So I said as gentli as I could:-- 

"I greatli fear I have distress you." 

"oh, no, not distress me," she replied, "but I have been more touch 
than I can say by your grief. that is a wonder machine, but it is 
cruelli true. It told me, in it veri tones, the anguish of your heart. 
It wa like a soul cri out to almighti god. No one must hear them 
spoken ever again! see, I have tri to be useful. I have copi out the 
word on my typewriter, and none other need now hear your heart beat, as 
I did." 

"no one need ever know, shall ever know," I said in a low voice. she 
laid her hand on mine and said veri gravely:-- 

"ah, but they must!" 

"must! but why?" I asked. 

"becaus it is a part of the terribl story, a part of poor dear lucy' 
death and all that led to it; becaus in the struggl which we have 
befor us to rid the earth of thi terribl monster we must have all 
the knowledg and all the help which we can get. I think that the 
cylind which you gave me contain more than you intend me to know; 
but I can see that there are in your record mani light to thi dark 
mystery. you will let me help, will you not? I know all up to a certain 
point; and I see already, though your diari onli took me to 7 september, 
how poor luci wa beset, and how her terribl doom wa be wrought 
out. jonathan and I have been work day and night sinc professor van 
hels saw us. He is gone to whitbi to get more information, and he 
will be here to-morrow to help us. We need have no secret amongst us; 
work togeth and with absolut trust, we can sure be stronger than 
if some of us were in the dark." she look at me so appealingly, and at 
the same time manifest such courag and resolut in her bearing, 
that I gave in at onc to her wishes. "you shall," I said, "do as you 
like in the matter. god forgiv me if I do wrong! there are terribl 
thing yet to learn of; but if you have so far travel on the road to 
poor lucy' death, you will not be content, I know, to remain in the 
dark. nay, the end--th veri end--may give you a gleam of peace. come, 
there is dinner. We must keep one anoth strong for what is befor us; 
we have a cruel and dread task. when you have eaten you shall learn 
the rest, and I shall answer ani question you ask--if there be anyth 
which you do not understand, though it wa appar to us who were 
present." 


_mina harker' journal._ 

_29 september._--aft dinner I came with dr. seward to hi study. He 
brought back the phonograph from my room, and I took my typewriter. He 
place me in a comfort chair, and arrang the phonograph so that I 
could touch it without get up, and show me how to stop it in case 
I should want to pause. then he veri thought took a chair, with hi 
back to me, so that I might be as free as possible, and began to read. I 
put the fork metal to my ear and listened. 

when the terribl stori of lucy' death, and--and all that followed, wa 
done, I lay back in my chair powerless. fortun I am not of a 
faint disposition. when dr. seward saw me he jump up with a 
horrifi exclamation, and hurriedli take a case-bottl from a 
cupboard, gave me some brandy, which in a few minut somewhat restor 
me. My brain wa all in a whirl, and onli that there came through all 
the multitud of horrors, the holi ray of light that my dear, dear luci 
wa at last at peace, I do not think I could have born it without 
make a scene. It is all so wild, and mysterious, and strang that if I 
had not known jonathan' experi in transylvania I could not have 
believed. As it was, I didn't know what to believe, and so got out of my 
difficulti by attend to someth else. I took the cover off my 
typewriter, and said to dr. seward:-- 

"let me write thi all out now. We must be readi for dr. van hels 
when he comes. I have sent a telegram to jonathan to come on here when 
he arriv in london from whitby. In thi matter date are everything, 
and I think that if we get all our materi ready, and have everi item 
put in chronolog order, we shall have done much. you tell me that 
lord godalm and mr. morri are come too. let us be abl to tell him 
when they come." He accordingli set the phonograph at a slow pace, and I 
began to typewrit from the begin of the seventh cylinder. I use 
manifold, and so took three copi of the diary, just as I had done with 
all the rest. It wa late when I got through, but dr. seward went about 
hi work of go hi round of the patients; when he had finish he 
came back and sat near me, reading, so that I did not feel too lone 
whilst I worked. how good and thought he is; the world seem full of 
good men--even if there _are_ monster in it. befor I left him I 
rememb what jonathan put in hi diari of the professor' 
perturb at read someth in an even paper at the station at 
exeter; so, see that dr. seward keep hi newspapers, I borrow the 
file of "the westminst gazette" and "the pall mall gazette," and took 
them to my room. I rememb how much "the dailygraph" and "the whitbi 
gazette," of which I had made cuttings, help us to understand the 
terribl event at whitbi when count dracula landed, so I shall look 
through the even paper sinc then, and perhap I shall get some new 
light. I am not sleepy, and the work will help to keep me quiet. 


_dr. seward' diary._ 

_30 september._--mr. harker arriv at nine o'clock. He had got hi 
wife' wire just befor starting. He is uncommonli clever, if one can 
judg from hi face, and full of energy. If thi journal be true--and 
judg by one' own wonder experiences, it must be--h is also a man 
of great nerve. that go down to the vault a second time wa a 
remark piec of daring. after read hi account of it I wa 
prepar to meet a good specimen of manhood, but hardli the quiet, 
business-lik gentleman who came here to-day. 

* * * * * 

_later._--aft lunch harker and hi wife went back to their own room, 
and as I pass a while ago I heard the click of the typewriter. they 
are hard at it. mrs. harker say that they are knit togeth in 
chronolog order everi scrap of evid they have. harker ha got 
the letter between the consigne of the box at whitbi and the 
carrier in london who took charg of them. He is now read hi wife' 
typescript of my diary. I wonder what they make out of it. here it 
is.... 

strang that it never struck me that the veri next hous might be 
the count' hiding-place! good know that we had enough clue 
from the conduct of the patient renfield! the bundl of letter 
relat to the purchas of the hous were with the typescript. oh, 
if we had onli had them earlier we might have save poor lucy! 
stop; that way mad lies! harker ha gone back, and is again 
collat hi material. He say that by dinner-tim they will be 
abl to show a whole connect narrative. He think that in the 
meantim I should see renfield, as hitherto he ha been a sort of 
index to the come and go of the count. I hardli see thi yet, 
but when I get at the date I suppos I shall. what a good thing 
that mrs. harker put my cylind into type! We never could have 
found the date otherwise.... 

I found renfield sit placidli in hi room with hi hand 
folded, smile benignly. At the moment he seem as sane as ani 
one I ever saw. I sat down and talk with him on a lot of 
subjects, all of which he treat naturally. He then, of hi own 
accord, spoke of go home, a subject he ha never mention to my 
knowledg dure hi sojourn here. In fact, he spoke quit 
confid of get hi discharg at once. I believ that, had I 
not had the chat with harker and read the letter and the date of 
hi outbursts, I should have been prepar to sign for him after a 
brief time of observation. As it is, I am darkli suspicious. all 
those outbreak were in some way link with the proxim of the 
count. what then doe thi absolut content mean? can it be that 
hi instinct is satisfi as to the vampire' ultim triumph? 
stay; he is himself zoöphagous, and in hi wild rave outsid the 
chapel door of the desert hous he alway spoke of "master." thi 
all seem confirm of our idea. however, after a while I came 
away; my friend is just a littl too sane at present to make it 
safe to probe him too deep with questions. He might begin to think, 
and then--! So I came away. I mistrust these quiet mood of his; so 
I have given the attend a hint to look close after him, and to 
have a strait-waistcoat readi in case of need. 


_jonathan harker' journal._ 

_29 september, in train to london._--when I receiv mr. billington' 
courteou messag that he would give me ani inform in hi power I 
thought it best to go down to whitbi and make, on the spot, such 
inquiri as I wanted. It wa now my object to trace that horrid cargo 
of the count' to it place in london. later, we may be abl to deal 
with it. billington junior, a nice lad, met me at the station, and 
brought me to hi father' house, where they had decid that I must 
stay the night. they are hospitable, with true yorkshir hospitality: 
give a guest everything, and leav him free to do as he likes. they all 
knew that I wa busy, and that my stay wa short, and mr. billington had 
readi in hi offic all the paper concern the consign of boxes. 
It gave me almost a turn to see again one of the letter which I had 
seen on the count' tabl befor I knew of hi diabol plans. 
everyth had been care thought out, and done systemat and 
with precision. He seem to have been prepar for everi obstacl which 
might be place by accid in the way of hi intent be carri 
out. To use an americanism, he had "taken no chances," and the absolut 
accuraci with which hi instruct were fulfilled, wa simpli the 
logic result of hi care. I saw the invoice, and took note of it: 
"fifti case of common earth, to be use for experiment purposes." 
also the copi of letter to carter paterson, and their reply; of both of 
these I got copies. thi wa all the inform mr. billington could 
give me, so I went down to the port and saw the coastguards, the custom 
offic and the harbour-master. they had all someth to say of the 
strang entri of the ship, which is alreadi take it place in local 
tradition; but no one could add to the simpl descript "fifti case 
of common earth." I then saw the station-master, who kindli put me in 
commun with the men who had actual receiv the boxes. their 
talli wa exact with the list, and they had noth to add except that 
the box were "main and mortal heavy," and that shift them wa dri 
work. one of them ad that it wa hard line that there wasn't ani 
gentleman "such-lik as yourself, squire," to show some sort of 
appreci of their effort in a liquid form; anoth put in a rider 
that the thirst then gener wa such that even the time which had 
elaps had not complet allay it. needless to add, I took care 
befor leav to lift, for ever and adequately, thi sourc of 
reproach. 

* * * * * 

_30 september._--th station-mast wa good enough to give me a line to 
hi old companion the station-mast at king' cross, so that when I 
arriv there in the morn I wa abl to ask him about the arriv of 
the boxes. he, too, put me at onc in commun with the proper 
officials, and I saw that their talli wa correct with the origin 
invoice. the opportun of acquir an abnorm thirst had been here 
limited; a nobl use of them had, however, been made, and again I wa 
compel to deal with the result in an _ex post facto_ manner. 

from thenc I went on to carter paterson' central office, where I met 
with the utmost courtesy. they look up the transact in their 
day-book and letter-book, and at onc telephon to their king' cross 
offic for more details. By good fortune, the men who did the team 
were wait for work, and the offici at onc sent them over, send 
also by one of them the way-bil and all the paper connect with the 
deliveri of the box at carfax. here again I found the talli agre 
exactly; the carriers' men were abl to supplement the pauciti of the 
written word with a few details. these were, I shortli found, connect 
almost sole with the dusti natur of the job, and of the consequ 
thirst engend in the operators. On my afford an opportunity, 
through the medium of the currenc of the realm, of the allaying, at a 
later period, thi benefici evil, one of the men remarked:-- 

"that 'ere 'ouse, guv'nor, is the rummiest I ever wa in. blyme! but it 
ain't been touch senc a hundr years. there wa dust that thick in 
the place that you might have slep' on it without 'urtin' of yer bones; 
an' the place wa that neglect that yer might 'ave smell ole 
jerusalem in it. but the ole chapel--that took the cike, that did! Me 
and my mate, we thort we wouldn't never git out quick enough. lor', I 
wouldn't take less nor a quid a moment to stay there arter dark." 

have been in the house, I could well believ him; but if he knew what 
I know, he would, I think, have rais hi terms. 

Of one thing I am now satisfied: that _all_ the box which arriv at 
whitbi from varna in the _demeter_ were safe deposit in the old 
chapel at carfax. there should be fifti of them there, unless ani have 
sinc been removed--a from dr. seward' diari I fear. 

I shall tri to see the carter who took away the box from carfax when 
renfield attack them. By follow up thi clue we may learn a good 
deal. 

* * * * * 

_later._--mina and I have work all day, and we have put all the paper 
into order. 


_mina harker' journal_ 

_30 september._--i am so glad that I hardli know how to contain myself. 
It is, I suppose, the reaction from the haunt fear which I have had: 
that thi terribl affair and the reopen of hi old wound might act 
detriment on jonathan. I saw him leav for whitbi with as brave a 
face as I could, but I wa sick with apprehension. the effort has, 
however, done him good. He wa never so resolute, never so strong, never 
so full of volcan energy, as at present. It is just as that dear, good 
professor van hels said: he is true grit, and he improv under 
strain that would kill a weaker nature. He came back full of life and 
hope and determination; we have got everyth in order for to-night. I 
feel myself quit wild with excitement. I suppos one ought to piti ani 
thing so hunt as is the count. that is just it: thi thing is not 
human--not even beast. To read dr. seward' account of poor lucy' 
death, and what followed, is enough to dri up the spring of piti in 
one' heart. 

* * * * * 

_later._--lord godalm and mr. morri arriv earlier than we 
expected. dr. seward wa out on business, and had taken jonathan with 
him, so I had to see them. It wa to me a pain meeting, for it 
brought back all poor dear lucy' hope of onli a few month ago. Of 
cours they had heard luci speak of me, and it seem that dr. van 
helsing, too, ha been quit "blow my trumpet," as mr. morri 
express it. poor fellows, neither of them is awar that I know all 
about the propos they made to lucy. they did not quit know what to 
say or do, as they were ignor of the amount of my knowledge; so they 
had to keep on neutral subjects. however, I thought the matter over, and 
came to the conclus that the best thing I could do would be to post 
them in affair right up to date. I knew from dr. seward' diari that 
they had been at lucy' death--her real death--and that I need not fear 
to betray ani secret befor the time. So I told them, as well as I 
could, that I had read all the paper and diaries, and that my husband 
and I, have typewritten them, had just finish put them in order. 
I gave them each a copi to read in the library. when lord godalm got 
hi and turn it over--it doe make a pretti good pile--h said:-- 

"did you write all this, mrs. harker?" 

I nodded, and he went on:-- 

"I don't quit see the drift of it; but you peopl are all so good and 
kind, and have been work so earnestli and so energetically, that all 
I can do is to accept your idea blindfold and tri to help you. I have 
had one lesson alreadi in accept fact that should make a man humbl 
to the last hour of hi life. besides, I know you love my poor lucy--" 
here he turn away and cover hi face with hi hands. I could hear 
the tear in hi voice. mr. morris, with instinct delicacy, just laid 
a hand for a moment on hi shoulder, and then walk quietli out of the 
room. I suppos there is someth in woman' natur that make a man 
free to break down befor her and express hi feel on the tender or 
emot side without feel it derogatori to hi manhood; for when 
lord godalm found himself alon with me he sat down on the sofa and 
gave way utterli and openly. I sat down besid him and took hi hand. I 
hope he didn't think it forward of me, and that if he ever think of it 
afterward he never will have such a thought. there I wrong him; I 
_know_ he never will--h is too true a gentleman. I said to him, for I 
could see that hi heart wa breaking:-- 

"I love dear lucy, and I know what she wa to you, and what you were to 
her. she and I were like sisters; and now she is gone, will you not let 
me be like a sister to you in your trouble? I know what sorrow you have 
had, though I cannot measur the depth of them. If sympathi and piti can 
help in your affliction, won't you let me be of some littl service--for 
lucy' sake?" 

In an instant the poor dear fellow wa overwhelm with grief. It seem 
to me that all that he had of late been suffer in silenc found a 
vent at once. He grew quit hysterical, and rais hi open hands, beat 
hi palm togeth in a perfect agoni of grief. He stood up and then sat 
down again, and the tear rain down hi cheeks. I felt an infinit 
piti for him, and open my arm unthinkingly. with a sob he laid hi 
head on my shoulder and cri like a weari child, whilst he shook with 
emotion. 

We women have someth of the mother in us that make us rise abov 
smaller matter when the mother-spirit is invoked; I felt thi big 
sorrow man' head rest on me, as though it were that of the babi 
that some day may lie on my bosom, and I stroke hi hair as though he 
were my own child. I never thought at the time how strang it all was. 

after a littl bit hi sob ceased, and he rais himself with an 
apology, though he made no disguis of hi emotion. He told me that for 
day and night past--weari day and sleepless nights--h had been 
unabl to speak with ani one, as a man must speak in hi time of 
sorrow. there wa no woman whose sympathi could be given to him, or with 
whom, owe to the terribl circumst with which hi sorrow wa 
surrounded, he could speak freely. "I know now how I suffered," he said, 
as he dri hi eyes, "but I do not know even yet--and none other can 
ever know--how much your sweet sympathi ha been to me to-day. I shall 
know better in time; and believ me that, though I am not ungrat 
now, my gratitud will grow with my understanding. you will let me be 
like a brother, will you not, for all our lives--for dear lucy' sake?" 

"for dear lucy' sake," I said as we clasp hands. "ay, and for your 
own sake," he added, "for if a man' esteem and gratitud are ever worth 
the winning, you have won mine to-day. If ever the futur should bring 
to you a time when you need a man' help, believ me, you will not call 
in vain. god grant that no such time may ever come to you to break the 
sunshin of your life; but if it should ever come, promis me that you 
will let me know." He wa so earnest, and hi sorrow wa so fresh, that 
I felt it would comfort him, so I said:-- 

"I promise." 

As I came along the corridor I saw mr. morri look out of a window. 
He turn as he heard my footsteps. "how is art?" he said. then notic 
my red eyes, he went on: "ah, I see you have been comfort him. poor 
old fellow! he need it. No one but a woman can help a man when he is in 
troubl of the heart; and he had no one to comfort him." 

He bore hi own troubl so brave that my heart bled for him. I saw the 
manuscript in hi hand, and I knew that when he read it he would realis 
how much I knew; so I said to him:-- 

"I wish I could comfort all who suffer from the heart. will you let me 
be your friend, and will you come to me for comfort if you need it? you 
will know, later on, whi I speak." He saw that I wa in earnest, and 
stooping, took my hand, and rais it to hi lips, kiss it. It seem 
but poor comfort to so brave and unselfish a soul, and impuls I 
bent over and kiss him. the tear rose in hi eyes, and there wa a 
momentari choke in hi throat; he said quit calmly:-- 

"littl girl, you will never regret that true-heart kindness, so long 
as ever you live!" then he went into the studi to hi friend. 

"littl girl!"--th veri word he had use to lucy, and oh, but he 
prove himself a friend! 




chapter xviii 

dr. seward' diari 


_30 september._--i got home at five o'clock, and found that godalm 
and morri had not onli arrived, but had alreadi studi the transcript 
of the variou diari and letter which harker and hi wonder wife 
had made and arranged. harker had not yet return from hi visit to the 
carriers' men, of whom dr. hennessey had written to me. mrs. harker gave 
us a cup of tea, and I can honestli say that, for the first time sinc I 
have live in it, thi old hous seem like _home_. when we had 
finished, mrs. harker said:-- 

"dr. seward, may I ask a favour? I want to see your patient, mr. 
renfield. Do let me see him. what you have said of him in your diari 
interest me so much!" she look so appeal and so pretti that I 
could not refus her, and there wa no possibl reason whi I should; so 
I took her with me. when I went into the room, I told the man that a 
ladi would like to see him; to which he simpli answered: "why?" 

"she is go through the house, and want to see everi one in it," I 
answered. "oh, veri well," he said; "let her come in, by all means; but 
just wait a minut till I tidi up the place." hi method of tidi wa 
peculiar: he simpli swallow all the fli and spider in the box 
befor I could stop him. It wa quit evid that he feared, or wa 
jealou of, some interference. when he had got through hi disgust 
task, he said cheerfully: "let the ladi come in," and sat down on the 
edg of hi bed with hi head down, but with hi eyelid rais so that 
he could see her as she entered. for a moment I thought that he might 
have some homicid intent; I rememb how quiet he had been just 
befor he attack me in my own study, and I took care to stand where I 
could seiz him at onc if he attempt to make a spring at her. she 
came into the room with an easi grace which would at onc command 
the respect of ani lunatic--for easi is one of the qualiti mad 
peopl most respect. she walk over to him, smile pleasantly, and 
held out her hand. 

"good-evening, mr. renfield," said she. "you see, I know you, for dr. 
seward ha told me of you." He made no immedi reply, but eye her all 
over intent with a set frown on hi face. thi look gave way to one 
of wonder, which merg in doubt; then, to my intens astonishment, he 
said:-- 

"you'r not the girl the doctor want to marry, are you? you can't be, 
you know, for she' dead." mrs. harker smile sweetli as she replied:-- 

"oh no! I have a husband of my own, to whom I wa marri befor I ever 
saw dr. seward, or he me. I am mrs. harker." 

"then what are you do here?" 

"mi husband and I are stay on a visit with dr. seward." 

"then don't stay." 

"but whi not?" I thought that thi style of convers might not be 
pleasant to mrs. harker, ani more than it wa to me, so I join in:-- 

"how did you know I want to marri ani one?" hi repli wa simpli 
contemptuous, given in a paus in which he turn hi eye from mrs. 
harker to me, instantli turn them back again:-- 

"what an asinin question!" 

"I don't see that at all, mr. renfield," said mrs. harker, at onc 
champion me. He repli to her with as much courtesi and respect as 
he had shown contempt to me:-- 

"you will, of course, understand, mrs. harker, that when a man is so 
love and honour as our host is, everyth regard him is of 
interest in our littl community. dr. seward is love not onli by hi 
household and hi friends, but even by hi patients, who, be some of 
them hardli in mental equilibrium, are apt to distort caus and 
effects. sinc I myself have been an inmat of a lunat asylum, I 
cannot but notic that the sophist tendenc of some of it inmat 
lean toward the error of _non causa_ and _ignoratio elenchi_." I 
posit open my eye at thi new development. here wa my own pet 
lunatic--th most pronounc of hi type that I had ever met 
with--talk element philosophy, and with the manner of a polish 
gentleman. I wonder if it wa mrs. harker' presenc which had touch 
some chord in hi memory. If thi new phase wa spontaneous, or in ani 
way due to her unconsci influence, she must have some rare gift or 
power. 

We continu to talk for some time; and, see that he wa seemingli 
quit reasonable, she ventured, look at me questioningli as she 
began, to lead him to hi favourit topic. I wa again astonished, for 
he address himself to the question with the imparti of the 
completest sanity; he even took himself as an exampl when he mention 
certain things. 

"why, I myself am an instanc of a man who had a strang belief. indeed, 
it wa no wonder that my friend were alarmed, and insist on my be 
put under control. I use to fanci that life wa a posit and 
perpetu entity, and that by consum a multitud of live things, no 
matter how low in the scale of creation, one might indefinit prolong 
life. At time I held the belief so strongli that I actual tri to 
take human life. the doctor here will bear me out that on one occas I 
tri to kill him for the purpos of strengthen my vital power by 
the assimil with my own bodi of hi life through the medium of hi 
blood--relying, of course, upon the scriptur phrase, 'for the blood is 
the life.' though, indeed, the vendor of a certain nostrum ha 
vulgaris the truism to the veri point of contempt. isn't that true, 
doctor?" I nod assent, for I wa so amaz that I hardli knew what to 
either think or say; it wa hard to imagin that I had seen him eat up 
hi spider and fli not five minut before. look at my watch, I 
saw that I should go to the station to meet van helsing, so I told mrs. 
harker that it wa time to leave. she came at once, after say 
pleasantli to mr. renfield: "good-bye, and I hope I may see you often, 
under auspic pleasant to yourself," to which, to my astonishment, he 
replied:-- 

"good-bye, my dear. I pray god I may never see your sweet face again. 
may He bless and keep you!" 

when I went to the station to meet van hels I left the boy behind 
me. poor art seem more cheer than he ha been sinc luci first took 
ill, and quincey is more like hi own bright self than he ha been for 
mani a long day. 

van hels step from the carriag with the eager nimbl of a 
boy. He saw me at once, and rush up to me, saying:-- 

"ah, friend john, how goe all? well? so! I have been busy, for I come 
here to stay if need be. all affair are settl with me, and I have 
much to tell. madam mina is with you? yes. and her so fine husband? and 
arthur and my friend quincey, they are with you, too? good!" 

As I drove to the hous I told him of what had passed, and of how my own 
diari had come to be of some use through mrs. harker' suggestion; at 
which the professor interrupt me:-- 

"ah, that wonder madam mina! she ha man' brain--a brain that a man 
should have were he much gifted--and a woman' heart. the good god 
fashion her for a purpose, believ me, when He made that so good 
combination. friend john, up to now fortun ha made that woman of help 
to us; after to-night she must not have to do with thi so terribl 
affair. It is not good that she run a risk so great. We men are 
determined--nay, are we not pledged?--to destroy thi monster; but it is 
no part for a woman. even if she be not harmed, her heart may fail her 
in so much and so mani horrors; and hereaft she may suffer--both in 
waking, from her nerves, and in sleep, from her dreams. and, besides, 
she is young woman and not so long married; there may be other thing to 
think of some time, if not now. you tell me she ha wrote all, then she 
must consult with us; but to-morrow she say good-by to thi work, and 
we go alone." I agre heartili with him, and then I told him what we 
had found in hi absence: that the hous which dracula had bought wa 
the veri next one to my own. He wa amazed, and a great concern seem 
to come on him. "oh that we had known it before!" he said, "for then we 
might have reach him in time to save poor lucy. however, 'the milk 
that is spilt cri not out afterwards,' as you say. We shall not think 
of that, but go on our way to the end." then he fell into a silenc that 
last till we enter my own gateway. befor we went to prepar for 
dinner he said to mrs. harker:-- 

"I am told, madam mina, by my friend john that you and your husband have 
put up in exact order all thing that have been, up to thi moment." 

"not up to thi moment, professor," she said impulsively, "but up to 
thi morning." 

"but whi not up to now? We have seen hitherto how good light all the 
littl thing have made. We have told our secrets, and yet no one who 
ha told is the wors for it." 

mrs. harker began to blush, and take a paper from her pockets, she 
said:-- 

"dr. van helsing, will you read this, and tell me if it must go in. It 
is my record of to-day. I too have seen the need of put down at 
present everything, howev trivial; but there is littl in thi except 
what is personal. must it go in?" the professor read it over gravely, 
and hand it back, saying:-- 

"it need not go in if you do not wish it; but I pray that it may. It can 
but make your husband love you the more, and all us, your friends, more 
honour you--a well as more esteem and love." she took it back with 
anoth blush and a bright smile. 

and so now, up to thi veri hour, all the record we have are complet 
and in order. the professor took away one copi to studi after dinner, 
and befor our meeting, which is fix for nine o'clock. the rest of us 
have alreadi read everything; so when we meet in the studi we shall all 
be inform as to facts, and can arrang our plan of battl with thi 
terribl and mysteri enemy. 


_mina harker' journal._ 

_30 september._--when we met in dr. seward' studi two hour after 
dinner, which had been at six o'clock, we unconsci form a sort of 
board or committee. professor van hels took the head of the table, to 
which dr. seward motion him as he came into the room. He made me sit 
next to him on hi right, and ask me to act as secretary; jonathan sat 
next to me. opposit us were lord godalming, dr. seward, and mr. 
morris--lord godalm be next the professor, and dr. seward in the 
centre. the professor said:-- 

"I may, I suppose, take it that we are all acquaint with the fact 
that are in these papers." We all express assent, and he went on:-- 

"then it were, I think good that I tell you someth of the kind of 
enemi with which we have to deal. I shall then make known to you 
someth of the histori of thi man, which ha been ascertain for me. 
So we then can discuss how we shall act, and can take our measur 
according. 

"there are such be as vampires; some of us have evid that they 
exist. even had we not the proof of our own unhappi experience, the 
teach and the record of the past give proof enough for sane 
peoples. I admit that at the first I wa sceptic. were it not that 
through long year I have train myself to keep an open mind, I could not 
have believ until such time as that fact thunder on my ear. 'see! see! 
I prove; I prove.' alas! had I known at the first what now I know--nay, 
had I even guess at him--on so preciou life had been spare to mani of 
us who did love her. but that is gone; and we must so work, that other 
poor soul perish not, whilst we can save. the _nosferatu_ do not die 
like the bee when he sting once. He is onli stronger; and be 
stronger, have yet more power to work evil. thi vampir which is 
amongst us is of himself so strong in person as twenti men; he is of 
cun more than mortal, for hi cun be the growth of ages; he have 
still the aid of necromancy, which is, as hi etymolog imply, the 
divin by the dead, and all the dead that he can come nigh to are 
for him at command; he is brute, and more than brute; he is devil in 
callous, and the heart of him is not; he can, within limitations, appear 
at will when, and where, and in ani of the form that are to him; he 
can, within hi range, direct the elements; the storm, the fog, the 
thunder; he can command all the meaner things: the rat, and the owl, and 
the bat--th moth, and the fox, and the wolf; he can grow and becom 
small; and he can at time vanish and come unknown. how then are we to 
begin our strike to destroy him? how shall we find hi where; and have 
found it, how can we destroy? My friends, thi is much; it is a terribl 
task that we undertake, and there may be consequ to make the brave 
shudder. for if we fail in thi our fight he must sure win; and then 
where end we? life is nothings; I heed him not. but to fail here, is not 
mere life or death. It is that we becom as him; that we henceforward 
becom foul thing of the night like him--without heart or conscience, 
prey on the bodi and the soul of those we love best. To us for 
ever are the gate of heaven shut; for who shall open them to us again? 
We go on for all time abhor by all; a blot on the face of god' 
sunshine; an arrow in the side of him who die for man. but we are face 
to face with duty; and in such case must we shrink? for me, I say, no; 
but then I am old, and life, with hi sunshine, hi fair places, hi 
song of birds, hi music and hi love, lie far behind. you other are 
young. some have seen sorrow; but there are fair day yet in store. what 
say you?" 

whilst he wa speaking, jonathan had taken my hand. I feared, oh so 
much, that the appal natur of our danger wa overcom him when I 
saw hi hand stretch out; but it wa life to me to feel it touch--so 
strong, so self-reliant, so resolute. A brave man' hand can speak for 
itself; it doe not even need a woman' love to hear it music. 

when the professor had done speak my husband look in my eyes, and I 
in his; there wa no need for speak between us. 

"I answer for mina and myself," he said. 

"count me in, professor," said mr. quincey morris, lacon as usual. 

"I am with you," said lord godalming, "for lucy' sake, if for no other 
reason." 

dr. seward simpli nodded. the professor stood up and, after lay hi 
golden crucifix on the table, held out hi hand on either side. I took 
hi right hand, and lord godalm hi left; jonathan held my right with 
hi left and stretch across to mr. morris. So as we all took hand our 
solemn compact wa made. I felt my heart ici cold, but it did not even 
occur to me to draw back. We resum our places, and dr. van hels 
went on with a sort of cheer which show that the seriou work 
had begun. It wa to be taken as gravely, and in as businesslik a way, 
as ani other transact of life:-- 

"well, you know what we have to contend against; but we, too, are not 
without strength. We have on our side power of combination--a power 
deni to the vampir kind; we have sourc of science; we are free to 
act and think; and the hour of the day and the night are our equally. 
In fact, so far as our power extend, they are unfettered, and we are 
free to use them. We have self-devot in a cause, and an end to 
achiev which is not a selfish one. these thing are much. 

"now let us see how far the gener power array against us are 
restrict, and how the individu cannot. In fine, let us consid the 
limit of the vampir in general, and of thi one in particular. 

"all we have to go upon are tradit and superstitions. these do not 
at the first appear much, when the matter is one of life and death--nay 
of more than either life or death. yet must we be satisfied; in the 
first place becaus we have to be--no other mean is at our control--and 
secondly, because, after all, these things--tradit and 
superstition--ar everything. doe not the belief in vampir rest for 
others--though not, alas! for us--on them? A year ago which of us would 
have receiv such a possibility, in the midst of our scientific, 
sceptical, matter-of-fact nineteenth century? We even scout a belief 
that we saw justifi under our veri eyes. take it, then, that the 
vampire, and the belief in hi limit and hi cure, rest for the 
moment on the same base. for, let me tell you, he is known everywher 
that men have been. In old greece, in old rome; he flourish in germani 
all over, in france, in india, even in the chernosese; and in china, so 
far from us in all ways, there even is he, and the peopl fear him at 
thi day. He have follow the wake of the berserk icelander, the 
devil-begotten hun, the slav, the saxon, the magyar. So far, then, we 
have all we may act upon; and let me tell you that veri much of the 
belief are justifi by what we have seen in our own so unhappi 
experience. the vampir live on, and cannot die by mere pass of the 
time; he can flourish when that he can fatten on the blood of the 
living. even more, we have seen amongst us that he can even grow 
younger; that hi vital faculti grow strenuous, and seem as though 
they refresh themselv when hi special pabulum is plenty. but he 
cannot flourish without thi diet; he eat not as others. even friend 
jonathan, who live with him for weeks, did never see him to eat, never! 
He throw no shadow; he make in the mirror no reflect, as again 
jonathan observe. He ha the strength of mani of hi hand--wit again 
jonathan when he shut the door against the wolfs, and when he help him 
from the dilig too. He can transform himself to wolf, as we gather 
from the ship arriv in whitby, when he tear open the dog; he can be as 
bat, as madam mina saw him on the window at whitby, and as friend john 
saw him fli from thi so near house, and as my friend quincey saw him at 
the window of miss lucy. He can come in mist which he create--that nobl 
ship' captain prove him of this; but, from what we know, the distanc 
he can make thi mist is limited, and it can onli be round himself. He 
come on moonlight ray as element dust--a again jonathan saw those 
sister in the castl of dracula. He becom so small--w ourselv saw 
miss lucy, ere she wa at peace, slip through a hairbreadth space at the 
tomb door. He can, when onc he find hi way, come out from anyth or 
into anything, no matter how close it be bound or even fuse up with 
fire--sold you call it. He can see in the dark--no small power this, 
in a world which is one half shut from the light. ah, but hear me 
through. He can do all these things, yet he is not free. nay; he is even 
more prison than the slave of the galley, than the madman in hi cell. 
He cannot go where he lists; he who is not of natur ha yet to obey 
some of nature' laws--whi we know not. He may not enter anywher at the 
first, unless there be some one of the household who bid him to come; 
though afterward he can come as he please. hi power ceases, as doe 
that of all evil things, at the come of the day. onli at certain time 
can he have limit freedom. If he be not at the place whither he is 
bound, he can onli chang himself at noon or at exact sunris or sunset. 
these thing are we told, and in thi record of our we have proof by 
inference. thus, wherea he can do as he will within hi limit, when he 
have hi earth-home, hi coffin-home, hi hell-home, the place 
unhallowed, as we saw when he went to the grave of the suicid at 
whitby; still at other time he can onli chang when the time come. It is 
said, too, that he can onli pass run water at the slack or the flood 
of the tide. then there are thing which so afflict him that he ha no 
power, as the garlic that we know of; and as for thing sacred, as thi 
symbol, my crucifix, that wa amongst us even now when we resolve, to 
them he is nothing, but in their presenc he take hi place far off and 
silent with respect. there are others, too, which I shall tell you of, 
lest in our seek we may need them. the branch of wild rose on hi 
coffin keep him that he move not from it; a sacr bullet fire into the 
coffin kill him so that he be true dead; and as for the stake through 
him, we know alreadi of it peace; or the cut-off head that giveth rest. 
We have seen it with our eyes. 

"thu when we find the habit of thi man-that-was, we can confin 
him to hi coffin and destroy him, if we obey what we know. but he is 
clever. I have ask my friend arminius, of buda-pesth university, to 
make hi record; and, from all the mean that are, he tell me of what he 
ha been. He must, indeed, have been that voivod dracula who won hi 
name against the turk, over the great river on the veri frontier of 
turkey-land. If it be so, then wa he no common man; for in that time, 
and for centuri after, he wa spoken of as the cleverest and the most 
cunning, as well as the bravest of the son of the 'land beyond the 
forest.' that mighti brain and that iron resolut went with him to hi 
grave, and are even now array against us. the dracula were, say 
arminius, a great and nobl race, though now and again were scion who 
were held by their coeval to have had deal with the evil one. they 
learn hi secret in the scholomance, amongst the mountain over lake 
hermanstadt, where the devil claim the tenth scholar as hi due. In the 
record are such word as 'stregoica'--witch, 'ordog,' and 
'pokol'--satan and hell; and in one manuscript thi veri dracula is 
spoken of as 'wampyr,' which we all understand too well. there have been 
from the loin of thi veri one great men and good women, and their 
grave make sacr the earth where alon thi foul can dwell. for it 
is not the least of it terror that thi evil thing is root deep in 
all good; in soil barren of holi memori it cannot rest." 

whilst they were talk mr. morri wa look steadili at the window, 
and he now got up quietly, and went out of the room. there wa a littl 
pause, and then the professor went on:-- 

"and now we must settl what we do. We have here much data, and we must 
proceed to lay out our campaign. We know from the inquiri of jonathan 
that from the castl to whitbi came fifti box of earth, all of which 
were deliv at carfax; we also know that at least some of these box 
have been removed. It seem to me, that our first step should be to 
ascertain whether all the rest remain in the hous beyond that wall 
where we look to-day; or whether ani more have been removed. If the 
latter, we must trace----" 

here we were interrupt in a veri startl way. outsid the hous came 
the sound of a pistol-shot; the glass of the window wa shatter with a 
bullet, which, ricochet from the top of the embrasure, struck the 
far wall of the room. I am afraid I am at heart a coward, for I shriek 
out. the men all jump to their feet; lord godalm flew over to the 
window and threw up the sash. As he did so we heard mr. morris' voic 
without:-- 

"sorry! I fear I have alarm you. I shall come in and tell you about 
it." A minut later he came in and said:-- 

"it wa an idiot thing of me to do, and I ask your pardon, mrs. 
harker, most sincerely; I fear I must have frighten you terribly. but 
the fact is that whilst the professor wa talk there came a big bat 
and sat on the window-sill. I have got such a horror of the damn 
brute from recent event that I cannot stand them, and I went out to 
have a shot, as I have been do of late of evenings, whenev I have 
seen one. you use to laugh at me for it then, art." 

"did you hit it?" ask dr. van helsing. 

"I don't know; I fanci not, for it flew away into the wood." without 
say ani more he took hi seat, and the professor began to resum hi 
statement:-- 

"we must trace each of these boxes; and when we are ready, we must 
either captur or kill thi monster in hi lair; or we must, so to 
speak, sterilis the earth, so that no more he can seek safeti in it. 
thu in the end we may find him in hi form of man between the hour of 
noon and sunset, and so engag with him when he is at hi most weak. 

"and now for you, madam mina, thi night is the end until all be well. 
you are too preciou to us to have such risk. when we part to-night, you 
no more must question. We shall tell you all in good time. We are men 
and are abl to bear; but you must be our star and our hope, and we 
shall act all the more free that you are not in the danger, such as we 
are." 

all the men, even jonathan, seem relieved; but it did not seem to me 
good that they should brave danger and, perhaps, lessen their 
safety--strength be the best safety--through care of me; but their 
mind were made up, and, though it wa a bitter pill for me to swallow, 
I could say nothing, save to accept their chivalr care of me. 

mr. morri resum the discussion:-- 

"a there is no time to lose, I vote we have a look at hi hous right 
now. time is everyth with him; and swift action on our part may save 
anoth victim." 

I own that my heart began to fail me when the time for action came so 
close, but I did not say anything, for I had a greater fear that if I 
appear as a drag or a hindranc to their work, they might even leav 
me out of their counsel altogether. they have now gone off to carfax, 
with mean to get into the house. 

manlike, they had told me to go to bed and sleep; as if a woman can 
sleep when those she love are in danger! I shall lie down and pretend 
to sleep, lest jonathan have ad anxieti about me when he returns. 


_dr. seward' diary._ 

_1 october, 4 a. m._--just as we were about to leav the house, an 
urgent messag wa brought to me from renfield to know if I would see 
him at once, as he had someth of the utmost import to say to me. 
I told the messeng to say that I would attend to hi wish in the 
morning; I wa busi just at the moment. the attend added:-- 

"he seem veri importunate, sir. I have never seen him so eager. I don't 
know but what, if you don't see him soon, he will have one of hi 
violent fits." I knew the man would not have said thi without some 
cause, so I said: "all right; i'll go now"; and I ask the other to 
wait a few minut for me, as I had to go and see my "patient." 

"take me with you, friend john," said the professor. "hi case in your 
diari interest me much, and it had bearing, too, now and again on _our_ 
case. I should much like to see him, and especi when hi mind is 
disturbed." 

"may I come also?" ask lord godalming. 

"me too?" said quincey morris. "may I come?" said harker. I nodded, and 
we all went down the passag together. 

We found him in a state of consider excitement, but far more 
ration in hi speech and manner than I had ever seen him. there wa an 
unusu understand of himself, which wa unlik anyth I had ever 
met with in a lunatic; and he took it for grant that hi reason would 
prevail with other entir sane. We all four went into the room, but 
none of the other at first said anything. hi request wa that I would 
at onc releas him from the asylum and send him home. thi he back up 
with argument regard hi complet recovery, and adduc hi own 
exist sanity. "I appeal to your friends," he said, "they will, 
perhaps, not mind sit in judgment on my case. By the way, you have 
not introduc me." I wa so much astonished, that the odd of 
introduc a madman in an asylum did not strike me at the moment; and, 
besides, there wa a certain digniti in the man' manner, so much of 
the habit of equality, that I at onc made the introduction: "lord 
godalming; professor van helsing; mr. quincey morris, of texas; mr. 
renfield." He shook hand with each of them, say in turn:-- 

"lord godalming, I had the honour of second your father at the 
windham; I griev to know, by your hold the title, that he is no 
more. He wa a man love and honour by all who knew him; and in hi 
youth was, I have heard, the inventor of a burnt rum punch, much 
patronis on derbi night. mr. morris, you should be proud of your great 
state. it recept into the union wa a preced which may have 
far-reach effect hereafter, when the pole and the tropic may hold 
allianc to the star and stripes. the power of treati may yet prove a 
vast engin of enlargement, when the monro doctrin take it true 
place as a polit fable. what shall ani man say of hi pleasur at 
meet van helsing? sir, I make no apolog for drop all form of 
convent prefix. when an individu ha revolutionis therapeut 
by hi discoveri of the continu evolut of brain-matter, 
convent form are unfitting, sinc they would seem to limit him to 
one of a class. you, gentlemen, who by nationality, by heredity, or by 
the possess of natur gifts, are fit to hold your respect 
place in the move world, I take to wit that I am as sane as at 
least the major of men who are in full possess of their liberties. 
and I am sure that you, dr. seward, humanitarian and medico-jurist as 
well as scientist, will deem it a moral duti to deal with me as one to 
be consid as under except circumstances." He made thi last 
appeal with a courtli air of convict which wa not without it own 
charm. 

I think we were all staggered. for my own part, I wa under the 
conviction, despit my knowledg of the man' charact and history, 
that hi reason had been restored; and I felt under a strong impuls to 
tell him that I wa satisfi as to hi sanity, and would see about the 
necessari formal for hi releas in the morning. I thought it 
better to wait, however, befor make so grave a statement, for of old 
I knew the sudden chang to which thi particular patient wa liable. 
So I content myself with make a gener statement that he appear 
to be improv veri rapidly; that I would have a longer chat with him 
in the morning, and would then see what I could do in the direct of 
meet hi wishes. thi did not at all satisfi him, for he said 
quickly:-- 

"but I fear, dr. seward, that you hardli apprehend my wish. I desir to 
go at once--here--now--thi veri hour--thi veri moment, if I may. time 
presses, and in our impli agreement with the old scytheman it is of 
the essenc of the contract. I am sure it is onli necessari to put 
befor so admir a practition as dr. seward so simple, yet so 
moment a wish, to ensur it fulfilment." He look at me keenly, and 
see the neg in my face, turn to the others, and scrutinis 
them closely. not meet ani suffici response, he went on:-- 

"i it possibl that I have er in my supposition?" 

"you have," I said frankly, but at the same time, as I felt, brutally. 
there wa a consider pause, and then he said slowly:-- 

"then I suppos I must onli shift my ground of request. let me ask for 
thi concession--boon, privilege, what you will. I am content to implor 
in such a case, not on person grounds, but for the sake of others. I 
am not at liberti to give you the whole of my reasons; but you may, I 
assur you, take it from me that they are good ones, sound and 
unselfish, and spring from the highest sens of duty. could you look, 
sir, into my heart, you would approv to the full the sentiment which 
anim me. nay, more, you would count me amongst the best and truest of 
your friends." again he look at us all keenly. I had a grow 
convict that thi sudden chang of hi entir intellectu method wa 
but yet anoth form or phase of hi madness, and so determin to let 
him go on a littl longer, know from experi that he would, like 
all lunatics, give himself away in the end. van hels wa gaze at 
him with a look of utmost intensity, hi bushi eyebrow almost meet 
with the fix concentr of hi look. He said to renfield in a tone 
which did not surpris me at the time, but onli when I thought of it 
afterwards--for it wa as of one address an equal:-- 

"can you not tell frankli your real reason for wish to be free 
to-night? I will undertak that if you will satisfi even me--a stranger, 
without prejudice, and with the habit of keep an open mind--dr. 
seward will give you, at hi own risk and on hi own responsibility, the 
privileg you seek." He shook hi head sadly, and with a look of 
poignant regret on hi face. the professor went on:-- 

"come, sir, bethink yourself. you claim the privileg of reason in the 
highest degree, sinc you seek to impress us with your complet 
reasonableness. you do this, whose saniti we have reason to doubt, sinc 
you are not yet releas from medic treatment for thi veri defect. If 
you will not help us in our effort to choos the wisest course, how can 
we perform the duti which you yourself put upon us? Be wise, and help 
us; and if we can we shall aid you to achiev your wish." He still shook 
hi head as he said:-- 

"dr. van helsing, I have noth to say. your argument is complete, and 
if I were free to speak I should not hesit a moment; but I am not my 
own master in the matter. I can onli ask you to trust me. If I am 
refused, the respons doe not rest with me." I thought it wa now 
time to end the scene, which wa becom too comic grave, so I went 
toward the door, simpli saying:-- 

"come, my friends, we have work to do. good-night." 

as, however, I got near the door, a new chang came over the patient. He 
move toward me so quickli that for the moment I fear that he wa 
about to make anoth homicid attack. My fears, however, were 
groundless, for he held up hi two hand imploringly, and made hi 
petit in a move manner. As he saw that the veri excess of hi 
emot wa milit against him, by restor us more to our old 
relations, he becam still more demonstrative. I glanc at van helsing, 
and saw my convict reflect in hi eyes; so I becam a littl more 
fix in my manner, if not more stern, and motion to him that hi 
effort were unavailing. I had previous seen someth of the same 
constantli grow excit in him when he had to make some request of 
which at the time he had thought much, such, for instance, as when he 
want a cat; and I wa prepar to see the collaps into the same 
sullen acquiesc on thi occasion. My expect wa not realised, 
for, when he found that hi appeal would not be successful, he got into 
quit a frantic condition. He threw himself on hi knees, and held up 
hi hands, wring them in plaintiv supplication, and pour forth a 
torrent of entreaty, with the tear roll down hi cheeks, and hi 
whole face and form express of the deepest emotion:-- 

"let me entreat you, dr. seward, oh, let me implor you, to let me out 
of thi hous at once. send me away how you will and where you will; 
send keeper with me with whip and chains; let them take me in a 
strait-waistcoat, manacl and leg-ironed, even to a gaol; but let me go 
out of this. you don't know what you do by keep me here. I am 
speak from the depth of my heart--of my veri soul. you don't know 
whom you wrong, or how; and I may not tell. woe is me! I may not tell. 
By all you hold sacred--bi all you hold dear--bi your love that is 
lost--bi your hope that lives--for the sake of the almighty, take me out 
of thi and save my soul from guilt! can't you hear me, man? can't you 
understand? will you never learn? don't you know that I am sane and 
earnest now; that I am no lunat in a mad fit, but a sane man fight 
for hi soul? oh, hear me! hear me! let me go! let me go! let me go!" 

I thought that the longer thi went on the wilder he would get, and so 
would bring on a fit; so I took him by the hand and rais him up. 

"come," I said sternly, "no more of this; we have had quit enough 
already. get to your bed and tri to behav more discreetly." 

He suddenli stop and look at me intent for sever moments. then, 
without a word, he rose and move over, sat down on the side of the 
bed. the collaps had come, as on former occasion, just as I had 
expected. 

when I wa leav the room, last of our party, he said to me in a 
quiet, well-br voice:-- 

"you will, I trust, dr. seward, do me the justic to bear in mind, later 
on, that I did what I could to convinc you to-night." 




chapter xix 

jonathan harker' journal 


_1 october, 5 a. m._--i went with the parti to the search with an easi 
mind, for I think I never saw mina so absolut strong and well. I am 
so glad that she consent to hold back and let us men do the work. 
somehow, it wa a dread to me that she wa in thi fear busi at 
all; but now that her work is done, and that it is due to her energi and 
brain and foresight that the whole stori is put togeth in such a way 
that everi point tells, she may well feel that her part is finished, and 
that she can henceforth leav the rest to us. We were, I think, all a 
littl upset by the scene with mr. renfield. when we came away from hi 
room we were silent till we got back to the study. then mr. morri said 
to dr. seward:-- 

"say, jack, if that man wasn't attempt a bluff, he is about the 
sanest lunat I ever saw. i'm not sure, but I believ that he had some 
seriou purpose, and if he had, it wa pretti rough on him not to get a 
chance." lord godalm and I were silent, but dr. van hels added:-- 

"friend john, you know more of lunat than I do, and i'm glad of it, 
for I fear that if it had been to me to decid I would befor that last 
hyster outburst have given him free. but we live and learn, and in 
our present task we must take no chance, as my friend quincey would say. 
all is best as they are." dr. seward seem to answer them both in a 
dreami kind of way:-- 

"I don't know but that I agre with you. If that man had been an 
ordinari lunat I would have taken my chanc of trust him; but he 
seem so mix up with the count in an indexi kind of way that I am 
afraid of do anyth wrong by help hi fads. I can't forget how 
he pray with almost equal fervour for a cat, and then tri to tear my 
throat out with hi teeth. besides, he call the count 'lord and 
master,' and he may want to get out to help him in some diabol way. 
that horrid thing ha the wolv and the rat and hi own kind to help 
him, so I suppos he isn't abov tri to use a respect lunatic. He 
certainli did seem earnest, though. I onli hope we have done what is 
best. these things, in conjunct with the wild work we have in hand, 
help to unnerv a man." the professor step over, and lay hi hand 
on hi shoulder, said in hi grave, kindli way:-- 

"friend john, have no fear. We are tri to do our duti in a veri sad 
and terribl case; we can onli do as we deem best. what els have we to 
hope for, except the piti of the good god?" lord godalm had slip 
away for a few minutes, but now he returned. He held up a littl silver 
whistle, as he remarked:-- 

"that old place may be full of rats, and if so, i'v got an antidot on 
call." have pass the wall, we took our way to the house, take care 
to keep in the shadow of the tree on the lawn when the moonlight shone 
out. when we got to the porch the professor open hi bag and took out 
a lot of things, which he laid on the step, sort them into four 
littl groups, evid one for each. then he spoke:-- 

"mi friends, we are go into a terribl danger, and we need arm of 
mani kinds. our enemi is not mere spiritual. rememb that he ha the 
strength of twenti men, and that, though our neck or our windpip are 
of the common kind--and therefor breakabl or crushable--hi are not 
amen to mere strength. A stronger man, or a bodi of men more strong 
in all than him, can at certain time hold him; but they cannot hurt him 
as we can be hurt by him. We must, therefore, guard ourselv from hi 
touch. keep thi near your heart"--a he spoke he lift a littl silver 
crucifix and held it out to me, I be nearest to him--"put these 
flower round your neck"--her he hand to me a wreath of wither 
garlic blossoms--"for other enemi more mundane, thi revolv and thi 
knife; and for aid in all, these so small electr lamps, which you can 
fasten to your breast; and for all, and abov all at the last, this, 
which we must not desecr needless." thi wa a portion of sacr 
wafer, which he put in an envelop and hand to me. each of the other 
wa similarli equipped. "now," he said, "friend john, where are the 
skeleton keys? If so that we can open the door, we need not break hous 
by the window, as befor at miss lucy's." 

dr. seward tri one or two skeleton keys, hi mechan dexter as a 
surgeon stand him in good stead. present he got one to suit; after 
a littl play back and forward the bolt yielded, and, with a rusti 
clang, shot back. We press on the door, the rusti hing creaked, and 
it slowli opened. It wa startlingli like the imag convey to me in 
dr. seward' diari of the open of miss westenra' tomb; I fanci that 
the same idea seem to strike the others, for with one accord they 
shrank back. the professor wa the first to move forward, and step 
into the open door. 

"_in manu tuas, domine!_" he said, cross himself as he pass over 
the threshold. We close the door behind us, lest when we should have 
lit our lamp we should possibl attract attent from the road. the 
professor care tri the lock, lest we might not be abl to open it 
from within should we be in a hurri make our exit. then we all lit our 
lamp and proceed on our search. 

the light from the tini lamp fell in all sort of odd forms, as the 
ray cross each other, or the opac of our bodi threw great 
shadows. I could not for my life get away from the feel that there 
wa some one els amongst us. I suppos it wa the recollection, so 
power brought home to me by the grim surroundings, of that terribl 
experi in transylvania. I think the feel wa common to us all, 
for I notic that the other kept look over their shoulder at everi 
sound and everi new shadow, just as I felt myself doing. 

the whole place wa thick with dust. the floor wa seemingli inch 
deep, except where there were recent footsteps, in which on hold down 
my lamp I could see mark of hobnail where the dust wa cracked. the 
wall were fluffi and heavi with dust, and in the corner were mass of 
spider' webs, whereon the dust had gather till they look like old 
tatter rag as the weight had torn them partli down. On a tabl in the 
hall wa a great bunch of keys, with a time-yellow label on each. they 
had been use sever times, for on the tabl were sever similar rent 
in the blanket of dust, similar to that expos when the professor 
lift them. He turn to me and said:-- 

"you know thi place, jonathan. you have copi map of it, and you know 
it at least more than we do. which is the way to the chapel?" I had an 
idea of it direction, though on my former visit I had not been abl to 
get admiss to it; so I led the way, and after a few wrong turn 
found myself opposit a low, arch oaken door, rib with iron bands. 
"thi is the spot," said the professor as he turn hi lamp on a small 
map of the house, copi from the file of my origin correspond 
regard the purchase. with a littl troubl we found the key on the 
bunch and open the door. We were prepar for some unpleasantness, for 
as we were open the door a faint, malodor air seem to exhal 
through the gaps, but none of us ever expect such an odour as we 
encountered. none of the other had met the count at all at close 
quarters, and when I had seen him he wa either in the fast stage of 
hi exist in hi room or, when he wa gloat with fresh blood, in 
a ruin build open to the air; but here the place wa small and 
close, and the long disus had made the air stagnant and foul. there wa 
an earthi smell, as of some dri miasma, which came through the fouler 
air. but as to the odour itself, how shall I describ it? It wa not 
alon that it wa compos of all the ill of mortal and with the 
pungent, acrid smell of blood, but it seem as though corrupt had 
becom itself corrupt. faugh! it sicken me to think of it. everi breath 
exhal by that monster seem to have clung to the place and 
intensifi it loathsomeness. 

under ordinari circumst such a stench would have brought our 
enterpris to an end; but thi wa no ordinari case, and the high and 
terribl purpos in which we were involv gave us a strength which rose 
abov mere physic considerations. after the involuntari shrink 
consequ on the first nauseou whiff, we one and all set about our 
work as though that loathsom place were a garden of roses. 

We made an accur examin of the place, the professor say as we 
began:-- 

"the first thing is to see how mani of the box are left; we must then 
examin everi hole and corner and cranni and see if we cannot get some 
clue as to what ha becom of the rest." A glanc wa suffici to show 
how mani remained, for the great earth chest were bulky, and there wa 
no mistak them. 

there were onli twenty-nin left out of the fifty! onc I got a fright, 
for, see lord godalm suddenli turn and look out of the vault 
door into the dark passag beyond, I look too, and for an instant my 
heart stood still. somewhere, look out from the shadow, I seem to 
see the high light of the count' evil face, the ridg of the nose, the 
red eyes, the red lips, the aw pallor. It wa onli for a moment, for, 
as lord godalm said, "I thought I saw a face, but it wa onli the 
shadows," and resum hi inquiry, I turn my lamp in the direction, 
and step into the passage. there wa no sign of ani one; and as there 
were no corners, no doors, no apertur of ani kind, but onli the solid 
wall of the passage, there could be no hiding-plac even for _him_. I 
took it that fear had help imagination, and said nothing. 

A few minut later I saw morri step suddenli back from a corner, which 
he wa examining. We all follow hi movement with our eyes, for 
undoubtedli some nervous wa grow on us, and we saw a whole mass 
of phosphorescence, which twinkl like stars. We all instinct drew 
back. the whole place wa becom aliv with rats. 

for a moment or two we stood appalled, all save lord godalming, who wa 
seemingli prepar for such an emergency. rush over to the great 
iron-bound oaken door, which dr. seward had describ from the outside, 
and which I had seen myself, he turn the key in the lock, drew the 
huge bolts, and swung the door open. then, take hi littl silver 
whistl from hi pocket, he blew a low, shrill call. It wa answer 
from behind dr. seward' hous by the yelp of dogs, and after about a 
minut three terrier came dash round the corner of the house. 
unconsci we had all move toward the door, and as we move I 
notic that the dust had been much disturbed: the box which had been 
taken out had been brought thi way. but even in the minut that had 
elaps the number of the rat had vastli increased. they seem to 
swarm over the place all at once, till the lamplight, shine on their 
move dark bodi and glittering, bale eyes, made the place look 
like a bank of earth set with fireflies. the dog dash on, but at the 
threshold suddenli stop and snarled, and then, simultan lift 
their noses, began to howl in most lugubri fashion. the rat were 
multipli in thousands, and we move out. 

lord godalm lift one of the dogs, and carri him in, place him 
on the floor. the instant hi feet touch the ground he seem to 
recov hi courage, and rush at hi natur enemies. they fled befor 
him so fast that befor he had shaken the life out of a score, the other 
dogs, who had by now been lift in the same manner, had but small prey 
ere the whole mass had vanished. 

with their go it seem as if some evil presenc had departed, for 
the dog frisk about and bark merrili as they made sudden dart at 
their prostrat foes, and turn them over and over and toss them in 
the air with viciou shakes. We all seem to find our spirit rise. 
whether it wa the purifi of the deadli atmospher by the open of 
the chapel door, or the relief which we experienc by find ourselv 
in the open I know not; but most certainli the shadow of dread seem to 
slip from us like a robe, and the occas of our come lost someth 
of it grim significance, though we did not slacken a whit in our 
resolution. We close the outer door and bar and lock it, and 
bring the dog with us, began our search of the house. We found 
noth throughout except dust in extraordinari proportions, and all 
untouch save for my own footstep when I had made my first visit. 
never onc did the dog exhibit ani symptom of uneasiness, and even when 
we return to the chapel they frisk about as though they had been 
rabbit-hunt in a summer wood. 

the morn wa quicken in the east when we emerg from the front. 
dr. van hels had taken the key of the hall-door from the bunch, and 
lock the door in orthodox fashion, put the key into hi pocket 
when he had done. 

"so far," he said, "our night ha been emin successful. No harm ha 
come to us such as I fear might be and yet we have ascertain how 
mani box are missing. more than all do I rejoic that this, our 
first--and perhap our most difficult and dangerous--step ha been 
accomplish without the bring thereinto our most sweet madam mina or 
troubl her wake or sleep thought with sight and sound and 
smell of horror which she might never forget. one lesson, too, we have 
learned, if it be allow to argu _a particulari_: that the brute 
beast which are to the count' command are yet themselv not amen 
to hi spiritu power; for look, these rat that would come to hi 
call, just as from hi castl top he summon the wolv to your go and 
to that poor mother' cry, though they come to him, they run pell-mel 
from the so littl dog of my friend arthur. We have other matter 
befor us, other dangers, other fears; and that monster--h ha not use 
hi power over the brute world for the onli or the last time to-night. 
So be it that he ha gone elsewhere. good! It ha given us opportun 
to cri 'check' in some way in thi chess game, which we play for the 
stake of human souls. and now let us go home. the dawn is close at hand, 
and we have reason to be content with our first night' work. It may be 
ordain that we have mani night and day to follow, if full of peril; 
but we must go on, and from no danger shall we shrink." 

the hous wa silent when we got back, save for some poor creatur who 
wa scream away in one of the distant wards, and a low, moan sound 
from renfield' room. the poor wretch wa doubtless tortur himself, 
after the manner of the insane, with needless thought of pain. 

I came tipto into our own room, and found mina asleep, breath so 
softli that I had to put my ear down to hear it. she look paler than 
usual. I hope the meet to-night ha not upset her. I am truli 
thank that she is to be left out of our futur work, and even of our 
deliberations. It is too great a strain for a woman to bear. I did not 
think so at first, but I know better now. therefor I am glad that it is 
settled. there may be thing which would frighten her to hear; and yet 
to conceal them from her might be wors than to tell her if onc she 
suspect that there wa ani concealment. henceforth our work is to be a 
seal book to her, till at least such time as we can tell her that all 
is finished, and the earth free from a monster of the nether world. I 
daresay it will be difficult to begin to keep silenc after such 
confid as ours; but I must be resolute, and to-morrow I shall keep 
dark over to-night' doings, and shall refus to speak of anyth that 
ha happened. I rest on the sofa, so as not to disturb her. 

* * * * * 

_1 october, later._--i suppos it wa natur that we should have all 
overslept ourselves, for the day wa a busi one, and the night had no 
rest at all. even mina must have felt it exhaustion, for though I slept 
till the sun wa high, I wa awak befor her, and had to call two or 
three time befor she awoke. indeed, she wa so sound asleep that for a 
few second she did not recogn me, but look at me with a sort of 
blank terror, as one look who ha been wake out of a bad dream. she 
complain a littl of be tired, and I let her rest till later in the 
day. We now know of twenty-on box have been removed, and if it be 
that sever were taken in ani of these remov we may be abl to trace 
them all. such will, of course, immens simplifi our labour, and the 
sooner the matter is attend to the better. I shall look up thoma 
snell to-day. 


_dr. seward' diary._ 

_1 october._--it wa toward noon when I wa awaken by the professor 
walk into my room. He wa more jolli and cheer than usual, and it 
is quit evid that last night' work ha help to take some of the 
brood weight off hi mind. after go over the adventur of the 
night he suddenli said:-- 

"your patient interest me much. may it be that with you I visit him 
thi morning? Or if that you are too occupy, I can go alon if it may 
be. It is a new experi to me to find a lunat who talk philosophy, 
and reason so sound." I had some work to do which pressed, so I told him 
that if he would go alon I would be glad, as then I should not have to 
keep him waiting; so I call an attend and gave him the necessari 
instructions. befor the professor left the room I caution him against 
get ani fals impress from my patient. "but," he answered, "I 
want him to talk of himself and of hi delus as to consum live 
things. He said to madam mina, as I see in your diari of yesterday, that 
he had onc had such a belief. whi do you smile, friend john?" 

"excus me," I said, "but the answer is here." I laid my hand on the 
type-written matter. "when our sane and learn lunat made that veri 
statement of how he _used_ to consum life, hi mouth wa actual 
nauseou with the fli and spider which he had eaten just befor mrs. 
harker enter the room." van hels smile in turn. "good!" he said. 
"your memori is true, friend john. I should have remembered. and yet it 
is thi veri obliqu of thought and memori which make mental diseas 
such a fascin study. perhap I may gain more knowledg out of the 
folli of thi madman than I shall from the teach of the most wise. 
who knows?" I went on with my work, and befor long wa through that in 
hand. It seem that the time had been veri short indeed, but there wa 
van hels back in the study. "do I interrupt?" he ask polit as he 
stood at the door. 

"not at all," I answered. "come in. My work is finished, and I am free. 
I can go with you now, if you like. 

"it is needless; I have seen him!" 

"well?" 

"I fear that he doe not apprais me at much. our interview wa short. 
when I enter hi room he wa sit on a stool in the centre, with 
hi elbow on hi knees, and hi face wa the pictur of sullen 
discontent. I spoke to him as cheer as I could, and with such a 
measur of respect as I could assume. He made no repli whatever. "don't 
you know me?" I asked. hi answer wa not reassuring: "I know you well 
enough; you are the old fool van helsing. I wish you would take yourself 
and your idiot brain theori somewher else. damn all thick-head 
dutchmen!" not a word more would he say, but sat in hi implac 
sullen as indiffer to me as though I had not been in the room at 
all. thu depart for thi time my chanc of much learn from thi so 
clever lunatic; so I shall go, if I may, and cheer myself with a few 
happi word with that sweet soul madam mina. friend john, it doe 
rejoic me unspeak that she is no more to be pained, no more to be 
worri with our terribl things. though we shall much miss her help, it 
is better so." 

"I agre with you with all my heart," I answer earnestly, for I did 
not want him to weaken in thi matter. "mrs. harker is better out of it. 
thing are quit bad enough for us, all men of the world, and who have 
been in mani tight place in our time; but it is no place for a woman, 
and if she had remain in touch with the affair, it would in time 
infal have wreck her." 

So van hels ha gone to confer with mrs. harker and harker; quincey 
and art are all out follow up the clue as to the earth-boxes. I 
shall finish my round of work and we shall meet to-night. 


_mina harker' journal._ 

_1 october._--it is strang to me to be kept in the dark as I am to-day; 
after jonathan' full confid for so mani years, to see him 
manifestli avoid certain matters, and those the most vital of all. thi 
morn I slept late after the fatigu of yesterday, and though 
jonathan wa late too, he wa the earlier. He spoke to me befor he went 
out, never more sweetli or tenderly, but he never mention a word of 
what had happen in the visit to the count' house. and yet he must 
have known how terribl anxiou I was. poor dear fellow! I suppos it 
must have distress him even more than it did me. they all agre that 
it wa best that I should not be drawn further into thi aw work, and 
I acquiesced. but to think that he keep anyth from me! and now I am 
cri like a silli fool, when I _know_ it come from my husband' great 
love and from the good, good wish of those other strong men. 

that ha done me good. well, some day jonathan will tell me all; and 
lest it should ever be that he should think for a moment that I kept 
anyth from him, I still keep my journal as usual. then if he ha 
fear of my trust I shall show it to him, with everi thought of my 
heart put down for hi dear eye to read. I feel strang sad and 
low-spirit to-day. I suppos it is the reaction from the terribl 
excitement. 

last night I went to bed when the men had gone, simpli becaus they told 
me to. I didn't feel sleepy, and I did feel full of devour anxiety. I 
kept think over everyth that ha been ever sinc jonathan came to 
see me in london, and it all seem like a horribl tragedy, with fate 
press on relentlessli to some destin end. everyth that one doe 
seems, no matter how right it may be, to bring on the veri thing which 
is most to be deplored. If I hadn't gone to whitby, perhap poor dear 
luci would be with us now. she hadn't taken to visit the churchyard 
till I came, and if she hadn't come there in the day-tim with me she 
wouldn't have walk there in her sleep; and if she hadn't gone there at 
night and asleep, that monster couldn't have destroy her as he did. 
oh, whi did I ever go to whitby? there now, cri again! I wonder what 
ha come over me to-day. I must hide it from jonathan, for if he knew 
that I had been cri twice in one morning--i, who never cri on my 
own account, and whom he ha never caus to shed a tear--th dear 
fellow would fret hi heart out. I shall put a bold face on, and if I do 
feel weepy, he shall never see it. I suppos it is one of the lesson 
that we poor women have to learn.... 

I can't quit rememb how I fell asleep last night. I rememb hear 
the sudden bark of the dog and a lot of queer sounds, like pray 
on a veri tumultu scale, from mr. renfield' room, which is somewher 
under this. and then there wa silenc over everything, silenc so 
profound that it startl me, and I got up and look out of the window. 
all wa dark and silent, the black shadow thrown by the moonlight 
seem full of a silent mysteri of their own. not a thing seem to be 
stirring, but all to be grim and fix as death or fate; so that a thin 
streak of white mist, that crept with almost impercept slow 
across the grass toward the house, seem to have a sentienc and a 
vital of it own. I think that the digress of my thought must 
have done me good, for when I got back to bed I found a lethargi 
creep over me. I lay a while, but could not quit sleep, so I got out 
and look out of the window again. the mist wa spreading, and wa now 
close up to the house, so that I could see it lie thick against the 
wall, as though it were steal up to the windows. the poor man wa 
more loud than ever, and though I could not distinguish a word he said, 
I could in some way recognis in hi tone some passion entreati on 
hi part. then there wa the sound of a struggle, and I knew that the 
attend were deal with him. I wa so frighten that I crept into 
bed, and pull the cloth over my head, put my finger in my ears. 
I wa not then a bit sleepy, at least so I thought; but I must have 
fallen asleep, for, except dreams, I do not rememb anyth until the 
morning, when jonathan woke me. I think that it took me an effort and a 
littl time to realis where I was, and that it wa jonathan who wa 
bend over me. My dream wa veri peculiar, and wa almost typic of 
the way that wake thought becom merg in, or continu in, dreams. 

I thought that I wa asleep, and wait for jonathan to come back. I 
wa veri anxiou about him, and I wa powerless to act; my feet, and my 
hands, and my brain were weighted, so that noth could proceed at the 
usual pace. and so I slept uneasili and thought. then it began to dawn 
upon me that the air wa heavy, and dank, and cold. I put back the 
cloth from my face, and found, to my surprise, that all wa dim 
around. the gaslight which I had left lit for jonathan, but turn down, 
came onli like a tini red spark through the fog, which had evid 
grown thicker and pour into the room. then it occur to me that I 
had shut the window befor I had come to bed. I would have got out to 
make certain on the point, but some leaden lethargi seem to chain my 
limb and even my will. I lay still and endured; that wa all. I close 
my eyes, but could still see through my eyelids. (it is wonder what 
trick our dream play us, and how conveni we can imagine.) the 
mist grew thicker and thicker and I could see now how it came in, for I 
could see it like smoke--or with the white energi of boil 
water--pour in, not through the window, but through the join of 
the door. It got thicker and thicker, till it seem as if it becam 
concentr into a sort of pillar of cloud in the room, through the top 
of which I could see the light of the ga shine like a red eye. thing 
began to whirl through my brain just as the cloudi column wa now 
whirl in the room, and through it all came the scriptur word "a 
pillar of cloud by day and of fire by night." wa it inde some such 
spiritu guidanc that wa come to me in my sleep? but the pillar wa 
compos of both the day and the night-guiding, for the fire wa in the 
red eye, which at the thought got a new fascin for me; till, as I 
looked, the fire divided, and seem to shine on me through the fog like 
two red eyes, such as luci told me of in her momentari mental wander 
when, on the cliff, the die sunlight struck the window of st. mary' 
church. suddenli the horror burst upon me that it wa thu that jonathan 
had seen those aw women grow into realiti through the whirl mist 
in the moonlight, and in my dream I must have fainted, for all becam 
black darkness. the last consciou effort which imagin made wa to 
show me a livid white face bend over me out of the mist. I must be 
care of such dreams, for they would unseat one' reason if there were 
too much of them. I would get dr. van hels or dr. seward to prescrib 
someth for me which would make me sleep, onli that I fear to alarm 
them. such a dream at the present time would becom woven into their 
fear for me. to-night I shall strive hard to sleep naturally. If I do 
not, I shall to-morrow night get them to give me a dose of chloral; that 
cannot hurt me for once, and it will give me a good night' sleep. last 
night tire me more than if I had not slept at all. 

* * * * * 

_2 octob 10 p. m._--last night I slept, but did not dream. I must have 
slept soundly, for I wa not wake by jonathan come to bed; but the 
sleep ha not refresh me, for to-day I feel terribl weak and 
spiritless. I spent all yesterday tri to read, or lie down dozing. 
In the afternoon mr. renfield ask if he might see me. poor man, he wa 
veri gentle, and when I came away he kiss my hand and bade god bless 
me. some way it affect me much; I am cri when I think of him. thi 
is a new weakness, of which I must be careful. jonathan would be 
miser if he knew I had been crying. He and the other were out till 
dinner-time, and they all came in tired. I did what I could to brighten 
them up, and I suppos that the effort did me good, for I forgot how 
tire I was. after dinner they sent me to bed, and all went off to smoke 
together, as they said, but I knew that they want to tell each other 
of what had occur to each dure the day; I could see from jonathan' 
manner that he had someth import to communicate. I wa not so 
sleepi as I should have been; so befor they went I ask dr. seward to 
give me a littl opiat of some kind, as I had not slept well the night 
before. He veri kindli made me up a sleep draught, which he gave to 
me, tell me that it would do me no harm, as it wa veri mild.... I 
have taken it, and am wait for sleep, which still keep aloof. I hope 
I have not done wrong, for as sleep begin to flirt with me, a new fear 
comes: that I may have been foolish in thu depriv myself of the 
power of waking. I might want it. here come sleep. good-night. 




chapter XX 

jonathan harker' journal 


_1 october, evening._--i found thoma snell in hi hous at bethnal 
green, but unhappili he wa not in a condit to rememb anything. the 
veri prospect of beer which my expect come had open to him had 
prove too much, and he had begun too earli on hi expect debauch. I 
learned, however, from hi wife, who seem a decent, poor soul, that he 
wa onli the assist to smollet, who of the two mate wa the 
respons person. So off I drove to walworth, and found mr. joseph 
smollet at home and in hi shirtsleeves, take a late tea out of a 
saucer. He is a decent, intellig fellow, distinctli a good, reliabl 
type of workman, and with a headpiec of hi own. He rememb all 
about the incid of the boxes, and from a wonder dog's-ear 
notebook, which he produc from some mysteri receptacl about the 
seat of hi trousers, and which had hieroglyph entri in thick, 
half-obliter pencil, he gave me the destin of the boxes. there 
were, he said, six in the cartload which he took from carfax and left at 
197, chicksand street, mile end new town, and anoth six which he 
deposit at jamaica lane, bermondsey. If then the count meant to 
scatter these ghastli refug of hi over london, these place were 
chosen as the first of delivery, so that later he might distribut more 
fully. the systemat manner in which thi wa done made me think that 
he could not mean to confin himself to two side of london. He wa now 
fix on the far east of the northern shore, on the east of the southern 
shore, and on the south. the north and west were sure never meant to 
be left out of hi diabol scheme--let alon the citi itself and the 
veri heart of fashion london in the south-west and west. I went back 
to smollet, and ask him if he could tell us if ani other box had 
been taken from carfax. 

He replied:-- 

"well, guv'nor, you'v treat me weri 'an'some"--i had given him half a 
sovereign--"an' i'll tell yer all I know. I heard a man by the name of 
bloxam say four night ago in the 'are an' 'ounds, in pincher' alley, 
as 'ow he an' hi mate 'ad 'ad a rare dusti job in a old 'ous at 
purfect. there ain't a-mani such job as thi 'ere, an' i'm thinkin' 
that mayb sam bloxam could tell ye summut." I ask if he could tell me 
where to find him. I told him that if he could get me the address it 
would be worth anoth half-sovereign to him. So he gulp down the rest 
of hi tea and stood up, say that he wa go to begin the search 
then and there. At the door he stopped, and said:-- 

"look 'ere, guv'nor, there ain't no sens in me a-keepin' you 'ere. I 
may find sam soon, or I mayn't; but anyhow he ain't like to be in a way 
to tell ye much to-night. sam is a rare one when he start on the booze. 
If you can give me a envelop with a stamp on it, and put yer address on 
it, i'll find out where sam is to be found and post it ye to-night. but 
ye'd better be up arter 'im soon in the mornin', or mayb ye won't ketch 
'im; for sam get off main early, never mind the booz the night afore." 

thi wa all practical, so one of the children went off with a penni to 
buy an envelop and a sheet of paper, and to keep the change. when she 
came back, I address the envelop and stamp it, and when smollet had 
again faith promis to post the address when found, I took my way 
to home. we'r on the track anyhow. I am tire to-night, and want sleep. 
mina is fast asleep, and look a littl too pale; her eye look as 
though she had been crying. poor dear, i'v no doubt it fret her to be 
kept in the dark, and it may make her doubli anxiou about me and the 
others. but it is best as it is. It is better to be disappoint and 
worri in such a way now than to have her nerv broken. the doctor 
were quit right to insist on her be kept out of thi dread 
business. I must be firm, for on me thi particular burden of silenc 
must rest. I shall not ever enter on the subject with her under ani 
circumstances. indeed, it may not be a hard task, after all, for she 
herself ha becom retic on the subject, and ha not spoken of the 
count or hi do ever sinc we told her of our decision. 

* * * * * 

_2 october, evening._--a long and tri and excit day. By the first 
post I got my direct envelop with a dirti scrap of paper enclosed, on 
which wa written with a carpenter' pencil in a sprawl hand:-- 

"sam bloxam, korkrans, 4, poter cort, bartel street, walworth. arsk for 
the depite." 

I got the letter in bed, and rose without wake mina. she look heavi 
and sleepi and pale, and far from well. I determin not to wake her, 
but that, when I should return from thi new search, I would arrang for 
her go back to exeter. I think she would be happier in our own home, 
with her daili task to interest her, than in be here amongst us and 
in ignorance. I onli saw dr. seward for a moment, and told him where I 
wa off to, promis to come back and tell the rest so soon as I should 
have found out anything. I drove to walworth and found, with some 
difficulty, potter' court. mr. smollet' spell misl me, as I ask 
for poter' court instead of potter' court. however, when I had found 
the court, I had no difficulti in discov corcoran' lodging-house. 
when I ask the man who came to the door for the "depite," he shook hi 
head, and said: "I dunno 'im. there ain't no such a person 'ere; I never 
'eard of 'im in all my bloomin' days. don't believ there ain't nobodi 
of that kind livin' ere or anywheres." I took out smollet' letter, and 
as I read it it seem to me that the lesson of the spell of the name 
of the court might guid me. "what are you?" I asked. 

"i'm the depity," he answered. I saw at onc that I wa on the right 
track; phonet spell had again misl me. A half-crown tip put the 
deputy' knowledg at my disposal, and I learn that mr. bloxam, who 
had slept off the remain of hi beer on the previou night at 
corcoran's, had left for hi work at poplar at five o'clock that 
morning. He could not tell me where the place of work wa situated, but 
he had a vagu idea that it wa some kind of a "new-fangl ware'us"; 
and with thi slender clue I had to start for poplar. It wa twelv 
o'clock befor I got ani satisfactori hint of such a building, and thi 
I got at a coffee-shop, where some workmen were have their dinner. one 
of these suggest that there wa be erect at cross angel street a 
new "cold storage" building; and as thi suit the condit of a 
"new-fangl ware'us," I at onc drove to it. An interview with a surli 
gatekeep and a surlier foreman, both of whom were appeas with the 
coin of the realm, put me on the track of bloxam; he wa sent for on my 
suggest that I wa will to pay hi day' wage to hi foreman for 
the privileg of ask him a few question on a privat matter. He wa 
a smart enough fellow, though rough of speech and bearing. when I had 
promis to pay for hi inform and given him an earnest, he told me 
that he had made two journey between carfax and a hous in piccadilly, 
and had taken from thi hous to the latter nine great boxes--"main 
heavi ones"--with a hors and cart hire by him for thi purpose. I 
ask him if he could tell me the number of the hous in piccadilly, to 
which he replied:-- 

"well, guv'nor, I forgit the number, but it wa onli a few door from a 
big white church or somethink of the kind, not long built. It wa a 
dusti old 'ouse, too, though nothin' to the dusti of the 'ous we 
took the bloomin' box from." 

"how did you get into the hous if they were both empty?" 

"there wa the old parti what engag me a-waitin' in the 'ous at 
purfleet. He 'elp me to lift the box and put them in the dray. curs 
me, but he wa the strongest chap I ever struck, an' him a old feller, 
with a white moustache, one that thin you would think he couldn't throw 
a shadder." 

how thi phrase thrill through me! 

"why, 'e took up 'i end o' the box like they wa pound of tea, and 
me a-puffin' an' a-blowin' afor I could up-end mine anyhow--an' i'm no 
chicken, neither." 

"how did you get into the hous in piccadilly?" I asked. 

"he wa there too. He must 'a' start off and got there afor me, for 
when I rung of the bell he kem an' open the door 'isself an' 'elp me 
to carri the box into the 'all." 

"the whole nine?" I asked. 

"yus; there wa five in the first load an' four in the second. It wa 
main dri work, an' I don't so well rememb 'ow I got 'ome." I 
interrupt him:-- 

"were the box left in the hall?" 

"yus; it wa a big 'all, an' there wa nothin' els in it." I made one 
more attempt to further matters:-- 

"you didn't have ani key?" 

"never use no key nor nothink. the old gent, he open the door 'isself 
an' shut it again when I druv off. I don't rememb the last time--but 
that wa the beer." 

"and you can't rememb the number of the house?" 

"no, sir. but ye needn't have no difficulti about that. it' a 'igh 'un 
with a stone front with a bow on it, an' 'igh step up to the door. I 
know them steps, 'avin' 'ad to carri the box up with three loafer 
what come round to earn a copper. the old gent give them shillin's, an' 
they seein' they got so much, they want more; but 'e took one of them 
by the shoulder and wa like to throw 'im down the steps, till the lot 
of them went away cussin'." I thought that with thi descript I could 
find the house, so, have paid my friend for hi information, I start 
off for piccadilly. I had gain a new pain experience; the count 
could, it wa evident, handl the earth-box himself. If so, time wa 
precious; for, now that he had achiev a certain amount of 
distribution, he could, by choos hi own time, complet the task 
unobserved. At piccadilli circu I discharg my cab, and walk 
westward; beyond the junior constitut I came across the hous 
described, and wa satisfi that thi wa the next of the lair 
arrang by dracula. the hous look as though it had been long 
untenanted. the window were encrust with dust, and the shutter were 
up. all the framework wa black with time, and from the iron the paint 
had mostli scale away. It wa evid that up to late there had been 
a larg notice-board in front of the balcony; it had, however, been 
roughli torn away, the upright which had support it still remaining. 
behind the rail of the balconi I saw there were some loos boards, 
whose raw edg look white. I would have given a good deal to have 
been abl to see the notice-board intact, as it would, perhaps, have 
given some clue to the ownership of the house. I rememb my 
experi of the investig and purchas of carfax, and I could not 
but feel that if I could find the former owner there might be some mean 
discov of gain access to the house. 

there wa at present noth to be learn from the piccadilli side, and 
noth could be done; so I went round to the back to see if anyth 
could be gather from thi quarter. the mew were active, the 
piccadilli hous be mostli in occupation. I ask one or two of the 
groom and helper whom I saw around if they could tell me anyth 
about the empti house. one of them said that he heard it had late been 
taken, but he couldn't say from whom. He told me, however, that up to 
veri late there had been a notice-board of "for sale" up, and that 
perhap mitchell, sons, & candy, the hous agents, could tell me 
something, as he thought he rememb see the name of that firm on 
the board. I did not wish to seem too eager, or to let my inform know 
or guess too much, so, thank him in the usual manner, I stroll 
away. It wa now grow dusk, and the autumn night wa close in, so I 
did not lose ani time. have learn the address of mitchell, sons, & 
candi from a directori at the berkeley, I wa soon at their offic in 
sackvil street. 

the gentleman who saw me wa particularli suav in manner, but 
uncommun in equal proportion. have onc told me that the 
piccadilli house--which throughout our interview he call a 
"mansion"--wa sold, he consid my busi as concluded. when I 
ask who had purchas it, he open hi eye a thought wider, and 
paus a few second befor replying:-- 

"it is sold, sir." 

"pardon me," I said, with equal politeness, "but I have a special reason 
for wish to know who purchas it." 

again he paus longer, and rais hi eyebrow still more. "it is sold, 
sir," wa again hi lacon reply. 

"surely," I said, "you do not mind let me know so much." 

"but I do mind," he answered. "the affair of their client are 
absolut safe in the hand of mitchell, sons, & candy." thi wa 
manifestli a prig of the first water, and there wa no use argu with 
him. I thought I had best meet him on hi own ground, so I said:-- 

"your clients, sir, are happi in have so resolut a guardian of their 
confidence. I am myself a profession man." here I hand him my card. 
"in thi instanc I am not prompt by curiosity; I act on the part of 
lord godalming, who wish to know someth of the properti which was, 
he understood, late for sale." these word put a differ complexion 
on affairs. He said:-- 

"I would like to oblig you if I could, mr. harker, and especi would 
I like to oblig hi lordship. We onc carri out a small matter of 
rent some chamber for him when he wa the honour arthur 
holmwood. If you will let me have hi lordship' address I will consult 
the hous on the subject, and will, in ani case, commun with hi 
lordship by to-night' post. It will be a pleasur if we can so far 
deviat from our rule as to give the requir inform to hi 
lordship." 

I want to secur a friend, and not to make an enemy, so I thank him, 
gave the address at dr. seward' and came away. It wa now dark, and I 
wa tire and hungry. I got a cup of tea at the aërat bread compani 
and came down to purfleet by the next train. 

I found all the other at home. mina wa look tire and pale, but she 
made a gallant effort to be bright and cheerful, it wrung my heart to 
think that I had had to keep anyth from her and so caus her 
inquietude. thank god, thi will be the last night of her look on at 
our conferences, and feel the sting of our not show our 
confidence. It took all my courag to hold to the wise resolut of 
keep her out of our grim task. she seem somehow more reconciled; or 
els the veri subject seem to have becom repugn to her, for when 
ani accident allus is made she actual shudders. I am glad we 
made our resolut in time, as with such a feel as this, our grow 
knowledg would be tortur to her. 

I could not tell the other of the day' discoveri till we were alone; 
so after dinner--follow by a littl music to save appear even 
amongst ourselves--i took mina to her room and left her to go to bed. 
the dear girl wa more affection with me than ever, and clung to me 
as though she would detain me; but there wa much to be talk of and I 
came away. thank god, the ceas of tell thing ha made no 
differ between us. 

when I came down again I found the other all gather round the fire in 
the study. In the train I had written my diari so far, and simpli read 
it off to them as the best mean of let them get abreast of my own 
information; when I had finish van hels said:-- 

"thi ha been a great day' work, friend jonathan. doubtless we are on 
the track of the miss boxes. If we find them all in that house, then 
our work is near the end. but if there be some missing, we must search 
until we find them. then shall we make our final _coup_, and hunt the 
wretch to hi real death." We all sat silent awhil and all at onc mr. 
morri spoke:-- 

"say! how are we go to get into that house?" 

"we got into the other," answer lord godalm quickly. 

"but, art, thi is different. We broke hous at carfax, but we had night 
and a wall park to protect us. It will be a mighti differ thing to 
commit burglari in piccadilly, either by day or night. I confess I don't 
see how we are go to get in unless that agenc duck can find us a key 
of some sort; perhap we shall know when you get hi letter in the 
morning." lord godalming' brow contracted, and he stood up and walk 
about the room. by-and-bi he stop and said, turn from one to 
anoth of us:-- 

"quincey' head is level. thi burglari busi is get serious; we 
got off onc all right; but we have now a rare job on hand--unless we 
can find the count' key basket." 

As noth could well be done befor morning, and as it would be at 
least advis to wait till lord godalm should hear from mitchell's, 
we decid not to take ani activ step befor breakfast time. for a good 
while we sat and smoked, discuss the matter in it variou light and 
bearings; I took the opportun of bring thi diari right up to the 
moment. I am veri sleepi and shall go to bed.... 

just a line. mina sleep soundli and her breath is regular. her 
forehead is pucker up into littl wrinkles, as though she think even 
in her sleep. she is still too pale, but doe not look so haggard as she 
did thi morning. to-morrow will, I hope, mend all this; she will be 
herself at home in exeter. oh, but I am sleepy! 


_dr. seward' diary._ 

_1 october._--i am puzzl afresh about renfield. hi mood chang so 
rapidli that I find it difficult to keep touch of them, and as they 
alway mean someth more than hi own well-being, they form a more 
than interest study. thi morning, when I went to see him after hi 
repuls of van helsing, hi manner wa that of a man command destiny. 
He was, in fact, command destiny--subjectively. He did not realli 
care for ani of the thing of mere earth; he wa in the cloud and 
look down on all the weak and want of us poor mortals. I 
thought I would improv the occas and learn something, so I ask 
him:-- 

"what about the fli these times?" He smile on me in quit a superior 
sort of way--such a smile as would have becom the face of malvolio--a 
he answer me:-- 

"the fly, my dear sir, ha one strike feature; it wing are typic 
of the aërial power of the psychic faculties. the ancient did well 
when they typifi the soul as a butterfly!" 

I thought I would push hi analog to it utmost logically, so I said 
quickly:-- 

"oh, it is a soul you are after now, is it?" hi mad foil hi 
reason, and a puzzl look spread over hi face as, shake hi head 
with a decis which I had but seldom seen in him, he said:-- 

"oh, no, oh no! I want no souls. life is all I want." here he brighten 
up; "I am pretti indiffer about it at present. life is all right; I 
have all I want. you must get a new patient, doctor, if you wish to 
studi zoöphagy!" 

thi puzzl me a little, so I drew him on:-- 

"then you command life; you are a god, I suppose?" He smile with an 
ineff benign superiority. 

"oh no! far be it from me to arrog to myself the attribut of the 
deity. I am not even concern in hi especi spiritu doings. If I 
may state my intellectu posit I am, so far as concern thing 
pure terrestrial, somewhat in the posit which enoch occupi 
spiritually!" thi wa a poser to me. I could not at the moment recal 
enoch' appositeness; so I had to ask a simpl question, though I felt 
that by so do I wa lower myself in the eye of the lunatic:-- 

"and whi with enoch?" 

"becaus he walk with god." I could not see the analogy, but did not 
like to admit it; so I hark back to what he had denied:-- 

"so you don't care about life and you don't want souls. whi not?" I put 
my question quickli and somewhat sternly, on purpos to disconcert him. 
the effort succeeded; for an instant he unconsci relaps into hi 
old servil manner, bent low befor me, and actual fawn upon me as 
he replied:-- 

"I don't want ani souls, indeed, indeed! I don't. I couldn't use them if 
I had them; they would be no manner of use to me. I couldn't eat them 
or----" He suddenli stop and the old cun look spread over hi 
face, like a wind-sweep on the surfac of the water. "and doctor, as to 
life, what is it after all? when you'v got all you require, and you 
know that you will never want, that is all. I have friends--good 
friends--lik you, dr. seward"; thi wa said with a leer of 
inexpress cunning. "I know that I shall never lack the mean of 
life!" 

I think that through the cloudi of hi insan he saw some 
antagon in me, for he at onc fell back on the last refug of such as 
he--a dog silence. after a short time I saw that for the present it 
wa useless to speak to him. He wa sulky, and so I came away. 

later in the day he sent for me. ordinarili I would not have come 
without special reason, but just at present I am so interest in him 
that I would gladli make an effort. besides, I am glad to have anyth 
to help to pass the time. harker is out, follow up clues; and so are 
lord godalm and quincey. van hels sit in my studi pore over the 
record prepar by the harkers; he seem to think that by accur 
knowledg of all detail he will light upon some clue. He doe not wish 
to be disturb in the work, without cause. I would have taken him with 
me to see the patient, onli I thought that after hi last repuls he 
might not care to go again. there wa also anoth reason: renfield 
might not speak so freeli befor a third person as when he and I were 
alone. 

I found him sit out in the middl of the floor on hi stool, a pose 
which is gener indic of some mental energi on hi part. when I 
came in, he said at once, as though the question had been wait on hi 
lips:-- 

"what about souls?" It wa evid then that my surmis had been 
correct. unconsci cerebr wa do it work, even with the 
lunatic. I determin to have the matter out. "what about them 
yourself?" I asked. He did not repli for a moment but look all round 
him, and up and down, as though he expect to find some inspir for 
an answer. 

"I don't want ani souls!" he said in a feeble, apologet way. the 
matter seem prey on hi mind, and so I determin to use it--to "be 
cruel onli to be kind." So I said:-- 

"you like life, and you want life?" 

"oh yes! but that is all right; you needn't worri about that!" 

"but," I asked, "how are we to get the life without get the soul 
also?" thi seem to puzzl him, so I follow it up:-- 

"A nice time you'll have some time when you'r fli out there, with 
the soul of thousand of fli and spider and bird and cat buzz 
and twitter and miau all round you. you'v got their lives, you 
know, and you must put up with their souls!" someth seem to affect 
hi imagination, for he put hi finger to hi ear and shut hi eyes, 
screw them up tightli just as a small boy doe when hi face is be 
soaped. there wa someth pathet in it that touch me; it also gave 
me a lesson, for it seem that befor me wa a child--onli a child, 
though the featur were worn, and the stubbl on the jaw wa white. It 
wa evid that he wa undergo some process of mental disturbance, 
and, know how hi past mood had interpret thing seemingli foreign 
to himself, I thought I would enter into hi mind as well as I could and 
go with him. the first step wa to restor confidence, so I ask him, 
speak pretti loud so that he would hear me through hi close ears:-- 

"would you like some sugar to get your fli round again?" He seem to 
wake up all at once, and shook hi head. with a laugh he replied:-- 

"not much! fli are poor things, after all!" after a paus he added, 
"but I don't want their soul buzz round me, all the same." 

"or spiders?" I went on. 

"blow spiders! what' the use of spiders? there isn't anyth in them 
to eat or"--h stop suddenly, as though remind of a forbidden 
topic. 

"so, so!" I thought to myself, "thi is the second time he ha suddenli 
stop at the word 'drink'; what doe it mean?" renfield seem himself 
awar of have made a lapse, for he hurri on, as though to distract 
my attent from it:-- 

"I don't take ani stock at all in such matters. 'rat and mice and such 
small deer,' as shakespear ha it, 'chicken-fe of the larder' they 
might be called. i'm past all that sort of nonsense. you might as well 
ask a man to eat molecul with a pair of chop-sticks, as to tri to 
interest me about the lesser carnivora, when I know of what is befor 
me." 

"I see," I said. "you want big thing that you can make your teeth meet 
in? how would you like to breakfast on elephant?" 

"what ridicul nonsens you are talking!" He wa get too wide 
awake, so I thought I would press him hard. "I wonder," I said 
reflectively, "what an elephant' soul is like!" 

the effect I desir wa obtained, for he at onc fell from hi 
high-hors and becam a child again. 

"I don't want an elephant' soul, or ani soul at all!" he said. for a 
few moment he sat despondently. suddenli he jump to hi feet, with 
hi eye blaze and all the sign of intens cerebr excitement. "to 
hell with you and your souls!" he shouted. "whi do you plagu me about 
souls? haven't I got enough to worry, and pain, and distract me already, 
without think of souls!" He look so hostil that I thought he wa 
in for anoth homicid fit, so I blew my whistle. the instant, 
however, that I did so he becam calm, and said apologetically:-- 

"forgiv me, doctor; I forgot myself. you do not need ani help. I am so 
worri in my mind that I am apt to be irritable. If you onli knew the 
problem I have to face, and that I am work out, you would pity, and 
tolerate, and pardon me. pray do not put me in a strait-waistcoat. I 
want to think and I cannot think freeli when my bodi is confined. I am 
sure you will understand!" He had evid self-control; so when the 
attend came I told them not to mind, and they withdrew. renfield 
watch them go; when the door wa close he said, with consider 
digniti and sweetness:-- 

"dr. seward, you have been veri consider toward me. believ me that 
I am very, veri grate to you!" I thought it well to leav him in thi 
mood, and so I came away. there is certainli someth to ponder over in 
thi man' state. sever point seem to make what the american 
interview call "a story," if one could onli get them in proper order. 
here they are:-- 

will not mention "drinking." 

fear the thought of be burden with the "soul" of anything. 

ha no dread of want "life" in the future. 

despis the meaner form of life altogether, though he dread be 
haunt by their souls. 

logic all these thing point one way! he ha assur of some kind 
that he will acquir some higher life. He dread the consequence--th 
burden of a soul. then it is a human life he look to! 

and the assurance--? 

merci god! the count ha been to him, and there is some new scheme of 
terror afoot! 

* * * * * 

_later._--i went after my round to van hels and told him my 
suspicion. He grew veri grave; and, after think the matter over for a 
while ask me to take him to renfield. I did so. As we came to the door 
we heard the lunat within sing gaily, as he use to do in the time 
which now seem so long ago. when we enter we saw with amaz that 
he had spread out hi sugar as of old; the flies, letharg with the 
autumn, were begin to buzz into the room. We tri to make him talk 
of the subject of our previou conversation, but he would not attend. He 
went on with hi singing, just as though we had not been present. He had 
got a scrap of paper and wa fold it into a note-book. We had to come 
away as ignor as we went in. 

hi is a curiou case indeed; we must watch him to-night. 


_letter, mitchell, son and candi to lord godalming._ 

_"1 october._ 

"mi lord, 

"we are at all time onli too happi to meet your wishes. We beg, with 
regard to the desir of your lordship, express by mr. harker on your 
behalf, to suppli the follow inform concern the sale and 
purchas of no. 347, piccadilly. the origin vendor are the executor 
of the late mr. archibald winter-suffield. the purchas is a foreign 
nobleman, count de ville, who effect the purchas himself pay the 
purchas money in note 'over the counter,' if your lordship will pardon 
us use so vulgar an expression. beyond thi we know noth whatev 
of him. 

"we are, my lord, 

"your lordship' humbl servants, 

"mitchell, son & candy." 


_dr. seward' diary._ 

_2 october._--i place a man in the corridor last night, and told him to 
make an accur note of ani sound he might hear from renfield' room, 
and gave him instruct that if there should be anyth strang he 
wa to call me. after dinner, when we had all gather round the fire 
in the study--mrs. harker have gone to bed--w discuss the attempt 
and discoveri of the day. harker wa the onli one who had ani result, 
and we are in great hope that hi clue may be an import one. 

befor go to bed I went round to the patient' room and look in 
through the observ trap. He wa sleep soundly, and hi heart 
rose and fell with regular respiration. 

thi morn the man on duti report to me that a littl after midnight 
he wa restless and kept say hi prayer somewhat loudly. I ask him 
if that wa all; he repli that it wa all he heard. there wa 
someth about hi manner so suspici that I ask him point blank if 
he had been asleep. He deni sleep, but admit to have "dozed" for 
a while. It is too bad that men cannot be trust unless they are 
watched. 

to-day harker is out follow up hi clue, and art and quincey are 
look after horses. godalm think that it will be well to have 
hors alway in readiness, for when we get the inform which we 
seek there will be no time to lose. We must sterilis all the import 
earth between sunris and sunset; we shall thu catch the count at hi 
weakest, and without a refug to fli to. van hels is off to the 
british museum look up some author on ancient medicine. the old 
physician took account of thing which their follow do not accept, 
and the professor is search for witch and demon cure which may be 
use to us later. 

I sometim think we must be all mad and that we shall wake to saniti in 
strait-waistcoats. 

* * * * * 

_later._--w have met again. We seem at last to be on the track, and our 
work of to-morrow may be the begin of the end. I wonder if 
renfield' quiet ha anyth to do with this. hi mood have so 
follow the do of the count, that the come destruct of the 
monster may be carri to him in some subtl way. If we could onli get 
some hint as to what pass in hi mind, between the time of my argument 
with him to-day and hi resumpt of fly-catching, it might afford us a 
valuabl clue. He is now seemingli quiet for a spell.... Is he?---- that 
wild yell seem to come from hi room.... 

* * * * * 

the attend came burst into my room and told me that renfield had 
somehow met with some accident. He had heard him yell; and when he went 
to him found him lie on hi face on the floor, all cover with blood. 
I must go at once.... 




chapter xxi 

dr. seward' diari 


_3 october._--let me put down with exact all that happened, as well 
as I can rememb it, sinc last I made an entry. not a detail that I 
can recal must be forgotten; in all calm I must proceed. 

when I came to renfield' room I found him lie on the floor on hi 
left side in a glitter pool of blood. when I went to move him, it 
becam at onc appar that he had receiv some terribl injuries; 
there seem none of that uniti of purpos between the part of the bodi 
which mark even letharg sanity. As the face wa expos I could see 
that it wa horribl bruised, as though it had been beaten against the 
floor--inde it wa from the face wound that the pool of blood 
originated. the attend who wa kneel besid the bodi said to me as 
we turn him over:-- 

"I think, sir, hi back is broken. see, both hi right arm and leg and 
the whole side of hi face are paralysed." how such a thing could have 
happen puzzl the attend beyond measure. He seem quit 
bewildered, and hi brow were gather in as he said:-- 

"I can't understand the two things. He could mark hi face like that by 
beat hi own head on the floor. I saw a young woman do it onc at the 
eversfield asylum befor anyon could lay hand on her. and I suppos he 
might have broke hi neck by fall out of bed, if he got in an awkward 
kink. but for the life of me I can't imagin how the two thing 
occurred. If hi back wa broke, he couldn't beat hi head; and if hi 
face wa like that befor the fall out of bed, there would be mark of 
it." I said to him:-- 

"go to dr. van helsing, and ask him to kindli come here at once. I want 
him without an instant' delay." the man ran off, and within a few 
minut the professor, in hi dress gown and slippers, appeared. when 
he saw renfield on the ground, he look keenli at him a moment, and 
then turn to me. I think he recognis my thought in my eyes, for he 
said veri quietly, manifestli for the ear of the attendant:-- 

"ah, a sad accident! He will need veri care watching, and much 
attention. I shall stay with you myself; but I shall first dress myself. 
If you will remain I shall in a few minut join you." 

the patient wa now breath stertor and it wa easi to see that 
he had suffer some terribl injury. van hels return with 
extraordinari celerity, bear with him a surgic case. He had 
evid been think and had hi mind made up; for, almost befor he 
look at the patient, he whisper to me:-- 

"send the attend away. We must be alon with him when he becom 
conscious, after the operation." So I said:-- 

"I think that will do now, simmons. We have done all that we can at 
present. you had better go your round, and dr. van hels will operate. 
let me know instantli if there be anyth unusu anywhere." 

the man withdrew, and we went into a strict examin of the patient. 
the wound of the face wa superficial; the real injuri wa a depress 
fractur of the skull, extend right up through the motor area. the 
professor thought a moment and said:-- 

"we must reduc the pressur and get back to normal conditions, as far 
as can be; the rapid of the suffus show the terribl natur of 
hi injury. the whole motor area seem affected. the suffus of the 
brain will increas quickly, so we must trephin at onc or it may be 
too late." As he wa speak there wa a soft tap at the door. I 
went over and open it and found in the corridor without, arthur and 
quincey in pajama and slippers: the former spoke:-- 

"I heard your man call up dr. van hels and tell him of an accident. 
So I woke quincey or rather call for him as he wa not asleep. thing 
are move too quickli and too strang for sound sleep for ani of us 
these times. i'v been think that to-morrow night will not see thing 
as they have been. we'll have to look back--and forward a littl more 
than we have done. may we come in?" I nodded, and held the door open 
till they had entered; then I close it again. when quincey saw the 
attitud and state of the patient, and note the horribl pool on the 
floor, he said softly:-- 

"mi god! what ha happen to him? poor, poor devil!" I told him 
briefly, and ad that we expect he would recov conscious after 
the operation--for a short time, at all events. He went at onc and sat 
down on the edg of the bed, with godalm besid him; we all watch 
in patience. 

"we shall wait," said van helsing, "just long enough to fix the best 
spot for trephining, so that we may most quickli and perfectli remov 
the blood clot; for it is evid that the hæmorrhag is increasing." 

the minut dure which we wait pass with fear slowness. I had a 
horribl sink in my heart, and from van helsing' face I gather 
that he felt some fear or apprehens as to what wa to come. I dread 
the word that renfield might speak. I wa posit afraid to think; 
but the convict of what wa come wa on me, as I have read of men 
who have heard the death-watch. the poor man' breath came in 
uncertain gasps. each instant he seem as though he would open hi eye 
and speak; but then would follow a prolong stertor breath, and he 
would relaps into a more fix insensibility. inur as I wa to sick 
bed and death, thi suspens grew, and grew upon me. I could almost 
hear the beat of my own heart; and the blood surg through my 
templ sound like blow from a hammer. the silenc final becam 
agonising. I look at my companions, one after another, and saw from 
their flush face and damp brow that they were endur equal 
torture. there wa a nervou suspens over us all, as though overhead 
some dread bell would peal out power when we should least expect 
it. 

At last there came a time when it wa evid that the patient wa 
sink fast; he might die at ani moment. I look up at the professor 
and caught hi eye fix on mine. hi face wa sternli set as he 
spoke:-- 

"there is no time to lose. hi word may be worth mani lives; I have 
been think so, as I stood here. It may be there is a soul at stake! 
We shall oper just abov the ear." 

without anoth word he made the operation. for a few moment the 
breath continu to be stertorous. then there came a breath so 
prolong that it seem as though it would tear open hi chest. 
suddenli hi eye opened, and becam fix in a wild, helpless stare. 
thi wa continu for a few moments; then it soften into a glad 
surprise, and from the lip came a sigh of relief. He move 
convulsively, and as he did so, said:-- 

"i'll be quiet, doctor. tell them to take off the strait-waistcoat. I 
have had a terribl dream, and it ha left me so weak that I cannot 
move. what' wrong with my face? it feel all swollen, and it smart 
dreadfully." He tri to turn hi head; but even with the effort hi 
eye seem to grow glassi again so I gentli put it back. then van 
hels said in a quiet grave tone:-- 

"tell us your dream, mr. renfield." As he heard the voic hi face 
brightened, through it mutilation, and he said:-- 

"that is dr. van helsing. how good it is of you to be here. give me some 
water, my lip are dry; and I shall tri to tell you. I dreamed"--h 
stop and seem fainting, I call quietli to quincey--"th 
brandy--it is in my study--quick!" He flew and return with a glass, 
the decant of brandi and a caraf of water. We moisten the parch 
lips, and the patient quickli revived. It seemed, however, that hi poor 
injur brain had been work in the interval, for, when he wa quit 
conscious, he look at me piercingli with an agonis confus which I 
shall never forget, and said:-- 

"I must not deceiv myself; it wa no dream, but all a grim reality." 
then hi eye rove round the room; as they caught sight of the two 
figur sit patient on the edg of the bed he went on:-- 

"if I were not sure already, I would know from them." for an instant hi 
eye closed--not with pain or sleep but voluntarily, as though he were 
bring all hi faculti to bear; when he open them he said, 
hurriedly, and with more energi than he had yet displayed:-- 

"quick, doctor, quick. I am dying! I feel that I have but a few minutes; 
and then I must go back to death--or worse! wet my lip with brandi 
again. I have someth that I must say befor I die; or befor my poor 
crush brain die anyhow. thank you! It wa that night after you left 
me, when I implor you to let me go away. I couldn't speak then, for I 
felt my tongu wa tied; but I wa as sane then, except in that way, as 
I am now. I wa in an agoni of despair for a long time after you left 
me; it seem hours. then there came a sudden peac to me. My brain 
seem to becom cool again, and I realis where I was. I heard the 
dog bark behind our house, but not where He was!" As he spoke, van 
helsing' eye never blinked, but hi hand came out and met mine and 
grip it hard. He did not, however, betray himself; he nod slightli 
and said: "go on," in a low voice. renfield proceeded:-- 

"he came up to the window in the mist, as I had seen him often before; 
but he wa solid then--not a ghost, and hi eye were fierc like a 
man' when angry. He wa laugh with hi red mouth; the sharp white 
teeth glint in the moonlight when he turn to look back over the belt 
of trees, to where the dog were barking. I wouldn't ask him to come in 
at first, though I knew he want to--just as he had want all along. 
then he began promis me things--not in word but by do them." He 
wa interrupt by a word from the professor:-- 

"how?" 

"bi make them happen; just as he use to send in the fli when the 
sun wa shining. great big fat one with steel and sapphir on their 
wings; and big moths, in the night, with skull and cross-bon on their 
backs." van hels nod to him as he whisper to me unconsciously:-- 

"the _acherontia aitetropo of the sphinges_--what you call the 
'death's-head moth'?" the patient went on without stopping. 

"then he began to whisper: 'rats, rats, rats! hundreds, thousands, 
million of them, and everi one a life; and dog to eat them, and cat 
too. all lives! all red blood, with year of life in it; and not mere 
buzz flies!' I laugh at him, for I want to see what he could do. 
then the dog howled, away beyond the dark tree in hi house. He 
beckon me to the window. I got up and look out, and He rais hi 
hands, and seem to call out without use ani words. A dark mass 
spread over the grass, come on like the shape of a flame of fire; and 
then He move the mist to the right and left, and I could see that there 
were thousand of rat with their eye blaze red--lik his, onli 
smaller. He held up hi hand, and they all stopped; and I thought he 
seem to be saying: 'all these live will I give you, ay, and mani more 
and greater, through countless ages, if you will fall down and worship 
me!' and then a red cloud, like the colour of blood, seem to close 
over my eyes; and befor I knew what I wa doing, I found myself open 
the sash and say to him: 'come in, lord and master!' the rat were 
all gone, but He slid into the room through the sash, though it wa onli 
open an inch wide--just as the moon herself ha often come in through 
the tiniest crack and ha stood befor me in all her size and 
splendour." 

hi voic wa weaker, so I moisten hi lip with the brandi again, and 
he continued; but it seem as though hi memori had gone on work in 
the interv for hi stori wa further advanced. I wa about to call him 
back to the point, but van hels whisper to me: "let him go on. Do 
not interrupt him; he cannot go back, and mayb could not proceed at all 
if onc he lost the thread of hi thought." He proceeded:-- 

"all day I wait to hear from him, but he did not send me anything, not 
even a blow-fly, and when the moon got up I wa pretti angri with him. 
when he slid in through the window, though it wa shut, and did not even 
knock, I got mad with him. He sneer at me, and hi white face look 
out of the mist with hi red eye gleaming, and he went on as though he 
own the whole place, and I wa no one. He didn't even smell the same 
as he went by me. I couldn't hold him. I thought that, somehow, mrs. 
harker had come into the room." 

the two men sit on the bed stood up and came over, stand behind 
him so that he could not see them, but where they could hear better. 
they were both silent, but the professor start and quivered; hi face, 
however, grew grimmer and sterner still. renfield went on without 
noticing:-- 

"when mrs. harker came in to see me thi afternoon she wasn't the same; 
it wa like tea after the teapot had been watered." here we all moved, 
but no one said a word; he went on:-- 

"I didn't know that she wa here till she spoke; and she didn't look the 
same. I don't care for the pale people; I like them with lot of blood 
in them, and her had all seem to have run out. I didn't think of it 
at the time; but when she went away I began to think, and it made me mad 
to know that He had been take the life out of her." I could feel that 
the rest quivered, as I did, but we remain otherwis still. "so when 
He came to-night I wa readi for him. I saw the mist steal in, and I 
grab it tight. I had heard that madmen have unnatur strength; and 
as I knew I wa a madman--at time anyhow--i resolv to use my power. 
ay, and He felt it too, for He had to come out of the mist to struggl 
with me. I held tight; and I thought I wa go to win, for I didn't 
mean him to take ani more of her life, till I saw hi eyes. they burn 
into me, and my strength becam like water. He slip through it, and 
when I tri to cling to him, He rais me up and flung me down. there 
wa a red cloud befor me, and a nois like thunder, and the mist seem 
to steal away under the door." hi voic wa becom fainter and hi 
breath more stertorous. van hels stood up instinctively. 

"we know the worst now," he said. "he is here, and we know hi purpose. 
It may not be too late. let us be armed--th same as we were the other 
night, but lose no time; there is not an instant to spare." there wa no 
need to put our fear, nay our conviction, into words--w share them in 
common. We all hurri and took from our room the same thing that we 
had when we enter the count' house. the professor had hi ready, and 
as we met in the corridor he point to them significantli as he said:-- 

"they never leav me; and they shall not till thi unhappi busi is 
over. Be wise also, my friends. It is no common enemi that we deal with. 
alas! alas! that that dear madam mina should suffer!" He stopped; hi 
voic wa breaking, and I do not know if rage or terror predomin in 
my own heart. 

outsid the harkers' door we paused. art and quincey held back, and the 
latter said:-- 

"should we disturb her?" 

"we must," said van hels grimly. "if the door be locked, I shall 
break it in." 

"may it not frighten her terribly? It is unusu to break into a lady' 
room!" 

van hels said solemnly, "you are alway right; but thi is life and 
death. all chamber are alik to the doctor; and even were they not they 
are all as one to me to-night. friend john, when I turn the handle, if 
the door doe not open, do you put your shoulder down and shove; and you 
too, my friends. now!" 

He turn the handl as he spoke, but the door did not yield. We threw 
ourselv against it; with a crash it burst open, and we almost fell 
headlong into the room. the professor did actual fall, and I saw 
across him as he gather himself up from hand and knees. what I saw 
appal me. I felt my hair rise like bristl on the back of my neck, 
and my heart seem to stand still. 

the moonlight wa so bright that through the thick yellow blind the room 
wa light enough to see. On the bed besid the window lay jonathan 
harker, hi face flush and breath heavili as though in a stupor. 
kneel on the near edg of the bed face outward wa the white-clad 
figur of hi wife. By her side stood a tall, thin man, clad in black. 
hi face wa turn from us, but the instant we saw we all recognis 
the count--in everi way, even to the scar on hi forehead. with hi left 
hand he held both mrs. harker' hands, keep them away with her arm 
at full tension; hi right hand grip her by the back of the neck, 
forc her face down on hi bosom. her white nightdress wa smear 
with blood, and a thin stream trickl down the man' bare breast which 
wa shown by hi torn-open dress. the attitud of the two had a terribl 
resembl to a child forc a kitten' nose into a saucer of milk to 
compel it to drink. As we burst into the room, the count turn hi 
face, and the hellish look that I had heard describ seem to leap 
into it. hi eye flame red with devilish passion; the great nostril 
of the white aquilin nose open wide and quiver at the edge; and the 
white sharp teeth, behind the full lip of the blood-drip mouth, 
champ togeth like those of a wild beast. with a wrench, which threw 
hi victim back upon the bed as though hurl from a height, he turn 
and sprang at us. but by thi time the professor had gain hi feet, 
and wa hold toward him the envelop which contain the sacr 
wafer. the count suddenli stopped, just as poor luci had done outsid 
the tomb, and cower back. further and further back he cowered, as we, 
lift our crucifixes, advanced. the moonlight suddenli failed, as a 
great black cloud sail across the sky; and when the gaslight sprang up 
under quincey' match, we saw noth but a faint vapour. this, as we 
looked, trail under the door, which with the recoil from it burst 
open, had swung back to it old position. van helsing, art, and I move 
forward to mrs. harker, who by thi time had drawn her breath and with 
it had given a scream so wild, so ear-piercing, so despair that it 
seem to me now that it will ring in my ear till my die day. for a 
few second she lay in her helpless attitud and disarray. her face wa 
ghastly, with a pallor which wa accentu by the blood which smear 
her lip and cheek and chin; from her throat trickl a thin stream of 
blood; her eye were mad with terror. then she put befor her face her 
poor crush hands, which bore on their white the red mark of the 
count' terribl grip, and from behind them came a low desol wail 
which made the terribl scream seem onli the quick express of an 
endless grief. van hels step forward and drew the coverlet gentli 
over her body, whilst art, after look at her face for an instant 
despairingly, ran out of the room. van hels whisper to me:-- 

"jonathan is in a stupor such as we know the vampir can produce. We can 
do noth with poor madam mina for a few moment till she recov 
herself; I must wake him!" He dip the end of a towel in cold water 
and with it began to flick him on the face, hi wife all the while 
hold her face between her hand and sob in a way that wa 
heart-break to hear. I rais the blind, and look out of the 
window. there wa much moonshine; and as I look I could see quincey 
morri run across the lawn and hide himself in the shadow of a great 
yew-tree. It puzzl me to think whi he wa do this; but at the 
instant I heard harker' quick exclam as he woke to partial 
consciousness, and turn to the bed. On hi face, as there might well 
be, wa a look of wild amazement. He seem daze for a few seconds, and 
then full conscious seem to burst upon him all at once, and he 
start up. hi wife wa arous by the quick movement, and turn to 
him with her arm stretch out, as though to embrac him; instantly, 
however, she drew them in again, and put her elbow together, held 
her hand befor her face, and shudder till the bed beneath her shook. 

"in god' name what doe thi mean?" harker cri out. "dr. seward, dr. 
van helsing, what is it? what ha happened? what is wrong? mina, dear, 
what is it? what doe that blood mean? My god, my god! ha it come to 
this!" and, rais himself to hi knees, he beat hi hand wildli 
together. "good god help us! help her! oh, help her!" with a quick 
movement he jump from bed, and began to pull on hi clothes,--al the 
man in him awak at the need for instant exertion. "what ha happened? 
tell me all about it!" he cri without pausing. "dr. van helsing, you 
love mina, I know. oh, do someth to save her. It cannot have gone too 
far yet. guard her while I look for _him_!" hi wife, through her terror 
and horror and distress, saw some sure danger to him: instantli 
forget her own grief, she seiz hold of him and cri out:-- 

"no! no! jonathan, you must not leav me. I have suffer enough 
to-night, god knows, without the dread of hi harm you. you must stay 
with me. stay with these friend who will watch over you!" her 
express becam frantic as she spoke; and, he yield to her, she 
pull him down sit on the bed side, and clung to him fiercely. 

van hels and I tri to calm them both. the professor held up hi 
littl golden crucifix, and said with wonder calmness:-- 

"do not fear, my dear. We are here; and whilst thi is close to you no 
foul thing can approach. you are safe for to-night; and we must be calm 
and take counsel together." she shudder and wa silent, hold down 
her head on her husband' breast. when she rais it, hi white 
night-rob wa stain with blood where her lip had touched, and where 
the thin open wound in her neck had sent forth drops. the instant she 
saw it she drew back, with a low wail, and whispered, amidst choke 
sobs:-- 

"unclean, unclean! I must touch him or kiss him no more. oh, that it 
should be that it is I who am now hi worst enemy, and whom he may have 
most caus to fear." To thi he spoke out resolutely:-- 

"nonsense, mina. It is a shame to me to hear such a word. I would not 
hear it of you; and I shall not hear it from you. may god judg me by my 
deserts, and punish me with more bitter suffer than even thi hour, 
if by ani act or will of mine anyth ever come between us!" He put out 
hi arm and fold her to hi breast; and for a while she lay there 
sobbing. He look at us over her bow head, with eye that blink 
dampli abov hi quiver nostrils; hi mouth wa set as steel. after a 
while her sob becam less frequent and more faint, and then he said to 
me, speak with a studi calm which I felt tri hi nervou 
power to the utmost:-- 

"and now, dr. seward, tell me all about it. too well I know the broad 
fact; tell me all that ha been." I told him exactli what had happened, 
and he listen with seem impassiveness; but hi nostril twitch 
and hi eye blaze as I told how the ruthless hand of the count had 
held hi wife in that terribl and horrid position, with her mouth to 
the open wound in hi breast. It interest me, even at that moment, to 
see, that, whilst the face of white set passion work convuls over 
the bow head, the hand tenderli and lovingli stroke the ruffl 
hair. just as I had finished, quincey and godalm knock at the door. 
they enter in obedi to our summons. van hels look at me 
questioningly. I understood him to mean if we were to take advantag of 
their come to divert if possibl the thought of the unhappi husband 
and wife from each other and from themselves; so on nod acquiesc 
to him he ask them what they had seen or done. To which lord godalm 
answered:-- 

"I could not see him anywher in the passage, or in ani of our rooms. I 
look in the studi but, though he had been there, he had gone. He had, 
however----" He stop suddenly, look at the poor droop figur on 
the bed. van hels said gravely:-- 

"go on, friend arthur. We want here no more concealments. our hope now 
is in know all. tell freely!" So art went on:-- 

"he had been there, and though it could onli have been for a few 
seconds, he made rare hay of the place. all the manuscript had been 
burned, and the blue flame were flicker amongst the white ashes; the 
cylind of your phonograph too were thrown on the fire, and the wax 
had help the flames." here I interrupted. "thank god there is the 
other copi in the safe!" hi face lit for a moment, but fell again as he 
went on: "I ran downstair then, but could see no sign of him. I look 
into renfield' room; but there wa no trace there except----!" again he 
paused. "go on," said harker hoarsely; so he bow hi head and 
moisten hi lip with hi tongue, added: "except that the poor fellow 
is dead." mrs. harker rais her head, look from one to the other of 
us she said solemnly:-- 

"god' will be done!" I could not but feel that art wa keep back 
something; but, as I took it that it wa with a purpose, I said nothing. 
van hels turn to morri and asked:-- 

"and you, friend quincey, have you ani to tell?" 

"A little," he answered. "it may be much eventually, but at present I 
can't say. I thought it well to know if possibl where the count would 
go when he left the house. I did not see him; but I saw a bat rise from 
renfield' window, and flap westward. I expect to see him in some 
shape go back to carfax; but he evid sought some other lair. He 
will not be back to-night; for the sky is redden in the east, and the 
dawn is close. We must work to-morrow!" 

He said the latter word through hi shut teeth. for a space of perhap 
a coupl of minut there wa silence, and I could fanci that I could 
hear the sound of our heart beating; then van hels said, place hi 
hand veri tenderli on mrs. harker' head:-- 

"and now, madam mina--poor, dear, dear madam mina--tel us exactli what 
happened. god know that I do not want that you be pained; but it is 
need that we know all. for now more than ever ha all work to be done 
quick and sharp, and in deadli earnest. the day is close to us that must 
end all, if it may be so; and now is the chanc that we may live and 
learn." 

the poor, dear ladi shivered, and I could see the tension of her nerv 
as she clasp her husband closer to her and bent her head lower and 
lower still on hi breast. then she rais her head proudly, and held 
out one hand to van hels who took it in his, and, after stoop and 
kiss it reverently, held it fast. the other hand wa lock in that 
of her husband, who held hi other arm thrown round her protectingly. 
after a paus in which she wa evid order her thoughts, she 
began:-- 

"I took the sleep draught which you had so kindli given me, but for a 
long time it did not act. I seem to becom more wakeful, and myriad 
of horribl fanci began to crowd in upon my mind--al of them 
connect with death, and vampires; with blood, and pain, and trouble." 
her husband involuntarili groan as she turn to him and said 
lovingly: "do not fret, dear. you must be brave and strong, and help me 
through the horribl task. If you onli knew what an effort it is to me 
to tell of thi fear thing at all, you would understand how much I 
need your help. well, I saw I must tri to help the medicin to it work 
with my will, if it wa to do me ani good, so I resolut set myself to 
sleep. sure enough sleep must soon have come to me, for I rememb no 
more. jonathan come in had not wake me, for he lay by my side when 
next I remember. there wa in the room the same thin white mist that I 
had befor noticed. but I forget now if you know of this; you will find 
it in my diari which I shall show you later. I felt the same vagu 
terror which had come to me befor and the same sens of some presence. 
I turn to wake jonathan, but found that he slept so soundli that it 
seem as if it wa he who had taken the sleep draught, and not I. I 
tried, but I could not wake him. thi caus me a great fear, and I 
look around terrified. then indeed, my heart sank within me: besid 
the bed, as if he had step out of the mist--or rather as if the mist 
had turn into hi figure, for it had entir disappeared--stood a 
tall, thin man, all in black. I knew him at onc from the descript of 
the others. the waxen face; the high aquilin nose, on which the light 
fell in a thin white line; the part red lips, with the sharp white 
teeth show between; and the red eye that I had seem to see in the 
sunset on the window of st. mary' church at whitby. I knew, too, the 
red scar on hi forehead where jonathan had struck him. for an instant 
my heart stood still, and I would have scream out, onli that I wa 
paralysed. In the paus he spoke in a sort of keen, cut whisper, 
point as he spoke to jonathan:-- 

"'silence! If you make a sound I shall take him and dash hi brain out 
befor your veri eyes.' I wa appal and wa too bewild to do or 
say anything. with a mock smile, he place one hand upon my shoulder 
and, hold me tight, bare my throat with the other, say as he did 
so, 'first, a littl refresh to reward my exertions. you may as well 
be quiet; it is not the first time, or the second, that your vein have 
appeas my thirst!' I wa bewildered, and, strang enough, I did not 
want to hinder him. I suppos it is a part of the horribl curs that 
such is, when hi touch is on hi victim. and oh, my god, my god, piti 
me! He place hi reek lip upon my throat!" her husband groan 
again. she clasp hi hand harder, and look at him pityingly, as if 
he were the injur one, and went on:-- 

"I felt my strength fade away, and I wa in a half swoon. how long 
thi horribl thing last I know not; but it seem that a long time 
must have pass befor he took hi foul, awful, sneer mouth away. I 
saw it drip with the fresh blood!" the remembr seem for a while to 
overpow her, and she droop and would have sunk down but for her 
husband' sustain arm. with a great effort she recov herself and 
went on:-- 

"then he spoke to me mockingly, 'and so you, like the others, would play 
your brain against mine. you would help these men to hunt me and 
frustrat me in my designs! you know now, and they know in part already, 
and will know in full befor long, what it is to cross my path. they 
should have kept their energi for use closer to home. whilst they 
play wit against me--against me who command nations, and intrigu 
for them, and fought for them, hundr of year befor they were 
born--i wa countermin them. and you, their best belov one, are now 
to me, flesh of my flesh; blood of my blood; kin of my kin; my bounti 
wine-press for a while; and shall be later on my companion and my 
helper. you shall be aveng in turn; for not one of them but shall 
minist to your needs. but as yet you are to be punish for what you 
have done. you have aid in thwart me; now you shall come to my 
call. when my brain say "come!" to you, you shall cross land or sea to 
do my bidding; and to that end this!' with that he pull open hi 
shirt, and with hi long sharp nail open a vein in hi breast. when 
the blood began to spurt out, he took my hand in one of his, hold 
them tight, and with the other seiz my neck and press my mouth to 
the wound, so that I must either suffoc or swallow some of the---- Oh 
my god! my god! what have I done? what have I done to deserv such a 
fate, I who have tri to walk in meek and righteous all my 
days. god piti me! look down on a poor soul in wors than mortal peril; 
and in merci piti those to whom she is dear!" then she began to rub her 
lip as though to cleans them from pollution. 

As she wa tell her terribl story, the eastern sky began to quicken, 
and everyth becam more and more clear. harker wa still and quiet; 
but over hi face, as the aw narr went on, came a grey look 
which deepen and deepen in the morn light, till when the first 
red streak of the come dawn shot up, the flesh stood darkli out 
against the whiten hair. 

We have arrang that one of us is to stay within call of the unhappi 
pair till we can meet togeth and arrang about take action. 

Of thi I am sure: the sun rise to-day on no more miser hous in 
all the great round of it daili course. 




chapter xxii 

jonathan harker' journal 


_3 october._--a I must do someth or go mad, I write thi diary. It 
is now six o'clock, and we are to meet in the studi in half an hour and 
take someth to eat; for dr. van hels and dr. seward are agre 
that if we do not eat we cannot work our best. our best will be, god 
knows, requir to-day. I must keep write at everi chance, for I dare 
not stop to think. all, big and little, must go down; perhap at the end 
the littl thing may teach us most. the teaching, big or little, could 
not have land mina or me anywher wors than we are to-day. however, 
we must trust and hope. poor mina told me just now, with the tear 
run down her dear cheeks, that it is in troubl and trial that our 
faith is tested--that we must keep on trusting; and that god will aid us 
up to the end. the end! oh my god! what end?... To work! To work! 

when dr. van hels and dr. seward had come back from see poor 
renfield, we went grave into what wa to be done. first, dr. seward 
told us that when he and dr. van hels had gone down to the room below 
they had found renfield lie on the floor, all in a heap. hi face wa 
all bruis and crush in, and the bone of the neck were broken. 

dr. seward ask the attend who wa on duti in the passag if he had 
heard anything. He said that he had been sit down--h confess to 
half dozing--when he heard loud voic in the room, and then renfield 
had call out loudli sever times, "god! god! god!" after that there 
wa a sound of falling, and when he enter the room he found him lie 
on the floor, face down, just as the doctor had seen him. van hels 
ask if he had heard "voices" or "a voice," and he said he could not 
say; that at first it had seem to him as if there were two, but as 
there wa no one in the room it could have been onli one. He could swear 
to it, if required, that the word "god" wa spoken by the patient. dr. 
seward said to us, when we were alone, that he did not wish to go into 
the matter; the question of an inquest had to be considered, and it 
would never do to put forward the truth, as no one would believ it. As 
it was, he thought that on the attendant' evid he could give a 
certif of death by misadventur in fall from bed. In case the 
coron should demand it, there would be a formal inquest, necessarili 
to the same result. 

when the question began to be discuss as to what should be our next 
step, the veri first thing we decid wa that mina should be in full 
confidence; that noth of ani sort--no matter how painful--should be 
kept from her. she herself agre as to it wisdom, and it wa piti 
to see her so brave and yet so sorrowful, and in such a depth of 
despair. "there must be no concealment," she said, "alas! we have had 
too much already. and besid there is noth in all the world that can 
give me more pain than I have alreadi endured--than I suffer now! 
whatev may happen, it must be of new hope or of new courag to me!" 
van hels wa look at her fixedli as she spoke, and said, suddenli 
but quietly:-- 

"but dear madam mina, are you not afraid; not for yourself, but for 
other from yourself, after what ha happened?" her face grew set in it 
lines, but her eye shone with the devot of a martyr as she 
answered:-- 

"ah no! for my mind is made up!" 

"to what?" he ask gently, whilst we were all veri still; for each in 
our own way we had a sort of vagu idea of what she meant. her answer 
came with direct simplicity, as though she were simpli state a fact:-- 

"becaus if I find in myself--and I shall watch keenli for it--a sign of 
harm to ani that I love, I shall die!" 

"you would not kill yourself?" he asked, hoarsely. 

"I would; if there were no friend who love me, who would save me such a 
pain, and so desper an effort!" she look at him meaningli as she 
spoke. He wa sit down; but now he rose and came close to her and 
put hi hand on her head as he said solemnly: 

"mi child, there is such an one if it were for your good. for myself I 
could hold it in my account with god to find such an euthanasia for you, 
even at thi moment if it were best. nay, were it safe! but my 
child----" for a moment he seem choked, and a great sob rose in hi 
throat; he gulp it down and went on:-- 

"there are here some who would stand between you and death. you must not 
die. you must not die by ani hand; but least of all by your own. until 
the other, who ha foul your sweet life, is true dead you must not 
die; for if he is still with the quick un-dead, your death would make 
you even as he is. no, you must live! you must struggl and strive to 
live, though death would seem a boon unspeakable. you must fight death 
himself, though he come to you in pain or in joy; by the day, or the 
night; in safeti or in peril! On your live soul I charg you that you 
do not die--nay, nor think of death--til thi great evil be past." the 
poor dear grew white as death, and shock and shivered, as I have seen a 
quicksand shake and shiver at the incom of the tide. We were all 
silent; we could do nothing. At length she grew more calm and turn to 
him said, sweetly, but oh! so sorrowfully, as she held out her hand:-- 

"I promis you, my dear friend, that if god will let me live, I shall 
strive to do so; till, if it may be in hi good time, thi horror may 
have pass away from me." she wa so good and brave that we all felt 
that our heart were strengthen to work and endur for her, and we 
began to discuss what we were to do. I told her that she wa to have all 
the paper in the safe, and all the paper or diari and phonograph we 
might hereaft use; and wa to keep the record as she had done before. 
she wa pleas with the prospect of anyth to do--if "pleased" could 
be use in connect with so grim an interest. 

As usual van hels had thought ahead of everyon else, and wa 
prepar with an exact order of our work. 

"it is perhap well," he said, "that at our meet after our visit to 
carfax we decid not to do anyth with the earth-box that lay 
there. had we done so, the count must have guess our purpose, and 
would doubtless have taken measur in advanc to frustrat such an 
effort with regard to the others; but now he doe not know our 
intentions. nay, more, in all probability, he doe not know that such a 
power exist to us as can sterilis hi lairs, so that he cannot use 
them as of old. We are now so much further advanc in our knowledg as 
to their disposit that, when we have examin the hous in 
piccadilly, we may track the veri last of them. to-day, then, is ours; 
and in it rest our hope. the sun that rose on our sorrow thi morn 
guard us in it course. until it set to-night, that monster must 
retain whatev form he now has. He is confin within the limit 
of hi earthli envelope. He cannot melt into thin air nor disappear 
through crack or chink or crannies. If he go through a doorway, he 
must open the door like a mortal. and so we have thi day to hunt out 
all hi lair and sterilis them. So we shall, if we have not yet catch 
him and destroy him, drive him to bay in some place where the catch 
and the destroy shall be, in time, sure." here I start up for I 
could not contain myself at the thought that the minut and second so 
precious laden with mina' life and happi were fli from us, 
sinc whilst we talk action wa impossible. but van hels held up 
hi hand warningly. "nay, friend jonathan," he said, "in this, the 
quickest way home is the longest way, so your proverb say. We shall all 
act and act with desper quick, when the time ha come. but think, in 
all probabl the key of the situat is in that hous in piccadilly. 
the count may have mani hous which he ha bought. Of them he will have 
deed of purchase, key and other things. He will have paper that he 
write on; he will have hi book of cheques. there are mani belong 
that he must have somewhere; whi not in thi place so central, so quiet, 
where he come and go by the front or the back at all hour, when in the 
veri vast of the traffic there is none to notice. We shall go there and 
search that house; and when we learn what it holds, then we do what our 
friend arthur call, in hi phrase of hunt 'stop the earths' and so we 
run down our old fox--so? is it not?" 

"then let us come at once," I cried, "we are wast the precious, 
preciou time!" the professor did not move, but simpli said:-- 

"and how are we to get into that hous in piccadilly?" 

"ani way!" I cried. "we shall break in if need be." 

"and your police; where will they be, and what will they say?" 

I wa staggered; but I knew that if he wish to delay he had a good 
reason for it. So I said, as quietli as I could:-- 

"don't wait more than need be; you know, I am sure, what tortur I am 
in." 

"ah, my child, that I do; and inde there is no wish of me to add to 
your anguish. but just think, what can we do, until all the world be at 
movement. then will come our time. I have thought and thought, and it 
seem to me that the simplest way is the best of all. now we wish to get 
into the house, but we have no key; is it not so?" I nodded. 

"now suppos that you were, in truth, the owner of that house, and could 
not still get it; and think there wa to you no conscienc of the 
housebreaker, what would you do?" 

"I should get a respect locksmith, and set him to work to pick the 
lock for me." 

"and your police, they would interfere, would they not?" 

"oh, no! not if they knew the man wa properli employed." 

"then," he look at me as keenli as he spoke, "all that is in doubt is 
the conscienc of the employer, and the belief of your policemen as to 
whether or no that employ ha a good conscienc or a bad one. your 
polic must inde be zealou men and clever--oh, so clever!--in read 
the heart, that they troubl themselv in such matter. no, no, my 
friend jonathan, you go take the lock off a hundr empti hous in thi 
your london, or of ani citi in the world; and if you do it as such 
thing are rightli done, and at the time such thing are rightli done, 
no one will interfere. I have read of a gentleman who own a so fine 
hous in london, and when he went for month of summer to switzerland 
and lock up hi house, some burglar came and broke window at back and 
got in. then he went and made open the shutter in front and walk out 
and in through the door, befor the veri eye of the police. then he 
have an auction in that house, and advertis it, and put up big notice; 
and when the day come he sell off by a great auction all the good of 
that other man who own them. then he go to a builder, and he sell him 
that house, make an agreement that he pull it down and take all away 
within a certain time. and your polic and other author help him all 
they can. and when that owner come back from hi holiday in switzerland 
he find onli an empti hole where hi hous had been. thi wa all done 
_en règle_; and in our work we shall be _en règle_ too. We shall not go 
so earli that the policemen who have then littl to think of, shall deem 
it strange; but we shall go after ten o'clock, when there are mani 
about, and such thing would be done were we inde owner of the 
house." 

I could not but see how right he wa and the terribl despair of mina' 
face becam relax a thought; there wa hope in such good counsel. van 
hels went on:-- 

"when onc within that hous we may find more clues; at ani rate some of 
us can remain there whilst the rest find the other place where there be 
more earth-boxes--at bermondsey and mile end." 

lord godalm stood up. "I can be of some use here," he said. "I shall 
wire to my peopl to have hors and carriag where they will be most 
convenient." 

"look here, old fellow," said morris, "it is a capit idea to have all 
readi in case we want to go horsebacking; but don't you think that one 
of your snappi carriag with it herald adorn in a byway of 
walworth or mile end would attract too much attent for our purposes? 
It seem to me that we ought to take cab when we go south or east; and 
even leav them somewher near the neighbourhood we are go to." 

"friend quincey is right!" said the professor. "hi head is what you 
call in plane with the horizon. It is a difficult thing that we go to 
do, and we do not want no peopl to watch us if so it may." 

mina took a grow interest in everyth and I wa rejoic to see 
that the exig of affair wa help her to forget for a time the 
terribl experi of the night. she wa very, veri pale--almost 
ghastly, and so thin that her lip were drawn away, show her teeth in 
somewhat of prominence. I did not mention thi last, lest it should give 
her needless pain; but it made my blood run cold in my vein to think of 
what had occur with poor luci when the count had suck her blood. As 
yet there wa no sign of the teeth grow sharper; but the time as yet 
wa short, and there wa time for fear. 

when we came to the discuss of the sequenc of our effort and of the 
disposit of our forces, there were new sourc of doubt. It wa 
final agre that befor start for piccadilli we should destroy the 
count' lair close at hand. In case he should find it out too soon, we 
should thu be still ahead of him in our work of destruction; and hi 
presenc in hi pure materi shape, and at hi weakest, might give us 
some new clue. 

As to the dispos of forces, it wa suggest by the professor that, 
after our visit to carfax, we should all enter the hous in piccadilly; 
that the two doctor and I should remain there, whilst lord godalm 
and quincey found the lair at walworth and mile end and destroy them. 
It wa possible, if not likely, the professor urged, that the count 
might appear in piccadilli dure the day, and that if so we might be 
abl to cope with him then and there. At ani rate, we might be abl to 
follow him in force. To thi plan I strenuous objected, and so far as 
my go wa concerned, for I said that I intend to stay and protect 
mina, I thought that my mind wa made up on the subject; but mina would 
not listen to my objection. she said that there might be some law matter 
in which I could be useful; that amongst the count' paper might be 
some clue which I could understand out of my experi in transylvania; 
and that, as it was, all the strength we could muster wa requir to 
cope with the count' extraordinari power. I had to give in, for mina' 
resolut wa fixed; she said that it wa the last hope for _her_ that 
we should all work together. "a for me," she said, "I have no fear. 
thing have been as bad as they can be; and whatev may happen must 
have in it some element of hope or comfort. go, my husband! god can, if 
He wish it, guard me as well alon as with ani one present." So I 
start up cri out: "then in god' name let us come at once, for we 
are lose time. the count may come to piccadilli earlier than we 
think." 

"not so!" said van helsing, hold up hi hand. 

"but why?" I asked. 

"do you forget," he said, with actual a smile, "that last night he 
banquet heavily, and will sleep late?" 

did I forget! shall I ever--can I ever! can ani of us ever forget that 
terribl scene! mina struggl hard to keep her brave countenance; but 
the pain overmast her and she put her hand befor her face, and 
shudder whilst she moaned. van hels had not intend to recal her 
fright experience. He had simpli lost sight of her and her part in 
the affair in hi intellectu effort. when it struck him what he said, 
he wa horrifi at hi thoughtless and tri to comfort her. "oh, 
madam mina," he said, "dear, dear madam mina, alas! that I of all who so 
rever you should have said anyth so forgetful. these stupid old 
lip of mine and thi stupid old head do not deserv so; but you will 
forget it, will you not?" He bent low besid her as he spoke; she took 
hi hand, and look at him through her tears, said hoarsely:-- 

"no, I shall not forget, for it is well that I remember; and with it I 
have so much in memori of you that is sweet, that I take it all 
together. now, you must all be go soon. breakfast is ready, and we 
must all eat that we may be strong." 

breakfast wa a strang meal to us all. We tri to be cheer and 
encourag each other, and mina wa the brightest and most cheer of 
us. when it wa over, van hels stood up and said:-- 

"now, my dear friends, we go forth to our terribl enterprise. are we 
all armed, as we were on that night when first we visit our enemy' 
lair; arm against ghostli as well as carnal attack?" We all assur 
him. "then it is well. now, madam mina, you are in ani case _quite_ safe 
here until the sunset; and befor then we shall return--if---- We shall 
return! but befor we go let me see you arm against person attack. I 
have myself, sinc you came down, prepar your chamber by the place 
of thing of which we know, so that He may not enter. now let me guard 
yourself. On your forehead I touch thi piec of sacr wafer in the 
name of the father, the son, and----" 

there wa a fear scream which almost froze our heart to hear. As he 
had place the wafer on mina' forehead, it had sear it--had burn 
into the flesh as though it had been a piec of white-hot metal. My poor 
darling' brain had told her the signific of the fact as quickli as 
her nerv receiv the pain of it; and the two so overwhelm her that 
her overwrought natur had it voic in that dread scream. but the 
word to her thought came quickly; the echo of the scream had not ceas 
to ring on the air when there came the reaction, and she sank on her 
knee on the floor in an agoni of abasement. pull her beauti hair 
over her face, as the leper of old hi mantle, she wail out:-- 

"unclean! unclean! even the almighti shun my pollut flesh! I must 
bear thi mark of shame upon my forehead until the judgment day." they 
all paused. I had thrown myself besid her in an agoni of helpless 
grief, and put my arm around held her tight. for a few minut our 
sorrow heart beat together, whilst the friend around us turn away 
their eye that ran tear silently. then van hels turn and said 
gravely; so grave that I could not help feel that he wa in some 
way inspired, and wa state thing outsid himself:-- 

"it may be that you may have to bear that mark till god himself see fit, 
as He most sure shall, on the judgment day, to redress all wrong of 
the earth and of hi children that He ha place thereon. and oh, madam 
mina, my dear, my dear, may we who love you be there to see, when that 
red scar, the sign of god' knowledg of what ha been, shall pass away, 
and leav your forehead as pure as the heart we know. for so sure as 
we live, that scar shall pass away when god see right to lift the 
burden that is hard upon us. till then we bear our cross, as hi son did 
in obedi to hi will. It may be that we are chosen instrument of 
hi good pleasure, and that we ascend to hi bid as that other 
through stripe and shame; through tear and blood; through doubt and 
fears, and all that make the differ between god and man." 

there wa hope in hi words, and comfort; and they made for resignation. 
mina and I both felt so, and simultan we each took one of the old 
man' hand and bent over and kiss it. then without a word we all 
knelt down together, and, all hold hands, swore to be true to each 
other. We men pledg ourselv to rais the veil of sorrow from the 
head of her whom, each in hi own way, we loved; and we pray for help 
and guidanc in the terribl task which lay befor us. 

It wa then time to start. So I said farewel to mina, a part which 
neither of us shall forget to our die day; and we set out. 

To one thing I have made up my mind: if we find out that mina must be a 
vampir in the end, then she shall not go into that unknown and terribl 
land alone. I suppos it is thu that in old time one vampir meant 
many; just as their hideou bodi could onli rest in sacr earth, so 
the holiest love wa the recruit sergeant for their ghastli ranks. 

We enter carfax without troubl and found all thing the same as on 
the first occasion. It wa hard to believ that amongst so prosaic 
surround of neglect and dust and decay there wa ani ground for such 
fear as alreadi we knew. had not our mind been made up, and had there 
not been terribl memori to spur us on, we could hardli have proceed 
with our task. We found no papers, or ani sign of use in the house; and 
in the old chapel the great box look just as we had seen them last. 
dr. van hels said to us solemnli as we stood befor them:-- 

"and now, my friends, we have a duti here to do. We must sterilis thi 
earth, so sacr of holi memories, that he ha brought from a far 
distant land for such fell use. He ha chosen thi earth becaus it ha 
been holy. thu we defeat him with hi own weapon, for we make it more 
holi still. It wa sanctifi to such use of man, now we sanctifi it to 
god." As he spoke he took from hi bag a screwdriv and a wrench, and 
veri soon the top of one of the case wa thrown open. the earth smell 
musti and close; but we did not somehow seem to mind, for our attent 
wa concentr on the professor. take from hi box a piec of the 
sacr wafer he laid it rever on the earth, and then shut down 
the lid began to screw it home, we aid him as he worked. 

one by one we treat in the same way each of the great boxes, and left 
them as we had found them to all appearance; but in each wa a portion 
of the host. 

when we close the door behind us, the professor said solemnly:-- 

"so much is alreadi done. If it may be that with all the other we can 
be so successful, then the sunset of thi even may shine on madam 
mina' forehead all white as ivori and with no stain!" 

As we pass across the lawn on our way to the station to catch our 
train we could see the front of the asylum. I look eagerly, and in the 
window of my own room saw mina. I wave my hand to her, and nod to 
tell that our work there wa success accomplished. she nod in 
repli to show that she understood. the last I saw, she wa wave her 
hand in farewell. It wa with a heavi heart that we sought the station 
and just caught the train, which wa steam in as we reach the 
platform. 

I have written thi in the train. 

* * * * * 

_piccadilly, 12:30 o'clock._--just befor we reach fenchurch street 
lord godalm said to me:-- 

"quincey and I will find a locksmith. you had better not come with us in 
case there should be ani difficulty; for under the circumst it 
wouldn't seem so bad for us to break into an empti house. but you are a 
solicitor and the incorpor law societi might tell you that you 
should have known better." I demur as to my not share ani danger 
even of odium, but he went on: "besides, it will attract less attent 
if there are not too mani of us. My titl will make it all right with 
the locksmith, and with ani policeman that may come along. you had 
better go with jack and the professor and stay in the green park, 
somewher in sight of the house; and when you see the door open and 
the smith ha gone away, do you all come across. We shall be on the 
lookout for you, and shall let you in." 

"the advic is good!" said van helsing, so we said no more. godalm 
and morri hurri off in a cab, we follow in another. At the corner 
of arlington street our conting got out and stroll into the green 
park. My heart beat as I saw the hous on which so much of our hope wa 
centred, loom up grim and silent in it desert condit amongst 
it more live and spruce-look neighbours. We sat down on a bench 
within good view, and began to smoke cigar so as to attract as littl 
attent as possible. the minut seem to pass with leaden feet as we 
wait for the come of the others. 

At length we saw a four-wheel drive up. out of it, in leisur 
fashion, got lord godalm and morris; and down from the box descend 
a thick-set work man with hi rush-woven basket of tools. morri paid 
the cabman, who touch hi hat and drove away. togeth the two 
ascend the steps, and lord godalm point out what he want done. 
the workman took off hi coat leisur and hung it on one of the spike 
of the rail, say someth to a policeman who just then saunter 
along. the policeman nod acquiescence, and the man kneel down 
place hi bag besid him. after search through it, he took out a 
select of tool which he produc to lay besid him in orderli 
fashion. then he stood up, look into the keyhole, blew into it, and 
turn to hi employers, made some remark. lord godalm smiled, and 
the man lift a good-siz bunch of keys; select one of them, he 
began to probe the lock, as if feel hi way with it. after fumbl 
about for a bit he tri a second, and then a third. all at onc the 
door open under a slight push from him, and he and the two other 
enter the hall. We sat still; my own cigar burnt furiously, but van 
helsing' went cold altogether. We wait patient as we saw the 
workman come out and bring in hi bag. then he held the door partli 
open, steadi it with hi knees, whilst he fit a key to the lock. 
thi he final hand to lord godalming, who took out hi purs and 
gave him something. the man touch hi hat, took hi bag, put on hi 
coat and departed; not a soul took the slightest notic of the whole 
transaction. 

when the man had fairli gone, we three cross the street and knock at 
the door. It wa immedi open by quincey morris, besid whom stood 
lord godalm light a cigar. 

"the place smell so vilely," said the latter as we came in. It did 
inde smell vilely--lik the old chapel at carfax--and with our 
previou experi it wa plain to us that the count had been use the 
place pretti freely. We move to explor the house, all keep togeth 
in case of attack; for we knew we had a strong and wili enemi to deal 
with, and as yet we did not know whether the count might not be in the 
house. In the dining-room, which lay at the back of the hall, we found 
eight box of earth. eight box onli out of the nine, which we sought! 
our work wa not over, and would never be until we should have found the 
miss box. first we open the shutter of the window which look out 
across a narrow stone-flag yard at the blank face of a stable, 
point to look like the front of a miniatur house. there were no 
window in it, so we were not afraid of be over-looked. We did not 
lose ani time in examin the chests. with the tool which we had 
brought with us we open them, one by one, and treat them as we had 
treat those other in the old chapel. It wa evid to us that the 
count wa not at present in the house, and we proceed to search for 
ani of hi effects. 

after a cursori glanc at the rest of the rooms, from basement to attic, 
we came to the conclus that the dining-room contain ani effect 
which might belong to the count; and so we proceed to minut examin 
them. they lay in a sort of orderli disord on the great dining-room 
table. there were titl deed of the piccadilli hous in a great bundle; 
deed of the purchas of the hous at mile end and bermondsey; 
note-paper, envelopes, and pen and ink. all were cover up in thin 
wrap paper to keep them from the dust. there were also a cloth 
brush, a brush and comb, and a jug and basin--th latter contain 
dirti water which wa redden as if with blood. last of all wa a 
littl heap of key of all sort and sizes, probabl those belong to 
the other houses. when we had examin thi last find, lord godalm 
and quincey morri take accur note of the variou address of the 
hous in the east and the south, took with them the key in a great 
bunch, and set out to destroy the box in these places. the rest of us 
are, with what patienc we can, wait their return--or the come of 
the count. 




chapter xxiii 

dr. seward' diari 


_3 october._--th time seem terribl long whilst we were wait for 
the come of godalm and quincey morris. the professor tri to keep 
our mind activ by use them all the time. I could see hi benefic 
purpose, by the side glanc which he threw from time to time at harker. 
the poor fellow is overwhelm in a miseri that is appal to see. 
last night he wa a frank, happy-look man, with strong, youth 
face, full of energy, and with dark brown hair. to-day he is a drawn, 
haggard old man, whose white hair match well with the hollow burn 
eye and grief-written line of hi face. hi energi is still intact; in 
fact, he is like a live flame. thi may yet be hi salvation, for, if 
all go well, it will tide him over the despair period; he will then, 
in a kind of way, wake again to the realiti of life. poor fellow, I 
thought my own troubl wa bad enough, but his----! the professor know 
thi well enough, and is do hi best to keep hi mind active. what he 
ha been say was, under the circumstances, of absorb interest. So 
well as I can remember, here it is:-- 

"I have studied, over and over again sinc they came into my hands, all 
the paper relat to thi monster; and the more I have studied, the 
greater seem the necess to utterli stamp him out. all through there 
are sign of hi advance; not onli of hi power, but of hi knowledg of 
it. As I learn from the research of my friend arminu of buda-pesth, 
he wa in life a most wonder man. soldier, statesman, and 
alchemist--which latter wa the highest develop of the 
science-knowledg of hi time. He had a mighti brain, a learn beyond 
compare, and a heart that knew no fear and no remorse. He dare even to 
attend the scholomance, and there wa no branch of knowledg of hi time 
that he did not essay. well, in him the brain power surviv the 
physic death; though it would seem that memori wa not all complete. 
In some faculti of mind he ha been, and is, onli a child; but he is 
growing, and some thing that were childish at the first are now of 
man' stature. He is experimenting, and do it well; and if it had not 
been that we have cross hi path he would be yet--h may be yet if we 
fail--th father or further of a new order of beings, whose road must 
lead through death, not life." 

harker groan and said, "and thi is all array against my darling! 
but how is he experimenting? the knowledg may help us to defeat him!" 

"he ha all along, sinc hi coming, been tri hi power, slowli but 
surely; that big child-brain of hi is working. well for us, it is, as 
yet, a child-brain; for had he dared, at the first, to attempt certain 
thing he would long ago have been beyond our power. however, he mean 
to succeed, and a man who ha centuri befor him can afford to wait 
and to go slow. _festina lente_ may well be hi motto." 

"I fail to understand," said harker wearily. "oh, do be more plain to 
me! perhap grief and troubl are dull my brain." 

the professor laid hi hand tenderli on hi shoulder as he spoke:-- 

"ah, my child, I will be plain. Do you not see how, of late, thi 
monster ha been creep into knowledg experimentally. how he ha been 
make use of the zoöphag patient to effect hi entri into friend 
john' home; for your vampire, though in all afterward he can come when 
and how he will, must at the first make entri onli when ask thereto by 
an inmate. but these are not hi most import experiments. Do we not 
see how at the first all these so great box were move by others. He 
knew not then but that must be so. but all the time that so great 
child-brain of hi wa growing, and he began to consid whether he 
might not himself move the box. So he began to help; and then, when he 
found that thi be all-right, he tri to move them all alone. and so he 
progress, and he scatter these grave of him; and none but he know where 
they are hidden. He may have intend to buri them deep in the ground. So 
that he onli use them in the night, or at such time as he can chang hi 
form, they do him equal well; and none may know these are hi 
hiding-place! but, my child, do not despair; thi knowledg come to him 
just too late! alreadi all of hi lair but one be sterilis as for him; 
and befor the sunset thi shall be so. then he have no place where he 
can move and hide. I delay thi morn that so we might be sure. Is 
there not more at stake for us than for him? then whi we not be even 
more care than him? By my clock it is one hour and already, if all be 
well, friend arthur and quincey are on their way to us. to-day is our 
day, and we must go sure, if slow, and lose no chance. see! there are 
five of us when those absent one return." 

whilst he wa speak we were startl by a knock at the hall door, the 
doubl postman' knock of the telegraph boy. We all move out to the 
hall with one impulse, and van helsing, hold up hi hand to us to 
keep silence, step to the door and open it. the boy hand in a 
despatch. the professor close the door again, and, after look at the 
direction, open it and read aloud. 

"look out for D. He ha just now, 12:45, come from carfax hurriedli and 
hasten toward the south. He seem to be go the round and may want 
to see you: mina." 

there wa a pause, broken by jonathan harker' voice:-- 

"now, god be thanked, we shall soon meet!" van hels turn to him 
quickli and said:-- 

"god will act in hi own way and time. Do not fear, and do not rejoic 
as yet; for what we wish for at the moment may be our undoings." 

"I care for noth now," he answer hotly, "except to wipe out thi 
brute from the face of creation. I would sell my soul to do it!" 

"oh, hush, hush, my child!" said van helsing. "god doe not purchas 
soul in thi wise; and the devil, though he may purchase, doe not keep 
faith. but god is merci and just, and know your pain and your 
devot to that dear madam mina. think you, how her pain would be 
doubled, did she but hear your wild words. Do not fear ani of us, we are 
all devot to thi cause, and to-day shall see the end. the time is 
come for action; to-day thi vampir is limit to the power of man, 
and till sunset he may not change. It will take him time to arriv 
here--see, it is twenti minut past one--and there are yet some time 
befor he can hither come, be he never so quick. what we must hope for 
is that my lord arthur and quincey arriv first." 

about half an hour after we had receiv mrs. harker' telegram, there 
came a quiet, resolut knock at the hall door. It wa just an ordinari 
knock, such as is given hourli by thousand of gentlemen, but it made 
the professor' heart and mine beat loudly. We look at each other, and 
togeth move out into the hall; we each held readi to use our variou 
armaments--th spiritu in the left hand, the mortal in the right. van 
hels pull back the latch, and, hold the door half open, stood 
back, have both hand readi for action. the glad of our heart 
must have shown upon our face when on the step, close to the door, we 
saw lord godalm and quincey morris. they came quickli in and close 
the door behind them, the former saying, as they move along the 
hall:-- 

"it is all right. We found both places; six box in each and we 
destroy them all!" 

"destroyed?" ask the professor. 

"for him!" We were silent for a minute, and then quincey said:-- 

"there' noth to do but to wait here. if, however, he doesn't turn up 
by five o'clock, we must start off; for it won't do to leav mrs. harker 
alon after sunset." 

"he will be here befor long now," said van helsing, who had been 
consult hi pocket-book. "_nota bene_, in madam' telegram he went 
south from carfax, that mean he went to cross the river, and he could 
onli do so at slack of tide, which should be someth befor one 
o'clock. that he went south ha a mean for us. He is as yet onli 
suspicious; and he went from carfax first to the place where he would 
suspect interfer least. you must have been at bermondsey onli a 
short time befor him. that he is not here alreadi show that he went to 
mile end next. thi took him some time; for he would then have to be 
carri over the river in some way. believ me, my friends, we shall not 
have long to wait now. We should have readi some plan of attack, so that 
we may throw away no chance. hush, there is no time now. have all your 
arms! Be ready!" He held up a warn hand as he spoke, for we all could 
hear a key softli insert in the lock of the hall door. 

I could not but admire, even at such a moment, the way in which a 
domin spirit assert itself. In all our hunt parti and 
adventur in differ part of the world, quincey morri had alway 
been the one to arrang the plan of action, and arthur and I had been 
accustom to obey him implicitly. now, the old habit seem to be 
renew instinctively. with a swift glanc around the room, he at onc 
laid out our plan of attack, and, without speak a word, with a 
gesture, place us each in position. van helsing, harker, and I were 
just behind the door, so that when it wa open the professor could 
guard it whilst we two step between the incom and the door. 
godalm behind and quincey in front stood just out of sight readi to 
move in front of the window. We wait in a suspens that made the 
second pass with nightmar slowness. the slow, care step came along 
the hall; the count wa evid prepar for some surprise--at least 
he fear it. 

suddenli with a singl bound he leap into the room, win a way past 
us befor ani of us could rais a hand to stay him. there wa someth 
so panther-lik in the movement--someth so unhuman, that it seem 
to sober us all from the shock of hi coming. the first to act wa 
harker, who, with a quick movement, threw himself befor the door 
lead into the room in the front of the house. As the count saw us, a 
horribl sort of snarl pass over hi face, show the eye-teeth long 
and pointed; but the evil smile as quickli pass into a cold stare of 
lion-lik disdain. hi express again chang as, with a singl 
impulse, we all advanc upon him. It wa a piti that we had not some 
better organis plan of attack, for even at the moment I wonder what 
we were to do. I did not myself know whether our lethal weapon would 
avail us anything. harker evid meant to tri the matter, for he had 
readi hi great kukri knife and made a fierc and sudden cut at him. the 
blow wa a power one; onli the diabol quick of the count' 
leap back save him. A second less and the trenchant blade had shorn 
through hi heart. As it was, the point just cut the cloth of hi coat, 
make a wide gap whenc a bundl of bank-not and a stream of gold 
fell out. the express of the count' face wa so hellish, that for a 
moment I fear for harker, though I saw him throw the terribl knife 
aloft again for anoth stroke. instinct I move forward with a 
protect impulse, hold the crucifix and wafer in my left hand. I 
felt a mighti power fli along my arm; and it wa without surpris that I 
saw the monster cower back befor a similar movement made spontan 
by each one of us. It would be imposs to describ the express of 
hate and baffl malignity--of anger and hellish rage--which came over 
the count' face. hi waxen hue becam greenish-yellow by the contrast 
of hi burn eyes, and the red scar on the forehead show on the 
pallid skin like a palpit wound. the next instant, with a sinuou 
dive he swept under harker' arm, ere hi blow could fall, and, grasp 
a hand of the money from the floor, dash across the room, threw 
himself at the window. amid the crash and glitter of the fall glass, 
he tumbl into the flag area below. through the sound of the 
shiver glass I could hear the "ting" of the gold, as some of the 
sovereign fell on the flagging. 

We ran over and saw him spring unhurt from the ground. he, rush up 
the steps, cross the flag yard, and push open the stabl door. 
there he turn and spoke to us:-- 

"you think to baffl me, you--with your pale face all in a row, like 
sheep in a butcher's. you shall be sorri yet, each one of you! you think 
you have left me without a place to rest; but I have more. My reveng is 
just begun! I spread it over centuries, and time is on my side. your 
girl that you all love are mine already; and through them you and 
other shall yet be mine--mi creatures, to do my bid and to be my 
jackal when I want to feed. bah!" with a contemptu sneer, he pass 
quickli through the door, and we heard the rusti bolt creak as he 
fasten it behind him. A door beyond open and shut. the first of us 
to speak wa the professor, as, realis the difficulti of follow 
him through the stable, we move toward the hall. 

"we have learnt something--much! notwithstand hi brave words, he 
fear us; he fear time, he fear want! for if not, whi he hurri so? hi 
veri tone betray him, or my ear deceive. whi take that money? you 
follow quick. you are hunter of wild beast, and understand it so. for 
me, I make sure that noth here may be of use to him, if so that he 
return." As he spoke he put the money remain into hi pocket; took 
the title-de in the bundl as harker had left them, and swept the 
remain thing into the open fireplace, where he set fire to them with 
a match. 

godalm and morri had rush out into the yard, and harker had 
lower himself from the window to follow the count. He had, however, 
bolt the stabl door; and by the time they had forc it open there 
wa no sign of him. van hels and I tri to make inquiri at the back 
of the house; but the mew wa desert and no one had seen him depart. 

It wa now late in the afternoon, and sunset wa not far off. We had to 
recognis that our game wa up; with heavi heart we agre with the 
professor when he said:-- 

"let us go back to madam mina--poor, poor dear madam mina. all we can do 
just now is done; and we can there, at least, protect her. but we need 
not despair. there is but one more earth-box, and we must tri to find 
it; when that is done all may yet be well." I could see that he spoke as 
brave as he could to comfort harker. the poor fellow wa quit broken 
down; now and again he gave a low groan which he could not suppress--h 
wa think of hi wife. 

with sad heart we came back to my house, where we found mrs. harker 
wait us, with an appear of cheer which did honour to her 
braveri and unselfishness. when she saw our faces, her own becam as 
pale as death: for a second or two her eye were close as if she were 
in secret prayer; and then she said cheerfully:-- 

"I can never thank you all enough. oh, my poor darling!" As she spoke, 
she took her husband' grey head in her hand and kiss it--"lay your 
poor head here and rest it. all will yet be well, dear! god will protect 
us if He so will it in hi good intent." the poor fellow groaned. there 
wa no place for word in hi sublim misery. 

We had a sort of perfunctori supper together, and I think it cheer us 
all up somewhat. It was, perhaps, the mere anim heat of food to hungri 
people--for none of us had eaten anyth sinc breakfast--or the sens 
of companionship may have help us; but anyhow we were all less 
miserable, and saw the morrow as not altogeth without hope. true to 
our promise, we told mrs. harker everyth which had passed; and 
although she grew snowi white at time when danger had seem to 
threaten her husband, and red at other when hi devot to her wa 
manifested, she listen brave and with calmness. when we came to the 
part where harker had rush at the count so recklessly, she clung to 
her husband' arm, and held it tight as though her cling could 
protect him from ani harm that might come. she said nothing, however, 
till the narrat wa all done, and matter had been brought right up 
to the present time. then without let go her husband' hand she 
stood up amongst us and spoke. oh, that I could give ani idea of the 
scene; of that sweet, sweet, good, good woman in all the radiant beauti 
of her youth and animation, with the red scar on her forehead, of which 
she wa conscious, and which we saw with grind of our 
teeth--rememb whenc and how it came; her love kind against 
our grim hate; her tender faith against all our fear and doubting; and 
we, know that so far as symbol went, she with all her good and 
puriti and faith, wa outcast from god. 

"jonathan," she said, and the word sound like music on her lip it wa 
so full of love and tenderness, "jonathan dear, and you all my true, 
true friends, I want you to bear someth in mind through all thi 
dread time. I know that you must fight--that you must destroy even as 
you destroy the fals luci so that the true luci might live hereafter; 
but it is not a work of hate. that poor soul who ha wrought all thi 
miseri is the saddest case of all. just think what will be hi joy when 
he, too, is destroy in hi worser part that hi better part may have 
spiritu immortality. you must be piti to him, too, though it may 
not hold your hand from hi destruction." 

As she spoke I could see her husband' face darken and draw together, as 
though the passion in him were shrivel hi be to it core. 
instinct the clasp on hi wife' hand grew closer, till hi 
knuckl look white. she did not flinch from the pain which I knew she 
must have suffered, but look at him with eye that were more appeal 
than ever. As she stop speak he leap to hi feet, almost tear 
hi hand from her as he spoke:-- 

"may god give him into my hand just for long enough to destroy that 
earthli life of him which we are aim at. If beyond it I could send 
hi soul for ever and ever to burn hell I would do it!" 

"oh, hush! oh, hush! in the name of the good god. don't say such things, 
jonathan, my husband; or you will crush me with fear and horror. just 
think, my dear--i have been think all thi long, long day of it--that 
... perhap ... some day ... I, too, may need such pity; and that some 
other like you--and with equal caus for anger--may deni it to me! oh, 
my husband! my husband, inde I would have spare you such a thought 
had there been anoth way; but I pray that god may not have treasur 
your wild words, except as the heart-broken wail of a veri love and 
sore stricken man. oh, god, let these poor white hair go in evid 
of what he ha suffered, who all hi life ha done no wrong, and on whom 
so mani sorrow have come." 

We men were all in tear now. there wa no resist them, and we wept 
openly. she wept, too, to see that her sweeter counsel had prevailed. 
her husband flung himself on hi knee besid her, and put hi arm 
round her, hid hi face in the fold of her dress. van hels beckon 
to us and we stole out of the room, leav the two love heart alon 
with their god. 

befor they retir the professor fix up the room against ani come 
of the vampire, and assur mrs. harker that she might rest in peace. 
she tri to school herself to the belief, and, manifestli for her 
husband' sake, tri to seem content. It wa a brave struggle; and was, 
I think and believe, not without it reward. van hels had place at 
hand a bell which either of them wa to sound in case of ani emergency. 
when they had retired, quincey, godalming, and I arrang that we should 
sit up, divid the night between us, and watch over the safeti of the 
poor stricken lady. the first watch fall to quincey, so the rest of us 
shall be off to bed as soon as we can. godalm ha alreadi turn in, 
for hi is the second watch. now that my work is done I, too, shall go 
to bed. 


_jonathan harker' journal._ 

_3-4 october, close to midnight._--i thought yesterday would never end. 
there wa over me a yearn for sleep, in some sort of blind belief 
that to wake would be to find thing changed, and that ani chang must 
now be for the better. befor we parted, we discuss what our next step 
wa to be, but we could arriv at no result. all we knew wa that one 
earth-box remained, and that the count alon knew where it was. If he 
choos to lie hidden, he may baffl us for years; and in the 
meantime!--th thought is too horrible, I dare not think of it even now. 
thi I know: that if ever there wa a woman who wa all perfection, that 
one is my poor wrong darling. I love her a thousand time more for her 
sweet piti of last night, a piti that made my own hate of the monster 
seem despicable. sure god will not permit the world to be the poorer 
by the loss of such a creature. thi is hope to me. We are all drift 
reefward now, and faith is our onli anchor. thank god! mina is 
sleeping, and sleep without dreams. I fear what her dream might be 
like, with such terribl memori to ground them in. she ha not been so 
calm, within my seeing, sinc the sunset. then, for a while, there came 
over her face a repos which wa like spring after the blast of march. 
I thought at the time that it wa the soft of the red sunset on her 
face, but somehow now I think it ha a deeper meaning. I am not sleepi 
myself, though I am weary--weari to death. however, I must tri to sleep; 
for there is to-morrow to think of, and there is no rest for me 
until.... 

* * * * * 

_later._--i must have fallen asleep, for I wa awak by mina, who wa 
sit up in bed, with a startl look on her face. I could see easily, 
for we did not leav the room in darkness; she had place a warn hand 
over my mouth, and now she whisper in my ear:-- 

"hush! there is someon in the corridor!" I got up softly, and cross 
the room, gentli open the door. 

just outside, stretch on a mattress, lay mr. morris, wide awake. He 
rais a warn hand for silenc as he whisper to me:-- 

"hush! go back to bed; it is all right. one of us will be here all 
night. We don't mean to take ani chances!" 

hi look and gestur forbad discussion, so I came back and told mina. 
she sigh and posit a shadow of a smile stole over her poor, pale 
face as she put her arm round me and said softly:-- 

"oh, thank god for good brave men!" with a sigh she sank back again to 
sleep. I write thi now as I am not sleepy, though I must tri again. 

* * * * * 

_4 october, morning._--onc again dure the night I wa waken by 
mina. thi time we had all had a good sleep, for the grey of the come 
dawn wa make the window into sharp oblongs, and the ga flame wa 
like a speck rather than a disc of light. she said to me hurriedly:-- 

"go, call the professor. I want to see him at once." 

"why?" I asked. 

"I have an idea. I suppos it must have come in the night, and matur 
without my know it. He must hypnotis me befor the dawn, and then I 
shall be abl to speak. Go quick, dearest; the time is get close." I 
went to the door. dr. seward wa rest on the mattress, and, see 
me, he sprang to hi feet. 

"i anyth wrong?" he asked, in alarm. 

"no," I replied; "but mina want to see dr. van hels at once." 

"I will go," he said, and hurri into the professor' room. 

In two or three minut later van hels wa in the room in hi 
dressing-gown, and mr. morri and lord godalm were with dr. seward at 
the door ask questions. when the professor saw mina a smile--a 
posit smile oust the anxieti of hi face; he rub hi hand as he 
said:-- 

"oh, my dear madam mina, thi is inde a change. see! friend jonathan, 
we have got our dear madam mina, as of old, back to us to-day!" then 
turn to her, he said, cheerfully: "and what am I do for you? for at 
thi hour you do not want me for nothings." 

"I want you to hypnotis me!" she said. "do it befor the dawn, for I 
feel that then I can speak, and speak freely. Be quick, for the time is 
short!" without a word he motion her to sit up in bed. 

look fixedli at her, he commenc to make pass in front of her, 
from over the top of her head downward, with each hand in turn. mina 
gaze at him fixedli for a few minutes, dure which my own heart beat 
like a trip hammer, for I felt that some crisi wa at hand. gradual 
her eye closed, and she sat, stock still; onli by the gentl heav of 
her bosom could one know that she wa alive. the professor made a few 
more pass and then stopped, and I could see that hi forehead wa 
cover with great bead of perspiration. mina open her eyes; but she 
did not seem the same woman. there wa a far-away look in her eyes, and 
her voic had a sad dreami which wa new to me. rais hi hand to 
impos silence, the professor motion to me to bring the other in. 
they came on tip-toe, close the door behind them, and stood at the 
foot of the bed, look on. mina appear not to see them. the 
still wa broken by van helsing' voic speak in a low level tone 
which would not break the current of her thoughts:-- 

"where are you?" the answer came in a neutral way:-- 

"I do not know. sleep ha no place it can call it own." for sever 
minut there wa silence. mina sat rigid, and the professor stood 
stare at her fixedly; the rest of us hardli dare to breathe. the room 
wa grow lighter; without take hi eye from mina' face, dr. van 
hels motion me to pull up the blind. I did so, and the day seem 
just upon us. A red streak shot up, and a rosi light seem to diffus 
itself through the room. On the instant the professor spoke again:-- 

"where are you now?" the answer came dreamily, but with intention; it 
were as though she were interpret something. I have heard her use the 
same tone when read her shorthand notes. 

"I do not know. It is all strang to me!" 

"what do you see?" 

"I can see nothing; it is all dark." 

"what do you hear?" I could detect the strain in the professor' patient 
voice. 

"the lap of water. It is gurgl by, and littl wave leap. I can 
hear them on the outside." 

"then you are on a ship?" We all look at each other, tri to glean 
someth each from the other. We were afraid to think. the answer came 
quick:-- 

"oh, yes!" 

"what els do you hear?" 

"the sound of men stamp overhead as they run about. there is the 
creak of a chain, and the loud tinkl as the check of the capstan 
fall into the rachet." 

"what are you doing?" 

"I am still--oh, so still. It is like death!" the voic fade away into 
a deep breath as of one sleeping, and the open eye close again. 

By thi time the sun had risen, and we were all in the full light of 
day. dr. van hels place hi hand on mina' shoulders, and laid her 
head down softli on her pillow. she lay like a sleep child for a few 
moments, and then, with a long sigh, awok and stare in wonder to see 
us all around her. "have I been talk in my sleep?" wa all she said. 
she seemed, however, to know the situat without telling, though she 
wa eager to know what she had told. the professor repeat the 
conversation, and she said:-- 

"then there is not a moment to lose: it may not be yet too late!" mr. 
morri and lord godalm start for the door but the professor' calm 
voic call them back:-- 

"stay, my friends. that ship, wherev it was, wa weigh anchor 
whilst she spoke. there are mani ship weigh anchor at the moment in 
your so great port of london. which of them is it that you seek? god be 
thank that we have onc again a clue, though whither it may lead us we 
know not. We have been blind somewhat; blind after the manner of men, 
sinc when we can look back we see what we might have seen look 
forward if we had been abl to see what we might have seen! alas, but 
that sentenc is a puddle; is it not? We can know now what wa in the 
count' mind, when he seiz that money, though jonathan' so fierc 
knife put him in the danger that even he dread. He meant escape. hear 
me, escape! He saw that with but one earth-box left, and a pack of men 
follow like dog after a fox, thi london wa no place for him. He 
have take hi last earth-box on board a ship, and he leav the land. He 
think to escape, but no! we follow him. talli ho! as friend arthur would 
say when he put on hi red frock! our old fox is wily; oh! so wily, and 
we must follow with wile. I, too, am wili and I think hi mind in a 
littl while. In meantim we may rest and in peace, for there are water 
between us which he do not want to pass, and which he could not if he 
would--unless the ship were to touch the land, and then onli at full or 
slack tide. see, and the sun is just rose, and all day to sunset is to 
us. let us take bath, and dress, and have breakfast which we all need, 
and which we can eat comfort sinc he be not in the same land with 
us." mina look at him appealingli as she asked:-- 

"but whi need we seek him further, when he is gone away from us?" He 
took her hand and pat it as he replied:-- 

"ask me noth as yet. when we have breakfast, then I answer all 
questions." He would say no more, and we separ to dress. 

after breakfast mina repeat her question. He look at her grave for 
a minut and then said sorrowfully:-- 

"becaus my dear, dear madam mina, now more than ever must we find him 
even if we have to follow him to the jaw of hell!" she grew paler as 
she ask faintly:-- 

"why?" 

"because," he answer solemnly, "he can live for centuries, and you are 
but mortal woman. time is now to be dreaded--sinc onc he put that mark 
upon your throat." 

I wa just in time to catch her as she fell forward in a faint. 




chapter xxiv 

dr. seward' phonograph diary, spoken BY van hels 


thi to jonathan harker. 

you are to stay with your dear madam mina. We shall go to make our 
search--if I can call it so, for it is not search but knowing, and we 
seek confirm only. but do you stay and take care of her to-day. 
thi is your best and most holiest office. thi day noth can find him 
here. let me tell you that so you will know what we four know already, 
for I have tell them. he, our enemy, have gone away; he have gone back 
to hi castl in transylvania. I know it so well, as if a great hand of 
fire wrote it on the wall. He have prepar for thi in some way, and 
that last earth-box wa readi to ship somewheres. for thi he took the 
money; for thi he hurri at the last, lest we catch him befor the sun 
go down. It wa hi last hope, save that he might hide in the tomb that 
he think poor miss lucy, be as he thought like him, keep open to him. 
but there wa not of time. when that fail he make straight for hi last 
resource--hi last earth-work I might say did I wish _doubl entente_. 
He is clever, oh, so clever! he know that hi game here wa finish; and 
so he decid he go back home. He find ship go by the rout he came, 
and he go in it. We go off now to find what ship, and whither bound; 
when we have discov that, we come back and tell you all. then we will 
comfort you and poor dear madam mina with new hope. for it will be hope 
when you think it over: that all is not lost. thi veri creatur that we 
pursue, he take hundr of year to get so far as london; and yet in 
one day, when we know of the dispos of him we drive him out. He is 
finite, though he is power to do much harm and suffer not as we do. 
but we are strong, each in our purpose; and we are all more strong 
together. take heart afresh, dear husband of madam mina. thi battl is 
but begun, and in the end we shall win--so sure as that god sit on high 
to watch over hi children. therefor be of much comfort till we return. 

van helsing. 


_jonathan harker' journal._ 

_4 october._--when I read to mina, van helsing' messag in the 
phonograph, the poor girl brighten up considerably. alreadi the 
certainti that the count is out of the countri ha given her comfort; 
and comfort is strength to her. for my own part, now that hi horribl 
danger is not face to face with us, it seem almost imposs to 
believ in it. even my own terribl experi in castl dracula seem 
like a long-forgotten dream. here in the crisp autumn air in the bright 
sunlight---- 

alas! how can I disbelieve! In the midst of my thought my eye fell on 
the red scar on my poor darling' white forehead. whilst that lasts, 
there can be no disbelief. and afterward the veri memori of it will 
keep faith crystal clear. mina and I fear to be idle, so we have been 
over all the diari again and again. somehow, although the realiti 
seem greater each time, the pain and the fear seem less. there is 
someth of a guid purpos manifest throughout, which is comforting. 
mina say that perhap we are the instrument of ultim good. It may 
be! I shall tri to think as she does. We have never spoken to each other 
yet of the future. It is better to wait till we see the professor and 
the other after their investigations. 

the day is run by more quickli than I ever thought a day could run 
for me again. It is now three o'clock. 


_mina harker' journal._ 

_5 october, 5 p. m._--our meet for report. present: professor van 
helsing, lord godalming, dr. seward, mr. quincey morris, jonathan 
harker, mina harker. 

dr. van hels describ what step were taken dure the day to 
discov on what boat and whither bound count dracula made hi escape:-- 

"a I knew that he want to get back to transylvania, I felt sure that 
he must go by the danub mouth; or by somewher in the black sea, sinc 
by that way he come. It wa a dreari blank that wa befor us. _omn 
ignotum pro magnifico_; and so with heavi heart we start to find what 
ship leav for the black sea last night. He wa in sail ship, sinc 
madam mina tell of sail be set. these not so import as to go in 
your list of the ship in the _times_, and so we go, by suggest of 
lord godalming, to your lloyd's, where are note of all ship that sail, 
howev so small. there we find that onli one black-sea-bound ship go 
out with the tide. she is the _czarina catherine_, and she sail from 
doolittle' wharf for varna, and thenc on to other part and up the 
danube. 'soh!' said I, 'thi is the ship whereon is the count.' So off 
we go to doolittle' wharf, and there we find a man in an offic of wood 
so small that the man look bigger than the office. from him we inquir 
of the go of the _czarina catherine_. He swear much, and he red face 
and loud of voice, but he good fellow all the same; and when quincey 
give him someth from hi pocket which crackl as he roll it up, and 
put it in a so small bag which he have hid deep in hi clothing, he 
still better fellow and humbl servant to us. He come with us, and ask 
mani men who are rough and hot; these be better fellow too when they 
have been no more thirsty. they say much of blood and bloom, and of 
other which I comprehend not, though I guess what they mean; but 
nevertheless they tell us all thing which we want to know. 

"they make known to us among them, how last afternoon at about five 
o'clock come a man so hurry. A tall man, thin and pale, with high nose 
and teeth so white, and eye that seem to be burning. that he be all in 
black, except that he have a hat of straw which suit not him or the 
time. that he scatter hi money in make quick inquiri as to what ship 
sail for the black sea and for where. some took him to the offic and 
then to the ship, where he will not go aboard but halt at shore end of 
gang-plank, and ask that the captain come to him. the captain come, when 
told that he will be pay well; and though he swear much at the first he 
agre to term. then the thin man go and some one tell him where hors 
and cart can be hired. He go there and soon he come again, himself 
drive cart on which a great box; thi he himself lift down, though it 
take sever to put it on truck for the ship. He give much talk to 
captain as to how and where hi box is to be place; but the captain like 
it not and swear at him in mani tongues, and tell him that if he like he 
can come and see where it shall be. but he say 'no'; that he come not 
yet, for that he have much to do. whereupon the captain tell him that he 
had better be quick--with blood--for that hi ship will leav the 
place--of blood--befor the turn of the tide--with blood. then the thin 
man smile and say that of cours he must go when he think fit; but he 
will be surpris if he go quit so soon. the captain swear again, 
polyglot, and the thin man make him bow, and thank him, and say that he 
will so far intrud on hi kind as to come aboard befor the 
sailing. final the captain, more red than ever, and in more tongu tell 
him that he doesn't want no frenchmen--with bloom upon them and also 
with blood--in hi ship--with blood on her also. and so, after ask 
where there might be close at hand a ship where he might purchas ship 
forms, he departed. 

"no one knew where he went 'or bloomin' well cared,' as they said, for 
they had someth els to think of--wel with blood again; for it soon 
becam appar to all that the _czarina catherine_ would not sail as 
wa expected. A thin mist began to creep up from the river, and it grew, 
and grew; till soon a dens fog envelop the ship and all around her. 
the captain swore polyglot--veri polyglot--polyglot with bloom and 
blood; but he could do nothing. the water rose and rose; and he began to 
fear that he would lose the tide altogether. He wa in no friendli mood, 
when just at full tide, the thin man came up the gang-plank again and 
ask to see where hi box had been stowed. then the captain repli 
that he wish that he and hi box--old and with much bloom and 
blood--wer in hell. but the thin man did not be offend, and went down 
with the mate and saw where it wa place, and came up and stood awhil 
on deck in fog. He must have come off by himself, for none notic him. 
inde they thought not of him; for soon the fog begin to melt away, and 
all wa clear again. My friend of the thirst and the languag that wa 
of bloom and blood laughed, as they told how the captain' swear 
exceed even hi usual polyglot, and wa more than ever full of 
picturesque, when on question other marin who were on movement up 
and down on the river that hour, he found that few of them had seen ani 
of fog at all, except where it lay round the wharf. however, the ship 
went out on the ebb tide; and wa doubtless by morn far down the 
river mouth. she wa by then, when they told us, well out to sea. 

"and so, my dear madam mina, it is that we have to rest for a time, for 
our enemi is on the sea, with the fog at hi command, on hi way to the 
danub mouth. To sail a ship take time, go she never so quick; and when 
we start we go on land more quick, and we meet him there. our best hope 
is to come on him when in the box between sunris and sunset; for then 
he can make no struggle, and we may deal with him as we should. there 
are day for us, in which we can make readi our plan. We know all about 
where he go; for we have seen the owner of the ship, who have shown us 
invoic and all paper that can be. the box we seek is to be land in 
varna, and to be given to an agent, one ristic who will there present 
hi credentials; and so our merchant friend will have done hi part. 
when he ask if there be ani wrong, for that so, he can telegraph and 
have inquiri made at varna, we say 'no'; for what is to be done is not 
for polic or of the customs. It must be done by us alon and in our own 
way." 

when dr. van hels had done speaking, I ask him if he were certain 
that the count had remain on board the ship. He replied: "we have the 
best proof of that: your own evidence, when in the hypnot tranc thi 
morning." I ask him again if it were realli necessari that they should 
pursu the count, for oh! I dread jonathan leav me, and I know that 
he would sure go if the other went. He answer in grow passion, 
at first quietly. As he went on, however, he grew more angri and more 
forceful, till in the end we could not but see wherein wa at least some 
of that person domin which made him so long a master amongst 
men:-- 

"yes, it is necessary--necessary--necessary! for your sake in the first, 
and then for the sake of humanity. thi monster ha done much harm 
already, in the narrow scope where he find himself, and in the short 
time when as yet he wa onli as a bodi grope hi so small measur in 
dark and not knowing. all thi have I told these others; you, my 
dear madam mina, will learn it in the phonograph of my friend john, or 
in that of your husband. I have told them how the measur of leav hi 
own barren land--barren of peoples--and come to a new land where life 
of man teem till they are like the multitud of stand corn, wa the 
work of centuries. were anoth of the un-dead, like him, to tri to do 
what he ha done, perhap not all the centuri of the world that have 
been, or that will be, could aid him. with thi one, all the forc of 
natur that are occult and deep and strong must have work togeth in 
some wondrou way. the veri place, where he have been alive, un-dead for 
all these centuries, is full of strang of the geolog and chemic 
world. there are deep cavern and fissur that reach none know whither. 
there have been volcanoes, some of whose open still send out water 
of strang properties, and gase that kill or make to vivify. doubtless, 
there is someth magnet or electr in some of these combin of 
occult forc which work for physic life in strang way; and in 
himself were from the first some great qualities. In a hard and warlik 
time he wa celebr that he have more iron nerve, more subtl brain, 
more braver heart, than ani man. In him some vital principl have in 
strang way found their utmost; and as hi bodi keep strong and grow and 
thrive, so hi brain grow too. all thi without that diabol aid which 
is sure to him; for it have to yield to the power that come from, 
and are, symbol of good. and now thi is what he is to us. He have 
infect you--oh, forgiv me, my dear, that I must say such; but it is for 
good of you that I speak. He infect you in such wise, that even if he do 
no more, you have onli to live--to live in your own old, sweet way; and 
so in time, death, which is of man' common lot and with god' sanction, 
shall make you like to him. thi must not be! We have sworn togeth 
that it must not. thu are we minist of god' own wish: that the 
world, and men for whom hi son die, will not be given over to monsters, 
whose veri exist would defam him. He have allow us to redeem one 
soul already, and we go out as the old knight of the cross to redeem 
more. like them we shall travel toward the sunrise; and like them, if 
we fall, we fall in good cause." He paus and I said:-- 

"but will not the count take hi rebuff wisely? sinc he ha been driven 
from england, will he not avoid it, as a tiger doe the villag from 
which he ha been hunted?" 

"aha!" he said, "your simil of the tiger good, for me, and I shall 
adopt him. your man-eater, as they of india call the tiger who ha onc 
tast blood of the human, care no more for the other prey, but prowl 
unceas till he get him. thi that we hunt from our villag is a 
tiger, too, a man-eater, and he never ceas to prowl. nay, in himself he 
is not one to retir and stay afar. In hi life, hi live life, he go 
over the turkey frontier and attack hi enemi on hi own ground; he be 
beaten back, but did he stay? no! He come again, and again, and again. 
look at hi persist and endurance. with the child-brain that wa to 
him he have long sinc conceiv the idea of come to a great city. what 
doe he do? He find out the place of all the world most of promis for 
him. then he deliber set himself down to prepar for the task. He 
find in patienc just how is hi strength, and what are hi powers. He 
studi new tongues. He learn new social life; new environ of old 
ways, the politic, the law, the finance, the science, the habit of a new 
land and a new peopl who have come to be sinc he was. hi glimps that 
he have had, whet hi appetit onli and enkeen hi desire. nay, it help 
him to grow as to hi brain; for it all prove to him how right he wa at 
the first in hi surmises. He have done thi alone; all alone! from a 
ruin tomb in a forgotten land. what more may he not do when the greater 
world of thought is open to him. He that can smile at death, as we know 
him; who can flourish in the midst of diseas that kill off whole 
peoples. oh, if such an one wa to come from god, and not the devil, 
what a forc for good might he not be in thi old world of ours. but we 
are pledg to set the world free. our toil must be in silence, and our 
effort all in secret; for in thi enlighten age, when men believ not 
even what they see, the doubt of wise men would be hi greatest 
strength. It would be at onc hi sheath and hi armour, and hi weapon 
to destroy us, hi enemies, who are will to peril even our own soul 
for the safeti of one we love--for the good of mankind, and for the 
honour and glori of god." 

after a gener discuss it wa determin that for to-night noth 
be definit settled; that we should all sleep on the facts, and tri to 
think out the proper conclusions. to-morrow, at breakfast, we are to 
meet again, and, after make our conclus known to one another, we 
shall decid on some definit caus of action. 

* * * * * 

I feel a wonder peac and rest to-night. It is as if some haunt 
presenc were remov from me. perhap ... 

My surmis wa not finished, could not be; for I caught sight in the 
mirror of the red mark upon my forehead; and I knew that I wa still 
unclean. 


_dr. seward' diary._ 

_5 october._--w all rose early, and I think that sleep did much for 
each and all of us. when we met at earli breakfast there wa more 
gener cheer than ani of us had ever expect to experi 
again. 

It is realli wonder how much resili there is in human nature. let 
ani obstruct cause, no matter what, be remov in ani way--even by 
death--and we fli back to first principl of hope and enjoyment. more 
than onc as we sat around the table, my eye open in wonder whether 
the whole of the past day had not been a dream. It wa onli when I 
caught sight of the red blotch on mrs. harker' forehead that I wa 
brought back to reality. even now, when I am grave revolv the 
matter, it is almost imposs to realis that the caus of all our 
troubl is still existent. even mrs. harker seem to lose sight of her 
troubl for whole spells; it is onli now and again, when someth 
recal it to her mind, that she think of her terribl scar. We are to 
meet here in my studi in half an hour and decid on our cours of 
action. I see onli one immedi difficulty, I know it by instinct 
rather than reason: we shall all have to speak frankly; and yet I fear 
that in some mysteri way poor mrs. harker' tongu is tied. I _know_ 
that she form conclus of her own, and from all that ha been I can 
guess how brilliant and how true they must be; but she will not, or 
cannot, give them utterance. I have mention thi to van helsing, and 
he and I are to talk it over when we are alone. I suppos it is some of 
that horrid poison which ha got into her vein begin to work. the 
count had hi own purpos when he gave her what van hels call "the 
vampire' baptism of blood." well, there may be a poison that distil 
itself out of good things; in an age when the exist of ptomain is 
a mysteri we should not wonder at anything! one thing I know: that if my 
instinct be true regard poor mrs. harker' silences, then there is a 
terribl difficulty--an unknown danger--in the work befor us. the same 
power that compel her silenc may compel her speech. I dare not think 
further; for so I should in my thought dishonour a nobl woman! 

van hels is come to my studi a littl befor the others. I shall 
tri to open the subject with him. 

* * * * * 

_later._--when the professor came in, we talk over the state of 
things. I could see that he had someth on hi mind which he want to 
say, but felt some hesit about broach the subject. after beat 
about the bush a little, he said suddenly:-- 

"friend john, there is someth that you and I must talk of alone, just 
at the first at ani rate. later, we may have to take the other into our 
confidence"; then he stopped, so I waited; he went on:-- 

"madam mina, our poor, dear madam mina is changing." A cold shiver ran 
through me to find my worst fear thu endorsed. van hels 
continued:-- 

"with the sad experi of miss lucy, we must thi time be warn 
befor thing go too far. our task is now in realiti more difficult than 
ever, and thi new troubl make everi hour of the direst importance. I 
can see the characterist of the vampir come in her face. It is now 
but very, veri slight; but it is to be seen if we have eye to notic 
without to prejudge. her teeth are some sharper, and at time her eye 
are more hard. but these are not all, there is to her the silenc now 
often; as so it wa with miss lucy. she did not speak, even when she 
wrote that which she wish to be known later. now my fear is this. If 
it be that she can, by our hypnot trance, tell what the count see and 
hear, is it not more true that he who have hypnotis her first, and who 
have drink of her veri blood and make her drink of his, should, if he 
will, compel her mind to disclos to him that which she know?" I nod 
acquiescence; he went on:-- 

"then, what we must do is to prevent this; we must keep her ignor of 
our intent, and so she cannot tell what she know not. thi is a pain 
task! oh, so pain that it heart-break me to think of; but it must be. 
when to-day we meet, I must tell her that for reason which we will not 
to speak she must not more be of our council, but be simpli guard by 
us." He wipe hi forehead, which had broken out in profus perspir 
at the thought of the pain which he might have to inflict upon the poor 
soul alreadi so tortured. I knew that it would be some sort of comfort 
to him if I told him that I also had come to the same conclusion; for at 
ani rate it would take away the pain of doubt. I told him, and the 
effect wa as I expected. 

It is now close to the time of our gener gathering. van hels ha 
gone away to prepar for the meeting, and hi pain part of it. I 
realli believ hi purpos is to be abl to pray alone. 

* * * * * 

_later._--at the veri outset of our meet a great person relief wa 
experienc by both van hels and myself. mrs. harker had sent a 
messag by her husband to say that she would not join us at present, as 
she thought it better that we should be free to discuss our movement 
without her presenc to embarrass us. the professor and I look at each 
other for an instant, and somehow we both seem relieved. for my own 
part, I thought that if mrs. harker realis the danger herself, it wa 
much pain as well as much danger averted. under the circumst we 
agreed, by a question look and answer, with finger on lip, to 
preserv silenc in our suspicions, until we should have been abl to 
confer alon again. We went at onc into our plan of campaign. van 
hels roughli put the fact befor us first:-- 

"the _czarina catherine_ left the thame yesterday morning. It will take 
her at the quickest speed she ha ever made at least three week to 
reach varna; but we can travel overland to the same place in three days. 
now, if we allow for two day less for the ship' voyage, owe to such 
weather influenc as we know that the count can bring to bear; and if 
we allow a whole day and night for ani delay which may occur to us, 
then we have a margin of nearli two weeks. thus, in order to be quit 
safe, we must leav here on 17th at latest. then we shall at ani rate 
be in varna a day befor the ship arrives, and abl to make such 
prepar as may be necessary. Of cours we shall all go armed--arm 
against evil things, spiritu as well as physical." here quincey morri 
added:-- 

"I understand that the count come from a wolf country, and it may be 
that he shall get there befor us. I propos that we add winchest to 
our armament. I have a kind of belief in a winchest when there is ani 
troubl of that sort around. Do you remember, art, when we had the pack 
after us at tobolsk? what wouldn't we have given then for a repeat 
apiece!" 

"good!" said van helsing, "winchest it shall be. quincey' head is 
level at all times, but most so when there is to hunt, metaphor be more 
dishonour to scienc than wolv be of danger to man. In the meantim we 
can do noth here; and as I think that varna is not familiar to ani of 
us, whi not go there more soon? It is as long to wait here as there. 
to-night and to-morrow we can get ready, and then, if all be well, we 
four can set out on our journey." 

"we four?" said harker interrogatively, look from one to anoth of 
us. 

"of course!" answer the professor quickly, "you must remain to take 
care of your so sweet wife!" harker wa silent for awhil and then said 
in a hollow voice:-- 

"let us talk of that part of it in the morning. I want to consult with 
mina." I thought that now wa the time for van hels to warn him not 
to disclos our plan to her; but he took no notice. I look at him 
significantli and coughed. for answer he put hi finger on hi lip and 
turn away. 


_jonathan harker' journal._ 

_5 october, afternoon._--for some time after our meet thi morn I 
could not think. the new phase of thing leav my mind in a state of 
wonder which allow no room for activ thought. mina' determin not 
to take ani part in the discuss set me thinking; and as I could not 
argu the matter with her, I could onli guess. I am as far as ever from 
a solut now. the way the other receiv it, too, puzzl me; the 
last time we talk of the subject we agre that there wa to be no 
more conceal of anyth amongst us. mina is sleep now, calmli 
and sweetli like a littl child. her lip are curv and her face beam 
with happiness. thank god, there are such moment still for her. 

* * * * * 

_later._--how strang it all is. I sat watch mina' happi sleep, and 
came as near to be happi myself as I suppos I shall ever be. As the 
even drew on, and the earth took it shadow from the sun sink 
lower, the silenc of the room grew more and more solemn to me. all at 
onc mina open her eyes, and look at me tenderly, said:-- 

"jonathan, I want you to promis me someth on your word of honour. A 
promis made to me, but made holili in god' hearing, and not to be 
broken though I should go down on my knee and implor you with bitter 
tears. quick, you must make it to me at once." 

"mina," I said, "a promis like that, I cannot make at once. I may have 
no right to make it." 

"but, dear one," she said, with such spiritu intens that her eye 
were like pole stars, "it is I who wish it; and it is not for myself. 
you can ask dr. van hels if I am not right; if he disagre you may 
do as you will. nay, more, if you all agree, later, you are absolv 
from the promise." 

"I promise!" I said, and for a moment she look suprem happy; though 
to me all happi for her wa deni by the red scar on her forehead. 
she said:-- 

"promis me that you will not tell me anyth of the plan form for 
the campaign against the count. not by word, or inference, or 
implication; not at ani time whilst thi remain to me!" and she 
solemnli point to the scar. I saw that she wa in earnest, and said 
solemnly:-- 

"I promise!" and as I said it I felt that from that instant a door had 
been shut between us. 

* * * * * 

_later, midnight._--mina ha been bright and cheer all the evening. 
So much so that all the rest seem to take courage, as if infect 
somewhat with her gaiety; as a result even I myself felt as if the pall 
of gloom which weigh us down were somewhat lifted. We all retir 
early. mina is now sleep like a littl child; it is a wonder thing 
that her faculti of sleep remain to her in the midst of her terribl 
trouble. thank god for it, for then at least she can forget her care. 
perhap her exampl may affect me as her gaieti did to-night. I shall 
tri it. oh! for a dreamless sleep. 

* * * * * 

_6 october, morning._--anoth surprise. mina woke me early, about the 
same time as yesterday, and ask me to bring dr. van helsing. I thought 
that it wa anoth occas for hypnotism, and without question went 
for the professor. He had evid expect some such call, for I found 
him dress in hi room. hi door wa ajar, so that he could hear the 
open of the door of our room. He came at once; as he pass into the 
room, he ask mina if the other might come, too. 

"no," she said quit simply, "it will not be necessary. you can tell 
them just as well. I must go with you on your journey." 

dr. van hels wa as startl as I was. after a moment' paus he 
asked:-- 

"but why?" 

"you must take me with you. I am safer with you, and you shall be safer, 
too." 

"but why, dear madam mina? you know that your safeti is our solemnest 
duty. We go into danger, to which you are, or may be, more liabl than 
ani of us from--from circumstances--th that have been." He paused, 
embarrassed. 

As she replied, she rais her finger and point to her forehead:-- 

"I know. that is whi I must go. I can tell you now, whilst the sun is 
come up; I may not be abl again. I know that when the count will me 
I must go. I know that if he tell me to come in secret, I must come by 
wile; by ani devic to hoodwink--even jonathan." god saw the look that 
she turn on me as she spoke, and if there be inde a record angel 
that look is note to her everlast honour. I could onli clasp her 
hand. I could not speak; my emot wa too great for even the relief of 
tears. she went on:-- 

"you men are brave and strong. you are strong in your numbers, for you 
can defi that which would break down the human endur of one who had 
to guard alone. besides, I may be of service, sinc you can hypnotis me 
and so learn that which even I myself do not know." dr. van hels said 
veri gravely:-- 

"madam mina, you are, as always, most wise. you shall with us come; and 
togeth we shall do that which we go forth to achieve." when he had 
spoken, mina' long spell of silenc made me look at her. she had fallen 
back on her pillow asleep; she did not even wake when I had pull up 
the blind and let in the sunlight which flood the room. van hels 
motion to me to come with him quietly. We went to hi room, and within 
a minut lord godalming, dr. seward, and mr. morri were with us also. 
He told them what mina had said, and went on:-- 

"in the morn we shall leav for varna. We have now to deal with a 
new factor: madam mina. oh, but her soul is true. It is to her an agoni 
to tell us so much as she ha done; but it is most right, and we are 
warn in time. there must be no chanc lost, and in varna we must be 
readi to act the instant when that ship arrives." 

"what shall we do exactly?" ask mr. morri laconically. the professor 
paus befor replying:-- 

"we shall at the first board that ship; then, when we have identifi 
the box, we shall place a branch of the wild rose on it. thi we shall 
fasten, for when it is there none can emerge; so at least say the 
superstition. and to superstit must we trust at the first; it wa 
man' faith in the early, and it have it root in faith still. then, 
when we get the opportun that we seek, when none are near to see, we 
shall open the box, and--and all will be well." 

"I shall not wait for ani opportunity," said morris. "when I see the box 
I shall open it and destroy the monster, though there were a thousand 
men look on, and if I am to be wipe out for it the next moment!" I 
grasp hi hand instinct and found it as firm as a piec of steel. 
I think he understood my look; I hope he did. 

"good boy," said dr. van helsing. "brave boy. quincey is all man. god 
bless him for it. My child, believ me none of us shall lag behind or 
paus from ani fear. I do but say what we may do--what we must do. but, 
indeed, inde we cannot say what we shall do. there are so mani thing 
which may happen, and their way and their end are so variou that 
until the moment we may not say. We shall all be armed, in all ways; and 
when the time for the end ha come, our effort shall not be lack. now 
let us to-day put all our affair in order. let all thing which touch 
on other dear to us, and who on us depend, be complete; for none of us 
can tell what, or when, or how, the end may be. As for me, my own 
affair are regulate; and as I have noth els to do, I shall go make 
arrang for the travel. I shall have all ticket and so forth for 
our journey." 

there wa noth further to be said, and we parted. I shall now settl 
up all my affair of earth, and be readi for whatev may come.... 

* * * * * 

_later._--it is all done; my will is made, and all complete. mina if she 
surviv is my sole heir. If it should not be so, then the other who 
have been so good to us shall have remainder. 

It is now draw toward the sunset; mina' uneasi call my 
attent to it. I am sure that there is someth on her mind which the 
time of exact sunset will reveal. these occas are becom harrow 
time for us all, for each sunris and sunset open up some new 
danger--som new pain, which, however, may in god' will be mean to a 
good end. I write all these thing in the diari sinc my darl must 
not hear them now; but if it may be that she can see them again, they 
shall be ready. 

she is call to me. 




chapter xxv 

dr. seward' diari 


_11 october, evening._--jonathan harker ha ask me to note this, as he 
say he is hardli equal to the task, and he want an exact record kept. 

I think that none of us were surpris when we were ask to see mrs. 
harker a littl befor the time of sunset. We have of late come to 
understand that sunris and sunset are to her time of peculiar freedom; 
when her old self can be manifest without ani control forc subdu 
or restrain her, or incit her to action. thi mood or condit 
begin some half hour or more befor actual sunris or sunset, and last 
till either the sun is high, or whilst the cloud are still aglow with 
the ray stream abov the horizon. At first there is a sort of 
neg condition, as if some tie were loosened, and then the absolut 
freedom quickli follows; when, however, the freedom ceas the 
change-back or relaps come quickly, preced onli by a spell of 
warn silence. 

to-night, when we met, she wa somewhat constrained, and bore all the 
sign of an intern struggle. I put it down myself to her make a 
violent effort at the earliest instant she could do so. A veri few 
minutes, however, gave her complet control of herself; then, motion 
her husband to sit besid her on the sofa where she wa half reclining, 
she made the rest of us bring chair up close. take her husband' hand 
in her began:-- 

"we are all here togeth in freedom, for perhap the last time! I know, 
dear; I know that you will alway be with me to the end." thi wa to 
her husband whose hand had, as we could see, tighten upon hers. "in 
the morn we go out upon our task, and god alon know what may be in 
store for ani of us. you are go to be so good to me as to take me 
with you. I know that all that brave earnest men can do for a poor weak 
woman, whose soul perhap is lost--no, no, not yet, but is at ani rate 
at stake--y will do. but you must rememb that I am not as you are. 
there is a poison in my blood, in my soul, which may destroy me; which 
must destroy me, unless some relief come to us. oh, my friends, you 
know as well as I do, that my soul is at stake; and though I know there 
is one way out for me, you must not and I must not take it!" she look 
appealingli to us all in turn, begin and end with her husband. 

"what is that way?" ask van hels in a hoars voice. "what is that 
way, which we must not--may not--take?" 

"that I may die now, either by my own hand or that of another, befor 
the greater evil is entir wrought. I know, and you know, that were I 
onc dead you could and would set free my immort spirit, even as you 
did my poor lucy's. were death, or the fear of death, the onli thing 
that stood in the way I would not shrink to die here, now, amidst the 
friend who love me. but death is not all. I cannot believ that to die 
in such a case, when there is hope befor us and a bitter task to be 
done, is god' will. therefore, I, on my part, give up here the 
certainti of etern rest, and go out into the dark where may be the 
blackest thing that the world or the nether world holds!" We were all 
silent, for we knew instinct that thi wa onli a prelude. the 
face of the other were set and harker' grew ashen grey; perhap he 
guess better than ani of us what wa coming. she continued:-- 

"thi is what I can give into the hotch-pot." I could not but note the 
quaint legal phrase which she use in such a place, and with all 
seriousness. "what will each of you give? your live I know," she went 
on quickly, "that is easi for brave men. your live are god's, and you 
can give them back to him; but what will you give to me?" she look 
again questioningly, but thi time avoid her husband' face. quincey 
seem to understand; he nodded, and her face lit up. "then I shall tell 
you plainli what I want, for there must be no doubt matter in thi 
connect between us now. you must promis me, one and all--even you, 
my belov husband--that, should the time come, you will kill me." 

"what is that time?" the voic wa quincey's, but it wa low and 
strained. 

"when you shall be convinc that I am so chang that it is better that 
I die that I may live. when I am thu dead in the flesh, then you will, 
without a moment' delay, drive a stake through me and cut off my head; 
or do whatev els may be want to give me rest!" 

quincey wa the first to rise after the pause. He knelt down befor her 
and take her hand in hi said solemnly:-- 

"i'm onli a rough fellow, who hasn't, perhaps, live as a man should to 
win such a distinction, but I swear to you by all that I hold sacr and 
dear that, should the time ever come, I shall not flinch from the duti 
that you have set us. and I promis you, too, that I shall make all 
certain, for if I am onli doubt I shall take it that the time ha 
come!" 

"mi true friend!" wa all she could say amid her fast-fal tears, as, 
bend over, she kiss hi hand. 

"I swear the same, my dear madam mina!" said van helsing. 

"and i!" said lord godalming, each of them in turn kneel to her to 
take the oath. I followed, myself. then her husband turn to her 
wan-ey and with a greenish pallor which subdu the snowi white of 
hi hair, and asked:-- 

"and must I, too, make such a promise, oh, my wife?" 

"you too, my dearest," she said, with infinit yearn of piti in her 
voic and eyes. "you must not shrink. you are nearest and dearest and 
all the world to me; our soul are knit into one, for all life and all 
time. think, dear, that there have been time when brave men have kill 
their wive and their womenkind, to keep them from fall into the 
hand of the enemy. their hand did not falter ani the more becaus 
those that they love implor them to slay them. It is men' duti 
toward those whom they love, in such time of sore trial! and oh, my 
dear, if it is to be that I must meet death at ani hand, let it be at 
the hand of him that love me best. dr. van helsing, I have not 
forgotten your merci in poor lucy' case to him who loved"--sh stop 
with a fli blush, and chang her phrase--"to him who had best right 
to give her peace. If that time shall come again, I look to you to make 
it a happi memori of my husband' life that it wa hi love hand which 
set me free from the aw thrall upon me." 

"again I swear!" came the professor' reson voice. mrs. harker 
smiled, posit smiled, as with a sigh of relief she lean back and 
said:-- 

"and now one word of warning, a warn which you must never forget: 
thi time, if it ever come, may come quickli and unexpectedly, and in 
such case you must lose no time in use your opportunity. At such a 
time I myself might be--nay! if the time ever comes, _shall be_--leagu 
with your enemi against you." 

"one more request;" she becam veri solemn as she said this, "it is not 
vital and necessari like the other, but I want you to do one thing for 
me, if you will." We all acquiesced, but no one spoke; there wa no need 
to speak:-- 

"I want you to read the burial service." she wa interrupt by a deep 
groan from her husband; take hi hand in hers, she held it over her 
heart, and continued: "you must read it over me some day. whatev may 
be the issu of all thi fear state of things, it will be a sweet 
thought to all or some of us. you, my dearest, will I hope read it, for 
then it will be in your voic in my memori for ever--com what may!" 

"but oh, my dear one," he pleaded, "death is afar off from you." 

"nay," she said, hold up a warn hand. "I am deeper in death at 
thi moment than if the weight of an earthli grave lay heavi upon me!" 

"oh, my wife, must I read it?" he said, befor he began. 

"it would comfort me, my husband!" wa all she said; and he began to 
read when she had got the book ready. 

"how can i--how could ani one--tel of that strang scene, it 
solemnity, it gloom, it sadness, it horror; and, withal, it 
sweetness. even a sceptic, who can see noth but a travesti of bitter 
truth in anyth holi or emotional, would have been melt to the heart 
had he seen that littl group of love and devot friend kneel 
round that stricken and sorrow lady; or heard the tender passion of 
her husband' voice, as in tone so broken with emot that often he 
had to pause, he read the simpl and beauti servic from the burial 
of the dead. i--i cannot go on--words--and--v-voice--f-fail m-me!" 

* * * * * 

she wa right in her instinct. strang as it all was, bizarr as it may 
hereaft seem even to us who felt it potent influenc at the time, it 
comfort us much; and the silence, which show mrs. harker' come 
relaps from her freedom of soul, did not seem so full of despair to ani 
of us as we had dreaded. 


_jonathan harker' journal._ 

_15 october, varna._--w left chare cross on the morn of the 12th, 
got to pari the same night, and took the place secur for us in the 
orient express. We travel night and day, arriv here at about five 
o'clock. lord godalm went to the consul to see if ani telegram had 
arriv for him, whilst the rest of us came on to thi hotel--"th 
odessus." the journey may have had incidents; I was, however, too eager 
to get on, to care for them. until the _czarina catherine_ come into 
port there will be no interest for me in anyth in the wide world. 
thank god! mina is well, and look to be get stronger; her colour is 
come back. she sleep a great deal; throughout the journey she slept 
nearli all the time. befor sunris and sunset, however, she is veri 
wake and alert; and it ha becom a habit for van hels to 
hypnotis her at such times. At first, some effort wa needed, and he 
had to make mani passes; but now, she seem to yield at once, as if by 
habit, and scarc ani action is needed. He seem to have power at 
these particular moment to simpli will, and her thought obey him. He 
alway ask her what she can see and hear. she answer to the first:-- 

"nothing; all is dark." and to the second:-- 

"I can hear the wave lap against the ship, and the water rush 
by. canva and cordag strain and mast and yard creak. the wind is 
high--i can hear it in the shrouds, and the bow throw back the foam." 
It is evid that the _czarina catherine_ is still at sea, hasten on 
her way to varna. lord godalm ha just returned. He had four 
telegrams, one each day sinc we started, and all to the same effect: 
that the _czarina catherine_ had not been report to lloyd' from 
anywhere. He had arrang befor leav london that hi agent should 
send him everi day a telegram say if the ship had been reported. He 
wa to have a messag even if she were not reported, so that he might be 
sure that there wa a watch be kept at the other end of the wire. 

We had dinner and went to bed early. to-morrow we are to see the 
vice-consul, and to arrange, if we can, about get on board the ship 
as soon as she arrives. van hels say that our chanc will be to get 
on the boat between sunris and sunset. the count, even if he take the 
form of a bat, cannot cross the run water of hi own volition, and 
so cannot leav the ship. As he dare not chang to man' form without 
suspicion--which he evid wish to avoid--h must remain in the 
box. if, then, we can come on board after sunrise, he is at our mercy; 
for we can open the box and make sure of him, as we did of poor lucy, 
befor he wakes. what merci he shall get from us will not count for 
much. We think that we shall not have much troubl with offici or the 
seamen. thank god! thi is the countri where briberi can do anything, 
and we are well suppli with money. We have onli to make sure that the 
ship cannot come into port between sunset and sunris without our be 
warned, and we shall be safe. judg moneybag will settl thi case, I 
think! 

* * * * * 

_16 october._--mina' report still the same: lap wave and rush 
water, dark and favour winds. We are evid in good time, and 
when we hear of the _czarina catherine_ we shall be ready. As she must 
pass the dardanel we are sure to have some report. 

* * * * * 

_17 october._--everyth is pretti well fix now, I think, to welcom 
the count on hi return from hi tour. godalm told the shipper that 
he fanci that the box sent aboard might contain someth stolen from 
a friend of his, and got a half consent that he might open it at hi own 
risk. the owner gave him a paper tell the captain to give him everi 
facil in do whatev he chose on board the ship, and also a 
similar authoris to hi agent at varna. We have seen the agent, who 
wa much impress with godalming' kindli manner to him, and we are all 
satisfi that whatev he can do to aid our wish will be done. We 
have alreadi arrang what to do in case we get the box open. If the 
count is there, van hels and seward will cut off hi head at onc and 
drive a stake through hi heart. morri and godalm and I shall 
prevent interference, even if we have to use the arm which we shall 
have ready. the professor say that if we can so treat the count' body, 
it will soon after fall into dust. In such case there would be no 
evid against us, in case ani suspicion of murder were aroused. but 
even if it were not, we should stand or fall by our act, and perhap 
some day thi veri script may be evid to come between some of us and 
a rope. for myself, I should take the chanc onli too thank if it 
were to come. We mean to leav no stone unturn to carri out our 
intent. We have arrang with certain offici that the instant the 
_czarina catherine_ is seen, we are to be inform by a special 
messenger. 

* * * * * 

_24 october._--a whole week of waiting. daili telegram to godalming, 
but onli the same story: "not yet reported." mina' morn and even 
hypnot answer is unvaried: lap waves, rush water, and creak 
masts. 

_telegram, octob 24th._ 

_rufu smith, lloyd's, london, to lord godalming, care of H. B. M. 
vice-consul, varna._ 

"_czarina catherine_ report thi morn from dardanelles." 


_dr. seward' diary._ 

_25 october._--how I miss my phonograph! To write diari with a pen is 
irksom to me; but van hels say I must. We were all wild with 
excit yesterday when godalm got hi telegram from lloyd's. I 
know now what men feel in battl when the call to action is heard. mrs. 
harker, alon of our party, did not show ani sign of emotion. after 
all, it is not strang that she did not; for we took special care not to 
let her know anyth about it, and we all tri not to show ani 
excit when we were in her presence. In old day she would, I am 
sure, have noticed, no matter how we might have tri to conceal it; but 
in thi way she is greatli chang dure the past three weeks. the 
lethargi grow upon her, and though she seem strong and well, and is 
get back some of her colour, van hels and I are not satisfied. We 
talk of her often; we have not, however, said a word to the others. It 
would break poor harker' heart--certainli hi nerve--if he knew that we 
had even a suspicion on the subject. van hels examines, he tell me, 
her teeth veri carefully, whilst she is in the hypnot condition, for 
he say that so long as they do not begin to sharpen there is no activ 
danger of a chang in her. If thi chang should come, it would be 
necessari to take steps!... We both know what those step would have to 
be, though we do not mention our thought to each other. We should 
neither of us shrink from the task--aw though it be to contemplate. 
"euthanasia" is an excel and a comfort word! I am grate to 
whoever invent it. 

It is onli about 24 hours' sail from the dardanel to here, at the 
rate the _czarina catherine_ ha come from london. she should therefor 
arriv some time in the morning; but as she cannot possibl get in 
befor then, we are all about to retir early. We shall get up at one 
o'clock, so as to be ready. 

* * * * * 

_25 october, noon_.--no news yet of the ship' arrival. mrs. harker' 
hypnot report thi morn wa the same as usual, so it is possibl 
that we may get news at ani moment. We men are all in a fever of 
excitement, except harker, who is calm; hi hand are cold as ice, and 
an hour ago I found him whet the edg of the great ghoorka knife 
which he now alway carri with him. It will be a bad lookout for the 
count if the edg of that "kukri" ever touch hi throat, driven by 
that stern, ice-cold hand! 

van hels and I were a littl alarm about mrs. harker to-day. about 
noon she got into a sort of lethargi which we did not like; although we 
kept silenc to the others, we were neither of us happi about it. she 
had been restless all the morning, so that we were at first glad to know 
that she wa sleeping. when, however, her husband mention casual 
that she wa sleep so soundli that he could not wake her, we went to 
her room to see for ourselves. she wa breath natur and look so 
well and peac that we agre that the sleep wa better for her than 
anyth else. poor girl, she ha so much to forget that it is no wonder 
that sleep, if it bring oblivion to her, doe her good. 

* * * * * 

_later._--our opinion wa justified, for when after a refresh sleep 
of some hour she woke up, she seem brighter and better than she had 
been for days. At sunset she made the usual hypnot report. wherev he 
may be in the black sea, the count is hurri to hi destination. To 
hi doom, I trust! 

* * * * * 

_26 october._--anoth day and no tide of the _czarina catherine_. 
she ought to be here by now. that she is still journey _somewhere_ is 
apparent, for mrs. harker' hypnot report at sunris wa still the 
same. It is possibl that the vessel may be lie by, at times, for fog; 
some of the steamer which came in last even report patch of fog 
both to north and south of the port. We must continu our watching, as 
the ship may now be signal ani moment. 

* * * * * 

_27 october, noon._--most strange; no news yet of the ship we wait for. 
mrs. harker report last night and thi morn as usual: "lap 
wave and rush water," though she ad that "the wave were veri 
faint." the telegram from london have been the same: "no further 
report." van hels is terribl anxious, and told me just now that he 
fear the count is escap us. He ad significantly:-- 

"I did not like that lethargi of madam mina's. soul and memori can do 
strang thing dure trance." I wa about to ask him more, but harker 
just then came in, and he held up a warn hand. We must tri to-night 
at sunset to make her speak more fulli when in her hypnot state. 

* * * * * 

_28 october._--telegram. _rufu smith, london, to lord godalming, 
care H. B. M. vice consul, varna._ 

"_czarina catherine_ report enter galatz at one o'clock 
to-day." 


_dr. seward' diary._ 

_28 october._--when the telegram came announc the arriv in galatz I 
do not think it wa such a shock to ani of us as might have been 
expected. true, we did not know whence, or how, or when, the bolt would 
come; but I think we all expect that someth strang would happen. 
the delay of arriv at varna made us individu satisfi that thing 
would not be just as we had expected; we onli wait to learn where the 
chang would occur. none the less, however, wa it a surprise. I suppos 
that natur work on such a hope basi that we believ against 
ourselv that thing will be as they ought to be, not as we should know 
that they will be. transcendent is a beacon to the angels, even if 
it be a will-o'-the-wisp to man. It wa an odd experi and we all 
took it differently. van hels rais hi hand over hi head for a 
moment, as though in remonstr with the almighty; but he said not a 
word, and in a few second stood up with hi face sternli set. lord 
godalm grew veri pale, and sat breath heavily. I wa myself half 
stun and look in wonder at one after another. quincey morri 
tighten hi belt with that quick movement which I knew so well; in our 
old wander day it meant "action." mrs. harker grew ghastli white, so 
that the scar on her forehead seem to burn, but she fold her hand 
meekli and look up in prayer. harker smiled--actu smiled--th 
dark, bitter smile of one who is without hope; but at the same time hi 
action beli hi words, for hi hand instinct sought the hilt of 
the great kukri knife and rest there. "when doe the next train start 
for galatz?" said van hels to us generally. 

"at 6:30 to-morrow morning!" We all started, for the answer came from 
mrs. harker. 

"how on earth do you know?" said art. 

"you forget--or perhap you do not know, though jonathan doe and so 
doe dr. van helsing--that I am the train fiend. At home in exet I 
alway use to make up the time-tables, so as to be help to my 
husband. I found it so use sometimes, that I alway make a studi of 
the time-t now. I knew that if anyth were to take us to castl 
dracula we should go by galatz, or at ani rate through bucharest, so I 
learn the time veri carefully. unhappili there are not mani to learn, 
as the onli train to-morrow leav as I say." 

"wonder woman!" murmur the professor. 

"can't we get a special?" ask lord godalming. van hels shook hi 
head: "I fear not. thi land is veri differ from your or mine; even 
if we did have a special, it would probabl not arriv as soon as our 
regular train. moreover, we have someth to prepare. We must think. 
now let us organize. you, friend arthur, go to the train and get the 
ticket and arrang that all be readi for us to go in the morning. Do 
you, friend jonathan, go to the agent of the ship and get from him 
letter to the agent in galatz, with author to make search the ship 
just as it wa here. morri quincey, you see the vice-consul, and get 
hi aid with hi fellow in galatz and all he can do to make our way 
smooth, so that no time be lost when over the danube. john will stay 
with madam mina and me, and we shall consult. for so if time be long you 
may be delayed; and it will not matter when the sun set, sinc I am here 
with madam to make report." 

"and i," said mrs. harker brightly, and more like her old self than she 
had been for mani a long day, "shall tri to be of use in all ways, and 
shall think and write for you as I use to do. someth is shift 
from me in some strang way, and I feel freer than I have been of late!" 
the three younger men look happier at the moment as they seem to 
realis the signific of her words; but van hels and I, turn to 
each other, met each a grave and troubl glance. We said noth at the 
time, however. 

when the three men had gone out to their task van hels ask mrs. 
harker to look up the copi of the diari and find him the part of 
harker' journal at the castle. she went away to get it; when the door 
wa shut upon her he said to me:-- 

"we mean the same! speak out!" 

"there is some change. It is a hope that make me sick, for it may 
deceiv us." 

"quit so. Do you know whi I ask her to get the manuscript?" 

"no!" said I, "unless it wa to get an opportun of see me alone." 

"you are in part right, friend john, but onli in part. I want to tell 
you something. and oh, my friend, I am take a great--a terrible--risk; 
but I believ it is right. In the moment when madam mina said those 
word that arrest both our understanding, an inspir came to me. In 
the tranc of three day ago the count sent her hi spirit to read her 
mind; or more like he took her to see him in hi earth-box in the ship 
with water rushing, just as it go free at rise and set of sun. He learn 
then that we are here; for she have more to tell in her open life with 
eye to see and ear to hear than he, shut, as he is, in hi coffin-box. 
now he make hi most effort to escap us. At present he want her not. 

"he is sure with hi so great knowledg that she will come at hi call; 
but he cut her off--tak her, as he can do, out of hi own power, that 
so she come not to him. ah! there I have hope that our man-brain that 
have been of man so long and that have not lost the grace of god, will 
come higher than hi child-brain that lie in hi tomb for centuries, 
that grow not yet to our stature, and that do onli work selfish and 
therefor small. here come madam mina; not a word to her of her trance! 
she know it not; and it would overwhelm her and make despair just when 
we want all her hope, all her courage; when most we want all her great 
brain which is train like man' brain, but is of sweet woman and have 
a special power which the count give her, and which he may not take away 
altogether--though he think not so. hush! let me speak, and you shall 
learn. oh, john, my friend, we are in aw straits. I fear, as I never 
fear before. We can onli trust the good god. silence! here she comes!" 

I thought that the professor wa go to break down and have hysterics, 
just as he had when luci died, but with a great effort he control 
himself and wa at perfect nervou pois when mrs. harker trip into 
the room, bright and happy-look and, in the do of work, seemingli 
forget of her misery. As she came in, she hand a number of sheet 
of typewrit to van helsing. He look over them gravely, hi face 
brighten up as he read. then hold the page between hi finger and 
thumb he said:-- 

"friend john, to you with so much of experi already--and you, too, 
dear madam mina, that are young--her is a lesson: do not fear ever to 
think. A half-thought ha been buzz often in my brain, but I fear to 
let him loos hi wings. here now, with more knowledge, I go back to 
where that half-thought come from and I find that he be no half-thought 
at all; that be a whole thought, though so young that he is not yet 
strong to use hi littl wings. nay, like the "ugli duck" of my friend 
han andersen, he be no duck-thought at all, but a big swan-thought that 
sail nobli on big wings, when the time come for him to tri them. see I 
read here what jonathan have written:-- 

"that other of hi race who, in a later age, again and again, brought 
hi forc over the great river into turkey land; who, when he wa 
beaten back, came again, and again, and again, though he had to come 
alon from the bloodi field where hi troop were be slaughtered, 
sinc he knew that he alon could ultim triumph." 

"what doe thi tell us? not much? no! the count' child-thought see 
nothing; therefor he speak so free. your man-thought see nothing; my 
man-thought see nothing, till just now. no! but there come anoth word 
from some one who speak without thought becaus she, too, know not what 
it mean--what it _might_ mean. just as there are element which rest, 
yet when in nature' cours they move on their way and they touch--then 
pouf! and there come a flash of light, heaven wide, that blind and kill 
and destroy some; but that show up all earth below for leagu and 
leagues. Is it not so? well, I shall explain. To begin, have you ever 
studi the philosophi of crime? 'yes' and 'no.' you, john, yes; for it is 
a studi of insanity. you, no, madam mina; for crime touch you not--not 
but once. still, your mind work true, and argu not _a particulari ad 
universale_. there is thi peculiar in criminals. It is so constant, 
in all countri and at all times, that even police, who know not much 
from philosophy, come to know it empirically, that _it is_. that is to 
be empiric. the crimin alway work at one crime--that is the true 
crimin who seem predestin to crime, and who will of none other. 
thi crimin ha not full man-brain. He is clever and cun and 
resourceful; but he be not of man-statur as to brain. He be of 
child-brain in much. now thi crimin of our is predestin to crime 
also; he, too, have child-brain, and it is of the child to do what he 
have done. the littl bird, the littl fish, the littl anim learn not 
by principle, but empirically; and when he learn to do, then there is to 
him the ground to start from to do more. '_do pou sto_,' said 
archimedes. 'give me a fulcrum, and I shall move the world!' To do once, 
is the fulcrum wherebi child-brain becom man-brain; and until he have 
the purpos to do more, he continu to do the same again everi time, 
just as he have done before! oh, my dear, I see that your eye are 
opened, and that to you the lightn flash show all the leagues," for 
mrs. harker began to clap her hand and her eye sparkled. He went on:-- 

"now you shall speak. tell us two dri men of scienc what you see with 
those so bright eyes." He took her hand and held it whilst she spoke. 
hi finger and thumb close on her pulse, as I thought instinct and 
unconsciously, as she spoke:-- 

"the count is a crimin and of crimin type. nordau and lombroso would 
so classifi him, and _quâ_ crimin he is of imperfectli form mind. 
thus, in a difficulti he ha to seek resourc in habit. hi past is a 
clue, and the one page of it that we know--and that from hi own 
lips--tel that onc before, when in what mr. morri would call a 
'tight place,' he went back to hi own countri from the land he had 
tri to invade, and thence, without lose purpose, prepar himself 
for a new effort. He came again better equip for hi work; and won. 
So he came to london to invad a new land. He wa beaten, and when all 
hope of success wa lost, and hi exist in danger, he fled back over 
the sea to hi home; just as formerli he had fled back over the danub 
from turkey land." 

"good, good! oh, you so clever lady!" said van helsing, 
enthusiastically, as he stoop and kiss her hand. A moment later he 
said to me, as calmli as though we had been have a sick-room 
consultation:-- 

"seventy-two only; and in all thi excitement. I have hope." turn to 
her again, he said with keen expectation:-- 

"but go on. Go on! there is more to tell if you will. Be not afraid; 
john and I know. I do in ani case, and shall tell you if you are right. 
speak, without fear!" 

"I will tri to; but you will forgiv me if I seem egotistical." 

"nay! fear not, you must be egotist, for it is of you that we think." 

"then, as he is crimin he is selfish; and as hi intellect is small 
and hi action is base on selfishness, he confin himself to one 
purpose. that purpos is remorseless. As he fled back over the danube, 
leav hi forc to be cut to pieces, so now he is intent on be 
safe, careless of all. So hi own selfish free my soul somewhat 
from the terribl power which he acquir over me on that dread 
night. I felt it! oh, I felt it! thank god, for hi great mercy! My soul 
is freer than it ha been sinc that aw hour; and all that haunt me 
is a fear lest in some tranc or dream he may have use my knowledg for 
hi ends." the professor stood up:-- 

"he ha so use your mind; and by it he ha left us here in varna, 
whilst the ship that carri him rush through envelop fog up to 
galatz, where, doubtless, he had made prepar for escap from us. 
but hi child-mind onli saw so far; and it may be that, as ever is in 
god' providence, the veri thing that the evil-do most reckon on for 
hi selfish good, turn out to be hi chiefest harm. the hunter is taken 
in hi own snare, as the great psalmist says. for now that he think he 
is free from everi trace of us all, and that he ha escap us with so 
mani hour to him, then hi selfish child-brain will whisper him to 
sleep. He think, too, that as he cut himself off from know your mind, 
there can be no knowledg of him to you; there is where he fail! that 
terribl baptism of blood which he give you make you free to go to him 
in spirit, as you have as yet done in your time of freedom, when the 
sun rise and set. At such time you go by my volit and not by his; 
and thi power to good of you and others, as you have won from your 
suffer at hi hands. thi is now all the more preciou that he know 
it not, and to guard himself have even cut himself off from hi 
knowledg of our where. we, however, are not selfish, and we believ 
that god is with us through all thi blackness, and these mani dark 
hours. We shall follow him; and we shall not flinch; even if we peril 
ourselv that we becom like him. friend john, thi ha been a great 
hour; and it have done much to advanc us on our way. you must be scribe 
and write him all down, so that when the other return from their work 
you can give it to them; then they shall know as we do." 

and so I have written it whilst we wait their return, and mrs. harker 
ha written with her typewrit all sinc she brought the ms. to us. 




chapter xxvi 

dr. seward' diari 


_29 october._--thi is written in the train from varna to galatz. last 
night we all assembl a littl befor the time of sunset. each of us 
had done hi work as well as he could; so far as thought, and endeavour, 
and opportun go, we are prepar for the whole of our journey, and 
for our work when we get to galatz. when the usual time came round mrs. 
harker prepar herself for her hypnot effort; and after a longer and 
more seriou effort on the part of van hels than ha been usual 
necessary, she sank into the trance. usual she speak on a hint; but 
thi time the professor had to ask her questions, and to ask them pretti 
resolutely, befor we could learn anything; at last her answer came:-- 

"I can see nothing; we are still; there are no wave lapping, but onli a 
steadi swirl of water softli run against the hawser. I can hear 
men' voic calling, near and far, and the roll and creak of oar in 
the rowlocks. A gun is fire somewhere; the echo of it seem far away. 
there is tramp of feet overhead, and rope and chain are drag 
along. what is this? there is a gleam of light; I can feel the air 
blow upon me." 

here she stopped. she had risen, as if impulsively, from where she lay 
on the sofa, and rais both her hands, palm upwards, as if lift a 
weight. van hels and I look at each other with understanding. 
quincey rais hi eyebrow slightli and look at her intently, whilst 
harker' hand instinct close round the hilt of hi kukri. there 
wa a long pause. We all knew that the time when she could speak wa 
passing; but we felt that it wa useless to say anything. suddenli she 
sat up, and, as she open her eyes, said sweetly:-- 

"would none of you like a cup of tea? you must all be so tired!" We 
could onli make her happy, and so acquiesced. she bustl off to get 
tea; when she had gone van hels said:-- 

"you see, my friends. _he_ is close to land: he ha left hi 
earth-chest. but he ha yet to get on shore. In the night he may lie 
hidden somewhere; but if he be not carri on shore, or if the ship do 
not touch it, he cannot achiev the land. In such case he can, if it be 
in the night, chang hi form and can jump or fli on shore, as he did 
at whitby. but if the day come befor he get on shore, then, unless he 
be carri he cannot escape. and if he be carried, then the custom men 
may discov what the box contain. thus, in fine, if he escap not on 
shore to-night, or befor dawn, there will be the whole day lost to him. 
We may then arriv in time; for if he escap not at night we shall come 
on him in daytime, box up and at our mercy; for he dare not be hi 
true self, awak and visible, lest he be discovered." 

there wa no more to be said, so we wait in patienc until the dawn; 
at which time we might learn more from mrs. harker. 

earli thi morn we listened, with breathless anxiety, for her 
respons in her trance. the hypnot stage wa even longer in come 
than before; and when it came the time remain until full sunris wa 
so short that we began to despair. van hels seem to throw hi whole 
soul into the effort; at last, in obedi to hi will she made 
reply:-- 

"all is dark. I hear lap water, level with me, and some creak as 
of wood on wood." she paused, and the red sun shot up. We must wait till 
to-night. 

and so it is that we are travel toward galatz in an agoni of 
expectation. We are due to arriv between two and three in the morning; 
but already, at bucharest, we are three hour late, so we cannot 
possibl get in till well after sun-up. thu we shall have two more 
hypnot messag from mrs. harker; either or both may possibl throw 
more light on what is happening. 

* * * * * 

_later._--sunset ha come and gone. fortun it came at a time when 
there wa no distraction; for had it occur whilst we were at a 
station, we might not have secur the necessari calm and isolation. 
mrs. harker yield to the hypnot influenc even less readili than 
thi morning. I am in fear that her power of read the count' 
sensat may die away, just when we want it most. It seem to me that 
her imagin is begin to work. whilst she ha been in the tranc 
hitherto she ha confin herself to the simplest of facts. If thi goe 
on it may ultim mislead us. If I thought that the count' power 
over her would die away equal with her power of knowledg it would be 
a happi thought; but I am afraid that it may not be so. when she did 
speak, her word were enigmatical:-- 

"someth is go out; I can feel it pass me like a cold wind. I can 
hear, far off, confus sounds--a of men talk in strang tongues, 
fierce-fal water, and the howl of wolves." she stop and a 
shudder ran through her, increas in intens for a few seconds, 
till, at the end, she shook as though in a palsy. she said no more, even 
in answer to the professor' imper questioning. when she woke from 
the trance, she wa cold, and exhausted, and languid; but her mind wa 
all alert. she could not rememb anything, but ask what she had said; 
when she wa told, she ponder over it deepli for a long time and in 
silence. 

* * * * * 

_30 october, 7 a. m._--we are near galatz now, and I may not have time 
to write later. sunris thi morn wa anxious look for by us all. 
know of the increas difficulti of procur the hypnot trance, 
van hels began hi pass earlier than usual. they produc no 
effect, however, until the regular time, when she yield with a still 
greater difficulty, onli a minut befor the sun rose. the professor 
lost no time in hi questioning; her answer came with equal quickness:-- 

"all is dark. I hear water swirl by, level with my ears, and the 
creak of wood on wood. cattl low far off. there is anoth sound, a 
queer one like----" she stop and grew white, and whiter still. 

"go on; go on! speak, I command you!" said van hels in an agonis 
voice. At the same time there wa despair in hi eyes, for the risen sun 
wa redden even mrs. harker' pale face. she open her eyes, and we 
all start as she said, sweetli and seemingli with the utmost 
unconcern:-- 

"oh, professor, whi ask me to do what you know I can't? I don't rememb 
anything." then, see the look of amaz on our faces, she said, 
turn from one to the other with a troubl look:-- 

"what have I said? what have I done? I know nothing, onli that I wa 
lie here, half asleep, and heard you say go on! speak, I command you!' 
It seem so funni to hear you order me about, as if I were a bad 
child!" 

"oh, madam mina," he said, sadly, "it is proof, if proof be needed, of 
how I love and honour you, when a word for your good, spoken more 
earnest than ever, can seem so strang becaus it is to order her whom I 
am proud to obey!" 

the whistl are sounding; we are near galatz. We are on fire with 
anxieti and eagerness. 


_mina harker' journal._ 

_30 october._--mr. morri took me to the hotel where our room had been 
order by telegraph, he be the one who could best be spared, sinc 
he doe not speak ani foreign language. the forc were distribut 
much as they had been at varna, except that lord godalm went to the 
vice-consul, as hi rank might serv as an immedi guarante of some 
sort to the official, we be in extrem hurry. jonathan and the two 
doctor went to the ship agent to learn particular of the arriv 
of the _czarina catherine_. 

* * * * * 

_later._--lord godalm ha returned. the consul is away, and the 
vice-consul sick; so the routin work ha been attend to by a clerk. 
He wa veri obliging, and offer to do anyth in hi power. 


_jonathan harker' journal._ 

_30 october._--at nine o'clock dr. van helsing, dr. seward, and I call 
on messrs. mackenzi & steinkoff, the agent of the london firm of 
hapgood. they had receiv a wire from london, in answer to lord 
godalming' telegraph request, ask us to show them ani civil in 
their power. they were more than kind and courteous, and took us at onc 
on board the _czarina catherine_, which lay at anchor out in the river 
harbour. there we saw the captain, donelson by name, who told us of hi 
voyage. He said that in all hi life he had never had so favour a 
run. 

"man!" he said, "but it made us afeard, for we expeckit that we should 
have to pay for it wi' some rare piec o' ill luck, so as to keep up the 
average. it' no canni to run frae london to the black sea wi' a wind 
ahint ye, as though the deil himself were blawin' on yer sail for hi 
ain purpose. an' a' the time we could no speer a thing. gin we were nigh 
a ship, or a port, or a headland, a fog fell on us and travel wi' us, 
till when after it had lift and we look out, the deil a thing could 
we see. We ran by gibraltar wi'oot bein' abl to signal; an' till we 
came to the dardanel and had to wait to get our permit to pass, we 
never were within hail o' aught. At first I inclin to slack off sail 
and beat about till the fog wa lifted; but whiles, I thocht that if the 
deil wa mind to get us into the black sea quick, he wa like to do it 
whether we would or no. If we had a quick voyag it would be no to our 
miscredit wi' the owners, or no hurt to our traffic; an' the old mon who 
had serv hi ain purpos wad be decent grate to us for no 
hinderin' him." thi mixtur of simplic and cunning, of superstit 
and commerci reasoning, arous van helsing, who said:-- 

"mine friend, that devil is more clever than he is thought by some; and 
he know when he meet hi match!" the skipper wa not displeas with the 
compliment, and went on:-- 

"when we got past the bosphoru the men began to grumble; some o' them, 
the roumanians, came and ask me to heav overboard a big box which had 
been put on board by a queer lookin' old man just befor we had start 
frae london. I had seen them speer at the fellow, and put out their twa 
finger when they saw him, to guard against the evil eye. man! but the 
supersteet of foreign is pairfectli rideeculous! I sent them aboot 
their busi pretti quick; but as just after a fog close in on us I 
felt a wee bit as they did anent something, though I wouldn't say it wa 
agin the big box. well, on we went, and as the fog didn't let up for 
five day I joost let the wind carri us; for if the deil want to get 
somewheres--well, he would fetch it up a'reet. an' if he didn't, well, 
we'd keep a sharp lookout anyhow. sure eneuch, we had a fair way and 
deep water all the time; and two day ago, when the mornin' sun came 
through the fog, we found ourselv just in the river opposit galatz. 
the roumanian were wild, and want me right or wrong to take out the 
box and fling it in the river. I had to argi wi' them aboot it wi' a 
handspike; an' when the last o' them rose off the deck wi' hi head in 
hi hand, I had convinc them that, evil eye or no evil eye, the 
properti and the trust of my owner were better in my hand than in the 
river danube. they had, mind ye, taken the box on the deck readi to 
fling in, and as it wa mark galatz _via_ varna, I thocht i'd let it 
lie till we discharg in the port an' get rid o't althegither. We 
didn't do much clearin' that day, an' had to remain the nicht at anchor; 
but in the mornin', braw an' airly, an hour befor sun-up, a man came 
aboard wi' an order, written to him from england, to receiv a box 
mark for one count dracula. sure eneuch the matter wa one readi to 
hi hand. He had hi paper a' reet, an' glad I wa to be rid o' the 
dam' thing, for I wa beginnin' masel' to feel uneasi at it. If the deil 
did have ani luggag aboord the ship, i'm thinkin' it wa nane ither 
than that same!" 

"what wa the name of the man who took it?" ask dr. van hels with 
restrain eagerness. 

"i'll be tellin' ye quick!" he answered, and, step down to hi 
cabin, produc a receipt sign "immanuel hildesheim." burgen-strass 
16 wa the address. We found out that thi wa all the captain knew; so 
with thank we came away. 

We found hildesheim in hi office, a hebrew of rather the adelphi 
theatr type, with a nose like a sheep, and a fez. hi argument were 
point with specie--w do the punctuation--and with a littl 
bargain he told us what he knew. thi turn out to be simpl but 
important. He had receiv a letter from mr. de vill of london, tell 
him to receive, if possibl befor sunris so as to avoid customs, a box 
which would arriv at galatz in the _czarina catherine_. thi he wa to 
give in charg to a certain petrof skinsky, who dealt with the slovak 
who trade down the river to the port. He had been paid for hi work by 
an english bank note, which had been duli cash for gold at the danub 
intern bank. when skinski had come to him, he had taken him to 
the ship and hand over the box, so as to save porterage. that wa all 
he knew. 

We then sought for skinsky, but were unabl to find him. one of hi 
neighbours, who did not seem to bear him ani affection, said that he had 
gone away two day before, no one knew whither. thi wa corrobor by 
hi landlord, who had receiv by messeng the key of the hous 
togeth with the rent due, in english money. thi had been between ten 
and eleven o'clock last night. We were at a standstil again. 

whilst we were talk one came run and breathlessli gasp out that 
the bodi of skinski had been found insid the wall of the churchyard of 
st. peter, and that the throat had been torn open as if by some wild 
animal. those we had been speak with ran off to see the horror, the 
women cri out "thi is the work of a slovak!" We hurri away lest we 
should have been in some way drawn into the affair, and so detained. 

As we came home we could arriv at no definit conclusion. We were all 
convinc that the box wa on it way, by water, to somewhere; but where 
that might be we would have to discover. with heavi heart we came home 
to the hotel to mina. 

when we met together, the first thing wa to consult as to take mina 
again into our confidence. thing are get desperate, and it is at 
least a chance, though a hazard one. As a preliminari step, I wa 
releas from my promis to her. 


_mina harker' journal._ 

_30 october, evening._--they were so tire and worn out and dispirit 
that there wa noth to be done till they had some rest; so I ask 
them all to lie down for half an hour whilst I should enter everyth 
up to the moment. I feel so grate to the man who invent the 
"traveller's" typewriter, and to mr. morri for get thi one for 
me. I should have felt quite; astray do the work if I had to write 
with a pen.... 

It is all done; poor dear, dear jonathan, what he must have suffered, 
what must he be suffer now. He lie on the sofa hardli seem to 
breathe, and hi whole bodi appear in collapse. hi brow are knit; hi 
face is drawn with pain. poor fellow, mayb he is thinking, and I can 
see hi face all wrinkl up with the concentr of hi thoughts. oh! 
if I could onli help at all.... I shall do what I can. 

I have ask dr. van helsing, and he ha got me all the paper that I 
have not yet seen.... whilst they are resting, I shall go over all 
carefully, and perhap I may arriv at some conclusion. I shall tri to 
follow the professor' example, and think without prejudic on the fact 
befor me.... 

* * * * * 

I do believ that under god' provid I have made a discovery. I 
shall get the map and look over them.... 

* * * * * 

I am more than ever sure that I am right. My new conclus is ready, so 
I shall get our parti togeth and read it. they can judg it; it is 
well to be accurate, and everi minut is precious. 


_mina harker' memorandum._ 

(enter in her journal.) 

_ground of inquiry._--count dracula' problem is to get back to hi own 
place. 

(_a_) He must be _brought back_ by some one. thi is evident; for had he 
power to move himself as he wish he could go either as man, or wolf, 
or bat, or in some other way. He evid fear discoveri or 
interference, in the state of helpless in which he must be--confin 
as he is between dawn and sunset in hi wooden box. 

(_b_) _how is he to be taken?_--her a process of exclus may help 
us. By road, by rail, by water? 

1. _bi road._--ther are endless difficulties, especi in leav the 
city. 

(_x_) there are people; and peopl are curious, and investigate. A hint, 
a surmise, a doubt as to what might be in the box, would destroy him. 

(_y_) there are, or there may be, custom and octroi offic to pass. 

(_z_) hi pursuer might follow. thi is hi highest fear; and in order 
to prevent hi be betray he ha repelled, so far as he can, even 
hi victim--me! 

2. _bi rail._--ther is no one in charg of the box. It would have to 
take it chanc of be delayed; and delay would be fatal, with enemi 
on the track. true, he might escap at night; but what would he be, if 
left in a strang place with no refug that he could fli to? thi is not 
what he intends; and he doe not mean to risk it. 

3. _bi water._--her is the safest way, in one respect, but with most 
danger in another. On the water he is powerless except at night; even 
then he can onli summon fog and storm and snow and hi wolves. but were 
he wrecked, the live water would engulf him, helpless; and he would 
inde be lost. He could have the vessel drive to land; but if it were 
unfriendli land, wherein he wa not free to move, hi posit would 
still be desperate. 

We know from the record that he wa on the water; so what we have to do 
is to ascertain _what_ water. 

the first thing is to realis exactli what he ha done as yet; we may, 
then, get a light on what hi later task is to be. 

_firstly._--w must differenti between what he did in london as part 
of hi gener plan of action, when he wa press for moment and had 
to arrang as best he could. 

_secondly_ we must see, as well as we can surmis it from the fact we 
know of, what he ha done here. 

As to the first, he evid intend to arriv at galatz, and sent 
invoic to varna to deceiv us lest we should ascertain hi mean of 
exit from england; hi immedi and sole purpos then wa to escape. 
the proof of this, is the letter of instruct sent to immanuel 
hildesheim to clear and take away the box _befor sunrise_. there is 
also the instruct to petrof skinsky. these we must onli guess at; but 
there must have been some letter or message, sinc skinski came to 
hildesheim. 

that, so far, hi plan were success we know. the _czarina catherine_ 
made a phenomen quick journey--so much so that captain donelson' 
suspicion were aroused; but hi superstit unit with hi canni 
play the count' game for him, and he ran with hi favour wind 
through fog and all till he brought up blindfold at galatz. that the 
count' arrang were well made, ha been proved. hildesheim clear 
the box, took it off, and gave it to skinsky. skinski took it--and here 
we lose the trail. We onli know that the box is somewher on the water, 
move along. the custom and the octroi, if there be any, have been 
avoided. 

now we come to what the count must have done after hi arrival--_on 
land_, at galatz. 

the box wa given to skinski befor sunrise. At sunris the count could 
appear in hi own form. here, we ask whi skinski wa chosen at all to 
aid in the work? In my husband' diary, skinski is mention as deal 
with the slovak who trade down the river to the port; and the man' 
remark, that the murder wa the work of a slovak, show the gener 
feel against hi class. the count want isolation. 

My surmis is, this: that in london the count decid to get back to hi 
castl by water, as the most safe and secret way. He wa brought from 
the castl by szgany, and probabl they deliv their cargo to slovak 
who took the box to varna, for there they were ship for london. 
thu the count had knowledg of the person who could arrang thi 
service. when the box wa on land, befor sunris or after sunset, he 
came out from hi box, met skinski and instruct him what to do as to 
arrang the carriag of the box up some river. when thi wa done, and 
he knew that all wa in train, he blot out hi traces, as he thought, 
by murder hi agent. 

I have examin the map and find that the river most suitabl for the 
slovak to have ascend is either the pruth or the sereth. I read in 
the typescript that in my tranc I heard cow low and water swirl 
level with my ear and the creak of wood. the count in hi box, then, 
wa on a river in an open boat--propel probabl either by oar or 
poles, for the bank are near and it is work against stream. there 
would be no such sound if float down stream. 

Of cours it may not be either the sereth or the pruth, but we may 
possibl investig further. now of these two, the pruth is the more 
easili navigated, but the sereth is, at fundu, join by the bistritza 
which run up round the borgo pass. the loop it make is manifestli as 
close to dracula' castl as can be got by water. 


_mina harker' journal--continued._ 

when I had done reading, jonathan took me in hi arm and kiss me. the 
other kept shake me by both hands, and dr. van hels said:-- 

"our dear madam mina is onc more our teacher. her eye have been where 
we were blinded. now we are on the track onc again, and thi time we 
may succeed. our enemi is at hi most helpless; and if we can come on 
him by day, on the water, our task will be over. He ha a start, but he 
is powerless to hasten, as he may not leav hi box lest those who carri 
him may suspect; for them to suspect would be to prompt them to throw 
him in the stream where he perish. thi he knows, and will not. now men, 
to our council of war; for, here and now, we must plan what each and all 
shall do." 

"I shall get a steam launch and follow him," said lord godalming. 

"and I, hors to follow on the bank lest by chanc he land," said mr. 
morris. 

"good!" said the professor, "both good. but neither must go alone. there 
must be forc to overcom forc if need be; the slovak is strong and 
rough, and he carri rude arms." all the men smiled, for amongst them 
they carri a small arsenal. said mr. morris:-- 

"I have brought some winchesters; they are pretti handi in a crowd, and 
there may be wolves. the count, if you remember, took some other 
precautions; he made some requisit on other that mrs. harker could 
not quit hear or understand. We must be readi at all points." dr. 
seward said:-- 

"I think I had better go with quincey. We have been accustom to hunt 
together, and we two, well armed, will be a match for whatev may come 
along. you must not be alone, art. It may be necessari to fight the 
slovaks, and a chanc thrust--for I don't suppos these fellow carri 
guns--would undo all our plans. there must be no chances, thi time; we 
shall, not rest until the count' head and bodi have been separated, and 
we are sure that he cannot re-incarnate." He look at jonathan as he 
spoke, and jonathan look at me. I could see that the poor dear wa 
torn about in hi mind. Of cours he want to be with me; but then the 
boat servic would, most likely, be the one which would destroy the ... 
the ... the ... vampire. (whi did I hesit to write the word?) He wa 
silent awhile, and dure hi silenc dr. van hels spoke:-- 

"friend jonathan, thi is to you for twice reasons. first, becaus you 
are young and brave and can fight, and all energi may be need at the 
last; and again that it is your right to destroy him--that--which ha 
wrought such woe to you and yours. Be not afraid for madam mina; she 
will be my care, if I may. I am old. My leg are not so quick to run as 
once; and I am not use to ride so long or to pursu as need be, or to 
fight with lethal weapons. but I can be of other service; I can fight in 
other way. and I can die, if need be, as well as younger men. now let 
me say that what I would is this: while you, my lord godalm and 
friend jonathan go in your so swift littl steamboat up the river, and 
whilst john and quincey guard the bank where perchanc he might be 
landed, I will take madam mina right into the heart of the enemy' 
country. whilst the old fox is tie in hi box, float on the run 
stream whenc he cannot escap to land--wher he dare not rais the lid 
of hi coffin-box lest hi slovak carrier should in fear leav him to 
perish--w shall go in the track where jonathan went,--from bistritz 
over the borgo, and find our way to the castl of dracula. here, madam 
mina' hypnot power will sure help, and we shall find our way--al 
dark and unknown otherwise--aft the first sunris when we are near 
that fate place. there is much to be done, and other place to be 
made sanctify, so that that nest of viper be obliterated." here 
jonathan interrupt him hotly:-- 

"do you mean to say, professor van helsing, that you would bring mina, 
in her sad case and taint as she is with that devil' illness, right 
into the jaw of hi death-trap? not for the world! not for heaven or 
hell!" He becam almost speechless for a minute, and then went on:-- 

"do you know what the place is? have you seen that aw den of hellish 
infamy--with the veri moonlight aliv with grisli shapes, and everi 
speck of dust that whirl in the wind a devour monster in embryo? 
have you felt the vampire' lip upon your throat?" here he turn to 
me, and as hi eye lit on my forehead he threw up hi arm with a cry: 
"oh, my god, what have we done to have thi terror upon us!" and he sank 
down on the sofa in a collaps of misery. the professor' voice, as he 
spoke in clear, sweet tones, which seem to vibrat in the air, calm 
us all:-- 

"oh, my friend, it is becaus I would save madam mina from that aw 
place that I would go. god forbid that I should take her into that 
place. there is work--wild work--to be done there, that her eye may not 
see. We men here, all save jonathan, have seen with their own eye what 
is to be done befor that place can be purify. rememb that we are in 
terribl straits. If the count escap us thi time--and he is strong and 
subtl and cunning--h may choos to sleep him for a century, and then 
in time our dear one"--h took my hand--"would come to him to keep him 
company, and would be as those other that you, jonathan, saw. you have 
told us of their gloat lips; you heard their ribald laugh as they 
clutch the move bag that the count threw to them. you shudder; and 
well may it be. forgiv me that I make you so much pain, but it is 
necessary. My friend, is it not a dire need for the which I am giving, 
possibl my life? If it were that ani one went into that place to stay, 
it is I who would have to go to keep them company." 

"do as you will," said jonathan, with a sob that shook him all over, "we 
are in the hand of god!" 

* * * * * 

_later._--oh, it did me good to see the way that these brave men worked. 
how can women help love men when they are so earnest, and so true, and 
so brave! and, too, it made me think of the wonder power of money! 
what can it not do when it is properli applied; and what might it do 
when base used. I felt so thank that lord godalm is rich, and 
that both he and mr. morris, who also ha plenti of money, are will 
to spend it so freely. for if they did not, our littl expedit could 
not start, either so promptli or so well equipped, as it will within 
anoth hour. It is not three hour sinc it wa arrang what part each 
of us wa to do; and now lord godalm and jonathan have a love steam 
launch, with steam up readi to start at a moment' notice. dr. seward 
and mr. morri have half a dozen good horses, well appointed. We have 
all the map and applianc of variou kind that can be had. professor 
van hels and I are to leav by the 11:40 train to-night for veresti, 
where we are to get a carriag to drive to the borgo pass. We are 
bring a good deal of readi money, as we are to buy a carriag and 
horses. We shall drive ourselves, for we have no one whom we can trust 
in the matter. the professor know someth of a great mani languages, 
so we shall get on all right. We have all got arms, even for me a 
large-bor revolver; jonathan would not be happi unless I wa arm like 
the rest. alas! I cannot carri one arm that the rest do; the scar on my 
forehead forbid that. dear dr. van hels comfort me by tell me 
that I am fulli arm as there may be wolves; the weather is get 
colder everi hour, and there are snow-flurri which come and go as 
warnings. 

* * * * * 

_later._--it took all my courag to say good-by to my darling. We may 
never meet again. courage, mina! the professor is look at you keenly; 
hi look is a warning. there must be no tear now--unless it may be that 
god will let them fall in gladness. 


_jonathan harker' journal._ 

_octob 30. night._--i am write thi in the light from the furnac 
door of the steam launch: lord godalm is fire up. He is an 
experienc hand at the work, as he ha had for year a launch of hi 
own on the thames, and anoth on the norfolk broads. regard our 
plans, we final decid that mina' guess wa correct, and that if ani 
waterway wa chosen for the count' escap back to hi castle, the 
sereth and then the bistritza at it junction, would be the one. We took 
it, that somewher about the 47th degree, north latitude, would be the 
place chosen for the cross the countri between the river and the 
carpathians. We have no fear in run at good speed up the river at 
night; there is plenti of water, and the bank are wide enough apart to 
make steaming, even in the dark, easi enough. lord godalm tell me to 
sleep for a while, as it is enough for the present for one to be on 
watch. but I cannot sleep--how can I with the terribl danger hang 
over my darling, and her go out into that aw place.... My onli 
comfort is that we are in the hand of god. onli for that faith it would 
be easier to die than to live, and so be quit of all the trouble. mr. 
morri and dr. seward were off on their long ride befor we started; 
they are to keep up the right bank, far enough off to get on higher 
land where they can see a good stretch of river and avoid the follow 
of it curves. they have, for the first stages, two men to ride and lead 
their spare horses--four in all, so as not to excit curiosity. when 
they dismiss the men, which shall be shortly, they shall themselv look 
after the horses. It may be necessari for us to join forces; if so they 
can mount our whole party. one of the saddl ha a movabl horn, and 
can be easili adapt for mina, if required. 

It is a wild adventur we are on. here, as we are rush along through 
the darkness, with the cold from the river seem to rise up and strike 
us; with all the mysteri voic of the night around us, it all come 
home. We seem to be drift into unknown place and unknown ways; into 
a whole world of dark and dread things. godalm is shut the 
furnac door.... 

* * * * * 

_31 october._--stil hurri along. the day ha come, and godalm is 
sleeping. I am on watch. the morn is bitterli cold; the furnac heat 
is grateful, though we have heavi fur coats. As yet we have pass onli 
a few open boats, but none of them had on board ani box or packag of 
anyth like the size of the one we seek. the men were scare everi 
time we turn our electr lamp on them, and fell on their knee and 
prayed. 

* * * * * 

_1 november, evening._--no news all day; we have found noth of the 
kind we seek. We have now pass into the bistritza; and if we are wrong 
in our surmis our chanc is gone. We have over-haul everi boat, big 
and little. earli thi morning, one crew took us for a govern boat, 
and treat us accordingly. We saw in thi a way of smooth matters, 
so at fundu, where the bistritza run into the sereth, we got a 
roumanian flag which we now fli conspicuously. with everi boat which we 
have over-haul sinc then thi trick ha succeeded; we have had everi 
defer shown to us, and not onc ani object to whatev we chose 
to ask or do. some of the slovak tell us that a big boat pass them, 
go at more than usual speed as she had a doubl crew on board. thi 
wa befor they came to fundu, so they could not tell us whether the 
boat turn into the bistritza or continu on up the sereth. At fundu 
we could not hear of ani such boat, so she must have pass there in the 
night. I am feel veri sleepy; the cold is perhap begin to tell 
upon me, and natur must have rest some time. godalm insist that he 
shall keep the first watch. god bless him for all hi good to poor 
dear mina and me. 

* * * * * 

_2 november, morning._--it is broad daylight. that good fellow would not 
wake me. He say it would have been a sin to, for I slept peac and 
wa forget my trouble. It seem brutal selfish to me to have slept 
so long, and let him watch all night; but he wa quit right. I am a new 
man thi morning; and, as I sit here and watch him sleeping, I can do 
all that is necessari both as to mind the engine, steering, and 
keep watch. I can feel that my strength and energi are come back to 
me. I wonder where mina is now, and van helsing. they should have got to 
veresti about noon on wednesday. It would take them some time to get the 
carriag and horses; so if they had start and travel hard, they 
would be about now at the borgo pass. god guid and help them! I am 
afraid to think what may happen. If we could onli go faster! but we 
cannot; the engin are throb and do their utmost. I wonder how 
dr. seward and mr. morri are get on. there seem to be endless 
stream run down the mountain into thi river, but as none of them 
are veri large--at present, at all events, though they are terribl 
doubtless in winter and when the snow melts--th horsemen may not have 
met much obstruction. I hope that befor we get to strasba we may see 
them; for if by that time we have not overtaken the count, it may be 
necessari to take counsel togeth what to do next. 


_dr. seward' diary._ 

_2 november._--thre day on the road. No news, and no time to write it 
if there had been, for everi moment is precious. We have had onli the 
rest need for the horses; but we are both bear it wonderfully. 
those adventur day of our are turn up useful. We must push on; 
we shall never feel happi till we get the launch in sight again. 

* * * * * 

_3 november._--w heard at fundu that the launch had gone up the 
bistritza. I wish it wasn't so cold. there are sign of snow coming; and 
if it fall heavi it will stop us. In such case we must get a sledg and 
go on, russian fashion. 

* * * * * 

_4 november._--to-day we heard of the launch have been detain by an 
accid when tri to forc a way up the rapids. the slovak boat get 
up all right, by aid of a rope and steer with knowledge. some went up 
onli a few hour before. godalm is an amateur fitter himself, and 
evid it wa he who put the launch in trim again. finally, they got 
up the rapid all right, with local help, and are off on the chase 
afresh. I fear that the boat is not ani better for the accident; the 
peasantri tell us that after she got upon smooth water again, she kept 
stop everi now and again so long as she wa in sight. We must push 
on harder than ever; our help may be want soon. 


_mina harker' journal._ 

_31 october._--arriv at veresti at noon. the professor tell me that 
thi morn at dawn he could hardli hypnotis me at all, and that all I 
could say was: "dark and quiet." He is off now buy a carriag and 
horses. He say that he will later on tri to buy addit horses, so 
that we may be abl to chang them on the way. We have someth more 
than 70 mile befor us. the countri is lovely, and most interesting; if 
onli we were under differ conditions, how delight it would be to 
see it all. If jonathan and I were drive through it alon what a 
pleasur it would be. To stop and see people, and learn someth of 
their life, and to fill our mind and memori with all the colour and 
picturesqu of the whole wild, beauti countri and the quaint 
people! but, alas!-- 

* * * * * 

_later._--dr. van hels ha returned. He ha got the carriag and 
horses; we are to have some dinner, and to start in an hour. the 
landladi is put us up a huge basket of provisions; it seem enough 
for a compani of soldiers. the professor encourag her, and whisper to 
me that it may be a week befor we can get ani good food again. He ha 
been shop too, and ha sent home such a wonder lot of fur coat 
and wraps, and all sort of warm things. there will not be ani chanc of 
our be cold. 

* * * * * 

We shall soon be off. I am afraid to think what may happen to us. We are 
truli in the hand of god. He alon know what may be, and I pray him, 
with all the strength of my sad and humbl soul, that He will watch over 
my belov husband; that whatev may happen, jonathan may know that I 
love him and honour him more than I can say, and that my latest and 
truest thought will be alway for him. 




chapter xxvii 

mina harker' journal 


_1 november._--al day long we have travelled, and at a good speed. the 
hors seem to know that they are be kindli treated, for they go 
willingli their full stage at best speed. We have now had so mani 
chang and find the same thing so constantli that we are encourag to 
think that the journey will be an easi one. dr. van hels is laconic; 
he tell the farmer that he is hurri to bistritz, and pay them well 
to make the exchang of horses. We get hot soup, or coffee, or tea; and 
off we go. It is a love country; full of beauti of all imagin 
kinds, and the peopl are brave, and strong, and simple, and seem full 
of nice qualities. they are _very, very_ superstitious. In the first 
hous where we stopped, when the woman who serv us saw the scar on my 
forehead, she cross herself and put out two finger toward me, to 
keep off the evil eye. I believ they went to the troubl of put an 
extra amount of garlic into our food; and I can't abid garlic. ever 
sinc then I have taken care not to take off my hat or veil, and so have 
escap their suspicions. We are travel fast, and as we have no 
driver with us to carri tales, we go ahead of scandal; but I daresay 
that fear of the evil eye will follow hard behind us all the way. the 
professor seem tireless; all day he would not take ani rest, though he 
made me sleep for a long spell. At sunset time he hypnotis me, and he 
say that I answer as usual "darkness, lap water and creak 
wood"; so our enemi is still on the river. I am afraid to think of 
jonathan, but somehow I have now no fear for him, or for myself. I write 
thi whilst we wait in a farmhous for the hors to be got ready. dr. 
van hels is sleeping, poor dear, he look veri tire and old and 
grey, but hi mouth is set as firmli as a conqueror's; even in hi sleep 
he is instinct with resolution. when we have well start I must make 
him rest whilst I drive. I shall tell him that we have day befor us, 
and we must not break down when most of all hi strength will be 
needed.... all is ready; we are off shortly. 

* * * * * 

_2 november, morning._--i wa successful, and we took turn drive all 
night; now the day is on us, bright though cold. there is a strang 
heavi in the air--i say heavi for want of a better word; I mean 
that it oppress us both. It is veri cold, and onli our warm fur keep 
us comfortable. At dawn van hels hypnotis me; he say I answer 
"darkness, creak wood and roar water," so the river is chang as 
they ascend. I do hope that my darl will not run ani chanc of 
danger--mor than need be; but we are in god' hands. 

* * * * * 

_2 november, night._--al day long driving. the countri get wilder as 
we go, and the great spur of the carpathians, which at veresti seem 
so far from us and so low on the horizon, now seem to gather round us 
and tower in front. We both seem in good spirits; I think we make an 
effort each to cheer the other; in the do so we cheer ourselves. dr. 
van hels say that by morn we shall reach the borgo pass. the 
hous are veri few here now, and the professor say that the last hors 
we got will have to go on with us, as we may not be abl to change. He 
got two in addit to the two we changed, so that now we have a rude 
four-in-hand. the dear hors are patient and good, and they give us no 
trouble. We are not worri with other travellers, and so even I can 
drive. We shall get to the pass in daylight; we do not want to arriv 
before. So we take it easy, and have each a long rest in turn. oh, what 
will to-morrow bring to us? We go to seek the place where my poor 
darl suffer so much. god grant that we may be guid aright, and 
that He will deign to watch over my husband and those dear to us both, 
and who are in such deadli peril. As for me, I am not worthi in hi 
sight. alas! I am unclean to hi eyes, and shall be until He may deign 
to let me stand forth in hi sight as one of those who have not incur 
hi wrath. 


_memorandum by abraham van helsing._ 

_4 november._--thi to my old and true friend john seward, m.d., of 
purfleet, london, in case I may not see him. It may explain. It is 
morning, and I write by a fire which all the night I have kept 
alive--madam mina aid me. It is cold, cold; so cold that the grey 
heavi sky is full of snow, which when it fall will settl for all 
winter as the ground is harden to receiv it. It seem to have 
affect madam mina; she ha been so heavi of head all day that she wa 
not like herself. she sleeps, and sleeps, and sleeps! she who is usual 
so alert, have done liter noth all the day; she even have lost 
her appetite. she make no entri into her littl diary, she who write so 
faith at everi pause. someth whisper to me that all is not well. 
however, to-night she is more _vif_. her long sleep all day have refresh 
and restor her, for now she is all sweet and bright as ever. At sunset 
I tri to hypnotis her, but alas! with no effect; the power ha grown 
less and less with each day, and to-night it fail me altogether. well, 
god' will be done--whatev it may be, and whithersoev it may lead! 

now to the historical, for as madam mina write not in her stenography, I 
must, in my cumbrou old fashion, that so each day of us may not go 
unrecorded. 

We got to the borgo pass just after sunris yesterday morning. when I 
saw the sign of the dawn I got readi for the hypnotism. We stop our 
carriage, and got down so that there might be no disturbance. I made a 
couch with furs, and madam mina, lie down, yield herself as usual, but 
more slow and more short time than ever, to the hypnot sleep. As 
before, came the answer: "dark and the swirl of water." then she 
woke, bright and radiant and we go on our way and soon reach the pass. 
At thi time and place, she becom all on fire with zeal; some new 
guid power be in her manifested, for she point to a road and say:-- 

"thi is the way." 

"how know you it?" I ask. 

"of cours I know it," she answer, and with a pause, add: "have not my 
jonathan travel it and wrote of hi travel?" 

At first I think somewhat strange, but soon I see that there be onli one 
such by-road. It is use but little, and veri differ from the coach 
road from the bukovina to bistritz, which is more wide and hard, and 
more of use. 

So we came down thi road; when we meet other ways--not alway were we 
sure that they were road at all, for they be neglect and light snow 
have fallen--th hors know and they only. I give rein to them, and 
they go on so patient. by-and-bi we find all the thing which jonathan 
have note in that wonder diari of him. then we go on for long, long 
hour and hours. At the first, I tell madam mina to sleep; she try, and 
she succeed. she sleep all the time; till at the last, I feel myself to 
suspici grow, and attempt to wake her. but she sleep on, and I may 
not wake her though I try. I do not wish to tri too hard lest I harm 
her; for I know that she have suffer much, and sleep at time be 
all-in-al to her. I think I drows myself, for all of sudden I feel 
guilt, as though I have done something; I find myself bolt up, with the 
rein in my hand, and the good hors go along jog, jog, just as ever. I 
look down and find madam mina still sleep. It is now not far off sunset 
time, and over the snow the light of the sun flow in big yellow flood, 
so that we throw great long shadow on where the mountain rise so steep. 
for we are go up, and up; and all is oh! so wild and rocky, as though 
it were the end of the world. 

then I arous madam mina. thi time she wake with not much trouble, and 
then I tri to put her to hypnot sleep. but she sleep not, be as 
though I were not. still I tri and try, till all at onc I find her and 
myself in dark; so I look round, and find that the sun have gone down. 
madam mina laugh, and I turn and look at her. she is now quit awake, 
and look so well as I never saw her sinc that night at carfax when we 
first enter the count' house. I am amaze, and not at eas then; but she 
is so bright and tender and thought for me that I forget all fear. I 
light a fire, for we have brought suppli of wood with us, and she 
prepar food while I undo the hors and set them, tether in shelter, 
to feed. then when I return to the fire she have my supper ready. I go 
to help her; but she smile, and tell me that she have eat already--that 
she wa so hungri that she would not wait. I like it not, and I have 
grave doubts; but I fear to affright her, and so I am silent of it. she 
help me and I eat alone; and then we wrap in fur and lie besid the 
fire, and I tell her to sleep while I watch. but present I forget all 
of watching; and when I sudden rememb that I watch, I find her lie 
quiet, but awake, and look at me with so bright eyes. once, twice 
more the same occur, and I get much sleep till befor morning. when I 
wake I tri to hypnotis her; but alas! though she shut her eye 
obedient, she may not sleep. the sun rise up, and up, and up; and then 
sleep come to her too late, but so heavi that she will not wake. I have 
to lift her up, and place her sleep in the carriag when I have 
har the hors and made all ready. madam still sleep, and she look 
in her sleep more healthi and more redder than before. and I like it 
not. and I am afraid, afraid, afraid!--i am afraid of all things--even 
to think but I must go on my way. the stake we play for is life and 
death, or more than these, and we must not flinch. 

* * * * * 

_5 november, morning._--let me be accur in everything, for though you 
and I have seen some strang thing together, you may at the first think 
that I, van helsing, am mad--that the mani horror and the so long 
strain on nerv ha at the last turn my brain. 

all yesterday we travel, ever get closer to the mountains, and 
move into a more and more wild and desert land. there are great, 
frown precipic and much fall water, and natur seem to have held 
sometim her carnival. madam mina still sleep and sleep; and though I 
did have hunger and appeas it, I could not waken her--even for food. I 
began to fear that the fatal spell of the place wa upon her, taint as 
she is with that vampir baptism. "well," said I to myself, "if it be 
that she sleep all the day, it shall also be that I do not sleep at 
night." As we travel on the rough road, for a road of an ancient and 
imperfect kind there was, I held down my head and slept. again I wake 
with a sens of guilt and of time passed, and found madam mina still 
sleeping, and the sun low down. but all wa inde changed; the frown 
mountain seem further away, and we were near the top of a 
steep-ris hill, on summit of which wa such a castl as jonathan tell 
of in hi diary. At onc I exult and feared; for now, for good or ill, 
the end wa near. 

I woke madam mina, and again tri to hypnotis her; but alas! 
unavail till too late. then, ere the great dark came upon us--for 
even after down-sun the heaven reflect the gone sun on the snow, and 
all wa for a time in a great twilight--i took out the hors and fed 
them in what shelter I could. then I make a fire; and near it I make 
madam mina, now awak and more charm than ever, sit comfort amid 
her rugs. I got readi food: but she would not eat, simpli say that 
she had not hunger. I did not press her, know her unavailingness. but 
I myself eat, for I must need now be strong for all. then, with the 
fear on me of what might be, I drew a ring so big for her comfort, round 
where madam mina sat; and over the ring I pass some of the wafer, and 
I broke it fine so that all wa well guarded. she sat still all the 
time--so still as one dead; and she grew whiter and ever whiter till the 
snow wa not more pale; and no word she said. but when I drew near, she 
clung to me, and I could know that the poor soul shook her from head to 
feet with a tremor that wa pain to feel. I said to her presently, when 
she had grown more quiet:-- 

"will you not come over to the fire?" for I wish to make a test of 
what she could. she rose obedient, but when she have made a step she 
stopped, and stood as one stricken. 

"whi not go on?" I asked. she shook her head, and, come back, sat 
down in her place. then, look at me with open eyes, as of one wake 
from sleep, she said simply:-- 

"I cannot!" and remain silent. I rejoiced, for I knew that what she 
could not, none of those that we dread could. though there might be 
danger to her body, yet her soul wa safe! 

present the hors began to scream, and tore at their tether till I 
came to them and quiet them. when they did feel my hand on them, they 
whinni low as in joy, and lick at my hand and were quiet for a 
time. mani time through the night did I come to them, till it arriv to 
the cold hour when all natur is at lowest; and everi time my come wa 
with quiet of them. In the cold hour the fire began to die, and I wa 
about step forth to replenish it, for now the snow came in fli 
sweep and with it a chill mist. even in the dark there wa a light of 
some kind, as there ever is over snow; and it seem as though the 
snow-flurri and the wreath of mist took shape as of women with 
trail garments. all wa in dead, grim silenc onli that the hors 
whinni and cowered, as if in terror of the worst. I began to 
fear--horr fears; but then came to me the sens of safeti in that 
ring wherein I stood. I began, too, to think that my imagin were of 
the night, and the gloom, and the unrest that I have gone through, and 
all the terribl anxiety. It wa as though my memori of all jonathan' 
horrid experi were befool me; for the snow flake and the mist 
began to wheel and circl round, till I could get as though a shadowi 
glimps of those women that would have kiss him. and then the hors 
cower lower and lower, and moan in terror as men do in pain. even 
the mad of fright wa not to them, so that they could break away. I 
fear for my dear madam mina when these weird figur drew near and 
circl round. I look at her, but she sat calm, and smile at me; when 
I would have step to the fire to replenish it, she caught me and held 
me back, and whispered, like a voic that one hear in a dream, so low 
it was:-- 

"no! no! Do not go without. here you are safe!" I turn to her, and 
look in her eyes, said:-- 

"but you? It is for you that I fear!" whereat she laughed--a laugh, low 
and unreal, and said:-- 

"fear for _me_! whi fear for me? none safer in all the world from them 
than I am," and as I wonder at the mean of her words, a puff of 
wind made the flame leap up, and I see the red scar on her forehead. 
then, alas! I knew. did I not, I would soon have learned, for the 
wheel figur of mist and snow came closer, but keep ever without 
the holi circle. then they began to materialis till--if god have not 
take away my reason, for I saw it through my eyes--ther were befor me 
in actual flesh the same three women that jonathan saw in the room, when 
they would have kiss hi throat. I knew the sway round forms, the 
bright hard eyes, the white teeth, the ruddi colour, the voluptu 
lips. they smile ever at poor dear madam mina; and as their laugh came 
through the silenc of the night, they twine their arm and point to 
her, and said in those so sweet tingl tone that jonathan said were 
of the intoler sweet of the water-glasses:-- 

"come, sister. come to us. come! come!" In fear I turn to my poor 
madam mina, and my heart with glad leapt like flame; for oh! the 
terror in her sweet eyes, the repulsion, the horror, told a stori to my 
heart that wa all of hope. god be thank she wa not, yet, of them. I 
seiz some of the firewood which wa by me, and hold out some of the 
wafer, advanc on them toward the fire. they drew back befor me, and 
laugh their low horrid laugh. I fed the fire, and fear them not; for 
I knew that we were safe within our protections. they could not 
approach, me, whilst so armed, nor madam mina whilst she remain within 
the ring, which she could not leav no more than they could enter. the 
hors had ceas to moan, and lay still on the ground; the snow fell on 
them softly, and they grew whiter. I knew that there wa for the poor 
beast no more of terror. 

and so we remain till the red of the dawn to fall through the 
snow-gloom. I wa desol and afraid, and full of woe and terror; but 
when that beauti sun began to climb the horizon life wa to me again. 
At the first come of the dawn the horrid figur melt in the 
whirl mist and snow; the wreath of transpar gloom move away 
toward the castle, and were lost. 

instinctively, with the dawn coming, I turn to madam mina, intend 
to hypnotis her; but she lay in a deep and sudden sleep, from which I 
could not wake her. I tri to hypnotis through her sleep, but she made 
no response, none at all; and the day broke. I fear yet to stir. I have 
made my fire and have seen the horses, they are all dead. to-day I have 
much to do here, and I keep wait till the sun is up high; for there 
may be place where I must go, where that sunlight, though snow and mist 
obscur it, will be to me a safety. 

I will strengthen me with breakfast, and then I will to my terribl 
work. madam mina still sleeps; and, god be thanked! she is calm in her 
sleep.... 


_jonathan harker' journal._ 

_4 november, evening._--th accid to the launch ha been a terribl 
thing for us. onli for it we should have overtaken the boat long ago; 
and by now my dear mina would have been free. I fear to think of her, 
off on the wold near that horrid place. We have got horses, and we 
follow on the track. I note thi whilst godalm is get ready. We 
have our arms. the szgani must look out if they mean fight. oh, if onli 
morri and seward were with us. We must onli hope! If I write no more 
good-bye, mina! god bless and keep you. 


_dr. seward' diary._ 

_5 november._--with the dawn we saw the bodi of szgani befor us dash 
away from the river with their leiter-wagon. they surround it in a 
cluster, and hurri along as though beset. the snow is fall lightli 
and there is a strang excit in the air. It may be our own 
feelings, but the depress is strange. far off I hear the howl of 
wolves; the snow bring them down from the mountains, and there are 
danger to all of us, and from all sides. the hors are nearli ready, 
and we are soon off. We ride to death of some one. god alon know who, 
or where, or what, or when, or how it may be.... 


_dr. van helsing' memorandum._ 

_5 november, afternoon._--i am at least sane. thank god for that merci 
at all events, though the prove it ha been dreadful. when I left 
madam mina sleep within the holi circle, I took my way to the castle. 
the blacksmith hammer which I took in the carriag from veresti wa 
useful; though the door were all open I broke them off the rusti 
hinges, lest some ill-int or ill-chanc should close them, so that 
be enter I might not get out. jonathan' bitter experi serv 
me here. By memori of hi diari I found my way to the old chapel, for I 
knew that here my work lay. the air wa oppressive; it seem as if 
there wa some sulphur fume, which at time made me dizzy. either 
there wa a roar in my ear or I heard afar off the howl of wolves. 
then I bethought me of my dear madam mina, and I wa in terribl plight. 
the dilemma had me between hi horns. 

her, I had not dare to take into thi place, but left safe from the 
vampir in that holi circle; and yet even there would be the wolf! I 
resolv me that my work lay here, and that as to the wolv we must 
submit, if it were god' will. At ani rate it wa onli death and 
freedom beyond. So did I choos for her. had it but been for myself the 
choic had been easy, the maw of the wolf were better to rest in than 
the grave of the vampire! So I make my choic to go on with my work. 

I knew that there were at least three grave to find--grav that are 
inhabit; so I search, and search, and I find one of them. she lay in her 
vampir sleep, so full of life and voluptu beauti that I shudder as 
though I have come to do murder. ah, I doubt not that in old time, when 
such thing were, mani a man who set forth to do such a task as mine, 
found at the last hi heart fail him, and then hi nerve. So he delay, 
and delay, and delay, till the mere beauti and the fascin of the 
wanton un-dead have hypnotis him; and he remain on and on, till sunset 
come, and the vampir sleep be over. then the beauti eye of the fair 
woman open and look love, and the voluptu mouth present to a 
kiss--and man is weak. and there remain one more victim in the vampir 
fold; one more to swell the grim and grisli rank of the un-dead!... 

there is some fascination, surely, when I am move by the mere presenc 
of such an one, even lie as she lay in a tomb fret with age and 
heavi with the dust of centuries, though there be that horrid odour such 
as the lair of the count have had. yes, I wa moved--i, van helsing, 
with all my purpos and with my motiv for hate--i wa move to a 
yearn for delay which seem to paralys my faculti and to clog my 
veri soul. It may have been that the need of natur sleep, and the 
strang oppress of the air were begin to overcom me. certain it 
wa that I wa laps into sleep, the open-ey sleep of one who yield 
to a sweet fascination, when there came through the snow-stil air a 
long, low wail, so full of woe and piti that it woke me like the sound 
of a clarion. for it wa the voic of my dear madam mina that I heard. 

then I brace myself again to my horrid task, and found by wrench 
away tomb-top one other of the sisters, the other dark one. I dare not 
paus to look on her as I had on her sister, lest onc more I should 
begin to be enthrall; but I go on search until, presently, I find in 
a high great tomb as if made to one much belov that other fair sister 
which, like jonathan I had seen to gather herself out of the atom of 
the mist. she wa so fair to look on, so radiantli beautiful, so 
exquisit voluptuous, that the veri instinct of man in me, which call 
some of my sex to love and to protect one of hers, made my head whirl 
with new emotion. but god be thanked, that soul-wail of my dear madam 
mina had not die out of my ears; and, befor the spell could be wrought 
further upon me, I had nerv myself to my wild work. By thi time I had 
search all the tomb in the chapel, so far as I could tell; and as 
there had been onli three of these un-dead phantom around us in the 
night, I took it that there were no more of activ un-dead existent. 
there wa one great tomb more lordli than all the rest; huge it was, and 
nobli proportioned. On it wa but one word 

dracula. 

thi then wa the un-dead home of the king-vampire, to whom so mani more 
were due. it empti spoke eloqu to make certain what I knew. 
befor I began to restor these women to their dead selv through my 
aw work, I laid in dracula' tomb some of the wafer, and so banish 
him from it, un-dead, for ever. 

then began my terribl task, and I dread it. had it been but one, it 
had been easy, comparative. but three! To begin twice more after I had 
been through a deed of horror; for if it wa terribl with the sweet 
miss lucy, what would it not be with these strang one who had surviv 
through centuries, and who had been strengthen by the pass of the 
years; who would, if they could, have fought for their foul lives.... 

oh, my friend john, but it wa butcher work; had I not been nerv by 
thought of other dead, and of the live over whom hung such a pall of 
fear, I could not have gone on. I trembl and trembl even yet, though 
till all wa over, god be thanked, my nerv did stand. had I not seen 
the repos in the first place, and the glad that stole over it just 
ere the final dissolut came, as realis that the soul had been 
won, I could not have gone further with my butchery. I could not have 
endur the horrid screech as the stake drove home; the plung of 
writh form, and lip of bloodi foam. I should have fled in terror and 
left my work undone. but it is over! and the poor souls, I can piti them 
now and weep, as I think of them placid each in her full sleep of death 
for a short moment ere fading. for, friend john, hardli had my knife 
sever the head of each, befor the whole bodi began to melt away and 
crumbl in to it nativ dust, as though the death that should have come 
centuri agon had at last assert himself and say at onc and loud "I 
am here!" 

befor I left the castl I so fix it entranc that never more can 
the count enter there un-dead. 

when I step into the circl where madam mina slept, she woke from her 
sleep, and, seeing, me, cri out in pain that I had endur too much. 

"come!" she said, "come away from thi aw place! let us go to meet my 
husband who is, I know, come toward us." she wa look thin and 
pale and weak; but her eye were pure and glow with fervour. I wa 
glad to see her pale and her illness, for my mind wa full of the 
fresh horror of that ruddi vampir sleep. 

and so with trust and hope, and yet full of fear, we go eastward to meet 
our friends--and _him_--whom madam mina tell me that she _know_ are 
come to meet us. 


_mina harker' journal._ 

_6 november._--it wa late in the afternoon when the professor and I 
took our way toward the east whenc I knew jonathan wa coming. We did 
not go fast, though the way wa steepli downhill, for we had to take 
heavi rug and wrap with us; we dare not face the possibl of be 
left without warmth in the cold and the snow. We had to take some of our 
provisions, too, for we were in a perfect desolation, and, so far as we 
could see through the snowfall, there wa not even the sign of 
habitation. when we had gone about a mile, I wa tire with the heavi 
walk and sat down to rest. then we look back and saw where the 
clear line of dracula' castl cut the sky; for we were so deep under 
the hill whereon it wa set that the angl of perspect of the 
carpathian mountain wa far below it. We saw it in all it grandeur, 
perch a thousand feet on the summit of a sheer precipice, and with 
seemingli a great gap between it and the steep of the adjac mountain 
on ani side. there wa someth wild and uncanni about the place. We 
could hear the distant howl of wolves. they were far off, but the 
sound, even though come muffl through the deaden snowfall, wa 
full of terror. I knew from the way dr. van hels wa search about 
that he wa tri to seek some strateg point, where we would be less 
expos in case of attack. the rough roadway still led downwards; we 
could trace it through the drift snow. 

In a littl while the professor signal to me, so I got up and join 
him. He had found a wonder spot, a sort of natur hollow in a rock, 
with an entranc like a doorway between two boulders. He took me by the 
hand and drew me in: "see!" he said, "here you will be in shelter; and 
if the wolv do come I can meet them one by one." He brought in our 
furs, and made a snug nest for me, and got out some provis and 
forc them upon me. but I could not eat; to even tri to do so wa 
repuls to me, and, much as I would have like to pleas him, I could 
not bring myself to the attempt. He look veri sad, but did not 
reproach me. take hi field-glass from the case, he stood on the top 
of the rock, and began to search the horizon. suddenli he call out:-- 

"look! madam mina, look! look!" I sprang up and stood besid him on the 
rock; he hand me hi glass and pointed. the snow wa now fall 
more heavily, and swirl about fiercely, for a high wind wa begin 
to blow. however, there were time when there were paus between the 
snow flurri and I could see a long way round. from the height where we 
were it wa possibl to see a great distance; and far off, beyond the 
white wast of snow, I could see the river lie like a black ribbon in 
kink and curl as it wound it way. straight in front of us and not far 
off--in fact, so near that I wonder we had not notic before--cam a 
group of mount men hurri along. In the midst of them wa a cart, a 
long leiter-wagon which swept from side to side, like a dog' tail 
wagging, with each stern inequ of the road. outlin against the 
snow as they were, I could see from the men' cloth that they were 
peasant or gypsi of some kind. 

On the cart wa a great squar chest. My heart leap as I saw it, for I 
felt that the end wa coming. the even wa now draw close, and 
well I knew that at sunset the thing, which wa till then imprison 
there, would take new freedom and could in ani of mani form elud all 
pursuit. In fear I turn to the professor; to my consternation, 
however, he wa not there. An instant later, I saw him below me. round 
the rock he had drawn a circle, such as we had found shelter in last 
night. when he had complet it he stood besid me again, saying:-- 

"at least you shall be safe here from _him_!" He took the glass from 
me, and at the next lull of the snow swept the whole space below us. 
"see," he said, "they come quickly; they are flog the horses, and 
gallop as hard as they can." He paus and went on in a hollow 
voice:-- 

"they are race for the sunset. We may be too late. god' will be 
done!" down came anoth blind rush of drive snow, and the whole 
landscap wa blot out. It soon passed, however, and onc more hi 
glass were fix on the plain. then came a sudden cry:-- 

"look! look! look! see, two horsemen follow fast, come up from the 
south. It must be quincey and john. take the glass. look befor the snow 
blot it all out!" I took it and looked. the two men might be dr. seward 
and mr. morris. I knew at all event that neither of them wa jonathan. 
At the same time I _knew_ that jonathan wa not far off; look around 
I saw on the north side of the come parti two other men, ride at 
break-neck speed. one of them I knew wa jonathan, and the other I took, 
of course, to be lord godalming. they, too, were pursu the parti with 
the cart. when I told the professor he shout in glee like a schoolboy, 
and, after look intent till a snow fall made sight impossible, he 
laid hi winchest rifl readi for use against the boulder at the 
open of our shelter. "they are all converging," he said. "when the 
time come we shall have gypsi on all sides." I got out my revolv 
readi to hand, for whilst we were speak the howl of wolv came 
louder and closer. when the snow storm abat a moment we look again. 
It wa strang to see the snow fall in such heavi flake close to us, 
and beyond, the sun shine more and more brightli as it sank down 
toward the far mountain tops. sweep the glass all around us I could 
see here and there dot move singli and in two and three and larger 
numbers--th wolv were gather for their prey. 

everi instant seem an age whilst we waited. the wind came now in 
fierc bursts, and the snow wa driven with furi as it swept upon us in 
circl eddies. At time we could not see an arm' length befor us; 
but at others, as the hollow-sound wind swept by us, it seem to 
clear the air-spac around us so that we could see afar off. We had of 
late been so accustom to watch for sunris and sunset, that we knew 
with fair accuraci when it would be; and we knew that befor long the 
sun would set. It wa hard to believ that by our watch it wa less 
than an hour that we wait in that rocki shelter befor the variou 
bodi began to converg close upon us. the wind came now with fiercer 
and more bitter sweeps, and more steadili from the north. It seemingli 
had driven the snow cloud from us, for, with onli occasion bursts, 
the snow fell. We could distinguish clearli the individu of each 
party, the pursu and the pursuers. strang enough those pursu did 
not seem to realise, or at least to care, that they were pursued; they 
seemed, however, to hasten with redoubl speed as the sun drop lower 
and lower on the mountain tops. 

closer and closer they drew. the professor and I crouch down behind 
our rock, and held our weapon ready; I could see that he wa determin 
that they should not pass. one and all were quit unawar of our 
presence. 

all at onc two voic shout out to: "halt!" one wa my jonathan's, 
rais in a high key of passion; the other mr. morris' strong resolut 
tone of quiet command. the gypsi may not have known the language, but 
there wa no mistak the tone, in whatev tongu the word were 
spoken. instinct they rein in, and at the instant lord godalm 
and jonathan dash up at one side and dr. seward and mr. morri on the 
other. the leader of the gypsies, a splendid-look fellow who sat hi 
hors like a centaur, wave them back, and in a fierc voic gave to hi 
companion some word to proceed. they lash the hors which sprang 
forward; but the four men rais their winchest rifles, and in an 
unmistak way command them to stop. At the same moment dr. van 
hels and I rose behind the rock and point our weapon at them. 
see that they were surround the men tighten their rein and drew 
up. the leader turn to them and gave a word at which everi man of the 
gypsi parti drew what weapon he carried, knife or pistol, and held 
himself in readi to attack. issu wa join in an instant. 

the leader, with a quick movement of hi rein, threw hi hors out in 
front, and point first to the sun--now close down on the hill 
tops--and then to the castle, said someth which I did not understand. 
for answer, all four men of our parti threw themselv from their hors 
and dash toward the cart. I should have felt terribl fear at see 
jonathan in such danger, but that the ardour of battl must have been 
upon me as well as the rest of them; I felt no fear, but onli a wild, 
surg desir to do something. see the quick movement of our 
parties, the leader of the gypsi gave a command; hi men instantli 
form round the cart in a sort of undisciplin endeavour, each one 
shoulder and push the other in hi eager to carri out the 
order. 

In the midst of thi I could see that jonathan on one side of the ring 
of men, and quincey on the other, were forc a way to the cart; it wa 
evid that they were bent on finish their task befor the sun 
should set. noth seem to stop or even to hinder them. neither the 
level weapon nor the flash knive of the gypsi in front, nor 
the howl of the wolv behind, appear to even attract their 
attention. jonathan' impetuosity, and the manifest singl of hi 
purpose, seem to overaw those in front of him; instinct they 
cowered, asid and let him pass. In an instant he had jump upon the 
cart, and, with a strength which seem incredible, rais the great 
box, and flung it over the wheel to the ground. In the meantime, mr. 
morri had had to use forc to pass through hi side of the ring of 
szgany. all the time I had been breathlessli watch jonathan I had, 
with the tail of my eye, seen him press desper forward, and had 
seen the knive of the gypsi flash as he won a way through them, and 
they cut at him. He had parri with hi great bowi knife, and at first 
I thought that he too had come through in safety; but as he sprang 
besid jonathan, who had by now jump from the cart, I could see that 
with hi left hand he wa clutch at hi side, and that the blood wa 
spurt through hi fingers. He did not delay notwithstand this, for 
as jonathan, with desper energy, attack one end of the chest, 
attempt to prize off the lid with hi great kukri knife, he attack 
the other frantic with hi bowie. under the effort of both men the 
lid began to yield; the nail drew with a quick screech sound, and 
the top of the box wa thrown back. 

By thi time the gypsies, see themselv cover by the winchesters, 
and at the merci of lord godalm and dr. seward, had given in and made 
no resistance. the sun wa almost down on the mountain tops, and the 
shadow of the whole group fell long upon the snow. I saw the count 
lie within the box upon the earth, some of which the rude fall from 
the cart had scatter over him. He wa deathli pale, just like a waxen 
image, and the red eye glare with the horribl vindict look which I 
knew too well. 

As I looked, the eye saw the sink sun, and the look of hate in them 
turn to triumph. 

but, on the instant, came the sweep and flash of jonathan' great knife. 
I shriek as I saw it shear through the throat; whilst at the same 
moment mr. morris' bowi knife plung into the heart. 

It wa like a miracle; but befor our veri eyes, and almost in the 
draw of a breath, the whole bodi crumbl into dust and pass from 
our sight. 

I shall be glad as long as I live that even in that moment of final 
dissolution, there wa in the face a look of peace, such as I never 
could have imagin might have rest there. 

the castl of dracula now stood out against the red sky, and everi stone 
of it broken battlement wa articul against the light of the 
set sun. 

the gypsies, take us as in some way the caus of the extraordinari 
disappear of the dead man, turned, without a word, and rode away as 
if for their lives. those who were unmount jump upon the 
leiter-wagon and shout to the horsemen not to desert them. the wolves, 
which had withdrawn to a safe distance, follow in their wake, leav 
us alone. 

mr. morris, who had sunk to the ground, lean on hi elbow, hold hi 
hand press to hi side; the blood still gush through hi fingers. I 
flew to him, for the holi circl did not now keep me back; so did the 
two doctors. jonathan knelt behind him and the wound man laid back hi 
head on hi shoulder. with a sigh he took, with a feebl effort, my hand 
in that of hi own which wa unstained. He must have seen the anguish of 
my heart in my face, for he smile at me and said:-- 

"I am onli too happi to have been of ani service! oh, god!" he cri 
suddenly, struggl up to a sit postur and point to me, "it wa 
worth for thi to die! look! look!" 

the sun wa now right down upon the mountain top, and the red gleam 
fell upon my face, so that it wa bath in rosi light. with one impuls 
the men sank on their knee and a deep and earnest "amen" broke from all 
as their eye follow the point of hi finger. the die man 
spoke:-- 

"now god be thank that all ha not been in vain! see! the snow is not 
more stainless than her forehead! the curs ha pass away!" 

and, to our bitter grief, with a smile and in silence, he died, a 
gallant gentleman. 




note 


seven year ago we all went through the flames; and the happi of 
some of us sinc then is, we think, well worth the pain we endured. It 
is an ad joy to mina and to me that our boy' birthday is the same 
day as that on which quincey morri died. hi mother holds, I know, the 
secret belief that some of our brave friend' spirit ha pass into 
him. hi bundl of name link all our littl band of men together; but 
we call him quincey. 

In the summer of thi year we made a journey to transylvania, and went 
over the old ground which was, and is, to us so full of vivid and 
terribl memories. It wa almost imposs to believ that the thing 
which we had seen with our own eye and heard with our own ear were 
live truths. everi trace of all that had been wa blot out. the 
castl stood as before, rear high abov a wast of desolation. 

when we got home we were talk of the old time--which we could all 
look back on without despair, for godalm and seward are both happili 
married. I took the paper from the safe where they had been ever sinc 
our return so long ago. We were struck with the fact, that in all the 
mass of materi of which the record is composed, there is hardli one 
authent document; noth but a mass of typewriting, except the later 
note-book of mina and seward and myself, and van helsing' memorandum. 
We could hardli ask ani one, even did we wish to, to accept these as 
proof of so wild a story. van hels sum it all up as he said, with 
our boy on hi knee:-- 

"we want no proofs; we ask none to believ us! thi boy will some day 
know what a brave and gallant woman hi mother is. alreadi he know her 
sweet and love care; later on he will understand how some men so 
love her, that they did dare much for her sake." 

jonathan harker. 

the end 

* * * * * 

_there' more to follow!_ 

more stori of the sort you like; more, probably, by the author of 
thi one; more than 500 titl all told by writer of world-wid 
reputation, in the authors' alphabet list which you will find 
on the _revers side_ of the wrapper of thi book. look it over 
befor you lay it aside. there are book here you are sure to 
want--some, possibly, that you have _always_ wanted. 

It is a _selected_ list; everi book in it ha achiev a certain 
measur of _success_. 

the grosset & dunlap list is not onli the greatest index of good 
fiction available, it repres in addit a gener accept 
standard of value. It will pay you to 

_look on the other side of the wrapper!_ 

_in case the wrapper is lost write to the publish for a complet 
catalog_ 

* * * * * 

detect stori BY J. S. fletcher 

may be had wherev book are sold. ask for grosset & dunlap' list 


the secret OF the barbican 

the annex societi 

the wolv and the lamb 

green ink 

the king versu wargrav 

the lost mr. linthwait 

the mill OF mani window 

the heaven-kiss hill 

the middl templ murder 

ravensden court 

the rayner-slad amalgam 

the safeti pin 

the secret way 

the valley OF headstrong men 

_ask for complet free list of G. & D. popular copyright fiction_ 

grosset & dunlap, _publishers_, new york 

* * * * * 

typograph error correct by the etext transcriber: 

in a veri simpli way=> in a veri simpl way {pg 68} 

"the westminist gazette," 25 september.=> "the westminst gazette," 
25 september. {pg 165} 

It have told him=> she must have told him {pg 169} 

from md sight=> from my sight {pg}184 

goldaming=> godalm {pg 226} 

I I did not want to hinder him=> I did not want to hinder him {pg 267} 

they lay in a sort of or-orderly=> they lay in a sort of orderli {pg 
279} 

translyvania=> transylvania {pg 294} 

thi mrrning from dardanelles=> thi morn from dardanel {pg 313} 







end of the project gutenberg ebook of dracula, by bram stoker 

*** end OF thi project gutenberg ebook dracula *** 

***** thi file should be name 345-8.txt or 345-8.zip ***** 
thi and all associ file of variou format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/3/4/345/ 

produc by chuck greif and the onlin distribut 
proofread team at http://www.pgdp.net (thi file wa 
produc from imag gener made avail by the 
internet archive) 


updat edit will replac the previou one--th old edit 
will be renamed. 

creat the work from public domain print edit mean that no 
one own a unit state copyright in these works, so the foundat 
(and you!) can copi and distribut it in the unit state without 
permiss and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the gener term of use part of thi license, appli to 
copi and distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a regist trademark, and may not be use if you 
charg for the ebooks, unless you receiv specif permission. If you 
do not charg anyth for copi of thi ebook, compli with the 
rule is veri easy. you may use thi ebook for nearli ani purpos 
such as creation of deriv works, reports, perform and 
research. they may be modifi and print and given away--y may do 
practic anyth with public domain ebooks. redistribut is 
subject to the trademark license, especi commerci 
redistribution. 



*** start: full licens *** 

the full project gutenberg licens 
pleas read thi befor you distribut OR use thi work 

To protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promot the free 
distribut of electron works, by use or distribut thi work 
(or ani other work associ in ani way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agre to compli with all the term of the full project 
gutenberg-tm licens (avail with thi file or onlin at 
http://gutenberg.org/license). 


section 1. gener term of use and redistribut project gutenberg-tm 
electron work 

1.a. By read or use ani part of thi project gutenberg-tm 
electron work, you indic that you have read, understand, agre to 
and accept all the term of thi licens and intellectu properti 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agre to abid by all 
the term of thi agreement, you must ceas use and return or destroy 
all copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in your possession. 
If you paid a fee for obtain a copi of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work and you do not agre to be bound by the 
term of thi agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entiti to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a regist trademark. It may onli be 
use on or associ in ani way with an electron work by peopl who 
agre to be bound by the term of thi agreement. there are a few 
thing that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electron work 
even without compli with the full term of thi agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of thing you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electron work if you follow the term of thi agreement 
and help preserv free futur access to project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compil copyright in the collect of project 
gutenberg-tm electron works. nearli all the individu work in the 
collect are in the public domain in the unit states. If an 
individu work is in the public domain in the unit state and you are 
locat in the unit states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or creat deriv 
work base on the work as long as all refer to project gutenberg 
are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promot free access to electron work by 
freeli share project gutenberg-tm work in complianc with the term of 
thi agreement for keep the project gutenberg-tm name associ with 
the work. you can easili compli with the term of thi agreement by 
keep thi work in the same format with it attach full project 
gutenberg-tm licens when you share it without charg with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are locat also govern 
what you can do with thi work. copyright law in most countri are in 
a constant state of change. If you are outsid the unit states, check 
the law of your countri in addit to the term of thi agreement 
befor downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribut or 
creat deriv work base on thi work or ani other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundat make no represent concern 
the copyright statu of ani work in ani countri outsid the unit 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remov all refer to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the follow sentence, with activ link to, or other immedi 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm licens must appear promin 
whenev ani copi of a project gutenberg-tm work (ani work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copi or distributed: 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.org/licens 

1.e.2. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is deriv 
from the public domain (doe not contain a notic indic that it is 
post with permiss of the copyright holder), the work can be copi 
and distribut to anyon in the unit state without pay ani fee 
or charges. If you are redistribut or provid access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associ with or appear on the 
work, you must compli either with the requir of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permiss for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is post 
with the permiss of the copyright holder, your use and distribut 
must compli with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and ani addit 
term impos by the copyright holder. addit term will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm licens for all work post with the 
permiss of the copyright holder found at the begin of thi work. 

1.e.4. Do not unlink or detach or remov the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens term from thi work, or ani file contain a part of thi 
work or ani other work associ with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribut or redistribut thi 
electron work, or ani part of thi electron work, without 
promin display the sentenc set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
activ link or immedi access to the full term of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribut thi work in ani binary, 
compressed, mark up, nonproprietari or proprietari form, includ ani 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provid access to or 
distribut copi of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the offici version 
post on the offici project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org), 
you must, at no addit cost, fee or expens to the user, provid a 
copy, a mean of export a copy, or a mean of obtain a copi upon 
request, of the work in it origin "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. ani altern format must includ the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens as specifi in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. Do not charg a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copi or distribut ani project gutenberg-tm work 
unless you compli with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charg a reason fee for copi of or provid 
access to or distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work provid 
that 

- you pay a royalti fee of 20% of the gross profit you deriv from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm work calcul use the method 
you alreadi use to calcul your applic taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
ha agre to donat royalti under thi paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literari archiv foundation. royalti payment 
must be paid within 60 day follow each date on which you 
prepar (or are legal requir to prepare) your period tax 
returns. royalti payment should be clearli mark as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat at the 
address specifi in section 4, "inform about donat to 
the project gutenberg literari archiv foundation." 

- you provid a full refund of ani money paid by a user who notifi 
you in write (or by e-mail) within 30 day of receipt that s/he 
doe not agre to the term of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must requir such a user to return or 
destroy all copi of the work possess in a physic medium 
and discontinu all use of and all access to other copi of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accord with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of ani 
money paid for a work or a replac copy, if a defect in the 
electron work is discov and report to you within 90 day 
of receipt of the work. 

- you compli with all other term of thi agreement for free 
distribut of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. If you wish to charg a fee or distribut a project gutenberg-tm 
electron work or group of work on differ term than are set 
forth in thi agreement, you must obtain permiss in write from 
both the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundat as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunt and employe expend consider 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcrib and proofread 
public domain work in creat the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despit these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electron 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limit to, incomplete, inaccur or 
corrupt data, transcript errors, a copyright or other intellectu 
properti infringement, a defect or damag disk or other medium, a 
comput virus, or comput code that damag or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limit warranty, disclaim OF damag - except for the "right 
of replac or refund" describ in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and ani other parti distribut a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work under thi agreement, disclaim all 
liabil to you for damages, cost and expenses, includ legal 
fees. you agre that you have NO remedi for negligence, strict 
liability, breach OF warranti OR breach OF contract except those 
provid IN paragraph 1.f.3. you agre that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and ani distributor under thi agreement will not BE 
liabl TO you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punit OR 
incident damag even IF you give notic OF the possibl OF such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limit right OF replac OR refund - If you discov a 
defect in thi electron work within 90 day of receiv it, you can 
receiv a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explan to the person you receiv the work from. If you 
receiv the work on a physic medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entiti that provid you with 
the defect work may elect to provid a replac copi in lieu of a 
refund. If you receiv the work electronically, the person or entiti 
provid it to you may choos to give you a second opportun to 
receiv the work electron in lieu of a refund. If the second copi 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in write without further 
opportun to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limit right of replac or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, thi work is provid to you 'as-is' with NO other 
warranti OF ani kind, express OR implied, includ but not limit TO 
warranti OF merchant OR fit for ani purpose. 

1.f.5. some state do not allow disclaim of certain impli 
warranti or the exclus or limit of certain type of damages. 
If ani disclaim or limit set forth in thi agreement violat the 
law of the state applic to thi agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaim or limit permit by 
the applic state law. the invalid or unenforc of ani 
provis of thi agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemn - you agre to indemnifi and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, ani agent or employe of the foundation, anyon 
provid copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in accord 
with thi agreement, and ani volunt associ with the production, 
promot and distribut of project gutenberg-tm electron works, 
harmless from all liability, cost and expenses, includ legal fees, 
that aris directli or indirectli from ani of the follow which you do 
or caus to occur: (a) distribut of thi or ani project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addit or delet to ani 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) ani defect you cause. 


section 2. inform about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonym with the free distribut of 
electron work in format readabl by the widest varieti of comput 
includ obsolete, old, middle-ag and new computers. It exist 
becaus of the effort of hundr of volunt and donat from 
peopl in all walk of life. 

volunt and financi support to provid volunt with the 
assist they need, are critic to reach project gutenberg-tm' 
goal and ensur that the project gutenberg-tm collect will 
remain freeli avail for gener to come. In 2001, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundat wa creat to provid a secur 
and perman futur for project gutenberg-tm and futur generations. 
To learn more about the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat 
and how your effort and donat can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundat web page at http://www.pglaf.org. 


section 3. inform about the project gutenberg literari archiv 
foundat 

the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educ corpor organ under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt statu by the intern 
revenu service. the foundation' ein or feder tax identif 
number is 64-6221541. it 501(c)(3) letter is post at 
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contribut to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. feder law and your state' laws. 

the foundation' princip offic is locat at 4557 melan dr. S. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but it volunt and employe are scatter 
throughout numer locations. it busi offic is locat at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact link and up to date contact 
inform can be found at the foundation' web site and offici 
page at http://pglaf.org 

for addit contact information: 
dr. gregori B. newbi 
chief execut and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 


section 4. inform about donat to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot surviv without wide 
spread public support and donat to carri out it mission of 
increas the number of public domain and licens work that can be 
freeli distribut in machin readabl form access by the widest 
array of equip includ outdat equipment. mani small donat 
($1 to $5,000) are particularli import to maintain tax exempt 
statu with the irs. 

the foundat is commit to compli with the law regul 
chariti and charit donat in all 50 state of the unit 
states. complianc requir are not uniform and it take a 
consider effort, much paperwork and mani fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. We do not solicit donat in locat 
where we have not receiv written confirm of compliance. To 
send donat or determin the statu of complianc for ani 
particular state visit http://pglaf.org 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribut from state where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibit 
against accept unsolicit donat from donor in such state who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

intern donat are grate accepted, but we cannot make 
ani statement concern tax treatment of donat receiv from 
outsid the unit states. u.s. law alon swamp our small staff. 

pleas check the project gutenberg web page for current donat 
method and addresses. donat are accept in a number of other 
way includ checks, onlin payment and credit card donations. 
To donate, pleas visit: http://pglaf.org/don 


section 5. gener inform about project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. 

professor michael S. hart is the origin of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a librari of electron work that could be freeli share 
with anyone. for thirti years, he produc and distribut project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with onli a loos network of volunt support. 


project gutenberg-tm ebook are often creat from sever print 
editions, all of which are confirm as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notic is included. thus, we do not necessarili 
keep ebook in complianc with ani particular paper edition. 


most peopl start at our web site which ha the main PG search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.org 

thi web site includ inform about project gutenberg-tm, 
includ how to make donat to the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundation, how to help produc our new ebooks, and how to 
subscrib to our email newslett to hear about new ebooks. 
