the project gutenberg ebook of metamorphosis, by franz kafka 
translat by david wyllie. 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.net 

** thi is a copyright project gutenberg ebook, detail below ** 
** pleas follow the copyright guidelin in thi file. ** 


title: metamorphosi 

author: franz kafka 

translator: david wylli 

releas date: august 16, 2005 [ebook #5200] 
first posted: may 13, 2002 
last updated: may 20, 2012 

language: english 


*** start OF thi project gutenberg ebook metamorphosi *** 




copyright (c) 2002 david wyllie. 





metamorphosi 
franz kafka 

translat by david wylli 



prefac 


one morning, when gregor samsa woke from troubl dreams, he found 
himself transform in hi bed into a horribl vermin. He lay on 
hi armour-lik back, and if he lift hi head a littl he could 
see hi brown belly, slightli dome and divid by arch into stiff 
sections. the bed wa hardli abl to cover it and seem readi 
to slide off ani moment. hi mani legs, piti thin compar 
with the size of the rest of him, wave about helplessli as he 
looked. 

"what' happen to me?" he thought. It wasn't a dream. hi room, 
a proper human room although a littl too small, lay peac 
between it four familiar walls. A collect of textil sampl 
lay spread out on the tabl - samsa wa a travel salesman - and 
abov it there hung a pictur that he had recent cut out of an 
illustr magazin and hous in a nice, gild frame. It show 
a ladi fit out with a fur hat and fur boa who sat upright, 
rais a heavi fur muff that cover the whole of her lower arm 
toward the viewer. 

gregor then turn to look out the window at the dull weather. 
drop of rain could be heard hit the pane, which made him feel 
quit sad. "how about if I sleep a littl bit longer and forget all 
thi nonsense", he thought, but that wa someth he wa unabl to 
do becaus he wa use to sleep on hi right, and in hi present 
state couldn't get into that position. howev hard he threw 
himself onto hi right, he alway roll back to where he was. He 
must have tri it a hundr times, shut hi eye so that he 
wouldn't have to look at the flounder legs, and onli stop when 
he began to feel a mild, dull pain there that he had never felt 
before. 

"oh, god", he thought, "what a strenuou career it is that i'v 
chosen! travel day in and day out. do busi like thi 
take much more effort than do your own busi at home, and on 
top of that there' the curs of travelling, worri about make 
train connections, bad and irregular food, contact with differ 
peopl all the time so that you can never get to know anyon or 
becom friendli with them. It can all go to hell!" He felt a 
slight itch up on hi belly; push himself slowli up on hi back 
toward the headboard so that he could lift hi head better; found 
where the itch was, and saw that it wa cover with lot of littl 
white spot which he didn't know what to make of; and when he tri 
to feel the place with one of hi leg he drew it quickli back 
becaus as soon as he touch it he wa overcom by a cold shudder. 

He slid back into hi former position. "get up earli all the 
time", he thought, "it make you stupid. you'v got to get enough 
sleep. other travel salesmen live a life of luxury. for 
instance, whenev I go back to the guest hous dure the morn 
to copi out the contract, these gentlemen are alway still sit 
there eat their breakfasts. I ought to just tri that with my 
boss; i'd get kick out on the spot. but who knows, mayb that 
would be the best thing for me. If I didn't have my parent to 
think about i'd have given in my notic a long time ago, i'd have 
gone up to the boss and told him just what I think, tell him 
everyth I would, let him know just what I feel. he'd fall right 
off hi desk! and it' a funni sort of busi to be sit up 
there at your desk, talk down at your subordin from up there, 
especi when you have to go right up close becaus the boss is 
hard of hearing. well, there' still some hope; onc i'v got the 
money togeth to pay off my parents' debt to him - anoth five or 
six year I suppos - that' definit what i'll do. that' when 
i'll make the big change. first of all though, i'v got to get up, 
my train leav at five." 

and he look over at the alarm clock, tick on the chest of 
drawers. "god in heaven!" he thought. It wa half past six and the 
hand were quietli move forwards, it wa even later than half 
past, more like quarter to seven. had the alarm clock not rung? He 
could see from the bed that it had been set for four o'clock as it 
should have been; it certainli must have rung. yes, but wa it 
possibl to quietli sleep through that furniture-rattl noise? 
true, he had not slept peacefully, but probabl all the more deepli 
becaus of that. what should he do now? the next train went at 
seven; if he were to catch that he would have to rush like mad and 
the collect of sampl wa still not packed, and he did not at 
all feel particularli fresh and lively. and even if he did catch 
the train he would not avoid hi boss' anger as the offic 
assist would have been there to see the five o'clock train go, he 
would have put in hi report about gregor' not be there a long 
time ago. the offic assist wa the boss' man, spineless, and 
with no understanding. what about if he report sick? but that 
would be extrem strain and suspici as in fifteen year of 
servic gregor had never onc yet been ill. hi boss would 
certainli come round with the doctor from the medic insur 
company, accus hi parent of have a lazi son, and accept the 
doctor' recommend not to make ani claim as the doctor believ 
that no-on wa ever ill but that mani were workshy. and what' 
more, would he have been entir wrong in thi case? gregor did in 
fact, apart from excess sleepi after sleep for so long, 
feel complet well and even felt much hungrier than usual. 

He wa still hurriedli think all thi through, unabl to decid 
to get out of the bed, when the clock struck quarter to seven. 
there wa a cautiou knock at the door near hi head. "gregor", 
somebodi call - it wa hi mother - "it' quarter to seven. 
didn't you want to go somewhere?" that gentl voice! gregor wa 
shock when he heard hi own voic answering, it could hardli be 
recognis as the voic he had had before. As if from deep insid 
him, there wa a pain and uncontrol squeak mix in with 
it, the word could be made out at first but then there wa a sort 
of echo which made them unclear, leav the hearer unsur whether 
he had heard properli or not. gregor had want to give a full 
answer and explain everything, but in the circumst content 
himself with saying: "yes, mother, yes, thank-you, i'm get up 
now." the chang in gregor' voic probabl could not be notic 
outsid through the wooden door, as hi mother wa satisfi with 
thi explan and shuffl away. but thi short convers 
made the other member of the famili awar that gregor, against 
their expect wa still at home, and soon hi father came 
knock at one of the side doors, gently, but with hi fist. 
"gregor, gregor", he called, "what' wrong?" and after a short 
while he call again with a warn deep in hi voice: "gregor! 
gregor!" At the other side door hi sister came plaintively: 
"gregor? aren't you well? Do you need anything?" gregor answer to 
both sides: "i'm ready, now", make an effort to remov all the 
strang from hi voic by enunci veri care and put 
long paus between each, individu word. hi father went back to 
hi breakfast, but hi sister whispered: "gregor, open the door, I 
beg of you." gregor, however, had no thought of open the door, 
and instead congratul himself for hi cautiou habit, acquir 
from hi travelling, of lock all door at night even when he wa 
at home. 

the first thing he want to do wa to get up in peac without be 
disturbed, to get dressed, and most of all to have hi breakfast. 
onli then would he consid what to do next, as he wa well awar 
that he would not bring hi thought to ani sensibl conclus by 
lie in bed. He rememb that he had often felt a slight pain in 
bed, perhap caus by lie awkwardly, but that had alway turn 
out to be pure imagin and he wonder how hi imagin would 
slowli resolv themselv today. He did not have the slightest 
doubt that the chang in hi voic wa noth more than the first 
sign of a seriou cold, which wa an occup hazard for 
travel salesmen. 

It wa a simpl matter to throw off the covers; he onli had to blow 
himself up a littl and they fell off by themselves. but it becam 
difficult after that, especi as he wa so except broad. 
He would have use hi arm and hi hand to push himself up; but 
instead of them he onli had all those littl leg continu 
move in differ directions, and which he wa moreov unabl to 
control. If he want to bend one of them, then that wa the first 
one that would stretch itself out; and if he final manag to do 
what he want with that leg, all the other seem to be set free 
and would move about painfully. "thi is someth that can't be 
done in bed", gregor said to himself, "so don't keep tri to do 
it". 

the first thing he want to do wa get the lower part of hi bodi 
out of the bed, but he had never seen thi lower part, and could not 
imagin what it look like; it turn out to be too hard to move; 
it went so slowly; and finally, almost in a frenzy, when he 
carelessli shove himself forward with all the forc he could 
gather, he chose the wrong direction, hit hard against the lower 
bedpost, and learn from the burn pain he felt that the lower 
part of hi bodi might well, at present, be the most sensitive. 

So then he tri to get the top part of hi bodi out of the bed 
first, care turn hi head to the side. thi he manag 
quit easily, and despit it breadth and it weight, the bulk of 
hi bodi eventu follow slowli in the direct of the head. 
but when he had at last got hi head out of the bed and into the 
fresh air it occur to him that if he let himself fall it would be 
a miracl if hi head were not injured, so he becam afraid to carri 
on push himself forward the same way. and he could not knock 
himself out now at ani price; better to stay in bed than lose 
consciousness. 

It took just as much effort to get back to where he had been 
earlier, but when he lay there sighing, and wa onc more watch 
hi leg as they struggl against each other even harder than 
before, if that wa possible, he could think of no way of bring 
peac and order to thi chaos. He told himself onc more that it 
wa not possibl for him to stay in bed and that the most sensibl 
thing to do would be to get free of it in whatev way he could at 
whatev sacrifice. At the same time, though, he did not forget to 
remind himself that calm consider wa much better than rush 
to desper conclusions. At time like thi he would direct hi 
eye to the window and look out as clearli as he could, but 
unfortunately, even the other side of the narrow street wa 
envelop in morn fog and the view had littl confid or cheer 
to offer him. "seven o'clock, already", he said to himself when the 
clock struck again, "seven o'clock, and there' still a fog like 
this." and he lay there quietli a while longer, breath lightli 
as if he perhap expect the total still to bring thing back 
to their real and natur state. 

but then he said to himself: "befor it strike quarter past seven 
i'll definit have to have got properli out of bed. and by then 
somebodi will have come round from work to ask what' happen to me 
as well, as they open up at work befor seven o'clock." and so he 
set himself to the task of swing the entir length of hi bodi 
out of the bed all at the same time. If he succeed in fall out 
of bed in thi way and kept hi head rais as he did so he could 
probabl avoid injur it. hi back seem to be quit hard, and 
probabl noth would happen to it fall onto the carpet. hi 
main concern wa for the loud nois he wa bound to make, and which 
even through all the door would probabl rais concern if not 
alarm. but it wa someth that had to be risked. 

when gregor wa alreadi stick half way out of the bed - the new 
method wa more of a game than an effort, all he had to do wa rock 
back and forth - it occur to him how simpl everyth would be 
if somebodi came to help him. two strong peopl - he had hi father 
and the maid in mind - would have been more than enough; they would 
onli have to push their arm under the dome of hi back, peel him 
away from the bed, bend down with the load and then be patient and 
care as he swang over onto the floor, where, hopefully, the 
littl leg would find a use. should he realli call for help 
though, even apart from the fact that all the door were locked? 
despit all the difficulti he wa in, he could not suppress a smile 
at thi thought. 

after a while he had alreadi move so far across that it would have 
been hard for him to keep hi balanc if he rock too hard. the 
time wa now ten past seven and he would have to make a final 
decis veri soon. then there wa a ring at the door of the flat. 
"that'll be someon from work", he said to himself, and froze veri 
still, although hi littl leg onli becam all the more live as 
they danc around. for a moment everyth remain quiet. 
"they'r not open the door", gregor said to himself, caught in 
some nonsens hope. but then of course, the maid' firm step 
went to the door as ever and open it. gregor onli need to hear 
the visitor' first word of greet and he knew who it wa - the 
chief clerk himself. whi did gregor have to be the onli one 
condemn to work for a compani where they immedi becam highli 
suspici at the slightest shortcoming? were all employees, everi 
one of them, louts, wa there not one of them who wa faith and 
devot who would go so mad with pang of conscienc that he 
couldn't get out of bed if he didn't spend at least a coupl of 
hour in the morn on compani business? wa it realli not enough 
to let one of the traine make enquiri - assum enquiri were 
even necessari - did the chief clerk have to come himself, and did 
they have to show the whole, innoc famili that thi wa so 
suspici that onli the chief clerk could be trust to have the 
wisdom to investig it? and more becaus these thought had made 
him upset than through ani proper decision, he swang himself with 
all hi forc out of the bed. there wa a loud thump, but it wasn't 
realli a loud noise. hi fall wa soften a littl by the carpet, 
and gregor' back wa also more elast than he had thought, which 
made the sound muffl and not too noticeable. He had not held hi 
head care enough, though, and hit it as he fell; annoy and in 
pain, he turn it and rub it against the carpet. 

"something' fallen down in there", said the chief clerk in the room 
on the left. gregor tri to imagin whether someth of the sort 
that had happen to him today could ever happen to the chief clerk 
too; you had to conced that it wa possible. but as if in gruff 
repli to thi question, the chief clerk' firm footstep in hi 
highli polish boot could now be heard in the adjoin room. 
from the room on hi right, gregor' sister whisper to him to let 
him know: "gregor, the chief clerk is here." "yes, I know", said 
gregor to himself; but without dare to rais hi voic loud enough 
for hi sister to hear him. 

"gregor", said hi father now from the room to hi left, "the chief 
clerk ha come round and want to know whi you didn't leav on the 
earli train. We don't know what to say to him. and anyway, he 
want to speak to you personally. So pleas open up thi door. i'm 
sure he'll be good enough to forgiv the untidi of your room." 
then the chief clerk call "good morning, mr. samsa". "he isn't 
well", said hi mother to the chief clerk, while hi father 
continu to speak through the door. "he isn't well, pleas believ 
me. whi els would gregor have miss a train! the lad onli ever 
think about the business. It nearli make me cross the way he 
never goe out in the evenings; he' been in town for a week now but 
stay home everi evening. He sit with us in the kitchen and just 
read the paper or studi train timetables. hi idea of relax 
is work with hi fretsaw. he' made a littl frame, for 
instance, it onli took him two or three evenings, you'll be amaz 
how nice it is; it' hang up in hi room; you'll see it as soon 
as gregor open the door. anyway, i'm glad you'r here; we wouldn't 
have been abl to get gregor to open the door by ourselves; he' so 
stubborn; and i'm sure he isn't well, he said thi morn that he 
is, but he isn't." "i'll be there in a moment", said gregor slowli 
and thoughtfully, but without move so that he would not miss ani 
word of the conversation. "well I can't think of ani other way of 
explain it, mrs. samsa", said the chief clerk, "I hope it' 
noth serious. but on the other hand, I must say that if we 
peopl in commerc ever becom slightli unwel then, fortun or 
unfortun as you like, we simpli have to overcom it becaus of 
busi considerations." "can the chief clerk come in to see you 
now then?", ask hi father impatiently, knock at the door 
again. "no", said gregor. In the room on hi right there follow 
a pain silence; in the room on hi left hi sister began to cry. 

So whi did hi sister not go and join the others? she had probabl 
onli just got up and had not even begun to get dressed. and whi wa 
she crying? wa it becaus he had not got up, and had not let the 
chief clerk in, becaus he wa in danger of lose hi job and if 
that happen hi boss would onc more pursu their parent with the 
same demand as before? there wa no need to worri about thing like 
that yet. gregor wa still there and had not the slightest 
intent of abandon hi family. for the time be he just lay 
there on the carpet, and no-on who knew the condit he wa in 
would serious have expect him to let the chief clerk in. It wa 
onli a minor discourtesy, and a suitabl excus could easili be 
found for it later on, it wa not someth for which gregor could 
be sack on the spot. and it seem to gregor much more sensibl 
to leav him now in peac instead of disturb him with talk at 
him and crying. but the other didn't know what wa happening, they 
were worried, that would excus their behaviour. 

the chief clerk now rais hi voice, "mr. samsa", he call to him, 
"what is wrong? you barricad yourself in your room, give us no more 
than ye or no for an answer, you are caus seriou and 
unnecessari concern to your parent and you fail - and I mention 
thi just by the way - you fail to carri out your busi duti in 
a way that is quit unheard of. i'm speak here on behalf of your 
parent and of your employer, and realli must request a clear and 
immedi explanation. I am astonished, quit astonished. I 
thought I knew you as a calm and sensibl person, and now you 
suddenli seem to be show off with peculiar whims. thi morning, 
your employ did suggest a possibl reason for your failur to 
appear, it' true - it had to do with the money that wa recent 
entrust to you - but I came near to give him my word of honour 
that that could not be the right explanation. but now that I see 
your incomprehens stubborn I no longer feel ani wish 
whatsoev to interced on your behalf. and nor is your posit 
all that secure. I had origin intend to say all thi to you 
in private, but sinc you caus me to wast my time here for no good 
reason I don't see whi your parent should not also learn of it. 
your turnov ha been veri unsatisfactori of late; I grant you that 
it' not the time of year to do especi good business, we 
recognis that; but there simpli is no time of year to do no 
busi at all, mr. samsa, we cannot allow there to be." 

"but sir", call gregor, besid himself and forget all els in 
the excitement, "i'll open up immediately, just a moment. i'm 
slightli unwell, an attack of dizziness, I haven't been abl to get 
up. i'm still in bed now. i'm quit fresh again now, though. i'm 
just get out of bed. just a moment. Be patient! it' not quit 
as easi as i'd thought. i'm quit alright now, though. it' 
shocking, what can suddenli happen to a person! I wa quit alright 
last night, my parent know about it, perhap better than me, I had 
a small symptom of it last night already. they must have notic 
it. I don't know whi I didn't let you know at work! but you alway 
think you can get over an ill without stay at home. please, 
don't make my parent suffer! there' no basi for ani of the 
accus you'r making; nobody' ever said a word to me about ani 
of these things. mayb you haven't read the latest contract I sent 
in. i'll set off with the eight o'clock train, as well, these few 
hour of rest have given me strength. you don't need to wait, sir; 
i'll be in the offic soon after you, and pleas be so good as to 
tell that to the boss and recommend me to him!" 

and while gregor gush out these words, hardli know what he wa 
saying, he made hi way over to the chest of drawer - thi wa 
easili done, probabl becaus of the practis he had alreadi had in 
bed - where he now tri to get himself upright. He realli did want 
to open the door, realli did want to let them see him and to speak 
with the chief clerk; the other were be so insistent, and he wa 
curiou to learn what they would say when they caught sight of him. 
If they were shock then it would no longer be gregor' 
respons and he could rest. if, however, they took everyth 
calmli he would still have no reason to be upset, and if he hurri 
he realli could be at the station for eight o'clock. the first few 
time he tri to climb up on the smooth chest of drawer he just 
slid down again, but he final gave himself one last swing and 
stood there upright; the lower part of hi bodi wa in seriou pain 
but he no longer gave ani attent to it. now he let himself fall 
against the back of a nearbi chair and held tightli to the edg of 
it with hi littl legs. By now he had also calm down, and kept 
quiet so that he could listen to what the chief clerk wa saying. 

"did you understand a word of all that?" the chief clerk ask hi 
parents, "sure he' not tri to make fool of us". "oh, god!" 
call hi mother, who wa alreadi in tears, "he could be serious 
ill and we'r make him suffer. grete! grete!" she then cried. 
"mother?" hi sister call from the other side. they commun 
across gregor' room. "you'll have to go for the doctor straight 
away. gregor is ill. quick, get the doctor. did you hear the way 
gregor spoke just now?" "that wa the voic of an animal", said the 
chief clerk, with a calm that wa in contrast with hi mother' 
screams. "anna! anna!" hi father call into the kitchen through 
the entranc hall, clap hi hands, "get a locksmith here, now!" 
and the two girls, their skirt swishing, immedi ran out 
through the hall, wrench open the front door of the flat as they 
went. how had hi sister manag to get dress so quickly? there 
wa no sound of the door bang shut again; they must have left it 
open; peopl often do in home where someth aw ha happened. 

gregor, in contrast, had becom much calmer. So they couldn't 
understand hi word ani more, although they seem clear enough to 
him, clearer than befor - perhap hi ear had becom use to the 
sound. they had realised, though, that there wa someth wrong 
with him, and were readi to help. the first respons to hi 
situat had been confid and wise, and that made him feel 
better. He felt that he had been drawn back in among people, and 
from the doctor and the locksmith he expect great and surpris 
achiev - although he did not realli distinguish one from the 
other. whatev wa said next would be crucial, so, in order to 
make hi voic as clear as possible, he cough a little, but take 
care to do thi not too loudli as even thi might well sound 
differ from the way that a human cough and he wa no longer sure 
he could judg thi for himself. meanwhile, it had becom veri 
quiet in the next room. perhap hi parent were sat at the tabl 
whisper with the chief clerk, or perhap they were all press 
against the door and listening. 

gregor slowli push hi way over to the door with the chair. onc 
there he let go of it and threw himself onto the door, hold 
himself upright against it use the adhes on the tip of hi 
legs. He rest there a littl while to recov from the effort 
involv and then set himself to the task of turn the key in the 
lock with hi mouth. He seemed, unfortunately, to have no proper 
teeth - how wa he, then, to grasp the key? - but the lack of teeth 
was, of course, made up for with a veri strong jaw; use the jaw, 
he realli wa abl to start the key turning, ignor the fact that 
he must have been caus some kind of damag as a brown fluid came 
from hi mouth, flow over the key and drip onto the floor. 
"listen", said the chief clerk in the next room, "he' turn the 
key." gregor wa greatli encourag by this; but they all should 
have been call to him, hi father and hi mother too: "well done, 
gregor", they should have cried, "keep at it, keep hold of the 
lock!" and with the idea that they were all excitedli follow hi 
efforts, he bit on the key with all hi strength, pay no 
attent to the pain he wa caus himself. As the key turn 
round he turn around the lock with it, onli hold himself 
upright with hi mouth, and hung onto the key or push it down 
again with the whole weight of hi bodi as needed. the clear sound 
of the lock as it snap back wa gregor' sign that he could break 
hi concentration, and as he regain hi breath he said to himself: 
"so, I didn't need the locksmith after all". then he lay hi head on 
the handl of the door to open it completely. 

becaus he had to open the door in thi way, it wa alreadi wide 
open befor he could be seen. He had first to slowli turn himself 
around one of the doubl doors, and he had to do it veri care 
if he did not want to fall flat on hi back befor enter the 
room. He wa still occupi with thi difficult movement, unabl to 
pay attent to anyth else, when he heard the chief clerk 
exclaim a loud "oh!", which sound like the sough of the wind. 
now he also saw him - he wa the nearest to the door - hi hand 
press against hi open mouth and slowli retreat as if driven by 
a steadi and invis force. gregor' mother, her hair still 
dishevel from bed despit the chief clerk' be there, look 
at hi father. then she unfold her arms, took two step forward 
toward gregor and sank down onto the floor into her skirt that 
spread themselv out around her as her head disappear down onto 
her breast. hi father look hostile, and clench hi fist as if 
want to knock gregor back into hi room. then he look 
uncertainli round the live room, cover hi eye with hi hand 
and wept so that hi power chest shook. 

So gregor did not go into the room, but leant against the insid of 
the other door which wa still held bolt in place. In thi way 
onli half of hi bodi could be seen, along with hi head abov it 
which he leant over to one side as he peer out at the others. 
meanwhil the day had becom much lighter; part of the endless, 
grey-black build on the other side of the street - which wa a 
hospit - could be seen quit clearli with the auster and regular 
line of window pierc it facade; the rain wa still 
falling, now throw down large, individu droplet which hit the 
ground one at a time. the wash up from breakfast lay on the 
table; there wa so much of it because, for gregor' father, 
breakfast wa the most import meal of the day and he would 
stretch it out for sever hour as he sat read a number of 
differ newspapers. On the wall exactli opposit there wa 
photograph of gregor when he wa a lieuten in the army, hi sword 
in hi hand and a carefre smile on hi face as he call forth 
respect for hi uniform and bearing. the door to the entranc hall 
wa open and as the front door of the flat wa also open he could 
see onto the land and the stair where they began their way down 
below. 

"now, then", said gregor, well awar that he wa the onli one to 
have kept calm, "i'll get dress straight away now, pack up my 
sampl and set off. will you pleas just let me leave? you can 
see", he said to the chief clerk, "that i'm not stubborn and I 
like to do my job; be a commerci travel is arduou but 
without travel I couldn't earn my living. So where are you 
going, in to the office? yes? will you report everyth accurately, 
then? it' quit possibl for someon to be temporarili unabl to 
work, but that' just the right time to rememb what' been 
achiev in the past and consid that later on, onc the difficulti 
ha been removed, he will certainli work with all the more dilig 
and concentration. you'r well awar that i'm serious in debt to 
our employ as well as have to look after my parent and my 
sister, so that i'm trap in a difficult situation, but I will 
work my way out of it again. pleas don't make thing ani harder 
for me than they are already, and don't take side against me at the 
office. I know that nobodi like the travellers. they think we 
earn an enorm wage as well as have a soft time of it. that' 
just prejudic but they have no particular reason to think better of 
it. but you, sir, you have a better overview than the rest of the 
staff, in fact, if I can say thi in confidence, a better overview 
than the boss himself - it' veri easi for a businessman like him to 
make mistak about hi employe and judg them more harshli than 
he should. and you'r also well awar that we travel spend 
almost the whole year away from the office, so that we can veri 
easili fall victim to gossip and chanc and groundless complaints, 
and it' almost imposs to defend yourself from that sort of 
thing, we don't usual even hear about them, or if at all it' when 
we arriv back home exhaust from a trip, and that' when we feel 
the harm effect of what' been go on without even know 
what caus them. please, don't go away, at least first say 
someth to show that you grant that i'm at least partli right!" 

but the chief clerk had turn away as soon as gregor had start to 
speak, and, with protrud lips, onli stare back at him over hi 
trembl shoulder as he left. He did not keep still for a moment 
while gregor wa speaking, but move steadili toward the door 
without take hi eye off him. He move veri gradually, as if 
there had been some secret prohibit on leav the room. It wa 
onli when he had reach the entranc hall that he made a sudden 
movement, drew hi foot from the live room, and rush forward in 
a panic. In the hall, he stretch hi right hand far out toward 
the stairway as if out there, there were some supernatur forc 
wait to save him. 

gregor realis that it wa out of the question to let the chief 
clerk go away in thi mood if hi posit in the firm wa not to be 
put into extrem danger. that wa someth hi parent did not 
understand veri well; over the years, they had becom convinc that 
thi job would provid for gregor for hi entir life, and besides, 
they had so much to worri about at present that they had lost sight 
of ani thought for the future. gregor, though, did think about the 
future. the chief clerk had to be held back, calm down, convinc 
and final won over; the futur of gregor and hi famili depend 
on it! If onli hi sister were here! she wa clever; she wa alreadi 
in tear while gregor wa still lie peac on hi back. and 
the chief clerk wa a lover of women, sure she could persuad him; 
she would close the front door in the entranc hall and talk him out 
of hi shock state. but hi sister wa not there, gregor would 
have to do the job himself. and without consid that he still 
wa not familiar with how well he could move about in hi present 
state, or that hi speech still might not - or probabl would not - 
be understood, he let go of the door; push himself through the 
opening; tri to reach the chief clerk on the land who, 
ridiculously, wa hold on to the banist with both hands; but 
gregor fell immedi over and, with a littl scream as he sought 
someth to hold onto, land on hi numer littl legs. hardli 
had that happen than, for the first time that day, he began to 
feel alright with hi body; the littl leg had the solid ground 
under them; to hi pleasure, they did exactli as he told them; they 
were even make the effort to carri him where he want to go; and 
he wa soon believ that all hi sorrow would soon be final at 
an end. He held back the urg to move but sway from side to side 
as he crouch there on the floor. hi mother wa not far away in 
front of him and seemed, at first, quit engross in herself, but 
then she suddenli jump up with her arm outstretch and her 
finger spread shouting: "help, for pity' sake, help!" the way she 
held her head suggest she want to see gregor better, but the 
unthink way she wa hurri backward show that she did not; 
she had forgotten that the tabl wa behind her with all the 
breakfast thing on it; when she reach the tabl she sat quickli 
down on it without know what she wa doing; without even seem 
to notic that the coffe pot had been knock over and a gush of 
coffe wa pour down onto the carpet. 

"mother, mother", said gregor gently, look up at her. He had 
complet forgotten the chief clerk for the moment, but could not 
help himself snap in the air with hi jaw at the sight of the 
flow of coffee. that set hi mother scream anew, she fled from 
the tabl and into the arm of hi father as he rush toward her. 
gregor, though, had no time to spare for hi parent now; the chief 
clerk had alreadi reach the stairs; with hi chin on the banister, 
he look back for the last time. gregor made a run for him; he 
want to be sure of reach him; the chief clerk must have 
expect something, as he leapt down sever step at onc and 
disappeared; hi shout resound all around the staircase. the 
flight of the chief clerk seemed, unfortunately, to put gregor' 
father into a panic as well. until then he had been rel self 
controlled, but now, instead of run after the chief clerk 
himself, or at least not imped gregor as he ran after him, 
gregor' father seiz the chief clerk' stick in hi right hand 
(the chief clerk had left it behind on a chair, along with hi hat 
and overcoat), pick up a larg newspap from the tabl with hi 
left, and use them to drive gregor back into hi room, stamp hi 
foot at him as he went. gregor' appeal to hi father were of no 
help, hi appeal were simpli not understood, howev much he humbl 
turn hi head hi father mere stamp hi foot all the harder. 
across the room, despit the chilli weather, gregor' mother had 
pull open a window, leant far out of it and press her hand to 
her face. A strong draught of air flew in from the street toward 
the stairway, the curtain flew up, the newspap on the tabl 
flutter and some of them were blown onto the floor. noth would 
stop gregor' father as he drove him back, make hiss nois at 
him like a wild man. gregor had never had ani practic in move 
backward and wa onli abl to go veri slowly. If gregor had onli 
been allow to turn round he would have been back in hi room 
straight away, but he wa afraid that if he took the time to do that 
hi father would becom impatient, and there wa the threat of a 
lethal blow to hi back or head from the stick in hi father' hand 
ani moment. eventually, though, gregor realis that he had no 
choic as he saw, to hi disgust, that he wa quit incap of 
go backward in a straight line; so he began, as quickli as 
possibl and with frequent anxiou glanc at hi father, to turn 
himself round. It went veri slowly, but perhap hi father wa abl 
to see hi good intent as he did noth to hinder him, in fact 
now and then he use the tip of hi stick to give direct from a 
distanc as to which way to turn. If onli hi father would stop 
that unbear hissing! It wa make gregor quit confused. when 
he had nearli finish turn round, still listen to that 
hissing, he made a mistak and turn himself back a littl the way 
he had just come. He wa pleas when he final had hi head in 
front of the doorway, but then saw that it wa too narrow, and hi 
bodi wa too broad to get through it without further difficulty. In 
hi present mood, it obvious did not occur to hi father to open 
the other of the doubl door so that gregor would have enough space 
to get through. He wa mere fix on the idea that gregor should 
be got back into hi room as quickli as possible. nor would he ever 
have allow gregor the time to get himself upright as prepar 
for get through the doorway. what he did, make more nois 
than ever, wa to drive gregor forward all the harder as if there 
had been noth in the way; it sound to gregor as if there wa 
now more than one father behind him; it wa not a pleasant 
experience, and gregor push himself into the doorway without 
regard for what might happen. one side of hi bodi lift itself, 
he lay at an angl in the doorway, one flank scrape on the white 
door and wa pain injured, leav vile brown fleck on it, 
soon he wa stuck fast and would not have been abl to move at all 
by himself, the littl leg along one side hung quiver in the air 
while those on the other side were press pain against the 
ground. then hi father gave him a hefti shove from behind which 
releas him from where he wa held and sent him flying, and heavili 
bleeding, deep into hi room. the door wa slam shut with the 
stick, then, finally, all wa quiet. 



II 


It wa not until it wa get dark that even that gregor awok 
from hi deep and coma-lik sleep. He would have woken soon 
afterward anyway even if he hadn't been disturbed, as he had had 
enough sleep and felt fulli rested. but he had the impress that 
some hurri step and the sound of the door lead into the front 
room be care shut had woken him. the light from the 
electr street lamp shone pale here and there onto the ceil 
and top of the furniture, but down below, where gregor was, it wa 
dark. He push himself over to the door, feel hi way clumsili 
with hi antenna - of which he wa now begin to learn the valu 
- in order to see what had been happen there. the whole of hi 
left side seem like one, pain stretch scar, and he limp 
badli on hi two row of legs. one of the leg had been badli 
injur in the event of that morn - it wa nearli a miracl that 
onli one of them had been - and drag along lifelessly. 

It wa onli when he had reach the door that he realis what it 
actual wa that had drawn him over to it; it wa the smell of 
someth to eat. By the door there wa a dish fill with 
sweeten milk with littl piec of white bread float in it. He 
wa so pleas he almost laughed, as he wa even hungrier than he 
had been that morning, and immedi dip hi head into the 
milk, nearli cover hi eye with it. but he soon drew hi head 
back again in disappointment; not onli did the pain in hi tender 
left side make it difficult to eat the food - he wa onli abl to 
eat if hi whole bodi work togeth as a snuffl whole - but the 
milk did not tast at all nice. milk like thi wa normal hi 
favourit drink, and hi sister had certainli left it there for him 
becaus of that, but he turned, almost against hi own will, away 
from the dish and crawl back into the centr of the room. 

through the crack in the door, gregor could see that the ga had 
been lit in the live room. hi father at thi time would normal 
be sat with hi even paper, read it out in a loud voic to 
gregor' mother, and sometim to hi sister, but there wa now not 
a sound to be heard. gregor' sister would often write and tell him 
about thi reading, but mayb hi father had lost the habit in 
recent times. It wa so quiet all around too, even though there 
must have been somebodi in the flat. "what a quiet life it is the 
famili lead", said gregor to himself, and, gaze into the darkness, 
felt a great pride that he wa abl to provid a life like that in 
such a nice home for hi sister and parents. but what now, if all 
thi peac and wealth and comfort should come to a horribl and 
frighten end? that wa someth that gregor did not want to 
think about too much, so he start to move about, crawl up and 
down the room. 

onc dure that long evening, the door on one side of the room wa 
open veri slightli and hurriedli close again; later on the door 
on the other side did the same; it seem that someon need to 
enter the room but thought better of it. gregor went and wait 
immedi by the door, resolv either to bring the timor 
visitor into the room in some way or at least to find out who it 
was; but the door wa open no more that night and gregor wait in 
vain. the previou morn while the door were lock everyon had 
want to get in there to him, but now, now that he had open up 
one of the door and the other had clearli been unlock some time 
dure the day, no-on came, and the key were in the other sides. 

It wa not until late at night that the gaslight in the live room 
wa put out, and now it wa easi to see that hi parent and sister had 
stay awak all that time, as they all could be distinctli heard as 
they went away togeth on tip-toe. It wa clear that no-on would 
come into gregor' room ani more until morning; that gave him plenti 
of time to think undisturb about how he would have to re-arrang 
hi life. for some reason, the tall, empti room where he wa forc 
to remain made him feel uneasi as he lay there flat on the floor, 
even though he had been live in it for five years. hardli awar 
of what he wa do other than a slight feel of shame, he 
hurri under the couch. It press down on hi back a little, and 
he wa no longer abl to lift hi head, but he nonetheless felt 
immedi at eas and hi onli regret wa that hi bodi wa too 
broad to get it all underneath. 

He spent the whole night there. some of the time he pass in a 
light sleep, although he frequent woke from it in alarm becaus of 
hi hunger, and some of the time wa spent in worri and vagu 
hope which, however, alway led to the same conclusion: for the 
time be he must remain calm, he must show patienc and the 
greatest consider so that hi famili could bear the 
unpleas that he, in hi present condition, wa forc to 
impos on them. 

gregor soon had the opportun to test the strength of hi 
decisions, as earli the next morning, almost befor the night had 
ended, hi sister, nearli fulli dressed, open the door from the 
front room and look anxious in. she did not see him straight 
away, but when she did notic him under the couch - he had to be 
somewhere, for god' sake, he couldn't have flown away - she wa so 
shock that she lost control of herself and slam the door shut 
again from outside. but she seem to regret her behaviour, as she 
open the door again straight away and came in on tip-to as if 
enter the room of someon serious ill or even of a stranger. 
gregor had push hi head forward, right to the edg of the couch, 
and watch her. would she notic that he had left the milk as it 
was, realis that it wa not from ani lack of hunger and bring him 
in some other food that wa more suitable? If she didn't do it 
herself he would rather go hungri than draw her attent to it, 
although he did feel a terribl urg to rush forward from under the 
couch, throw himself at hi sister' feet and beg her for someth 
good to eat. however, hi sister notic the full dish immedi 
and look at it and the few drop of milk splash around it with 
some surprise. she immedi pick it up - use a rag, 
not her bare hand - and carri it out. gregor wa extrem 
curiou as to what she would bring in it place, imagin the 
wildest possibilities, but he never could have guess what hi 
sister, in her goodness, actual did bring. In order to test hi 
taste, she brought him a whole select of things, all spread out 
on an old newspaper. there were old, half-rotten vegetables; bone 
from the even meal, cover in white sauc that had gone hard; a 
few raisin and almonds; some chees that gregor had declar 
ined two day before; a dri roll and some bread spread with 
butter and salt. As well as all that she had pour some water into 
the dish, which had probabl been perman set asid for gregor' 
use, and place it besid them. then, out of consider for 
gregor' feelings, as she knew that he would not eat in front of 
her, she hurri out again and even turn the key in the lock so 
that gregor would know he could make thing as comfort for 
himself as he liked. gregor' littl leg whirred, at last he could 
eat. what' more, hi injuri must alreadi have complet heal 
as he found no difficulti in moving. thi amaz him, as more than 
a month earlier he had cut hi finger slightli with a knife, he 
thought of how hi finger had still hurt the day befor yesterday. 
"am I less sensit than I use to be, then?", he thought, and wa 
alreadi suck greedili at the chees which had immediately, almost 
compellingly, attract him much more than the other food on the 
newspaper. quickli one after another, hi eye water with 
pleasure, he consum the cheese, the veget and the sauce; the 
fresh foods, on the other hand, he didn't like at all, and even 
drag the thing he did want to eat a littl way away from them 
becaus he couldn't stand the smell. long after he had finish 
eat and lay letharg in the same place, hi sister slowli turn 
the key in the lock as a sign to him that he should withdraw. He 
wa immedi startled, although he had been half asleep, and he 
hurri back under the couch. but he need great self-control to 
stay there even for the short time that hi sister wa in the room, 
as eat so much food had round out hi bodi a littl and he 
could hardli breath in that narrow space. half suffocating, he 
watch with bulg eye as hi sister unselfconsci took a 
broom and swept up the left-overs, mix them in with the food he 
had not even touch at all as if it could not be use ani more. 
she quickli drop it all into a bin, close it with it wooden 
lid, and carri everyth out. she had hardli turn her back 
befor gregor came out again from under the couch and stretch 
himself. 

thi wa how gregor receiv hi food each day now, onc in the 
morn while hi parent and the maid were still asleep, and the 
second time after everyon had eaten their meal at midday as hi 
parent would sleep for a littl while then as well, and gregor' 
sister would send the maid away on some errand. gregor' father and 
mother certainli did not want him to starv either, but perhap it 
would have been more than they could stand to have ani more 
experi of hi feed than be told about it, and perhap hi 
sister want to spare them what distress she could as they were 
inde suffer enough. 

It wa imposs for gregor to find out what they had told the 
doctor and the locksmith that first morn to get them out of the 
flat. As nobodi could understand him, nobody, not even hi sister, 
thought that he could understand them, so he had to be content to 
hear hi sister' sigh and appeal to the saint as she move about 
hi room. It wa onli later, when she had becom a littl more use 
to everyth - there was, of course, no question of her ever 
becom fulli use to the situat - that gregor would sometim 
catch a friendli comment, or at least a comment that could be 
constru as friendly. "he' enjoy hi dinner today", she might 
say when he had dilig clear away all the food left for him, 
or if he left most of it, which slowli becam more and more 
frequent, she would often say, sadly, "now everything' just been 
left there again". 

although gregor wasn't abl to hear ani news directli he did listen 
to much of what wa said in the next rooms, and whenev he heard 
anyon speak he would scurri straight to the appropri door and 
press hi whole bodi against it. there wa seldom ani conversation, 
especi at first, that wa not about him in some way, even if 
onli in secret. for two whole days, all the talk at everi mealtim 
wa about what they should do now; but even between meal they spoke 
about the same subject as there were alway at least two member of 
the famili at home - nobodi want to be at home by themselv and 
it wa out of the question to leav the flat entir empty. and on 
the veri first day the maid had fallen to her knee and beg 
gregor' mother to let her go without delay. It wa not veri clear 
how much she knew of what had happen but she left within a quarter 
of an hour, tear thank gregor' mother for her dismiss as 
if she had done her an enorm service. she even swore 
emphat not to tell anyon the slightest about what had 
happened, even though no-on had ask that of her. 

now gregor' sister also had to help hi mother with the cooking; 
although that wa not so much bother as no-on ate veri much. 
gregor often heard how one of them would unsuccess urg anoth 
to eat, and receiv no more answer than "no thanks, i'v had enough" 
or someth similar. no-on drank veri much either. hi sister 
would sometim ask hi father whether he would like a beer, hope 
for the chanc to go and fetch it herself. when hi father then 
said noth she would add, so that he would not feel selfish, that 
she could send the housekeep for it, but then hi father would 
close the matter with a big, loud "no", and no more would be said. 

even befor the first day had come to an end, hi father had 
explain to gregor' mother and sister what their financ and 
prospect were. now and then he stood up from the tabl and took 
some receipt or document from the littl cash box he had save from 
hi busi when it had collaps five year earlier. gregor heard 
how he open the complic lock and then close it again after he 
had taken the item he wanted. what he heard hi father say wa some 
of the first good news that gregor heard sinc he had first been 
incarcer in hi room. He had thought that noth at all 
remain from hi father' business, at least he had never told him 
anyth different, and gregor had never ask him about it anyway. 
their busi misfortun had reduc the famili to a state of total 
despair, and gregor' onli concern at that time had been to arrang 
thing so that they could all forget about it as quickli as 
possible. So then he start work especi hard, with a fieri 
vigour that rais him from a junior salesman to a travel 
repres almost overnight, bring with it the chanc to earn 
money in quit differ ways. gregor convert hi success at work 
straight into cash that he could lay on the tabl at home for the 
benefit of hi astonish and delight family. they had been good 
time and they had never come again, at least not with the same 
splendour, even though gregor had later earn so much that he wa 
in a posit to bear the cost of the whole family, and did bear 
them. they had even got use to it, both gregor and the family, 
they took the money with gratitud and he wa glad to provid it, 
although there wa no longer much warm affect given in return. 
gregor onli remain close to hi sister now. unlik him, she wa 
veri fond of music and a gift and express violinist, it wa hi 
secret plan to send her to the conservatori next year even though it 
would caus great expens that would have to be made up for in some 
other way. dure gregor' short period in town, convers with 
hi sister would often turn to the conservatori but it wa onli ever 
mention as a love dream that could never be realised. their 
parent did not like to hear thi innoc talk, but gregor thought 
about it quit hard and decid he would let them know what he 
plan with a grand announc of it on christma day. 

that wa the sort of total pointless thing that went through hi 
mind in hi present state, press upright against the door and 
listening. there were time when he simpli becam too tire to 
continu listening, when hi head would fall wearili against the 
door and he would pull it up again with a start, as even the 
slightest nois he caus would be heard next door and they would 
all go silent. "what' that he' do now", hi father would say 
after a while, clearli have gone over to the door, and onli then 
would the interrupt convers slowli be taken up again. 

when explain things, hi father repeat himself sever times, 
partli becaus it wa a long time sinc he had been occupi with 
these matter himself and partli becaus gregor' mother did not 
understand everyth the first time. from these repeat explan 
gregor learned, to hi pleasure, that despit all their misfortun 
there wa still some money avail from the old days. It wa not 
a lot, but it had not been touch in the meantim and some interest 
had accumulated. besid that, they had not been use up all the 
money that gregor had been bring home everi month, keep onli a 
littl for himself, so that that, too, had been accumulating. 
behind the door, gregor nod with enthusiasm in hi pleasur at 
thi unexpect thrift and caution. He could actual have use 
thi surplu money to reduc hi father' debt to hi boss, and the 
day when he could have freed himself from that job would have come 
much closer, but now it wa certainli better the way hi father had 
done things. 

thi money, however, wa certainli not enough to enabl the famili 
to live off the interest; it wa enough to maintain them for, 
perhaps, one or two years, no more. that' to say, it wa money 
that should not realli be touch but set asid for emergencies; 
money to live on had to be earned. hi father wa healthi but old, 
and lack in self confidence. dure the five year that he had 
not been work - the first holiday in a life that had been full of 
strain and no success - he had put on a lot of weight and becom 
veri slow and clumsy. would gregor' elderli mother now have to go 
and earn money? she suffer from asthma and it wa a strain for her 
just to move about the home, everi other day would be spent 
struggl for breath on the sofa by the open window. would hi 
sister have to go and earn money? she wa still a child of 
seventeen, her life up till then had been veri enviable, consist 
of wear nice clothes, sleep late, help out in the business, 
join in with a few modest pleasur and most of all play the 
violin. whenev they began to talk of the need to earn money, 
gregor would alway first let go of the door and then throw himself 
onto the cool, leather sofa next to it, as he becam quit hot with 
shame and regret. 

He would often lie there the whole night through, not sleep a 
wink but scratch at the leather for hour on end. Or he might go 
to all the effort of push a chair to the window, climb up onto 
the sill and, prop up in the chair, lean on the window to 
stare out of it. He had use to feel a great sens of freedom from 
do this, but do it now wa obvious someth more rememb 
than experienced, as what he actual saw in thi way wa becom 
less distinct everi day, even thing that were quit near; he had 
use to curs the ever-pres view of the hospit across the 
street, but now he could not see it at all, and if he had not known 
that he live in charlottenstrasse, which wa a quiet street despit 
be in the middl of the city, he could have thought that he wa 
look out the window at a barren wast where the grey sky and the 
grey earth mingl inseparably. hi observ sister onli need to 
notic the chair twice befor she would alway push it back to it 
exact posit by the window after she had tidi up the room, and 
even left the inner pane of the window open from then on. 

If gregor had onli been abl to speak to hi sister and thank her 
for all that she had to do for him it would have been easier for him 
to bear it; but as it wa it caus him pain. hi sister, 
naturally, tri as far as possibl to pretend there wa noth 
burdensom about it, and the longer it went on, of course, the 
better she wa abl to do so, but as time went by gregor wa also 
abl to see through it all so much better. It had even becom veri 
unpleas for him, now, whenev she enter the room. No sooner 
had she come in than she would quickli close the door as a 
precaut so that no-on would have to suffer the view into 
gregor' room, then she would go straight to the window and pull it 
hurriedli open almost as if she were suffocating. even if it wa 
cold, she would stay at the window breath deepli for a littl 
while. she would alarm gregor twice a day with thi run about 
and nois making; he would stay under the couch shiver the whole 
while, know full well that she would certainli have like to 
spare him thi ordeal, but it wa imposs for her to be in the 
same room with him with the window closed. 

one day, about a month after gregor' transform when hi sister 
no longer had ani particular reason to be shock at hi appearance, 
she came into the room a littl earlier than usual and found him 
still stare out the window, motionless, and just where he would be 
most horrible. In itself, hi sister' not come into the room 
would have been no surpris for gregor as it would have been 
difficult for her to immedi open the window while he wa still 
there, but not onli did she not come in, she went straight back and 
close the door behind her, a stranger would have thought he had 
threaten her and tri to bite her. gregor went straight to hide 
himself under the couch, of course, but he had to wait until midday 
befor hi sister came back and she seem much more uneasi than 
usual. It made him realis that she still found hi appear 
unbear and would continu to do so, she probabl even had to 
overcom the urg to flee when she saw the littl bit of him that 
protrud from under the couch. one day, in order to spare her even 
thi sight, he spent four hour carri the bedsheet over to the 
couch on hi back and arrang it so that he wa complet cover 
and hi sister would not be abl to see him even if she bent down. 
If she did not think thi sheet wa necessari then all she had to do 
wa take it off again, as it wa clear enough that it wa no 
pleasur for gregor to cut himself off so completely. she left the 
sheet where it was. gregor even thought he glimps a look of 
gratitud one time when he care look out from under the sheet 
to see how hi sister like the new arrangement. 

for the first fourteen days, gregor' parent could not bring 
themselv to come into the room to see him. He would often hear 
them say how they appreci all the new work hi sister wa do 
even though, before, they had seen her as a girl who wa somewhat 
useless and frequent been annoy with her. but now the two of 
them, father and mother, would often both wait outsid the door of 
gregor' room while hi sister tidi up in there, and as soon as 
she went out again she would have to tell them exactli how 
everyth looked, what gregor had eaten, how he had behav thi 
time and whether, perhaps, ani slight improv could be seen. 
hi mother also want to go in and visit gregor rel soon but 
hi father and sister at first persuad her against it. gregor 
listen veri close to all this, and approv fully. later, 
though, she had to be held back by force, which made her call out: 
"let me go and see gregor, he is my unfortun son! can't you 
understand I have to see him?", and gregor would think to himself 
that mayb it would be better if hi mother came in, not everi day 
of course, but one day a week, perhaps; she could understand 
everyth much better than hi sister who, for all her courage, wa 
still just a child after all, and realli might not have had an 
adult' appreci of the burdensom job she had taken on. 

gregor' wish to see hi mother wa soon realised. out of 
consider for hi parents, gregor want to avoid be seen at 
the window dure the day, the few squar meter of the floor did 
not give him much room to crawl about, it wa hard to just lie 
quietli through the night, hi food soon stop give him ani 
pleasur at all, and so, to entertain himself, he got into the habit 
of crawl up and down the wall and ceiling. He wa especi 
fond of hang from the ceiling; it wa quit differ from lie 
on the floor; he could breath more freely; hi bodi had a light 
swing to it; and up there, relax and almost happy, it might happen 
that he would surpris even himself by let go of the ceil and 
land on the floor with a crash. but now, of course, he had far 
better control of hi bodi than befor and, even with a fall as 
great as that, caus himself no damage. veri soon hi sister 
notic gregor' new way of entertain himself - he had, after 
all, left trace of the adhes from hi feet as he crawl about - 
and got it into her head to make it as easi as possibl for him by 
remov the furnitur that got in hi way, especi the chest of 
drawer and the desk. now, thi wa not someth that she would be 
abl to do by herself; she did not dare to ask for help from her 
father; the sixteen year old maid had carri on brave sinc the 
cook had left but she certainli would not have help in this, she 
had even ask to be allow to keep the kitchen lock at all time 
and never to have to open the door unless it wa especi 
important; so hi sister had no choic but to choos some time when 
gregor' father wa not there and fetch hi mother to help her. As 
she approach the room, gregor could hear hi mother express her 
joy, but onc at the door she went silent. first, of course, hi 
sister came in and look round to see that everyth in the room 
wa alright; and onli then did she let her mother enter. gregor had 
hurriedli pull the sheet down lower over the couch and put more 
fold into it so that everyth realli look as if it had just 
been thrown down by chance. gregor also refrained, thi time, from 
spi out from under the sheet; he gave up the chanc to see hi 
mother until later and wa simpli glad that she had come. "you can 
come in, he can't be seen", said hi sister, obvious lead her 
in by the hand. the old chest of drawer wa too heavi for a pair 
of feebl women to be heav about, but gregor listen as they 
push it from it place, hi sister alway take on the heaviest 
part of the work for herself and ignor her mother' warn that 
she would strain herself. thi last a veri long time. after 
labour at it for fifteen minut or more hi mother said it would 
be better to leav the chest where it was, for one thing it wa too 
heavi for them to get the job finish befor gregor' father got 
home and leav it in the middl of the room it would be in hi way 
even more, and for anoth thing it wasn't even sure that take the 
furnitur away would realli be ani help to him. she thought just 
the opposite; the sight of the bare wall sadden her right to her 
heart; and whi wouldn't gregor feel the same way about it, he'd been 
use to thi furnitur in hi room for a long time and it would make 
him feel abandon to be in an empti room like that. then, quietly, 
almost whisper as if want gregor (whose whereabout she did 
not know) to hear not even the tone of her voice, as she wa 
convinc that he did not understand her words, she ad "and by 
take the furnitur away, won't it seem like we'r show that 
we'v given up all hope of improv and we'r abandon him to 
cope for himself? I think it'd be best to leav the room exactli the 
way it wa befor so that when gregor come back to us again he'll 
find everyth unchang and he'll be abl to forget the time in 
between all the easier". 

hear these word from hi mother made gregor realis that the 
lack of ani direct human communication, along with the monoton 
life led by the famili dure these two months, must have made him 
confus - he could think of no other way of explain to himself 
whi he had serious want hi room empti out. had he realli 
want to transform hi room into a cave, a warm room fit out 
with the nice furnitur he had inherited? that would have let him 
crawl around unimped in ani direction, but it would also have let 
him quickli forget hi past when he had still been human. He had 
come veri close to forgetting, and it had onli been the voic of hi 
mother, unheard for so long, that had shaken him out of it. noth 
should be removed; everyth had to stay; he could not do without 
the good influenc the furnitur had on hi condition; and if the 
furnitur made it difficult for him to crawl about mindlessli that 
wa not a loss but a great advantage. 

hi sister, unfortunately, did not agree; she had becom use to the 
idea, not without reason, that she wa gregor' spokesman to hi 
parent about the thing that concern him. thi meant that hi 
mother' advic now wa suffici reason for her to insist on 
remov not onli the chest of drawer and the desk, as she had 
thought at first, but all the furnitur apart from the all-import 
couch. It wa more than childish perversity, of course, or the 
unexpect confid she had recent acquired, that made her 
insist; she had inde notic that gregor need a lot of room to 
crawl about in, wherea the furniture, as far as anyon could see, 
wa of no use to him at all. girl of that age, though, do becom 
enthusiast about thing and feel they must get their way whenev 
they can. perhap thi wa what tempt grete to make gregor' 
situat seem even more shock than it wa so that she could do 
even more for him. grete would probabl be the onli one who would 
dare enter a room domin by gregor crawl about the bare wall 
by himself. 

So she refus to let her mother dissuad her. gregor' mother 
alreadi look uneasi in hi room, she soon stop speak and 
help gregor' sister to get the chest of drawer out with what 
strength she had. the chest of drawer wa someth that gregor 
could do without if he had to, but the write desk had to stay. 
hardli had the two women push the chest of drawers, groaning, out 
of the room than gregor poke hi head out from under the couch to 
see what he could do about it. He meant to be as care and 
consider as he could, but, unfortunately, it wa hi mother who 
came back first while grete in the next room had her arm round the 
chest, push and pull at it from side to side by herself 
without, of course, move it an inch. hi mother wa not use to 
the sight of gregor, he might have made her ill, so gregor hurri 
backward to the far end of the couch. In hi startlement, though, 
he wa not abl to prevent the sheet at it front from move a 
little. It wa enough to attract hi mother' attention. she stood 
veri still, remain there a moment, and then went back out to 
grete. 

gregor kept tri to assur himself that noth unusu wa 
happening, it wa just a few piec of furnitur be move after 
all, but he soon had to admit that the women go to and fro, their 
littl call to each other, the scrape of the furnitur on the 
floor, all these thing made him feel as if he were be assail 
from all sides. with hi head and leg pull in against him and 
hi bodi press to the floor, he wa forc to admit to himself 
that he could not stand all of thi much longer. they were empti 
hi room out; take away everyth that wa dear to him; they had 
alreadi taken out the chest contain hi fretsaw and other tools; 
now they threaten to remov the write desk with it place 
clearli worn into the floor, the desk where he had done hi homework 
as a busi trainee, at high school, even while he had been at 
infant school--h realli could not wait ani longer to see whether 
the two women' intent were good. He had nearli forgotten they 
were there anyway, as they were now too tire to say anyth while 
they work and he could onli hear their feet as they step 
heavili on the floor. 

so, while the women were leant against the desk in the other room 
catch their breath, he salli out, chang direct four time 
not know what he should save first befor hi attent wa 
suddenli caught by the pictur on the wall - which wa alreadi 
denud of everyth els that had been on it - of the ladi dress 
in copiou fur. He hurri up onto the pictur and press himself 
against it glass, it held him firmli and felt good on hi hot 
belly. thi pictur at least, now total cover by gregor, would 
certainli be taken away by no-one. He turn hi head to face the 
door into the live room so that he could watch the women when they 
came back. 

they had not allow themselv a long rest and came back quit 
soon; grete had put her arm around her mother and wa nearli 
carri her. "what shall we take now, then?", said grete and 
look around. her eye met those of gregor on the wall. perhap 
onli becaus her mother wa there, she remain calm, bent her face 
to her so that she would not look round and said, albeit hurriedli 
and with a tremor in her voice: "come on, let' go back in the 
live room for a while?" gregor could see what grete had in mind, 
she want to take her mother somewher safe and then chase him down 
from the wall. well, she could certainli tri it! He sat unyield 
on hi picture. He would rather jump at grete' face. 

but grete' word had made her mother quit worried, she step to 
one side, saw the enorm brown patch against the flower of the 
wallpaper, and befor she even realis it wa gregor that she saw 
screamed: "oh god, oh god!" arm outstretched, she fell onto the 
couch as if she had given up everyth and stay there immobile. 
"gregor!" shout hi sister, glower at him and shake her fist. 
that wa the first word she had spoken to him directli sinc hi 
transformation. she ran into the other room to fetch some kind of 
smell salt to bring her mother out of her faint; gregor want 
to help too - he could save hi pictur later, although he stuck 
fast to the glass and had to pull himself off by force; then he, 
too, ran into the next room as if he could advis hi sister like in 
the old days; but he had to just stand behind her do nothing; she 
wa look into variou bottles, he startl her when she turn 
round; a bottl fell to the ground and broke; a splinter cut 
gregor' face, some kind of caustic medicin splash all over him; 
now, without delay ani longer, grete took hold of all the bottl 
she could and ran with them in to her mother; she slam the door 
shut with her foot. So now gregor wa shut out from hi mother, 
who, becaus of him, might be near to death; he could not open the 
door if he did not want to chase hi sister away, and she had to 
stay with hi mother; there wa noth for him to do but wait; and, 
oppress with anxieti and self-reproach, he began to crawl about, 
he crawl over everything, walls, furniture, ceiling, and final 
in hi confus as the whole room began to spin around him he fell 
down into the middl of the dinner table. 

He lay there for a while, numb and immobile, all around him it wa 
quiet, mayb that wa a good sign. then there wa someon at the 
door. the maid, of course, had lock herself in her kitchen so 
that grete would have to go and answer it. hi father had arriv 
home. "what' happened?" were hi first words; grete' appear 
must have made everyth clear to him. she answer him with 
subdu voice, and openli press her face into hi chest: "mother' 
fainted, but she' better now. gregor got out." "just as I 
expected", said hi father, "just as I alway said, but you women 
wouldn't listen, would you." It wa clear to gregor that grete had 
not said enough and that hi father took it to mean that someth 
bad had happened, that he wa respons for some act of violence. 
that meant gregor would now have to tri to calm hi father, as he 
did not have the time to explain thing to him even if that had been 
possible. So he fled to the door of hi room and press himself 
against it so that hi father, when he came in from the hall, could 
see straight away that gregor had the best intent and would go 
back into hi room without delay, that it would not be necessari to 
drive him back but that they had onli to open the door and he would 
disappear. 

hi father, though, wa not in the mood to notic subtleti like 
that; "ah!", he shout as he came in, sound as if he were both 
angri and glad at the same time. gregor drew hi head back from the 
door and lift it toward hi father. He realli had not imagin 
hi father the way he stood there now; of late, with hi new habit 
of crawl about, he had neglect to pay attent to what wa 
go on the rest of the flat the way he had done before. He realli 
ought to have expect thing to have changed, but still, still, wa 
that realli hi father? the same tire man as use to be lay 
there entomb in hi bed when gregor came back from hi busi 
trips, who would receiv him sit in the armchair in hi 
nightgown when he came back in the evenings; who wa hardli even 
abl to stand up but, as a sign of hi pleasure, would just rais 
hi arm and who, on the coupl of time a year when they went for a 
walk togeth on a sunday or public holiday wrap up tightli in 
hi overcoat between gregor and hi mother, would alway labour hi 
way forward a littl more slowli than them, who were alreadi walk 
slowli for hi sake; who would place hi stick down care and, 
if he want to say someth would invari stop and gather hi 
companion around him. He wa stand up straight enough now; 
dress in a smart blue uniform with gold buttons, the sort worn by 
the employe at the bank institute; abov the high, stiff collar 
of the coat hi strong double-chin emerged; under the bushi 
eyebrows, hi piercing, dark eye look out fresh and alert; hi 
normal unkempt white hair wa comb down pain close to hi 
scalp. He took hi cap, with it gold monogram from, probably, some 
bank, and threw it in an arc right across the room onto the sofa, 
put hi hand in hi trouser pockets, push back the bottom of hi 
long uniform coat, and, with look of determination, walk toward 
gregor. He probabl did not even know himself what he had in mind, 
but nonetheless lift hi feet unusu high. gregor wa amaz 
at the enorm size of the sole of hi boots, but wast no time 
with that - he knew full well, right from the first day of hi new 
life, that hi father thought it necessari to alway be extrem 
strict with him. and so he ran up to hi father, stop when hi 
father stopped, scurri forward again when he moved, even 
slightly. In thi way they went round the room sever time 
without anyth decis happening, without even give the 
impress of a chase as everyth went so slowly. gregor remain 
all thi time on the floor, larg becaus he fear hi father 
might see it as especi provok if he fled onto the wall or 
ceiling. whatev he did, gregor had to admit that he certainli 
would not be abl to keep up thi run about for long, as for 
each step hi father took he had to carri out countless movements. 
He becam notic short of breath, even in hi earlier life hi 
lung had not been veri reliable. now, as he lurch about in hi 
effort to muster all the strength he could for run he could 
hardli keep hi eye open; hi thought becam too slow for him to 
think of ani other way of save himself than running; he almost 
forgot that the wall were there for him to use although, here, they 
were conceal behind care carv furnitur full of notch and 
protrus - then, right besid him, lightli tossed, someth flew 
down and roll in front of him. It wa an apple; then anoth one 
immedi flew at him; gregor froze in shock; there wa no longer 
ani point in run as hi father had decid to bombard him. He 
had fill hi pocket with fruit from the bowl on the sideboard and 
now, without even take the time for care aim, threw one appl 
after another. these little, red appl roll about on the floor, 
knock into each other as if they had electr motors. An appl 
thrown without much forc glanc against gregor' back and slid off 
without do ani harm. anoth one however, immedi follow 
it, hit squar and lodg in hi back; gregor want to drag 
himself away, as if he could remov the surprising, the incred 
pain by chang hi position; but he felt as if nail to the spot 
and spread himself out, all hi sens in confusion. the last thing 
he saw wa the door of hi room be pull open, hi sister wa 
screaming, hi mother ran out in front of her in her blous (a hi 
sister had taken off some of her cloth after she had faint to 
make it easier for her to breathe), she ran to hi father, her 
skirt unfasten and slide one after anoth to the ground, 
stumbl over the skirt she push herself to hi father, her arm 
around him, unit herself with him total - now gregor lost hi 
abil to see anyth - her hand behind hi father' head beg 
him to spare gregor' life. 



iii 


no-on dare to remov the appl lodg in gregor' flesh, so it 
remain there as a visibl remind of hi injury. He had suffer 
it there for more than a month, and hi condit seem seriou 
enough to remind even hi father that gregor, despit hi current 
sad and revolt form, wa a famili member who could not be treat 
as an enemy. On the contrary, as a famili there wa a duti to 
swallow ani revuls for him and to be patient, just to be patient. 

becaus of hi injuries, gregor had lost much of hi mobil - 
probabl permanently. He had been reduc to the condit of an 
ancient invalid and it took him long, long minut to crawl across 
hi room - crawl over the ceil wa out of the question - but 
thi deterior in hi condit wa fulli (in hi opinion) made 
up for by the door to the live room be left open everi evening. 
He got into the habit of close watch it for one or two hour 
befor it wa open and then, lie in the dark of hi room 
where he could not be seen from the live room, he could watch the 
famili in the light of the dinner tabl and listen to their 
convers - with everyone' permission, in a way, and thu quit 
differ from before. 

they no longer held the live convers of earlier times, of 
course, the one that gregor alway thought about with long when 
he wa tire and get into the damp bed in some small hotel room. 
all of them were usual veri quiet nowadays. soon after dinner, 
hi father would go to sleep in hi chair; hi mother and sister 
would urg each other to be quiet; hi mother, bent deepli under the 
lamp, would sew fanci underwear for a fashion shop; hi sister, who 
had taken a sale job, learn shorthand and french in the even 
so that she might be abl to get a better posit later on. 
sometim hi father would wake up and say to gregor' mother 
"you'r do so much sew again today!", as if he did not know 
that he had been doze - and then he would go back to sleep again 
while mother and sister would exchang a tire grin. 

with a kind of stubbornness, gregor' father refus to take hi 
uniform off even at home; while hi nightgown hung unus on it peg 
gregor' father would slumber where he was, fulli dressed, as if 
alway readi to serv and expect to hear the voic of hi 
superior even here. the uniform had not been new to start with, but 
as a result of thi it slowli becam even shabbier despit the 
effort of gregor' mother and sister to look after it. gregor 
would often spend the whole even look at all the stain on 
thi coat, with it gold button alway kept polish and shiny, 
while the old man in it would sleep, highli uncomfort but 
peaceful. 

As soon as it struck ten, gregor' mother would speak gentli to hi 
father to wake him and tri to persuad him to go to bed, as he 
couldn't sleep properli where he wa and he realli had to get hi 
sleep if he wa to be up at six to get to work. but sinc he had 
been in work he had becom more obstin and would alway insist on 
stay longer at the table, even though he regularli fell asleep 
and it wa then harder than ever to persuad him to exchang the 
chair for hi bed. then, howev much mother and sister would 
importun him with littl reproach and warn he would keep 
slowli shake hi head for a quarter of an hour with hi eye 
close and refus to get up. gregor' mother would tug at hi 
sleeve, whisper endear into hi ear, gregor' sister would 
leav her work to help her mother, but noth would have ani effect 
on him. He would just sink deeper into hi chair. onli when the 
two women took him under the arm he would abruptli open hi eyes, 
look at them one after the other and say: "what a life! thi is what 
peac I get in my old age!" and support by the two women he would 
lift himself up care as if he were carri the greatest load 
himself, let the women take him to the door, send them off and carri 
on by himself while gregor' mother would throw down her needl and 
hi sister her pen so that they could run after hi father and 
continu be of help to him. 

who, in thi tire and overwork family, would have had time to 
give more attent to gregor than wa absolut necessary? the 
household budget becam even smaller; so now the maid wa dismissed; 
an enormous, thick-bon charwoman with white hair that flap 
around her head came everi morn and even to do the heaviest 
work; everyth els wa look after by gregor' mother on top of 
the larg amount of sew work she did. gregor even learned, 
listen to the even convers about what price they had 
hope for, that sever item of jewelleri belong to the famili 
had been sold, even though both mother and sister had been veri fond 
of wear them at function and celebrations. but the loudest 
complaint wa that although the flat wa much too big for their 
present circumstances, they could not move out of it, there wa no 
imagin way of transfer gregor to the new address. He could 
see quit well, though, that there were more reason than 
consider for him that made it difficult for them to move, it 
would have been quit easi to transport him in ani suitabl crate 
with a few air hole in it; the main thing hold the famili back 
from their decis to move wa much more to do with their total 
despair, and the thought that they had been struck with a misfortun 
unlik anyth experienc by anyon els they knew or were relat 
to. they carri out absolut everyth that the world expect 
from poor people, gregor' father brought bank employe their 
breakfast, hi mother sacrif herself by wash cloth for 
strangers, hi sister ran back and forth behind her desk at the 
behest of the customers, but they just did not have the strength to 
do ani more. and the injuri in gregor' back began to hurt as much 
as when it wa new. after they had come back from take hi father 
to bed gregor' mother and sister would now leav their work where 
it wa and sit close together, cheek to cheek; hi mother would 
point to gregor' room and say "close that door, grete", and then, 
when he wa in the dark again, they would sit in the next room and 
their tear would mingle, or they would simpli sit there stare 
dry-ey at the table. 

gregor hardli slept at all, either night or day. sometim he would 
think of take over the family' affairs, just like before, the 
next time the door wa opened; he had long forgotten about hi boss 
and the chief clerk, but they would appear again in hi thoughts, 
the salesmen and the apprentices, that stupid teaboy, two or three 
friend from other businesses, one of the chambermaid from a 
provinci hotel, a tender memori that appear and disappear 
again, a cashier from a hat shop for whom hi attent had been 
seriou but too slow, - all of them appear to him, mix togeth 
with stranger and other he had forgotten, but instead of help 
him and hi famili they were all of them inaccessible, and he wa 
glad when they disappeared. other time he wa not at all in the 
mood to look after hi family, he wa fill with simpl rage about 
the lack of attent he wa shown, and although he could think of 
noth he would have wanted, he made plan of how he could get into 
the pantri where he could take all the thing he wa entitl to, 
even if he wa not hungry. gregor' sister no longer thought about 
how she could pleas him but would hurriedli push some food or other 
into hi room with her foot befor she rush out to work in the 
morn and at midday, and in the even she would sweep it away 
again with the broom, indiffer as to whether it had been eaten or 
- more often than not - had been left total untouched. she still 
clear up the room in the evening, but now she could not have been 
ani quicker about it. smear of dirt were left on the walls, here 
and there were littl ball of dust and filth. At first, gregor 
went into one of the worst of these place when hi sister arriv 
as a reproach to her, but he could have stay there for week 
without hi sister do anyth about it; she could see the dirt 
as well as he could but she had simpli decid to leav him to it. 
At the same time she becam touchi in a way that wa quit new for 
her and which everyon in the famili understood - clean up 
gregor' room wa for her and her alone. gregor' mother did onc 
thoroughli clean hi room, and need to use sever bucket of 
water to do it - although that much damp also made gregor ill 
and he lay flat on the couch, bitter and immobile. but hi mother 
wa to be punish still more for what she had done, as hardli had 
hi sister arriv home in the even than she notic the chang 
in gregor' room and, highli aggrieved, ran back into the live 
room where, despit her mother rais and implor hands, she 
broke into convuls tears. her father, of course, wa startl 
out of hi chair and the two parent look on astonish and 
helpless; then they, too, becam agitated; gregor' father, stand 
to the right of hi mother, accus her of not leav the clean 
of gregor' room to hi sister; from her left, gregor' sister 
scream at her that she wa never to clean gregor' room again; 
while hi mother tri to draw hi father, who wa besid himself 
with anger, into the bedroom; hi sister, quak with tears, 
thump on the tabl with her small fists; and gregor hiss in 
anger that no-on had even thought of close the door to save him 
the sight of thi and all it noise. 

gregor' sister wa exhaust from go out to work, and look 
after gregor as she had done befor wa even more work for her, but 
even so hi mother ought certainli not to have taken her place. 
gregor, on the other hand, ought not to be neglected. now, though, 
the charwoman wa here. thi elderli widow, with a robust bone 
structur that made her abl to withstand the hardest of thing in 
her long life, wasn't realli repel by gregor. just by chanc one 
day, rather than ani real curiosity, she open the door to gregor' 
room and found herself face to face with him. He wa taken total 
by surprise, no-on wa chase him but he began to rush to and fro 
while she just stood there in amaz with her hand cross in 
front of her. from then on she never fail to open the door 
slightli everi even and morn and look briefli in on him. At 
first she would call to him as she did so with word that she 
probabl consid friendly, such as "come on then, you old 
dung-beetle!", or "look at the old dung-beetl there!" gregor never 
respond to be spoken to in that way, but just remain where he 
wa without move as if the door had never even been opened. If 
onli they had told thi charwoman to clean up hi room everi day 
instead of let her disturb him for no reason whenev she felt 
like it! one day, earli in the morn while a heavi rain struck the 
windowpanes, perhap indic that spring wa coming, she began to 
speak to him in that way onc again. gregor wa so resent of it 
that he start to move toward her, he wa slow and infirm, but it 
wa like a kind of attack. instead of be afraid, the charwoman 
just lift up one of the chair from near the door and stood there 
with her mouth open, clearli intend not to close her mouth until 
the chair in her hand had been slam down into gregor' back. 
"aren't you come ani closer, then?", she ask when gregor turn 
round again, and she calmli put the chair back in the corner. 

gregor had almost entir stop eating. onli if he happen to 
find himself next to the food that had been prepar for him he 
might take some of it into hi mouth to play with it, leav it there 
a few hour and then, more often than not, spit it out again. At 
first he thought it wa distress at the state of hi room that 
stop him eating, but he had soon got use to the chang made 
there. they had got into the habit of put thing into thi room 
that they had no room for anywher else, and there were now mani 
such thing as one of the room in the flat had been rent out to 
three gentlemen. these earnest gentlemen - all three of them had 
full beards, as gregor learn peer through the crack in the door 
one day - were pain insist on things' be tidy. thi 
meant not onli in their own room but, sinc they had taken a room in 
thi establishment, in the entir flat and especi in the 
kitchen. unnecessari clutter wa someth they could not tolerate, 
especi if it wa dirty. they had moreov brought most of their 
own furnish and equip with them. for thi reason, mani 
thing had becom superflu which, although they could not be 
sold, the famili did not wish to discard. all these thing found 
their way into gregor' room. the dustbin from the kitchen found 
their way in there too. the charwoman wa alway in a hurry, and 
anyth she couldn't use for the time be she would just chuck in 
there. he, fortunately, would usual see no more than the object 
and the hand that held it. the woman most like meant to fetch the 
thing back out again when she had time and the opportunity, or to 
throw everyth out in one go, but what actual happen wa that 
they were left where they land when they had first been thrown 
unless gregor made hi way through the junk and move it somewher 
else. At first he move it because, with no other room free where 
he could crawl about, he wa forc to, but later on he came to 
enjoy it although move about in that way left him sad and tire to 
death, and he would remain immobil for hour afterwards. 

the gentlemen who rent the room would sometim take their even 
meal at home in the live room that wa use by everyone, and so 
the door to thi room wa often kept close in the evening. but 
gregor found it easi to give up have the door open, he had, after 
all, often fail to make use of it when it wa open and, without 
the famili have notic it, lain in hi room in it darkest 
corner. one time, though, the charwoman left the door to the live 
room slightli open, and it remain open when the gentlemen who 
rent the room came in in the even and the light wa put on. 
they sat up at the tabl where, formerly, gregor had taken hi meal 
with hi father and mother, they unfold the serviett and pick 
up their knive and forks. gregor' mother immedi appear in 
the doorway with a dish of meat and soon behind her came hi sister 
with a dish pile high with potatoes. the food wa steaming, and 
fill the room with it smell. the gentlemen bent over the dish 
set in front of them as if they want to test the food befor 
eat it, and the gentleman in the middle, who seem to count as 
an author for the other two, did inde cut off a piec of meat 
while it wa still in it dish, clearli wish to establish whether 
it wa suffici cook or whether it should be sent back to the 
kitchen. It wa to hi satisfaction, and gregor' mother and 
sister, who had been look on anxiously, began to breath again 
and smiled. 

the famili themselv ate in the kitchen. nonetheless, gregor' 
father came into the live room befor he went into the kitchen, 
bow onc with hi cap in hi hand and did hi round of the table. 
the gentlemen stood as one, and mumbl someth into their beards. 
then, onc they were alone, they ate in near perfect silence. It 
seem remark to gregor that abov all the variou nois of 
eat their chew teeth could still be heard, as if they had 
want to show gregor that you need teeth in order to eat and it wa 
not possibl to perform anyth with jaw that are toothless 
howev nice they might be. "i'd like to eat something", said 
gregor anxiously, "but not anyth like they'r eating. they do 
feed themselves. and here I am, dying!" 

throughout all thi time, gregor could not rememb have heard the 
violin be played, but thi even it began to be heard from the 
kitchen. the three gentlemen had alreadi finish their meal, the 
one in the middl had produc a newspaper, given a page to each of 
the others, and now they leant back in their chair read them and 
smoking. when the violin began play they becam attentive, stood 
up and went on tip-to over to the door of the hallway where they 
stood press against each other. someon must have heard them in 
the kitchen, as gregor' father call out: "i the play perhap 
unpleas for the gentlemen? We can stop it straight away." "on 
the contrary", said the middl gentleman, "would the young ladi not 
like to come in and play for us here in the room, where it is, after 
all, much more cosi and comfortable?" "oh yes, we'd love to", 
call back gregor' father as if he had been the violin player 
himself. the gentlemen step back into the room and waited. 
gregor' father soon appear with the music stand, hi mother with 
the music and hi sister with the violin. she calmli prepar 
everyth for her to begin playing; hi parents, who had never 
rent a room out befor and therefor show an exagger 
courtesi toward the three gentlemen, did not even dare to sit on 
their own chairs; hi father leant against the door with hi right 
hand push in between two button on hi uniform coat; hi mother, 
though, wa offer a seat by one of the gentlemen and sat - leav 
the chair where the gentleman happen to have place it - out of 
the way in a corner. 

hi sister began to play; father and mother paid close attention, 
one on each side, to the movement of her hands. drawn in by the 
playing, gregor had dare to come forward a littl and alreadi had 
hi head in the live room. before, he had taken great pride in 
how consider he wa but now it hardli occur to him that he had 
becom so thoughtless about the others. what' more, there wa now 
all the more reason to keep himself hidden as he wa cover in the 
dust that lay everywher in hi room and flew up at the slightest 
movement; he carri threads, hairs, and remain of food about on 
hi back and sides; he wa much too indiffer to everyth now to 
lay on hi back and wipe himself on the carpet like he had use to 
do sever time a day. and despit thi condition, he wa not too 
shi to move forward a littl onto the immacul floor of the live 
room. 

no-on notic him, though. the famili wa total preoccupi with 
the violin playing; at first, the three gentlemen had put their 
hand in their pocket and come up far too close behind the music 
stand to look at all the note be played, and they must have 
disturb gregor' sister, but soon, in contrast with the family, 
they withdrew back to the window with their head sunk and talk 
to each other at half volume, and they stay by the window while 
gregor' father observ them anxiously. It realli now seem veri 
obviou that they had expect to hear some beauti or 
entertain violin play but had been disappointed, that they had 
had enough of the whole perform and it wa onli now out of 
polit that they allow their peac to be disturbed. It wa 
especi unnerving, the way they all blew the smoke from their 
cigarett upward from their mouth and noses. yet gregor' sister 
wa play so beautifully. her face wa leant to one side, 
follow the line of music with a care and melancholi 
expression. gregor crawl a littl further forward, keep hi 
head close to the ground so that he could meet her eye if the 
chanc came. wa he an anim if music could captiv him so? It 
seem to him that he wa be shown the way to the unknown 
nourish he had been yearn for. He wa determin to make hi 
way forward to hi sister and tug at her skirt to show her she might 
come into hi room with her violin, as no-on appreci her 
play here as much as he would. He never want to let her out of 
hi room, not while he lived, anyway; hi shock appear 
should, for once, be of some use to him; he want to be at everi 
door of hi room at onc to hiss and spit at the attackers; hi 
sister should not be forc to stay with him, though, but stay of 
her own free will; she would sit besid him on the couch with her 
ear bent down to him while he told her how he had alway intend to 
send her to the conservatory, how he would have told everyon about 
it last christma - had christma realli come and gone already? - if 
thi misfortun hadn't got in the way, and refus to let anyon 
dissuad him from it. On hear all this, hi sister would break 
out in tear of emotion, and gregor would climb up to her shoulder 
and kiss her neck, which, sinc she had been go out to work, she 
had kept free without ani necklac or collar. 

"mr. samsa!", shout the middl gentleman to gregor' father, 
pointing, without wast ani more words, with hi forefing at 
gregor as he slowli move forward. the violin went silent, the 
middl of the three gentlemen first smile at hi two friends, 
shake hi head, and then look back at gregor. hi father seem 
to think it more import to calm the three gentlemen befor 
drive gregor out, even though they were not at all upset and 
seem to think gregor wa more entertain than the violin play 
had been. He rush up to them with hi arm spread out and 
attempt to drive them back into their room at the same time as 
tri to block their view of gregor with hi body. now they did 
becom a littl annoyed, and it wa not clear whether it wa hi 
father' behaviour that annoy them or the dawn realis that 
they had had a neighbour like gregor in the next room without 
know it. they ask gregor' father for explanations, rais 
their arm like he had, tug excitedli at their beard and move 
back toward their room onli veri slowly. meanwhil gregor' sister 
had overcom the despair she had fallen into when her play wa 
suddenli interrupted. she had let her hand drop and let violin and 
bow hang limpli for a while but continu to look at the music as if 
still playing, but then she suddenli pull herself together, lay 
the instrument on her mother' lap who still sat labori 
struggl for breath where she was, and ran into the next room 
which, under pressur from her father, the three gentlemen were more 
quickli move toward. under hi sister' experienc hand, the 
pillow and cover on the bed flew up and were put into order and 
she had alreadi finish make the bed and slip out again 
befor the three gentlemen had reach the room. gregor' father 
seem so obsess with what he wa do that he forgot all the 
respect he owe to hi tenants. He urg them and press them 
until, when he wa alreadi at the door of the room, the middl of 
the three gentlemen shout like thunder and stamp hi foot and 
therebi brought gregor' father to a halt. "I declar here and 
now", he said, rais hi hand and glanc at gregor' mother and 
sister to gain their attent too, "that with regard to the 
repugn condit that prevail in thi flat and with thi family" 
- here he look briefli but decis at the floor - "I give 
immedi notic on my room. for the day that I have been live 
here I will, of course, pay noth at all, on the contrari I will 
consid whether to proceed with some kind of action for damag 
from you, and believ me it would be veri easi to set out the 
ground for such an action." He wa silent and look straight 
ahead as if wait for something. and indeed, hi two friend 
join in with the words: "and we also give immedi notice." with 
that, he took hold of the door handl and slam the door. 

gregor' father stagger back to hi seat, feel hi way with hi 
hands, and fell into it; it look as if he wa stretch himself 
out for hi usual even nap but from the uncontrol way hi head 
kept nod it could be seen that he wa not sleep at all. 
throughout all this, gregor had lain still where the three gentlemen 
had first seen him. hi disappoint at the failur of hi plan, 
and perhap also becaus he wa weak from hunger, made it imposs 
for him to move. He wa sure that everyon would turn on him ani 
moment, and he waited. He wa not even startl out of thi state 
when the violin on hi mother' lap fell from her trembl finger 
and land loudli on the floor. 

"father, mother", said hi sister, hit the tabl with her hand 
as introduction, "we can't carri on like this. mayb you can't see 
it, but I can. I don't want to call thi monster my brother, all I 
can say is: we have to tri and get rid of it. we'v done all that' 
humanli possibl to look after it and be patient, I don't think 
anyon could accus us of do anyth wrong." 

"she' absolut right", said gregor' father to himself. hi 
mother, who still had not had time to catch her breath, began to 
cough dully, her hand held out in front of her and a derang 
express in her eyes. 

gregor' sister rush to hi mother and put her hand on her 
forehead. her word seem to give gregor' father some more 
definit ideas. He sat upright, play with hi uniform cap between 
the plate left by the three gentlemen after their meal, and 
occasion look down at gregor as he lay there immobile. 

"we have to tri and get rid of it", said gregor' sister, now 
speak onli to her father, as her mother wa too occupi with 
cough to listen, "it'll be the death of both of you, I can see it 
coming. We can't all work as hard as we have to and then come home 
to be tortur like this, we can't endur it. I can't endur it ani 
more." and she broke out so heavili in tear that they flow down 
the face of her mother, and she wipe them away with mechan hand 
movements. 

"mi child", said her father with sympathi and obviou understanding, 
"what are we to do?" 

hi sister just shrug her shoulder as a sign of the helpless 
and tear that had taken hold of her, displac her earlier 
certainty. 

"if he could just understand us", said hi father almost as a 
question; hi sister shook her hand vigor through her tear as 
a sign that of that there wa no question. 

"if he could just understand us", repeat gregor' father, close 
hi eye in accept of hi sister' certainti that that wa quit 
impossible, "then perhap we could come to some kind of arrang 
with him. but as it is ..." 

"it' got to go", shout hi sister, "that' the onli way, father. 
you'v got to get rid of the idea that that' gregor. we'v onli 
harm ourselv by believ it for so long. how can that be 
gregor? If it were gregor he would have seen long ago that it' not 
possibl for human be to live with an anim like that and he 
would have gone of hi own free will. We wouldn't have a brother 
ani more, then, but we could carri on with our live and rememb 
him with respect. As it is thi anim is persecut us, it' 
driven out our tenants, it obvious want to take over the whole 
flat and forc us to sleep on the streets. father, look, just 
look", she suddenli screamed, "he' start again!" In her alarm, 
which wa total beyond gregor' comprehension, hi sister even 
abandon hi mother as she push herself vigor out of her 
chair as if more will to sacrific her own mother than stay 
anywher near gregor. she rush over to behind her father, who had 
becom excit mere becaus she wa and stood up half rais hi 
hand in front of gregor' sister as if to protect her. 

but gregor had had no intent of frighten anyone, least of all 
hi sister. all he had done wa begin to turn round so that he 
could go back into hi room, although that wa in itself quit 
startl as hi pain-wrack condit meant that turn round 
requir a great deal of effort and he wa use hi head to help 
himself do it, repeatedli rais it and strike it against the 
floor. He stop and look round. they seem to have realis 
hi good intent and had onli been alarm briefly. now they all 
look at him in unhappi silence. hi mother lay in her chair with 
her leg stretch out and press against each other, her eye 
nearli close with exhaustion; hi sister sat next to hi father 
with her arm around hi neck. 

"mayb now they'll let me turn round", thought gregor and went back 
to work. He could not help pant loudli with the effort and had 
sometim to stop and take a rest. no-on wa make him rush ani 
more, everyth wa left up to him. As soon as he had final 
finish turn round he began to move straight ahead. He wa 
amaz at the great distanc that separ him from hi room, and 
could not understand how he had cover that distanc in hi weak 
state a littl while befor and almost without notic it. He 
concentr on crawl as fast as he could and hardli notic that 
there wa not a word, not ani cry, from hi famili to distract him. 
He did not turn hi head until he had reach the doorway. He did 
not turn it all the way round as he felt hi neck becom stiff, 
but it wa nonetheless enough to see that noth behind him had 
changed, onli hi sister had stood up. with hi last glanc he saw 
that hi mother had now fallen complet asleep. 

He wa hardli insid hi room befor the door wa hurriedli shut, 
bolt and locked. the sudden nois behind gregor so startl him 
that hi littl leg collaps under him. It wa hi sister who had 
been in so much of a rush. she had been stand there wait and 
sprung forward lightly, gregor had not heard her come at all, and 
as she turn the key in the lock she said loudli to her parent "at 
last!". 

"what now, then?", gregor ask himself as he look round in the 
darkness. He soon made the discoveri that he could no longer move 
at all. thi wa no surpris to him, it seem rather that be 
abl to actual move around on those spindli littl leg until then 
wa unnatural. He also felt rel comfortable. It is true 
that hi entir bodi wa aching, but the pain seem to be slowli 
get weaker and weaker and would final disappear altogether. 
He could alreadi hardli feel the decay appl in hi back or the 
inflam area around it, which wa entir cover in white dust. 
He thought back of hi famili with emot and love. If it wa 
possible, he felt that he must go away even more strongli than hi 
sister. He remain in thi state of empti and peac rumin 
until he heard the clock tower strike three in the morning. He 
watch as it slowli began to get light everywher outsid the 
window too. then, without hi will it, hi head sank down 
completely, and hi last breath flow weakli from hi nostrils. 

when the cleaner came in earli in the morn - they'd often ask 
her not to keep slam the door but with her strength and in her 
hurri she still did, so that everyon in the flat knew when she'd 
arriv and from then on it wa imposs to sleep in peac - she 
made her usual brief look in on gregor and at first found noth 
special. she thought he wa lay there so still on purpose, 
play the martyr; she attribut all possibl understand to 
him. she happen to be hold the long broom in her hand, so she 
tri to tickl gregor with it from the doorway. when she had no 
success with that she tri to make a nuisanc of herself and poke 
at him a little, and onli when she found she could shove him across 
the floor with no resist at all did she start to pay attention. 
she soon realis what had realli happened, open her eye wide, 
whistl to herself, but did not wast time to yank open the bedroom 
door and shout loudli into the dark of the bedrooms: "come and 
'ave a look at this, it' dead, just lie there, stone dead!" 

mr. and mrs. samsa sat upright there in their marriag bed and had 
to make an effort to get over the shock caus by the cleaner befor 
they could grasp what she wa saying. but then, each from hi own 
side, they hurri out of bed. mr. samsa threw the blanket over hi 
shoulders, mrs. samsa just came out in her nightdress; and that is 
how they went into gregor' room. On the way they open the door 
to the live room where grete had been sleep sinc the three 
gentlemen had move in; she wa fulli dress as if she had never 
been asleep, and the pale of her face seem to confirm this. 
"dead?", ask mrs. samsa, look at the charwoman enquiringly, 
even though she could have check for herself and could have known 
it even without checking. "that' what I said", repli the 
cleaner, and to prove it she gave gregor' bodi anoth shove with 
the broom, send it sideway across the floor. mrs. samsa made a 
movement as if she want to hold back the broom, but did not 
complet it. "now then", said mr. samsa, "let' give thank to god 
for that". He cross himself, and the three women follow hi 
example. grete, who had not taken her eye from the corpse, said: 
"just look how thin he was. He didn't eat anyth for so long. 
the food came out again just the same as when it went in". gregor' 
bodi wa inde complet dri up and flat, they had not seen it 
until then, but now he wa not lift up on hi littl legs, nor did 
he do anyth to make them look away. 

"grete, come with us in here for a littl while", said mrs. samsa 
with a pain smile, and grete follow her parent into the bedroom 
but not without look back at the body. the cleaner shut the door 
and open the window wide. although it wa still earli in the 
morn the fresh air had someth of warmth mix in with it. It 
wa alreadi the end of march, after all. 

the three gentlemen step out of their room and look round in 
amaz for their breakfasts; they had been forgotten about. 
"where is our breakfast?", the middl gentleman ask the cleaner 
irritably. she just put her finger on her lip and made a quick and 
silent sign to the men that they might like to come into gregor' 
room. they did so, and stood around gregor' corps with their 
hand in the pocket of their well-worn coats. It wa now quit 
light in the room. 

then the door of the bedroom open and mr. samsa appear in hi 
uniform with hi wife on one arm and hi daughter on the other. all 
of them had been cri a little; grete now and then press her 
face against her father' arm. 

"leav my home. now!", said mr. samsa, indic the door and 
without let the women from him. "what do you mean?", ask the 
middl of the three gentlemen somewhat disconcerted, and he smile 
sweetly. the other two held their hand behind their back and 
continu rub them togeth in gleeful anticip of a loud 
quarrel which could onli end in their favour. "I mean just what I 
said", answer mr. samsa, and, with hi two companions, went in a 
straight line toward the man. At first, he stood there still, 
look at the ground as if the content of hi head were 
rearrang themselv into new positions. "alright, we'll go 
then", he said, and look up at mr. samsa as if he had been 
suddenli overcom with humil and want permiss again from 
mr. samsa for hi decision. mr. samsa mere open hi eye wide 
and briefli nod to him sever times. At that, and without 
delay, the man actual did take long stride into the front 
hallway; hi two friend had stop rub their hand some time 
befor and had been listen to what wa be said. now they 
jump off after their friend as if taken with a sudden fear that 
mr. samsa might go into the hallway in front of them and break the 
connect with their leader. onc there, all three took their hat 
from the stand, took their stick from the holder, bow without a 
word and left the premises. mr. samsa and the two women follow 
them out onto the landing; but they had had no reason to mistrust 
the men' intent and as they lean over the land they saw how 
the three gentlemen made slow but steadi progress down the mani 
steps. As they turn the corner on each floor they disappear and 
would reappear a few moment later; the further down they went, the 
more that the samsa famili lost interest in them; when a butcher' 
boy, proud of postur with hi tray on hi head, pass them on hi 
way up and came nearer than they were, mr. samsa and the women came 
away from the land and went, as if relieved, back into the flat. 

they decid the best way to make use of that day wa for relax 
and to go for a walk; not onli had they earn a break from work but 
they were in seriou need of it. So they sat at the tabl and wrote 
three letter of excusal, mr. samsa to hi employers, mrs. samsa 
to her contractor and grete to her principal. the cleaner came in 
while they were write to tell them she wa going, she'd finish 
her work for that morning. the three of them at first just nod 
without look up from what they were writing, and it wa onli when 
the cleaner still did not seem to want to leav that they look up 
in irritation. "well?", ask mr. samsa. the charwoman stood in 
the doorway with a smile on her face as if she had some tremend 
good news to report, but would onli do it if she wa clearli ask 
to. the almost vertic littl ostrich feather on her hat, which 
had been a sourc of irrit to mr. samsa all the time she had 
been work for them, sway gentli in all directions. "what is it 
you want then?", ask mrs. samsa, whom the cleaner had the most 
respect for. "yes", she answered, and broke into a friendli laugh 
that made her unabl to speak straight away, "well then, that thing 
in there, you needn't worri about how you'r go to get rid of it. 
that' all been sort out." mrs. samsa and grete bent down over 
their letter as if intent on continu with what they were 
writing; mr. samsa saw that the cleaner want to start describ 
everyth in detail but, with outstretch hand, he made it quit 
clear that she wa not to. so, as she wa prevent from tell 
them all about it, she suddenli rememb what a hurri she wa in 
and, clearli peeved, call out "cheerio then, everyone", turn 
round sharpli and left, slam the door terribl as she went. 

"tonight she get sacked", said mr. samsa, but he receiv no repli 
from either hi wife or hi daughter as the charwoman seem to have 
destroy the peac they had onli just gained. they got up and went 
over to the window where they remain with their arm around each 
other. mr. samsa twist round in hi chair to look at them and sat 
there watch for a while. then he call out: "come here, then. 
let' forget about all that old stuff, shall we. come and give me a 
bit of attention". the two women immedi did as he said, 
hurri over to him where they kiss him and hug him and then 
they quickli finish their letters. 

after that, the three of them left the flat together, which wa 
someth they had not done for months, and took the tram out to the 
open countri outsid the town. they had the tram, fill with warm 
sunshine, all to themselves. leant back comfort on their seats, 
they discuss their prospect and found that on closer examin 
they were not at all bad - until then they had never ask each 
other about their work but all three had job which were veri good 
and held particularli good promis for the future. the greatest 
improv for the time being, of course, would be achiev quit 
easili by move house; what they need now wa a flat that wa 
smaller and cheaper than the current one which had been chosen by 
gregor, one that wa in a better locat and, most of all, more 
practical. all the time, grete wa becom livelier. with all the 
worri they had been have of late her cheek had becom pale, but, 
while they were talking, mr. and mrs. samsa were struck, almost 
simultaneously, with the thought of how their daughter wa 
blossom into a well built and beauti young lady. they becam 
quieter. just from each other' glanc and almost without know 
it they agre that it would soon be time to find a good man for 
her. and, as if in confirm of their new dream and good 
intentions, as soon as they reach their destin grete wa the 
first to get up and stretch out her young body. 






end of the project gutenberg ebook of metamorphosis, by franz kafka 
translat by david wyllie. 

*** end OF thi project gutenberg ebook metamorphosi *** 

***** thi file should be name 5200.txt or 5200.zip ***** 
thi and all associ file of variou format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.net/5/2/0/5200/ 



updat edit will replac the previou one--th old edit 
will be renamed. 

creat the work from public domain print edit mean that no 
one own a unit state copyright in these works, so the foundat 
(and you!) can copi and distribut it in the unit state without 
permiss and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the gener term of use part of thi license, appli to 
copi and distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a regist trademark, and may not be use if you 
charg for the ebooks, unless you receiv specif permission. If you 
do not charg anyth for copi of thi ebook, compli with the 
rule is veri easy. you may use thi ebook for nearli ani purpos 
such as creation of deriv works, reports, perform and 
research. they may be modifi and print and given away--y may do 
practic anyth with public domain ebooks. redistribut is 
subject to the trademark license, especi commerci 
redistribution. 



*** start: full licens *** 

the full project gutenberg licens 
pleas read thi befor you distribut OR use thi work 

To protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promot the free 
distribut of electron works, by use or distribut thi work 
(or ani other work associ in ani way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agre to compli with all the term of the full project 
gutenberg-tm licens (avail with thi file or onlin at 
http://gutenberg.net/license). 


section 1. gener term of use and redistribut project gutenberg-tm 
electron work 

1.a. By read or use ani part of thi project gutenberg-tm 
electron work, you indic that you have read, understand, agre to 
and accept all the term of thi licens and intellectu properti 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agre to abid by all 
the term of thi agreement, you must ceas use and return or destroy 
all copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in your possession. 
If you paid a fee for obtain a copi of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work and you do not agre to be bound by the 
term of thi agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entiti to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a regist trademark. It may onli be 
use on or associ in ani way with an electron work by peopl who 
agre to be bound by the term of thi agreement. there are a few 
thing that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electron work 
even without compli with the full term of thi agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of thing you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electron work if you follow the term of thi agreement 
and help preserv free futur access to project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compil copyright in the collect of project 
gutenberg-tm electron works. nearli all the individu work in the 
collect are in the public domain in the unit states. If an 
individu work is in the public domain in the unit state and you are 
locat in the unit states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or creat deriv 
work base on the work as long as all refer to project gutenberg 
are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promot free access to electron work by 
freeli share project gutenberg-tm work in complianc with the term of 
thi agreement for keep the project gutenberg-tm name associ with 
the work. you can easili compli with the term of thi agreement by 
keep thi work in the same format with it attach full project 
gutenberg-tm licens when you share it without charg with others. 
thi particular work is one of the few copyright individu work 
includ with the permiss of the copyright holder. inform on 
the copyright owner for thi particular work and the term of use 
impos by the copyright holder on thi work are set forth at the 
begin of thi work. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are locat also govern 
what you can do with thi work. copyright law in most countri are in 
a constant state of change. If you are outsid the unit states, check 
the law of your countri in addit to the term of thi agreement 
befor downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribut or 
creat deriv work base on thi work or ani other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundat make no represent concern 
the copyright statu of ani work in ani countri outsid the unit 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remov all refer to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the follow sentence, with activ link to, or other immedi 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm licens must appear promin 
whenev ani copi of a project gutenberg-tm work (ani work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copi or distributed: 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.net 

1.e.2. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is deriv 
from the public domain (doe not contain a notic indic that it is 
post with permiss of the copyright holder), the work can be copi 
and distribut to anyon in the unit state without pay ani fee 
or charges. If you are redistribut or provid access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associ with or appear on the 
work, you must compli either with the requir of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permiss for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is post 
with the permiss of the copyright holder, your use and distribut 
must compli with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and ani addit 
term impos by the copyright holder. addit term will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm licens for all work post with the 
permiss of the copyright holder found at the begin of thi work. 

1.e.4. Do not unlink or detach or remov the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens term from thi work, or ani file contain a part of thi 
work or ani other work associ with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribut or redistribut thi 
electron work, or ani part of thi electron work, without 
promin display the sentenc set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
activ link or immedi access to the full term of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribut thi work in ani binary, 
compressed, mark up, nonproprietari or proprietari form, includ ani 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provid access to or 
distribut copi of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the offici version 
post on the offici project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net), 
you must, at no addit cost, fee or expens to the user, provid a 
copy, a mean of export a copy, or a mean of obtain a copi upon 
request, of the work in it origin "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. ani altern format must includ the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens as specifi in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. Do not charg a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copi or distribut ani project gutenberg-tm work 
unless you compli with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charg a reason fee for copi of or provid 
access to or distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work provid 
that 

- you pay a royalti fee of 20% of the gross profit you deriv from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm work calcul use the method 
you alreadi use to calcul your applic taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
ha agre to donat royalti under thi paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literari archiv foundation. royalti payment 
must be paid within 60 day follow each date on which you 
prepar (or are legal requir to prepare) your period tax 
returns. royalti payment should be clearli mark as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat at the 
address specifi in section 4, "inform about donat to 
the project gutenberg literari archiv foundation." 

- you provid a full refund of ani money paid by a user who notifi 
you in write (or by e-mail) within 30 day of receipt that s/he 
doe not agre to the term of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must requir such a user to return or 
destroy all copi of the work possess in a physic medium 
and discontinu all use of and all access to other copi of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accord with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of ani 
money paid for a work or a replac copy, if a defect in the 
electron work is discov and report to you within 90 day 
of receipt of the work. 

- you compli with all other term of thi agreement for free 
distribut of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. If you wish to charg a fee or distribut a project gutenberg-tm 
electron work or group of work on differ term than are set 
forth in thi agreement, you must obtain permiss in write from 
both the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundat as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunt and employe expend consider 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcrib and proofread 
public domain work in creat the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despit these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electron 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limit to, incomplete, inaccur or 
corrupt data, transcript errors, a copyright or other intellectu 
properti infringement, a defect or damag disk or other medium, a 
comput virus, or comput code that damag or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limit warranty, disclaim OF damag - except for the "right 
of replac or refund" describ in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and ani other parti distribut a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work under thi agreement, disclaim all 
liabil to you for damages, cost and expenses, includ legal 
fees. you agre that you have NO remedi for negligence, strict 
liability, breach OF warranti OR breach OF contract except those 
provid IN paragraph f3. you agre that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and ani distributor under thi agreement will not BE 
liabl TO you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punit OR 
incident damag even IF you give notic OF the possibl OF such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limit right OF replac OR refund - If you discov a 
defect in thi electron work within 90 day of receiv it, you can 
receiv a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explan to the person you receiv the work from. If you 
receiv the work on a physic medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entiti that provid you with 
the defect work may elect to provid a replac copi in lieu of a 
refund. If you receiv the work electronically, the person or entiti 
provid it to you may choos to give you a second opportun to 
receiv the work electron in lieu of a refund. If the second copi 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in write without further 
opportun to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limit right of replac or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, thi work is provid to you 'as-is,' with NO other 
warranti OF ani kind, express OR implied, includ but not limit TO 
warranti OF merchant OR fit for ani purpose. 

1.f.5. some state do not allow disclaim of certain impli 
warranti or the exclus or limit of certain type of damages. 
If ani disclaim or limit set forth in thi agreement violat the 
law of the state applic to thi agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaim or limit permit by 
the applic state law. the invalid or unenforc of ani 
provis of thi agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemn - you agre to indemnifi and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, ani agent or employe of the foundation, anyon 
provid copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in accord 
with thi agreement, and ani volunt associ with the production, 
promot and distribut of project gutenberg-tm electron works, 
harmless from all liability, cost and expenses, includ legal fees, 
that aris directli or indirectli from ani of the follow which you do 
or caus to occur: (a) distribut of thi or ani project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addit or delet to ani 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) ani defect you cause. 


section 2. inform about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonym with the free distribut of 
electron work in format readabl by the widest varieti of comput 
includ obsolete, old, middle-ag and new computers. It exist 
becaus of the effort of hundr of volunt and donat from 
peopl in all walk of life. 

volunt and financi support to provid volunt with the 
assist they need, is critic to reach project gutenberg-tm' 
goal and ensur that the project gutenberg-tm collect will 
remain freeli avail for gener to come. In 2001, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundat wa creat to provid a secur 
and perman futur for project gutenberg-tm and futur generations. 
To learn more about the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat 
and how your effort and donat can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundat web page at http://www.pglaf.org. 


section 3. inform about the project gutenberg literari archiv 
foundat 

the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educ corpor organ under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt statu by the intern 
revenu service. the foundation' ein or feder tax identif 
number is 64-6221541. it 501(c)(3) letter is post at 
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contribut to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. feder law and your state' laws. 

the foundation' princip offic is locat at 4557 melan dr. S. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but it volunt and employe are scatter 
throughout numer locations. it busi offic is locat at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact link and up to date contact 
inform can be found at the foundation' web site and offici 
page at http://pglaf.org 

for addit contact information: 
dr. gregori B. newbi 
chief execut and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 

section 4. inform about donat to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot surviv without wide 
spread public support and donat to carri out it mission of 
increas the number of public domain and licens work that can be 
freeli distribut in machin readabl form access by the widest 
array of equip includ outdat equipment. mani small donat 
($1 to $5,000) are particularli import to maintain tax exempt 
statu with the irs. 

the foundat is commit to compli with the law regul 
chariti and charit donat in all 50 state of the unit 
states. complianc requir are not uniform and it take a 
consider effort, much paperwork and mani fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. We do not solicit donat in locat 
where we have not receiv written confirm of compliance. To 
send donat or determin the statu of complianc for ani 
particular state visit http://pglaf.org 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribut from state where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibit 
against accept unsolicit donat from donor in such state who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

intern donat are grate accepted, but we cannot make 
ani statement concern tax treatment of donat receiv from 
outsid the unit states. u.s. law alon swamp our small staff. 

pleas check the project gutenberg web page for current donat 
method and addresses. donat are accept in a number of other 
way includ includ checks, onlin payment and credit card 
donations. To donate, pleas visit: http://pglaf.org/don 


section 5. gener inform about project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. 

professor michael S. hart is the origin of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a librari of electron work that could be freeli share 
with anyone. for thirti years, he produc and distribut project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with onli a loos network of volunt support. 

project gutenberg-tm ebook are often creat from sever print 
editions, all of which are confirm as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notic is included. thus, we do not necessarili 
keep ebook in complianc with ani particular paper edition. 

most peopl start at our web site which ha the main PG search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.net 

thi web site includ inform about project gutenberg-tm, 
includ how to make donat to the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundation, how to help produc our new ebooks, and how to 
subscrib to our email newslett to hear about new ebooks. 
