the project gutenberg ebook of northang abbey, by jane austen 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.org 


title: northang abbey 

author: jane austen 

releas date: april, 1994 [etext #121] 
last updated: march 10, 2018 

language: english 

charact set encoding: utf-8 

*** start OF thi project gutenberg ebook northang abbey *** 




produc by An anonym volunt 





northang abbey 


by 

jane austen (1803) 




advertis BY the authoress, TO northang abbey 

thi littl work wa finish in the year 1803, and intend for 
immedi publication. It wa dispos of to a bookseller, it wa even 
advertised, and whi the busi proceed no farther, the author 
ha never been abl to learn. that ani booksel should think it 
worth-whil to purchas what he did not think it worth-whil to publish 
seem extraordinary. but with this, neither the author nor the public 
have ani other concern than as some observ is necessari upon those 
part of the work which thirteen year have made compar obsolete. 
the public are entreat to bear in mind that thirteen year have pass 
sinc it wa finished, mani more sinc it wa begun, and that dure 
that period, places, manners, books, and opinion have undergon 
consider changes. 


prefac 
chapter 1 


No one who had ever seen catherin morland in her infanc would have 
suppos her born to be an heroine. her situat in life, the charact 
of her father and mother, her own person and disposition, were 
all equal against her. her father wa a clergyman, without be 
neglected, or poor, and a veri respect man, though hi name 
wa richard--and he had never been handsome. He had a consider 
independ besid two good livings--and he wa not in the least 
addict to lock up hi daughters. her mother wa a woman of use 
plain sense, with a good temper, and, what is more remarkable, with a 
good constitution. she had three son befor catherin wa born; and 
instead of die in bring the latter into the world, as anybodi might 
expect, she still live on--liv to have six children more--to see them 
grow up around her, and to enjoy excel health herself. A famili 
of ten children will be alway call a fine family, where there are 
head and arm and leg enough for the number; but the morland had 
littl other right to the word, for they were in gener veri plain, and 
catherine, for mani year of her life, as plain as any. she had a thin 
awkward figure, a sallow skin without colour, dark lank hair, and strong 
features--so much for her person; and not less unpropiti for heroism 
seem her mind. she wa fond of all boy' plays, and greatli prefer 
cricket not mere to dolls, but to the more heroic enjoy of 
infancy, nurs a dormouse, feed a canary-bird, or water a 
rose-bush. inde she had no tast for a garden; and if she gather 
flower at all, it wa chiefli for the pleasur of mischief--at least 
so it wa conjectur from her alway prefer those which she wa 
forbidden to take. such were her propensities--h abil were quit 
as extraordinary. she never could learn or understand anyth 
befor she wa taught; and sometim not even then, for she wa often 
inattentive, and occasion stupid. her mother wa three month in 
teach her onli to repeat the “beggar' petition”; and after all, her 
next sister, sally, could say it better than she did. not that catherin 
wa alway stupid--bi no means; she learnt the fabl of “the hare and 
mani friends” as quickli as ani girl in england. her mother wish her 
to learn music; and catherin wa sure she should like it, for she wa 
veri fond of tinkl the key of the old forlorn spinnet; so, at eight 
year old she began. she learnt a year, and could not bear it; and mrs. 
morland, who did not insist on her daughter be accomplish in 
spite of incapac or distaste, allow her to leav off. the day which 
dismiss the music-mast wa one of the happiest of catherine' life. 
her tast for draw wa not superior; though whenev she could obtain 
the outsid of a letter from her mother or seiz upon ani other odd 
piec of paper, she did what she could in that way, by draw hous 
and trees, hen and chickens, all veri much like one another. write 
and account she wa taught by her father; french by her mother: her 
profici in either wa not remarkable, and she shirk her lesson in 
both whenev she could. what a strange, unaccount character!--for 
with all these symptom of profligaci at ten year old, she had neither 
a bad heart nor a bad temper, wa seldom stubborn, scarc ever 
quarrelsome, and veri kind to the littl ones, with few interrupt 
of tyranny; she wa moreov noisi and wild, hate confin and 
cleanliness, and love noth so well in the world as roll down the 
green slope at the back of the house. 

such wa catherin morland at ten. At fifteen, appear were mending; 
she began to curl her hair and long for balls; her complexion improved, 
her featur were soften by plump and colour, her eye gain more 
animation, and her figur more consequence. her love of dirt gave way to 
an inclin for finery, and she grew clean as she grew smart; she had 
now the pleasur of sometim hear her father and mother remark 
on her person improvement. “catherin grow quit a good-look 
girl--sh is almost pretti today,” were word which caught her ear now 
and then; and how welcom were the sounds! To look almost pretti is an 
acquisit of higher delight to a girl who ha been look plain the 
first fifteen year of her life than a beauti from her cradl can ever 
receive. 

mrs. morland wa a veri good woman, and wish to see her children 
everyth they ought to be; but her time wa so much occupi in 
lying-in and teach the littl ones, that her elder daughter were 
inevit left to shift for themselves; and it wa not veri wonder 
that catherine, who had by natur noth heroic about her, should 
prefer cricket, baseball, ride on horseback, and run about 
the countri at the age of fourteen, to books--or at least book of 
information--for, provid that noth like use knowledg could be 
gain from them, provid they were all stori and no reflection, she 
had never ani object to book at all. but from fifteen to seventeen 
she wa in train for a heroine; she read all such work as heroin 
must read to suppli their memori with those quotat which are so 
servic and so sooth in the vicissitud of their event lives. 

from pope, she learnt to censur those who 

“bear about the mockeri of woe.” 


from gray, that 

“mani a flower is born to blush unseen, 
“and wast it fragranc on the desert air.” 


from thompson, that-- 

“it is a delight task 
“to teach the young idea how to shoot.” 


and from shakespear she gain a great store of information--amongst 
the rest, that-- 

“trifl light as air, 
“are, to the jealous, confirm strong, 
“a proof of holi writ.” 


that 

“the poor beetle, which we tread upon, 
“in corpor suffer feel a pang as great 
“a when a giant dies.” 


and that a young woman in love alway looks-- 

“like patienc on a monument 
“smile at grief.” 


So far her improv wa sufficient--and in mani other point she came 
on exceedingli well; for though she could not write sonnets, she brought 
herself to read them; and though there seem no chanc of her throw 
a whole parti into raptur by a prelud on the pianoforte, of her own 
composition, she could listen to other people' perform with veri 
littl fatigue. her greatest defici wa in the pencil--sh had no 
notion of drawing--not enough even to attempt a sketch of her lover' 
profile, that she might be detect in the design. there she fell 
miser short of the true heroic height. At present she did not know 
her own poverty, for she had no lover to portray. she had reach the 
age of seventeen, without have seen one amiabl youth who could call 
forth her sensibility, without have inspir one real passion, and 
without have excit even ani admir but what wa veri moder 
and veri transient. thi wa strang indeed! but strang thing may be 
gener account for if their caus be fairli search out. there wa 
not one lord in the neighbourhood; no--not even a baronet. there wa not 
one famili among their acquaint who had rear and support a boy 
accident found at their door--not one young man whose origin 
wa unknown. her father had no ward, and the squir of the parish no 
children. 

but when a young ladi is to be a heroine, the pervers of forti 
surround famili cannot prevent her. someth must and will happen 
to throw a hero in her way. 

mr. allen, who own the chief of the properti about fullerton, the 
villag in wiltshir where the morland lived, wa order to bath 
for the benefit of a gouti constitution--and hi lady, a good-humour 
woman, fond of miss morland, and probabl awar that if adventur will 
not befal a young ladi in her own village, she must seek them abroad, 
invit her to go with them. mr. and mrs. morland were all compliance, 
and catherin all happiness. 




chapter 2 


In addit to what ha been alreadi said of catherin morland' 
person and mental endowments, when about to be launch into all the 
difficulti and danger of a six weeks' resid in bath, it may be 
stated, for the reader' more certain information, lest the follow 
page should otherwis fail of give ani idea of what her charact is 
meant to be, that her heart wa affectionate; her disposit cheer 
and open, without conceit or affect of ani kind--her manner just 
remov from the awkward and shyness of a girl; her person pleasing, 
and, when in good looks, pretty--and her mind about as ignor and 
uninform as the femal mind at seventeen usual is. 

when the hour of departur drew near, the matern anxieti of mrs. 
morland will be natur suppos to be most severe. A thousand 
alarm presenti of evil to her belov catherin from thi 
terrif separ must oppress her heart with sadness, and drown her 
in tear for the last day or two of their be together; and advic of 
the most import and applic natur must of cours flow from her 
wise lip in their part confer in her closet. caution against 
the violenc of such noblemen and baronet as delight in forc young 
ladi away to some remot farm-house, must, at such a moment, reliev 
the ful of her heart. who would not think so? but mrs. morland knew 
so littl of lord and baronets, that she entertain no notion of their 
gener mischievousness, and wa wholli unsuspici of danger to her 
daughter from their machinations. her caution were confin to the 
follow points. “I beg, catherine, you will alway wrap yourself up 
veri warm about the throat, when you come from the room at night; and 
I wish you would tri to keep some account of the money you spend; I will 
give you thi littl book on purpose.” 

sally, or rather sarah (for what young ladi of common gentil will 
reach the age of sixteen without alter her name as far as she can?), 
must from situat be at thi time the intim friend and confidant 
of her sister. It is remarkable, however, that she neither insist 
on catherine' write by everi post, nor exact her promis of 
transmit the charact of everi new acquaintance, nor a detail 
of everi interest convers that bath might produce. everyth 
inde rel to thi import journey wa done, on the part of the 
morlands, with a degre of moder and composure, which seem 
rather consist with the common feel of common life, than with the 
refin susceptibilities, the tender emot which the first separ 
of a heroin from her famili ought alway to excite. her father, instead 
of give her an unlimit order on hi banker, or even put an 
hundr pound bank-bil into her hands, gave her onli ten guineas, and 
promis her more when she want it. 

under these unpromis auspices, the part took place, and the 
journey began. It wa perform with suitabl quiet and unev 
safety. neither robber nor tempest befriend them, nor one lucki 
overturn to introduc them to the hero. noth more alarm occur 
than a fear, on mrs. allen' side, of have onc left her clog behind 
her at an inn, and that fortun prove to be groundless. 

they arriv at bath. catherin wa all eager delight--h eye were 
here, there, everywhere, as they approach it fine and strike 
environs, and afterward drove through those street which conduct 
them to the hotel. she wa come to be happy, and she felt happi already. 

they were soon settl in comfort lodg in pulteney street. 

It is now expedi to give some descript of mrs. allen, that the 
reader may be abl to judg in what manner her action will hereaft 
tend to promot the gener distress of the work, and how she will, 
probably, contribut to reduc poor catherin to all the desper 
wretched of which a last volum is capable--wheth by her 
imprudence, vulgarity, or jealousy--wheth by intercept her letters, 
ruin her character, or turn her out of doors. 

mrs. allen wa one of that numer class of females, whose societi can 
rais no other emot than surpris at there be ani men in the world 
who could like them well enough to marri them. she had neither beauty, 
genius, accomplishment, nor manner. the air of a gentlewoman, a great 
deal of quiet, inact good temper, and a trifl turn of mind 
were all that could account for her be the choic of a sensible, 
intellig man like mr. allen. In one respect she wa admir fit 
to introduc a young ladi into public, be as fond of go everywher 
and see everyth herself as ani young ladi could be. dress wa 
her passion. she had a most harmless delight in be fine; and our 
heroine' entre into life could not take place till after three or four 
day had been spent in learn what wa mostli worn, and her chaperon 
wa provid with a dress of the newest fashion. catherin too made 
some purchas herself, and when all these matter were arranged, the 
import even came which wa to usher her into the upper rooms. her 
hair wa cut and dress by the best hand, her cloth put on with care, 
and both mrs. allen and her maid declar she look quit as she should 
do. with such encouragement, catherin hope at least to pass uncensur 
through the crowd. As for admiration, it wa alway veri welcom when it 
came, but she did not depend on it. 

mrs. allen wa so long in dress that they did not enter the ballroom 
till late. the season wa full, the room crowded, and the two ladi 
squeez in as well as they could. As for mr. allen, he repair 
directli to the card-room, and left them to enjoy a mob by themselves. 
with more care for the safeti of her new gown than for the comfort of 
her protegee, mrs. allen made her way through the throng of men by 
the door, as swiftli as the necessari caution would allow; catherine, 
however, kept close at her side, and link her arm too firmli within 
her friend' to be torn asund by ani common effort of a struggl 
assembly. but to her utter amaz she found that to proceed along the 
room wa by no mean the way to disengag themselv from the crowd; it 
seem rather to increas as they went on, wherea she had imagin that 
when onc fairli within the door, they should easili find seat and be 
abl to watch the danc with perfect convenience. but thi wa far from 
be the case, and though by unweari dilig they gain even the 
top of the room, their situat wa just the same; they saw noth 
of the dancer but the high feather of some of the ladies. still they 
move on--someth better wa yet in view; and by a continu exert 
of strength and ingenu they found themselv at last in the passag 
behind the highest bench. here there wa someth less of crowd than 
below; and henc miss morland had a comprehens view of all the 
compani beneath her, and of all the danger of her late passag through 
them. It wa a splendid sight, and she began, for the first time that 
evening, to feel herself at a ball: she long to dance, but she had 
not an acquaint in the room. mrs. allen did all that she could do 
in such a case by say veri placidly, everi now and then, “I wish you 
could dance, my dear--i wish you could get a partner.” for some time 
her young friend felt oblig to her for these wishes; but they were 
repeat so often, and prove so total ineffectual, that catherin 
grew tire at last, and would thank her no more. 

they were not long able, however, to enjoy the repos of the emin 
they had so labori gained. everybodi wa shortli in motion for 
tea, and they must squeez out like the rest. catherin began to feel 
someth of disappointment--sh wa tire of be continu press 
against by people, the gener of whose face possess noth to 
interest, and with all of whom she wa so wholli unacquaint that she 
could not reliev the irksom of imprison by the exchang of a 
syllabl with ani of her fellow captives; and when at last arriv in 
the tea-room, she felt yet more the awkward of have no parti to 
join, no acquaint to claim, no gentleman to assist them. they saw 
noth of mr. allen; and after look about them in vain for a more 
elig situation, were oblig to sit down at the end of a table, at 
which a larg parti were alreadi placed, without have anyth to do 
there, or anybodi to speak to, except each other. 

mrs. allen congratul herself, as soon as they were seated, on have 
preserv her gown from injury. “it would have been veri shock to 
have it torn,” said she, “would not it? It is such a delic muslin. 
for my part I have not seen anyth I like so well in the whole room, I 
assur you.” 

“how uncomfort it is,” whisper catherine, “not to have a singl 
acquaint here!” 

“yes, my dear,” repli mrs. allen, with perfect serenity, “it is veri 
uncomfort indeed.” 

“what shall we do? the gentlemen and ladi at thi tabl look as if 
they wonder whi we came here--w seem forc ourselv into their 
party.” 

“aye, so we do. that is veri disagreeable. I wish we had a larg 
acquaint here.” 

“I wish we had any--it would be somebodi to go to.” 

“veri true, my dear; and if we knew anybodi we would join them directly. 
the skinner were here last year--i wish they were here now.” 

“had not we better go away as it is? here are no tea-th for us, you 
see.” 

“no more there are, indeed. how veri provoking! but I think we had 
better sit still, for one get so tumbl in such a crowd! how is my 
head, my dear? somebodi gave me a push that ha hurt it, I am afraid.” 

“no, indeed, it look veri nice. but, dear mrs. allen, are you sure 
there is nobodi you know in all thi multitud of people? I think you 
must know somebody.” 

“I don't, upon my word--i wish I did. I wish I had a larg acquaint 
here with all my heart, and then I should get you a partner. I should be 
so glad to have you dance. there goe a strange-look woman! what an 
odd gown she ha got on! how old-fashion it is! look at the back.” 

after some time they receiv an offer of tea from one of their 
neighbours; it wa thank accepted, and thi introduc a light 
convers with the gentleman who offer it, which wa the onli time 
that anybodi spoke to them dure the evening, till they were discov 
and join by mr. allen when the danc wa over. 

“well, miss morland,” said he, directly, “I hope you have had an 
agreeabl ball.” 

“veri agreeabl indeed,” she replied, vainli endeavour to hide a 
great yawn. 

“I wish she had been abl to dance,” said hi wife; “I wish we could 
have got a partner for her. I have been say how glad I should be if 
the skinner were here thi winter instead of last; or if the parri had 
come, as they talk of once, she might have danc with georg parry. I 
am so sorri she ha not had a partner!” 

“we shall do better anoth even I hope,” wa mr. allen' 
consolation. 

the compani began to dispers when the danc wa over--enough to leav 
space for the remaind to walk about in some comfort; and now wa the 
time for a heroine, who had not yet play a veri distinguish part 
in the event of the evening, to be notic and admired. everi five 
minutes, by remov some of the crowd, gave greater open for her 
charms. she wa now seen by mani young men who had not been near her 
before. not one, however, start with raptur wonder on behold 
her, no whisper of eager inquiri ran round the room, nor wa she onc 
call a divin by anybody. yet catherin wa in veri good looks, and 
had the compani onli seen her three year before, they would now have 
thought her exceedingli handsome. 

she wa look at, however, and with some admiration; for, in her own 
hearing, two gentlemen pronounc her to be a pretti girl. such word 
had their due effect; she immedi thought the even pleasant 
than she had found it before--h humbl vaniti wa contented--sh 
felt more oblig to the two young men for thi simpl prais than a 
true-qual heroin would have been for fifteen sonnet in celebr 
of her charms, and went to her chair in good humour with everybody, and 
perfectli satisfi with her share of public attention. 




chapter 3 


everi morn now brought it regular duties--shop were to be visited; 
some new part of the town to be look at; and the pump-room to be 
attended, where they parad up and down for an hour, look at 
everybodi and speak to no one. the wish of a numer acquaint 
in bath wa still uppermost with mrs. allen, and she repeat it after 
everi fresh proof, which everi morn brought, of her know nobodi at 
all. 

they made their appear in the lower rooms; and here fortun wa more 
favour to our heroine. the master of the ceremoni introduc to 
her a veri gentlemanlik young man as a partner; hi name wa tilney. 
He seem to be about four or five and twenty, wa rather tall, had a 
pleas countenance, a veri intellig and live eye, and, if not 
quit handsome, wa veri near it. hi address wa good, and catherin 
felt herself in high luck. there wa littl leisur for speak 
while they danced; but when they were seat at tea, she found him as 
agreeabl as she had alreadi given him credit for being. He talk with 
fluenci and spirit--and there wa an arch and pleasantri in hi 
manner which interested, though it wa hardli understood by her. after 
chat some time on such matter as natur aros from the object 
around them, he suddenli address her with--“i have hitherto been veri 
remiss, madam, in the proper attent of a partner here; I have not 
yet ask you how long you have been in bath; whether you were ever here 
before; whether you have been at the upper rooms, the theatre, and 
the concert; and how you like the place altogether. I have been 
veri negligent--but are you now at leisur to satisfi me in these 
particulars? If you are I will begin directly.” 

“you need not give yourself that trouble, sir.” 

“no trouble, I assur you, madam.” then form hi featur into a set 
smile, and affectedli soften hi voice, he added, with a simper 
air, “have you been long in bath, madam?” 

“about a week, sir,” repli catherine, tri not to laugh. 

“really!” with affect astonishment. 

“whi should you be surprised, sir?” 

“why, indeed!” said he, in hi natur tone. “but some emot must 
appear to be rais by your reply, and surpris is more easili assumed, 
and not less reason than ani other. now let us go on. were you never 
here before, madam?” 

“never, sir.” 

“indeed! have you yet honour the upper rooms?” 

“yes, sir, I wa there last monday.” 

“have you been to the theatre?” 

“yes, sir, I wa at the play on tuesday.” 

“to the concert?” 

“yes, sir, on wednesday.” 

“and are you altogeth pleas with bath?” 

“yes--i like it veri well.” 

“now I must give one smirk, and then we may be ration again.” 
catherin turn away her head, not know whether she might ventur to 
laugh. “I see what you think of me,” said he gravely--“i shall make but 
a poor figur in your journal tomorrow.” 

“mi journal!” 

“yes, I know exactli what you will say: friday, went to the lower 
rooms; wore my sprig muslin robe with blue trimmings--plain black 
shoes--appear to much advantage; but wa strang harass by a 
queer, half-wit man, who would make me danc with him, and distress 
me by hi nonsense.” 

“inde I shall say no such thing.” 

“shall I tell you what you ought to say?” 

“if you please.” 

“I danc with a veri agreeabl young man, introduc by mr. king; had 
a great deal of convers with him--seem a most extraordinari 
genius--hop I may know more of him. that, madam, is what I wish you to 
say.” 

“but, perhaps, I keep no journal.” 

“perhap you are not sit in thi room, and I am not sit by 
you. these are point in which a doubt is equal possible. not keep a 
journal! how are your absent cousin to understand the tenour of your 
life in bath without one? how are the civil and compliment of 
everi day to be relat as they ought to be, unless note down everi 
even in a journal? how are your variou dress to be remembered, 
and the particular state of your complexion, and curl of your hair to be 
describ in all their diversities, without have constant recours to 
a journal? My dear madam, I am not so ignor of young ladies' way as 
you wish to believ me; it is thi delight habit of journal which 
larg contribut to form the easi style of write for which ladi 
are so gener celebrated. everybodi allow that the talent of write 
agreeabl letter is peculiarli female. natur may have done something, 
but I am sure it must be essenti assist by the practic of keep 
a journal.” 

“I have sometim thought,” said catherine, doubtingly, “whether ladi 
do write so much better letter than gentlemen! that is--i should not 
think the superior wa alway on our side.” 

“a far as I have had opportun of judging, it appear to me that the 
usual style of letter-writ among women is faultless, except in three 
particulars.” 

“and what are they?” 

“A gener defici of subject, a total inattent to stops, and a 
veri frequent ignor of grammar.” 

“upon my word! I need not have been afraid of disclaim the 
compliment. you do not think too highli of us in that way.” 

“I should no more lay it down as a gener rule that women write better 
letter than men, than that they sing better duets, or draw better 
landscapes. In everi power, of which tast is the foundation, excel 
is pretti fairli divid between the sexes.” 

they were interrupt by mrs. allen: “mi dear catherine,” said she, “do 
take thi pin out of my sleeve; I am afraid it ha torn a hole already; 
I shall be quit sorri if it has, for thi is a favourit gown, though 
it cost but nine shill a yard.” 

“that is exactli what I should have guess it, madam,” said mr. tilney, 
look at the muslin. 

“do you understand muslins, sir?” 

“particularli well; I alway buy my own cravats, and am allow to be an 
excel judge; and my sister ha often trust me in the choic of a 
gown. I bought one for her the other day, and it wa pronounc to be a 
prodigi bargain by everi ladi who saw it. I gave but five shill a 
yard for it, and a true indian muslin.” 

mrs. allen wa quit struck by hi genius. “men commonli take so littl 
notic of those things,” said she; “I can never get mr. allen to know 
one of my gown from another. you must be a great comfort to your 
sister, sir.” 

“I hope I am, madam.” 

“and pray, sir, what do you think of miss morland' gown?” 

“it is veri pretty, madam,” said he, grave examin it; “but I do not 
think it will wash well; I am afraid it will fray.” 

“how can you,” said catherine, laughing, “be so--” she had almost said 
“strange.” 

“I am quit of your opinion, sir,” repli mrs. allen; “and so I told 
miss morland when she bought it.” 

“but then you know, madam, muslin alway turn to some account or other; 
miss morland will get enough out of it for a handkerchief, or a cap, or 
a cloak. muslin can never be said to be wasted. I have heard my sister 
say so forti times, when she ha been extravag in buy more than 
she wanted, or careless in cut it to pieces.” 

“bath is a charm place, sir; there are so mani good shop here. We 
are sadli off in the country; not but what we have veri good shop in 
salisbury, but it is so far to go--eight mile is a long way; mr. allen 
say it is nine, measur nine; but I am sure it cannot be more than 
eight; and it is such a fag--i come back tire to death. now, here one 
can step out of door and get a thing in five minutes.” 

mr. tilney wa polit enough to seem interest in what she said; and 
she kept him on the subject of muslin till the danc recommenced. 
catherin feared, as she listen to their discourse, that he indulg 
himself a littl too much with the foibl of others. “what are you 
think of so earnestly?” said he, as they walk back to the ballroom; 
“not of your partner, I hope, for, by that shake of the head, your 
medit are not satisfactory.” 

catherin coloured, and said, “I wa not think of anything.” 

“that is art and deep, to be sure; but I had rather be told at onc 
that you will not tell me.” 

“well then, I will not.” 

“thank you; for now we shall soon be acquainted, as I am author to 
teas you on thi subject whenev we meet, and noth in the world 
advanc intimaci so much.” 

they danc again; and, when the assembl closed, parted, on the 
lady' side at least, with a strong inclin for continu the 
acquaintance. whether she thought of him so much, while she drank her 
warm wine and water, and prepar herself for bed, as to dream of him 
when there, cannot be ascertained; but I hope it wa no more than in 
a slight slumber, or a morn doze at most; for if it be true, as a 
celebr writer ha maintained, that no young ladi can be justifi 
in fall in love befor the gentleman' love is declared,* it must be 
veri improp that a young ladi should dream of a gentleman befor the 
gentleman is first known to have dreamt of her. how proper mr. tilney 
might be as a dreamer or a lover had not yet perhap enter mr. allen' 
head, but that he wa not objection as a common acquaint for 
hi young charg he wa on inquiri satisfied; for he had earli in the 
even taken pain to know who her partner was, and had been assur 
of mr. tilney' be a clergyman, and of a veri respect famili in 
gloucestershire. 




chapter 4 


with more than usual eager did catherin hasten to the pump-room the 
next day, secur within herself of see mr. tilney there befor the 
morn were over, and readi to meet him with a smile; but no smile 
wa demanded--mr. tilney did not appear. everi creatur in bath, 
except himself, wa to be seen in the room at differ period of the 
fashion hours; crowd of peopl were everi moment pass in and 
out, up the step and down; peopl whom nobodi care about, and nobodi 
want to see; and he onli wa absent. “what a delight place bath 
is,” said mrs. allen as they sat down near the great clock, after 
parad the room till they were tired; “and how pleasant it would be if 
we had ani acquaint here.” 

thi sentiment had been utter so often in vain that mrs. allen had no 
particular reason to hope it would be follow with more advantag now; 
but we are told to “despair of noth we would attain,” as “unweari 
dilig our point would gain”; and the unweari dilig with which 
she had everi day wish for the same thing wa at length to have it 
just reward, for hardli had she been seat ten minut befor a ladi of 
about her own age, who wa sit by her, and had been look at her 
attent for sever minutes, address her with great complais 
in these words: “I think, madam, I cannot be mistaken; it is a long time 
sinc I had the pleasur of see you, but is not your name allen?” 
thi question answered, as it readili was, the stranger pronounc her 
to be thorpe; and mrs. allen immedi recogn the featur of 
a former schoolfellow and intimate, whom she had seen onli onc sinc 
their respect marriages, and that mani year ago. their joy on thi 
meet wa veri great, as well it might, sinc they had been content 
to know noth of each other for the last fifteen years. compliment 
on good look now passed; and, after observ how time had slip away 
sinc they were last together, how littl they had thought of meet in 
bath, and what a pleasur it wa to see an old friend, they proceed to 
make inquiri and give intellig as to their families, sisters, and 
cousins, talk both together, far more readi to give than to receiv 
information, and each hear veri littl of what the other said. mrs. 
thorpe, however, had one great advantag as a talker, over mrs. allen, 
in a famili of children; and when she expati on the talent of her 
sons, and the beauti of her daughters, when she relat their differ 
situat and views--that john wa at oxford, edward at merchant 
taylors', and william at sea--and all of them more belov and respect 
in their differ station than ani other three be ever were, mrs. 
allen had no similar inform to give, no similar triumph to press 
on the unwil and unbeliev ear of her friend, and wa forc to 
sit and appear to listen to all these matern effusions, consol 
herself, however, with the discovery, which her keen eye soon made, that 
the lace on mrs. thorpe' peliss wa not half so handsom as that on 
her own. 

“here come my dear girls,” cri mrs. thorpe, point at three 
smart-look femal who, arm in arm, were then move toward her. “mi 
dear mrs. allen, I long to introduc them; they will be so delight 
to see you: the tallest is isabella, my eldest; is not she a fine young 
woman? the other are veri much admir too, but I believ isabella is 
the handsomest.” 

the miss thorp were introduced; and miss morland, who had been for a 
short time forgotten, wa introduc likewise. the name seem to strike 
them all; and, after speak to her with great civility, the eldest 
young ladi observ aloud to the rest, “how excess like her brother 
miss morland is!” 

“the veri pictur of him indeed!” cri the mother--and “I should have 
known her anywher for hi sister!” wa repeat by them all, two or 
three time over. for a moment catherin wa surprised; but mrs. thorp 
and her daughter had scarc begun the histori of their acquaint 
with mr. jame morland, befor she rememb that her eldest brother 
had late form an intimaci with a young man of hi own college, of 
the name of thorpe; and that he had spent the last week of the christma 
vacat with hi family, near london. 

the whole be explained, mani oblig thing were said by the miss 
thorp of their wish of be better acquaint with her; of be 
consid as alreadi friends, through the friendship of their brothers, 
etc., which catherin heard with pleasure, and answer with all the 
pretti express she could command; and, as the first proof of amity, 
she wa soon invit to accept an arm of the eldest miss thorpe, and 
take a turn with her about the room. catherin wa delight with thi 
extens of her bath acquaintance, and almost forgot mr. tilney while 
she talk to miss thorpe. friendship is certainli the finest balm for 
the pang of disappoint love. 

their convers turn upon those subjects, of which the free 
discuss ha gener much to do in perfect a sudden intimaci 
between two young ladies: such as dress, balls, flirtations, and 
quizzes. miss thorpe, however, be four year older than miss morland, 
and at least four year better informed, had a veri decid advantag in 
discuss such points; she could compar the ball of bath with those 
of tunbridge, it fashion with the fashion of london; could rectifi 
the opinion of her new friend in mani articl of tast attire; 
could discov a flirtat between ani gentleman and ladi who onli 
smile on each other; and point out a quiz through the thick of a 
crowd. these power receiv due admir from catherine, to whom they 
were entir new; and the respect which they natur inspir might 
have been too great for familiarity, had not the easi gaieti of miss 
thorpe' manners, and her frequent express of delight on thi 
acquaint with her, soften down everi feel of awe, and left 
noth but tender affection. their increas attach wa not to be 
satisfi with half a dozen turn in the pump-room, but required, when 
they all quit it together, that miss thorp should accompani miss 
morland to the veri door of mr. allen' house; and that they should 
there part with a most affection and lengthen shake of hands, after 
learning, to their mutual relief, that they should see each other across 
the theatr at night, and say their prayer in the same chapel the next 
morning. catherin then ran directli upstairs, and watch miss thorpe' 
progress down the street from the drawing-room window; admir the 
grace spirit of her walk, the fashion air of her figur and 
dress; and felt grateful, as well she might, for the chanc which had 
procur her such a friend. 

mrs. thorp wa a widow, and not a veri rich one; she wa a 
good-humoured, well-mean woman, and a veri indulg mother. her 
eldest daughter had great person beauty, and the younger ones, by 
pretend to be as handsom as their sister, imit her air, and 
dress in the same style, did veri well. 

thi brief account of the famili is intend to supersed the necess 
of a long and minut detail from mrs. thorp herself, of her past 
adventur and sufferings, which might otherwis be expect to occupi 
the three or four follow chapters; in which the worthless of 
lord and attorney might be set forth, and conversations, which had 
pass twenti year before, be minut repeated. 




chapter 5 


catherin wa not so much engag at the theatr that evening, in 
return the nod and smile of miss thorpe, though they certainli 
claim much of her leisure, as to forget to look with an inquir eye 
for mr. tilney in everi box which her eye could reach; but she look in 
vain. mr. tilney wa no fonder of the play than the pump-room. she hope 
to be more fortun the next day; and when her wish for fine weather 
were answer by see a beauti morning, she hardli felt a doubt of 
it; for a fine sunday in bath empti everi hous of it inhabitants, 
and all the world appear on such an occas to walk about and tell 
their acquaint what a charm day it is. 

As soon as divin servic wa over, the thorp and allen eagerli 
join each other; and after stay long enough in the pump-room to 
discov that the crowd wa insupportable, and that there wa not 
a genteel face to be seen, which everybodi discov everi sunday 
throughout the season, they hasten away to the crescent, to breath 
the fresh air of better company. here catherin and isabella, arm 
in arm, again tast the sweet of friendship in an unreserv 
conversation; they talk much, and with much enjoyment; but again 
wa catherin disappoint in her hope of rese her partner. He wa 
nowher to be met with; everi search for him wa equal unsuccessful, 
in morn loung or even assemblies; neither at the upper nor lower 
rooms, at dress or undress balls, wa he perceivable; nor among the 
walkers, the horsemen, or the curricle-driv of the morning. hi name 
wa not in the pump-room book, and curios could do no more. He must 
be gone from bath. yet he had not mention that hi stay would be so 
short! thi sort of mysteriousness, which is alway so becom in a 
hero, threw a fresh grace in catherine' imagin around hi person 
and manners, and increas her anxieti to know more of him. from the 
thorp she could learn nothing, for they had been onli two day in bath 
befor they met with mrs. allen. It wa a subject, however, in which 
she often indulg with her fair friend, from whom she receiv everi 
possibl encourag to continu to think of him; and hi impress 
on her fanci wa not suffer therefor to weaken. isabella wa veri 
sure that he must be a charm young man, and wa equal sure that he 
must have been delight with her dear catherine, and would therefor 
shortli return. she like him the better for be a clergyman, “for she 
must confess herself veri partial to the profession”; and someth like 
a sigh escap her as she said it. perhap catherin wa wrong in not 
demand the caus of that gentl emotion--but she wa not experienc 
enough in the finess of love, or the duti of friendship, to know when 
delic railleri wa properli call for, or when a confid should 
be forced. 

mrs. allen wa now quit happy--quit satisfi with bath. she had found 
some acquaintance, had been so lucki too as to find in them the famili 
of a most worthi old friend; and, as the complet of good fortune, had 
found these friend by no mean so expens dress as herself. her 
daili express were no longer, “I wish we had some acquaint in 
bath!” they were chang into, “how glad I am we have met with mrs. 
thorpe!” and she wa as eager in promot the intercours of the two 
families, as her young charg and isabella themselv could be; never 
satisfi with the day unless she spent the chief of it by the side of 
mrs. thorpe, in what they call conversation, but in which there wa 
scarc ever ani exchang of opinion, and not often ani resembl of 
subject, for mrs. thorp talk chiefli of her children, and mrs. allen 
of her gowns. 

the progress of the friendship between catherin and isabella wa quick 
as it begin had been warm, and they pass so rapidli through everi 
gradat of increas tender that there wa shortli no fresh proof 
of it to be given to their friend or themselves. they call each other 
by their christian name, were alway arm in arm when they walked, pin 
up each other' train for the dance, and were not to be divid in the 
set; and if a raini morn depriv them of other enjoyments, they 
were still resolut in meet in defianc of wet and dirt, and shut 
themselv up, to read novel together. yes, novels; for I will not 
adopt that ungener and impolit custom so common with novel-writers, 
of degrad by their contemptu censur the veri performances, to the 
number of which they are themselv adding--join with their greatest 
enemi in bestow the harshest epithet on such works, and scarc 
ever permit them to be read by their own heroine, who, if she 
accident take up a novel, is sure to turn over it insipid page 
with disgust. alas! If the heroin of one novel be not patron by the 
heroin of another, from whom can she expect protect and regard? I 
cannot approv of it. let us leav it to the review to abus such 
effus of fanci at their leisure, and over everi new novel to talk in 
threadbar strain of the trash with which the press now groans. let us 
not desert one another; we are an injur body. although our product 
have afford more extens and unaffect pleasur than those of ani 
other literari corpor in the world, no speci of composit ha 
been so much decried. from pride, ignorance, or fashion, our foe 
are almost as mani as our readers. and while the abil of the 
nine-hundredth abridg of the histori of england, or of the man who 
collect and publish in a volum some dozen line of milton, pope, and 
prior, with a paper from the spectator, and a chapter from sterne, 
are eulog by a thousand pens--ther seem almost a gener wish of 
decri the capac and undervalu the labour of the novelist, and 
of slight the perform which have onli genius, wit, and tast to 
recommend them. “I am no novel-reader--i seldom look into novels--do not 
imagin that I often read novels--it is realli veri well for a novel.” 
such is the common cant. “and what are you reading, miss--?” “oh! It is 
onli a novel!” repli the young lady, while she lay down her book 
with affect indifference, or momentari shame. “it is onli cecilia, or 
camilla, or belinda”; or, in short, onli some work in which the greatest 
power of the mind are displayed, in which the most thorough knowledg 
of human nature, the happiest delin of it varieties, the 
liveliest effus of wit and humour, are convey to the world in the 
best-chosen language. now, had the same young ladi been engag with a 
volum of the spectator, instead of such a work, how proudli would she 
have produc the book, and told it name; though the chanc must be 
against her be occupi by ani part of that volumin publication, 
of which either the matter or manner would not disgust a young person of 
taste: the substanc of it paper so often consist in the statement 
of improb circumstances, unnatur characters, and topic of 
convers which no longer concern anyon living; and their language, 
too, frequent so coars as to give no veri favour idea of the age 
that could endur it. 




chapter 6 


the follow conversation, which took place between the two friend in 
the pump-room one morning, after an acquaint of eight or nine 
days, is given as a specimen of their veri warm attachment, and of the 
delicacy, discretion, origin of thought, and literari tast which 
mark the reason of that attachment. 

they met by appointment; and as isabella had arriv nearli five 
minut befor her friend, her first address natur was, “mi dearest 
creature, what can have made you so late? I have been wait for you at 
least thi age!” 

“have you, indeed! I am veri sorri for it; but realli I thought I wa in 
veri good time. It is but just one. I hope you have not been here long?” 

“oh! these ten age at least. I am sure I have been here thi half hour. 
but now, let us go and sit down at the other end of the room, and enjoy 
ourselves. I have an hundr thing to say to you. In the first place, 
I wa so afraid it would rain thi morning, just as I want to set off; 
it look veri showery, and that would have thrown me into agonies! Do 
you know, I saw the prettiest hat you can imagine, in a shop window in 
milsom street just now--veri like yours, onli with coquelicot ribbon 
instead of green; I quit long for it. but, my dearest catherine, what 
have you been do with yourself all thi morning? have you gone on 
with udolpho?” 

“yes, I have been read it ever sinc I woke; and I am got to the 
black veil.” 

“are you, indeed? how delightful! oh! I would not tell you what is 
behind the black veil for the world! are not you wild to know?” 

“oh! yes, quite; what can it be? but do not tell me--i would not be 
told upon ani account. I know it must be a skeleton, I am sure it is 
laurentina' skeleton. oh! I am delight with the book! I should like 
to spend my whole life in read it. I assur you, if it had not been 
to meet you, I would not have come away from it for all the world.” 

“dear creature! how much I am oblig to you; and when you have finish 
udolpho, we will read the italian together; and I have made out a list 
of ten or twelv more of the same kind for you.” 

“have you, indeed! how glad I am! what are they all?” 

“I will read you their name directly; here they are, in my pocketbook. 
castl of wolfenbach, clermont, mysteri warnings, necromanc of the 
black forest, midnight bell, orphan of the rhine, and horrid mysteries. 
those will last us some time.” 

“yes, pretti well; but are they all horrid, are you sure they are all 
horrid?” 

“yes, quit sure; for a particular friend of mine, a miss andrews, a 
sweet girl, one of the sweetest creatur in the world, ha read everi 
one of them. I wish you knew miss andrews, you would be delight with 
her. she is net herself the sweetest cloak you can conceive. I think 
her as beauti as an angel, and I am so vex with the men for not 
admir her! I scold them all amazingli about it.” 

“scold them! Do you scold them for not admir her?” 

“yes, that I do. there is noth I would not do for those who are 
realli my friends. I have no notion of love peopl by halves; it is 
not my nature. My attach are alway excess strong. I told 
captain hunt at one of our assembl thi winter that if he wa to 
teas me all night, I would not danc with him, unless he would allow 
miss andrew to be as beauti as an angel. the men think us incap 
of real friendship, you know, and I am determin to show them the 
difference. now, if I were to hear anybodi speak slightingli of you, I 
should fire up in a moment: but that is not at all likely, for you are 
just the kind of girl to be a great favourit with the men.” 

“oh, dear!” cri catherine, colouring. “how can you say so?” 

“I know you veri well; you have so much animation, which is exactli 
what miss andrew wants, for I must confess there is someth amazingli 
insipid about her. oh! I must tell you, that just after we part 
yesterday, I saw a young man look at you so earnestly--i am sure he 
is in love with you.” catherin coloured, and disclaim again. isabella 
laughed. “it is veri true, upon my honour, but I see how it is; you are 
indiffer to everybody' admiration, except that of one gentleman, 
who shall be nameless. nay, I cannot blame you”--speak more 
seriously--“your feel are easili understood. where the heart is 
realli attached, I know veri well how littl one can be pleas with the 
attent of anybodi else. everyth is so insipid, so uninteresting, 
that doe not relat to the belov object! I can perfectli comprehend 
your feelings.” 

“but you should not persuad me that I think so veri much about mr. 
tilney, for perhap I may never see him again.” 

“not see him again! My dearest creature, do not talk of it. I am sure 
you would be miser if you thought so!” 

“no, indeed, I should not. I do not pretend to say that I wa not veri 
much pleas with him; but while I have udolpho to read, I feel as if 
nobodi could make me miserable. oh! the dread black veil! My dear 
isabella, I am sure there must be laurentina' skeleton behind it.” 

“it is so odd to me, that you should never have read udolpho before; but 
I suppos mrs. morland object to novels.” 

“no, she doe not. she veri often read sir charl grandison herself; 
but new book do not fall in our way.” 

“sir charl grandison! that is an amaz horrid book, is it not? I 
rememb miss andrew could not get through the first volume.” 

“it is not like udolpho at all; but yet I think it is veri 
entertaining.” 

“do you indeed! you surpris me; I thought it had not been readable. 
but, my dearest catherine, have you settl what to wear on your head 
tonight? I am determin at all event to be dress exactli like you. 
the men take notic of that sometimes, you know.” 

“but it doe not signifi if they do,” said catherine, veri innocently. 

“signify! oh, heavens! I make it a rule never to mind what they say. 
they are veri often amazingli impertin if you do not treat them with 
spirit, and make them keep their distance.” 

“are they? well, I never observ that. they alway behav veri well to 
me.” 

“oh! they give themselv such airs. they are the most conceit 
creatur in the world, and think themselv of so much importance! 
By the by, though I have thought of it a hundr times, I have alway 
forgot to ask you what is your favourit complexion in a man. Do you 
like them best dark or fair?” 

“I hardli know. I never much thought about it. someth between both, I 
think. brown--not fair, and--and not veri dark.” 

“veri well, catherine. that is exactli he. I have not forgot your 
descript of mr. tilney--'a brown skin, with dark eyes, and rather 
dark hair.' well, my tast is different. I prefer light eyes, and as to 
complexion--do you know--i like a sallow better than ani other. you must 
not betray me, if you should ever meet with one of your acquaint 
answer that description.” 

“betray you! what do you mean?” 

“nay, do not distress me. I believ I have said too much. let us drop 
the subject.” 

catherine, in some amazement, complied, and after remain a few 
moment silent, wa on the point of revert to what interest her 
at that time rather more than anyth els in the world, laurentina' 
skeleton, when her friend prevent her, by saying, “for heaven' sake! 
let us move away from thi end of the room. Do you know, there are two 
odiou young men who have been stare at me thi half hour. they realli 
put me quit out of countenance. let us go and look at the arrivals. 
they will hardli follow us there.” 

away they walk to the book; and while isabella examin the names, it 
wa catherine' employ to watch the proceed of these alarm 
young men. 

“they are not come thi way, are they? I hope they are not so 
impertin as to follow us. pray let me know if they are coming. I am 
determin I will not look up.” 

In a few moment catherine, with unaffect pleasure, assur her 
that she need not be longer uneasy, as the gentlemen had just left the 
pump-room. 

“and which way are they gone?” said isabella, turn hastili round. 
“one wa a veri good-look young man.” 

“they went toward the church-yard.” 

“well, I am amazingli glad I have got rid of them! and now, what say you 
to go to edgar' build with me, and look at my new hat? you 
said you should like to see it.” 

catherin readili agreed. “only,” she added, “perhap we may overtak 
the two young men.” 

“oh! never mind that. If we make haste, we shall pass by them presently, 
and I am die to show you my hat.” 

“but if we onli wait a few minutes, there will be no danger of our 
see them at all.” 

“I shall not pay them ani such compliment, I assur you. I have no 
notion of treat men with such respect. that is the way to spoil 
them.” 

catherin had noth to oppos against such reasoning; and therefore, 
to show the independ of miss thorpe, and her resolut of humbl 
the sex, they set off immedi as fast as they could walk, in pursuit 
of the two young men. 




chapter 7 


half a minut conduct them through the pump-yard to the archway, 
opposit union passage; but here they were stopped. everybodi acquaint 
with bath may rememb the difficulti of cross cheap street at 
thi point; it is inde a street of so impertin a nature, so 
unfortun connect with the great london and oxford roads, and the 
princip inn of the city, that a day never pass in which parti of 
ladies, howev import their business, whether in quest of pastry, 
millinery, or even (a in the present case) of young men, are not 
detain on one side or other by carriages, horsemen, or carts. thi 
evil had been felt and lamented, at least three time a day, by isabella 
sinc her resid in bath; and she wa now fate to feel and lament it 
onc more, for at the veri moment of come opposit to union passage, 
and within view of the two gentlemen who were proceed through the 
crowds, and thread the gutter of that interest alley, they 
were prevent cross by the approach of a gig, driven along on bad 
pavement by a most knowing-look coachman with all the vehem that 
could most fitli endang the live of himself, hi companion, and hi 
horse. 

“oh, these odiou gigs!” said isabella, look up. “how I detest them.” 
but thi detestation, though so just, wa of short duration, for she 
look again and exclaimed, “delightful! mr. morland and my brother!” 

“good heaven! 'ti james!” wa utter at the same moment by catherine; 
and, on catch the young men' eyes, the hors wa immedi check 
with a violenc which almost threw him on hi haunches, and the servant 
have now scamper up, the gentlemen jump out, and the equipag wa 
deliv to hi care. 

catherine, by whom thi meet wa wholli unexpected, receiv her 
brother with the liveliest pleasure; and he, be of a veri amiabl 
disposition, and sincer attach to her, gave everi proof on hi 
side of equal satisfaction, which he could have leisur to do, while the 
bright eye of miss thorp were incessantli challeng hi notice; 
and to her hi devoir were speedili paid, with a mixtur of joy and 
embarrass which might have inform catherine, had she been more 
expert in the develop of other people' feelings, and less simpli 
engross by her own, that her brother thought her friend quit as 
pretti as she could do herself. 

john thorpe, who in the meantim had been give order about the 
horses, soon join them, and from him she directli receiv the amend 
which were her due; for while he slightli and carelessli touch the 
hand of isabella, on her he bestow a whole scrape and half a short 
bow. He wa a stout young man of middl height, who, with a plain face 
and ungrac form, seem fear of be too handsom unless he wore 
the dress of a groom, and too much like a gentleman unless he were easi 
where he ought to be civil, and impud where he might be allow to be 
easy. He took out hi watch: “how long do you think we have been run 
it from tetbury, miss morland?” 

“I do not know the distance.” her brother told her that it wa 
twenty-thre miles. 

“three and twenty!” cri thorpe. “five and twenti if it is an inch.” 
morland remonstrated, plead the author of road-books, innkeepers, 
and milestones; but hi friend disregard them all; he had a surer test 
of distance. “I know it must be five and twenty,” said he, “bi the time 
we have been do it. It is now half after one; we drove out of the 
inn-yard at tetburi as the town clock struck eleven; and I defi ani man 
in england to make my hors go less than ten mile an hour in harness; 
that make it exactli twenty-five.” 

“you have lost an hour,” said morland; “it wa onli ten o'clock when we 
came from tetbury.” 

“ten o'clock! It wa eleven, upon my soul! I count everi stroke. thi 
brother of your would persuad me out of my senses, miss morland; do 
but look at my horse; did you ever see an anim so made for speed in 
your life?” (the servant had just mount the carriag and wa drive 
off.) “such true blood! three hour and and a half inde come onli 
three and twenti miles! look at that creature, and suppos it possibl 
if you can.” 

“he doe look veri hot, to be sure.” 

“hot! He had not turn a hair till we came to walcot church; but look 
at hi forehand; look at hi loins; onli see how he moves; that hors 
cannot go less than ten mile an hour: tie hi leg and he will get on. 
what do you think of my gig, miss morland? A neat one, is not it? 
well hung; town-built; I have not had it a month. It wa built for a 
christchurch man, a friend of mine, a veri good sort of fellow; he ran 
it a few weeks, till, I believe, it wa conveni to have done with it. 
I happen just then to be look out for some light thing of the kind, 
though I had pretti well determin on a curricl too; but I chanc to 
meet him on magdalen bridge, as he wa drive into oxford, last term: 
'ah! thorpe,' said he, 'do you happen to want such a littl thing as 
this? It is a capit one of the kind, but I am curs tire of it.' 
'oh! d--,' said I; 'I am your man; what do you ask?' and how much do you 
think he did, miss morland?” 

“I am sure I cannot guess at all.” 

“curricle-hung, you see; seat, trunk, sword-case, splashing-board, 
lamps, silver moulding, all you see complete; the iron-work as good 
as new, or better. He ask fifti guineas; I close with him directly, 
threw down the money, and the carriag wa mine.” 

“and I am sure,” said catherine, “I know so littl of such thing that I 
cannot judg whether it wa cheap or dear.” 

“neither one nor t'other; I might have got it for less, I dare say; but 
I hate haggling, and poor freeman want cash.” 

“that wa veri good-natur of you,” said catherine, quit pleased. 

“oh! d---- it, when one ha the mean of do a kind thing by a friend, 
I hate to be pitiful.” 

An inquiri now took place into the intend movement of the young 
ladies; and, on find whither they were going, it wa decid that 
the gentlemen should accompani them to edgar' buildings, and pay their 
respect to mrs. thorpe. jame and isabella led the way; and so 
well satisfi wa the latter with her lot, so contentedli wa she 
endeavour to ensur a pleasant walk to him who brought the doubl 
recommend of be her brother' friend, and her friend' brother, 
so pure and uncoquettish were her feelings, that, though they overtook 
and pass the two offend young men in milsom street, she wa so far 
from seek to attract their notice, that she look back at them onli 
three times. 

john thorp kept of cours with catherine, and, after a few minutes' 
silence, renew the convers about hi gig. “you will find, 
however, miss morland, it would be reckon a cheap thing by some 
people, for I might have sold it for ten guinea more the next day; 
jackson, of oriel, bid me sixti at once; morland wa with me at the 
time.” 

“yes,” said morland, who overheard this; “but you forget that your hors 
wa included.” 

“mi horse! oh, d---- it! I would not sell my hors for a hundred. are 
you fond of an open carriage, miss morland?” 

“yes, very; I have hardli ever an opportun of be in one; but I am 
particularli fond of it.” 

“I am glad of it; I will drive you out in mine everi day.” 

“thank you,” said catherine, in some distress, from a doubt of the 
proprieti of accept such an offer. 

“I will drive you up lansdown hill tomorrow.” 

“thank you; but will not your hors want rest?” 

“rest! He ha onli come three and twenti mile today; all nonsense; 
noth ruin hors so much as rest; noth knock them up so soon. 
no, no; I shall exercis mine at the averag of four hour everi day 
while I am here.” 

“shall you indeed!” said catherin veri seriously. “that will be forti 
mile a day.” 

“forty! aye, fifty, for what I care. well, I will drive you up lansdown 
tomorrow; mind, I am engaged.” 

“how delight that will be!” cri isabella, turn round. “mi 
dearest catherine, I quit envi you; but I am afraid, brother, you will 
not have room for a third.” 

“A third indeed! no, no; I did not come to bath to drive my sister 
about; that would be a good joke, faith! morland must take care of you.” 

thi brought on a dialogu of civil between the other two; but 
catherin heard neither the particular nor the result. her companion' 
discours now sunk from it hitherto anim pitch to noth more than 
a short decis sentenc of prais or condemn on the face of everi 
woman they met; and catherine, after listen and agre as long as 
she could, with all the civil and defer of the youth femal 
mind, fear of hazard an opinion of it own in opposit to that 
of a self-assur man, especi where the beauti of her own sex is 
concerned, ventur at length to vari the subject by a question which 
had been long uppermost in her thoughts; it was, “have you ever read 
udolpho, mr. thorpe?” 

“udolpho! oh, lord! not I; I never read novels; I have someth els to 
do.” 

catherine, humbl and ashamed, wa go to apolog for her question, 
but he prevent her by saying, “novel are all so full of nonsens 
and stuff; there ha not been a toler decent one come out sinc 
tom jones, except the monk; I read that t'other day; but as for all the 
others, they are the stupidest thing in creation.” 

“I think you must like udolpho, if you were to read it; it is so veri 
interesting.” 

“not I, faith! no, if I read any, it shall be mrs. radcliffe's; her 
novel are amus enough; they are worth reading; some fun and natur 
in them.” 

“udolpho wa written by mrs. radcliffe,” said catherine, with some 
hesitation, from the fear of mortifi him. 

“no sure; wa it? aye, I remember, so it was; I wa think of that 
other stupid book, written by that woman they make such a fuss about, 
she who marri the french emigrant.” 

“I suppos you mean camilla?” 

“yes, that' the book; such unnatur stuff! An old man play at 
see-saw, I took up the first volum onc and look it over, but I soon 
found it would not do; inde I guess what sort of stuff it must be 
befor I saw it: as soon as I heard she had marri an emigrant, I wa 
sure I should never be abl to get through it.” 

“I have never read it.” 

“you had no loss, I assur you; it is the horridest nonsens you can 
imagine; there is noth in the world in it but an old man' play at 
see-saw and learn latin; upon my soul there is not.” 

thi critique, the just of which wa unfortun lost on poor 
catherine, brought them to the door of mrs. thorpe' lodgings, and the 
feel of the discern and unprejud reader of camilla gave way 
to the feel of the duti and affection son, as they met mrs. 
thorpe, who had descri them from above, in the passage. “ah, mother! 
how do you do?” said he, give her a hearti shake of the hand. “where 
did you get that quiz of a hat? It make you look like an old witch. 
here is morland and I come to stay a few day with you, so you must look 
out for a coupl of good bed somewher near.” and thi address seem 
to satisfi all the fondest wish of the mother' heart, for she 
receiv him with the most delight and exult affection. On hi 
two younger sister he then bestow an equal portion of hi fratern 
tenderness, for he ask each of them how they did, and observ that 
they both look veri ugly. 

these manner did not pleas catherine; but he wa james' friend 
and isabella' brother; and her judgment wa further bought off by 
isabella' assur her, when they withdrew to see the new hat, that 
john thought her the most charm girl in the world, and by john' 
engag her befor they part to danc with him that evening. had she 
been older or vainer, such attack might have done little; but, where 
youth and diffid are united, it requir uncommon steadi of 
reason to resist the attract of be call the most charm girl 
in the world, and of be so veri earli engag as a partner; and the 
consequ wa that, when the two morlands, after sit an hour with 
the thorpes, set off to walk togeth to mr. allen's, and james, as 
the door wa close on them, said, “well, catherine, how do you like my 
friend thorpe?” instead of answering, as she probabl would have done, 
had there been no friendship and no flatteri in the case, “I do not like 
him at all,” she directli replied, “I like him veri much; he seem veri 
agreeable.” 

“he is as good-natur a fellow as ever lived; a littl of a rattle; but 
that will recommend him to your sex, I believe: and how do you like the 
rest of the family?” 

“very, veri much indeed: isabella particularly.” 

“I am veri glad to hear you say so; she is just the kind of young woman 
I could wish to see you attach to; she ha so much good sense, and is 
so thoroughli unaffect and amiable; I alway want you to know her; 
and she seem veri fond of you. she said the highest thing in your 
prais that could possibl be; and the prais of such a girl as miss 
thorp even you, catherine,” take her hand with affection, “may be 
proud of.” 

“inde I am,” she replied; “I love her exceedingly, and am delight 
to find that you like her too. you hardli mention anyth of her when 
you wrote to me after your visit there.” 

“becaus I thought I should soon see you myself. I hope you will be a 
great deal togeth while you are in bath. she is a most amiabl girl; 
such a superior understanding! how fond all the famili are of her; she 
is evid the gener favourite; and how much she must be admir in 
such a place as this--i not she?” 

“yes, veri much indeed, I fancy; mr. allen think her the prettiest girl 
in bath.” 

“I dare say he does; and I do not know ani man who is a better judg of 
beauti than mr. allen. I need not ask you whether you are happi here, my 
dear catherine; with such a companion and friend as isabella thorpe, it 
would be imposs for you to be otherwise; and the allens, I am sure, 
are veri kind to you?” 

“yes, veri kind; I never wa so happi before; and now you are come it 
will be more delight than ever; how good it is of you to come so far 
on purpos to see me.” 

jame accept thi tribut of gratitude, and qualifi hi conscienc 
for accept it too, by say with perfect sincerity, “indeed, 
catherine, I love you dearly.” 

inquiri and commun concern brother and sisters, the 
situat of some, the growth of the rest, and other famili matter now 
pass between them, and continued, with onli one small digress 
on james' part, in prais of miss thorpe, till they reach pulteney 
street, where he wa welcom with great kind by mr. and mrs. allen, 
invit by the former to dine with them, and summon by the latter 
to guess the price and weigh the merit of a new muff and tippet. 
A pre-engag in edgar' build prevent hi accept the 
invit of one friend, and oblig him to hurri away as soon as he 
had satisfi the demand of the other. the time of the two parti 
unit in the octagon room be correctli adjusted, catherin wa then 
left to the luxuri of a raised, restless, and frighten imagin 
over the page of udolpho, lost from all worldli concern of dress 
and dinner, incap of sooth mrs. allen' fear on the delay of an 
expect dressmaker, and have onli one minut in sixti to bestow even 
on the reflect of her own felicity, in be alreadi engag for the 
evening. 




chapter 8 


In spite of udolpho and the dressmaker, however, the parti from pulteney 
street reach the upper room in veri good time. the thorp and jame 
morland were there onli two minut befor them; and isabella have 
gone through the usual ceremoni of meet her friend with the most 
smile and affection haste, of admir the set of her gown, and 
envi the curl of her hair, they follow their chaperones, arm in 
arm, into the ballroom, whisper to each other whenev a thought 
occurred, and suppli the place of mani idea by a squeez of the hand 
or a smile of affection. 

the danc began within a few minut after they were seated; and 
james, who had been engag quit as long as hi sister, wa veri 
importun with isabella to stand up; but john wa gone into the 
card-room to speak to a friend, and nothing, she declared, should induc 
her to join the set befor her dear catherin could join it too. “I 
assur you,” said she, “I would not stand up without your dear sister 
for all the world; for if I did we should certainli be separ the 
whole evening.” catherin accept thi kind with gratitude, and 
they continu as they were for three minut longer, when isabella, who 
had been talk to jame on the other side of her, turn again to hi 
sister and whispered, “mi dear creature, I am afraid I must leav you, 
your brother is so amazingli impati to begin; I know you will not 
mind my go away, and I dare say john will be back in a moment, 
and then you may easili find me out.” catherine, though a littl 
disappointed, had too much good natur to make ani opposition, and the 
other rise up, isabella had onli time to press her friend' hand and 
say, “good-bye, my dear love,” befor they hurri off. the younger 
miss thorp be also dancing, catherin wa left to the merci of mrs. 
thorp and mrs. allen, between whom she now remained. she could not help 
be vex at the non-appear of mr. thorpe, for she not onli long 
to be dancing, but wa likewis awar that, as the real digniti of her 
situat could not be known, she wa share with the score of other 
young ladi still sit down all the discredit of want a partner. 
To be disgrac in the eye of the world, to wear the appear of 
infami while her heart is all purity, her action all innocence, and the 
misconduct of anoth the true sourc of her debasement, is one of those 
circumst which peculiarli belong to the heroine' life, and her 
fortitud under it what particularli dignifi her character. catherin 
had fortitud too; she suffered, but no murmur pass her lips. 

from thi state of humiliation, she wa roused, at the end of ten 
minutes, to a pleasant feeling, by seeing, not mr. thorpe, but mr. 
tilney, within three yard of the place where they sat; he seem to be 
move that way, but he did not see her, and therefor the smile and the 
blush, which hi sudden reappear rais in catherine, pass away 
without sulli her heroic importance. He look as handsom and as 
live as ever, and wa talk with interest to a fashion and 
pleasing-look young woman, who leant on hi arm, and whom catherin 
immedi guess to be hi sister; thu unthinkingli throw away 
a fair opportun of consid him lost to her forever, by be 
marri already. but guid onli by what wa simpl and probable, it 
had never enter her head that mr. tilney could be married; he had not 
behaved, he had not talked, like the marri men to whom she had been 
used; he had never mention a wife, and he had acknowledg a sister. 
from these circumst sprang the instant conclus of hi sister' 
now be by hi side; and therefore, instead of turn of a deathlik 
pale and fall in a fit on mrs. allen' bosom, catherin sat 
erect, in the perfect use of her senses, and with cheek onli a littl 
redder than usual. 

mr. tilney and hi companion, who continued, though slowly, to approach, 
were immedi preced by a lady, an acquaint of mrs. thorpe; and 
thi ladi stop to speak to her, they, as belong to her, stop 
likewise, and catherine, catch mr. tilney' eye, instantli receiv 
from him the smile tribut of recognition. she return it with 
pleasure, and then advanc still nearer, he spoke both to her and mrs. 
allen, by whom he wa veri civilli acknowledged. “I am veri happi to see 
you again, sir, indeed; I wa afraid you had left bath.” He thank her 
for her fears, and said that he had quit it for a week, on the veri 
morn after hi have had the pleasur of see her. 

“well, sir, and I dare say you are not sorri to be back again, for it 
is just the place for young people--and inde for everybodi els too. 
I tell mr. allen, when he talk of be sick of it, that I am sure he 
should not complain, for it is so veri agreeabl a place, that it is 
much better to be here than at home at thi dull time of year. I tell 
him he is quit in luck to be sent here for hi health.” 

“and I hope, madam, that mr. allen will be oblig to like the place, 
from find it of servic to him.” 

“thank you, sir. I have no doubt that he will. A neighbour of ours, 
dr. skinner, wa here for hi health last winter, and came away quit 
stout.” 

“that circumst must give great encouragement.” 

“yes, sir--and dr. skinner and hi famili were here three months; so I 
tell mr. allen he must not be in a hurri to get away.” 

here they were interrupt by a request from mrs. thorp to mrs. allen, 
that she would move a littl to accommod mrs. hugh and miss tilney 
with seats, as they had agre to join their party. thi wa accordingli 
done, mr. tilney still continu stand befor them; and after a 
few minutes' consideration, he ask catherin to danc with him. thi 
compliment, delight as it was, produc sever mortif to the 
lady; and in give her denial, she express her sorrow on the occas 
so veri much as if she realli felt it that had thorpe, who join her 
just afterwards, been half a minut earlier, he might have thought her 
suffer rather too acute. the veri easi manner in which he then told 
her that he had kept her wait did not by ani mean reconcil her more 
to her lot; nor did the particular which he enter into while they 
were stand up, of the hors and dog of the friend whom he had just 
left, and of a propos exchang of terrier between them, interest her 
so much as to prevent her look veri often toward that part of the 
room where she had left mr. tilney. Of her dear isabella, to whom she 
particularli long to point out that gentleman, she could see nothing. 
they were in differ sets. she wa separ from all her party, and 
away from all her acquaintance; one mortif succeed another, 
and from the whole she deduc thi use lesson, that to go previous 
engag to a ball doe not necessarili increas either the digniti or 
enjoy of a young lady. from such a moral strain as this, she 
wa suddenli rous by a touch on the shoulder, and turn round, 
perceiv mrs. hugh directli behind her, attend by miss tilney and 
a gentleman. “I beg your pardon, miss morland,” said she, “for thi 
liberty--but I cannot anyhow get to miss thorpe, and mrs. thorp said 
she wa sure you would not have the least object to let in thi 
young ladi by you.” mrs. hugh could not have appli to ani creatur 
in the room more happi to oblig her than catherine. the young ladi 
were introduc to each other, miss tilney express a proper sens of 
such goodness, miss morland with the real delicaci of a gener mind 
make light of the obligation; and mrs. hughes, satisfi with have 
so respect settl her young charge, return to her party. 

miss tilney had a good figure, a pretti face, and a veri agreeabl 
countenance; and her air, though it had not all the decid pretension, 
the resolut stylish of miss thorpe's, had more real elegance. her 
manner show good sens and good breeding; they were neither shi nor 
affectedli open; and she seem capabl of be young, attractive, and 
at a ball without want to fix the attent of everi man near her, 
and without exagger feel of ecstat delight or inconceiv 
vexat on everi littl trifl occurrence. catherine, interest at 
onc by her appear and her relationship to mr. tilney, wa desir 
of be acquaint with her, and readili talk therefor whenev she 
could think of anyth to say, and had courag and leisur for say 
it. but the hindranc thrown in the way of a veri speedi intimacy, by 
the frequent want of one or more of these requisites, prevent their 
do more than go through the first rudiment of an acquaintance, by 
inform themselv how well the other like bath, how much she admir 
it build and surround country, whether she drew, or played, or 
sang, and whether she wa fond of ride on horseback. 

the two danc were scarc conclud befor catherin found her arm 
gentli seiz by her faith isabella, who in great spirit exclaimed, 
“at last I have got you. My dearest creature, I have been look for 
you thi hour. what could induc you to come into thi set, when you 
knew I wa in the other? I have been quit wretch without you.” 

“mi dear isabella, how wa it possibl for me to get at you? I could not 
even see where you were.” 

“so I told your brother all the time--but he would not believ me. Do go 
and see for her, mr. morland, said i--but all in vain--h would not stir 
an inch. wa not it so, mr. morland? but you men are all so immoder 
lazy! I have been scold him to such a degree, my dear catherine, you 
would be quit amazed. you know I never stand upon ceremoni with such 
people.” 

“look at that young ladi with the white bead round her head,” whisper 
catherine, detach her friend from james. “it is mr. tilney' sister.” 

“oh! heavens! you don't say so! let me look at her thi moment. what a 
delight girl! I never saw anyth half so beautiful! but where is 
her all-conqu brother? Is he in the room? point him out to me thi 
instant, if he is. I die to see him. mr. morland, you are not to listen. 
We are not talk about you.” 

“but what is all thi whisper about? what is go on?” 

“there now, I knew how it would be. you men have such restless 
curiosity! talk of the curios of women, indeed! 'ti nothing. but be 
satisfied, for you are not to know anyth at all of the matter.” 

“and is that like to satisfi me, do you think?” 

“well, I declar I never knew anyth like you. what can it signifi to 
you, what we are talk of. perhap we are talk about you; therefor 
I would advis you not to listen, or you may happen to hear someth 
not veri agreeable.” 

In thi commonplac chatter, which last some time, the origin 
subject seem entir forgotten; and though catherin wa veri well 
pleas to have it drop for a while, she could not avoid a littl 
suspicion at the total suspens of all isabella' impati desir to 
see mr. tilney. when the orchestra struck up a fresh dance, jame would 
have led hi fair partner away, but she resisted. “I tell you, mr. 
morland,” she cried, “I would not do such a thing for all the world. 
how can you be so teasing; onli conceive, my dear catherine, what your 
brother want me to do. He want me to danc with him again, though 
I tell him that it is a most improp thing, and entir against the 
rules. It would make us the talk of the place, if we were not to chang 
partners.” 

“upon my honour,” said james, “in these public assemblies, it is as 
often done as not.” 

“nonsense, how can you say so? but when you men have a point to carry, 
you never stick at anything. My sweet catherine, do support me; persuad 
your brother how imposs it is. tell him that it would quit shock 
you to see me do such a thing; now would not it?” 

“no, not at all; but if you think it wrong, you had much better change.” 

“there,” cri isabella, “you hear what your sister says, and yet you 
will not mind her. well, rememb that it is not my fault, if we set all 
the old ladi in bath in a bustle. come along, my dearest catherine, 
for heaven' sake, and stand by me.” and off they went, to regain 
their former place. john thorpe, in the meanwhile, had walk away; and 
catherine, ever will to give mr. tilney an opportun of repeat 
the agreeabl request which had alreadi flatter her once, made her 
way to mrs. allen and mrs. thorp as fast as she could, in the hope 
of find him still with them--a hope which, when it prove to be 
fruitless, she felt to have been highli unreasonable. “well, my dear,” 
said mrs. thorpe, impati for prais of her son, “I hope you have had 
an agreeabl partner.” 

“veri agreeable, madam.” 

“I am glad of it. john ha charm spirits, ha not he?” 

“did you meet mr. tilney, my dear?” said mrs. allen. 

“no, where is he?” 

“he wa with us just now, and said he wa so tire of loung about, 
that he wa resolv to go and dance; so I thought perhap he would ask 
you, if he met with you.” 

“where can he be?” said catherine, look round; but she had not look 
round long befor she saw him lead a young ladi to the dance. 

“ah! He ha got a partner; I wish he had ask you,” said mrs. allen; 
and after a short silence, she added, “he is a veri agreeabl young 
man.” 

“inde he is, mrs. allen,” said mrs. thorpe, smile complacently; “I 
must say it, though I am hi mother, that there is not a more agreeabl 
young man in the world.” 

thi inapplic answer might have been too much for the comprehens 
of many; but it did not puzzl mrs. allen, for after onli a moment' 
consideration, she said, in a whisper to catherine, “I dare say she 
thought I wa speak of her son.” 

catherin wa disappoint and vexed. she seem to have miss by so 
littl the veri object she had had in view; and thi persuas did not 
inclin her to a veri graciou reply, when john thorp came up to her 
soon afterward and said, “well, miss morland, I suppos you and I are 
to stand up and jig it togeth again.” 

“oh, no; I am much oblig to you, our two danc are over; and, 
besides, I am tired, and do not mean to danc ani more.” 

“do not you? then let us walk about and quiz people. come along with 
me, and I will show you the four greatest quizzer in the room; my two 
younger sister and their partners. I have been laugh at them thi 
half hour.” 

again catherin excus herself; and at last he walk off to quiz hi 
sister by himself. the rest of the even she found veri dull; mr. 
tilney wa drawn away from their parti at tea, to attend that of hi 
partner; miss tilney, though belong to it, did not sit near her, and 
jame and isabella were so much engag in convers togeth that the 
latter had no leisur to bestow more on her friend than one smile, one 
squeeze, and one “dearest catherine.” 




chapter 9 


the progress of catherine' unhappi from the event of the even 
wa as follows. It appear first in a gener dissatisfact with 
everybodi about her, while she remain in the rooms, which speedili 
brought on consider weari and a violent desir to go home. this, 
on arriv in pulteney street, took the direct of extraordinari 
hunger, and when that wa appeased, chang into an earnest long to 
be in bed; such wa the extrem point of her distress; for when there 
she immedi fell into a sound sleep which last nine hours, and 
from which she awok perfectli revived, in excel spirits, with fresh 
hope and fresh schemes. the first wish of her heart wa to improv her 
acquaint with miss tilney, and almost her first resolution, to seek 
her for that purpose, in the pump-room at noon. In the pump-room, one 
so newli arriv in bath must be met with, and that build she had 
alreadi found so favour for the discoveri of femal excellence, 
and the complet of femal intimacy, so admir adapt for secret 
discours and unlimit confidence, that she wa most reason 
encourag to expect anoth friend from within it walls. her plan 
for the morn thu settled, she sat quietli down to her book after 
breakfast, resolv to remain in the same place and the same employ 
till the clock struck one; and from habitud veri littl incommod by 
the remark and ejacul of mrs. allen, whose vacanc of mind and 
incapac for think were such, that as she never talk a great 
deal, so she could never be entir silent; and, therefore, while she 
sat at her work, if she lost her needl or broke her thread, if she 
heard a carriag in the street, or saw a speck upon her gown, she must 
observ it aloud, whether there were anyon at leisur to answer her or 
not. At about half past twelve, a remark loud rap drew her in hast 
to the window, and scarc had she time to inform catherin of there 
be two open carriag at the door, in the first onli a servant, 
her brother drive miss thorp in the second, befor john thorp came 
run upstairs, call out, “well, miss morland, here I am. have 
you been wait long? We could not come before; the old devil of a 
coachmak wa such an etern find out a thing fit to be got into, 
and now it is ten thousand to one but they break down befor we are out 
of the street. how do you do, mrs. allen? A famou ball last night, wa 
not it? come, miss morland, be quick, for the other are in a confound 
hurri to be off. they want to get their tumbl over.” 

“what do you mean?” said catherine. “where are you all go to?” 

“go to? why, you have not forgot our engagement! did not we agre 
togeth to take a drive thi morning? what a head you have! We are 
go up claverton down.” 

“someth wa said about it, I remember,” said catherine, look at 
mrs. allen for her opinion; “but realli I did not expect you.” 

“not expect me! that' a good one! and what a dust you would have made, 
if I had not come.” 

catherine' silent appeal to her friend, meanwhile, wa entir thrown 
away, for mrs. allen, not be at all in the habit of convey ani 
express herself by a look, wa not awar of it be ever intend 
by anybodi else; and catherine, whose desir of see miss tilney again 
could at that moment bear a short delay in favour of a drive, and who 
thought there could be no improprieti in her go with mr. thorpe, as 
isabella wa go at the same time with james, wa therefor oblig to 
speak plainer. “well, ma'am, what do you say to it? can you spare me for 
an hour or two? shall I go?” 

“do just as you please, my dear,” repli mrs. allen, with the most 
placid indifference. catherin took the advice, and ran off to get 
ready. In a veri few minut she reappeared, have scarc allow 
the two other time enough to get through a few short sentenc in her 
praise, after thorp had procur mrs. allen' admir of hi gig; 
and then receiv her friend' part good wishes, they both hurri 
downstairs. “mi dearest creature,” cri isabella, to whom the duti 
of friendship immedi call her befor she could get into the 
carriage, “you have been at least three hour get ready. I wa 
afraid you were ill. what a delight ball we had last night. I have a 
thousand thing to say to you; but make hast and get in, for I long to 
be off.” 

catherin follow her order and turn away, but not too soon to hear 
her friend exclaim aloud to james, “what a sweet girl she is! I quit 
dote on her.” 

“you will not be frightened, miss morland,” said thorpe, as he hand 
her in, “if my hors should danc about a littl at first set off. 
He will, most likely, give a plung or two, and perhap take the rest 
for a minute; but he will soon know hi master. He is full of spirits, 
play as can be, but there is no vice in him.” 

catherin did not think the portrait a veri invit one, but it wa too 
late to retreat, and she wa too young to own herself frightened; so, 
resign herself to her fate, and trust to the animal' boast 
knowledg of it owner, she sat peaceabl down, and saw thorp sit down 
by her. everyth be then arranged, the servant who stood at the 
horse' head wa bid in an import voic “to let him go,” and off they 
went in the quietest manner imaginable, without a plung or a caper, or 
anyth like one. catherine, delight at so happi an escape, spoke 
her pleasur aloud with grate surprise; and her companion immedi 
made the matter perfectli simpl by assur her that it wa entir 
owe to the peculiarli judici manner in which he had then held the 
reins, and the singular discern and dexter with which he had 
direct hi whip. catherine, though she could not help wonder that 
with such perfect command of hi horse, he should think it necessari to 
alarm her with a relat of it tricks, congratul herself sincer 
on be under the care of so excel a coachman; and perceiv that 
the anim continu to go on in the same quiet manner, without 
show the smallest propens toward ani unpleas vivacity, and 
(consid it inevit pace wa ten mile an hour) by no mean 
alarmingli fast, gave herself up to all the enjoy of air and 
exercis of the most invigor kind, in a fine mild day of february, 
with the conscious of safety. A silenc of sever minut succeed 
their first short dialogue; it wa broken by thorpe' say veri 
abruptly, “old allen is as rich as a jew--i not he?” catherin did not 
understand him--and he repeat hi question, ad in explanation, 
“old allen, the man you are with.” 

“oh! mr. allen, you mean. yes, I believe, he is veri rich.” 

“and no children at all?” 

“no--not any.” 

“A famou thing for hi next heirs. He is your godfather, is not he?” 

“mi godfather! no.” 

“but you are alway veri much with them.” 

“yes, veri much.” 

“aye, that is what I meant. He seem a good kind of old fellow enough, 
and ha live veri well in hi time, I dare say; he is not gouti for 
nothing. doe he drink hi bottl a day now?” 

“hi bottl a day! no. whi should you think of such a thing? He is a 
veri temper man, and you could not fanci him in liquor last night?” 

“lord help you! you women are alway think of men' be in liquor. 
why, you do not suppos a man is overset by a bottle? I am sure of 
this--that if everybodi wa to drink their bottl a day, there would not 
be half the disord in the world there are now. It would be a famou 
good thing for us all.” 

“I cannot believ it.” 

“oh! lord, it would be the save of thousands. there is not the 
hundredth part of the wine consum in thi kingdom that there ought to 
be. our foggi climat want help.” 

“and yet I have heard that there is a great deal of wine drunk in 
oxford.” 

“oxford! there is no drink at oxford now, I assur you. nobodi drink 
there. you would hardli meet with a man who goe beyond hi four pint 
at the utmost. now, for instance, it wa reckon a remark thing, at 
the last parti in my rooms, that upon an averag we clear about five 
pint a head. It wa look upon as someth out of the common way. 
mine is famou good stuff, to be sure. you would not often meet with 
anyth like it in oxford--and that may account for it. but thi will 
just give you a notion of the gener rate of drink there.” 

“yes, it doe give a notion,” said catherin warmly, “and that is, that 
you all drink a great deal more wine than I thought you did. however, I 
am sure jame doe not drink so much.” 

thi declar brought on a loud and overpow reply, of which 
no part wa veri distinct, except the frequent exclamations, amount 
almost to oaths, which adorn it, and catherin wa left, when it 
ended, with rather a strengthen belief of there be a great deal 
of wine drunk in oxford, and the same happi convict of her brother' 
compar sobriety. 

thorpe' idea then all revert to the merit of hi own equipage, and 
she wa call on to admir the spirit and freedom with which hi hors 
move along, and the eas which hi paces, as well as the excel of 
the springs, gave the motion of the carriage. she follow him in all 
hi admir as well as she could. To go befor or beyond him wa 
impossible. hi knowledg and her ignor of the subject, hi rapid 
of expression, and her diffid of herself put that out of her power; 
she could strike out noth new in commendation, but she readili echo 
whatev he chose to assert, and it wa final settl between them 
without ani difficulti that hi equipag wa altogeth the most 
complet of it kind in england, hi carriag the neatest, hi hors the 
best goer, and himself the best coachman. “you do not realli think, 
mr. thorpe,” said catherine, ventur after some time to consid the 
matter as entir decided, and to offer some littl variat on the 
subject, “that james' gig will break down?” 

“break down! oh! lord! did you ever see such a littl tittuppi thing in 
your life? there is not a sound piec of iron about it. the wheel have 
been fairli worn out these ten year at least--and as for the body! upon 
my soul, you might shake it to piec yourself with a touch. It is the 
most devilish littl ricketi busi I ever beheld! thank god! we 
have got a better. I would not be bound to go two mile in it for fifti 
thousand pounds.” 

“good heavens!” cri catherine, quit frightened. “then pray let us 
turn back; they will certainli meet with an accid if we go on. Do let 
us turn back, mr. thorpe; stop and speak to my brother, and tell him how 
veri unsaf it is.” 

“unsafe! oh, lord! what is there in that? they will onli get a roll if 
it doe break down; and there is plenti of dirt; it will be excel 
falling. oh, curs it! the carriag is safe enough, if a man know how 
to drive it; a thing of that sort in good hand will last abov twenti 
year after it is fairli worn out. lord bless you! I would undertak for 
five pound to drive it to york and back again, without lose a nail.” 

catherin listen with astonishment; she knew not how to reconcil two 
such veri differ account of the same thing; for she had not been 
brought up to understand the propens of a rattle, nor to know to 
how mani idl assert and impud falsehood the excess of vaniti 
will lead. her own famili were plain, matter-of-fact peopl who seldom 
aim at wit of ani kind; her father, at the utmost, be content 
with a pun, and her mother with a proverb; they were not in the habit 
therefor of tell lie to increas their importance, or of assert 
at one moment what they would contradict the next. she reflect on the 
affair for some time in much perplexity, and wa more than onc on the 
point of request from mr. thorp a clearer insight into hi real 
opinion on the subject; but she check herself, becaus it appear to 
her that he did not excel in give those clearer insights, in make 
those thing plain which he had befor made ambiguous; and, join to 
this, the consider that he would not realli suffer hi sister and 
hi friend to be expos to a danger from which he might easili preserv 
them, she conclud at last that he must know the carriag to be in fact 
perfectli safe, and therefor would alarm herself no longer. By him 
the whole matter seem entir forgotten; and all the rest of hi 
conversation, or rather talk, began and end with himself and hi own 
concerns. He told her of hors which he had bought for a trifl and 
sold for incred sums; of race matches, in which hi judgment had 
infal foretold the winner; of shoot parties, in which he had 
kill more bird (though without have one good shot) than all hi 
companion together; and describ to her some famou day' sport, with 
the fox-hounds, in which hi foresight and skill in direct the dog 
had repair the mistak of the most experienc huntsman, and in which 
the bold of hi riding, though it had never endang hi own life 
for a moment, had been constantli lead other into difficulties, 
which he calmli conclud had broken the neck of many. 

littl as catherin wa in the habit of judg for herself, and unfix 
as were her gener notion of what men ought to be, she could not 
entir repress a doubt, while she bore with the effus of hi 
endless conceit, of hi be altogeth complet agreeable. It wa a 
bold surmise, for he wa isabella' brother; and she had been assur by 
jame that hi manner would recommend him to all her sex; but in spite 
of this, the extrem weari of hi company, which crept over her 
befor they had been out an hour, and which continu unceasingli to 
increas till they stop in pulteney street again, induc her, in 
some small degree, to resist such high authority, and to distrust hi 
power of give univers pleasure. 

when they arriv at mrs. allen' door, the astonish of isabella wa 
hardli to be expressed, on find that it wa too late in the day for 
them to attend her friend into the house: “past three o'clock!” It wa 
inconceivable, incredible, impossible! and she would neither believ her 
own watch, nor her brother's, nor the servant's; she would believ no 
assur of it found on reason or reality, till morland produc hi 
watch, and ascertain the fact; to have doubt a moment longer then 
would have been equal inconceivable, incredible, and impossible; and 
she could onli protest, over and over again, that no two hour and a 
half had ever gone off so swiftli before, as catherin wa call on to 
confirm; catherin could not tell a falsehood even to pleas isabella; 
but the latter wa spare the miseri of her friend' dissent voice, 
by not wait for her answer. her own feel entir engross 
her; her wretched wa most acut on find herself oblig to go 
directli home. It wa age sinc she had had a moment' convers 
with her dearest catherine; and, though she had such thousand of thing 
to say to her, it appear as if they were never to be togeth again; 
so, with smile of most exquisit misery, and the laugh eye of utter 
despondency, she bade her friend adieu and went on. 

catherin found mrs. allen just return from all the busi idl of 
the morning, and wa immedi greet with, “well, my dear, here 
you are,” a truth which she had no greater inclin than power to 
dispute; “and I hope you have had a pleasant airing?” 

“yes, ma'am, I thank you; we could not have had a nicer day.” 

“so mrs. thorp said; she wa vastli pleas at your all going.” 

“you have seen mrs. thorpe, then?” 

“yes, I went to the pump-room as soon as you were gone, and there I met 
her, and we had a great deal of talk together. she say there wa hardli 
ani veal to be got at market thi morning, it is so uncommonli scarce.” 

“did you see anybodi els of our acquaintance?” 

“yes; we agre to take a turn in the crescent, and there we met mrs. 
hughes, and mr. and miss tilney walk with her.” 

“did you indeed? and did they speak to you?” 

“yes, we walk along the crescent togeth for half an hour. they seem 
veri agreeabl people. miss tilney wa in a veri pretti spot 
muslin, and I fancy, by what I can learn, that she alway dress veri 
handsomely. mrs. hugh talk to me a great deal about the family.” 

“and what did she tell you of them?” 

“oh! A vast deal indeed; she hardli talk of anyth else.” 

“did she tell you what part of gloucestershir they come from?” 

“yes, she did; but I cannot recollect now. but they are veri good kind 
of people, and veri rich. mrs. tilney wa a miss drummond, and she 
and mrs. hugh were schoolfellows; and miss drummond had a veri larg 
fortune; and, when she married, her father gave her twenti thousand 
pounds, and five hundr to buy wedding-clothes. mrs. hugh saw all the 
cloth after they came from the warehouse.” 

“and are mr. and mrs. tilney in bath?” 

“yes, I fanci they are, but I am not quit certain. upon recollection, 
however, I have a notion they are both dead; at least the mother is; 
yes, I am sure mrs. tilney is dead, becaus mrs. hugh told me there 
wa a veri beauti set of pearl that mr. drummond gave hi daughter 
on her wedding-day and that miss tilney ha got now, for they were put 
by for her when her mother died.” 

“and is mr. tilney, my partner, the onli son?” 

“I cannot be quit posit about that, my dear; I have some idea he is; 
but, however, he is a veri fine young man, mrs. hugh says, and like 
to do veri well.” 

catherin inquir no further; she had heard enough to feel that 
mrs. allen had no real intellig to give, and that she wa most 
particularli unfortun herself in have miss such a meet with 
both brother and sister. could she have foreseen such a circumstance, 
noth should have persuad her to go out with the others; and, as 
it was, she could onli lament her ill luck, and think over what she had 
lost, till it wa clear to her that the drive had by no mean been veri 
pleasant and that john thorp himself wa quit disagreeable. 




chapter 10 


the allens, thorpes, and morland all met in the even at the 
theatre; and, as catherin and isabella sat together, there wa then an 
opportun for the latter to utter some few of the mani thousand 
thing which had been collect within her for commun in the 
immeasur length of time which had divid them. “oh, heavens! 
My belov catherine, have I got you at last?” wa her address on 
catherine' enter the box and sit by her. “now, mr. morland,” for 
he wa close to her on the other side, “I shall not speak anoth word 
to you all the rest of the evening; so I charg you not to expect it. My 
sweetest catherine, how have you been thi long age? but I need not ask 
you, for you look delightfully. you realli have done your hair in a 
more heavenli style than ever; you mischiev creature, do you want to 
attract everybody? I assur you, my brother is quit in love with you 
already; and as for mr. tilney--but that is a settl thing--even your 
modesti cannot doubt hi attach now; hi come back to bath make 
it too plain. oh! what would not I give to see him! I realli am quit 
wild with impatience. My mother say he is the most delight young man 
in the world; she saw him thi morning, you know; you must introduc him 
to me. Is he in the hous now? look about, for heaven' sake! I assur 
you, I can hardli exist till I see him.” 

“no,” said catherine, “he is not here; I cannot see him anywhere.” 

“oh, horrid! Am I never to be acquaint with him? how do you like my 
gown? I think it doe not look amiss; the sleev were entir my own 
thought. Do you know, I get so immoder sick of bath; your brother 
and I were agre thi morn that, though it is vastli well to be 
here for a few weeks, we would not live here for millions. We soon found 
out that our tast were exactli alik in prefer the countri to 
everi other place; really, our opinion were so exactli the same, it wa 
quit ridiculous! there wa not a singl point in which we differed; I 
would not have had you by for the world; you are such a sli thing, I am 
sure you would have made some droll remark or other about it.” 

“no, inde I should not.” 

“oh, ye you would indeed; I know you better than you know yourself. you 
would have told us that we seem born for each other, or some nonsens 
of that kind, which would have distress me beyond conception; my 
cheek would have been as red as your roses; I would not have had you by 
for the world.” 

“inde you do me injustice; I would not have made so improp a remark 
upon ani account; and besides, I am sure it would never have enter my 
head.” 

isabella smile incredul and talk the rest of the even to 
james. 

catherine' resolut of endeavour to meet miss tilney again 
continu in full forc the next morning; and till the usual moment of 
go to the pump-room, she felt some alarm from the dread of a second 
prevention. but noth of that kind occurred, no visitor appear to 
delay them, and they all three set off in good time for the pump-room, 
where the ordinari cours of event and convers took place; mr. 
allen, after drink hi glass of water, join some gentlemen to 
talk over the polit of the day and compar the account of their 
newspapers; and the ladi walk about together, notic everi new 
face, and almost everi new bonnet in the room. the femal part of the 
thorp family, attend by jame morland, appear among the crowd in 
less than a quarter of an hour, and catherin immedi took her 
usual place by the side of her friend. james, who wa now in constant 
attendance, maintain a similar position, and separ themselv 
from the rest of their party, they walk in that manner for some 
time, till catherin began to doubt the happi of a situat which, 
confin her entir to her friend and brother, gave her veri 
littl share in the notic of either. they were alway engag in 
some sentiment discuss or live dispute, but their sentiment wa 
convey in such whisper voices, and their vivac attend with 
so much laughter, that though catherine' support opinion wa not 
unfrequ call for by one or the other, she wa never abl to give 
any, from not have heard a word of the subject. At length howev 
she wa empow to disengag herself from her friend, by the avow 
necess of speak to miss tilney, whom she most joy saw just 
enter the room with mrs. hughes, and whom she instantli joined, with 
a firmer determin to be acquainted, than she might have had courag 
to command, had she not been urg by the disappoint of the day 
before. miss tilney met her with great civility, return her advanc 
with equal goodwill, and they continu talk togeth as long as 
both parti remain in the room; and though in all probabl not 
an observ wa made, nor an express use by either which had not 
been made and use some thousand of time before, under that roof, in 
everi bath season, yet the merit of their be spoken with simplic 
and truth, and without person conceit, might be someth uncommon. 

“how well your brother dances!” wa an artless exclam of 
catherine' toward the close of their conversation, which at onc 
surpris and amus her companion. 

“henry!” she repli with a smile. “yes, he doe danc veri well.” 

“he must have thought it veri odd to hear me say I wa engag the other 
evening, when he saw me sit down. but I realli had been engag 
the whole day to mr. thorpe.” miss tilney could onli bow. “you cannot 
think,” ad catherin after a moment' silence, “how surpris I wa 
to see him again. I felt so sure of hi be quit gone away.” 

“when henri had the pleasur of see you before, he wa in bath but 
for a coupl of days. He came onli to engag lodg for us.” 

“that never occur to me; and of course, not see him anywhere, I 
thought he must be gone. wa not the young ladi he danc with on monday 
a miss smith?” 

“yes, an acquaint of mrs. hughes.” 

“I dare say she wa veri glad to dance. Do you think her pretty?” 

“not very.” 

“he never come to the pump-room, I suppose?” 

“yes, sometimes; but he ha rid out thi morn with my father.” 

mrs. hugh now join them, and ask miss tilney if she wa readi to 
go. “I hope I shall have the pleasur of see you again soon,” said 
catherine. “shall you be at the cotillion ball tomorrow?” 

“perhap we--yes, I think we certainli shall.” 

“I am glad of it, for we shall all be there.” thi civil wa duli 
returned; and they parted--on miss tilney' side with some knowledg 
of her new acquaintance' feelings, and on catherine's, without the 
smallest conscious of have explain them. 

she went home veri happy. the morn had answer all her hopes, and 
the even of the follow day wa now the object of expectation, 
the futur good. what gown and what head-dress she should wear on the 
occas becam her chief concern. she cannot be justifi in it. dress 
is at all time a frivol distinction, and excess solicitud about 
it often destroy it own aim. catherin knew all thi veri well; her 
great aunt had read her a lectur on the subject onli the christma 
before; and yet she lay awak ten minut on wednesday night debat 
between her spot and her tambour muslin, and noth but the 
short of the time prevent her buy a new one for the evening. 
thi would have been an error in judgment, great though not uncommon, 
from which one of the other sex rather than her own, a brother rather 
than a great aunt, might have warn her, for man onli can be awar of 
the insens of man toward a new gown. It would be mortifi to 
the feel of mani ladies, could they be made to understand how littl 
the heart of man is affect by what is costli or new in their attire; 
how littl it is bias by the textur of their muslin, and how 
unsuscept of peculiar tender toward the spotted, the sprigged, 
the mull, or the jackonet. woman is fine for her own satisfact alone. 
No man will admir her the more, no woman will like her the better for 
it. neat and fashion are enough for the former, and a someth of 
shabbi or improprieti will be most endear to the latter. but not 
one of these grave reflect troubl the tranquil of catherine. 

she enter the room on thursday even with feel veri differ 
from what had attend her thither the monday before. she had then been 
exult in her engag to thorpe, and wa now chiefli anxiou to 
avoid hi sight, lest he should engag her again; for though she could 
not, dare not expect that mr. tilney should ask her a third time to 
dance, her wishes, hopes, and plan all centr in noth less. everi 
young ladi may feel for my heroin in thi critic moment, for everi 
young ladi ha at some time or other known the same agitation. all have 
been, or at least all have believ themselv to be, in danger from the 
pursuit of someon whom they wish to avoid; and all have been anxiou 
for the attent of someon whom they wish to please. As soon as 
they were join by the thorpes, catherine' agoni began; she fidget 
about if john thorp came toward her, hid herself as much as possibl 
from hi view, and when he spoke to her pretend not to hear him. the 
cotillion were over, the country-danc beginning, and she saw noth 
of the tilneys. 

“do not be frightened, my dear catherine,” whisper isabella, “but I am 
realli go to danc with your brother again. I declar posit it 
is quit shocking. I tell him he ought to be asham of himself, but you 
and john must keep us in countenance. make haste, my dear creature, and 
come to us. john is just walk off, but he will be back in a moment.” 

catherin had neither time nor inclin to answer. the other walk 
away, john thorp wa still in view, and she gave herself up for lost. 
that she might not appear, however, to observ or expect him, she kept 
her eye intent fix on her fan; and a self-condemn for her 
folly, in suppos that among such a crowd they should even meet with 
the tilney in ani reason time, had just pass through her mind, 
when she suddenli found herself address and again solicit to dance, 
by mr. tilney himself. with what sparkl eye and readi motion she 
grant hi request, and with how pleas a flutter of heart she went 
with him to the set, may be easili imagined. To escape, and, as 
she believed, so narrowli escap john thorpe, and to be asked, so 
immedi on hi join her, ask by mr. tilney, as if he had sought 
her on purpose!--it did not appear to her that life could suppli ani 
greater felicity. 

scarc had they work themselv into the quiet possess of a 
place, however, when her attent wa claim by john thorpe, who stood 
behind her. “heyday, miss morland!” said he. “what is the mean of 
this? I thought you and I were to danc together.” 

“I wonder you should think so, for you never ask me.” 

“that is a good one, by jove! I ask you as soon as I came into the 
room, and I wa just go to ask you again, but when I turn round, 
you were gone! thi is a curs shabbi trick! I onli came for the sake 
of danc with you, and I firmli believ you were engag to me ever 
sinc monday. yes; I remember, I ask you while you were wait in the 
lobbi for your cloak. and here have I been tell all my acquaint 
that I wa go to danc with the prettiest girl in the room; and 
when they see you stand up with somebodi else, they will quiz me 
famously.” 

“oh, no; they will never think of me, after such a descript as that.” 

“bi heavens, if they do not, I will kick them out of the room for 
blockheads. what chap have you there?” catherin satisfi hi 
curiosity. “tilney,” he repeated. “hum--i do not know him. A good figur 
of a man; well put together. doe he want a horse? here is a friend 
of mine, sam fletcher, ha got one to sell that would suit anybody. A 
famou clever anim for the road--onli forti guineas. I had fifti mind 
to buy it myself, for it is one of my maxim alway to buy a good hors 
when I meet with one; but it would not answer my purpose, it would not 
do for the field. I would give ani money for a real good hunter. I 
have three now, the best that ever were backed. I would not take 
eight hundr guinea for them. fletcher and I mean to get a hous in 
leicestershire, against the next season. It is so d--uncomfortable, 
live at an inn.” 

thi wa the last sentenc by which he could weari catherine' 
attention, for he wa just then born off by the resistless pressur of 
a long string of pass ladies. her partner now drew near, and said, 
“that gentleman would have put me out of patience, had he stay with 
you half a minut longer. He ha no busi to withdraw the attent 
of my partner from me. We have enter into a contract of mutual 
agreeabl for the space of an evening, and all our agreeabl 
belong sole to each other for that time. nobodi can fasten themselv 
on the notic of one, without injur the right of the other. 
I consid a country-d as an emblem of marriage. fidel and 
complais are the princip duti of both; and those men who do not 
choos to danc or marri themselves, have no busi with the partner 
or wive of their neighbours.” 

“but they are such veri differ things!” 

“--that you think they cannot be compar together.” 

“to be sure not. peopl that marri can never part, but must go and keep 
hous together. peopl that danc onli stand opposit each other in a 
long room for half an hour.” 

“and such is your definit of matrimoni and dancing. taken in that 
light certainly, their resembl is not striking; but I think I could 
place them in such a view. you will allow, that in both, man ha the 
advantag of choice, woman onli the power of refusal; that in both, 
it is an engag between man and woman, form for the advantag of 
each; and that when onc enter into, they belong exclus to each 
other till the moment of it dissolution; that it is their duty, each 
to endeavour to give the other no caus for wish that he or she had 
bestow themselv elsewhere, and their best interest to keep their own 
imagin from wander toward the perfect of their neighbours, 
or fanci that they should have been better off with anyon else. you 
will allow all this?” 

“yes, to be sure, as you state it, all thi sound veri well; but still 
they are so veri different. I cannot look upon them at all in the same 
light, nor think the same duti belong to them.” 

“in one respect, there certainli is a difference. In marriage, the man 
is suppos to provid for the support of the woman, the woman to make 
the home agreeabl to the man; he is to purvey, and she is to smile. 
but in dancing, their duti are exactli changed; the agreeableness, the 
complianc are expect from him, while she furnish the fan and the 
lavend water. that, I suppose, wa the differ of duti which 
struck you, as render the condit incap of comparison.” 

“no, indeed, I never thought of that.” 

“then I am quit at a loss. one thing, however, I must observe. thi 
disposit on your side is rather alarming. you total disallow ani 
similar in the obligations; and may I not thenc infer that your 
notion of the duti of the danc state are not so strict as your 
partner might wish? have I not reason to fear that if the gentleman who 
spoke to you just now were to return, or if ani other gentleman were to 
address you, there would be noth to restrain you from convers with 
him as long as you chose?” 

“mr. thorp is such a veri particular friend of my brother's, that if he 
talk to me, I must talk to him again; but there are hardli three young 
men in the room besid him that I have ani acquaint with.” 

“and is that to be my onli security? alas, alas!” 

“nay, I am sure you cannot have a better; for if I do not know anybody, 
it is imposs for me to talk to them; and, besides, I do not want to 
talk to anybody.” 

“now you have given me a secur worth having; and I shall proceed 
with courage. Do you find bath as agreeabl as when I had the honour of 
make the inquiri before?” 

“yes, quite--mor so, indeed.” 

“more so! take care, or you will forget to be tire of it at the proper 
time. you ought to be tire at the end of six weeks.” 

“I do not think I should be tired, if I were to stay here six months.” 

“bath, compar with london, ha littl variety, and so everybodi find 
out everi year. 'for six weeks, I allow bath is pleasant enough; but 
beyond that, it is the most tiresom place in the world.' you would be 
told so by peopl of all descriptions, who come regularli everi winter, 
lengthen their six week into ten or twelve, and go away at last becaus 
they can afford to stay no longer.” 

“well, other peopl must judg for themselves, and those who go to 
london may think noth of bath. but I, who live in a small retir 
villag in the country, can never find greater same in such a place 
as thi than in my own home; for here are a varieti of amusements, a 
varieti of thing to be seen and done all day long, which I can know 
noth of there.” 

“you are not fond of the country.” 

“yes, I am. I have alway live there, and alway been veri happy. but 
certainli there is much more same in a countri life than in a bath 
life. one day in the countri is exactli like another.” 

“but then you spend your time so much more ration in the country.” 

“do i?” 

“do you not?” 

“I do not believ there is much difference.” 

“here you are in pursuit onli of amus all day long.” 

“and so I am at home--onli I do not find so much of it. I walk about 
here, and so I do there; but here I see a varieti of peopl in everi 
street, and there I can onli go and call on mrs. allen.” 

mr. tilney wa veri much amused. 

“onli go and call on mrs. allen!” he repeated. “what a pictur of 
intellectu poverty! however, when you sink into thi abyss again, you 
will have more to say. you will be abl to talk of bath, and of all that 
you did here.” 

“oh! yes. I shall never be in want of someth to talk of again to mrs. 
allen, or anybodi else. I realli believ I shall alway be talk of 
bath, when I am at home again--i do like it so veri much. If I could but 
have papa and mamma, and the rest of them here, I suppos I should be 
too happy! james' come (mi eldest brother) is quit delightful--and 
especi as it turn out that the veri famili we are just got so 
intim with are hi intim friend already. oh! who can ever be 
tire of bath?” 

“not those who bring such fresh feel of everi sort to it as you do. 
but papa and mammas, and brothers, and intim friend are a good deal 
gone by, to most of the frequent of bath--and the honest relish of 
ball and plays, and everyday sights, is past with them.” here 
their convers closed, the demand of the danc becom now too 
importun for a divid attention. 

soon after their reach the bottom of the set, catherin perceiv 
herself to be earnestli regard by a gentleman who stood among the 
lookers-on, immedi behind her partner. He wa a veri handsom man, 
of a command aspect, past the bloom, but not past the vigour of 
life; and with hi eye still direct toward her, she saw him present 
address mr. tilney in a familiar whisper. confus by hi notice, and 
blush from the fear of it be excit by someth wrong in 
her appearance, she turn away her head. but while she did so, the 
gentleman retreated, and her partner, come nearer, said, “I see that 
you guess what I have just been asked. that gentleman know your name, 
and you have a right to know his. It is gener tilney, my father.” 

catherine' answer wa onli “oh!”--but it wa an “oh!” express 
everyth needful: attent to hi words, and perfect relianc on 
their truth. with real interest and strong admir did her eye now 
follow the general, as he move through the crowd, and “how handsom a 
famili they are!” wa her secret remark. 

In chat with miss tilney befor the even concluded, a new sourc 
of felic aros to her. she had never taken a countri walk sinc 
her arriv in bath. miss tilney, to whom all the commonli frequent 
environ were familiar, spoke of them in term which made her all 
eager to know them too; and on her openli fear that she might 
find nobodi to go with her, it wa propos by the brother and sister 
that they should join in a walk, some morn or other. “I shall like 
it,” she cried, “beyond anyth in the world; and do not let us put 
it off--let us go tomorrow.” thi wa readili agre to, with onli a 
proviso of miss tilney's, that it did not rain, which catherin wa sure 
it would not. At twelv o'clock, they were to call for her in pulteney 
street; and “remember--twelv o'clock,” wa her part speech to 
her new friend. Of her other, her older, her more establish friend, 
isabella, of whose fidel and worth she had enjoy a fortnight' 
experience, she scarc saw anyth dure the evening. yet, though 
long to make her acquaint with her happiness, she cheer 
submit to the wish of mr. allen, which took them rather earli away, 
and her spirit danc within her, as she danc in her chair all the 
way home. 




chapter 11 


the morrow brought a veri sober-look morning, the sun make onli 
a few effort to appear, and catherin augur from it everyth most 
favour to her wishes. A bright morn so earli in the year, 
she allowed, would gener turn to rain, but a cloudi one foretold 
improv as the day advanced. she appli to mr. allen for 
confirm of her hopes, but mr. allen, not have hi own sky and 
baromet about him, declin give ani absolut promis of sunshine. 
she appli to mrs. allen, and mrs. allen' opinion wa more positive. 
“she had no doubt in the world of it be a veri fine day, if the 
cloud would onli go off, and the sun keep out.” 

At about eleven o'clock, however, a few speck of small rain upon the 
window caught catherine' watch eye, and “oh! dear, I do believ it 
will be wet,” broke from her in a most despond tone. 

“I thought how it would be,” said mrs. allen. 

“no walk for me today,” sigh catherine; “but perhap it may come to 
nothing, or it may hold up befor twelve.” 

“perhap it may, but then, my dear, it will be so dirty.” 

“oh! that will not signify; I never mind dirt.” 

“no,” repli her friend veri placidly, “I know you never mind dirt.” 

after a short pause, “it come on faster and faster!” said catherine, as 
she stood watch at a window. 

“so it doe indeed. If it keep raining, the street will be veri wet.” 

“there are four umbrella up already. how I hate the sight of an 
umbrella!” 

“they are disagre thing to carry. I would much rather take a chair 
at ani time.” 

“it wa such a nice-look morning! I felt so convinc it would be 
dry!” 

“anybodi would have thought so indeed. there will be veri few peopl in 
the pump-room, if it rain all the morning. I hope mr. allen will put 
on hi greatcoat when he goes, but I dare say he will not, for he had 
rather do anyth in the world than walk out in a greatcoat; I wonder 
he should dislik it, it must be so comfortable.” 

the rain continued--fast, though not heavy. catherin went everi five 
minut to the clock, threaten on each return that, if it still 
kept on rain anoth five minutes, she would give up the matter as 
hopeless. the clock struck twelve, and it still rained. “you will not be 
abl to go, my dear.” 

“I do not quit despair yet. I shall not give it up till a quarter after 
twelve. thi is just the time of day for it to clear up, and I do think 
it look a littl lighter. there, it is twenti minut after twelve, and 
now I shall give it up entirely. oh! that we had such weather here 
as they had at udolpho, or at least in tuscani and the south of 
france!--th night that poor st. aubin died!--such beauti weather!” 

At half past twelve, when catherine' anxiou attent to the weather 
wa over and she could no longer claim ani merit from it amendment, the 
sky began voluntarili to clear. A gleam of sunshin took her quit by 
surprise; she look round; the cloud were parting, and she instantli 
return to the window to watch over and encourag the happi appearance. 
ten minut more made it certain that a bright afternoon would succeed, 
and justifi the opinion of mrs. allen, who had “alway thought it 
would clear up.” but whether catherin might still expect her friends, 
whether there had not been too much rain for miss tilney to venture, 
must yet be a question. 

It wa too dirti for mrs. allen to accompani her husband to the 
pump-room; he accordingli set off by himself, and catherin had bare 
watch him down the street when her notic wa claim by the approach 
of the same two open carriages, contain the same three peopl that 
had surpris her so much a few morn back. 

“isabella, my brother, and mr. thorpe, I declare! they are come for 
me perhaps--but I shall not go--i cannot go indeed, for you know miss 
tilney may still call.” mrs. allen agre to it. john thorp wa soon 
with them, and hi voic wa with them yet sooner, for on the stair he 
wa call out to miss morland to be quick. “make haste! make haste!” 
as he threw open the door. “put on your hat thi moment--ther is no 
time to be lost--w are go to bristol. how d'ye do, mrs. allen?” 

“to bristol! Is not that a great way off? but, however, I cannot go with 
you today, becaus I am engaged; I expect some friend everi moment.” 
thi wa of cours vehement talk down as no reason at all; mrs. 
allen wa call on to second him, and the two other walk in, to give 
their assistance. “mi sweetest catherine, is not thi delightful? We 
shall have a most heavenli drive. you are to thank your brother and me 
for the scheme; it dart into our head at breakfast-time, I verili 
believ at the same instant; and we should have been off two hour ago 
if it had not been for thi detest rain. but it doe not signify, 
the night are moonlight, and we shall do delightfully. oh! I am in such 
ecstasi at the thought of a littl countri air and quiet! So much 
better than go to the lower rooms. We shall drive directli to clifton 
and dine there; and, as soon as dinner is over, if there is time for it, 
go on to kingsweston.” 

“I doubt our be abl to do so much,” said morland. 

“you croak fellow!” cri thorpe. “we shall be abl to do ten time 
more. kingsweston! aye, and blaiz castl too, and anyth els we can 
hear of; but here is your sister say she will not go.” 

“blaiz castle!” cri catherine. “what is that?” 

“the finest place in england--worth go fifti mile at ani time to 
see.” 

“what, is it realli a castle, an old castle?” 

“the oldest in the kingdom.” 

“but is it like what one read of?” 

“exactly--th veri same.” 

“but now really--ar there tower and long galleries?” 

“bi dozens.” 

“then I should like to see it; but I cannot--i cannot go.” 

“not go! My belov creature, what do you mean?” 

“I cannot go, because”--look down as she spoke, fear of isabella' 
smile--“i expect miss tilney and her brother to call on me to take a 
countri walk. they promis to come at twelve, onli it rained; but now, 
as it is so fine, I dare say they will be here soon.” 

“not they indeed,” cri thorpe; “for, as we turn into broad street, I 
saw them--do he not drive a phaeton with bright chestnuts?” 

“I do not know indeed.” 

“yes, I know he does; I saw him. you are talk of the man you danc 
with last night, are not you?” 

“yes.” 

“well, I saw him at that moment turn up the lansdown road, drive a 
smart-look girl.” 

“did you indeed?” 

“did upon my soul; knew him again directly, and he seem to have got 
some veri pretti cattl too.” 

“it is veri odd! but I suppos they thought it would be too dirti for a 
walk.” 

“and well they might, for I never saw so much dirt in my life. walk! 
you could no more walk than you could fly! It ha not been so dirti the 
whole winter; it is ankle-deep everywhere.” 

isabella corrobor it: “mi dearest catherine, you cannot form an idea 
of the dirt; come, you must go; you cannot refus go now.” 

“I should like to see the castle; but may we go all over it? may we go 
up everi staircase, and into everi suit of rooms?” 

“yes, yes, everi hole and corner.” 

“but then, if they should onli be gone out for an hour till it is dryer, 
and call by and by?” 

“make yourself easy, there is no danger of that, for I heard tilney 
halloo to a man who wa just pass by on horseback, that they were 
go as far as wick rocks.” 

“then I will. shall I go, mrs. allen?” 

“just as you please, my dear.” 

“mrs. allen, you must persuad her to go,” wa the gener cry. mrs. 
allen wa not inattent to it: “well, my dear,” said she, “suppos you 
go.” and in two minut they were off. 

catherine' feelings, as she got into the carriage, were in a veri 
unsettl state; divid between regret for the loss of one great 
pleasure, and the hope of soon enjoy another, almost it equal in 
degree, howev unlik in kind. she could not think the tilney had 
act quit well by her, in so readili give up their engagement, 
without send her ani messag of excuse. It wa now but an hour later 
than the time fix on for the begin of their walk; and, in spite of 
what she had heard of the prodigi accumul of dirt in the cours 
of that hour, she could not from her own observ help think that 
they might have gone with veri littl inconvenience. To feel herself 
slight by them wa veri painful. On the other hand, the delight of 
explor an edific like udolpho, as her fanci repres blaiz 
castl to be, wa such a counterpois of good as might consol her for 
almost anything. 

they pass briskli down pulteney street, and through laura place, 
without the exchang of mani words. thorp talk to hi horse, and she 
meditated, by turns, on broken promis and broken arches, phaeton 
and fals hangings, tilney and trap-doors. As they enter argyl 
buildings, however, she wa rous by thi address from her companion, 
“who is that girl who look at you so hard as she went by?” 

“who? where?” 

“on the right-hand pavement--sh must be almost out of sight now.” 
catherin look round and saw miss tilney lean on her brother' arm, 
walk slowli down the street. she saw them both look back at her. 
“stop, stop, mr. thorpe,” she impati cried; “it is miss tilney; it 
is indeed. how could you tell me they were gone? stop, stop, I will 
get out thi moment and go to them.” but to what purpos did she speak? 
thorp onli lash hi hors into a brisker trot; the tilneys, who had 
soon ceas to look after her, were in a moment out of sight round the 
corner of laura place, and in anoth moment she wa herself whisk 
into the marketplace. still, however, and dure the length of anoth 
street, she entreat him to stop. “pray, pray stop, mr. thorpe. I 
cannot go on. I will not go on. I must go back to miss tilney.” but mr. 
thorp onli laughed, smack hi whip, encourag hi horse, made odd 
noises, and drove on; and catherine, angri and vex as she was, have 
no power of get away, wa oblig to give up the point and submit. 
her reproaches, however, were not spared. “how could you deceiv me so, 
mr. thorpe? how could you say that you saw them drive up the lansdown 
road? I would not have had it happen so for the world. they must think 
it so strange, so rude of me! To go by them, too, without say a word! 
you do not know how vex I am; I shall have no pleasur at clifton, nor 
in anyth else. I had rather, ten thousand time rather, get out now, 
and walk back to them. how could you say you saw them drive out in a 
phaeton?” thorp defend himself veri stoutly, declar he had never 
seen two men so much alik in hi life, and would hardli give up the 
point of it have been tilney himself. 

their drive, even when thi subject wa over, wa not like to be veri 
agreeable. catherine' complais wa no longer what it had been in 
their former airing. she listen reluctantly, and her repli were 
short. blaiz castl remain her onli comfort; toward that, she still 
look at interv with pleasure; though rather than be disappoint of 
the promis walk, and especi rather than be thought ill of by the 
tilneys, she would willingli have given up all the happi which it 
wall could supply--th happi of a progress through a long suit of 
lofti rooms, exhibit the remain of magnific furniture, though 
now for mani year deserted--th happi of be stop in their way 
along narrow, wind vaults, by a low, grate door; or even of have 
their lamp, their onli lamp, extinguish by a sudden gust of wind, and 
of be left in total darkness. In the meanwhile, they proceed on 
their journey without ani mischance, and were within view of the town 
of keynsham, when a halloo from morland, who wa behind them, made hi 
friend pull up, to know what wa the matter. the other then came close 
enough for conversation, and morland said, “we had better go back, 
thorpe; it is too late to go on today; your sister think so as well as 
I. We have been exactli an hour come from pulteney street, veri littl 
more than seven miles; and, I suppose, we have at least eight more to 
go. It will never do. We set out a great deal too late. We had much 
better put it off till anoth day, and turn round.” 

“it is all one to me,” repli thorp rather angrily; and instantli 
turn hi horse, they were on their way back to bath. 

“if your brother had not got such a d--beast to drive,” said he soon 
afterwards, “we might have done it veri well. My hors would have 
trot to clifton within the hour, if left to himself, and I have 
almost broke my arm with pull him in to that curs broken-wind 
jade' pace. morland is a fool for not keep a hors and gig of hi 
own.” 

“no, he is not,” said catherin warmly, “for I am sure he could not 
afford it.” 

“and whi cannot he afford it?” 

“becaus he ha not money enough.” 

“and whose fault is that?” 

“nobody's, that I know of.” thorp then said someth in the loud, 
incoher way to which he had often recourse, about it be a 
d--thing to be miserly; and that if peopl who roll in money could not 
afford things, he did not know who could, which catherin did not even 
endeavour to understand. disappoint of what wa to have been the 
consol for her first disappointment, she wa less and less dispos 
either to be agreeabl herself or to find her companion so; and they 
return to pulteney street without her speak twenti words. 

As she enter the house, the footman told her that a gentleman and ladi 
had call and inquir for her a few minut after her set off; 
that, when he told them she wa gone out with mr. thorpe, the ladi had 
ask whether ani messag had been left for her; and on hi say no, 
had felt for a card, but said she had none about her, and went away. 
ponder over these heart-rend tidings, catherin walk slowli 
upstairs. At the head of them she wa met by mr. allen, who, on hear 
the reason of their speedi return, said, “I am glad your brother had so 
much sense; I am glad you are come back. It wa a strange, wild scheme.” 

they all spent the even togeth at thorpe's. catherin wa disturb 
and out of spirits; but isabella seem to find a pool of commerce, in 
the fate of which she shared, by privat partnership with morland, a 
veri good equival for the quiet and countri air of an inn at clifton. 
her satisfaction, too, in not be at the lower room wa spoken more 
than once. “how I piti the poor creatur that are go there! how glad 
I am that I am not amongst them! I wonder whether it will be a full ball 
or not! they have not begun danc yet. I would not be there for 
all the world. It is so delight to have an even now and then 
to oneself. I dare say it will not be a veri good ball. I know the 
mitchel will not be there. I am sure I piti everybodi that is. but I 
dare say, mr. morland, you long to be at it, do not you? I am sure you 
do. well, pray do not let anybodi here be a restraint on you. I dare say 
we could do veri well without you; but you men think yourselv of such 
consequence.” 

catherin could almost have accus isabella of be want in 
tender toward herself and her sorrows, so veri littl did they 
appear to dwell on her mind, and so veri inadequ wa the comfort she 
offered. “do not be so dull, my dearest creature,” she whispered. “you 
will quit break my heart. It wa amazingli shocking, to be sure; but 
the tilney were entir to blame. whi were not they more punctual? 
It wa dirty, indeed, but what did that signify? I am sure john and I 
should not have mind it. I never mind go through anything, where a 
friend is concerned; that is my disposition, and john is just the same; 
he ha amaz strong feelings. good heavens! what a delight hand you 
have got! kings, I vow! I never wa so happi in my life! I would fifti 
time rather you should have them than myself.” 

and now I may dismiss my heroin to the sleepless couch, which is the 
true heroine' portion; to a pillow strew with thorn and wet with 
tears. and lucki may she think herself, if she get anoth good night' 
rest in the cours of the next three months. 




chapter 12 


“mrs. allen,” said catherin the next morning, “will there be ani harm 
in my call on miss tilney today? I shall not be easi till I have 
explain everything.” 

“go, by all means, my dear; onli put on a white gown; miss tilney alway 
wear white.” 

catherin cheer complied, and be properli equipped, wa more 
impati than ever to be at the pump-room, that she might inform 
herself of gener tilney' lodgings, for though she believ they were 
in milsom street, she wa not certain of the house, and mrs. allen' 
waver convict onli made it more doubtful. To milsom street she 
wa directed, and have made herself perfect in the number, hasten 
away with eager step and a beat heart to pay her visit, explain her 
conduct, and be forgiven; trip lightli through the church-yard, and 
resolut turn away her eyes, that she might not be oblig to 
see her belov isabella and her dear family, who, she had reason to 
believe, were in a shop hard by. she reach the hous without ani 
impediment, look at the number, knock at the door, and inquir for 
miss tilney. the man believ miss tilney to be at home, but wa not 
quit certain. would she be pleas to send up her name? she gave her 
card. In a few minut the servant returned, and with a look which did 
not quit confirm hi words, said he had been mistaken, for that miss 
tilney wa walk out. catherine, with a blush of mortification, left 
the house. she felt almost persuad that miss tilney wa at home, and 
too much offend to admit her; and as she retir down the street, 
could not withhold one glanc at the drawing-room windows, in 
expect of see her there, but no one appear at them. At the 
bottom of the street, however, she look back again, and then, not at a 
window, but issu from the door, she saw miss tilney herself. she wa 
follow by a gentleman, whom catherin believ to be her father, 
and they turn up toward edgar' buildings. catherine, in deep 
mortification, proceed on her way. she could almost be angri herself 
at such angri incivility; but she check the resent sensation; she 
rememb her own ignorance. she knew not how such an offenc as her 
might be class by the law of worldli politeness, to what a degre 
of unforgiving it might with proprieti lead, nor to what rigour of 
rude in return it might justli make her amenable. 

deject and humbled, she had even some thought of not go with the 
other to the theatr that night; but it must be confess that they 
were not of long continuance, for she soon recollected, in the first 
place, that she wa without ani excus for stay at home; and, in the 
second, that it wa a play she want veri much to see. To the theatr 
accordingli they all went; no tilney appear to plagu or pleas her; 
she fear that, amongst the mani perfect of the family, a fond 
for play wa not to be ranked; but perhap it wa becaus they were 
habitu to the finer perform of the london stage, which she 
knew, on isabella' authority, render everyth els of the kind 
“quit horrid.” she wa not deceiv in her own expect of pleasure; 
the comedi so well suspend her care that no one, observ her dure 
the first four acts, would have suppos she had ani wretched about 
her. On the begin of the fifth, however, the sudden view of mr. 
henri tilney and hi father, join a parti in the opposit box, 
recal her to anxieti and distress. the stage could no longer excit 
genuin merriment--no longer keep her whole attention. everi other look 
upon an averag wa direct toward the opposit box; and, for the 
space of two entir scenes, did she thu watch henri tilney, without 
be onc abl to catch hi eye. No longer could he be suspect of 
indiffer for a play; hi notic wa never withdrawn from the stage 
dure two whole scenes. At length, however, he did look toward her, 
and he bowed--but such a bow! No smile, no continu observ attend 
it; hi eye were immedi return to their former direction. 
catherin wa restlessli miserable; she could almost have run round to 
the box in which he sat and forc him to hear her explanation. feel 
rather natur than heroic possess her; instead of consid her 
own digniti injur by thi readi condemnation--instead of proudli 
resolving, in consciou innocence, to show her resent toward him 
who could harbour a doubt of it, to leav to him all the troubl 
of seek an explanation, and to enlighten him on the past onli by 
avoid hi sight, or flirt with somebodi else--sh took to herself 
all the shame of misconduct, or at least of it appearance, and wa onli 
eager for an opportun of explain it cause. 

the play concluded--th curtain fell--henri tilney wa no longer to be 
seen where he had hitherto sat, but hi father remained, and perhap he 
might be now come round to their box. she wa right; in a few minut 
he appeared, and, make hi way through the then thin rows, spoke 
with like calm polit to mrs. allen and her friend. not with such 
calm wa he answer by the latter: “oh! mr. tilney, I have been 
quit wild to speak to you, and make my apologies. you must have thought 
me so rude; but inde it wa not my own fault, wa it, mrs. allen? 
did not they tell me that mr. tilney and hi sister were gone out in a 
phaeton together? and then what could I do? but I had ten thousand time 
rather have been with you; now had not I, mrs. allen?” 

“mi dear, you tumbl my gown,” wa mrs. allen' reply. 

her assurance, however, stand sole as it did, wa not thrown away; it 
brought a more cordial, more natur smile into hi countenance, and 
he repli in a tone which retain onli a littl affect reserve: 
“we were much oblig to you at ani rate for wish us a pleasant walk 
after our pass you in argyl street: you were so kind as to look back 
on purpose.” 

“but inde I did not wish you a pleasant walk; I never thought of such 
a thing; but I beg mr. thorp so earnestli to stop; I call out to 
him as soon as ever I saw you; now, mrs. allen, did not--oh! you were 
not there; but inde I did; and, if mr. thorp would onli have stopped, 
I would have jump out and run after you.” 

Is there a henri in the world who could be insens to such a 
declaration? henri tilney at least wa not. with a yet sweeter smile, he 
said everyth that need be said of hi sister' concern, regret, and 
depend on catherine' honour. “oh! Do not say miss tilney wa not 
angry,” cri catherine, “becaus I know she was; for she would not see 
me thi morn when I called; I saw her walk out of the hous the next 
minut after my leav it; I wa hurt, but I wa not affronted. perhap 
you did not know I had been there.” 

“I wa not within at the time; but I heard of it from eleanor, and she 
ha been wish ever sinc to see you, to explain the reason of such 
incivility; but perhap I can do it as well. It wa noth more than 
that my father--they were just prepar to walk out, and he be 
hurri for time, and not care to have it put off--mad a point of her 
be denied. that wa all, I do assur you. she wa veri much vexed, 
and meant to make her apolog as soon as possible.” 

catherine' mind wa greatli eas by thi information, yet a someth 
of solicitud remained, from which sprang the follow question, 
thoroughli artless in itself, though rather distress to the 
gentleman: “but, mr. tilney, whi were you less gener than your 
sister? If she felt such confid in my good intentions, and could 
suppos it to be onli a mistake, whi should you be so readi to take 
offence?” 

“me! I take offence!” 

“nay, I am sure by your look, when you came into the box, you were 
angry.” 

“I angry! I could have no right.” 

“well, nobodi would have thought you had no right who saw your face.” He 
repli by ask her to make room for him, and talk of the play. 

He remain with them some time, and wa onli too agreeabl for 
catherin to be content when he went away. befor they parted, 
however, it wa agre that the project walk should be taken as soon 
as possible; and, set asid the miseri of hi quit their box, 
she was, upon the whole, left one of the happiest creatur in the 
world. 

while talk to each other, she had observ with some surpris that 
john thorpe, who wa never in the same part of the hous for ten minut 
together, wa engag in convers with gener tilney; and she felt 
someth more than surpris when she thought she could perceiv herself 
the object of their attent and discourse. what could they have to say 
of her? she fear gener tilney did not like her appearance: she found 
it wa impli in hi prevent her admitt to hi daughter, rather 
than postpon hi own walk a few minutes. “how came mr. thorp to know 
your father?” wa her anxiou inquiry, as she point them out to her 
companion. He knew noth about it; but hi father, like everi militari 
man, had a veri larg acquaintance. 

when the entertain wa over, thorp came to assist them in get 
out. catherin wa the immedi object of hi gallantry; and, while 
they wait in the lobbi for a chair, he prevent the inquiri which had 
travel from her heart almost to the tip of her tongue, by asking, in 
a consequenti manner, whether she had seen him talk with gener 
tilney: “he is a fine old fellow, upon my soul! stout, active--look 
as young as hi son. I have a great regard for him, I assur you: a 
gentleman-like, good sort of fellow as ever lived.” 

“but how came you to know him?” 

“know him! there are few peopl much about town that I do not know. I 
have met him forev at the bedford; and I knew hi face again today the 
moment he came into the billiard-room. one of the best player we have, 
by the by; and we had a littl touch together, though I wa almost 
afraid of him at first: the odd were five to four against me; and, if 
I had not made one of the cleanest stroke that perhap ever wa made in 
thi world--i took hi ball exactly--but I could not make you understand 
it without a table; however, I did beat him. A veri fine fellow; as rich 
as a jew. I should like to dine with him; I dare say he give famou 
dinners. but what do you think we have been talk of? you. yes, by 
heavens! and the gener think you the finest girl in bath.” 

“oh! nonsense! how can you say so?” 

“and what do you think I said?”--low hi voice--“wel done, 
general, said I; I am quit of your mind.” 

here catherine, who wa much less gratifi by hi admir than by 
gener tilney's, wa not sorri to be call away by mr. allen. thorpe, 
however, would see her to her chair, and, till she enter it, continu 
the same kind of delic flattery, in spite of her entreat him to 
have done. 

that gener tilney, instead of disliking, should admir her, wa veri 
delightful; and she joy thought that there wa not one of the 
famili whom she need now fear to meet. the even had done more, much 
more, for her than could have been expected. 




chapter 13 


monday, tuesday, wednesday, thursday, friday, and saturday have now 
pass in review befor the reader; the event of each day, it hope 
and fears, mortif and pleasures, have been separ stated, 
and the pang of sunday onli now remain to be described, and close the 
week. the clifton scheme had been deferred, not relinquished, and on 
the afternoon' crescent of thi day, it wa brought forward again. In a 
privat consult between isabella and james, the former of whom had 
particularli set her heart upon going, and the latter no less anxious 
place hi upon pleas her, it wa agre that, provid the weather 
were fair, the parti should take place on the follow morning; and 
they were to set off veri early, in order to be at home in good time. 
the affair thu determined, and thorpe' approb secured, catherin 
onli remain to be appris of it. she had left them for a few minut 
to speak to miss tilney. In that interv the plan wa completed, and as 
soon as she came again, her agreement wa demanded; but instead of the 
gay acquiesc expect by isabella, catherin look grave, wa veri 
sorry, but could not go. the engag which ought to have kept her 
from join in the former attempt would make it imposs for her to 
accompani them now. she had that moment settl with miss tilney to take 
their propos walk tomorrow; it wa quit determined, and she would 
not, upon ani account, retract. but that she must and should retract 
wa instantli the eager cri of both the thorpes; they must go to clifton 
tomorrow, they would not go without her, it would be noth to put off 
a mere walk for one day longer, and they would not hear of a refusal. 
catherin wa distressed, but not subdued. “do not urg me, isabella. I 
am engag to miss tilney. I cannot go.” thi avail nothing. the same 
argument assail her again; she must go, she should go, and they would 
not hear of a refusal. “it would be so easi to tell miss tilney that you 
had just been remind of a prior engagement, and must onli beg to put 
off the walk till tuesday.” 

“no, it would not be easy. I could not do it. there ha been no prior 
engagement.” but isabella becam onli more and more urgent, call 
on her in the most affection manner, address her by the most 
endear names. she wa sure her dearest, sweetest catherin would not 
serious refus such a trifl request to a friend who love her so 
dearly. she knew her belov catherin to have so feel a heart, so 
sweet a temper, to be so easili persuad by those she loved. but all 
in vain; catherin felt herself to be in the right, and though pain 
by such tender, such flatter supplication, could not allow it to 
influenc her. isabella then tri anoth method. she reproach her 
with have more affect for miss tilney, though she had known her so 
littl a while, than for her best and oldest friends, with be grown 
cold and indifferent, in short, toward herself. “I cannot help be 
jealous, catherine, when I see myself slight for strangers, I, who 
love you so excessively! when onc my affect are placed, it is not 
in the power of anyth to chang them. but I believ my feel are 
stronger than anybody's; I am sure they are too strong for my own peace; 
and to see myself supplant in your friendship by stranger doe cut me 
to the quick, I own. these tilney seem to swallow up everyth else.” 

catherin thought thi reproach equal strang and unkind. wa it the 
part of a friend thu to expos her feel to the notic of others? 
isabella appear to her ungener and selfish, regardless of 
everyth but her own gratification. these pain idea cross her 
mind, though she said nothing. isabella, in the meanwhile, had appli 
her handkerchief to her eyes; and morland, miser at such a sight, 
could not help saying, “nay, catherine. I think you cannot stand out ani 
longer now. the sacrific is not much; and to oblig such a friend--i 
shall think you quit unkind, if you still refuse.” 

thi wa the first time of her brother' openli side against her, and 
anxiou to avoid hi displeasure, she propos a compromise. If they 
would onli put off their scheme till tuesday, which they might easili 
do, as it depend onli on themselves, she could go with them, and 
everybodi might then be satisfied. but “no, no, no!” wa the immedi 
answer; “that could not be, for thorp did not know that he might not 
go to town on tuesday.” catherin wa sorry, but could do no more; and 
a short silenc ensued, which wa broken by isabella, who in a voic of 
cold resent said, “veri well, then there is an end of the party. 
If catherin doe not go, I cannot. I cannot be the onli woman. I would 
not, upon ani account in the world, do so improp a thing.” 

“catherine, you must go,” said james. 

“but whi cannot mr. thorp drive one of hi other sisters? I dare say 
either of them would like to go.” 

“thank ye,” cri thorpe, “but I did not come to bath to drive my 
sister about, and look like a fool. no, if you do not go, d---- me if I 
do. I onli go for the sake of drive you.” 

“that is a compliment which give me no pleasure.” but her word were 
lost on thorpe, who had turn abruptli away. 

the three other still continu together, walk in a most 
uncomfort manner to poor catherine; sometim not a word wa said, 
sometim she wa again attack with supplic or reproaches, and 
her arm wa still link within isabella's, though their heart were 
at war. At one moment she wa softened, at anoth irritated; alway 
distressed, but alway steady. 

“I did not think you had been so obstinate, catherine,” said james; 
“you were not use to be so hard to persuade; you onc were the kindest, 
best-temp of my sisters.” 

“I hope I am not less so now,” she replied, veri feelingly; “but inde 
I cannot go. If I am wrong, I am do what I believ to be right.” 

“I suspect,” said isabella, in a low voice, “there is no great 
struggle.” 

catherine' heart swelled; she drew away her arm, and isabella made no 
opposition. thu pass a long ten minutes, till they were again join 
by thorpe, who, come to them with a gayer look, said, “well, I 
have settl the matter, and now we may all go tomorrow with a safe 
conscience. I have been to miss tilney, and made your excuses.” 

“you have not!” cri catherine. 

“I have, upon my soul. left her thi moment. told her you had sent me to 
say that, have just recollect a prior engag of go to clifton 
with us tomorrow, you could not have the pleasur of walk with her 
till tuesday. she said veri well, tuesday wa just as conveni to her; 
so there is an end of all our difficulties. A pretti good thought of 
mine--hey?” 

isabella' counten wa onc more all smile and good humour, and 
jame too look happi again. 

“A most heavenli thought indeed! now, my sweet catherine, all our 
distress are over; you are honour acquitted, and we shall have a 
most delight party.” 

“thi will not do,” said catherine; “I cannot submit to this. I must run 
after miss tilney directli and set her right.” 

isabella, however, caught hold of one hand, thorp of the other, and 
remonstr pour in from all three. even jame wa quit angry. when 
everyth wa settled, when miss tilney herself said that tuesday would 
suit her as well, it wa quit ridiculous, quit absurd, to make ani 
further objection. 

“I do not care. mr. thorp had no busi to invent ani such message. 
If I had thought it right to put it off, I could have spoken to miss 
tilney myself. thi is onli do it in a ruder way; and how do I know 
that mr. thorp has--h may be mistaken again perhaps; he led me into 
one act of rude by hi mistak on friday. let me go, mr. thorpe; 
isabella, do not hold me.” 

thorp told her it would be in vain to go after the tilneys; they were 
turn the corner into brock street, when he had overtaken them, and 
were at home by thi time. 

“then I will go after them,” said catherine; “wherev they are I will 
go after them. It doe not signifi talking. If I could not be persuad 
into do what I thought wrong, I never will be trick into it.” 
and with these word she broke away and hurri off. thorp would have 
dart after her, but morland withheld him. “let her go, let her go, if 
she will go.” 

“she is as obstin as--” 

thorp never finish the simile, for it could hardli have been a proper 
one. 

away walk catherin in great agitation, as fast as the crowd would 
permit her, fear of be pursued, yet determin to persevere. As 
she walked, she reflect on what had passed. It wa pain to her to 
disappoint and displeas them, particularli to displeas her brother; 
but she could not repent her resistance. set her own inclin 
apart, to have fail a second time in her engag to miss tilney, to 
have retract a promis voluntarili made onli five minut before, 
and on a fals pretenc too, must have been wrong. she had not been 
withstand them on selfish principl alone, she had not consult 
mere her own gratification; that might have been ensur in some 
degre by the excurs itself, by see blaiz castle; no, she had 
attend to what wa due to others, and to her own charact in their 
opinion. her convict of be right, however, wa not enough to 
restor her composure; till she had spoken to miss tilney she could not 
be at ease; and quicken her pace when she got clear of the crescent, 
she almost ran over the remain ground till she gain the top of 
milsom street. So rapid had been her movement that in spite of the 
tilneys' advantag in the outset, they were but just turn into 
their lodg as she came within view of them; and the servant still 
remain at the open door, she use onli the ceremoni of say 
that she must speak with miss tilney that moment, and hurri by him 
proceed upstairs. then, open the first door befor her, which 
happen to be the right, she immedi found herself in the 
drawing-room with gener tilney, hi son, and daughter. her 
explanation, defect onli in being--from her irrit of nerv and 
short of breath--no explan at all, wa instantli given. “I am 
come in a great hurry--it wa all a mistake--i never promis to go--i 
told them from the first I could not go.--i ran away in a great hurri 
to explain it.--i did not care what you thought of me.--i would not stay 
for the servant.” 

the business, however, though not perfectli elucid by thi speech, 
soon ceas to be a puzzle. catherin found that john thorp had given 
the message; and miss tilney had no scrupl in own herself greatli 
surpris by it. but whether her brother had still exceed her in 
resentment, catherine, though she instinct address herself as 
much to one as to the other in her vindication, had no mean of knowing. 
whatev might have been felt befor her arrival, her eager declar 
immedi made everi look and sentenc as friendli as she could 
desire. 

the affair thu happili settled, she wa introduc by miss tilney 
to her father, and receiv by him with such ready, such solicit 
polit as recal thorpe' inform to her mind, and made her 
think with pleasur that he might be sometim depend on. To such 
anxiou attent wa the general' civil carried, that not awar of 
her extraordinari swift in enter the house, he wa quit angri 
with the servant whose neglect had reduc her to open the door of the 
apart herself. “what did william mean by it? He should make a point 
of inquir into the matter.” and if catherin had not most warmli 
assert hi innocence, it seem like that william would lose the 
favour of hi master forever, if not hi place, by her rapidity. 

after sit with them a quarter of an hour, she rose to take leave, 
and wa then most agreeabl surpris by gener tilney' ask her if 
she would do hi daughter the honour of dine and spend the rest 
of the day with her. miss tilney ad her own wishes. catherin wa 
greatli obliged; but it wa quit out of her power. mr. and mrs. allen 
would expect her back everi moment. the gener declar he could say no 
more; the claim of mr. and mrs. allen were not to be superseded; but on 
some other day he trusted, when longer notic could be given, they would 
not refus to spare her to her friend. “oh, no; catherin wa sure they 
would not have the least objection, and she should have great pleasur 
in coming.” the gener attend her himself to the street-door, say 
everyth gallant as they went downstairs, admir the elast of 
her walk, which correspond exactli with the spirit of her dancing, and 
make her one of the most grace bow she had ever beheld, when they 
parted. 

catherine, delight by all that had passed, proceed gaili to pulteney 
street, walking, as she concluded, with great elasticity, though she 
had never thought of it before. she reach home without see anyth 
more of the offend party; and now that she had been triumphant 
throughout, had carri her point, and wa secur of her walk, she began 
(a the flutter of her spirit subsided) to doubt whether she had been 
perfectli right. A sacrific wa alway noble; and if she had given way 
to their entreaties, she should have been spare the distress idea of 
a friend displeased, a brother angry, and a scheme of great happi 
to both destroyed, perhap through her means. To eas her mind, and 
ascertain by the opinion of an unprejud person what her own conduct 
had realli been, she took occas to mention befor mr. allen the 
half-settl scheme of her brother and the thorp for the follow 
day. mr. allen caught at it directly. “well,” said he, “and do you think 
of go too?” 

“no; I had just engag myself to walk with miss tilney befor they told 
me of it; and therefor you know I could not go with them, could i?” 

“no, certainli not; and I am glad you do not think of it. these scheme 
are not at all the thing. young men and women drive about the countri 
in open carriages! now and then it is veri well; but go to inn and 
public place together! It is not right; and I wonder mrs. thorp should 
allow it. I am glad you do not think of going; I am sure mrs. morland 
would not be pleased. mrs. allen, are not you of my way of thinking? Do 
not you think these kind of project objectionable?” 

“yes, veri much so indeed. open carriag are nasti things. A clean 
gown is not five minutes' wear in them. you are splash get in 
and get out; and the wind take your hair and your bonnet in everi 
direction. I hate an open carriag myself.” 

“I know you do; but that is not the question. Do not you think it ha an 
odd appearance, if young ladi are frequent driven about in them by 
young men, to whom they are not even related?” 

“yes, my dear, a veri odd appear indeed. I cannot bear to see it.” 

“dear madam,” cri catherine, “then whi did not you tell me so before? 
I am sure if I had known it to be improper, I would not have gone with 
mr. thorp at all; but I alway hope you would tell me, if you thought 
I wa do wrong.” 

“and so I should, my dear, you may depend on it; for as I told mrs. 
morland at parting, I would alway do the best for you in my power. but 
one must not be over particular. young peopl will be young people, 
as your good mother say herself. you know I want you, when we first 
came, not to buy that sprig muslin, but you would. young peopl do 
not like to be alway thwarted.” 

“but thi wa someth of real consequence; and I do not think you 
would have found me hard to persuade.” 

“a far as it ha gone hitherto, there is no harm done,” said mr. allen; 
“and I would onli advis you, my dear, not to go out with mr. thorp ani 
more.” 

“that is just what I wa go to say,” ad hi wife. 

catherine, reliev for herself, felt uneasi for isabella, and after a 
moment' thought, ask mr. allen whether it would not be both proper 
and kind in her to write to miss thorpe, and explain the indecorum of 
which she must be as insens as herself; for she consid that 
isabella might otherwis perhap be go to clifton the next day, in 
spite of what had passed. mr. allen, however, discourag her from do 
ani such thing. “you had better leav her alone, my dear; she is old 
enough to know what she is about, and if not, ha a mother to advis 
her. mrs. thorp is too indulg beyond a doubt; but, however, you had 
better not interfere. she and your brother choos to go, and you will be 
onli get ill will.” 

catherin submitted, and though sorri to think that isabella should be 
do wrong, felt greatli reliev by mr. allen' approb of her 
own conduct, and truli rejoic to be preserv by hi advic from the 
danger of fall into such an error herself. her escap from be one 
of the parti to clifton wa now an escap indeed; for what would the 
tilney have thought of her, if she had broken her promis to them in 
order to do what wa wrong in itself, if she had been guilti of one 
breach of propriety, onli to enabl her to be guilti of another? 




chapter 14 


the next morn wa fair, and catherin almost expect anoth attack 
from the assembl party. with mr. allen to support her, she felt no 
dread of the event: but she would gladli be spare a contest, where 
victori itself wa painful, and wa heartili rejoic therefor at 
neither see nor hear anyth of them. the tilney call for 
her at the appoint time; and no new difficulti arising, no sudden 
recollection, no unexpect summons, no impertin intrus to 
disconcert their measures, my heroin wa most unnatur abl to 
fulfil her engagement, though it wa made with the hero himself. 
they determin on walk round beechen cliff, that nobl hill whose 
beauti verdur and hang coppic render it so strike an object 
from almost everi open in bath. 

“I never look at it,” said catherine, as they walk along the side of 
the river, “without think of the south of france.” 

“you have been abroad then?” said henry, a littl surprised. 

“oh! no, I onli mean what I have read about. It alway put me in mind 
of the countri that emili and her father travel through, in the 
mysteri of udolpho. but you never read novels, I dare say?” 

“whi not?” 

“becaus they are not clever enough for you--gentlemen read better 
books.” 

“the person, be it gentleman or lady, who ha not pleasur in a good 
novel, must be intoler stupid. I have read all mrs. radcliffe' 
works, and most of them with great pleasure. the mysteri of udolpho, 
when I had onc begun it, I could not lay down again; I rememb 
finish it in two days--mi hair stand on end the whole time.” 

“yes,” ad miss tilney, “and I rememb that you undertook to read it 
aloud to me, and that when I wa call away for onli five minut to 
answer a note, instead of wait for me, you took the volum into the 
hermitag walk, and I wa oblig to stay till you had finish it.” 

“thank you, eleanor--a most honour testimony. you see, miss morland, 
the injustic of your suspicions. here wa I, in my eager to get on, 
refus to wait onli five minut for my sister, break the promis 
I had made of read it aloud, and keep her in suspens at a most 
interest part, by run away with the volume, which, you are to 
observe, wa her own, particularli her own. I am proud when I reflect on 
it, and I think it must establish me in your good opinion.” 

“I am veri glad to hear it indeed, and now I shall never be asham of 
like udolpho myself. but I realli thought before, young men despis 
novel amazingly.” 

“it is amazingly; it may well suggest amaz if they do--for they 
read nearli as mani as women. I myself have read hundr and hundreds. 
Do not imagin that you can cope with me in a knowledg of julia and 
louisas. If we proceed to particulars, and engag in the never-ceas 
inquiri of 'have you read this?' and 'have you read that?' I shall soon 
leav you as far behind me as--what shall I say?--i want an appropri 
simile.--a far as your friend emili herself left poor valancourt when 
she went with her aunt into italy. consid how mani year I have had 
the start of you. I had enter on my studi at oxford, while you were 
a good littl girl work your sampler at home!” 

“not veri good, I am afraid. but now really, do not you think udolpho 
the nicest book in the world?” 

“the nicest--bi which I suppos you mean the neatest. that must depend 
upon the binding.” 

“henry,” said miss tilney, “you are veri impertinent. miss morland, he 
is treat you exactli as he doe hi sister. He is forev find 
fault with me, for some incorrect of language, and now he is take 
the same liberti with you. the word 'nicest,' as you use it, did not 
suit him; and you had better chang it as soon as you can, or we shall 
be overpow with johnson and blair all the rest of the way.” 

“I am sure,” cri catherine, “I did not mean to say anyth wrong; but 
it is a nice book, and whi should not I call it so?” 

“veri true,” said henry, “and thi is a veri nice day, and we are take 
a veri nice walk, and you are two veri nice young ladies. oh! It is a 
veri nice word indeed! It doe for everything. origin perhap it 
wa appli onli to express neatness, propriety, delicacy, or 
refinement--peopl were nice in their dress, in their sentiments, or 
their choice. but now everi commend on everi subject is compris 
in that one word.” 

“while, in fact,” cri hi sister, “it ought onli to be appli to you, 
without ani commend at all. you are more nice than wise. come, 
miss morland, let us leav him to medit over our fault in the utmost 
proprieti of diction, while we prais udolpho in whatev term we 
like best. It is a most interest work. you are fond of that kind of 
reading?” 

“to say the truth, I do not much like ani other.” 

“indeed!” 

“that is, I can read poetri and plays, and thing of that sort, and 
do not dislik travels. but history, real solemn history, I cannot be 
interest in. can you?” 

“yes, I am fond of history.” 

“I wish I were too. I read it a littl as a duty, but it tell me 
noth that doe not either vex or weari me. the quarrel of pope and 
kings, with war or pestilences, in everi page; the men all so good for 
nothing, and hardli ani women at all--it is veri tiresome: and yet I 
often think it odd that it should be so dull, for a great deal of it 
must be invention. the speech that are put into the heroes' mouths, 
their thought and designs--th chief of all thi must be invention, and 
invent is what delight me in other books.” 

“historians, you think,” said miss tilney, “are not happi in their 
flight of fancy. they display imagin without rais interest. I 
am fond of history--and am veri well content to take the fals with 
the true. In the princip fact they have sourc of intellig 
in former histori and records, which may be as much depend on, 
I conclude, as anyth that doe not actual pass under one' own 
observation; and as for the littl embellish you speak of, they are 
embellishments, and I like them as such. If a speech be well drawn up, 
I read it with pleasure, by whomsoev it may be made--and probabl with 
much greater, if the product of mr. hume or mr. robertson, than if 
the genuin word of caractacus, agricola, or alfr the great.” 

“you are fond of history! and so are mr. allen and my father; and I have 
two brother who do not dislik it. So mani instanc within my small 
circl of friend is remarkable! At thi rate, I shall not piti the 
writer of histori ani longer. If peopl like to read their books, it 
is all veri well, but to be at so much troubl in fill great volumes, 
which, as I use to think, nobodi would willingli ever look into, to be 
labour onli for the torment of littl boy and girls, alway struck 
me as a hard fate; and though I know it is all veri right and necessary, 
I have often wonder at the person' courag that could sit down on 
purpos to do it.” 

“that littl boy and girl should be tormented,” said henry, “i what 
no one at all acquaint with human natur in a civil state can 
deny; but in behalf of our most distinguish historians, I must observ 
that they might well be offend at be suppos to have no higher 
aim, and that by their method and style, they are perfectli well 
qualifi to torment reader of the most advanc reason and matur 
time of life. I use the verb 'to torment,' as I observ to be your own 
method, instead of 'to instruct,' suppos them to be now admit as 
synonymous.” 

“you think me foolish to call instruct a torment, but if you had been 
as much use as myself to hear poor littl children first learn their 
letter and then learn to spell, if you had ever seen how stupid they 
can be for a whole morn together, and how tire my poor mother is 
at the end of it, as I am in the habit of see almost everi day of my 
life at home, you would allow that 'to torment' and 'to instruct' might 
sometim be use as synonym words.” 

“veri probably. but historian are not account for the difficulti 
of learn to read; and even you yourself, who do not altogeth seem 
particularli friendli to veri severe, veri intens application, may 
perhap be brought to acknowledg that it is veri well worth-whil to 
be torment for two or three year of one' life, for the sake of 
be abl to read all the rest of it. consider--if read had not been 
taught, mrs. radcliff would have written in vain--or perhap might not 
have written at all.” 

catherin assented--and a veri warm panegyr from her on that lady' 
merit close the subject. the tilney were soon engag in anoth on 
which she had noth to say. they were view the countri with the 
eye of person accustom to drawing, and decid on it capabl of 
be form into pictures, with all the eager of real taste. here 
catherin wa quit lost. she knew noth of drawing--noth of taste: 
and she listen to them with an attent which brought her littl 
profit, for they talk in phrase which convey scarc ani idea 
to her. the littl which she could understand, however, appear to 
contradict the veri few notion she had entertain on the matter 
before. It seem as if a good view were no longer to be taken from the 
top of an high hill, and that a clear blue sky wa no longer a proof 
of a fine day. she wa heartili asham of her ignorance. A misplac 
shame. where peopl wish to attach, they should alway be ignorant. 
To come with a well-inform mind is to come with an inabl of 
administ to the vaniti of others, which a sensibl person would 
alway wish to avoid. A woman especially, if she have the misfortun of 
know anything, should conceal it as well as she can. 

the advantag of natur folli in a beauti girl have been alreadi 
set forth by the capit pen of a sister author; and to her treatment 
of the subject I will onli add, in justic to men, that though to the 
larger and more trifl part of the sex, imbecil in femal is a 
great enhanc of their person charms, there is a portion of them 
too reason and too well inform themselv to desir anyth 
more in woman than ignorance. but catherin did not know her own 
advantages--did not know that a good-look girl, with an affection 
heart and a veri ignor mind, cannot fail of attract a clever young 
man, unless circumst are particularli untoward. In the present 
instance, she confess and lament her want of knowledge, declar 
that she would give anyth in the world to be abl to draw; and 
a lectur on the picturesqu immedi followed, in which hi 
instruct were so clear that she soon began to see beauti in 
everyth admir by him, and her attent wa so earnest that he 
becam perfectli satisfi of her have a great deal of natur taste. 
He talk of foregrounds, distances, and second distances--side-screen 
and perspectives--light and shades; and catherin wa so hope a 
scholar that when they gain the top of beechen cliff, she voluntarili 
reject the whole citi of bath as unworthi to make part of a landscape. 
delight with her progress, and fear of weari her with too much 
wisdom at once, henri suffer the subject to decline, and by an easi 
transit from a piec of rocki fragment and the wither oak which 
he had place near it summit, to oak in general, to forests, the 
enclosur of them, wast lands, crown land and government, he shortli 
found himself arriv at politics; and from politics, it wa an 
easi step to silence. the gener paus which succeed hi short 
disquisit on the state of the nation wa put an end to by catherine, 
who, in rather a solemn tone of voice, utter these words, “I have 
heard that someth veri shock inde will soon come out in london.” 

miss tilney, to whom thi wa chiefli addressed, wa startled, and 
hastili replied, “indeed! and of what nature?” 

“that I do not know, nor who is the author. I have onli heard that it is 
to be more horribl than anyth we have met with yet.” 

“good heaven! where could you hear of such a thing?” 

“A particular friend of mine had an account of it in a letter from 
london yesterday. It is to be uncommonli dreadful. I shall expect murder 
and everyth of the kind.” 

“you speak with astonish composure! but I hope your friend' account 
have been exaggerated; and if such a design is known beforehand, proper 
measur will undoubtedli be taken by govern to prevent it come 
to effect.” 

“government,” said henry, endeavour not to smile, “neither desir 
nor dare to interfer in such matters. there must be murder; and 
govern care not how much.” 

the ladi stared. He laughed, and added, “come, shall I make you 
understand each other, or leav you to puzzl out an explan as 
you can? no--i will be noble. I will prove myself a man, no less by the 
generos of my soul than the clear of my head. I have no patienc 
with such of my sex as disdain to let themselv sometim down to the 
comprehens of yours. perhap the abil of women are neither sound 
nor acute--neith vigor nor keen. perhap they may want observation, 
discernment, judgment, fire, genius, and wit.” 

“miss morland, do not mind what he says; but have the good to 
satisfi me as to thi dread riot.” 

“riot! what riot?” 

“mi dear eleanor, the riot is onli in your own brain. the confus 
there is scandalous. miss morland ha been talk of noth more 
dread than a new public which is shortli to come out, in three 
duodecimo volumes, two hundr and seventy-six page in each, with 
a frontispiec to the first, of two tombston and a lantern--do you 
understand? and you, miss morland--mi stupid sister ha mistaken all 
your clearest expressions. you talk of expect horror in london--and 
instead of instantli conceiving, as ani ration creatur would have 
done, that such word could relat onli to a circul library, she 
immedi pictur to herself a mob of three thousand men assembl 
in st. george' fields, the bank attacked, the tower threatened, the 
street of london flow with blood, a detach of the twelfth light 
dragoon (the hope of the nation) call up from northampton to quell 
the insurgents, and the gallant captain frederick tilney, in the 
moment of charg at the head of hi troop, knock off hi hors by a 
brickbat from an upper window. forgiv her stupidity. the fear of the 
sister have ad to the weak of the woman; but she is by no mean a 
simpleton in general.” 

catherin look grave. “and now, henry,” said miss tilney, “that you 
have made us understand each other, you may as well make miss morland 
understand yourself--unless you mean to have her think you intoler 
rude to your sister, and a great brute in your opinion of women in 
general. miss morland is not use to your odd ways.” 

“I shall be most happi to make her better acquaint with them.” 

“no doubt; but that is no explan of the present.” 

“what am I to do?” 

“you know what you ought to do. clear your charact handsom befor 
her. tell her that you think veri highli of the understand of women.” 

“miss morland, I think veri highli of the understand of all the women 
in the world--especi of those--whoev they may be--with whom I 
happen to be in company.” 

“that is not enough. Be more serious.” 

“miss morland, no one can think more highli of the understand of 
women than I do. In my opinion, natur ha given them so much that they 
never find it necessari to use more than half.” 

“we shall get noth more seriou from him now, miss morland. He is 
not in a sober mood. but I do assur you that he must be entir 
misunderstood, if he can ever appear to say an unjust thing of ani woman 
at all, or an unkind one of me.” 

It wa no effort to catherin to believ that henri tilney could never 
be wrong. hi manner might sometim surprise, but hi mean must 
alway be just: and what she did not understand, she wa almost as readi 
to admire, as what she did. the whole walk wa delightful, and though it 
end too soon, it conclus wa delight too; her friend attend 
her into the house, and miss tilney, befor they parted, address 
herself with respect form, as much to mrs. allen as to catherine, 
petit for the pleasur of her compani to dinner on the day after 
the next. No difficulti wa made on mrs. allen' side, and the onli 
difficulti on catherine' wa in conceal the excess of her pleasure. 

the morn had pass away so charmingli as to banish all her 
friendship and natur affection, for no thought of isabella or jame 
had cross her dure their walk. when the tilney were gone, she 
becam amiabl again, but she wa amiabl for some time to littl 
effect; mrs. allen had no intellig to give that could reliev her 
anxiety; she had heard noth of ani of them. toward the end of the 
morning, however, catherine, have occas for some indispens yard 
of ribbon which must be bought without a moment' delay, walk out into 
the town, and in bond street overtook the second miss thorp as she wa 
loiter toward edgar' build between two of the sweetest girl in 
the world, who had been her dear friend all the morning. from her, she 
soon learn that the parti to clifton had taken place. “they set off at 
eight thi morning,” said miss anne, “and I am sure I do not envi 
them their drive. I think you and I are veri well off to be out of the 
scrape. It must be the dullest thing in the world, for there is not a 
soul at clifton at thi time of year. bell went with your brother, and 
john drove maria.” 

catherin spoke the pleasur she realli felt on hear thi part of the 
arrangement. 

“oh! yes,” rejoin the other, “maria is gone. she wa quit wild to go. 
she thought it would be someth veri fine. I cannot say I admir her 
taste; and for my part, I wa determin from the first not to go, if 
they press me ever so much.” 

catherine, a littl doubt of this, could not help answering, “I wish 
you could have gone too. It is a piti you could not all go.” 

“thank you; but it is quit a matter of indiffer to me. indeed, I 
would not have gone on ani account. I wa say so to emili and sophia 
when you overtook us.” 

catherin wa still unconvinced; but glad that ann should have the 
friendship of an emili and a sophia to consol her, she bade her adieu 
without much uneasiness, and return home, pleas that the parti had 
not been prevent by her refus to join it, and veri heartili wish 
that it might be too pleasant to allow either jame or isabella to 
resent her resist ani longer. 




chapter 15 


earli the next day, a note from isabella, speak peac and tender 
in everi line, and entreat the immedi presenc of her friend on 
a matter of the utmost importance, hasten catherine, in the happiest 
state of confid and curiosity, to edgar' buildings. the two 
youngest miss thorp were by themselv in the parlour; and, on anne' 
quit it to call her sister, catherin took the opportun of ask 
the other for some particular of their yesterday' party. maria desir 
no greater pleasur than to speak of it; and catherin immedi 
learnt that it had been altogeth the most delight scheme in the 
world, that nobodi could imagin how charm it had been, and that 
it had been more delight than anybodi could conceive. such wa the 
inform of the first five minutes; the second unfold thu much in 
detail--that they had driven directli to the york hotel, ate some soup, 
and bespok an earli dinner, walk down to the pump-room, tast the 
water, and laid out some shill in purs and spars; thenc adjourn 
to eat ice at a pastry-cook's, and hurri back to the hotel, swallow 
their dinner in haste, to prevent be in the dark; and then had a 
delight drive back, onli the moon wa not up, and it rain a little, 
and mr. morland' hors wa so tire he could hardli get it along. 

catherin listen with heartfelt satisfaction. It appear that blaiz 
castl had never been thought of; and, as for all the rest, there wa 
noth to regret for half an instant. maria' intellig conclud 
with a tender effus of piti for her sister anne, whom she repres 
as insupport cross, from be exclud the party. 

“she will never forgiv me, I am sure; but, you know, how could I help 
it? john would have me go, for he vow he would not drive her, becaus 
she had such thick ankles. I dare say she will not be in good humour 
again thi month; but I am determin I will not be cross; it is not a 
littl matter that put me out of temper.” 

isabella now enter the room with so eager a step, and a look of such 
happi importance, as engag all her friend' notice. maria wa without 
ceremoni sent away, and isabella, embrac catherine, thu began: “yes, 
my dear catherine, it is so indeed; your penetr ha not deceiv 
you. oh! that arch eye of yours! It see through everything.” 

catherin repli onli by a look of wonder ignorance. 

“nay, my beloved, sweetest friend,” continu the other, “compos 
yourself. I am amazingli agitated, as you perceive. let us sit down and 
talk in comfort. well, and so you guess it the moment you had my note? 
sli creature! oh! My dear catherine, you alone, who know my heart, can 
judg of my present happiness. your brother is the most charm of 
men. I onli wish I were more worthi of him. but what will your excel 
father and mother say? oh! heavens! when I think of them I am so 
agitated!” 

catherine' understand began to awake: an idea of the truth suddenli 
dart into her mind; and, with the natur blush of so new an emotion, 
she cri out, “good heaven! My dear isabella, what do you mean? can 
you--can you realli be in love with james?” 

thi bold surmise, however, she soon learnt comprehend but half the 
fact. the anxiou affection, which she wa accus of have continu 
watch in isabella' everi look and action, had, in the cours of their 
yesterday' party, receiv the delight confess of an equal love. 
her heart and faith were alik engag to james. never had catherin 
listen to anyth so full of interest, wonder, and joy. her brother 
and her friend engaged! new to such circumstances, the import of 
it appear unspeak great, and she contempl it as one of those 
grand events, of which the ordinari cours of life can hardli afford a 
return. the strength of her feel she could not express; the natur 
of them, however, content her friend. the happi of have such a 
sister wa their first effusion, and the fair ladi mingl in embrac 
and tear of joy. 

delighting, however, as catherin sincer did in the prospect of the 
connection, it must be acknowledg that isabella far surpass her 
in tender anticipations. “you will be so infinit dearer to me, my 
catherine, than either ann or maria: I feel that I shall be so much 
more attach to my dear morland' famili than to my own.” 

thi wa a pitch of friendship beyond catherine. 

“you are so like your dear brother,” continu isabella, “that I quit 
dote on you the first moment I saw you. but so it alway is with me; 
the first moment settl everything. the veri first day that morland 
came to us last christmas--th veri first moment I beheld him--mi heart 
wa irrecover gone. I rememb I wore my yellow gown, with my hair 
done up in braids; and when I came into the drawing-room, and john 
introduc him, I thought I never saw anybodi so handsom before.” 

here catherin secretli acknowledg the power of love; for, though 
exceedingli fond of her brother, and partial to all hi endowments, she 
had never in her life thought him handsome. 

“I rememb too, miss andrew drank tea with us that evening, and wore 
her puce-colour sarsenet; and she look so heavenli that I thought 
your brother must certainli fall in love with her; I could not sleep 
a wink all right for think of it. oh! catherine, the mani sleepless 
night I have had on your brother' account! I would not have you suffer 
half what I have done! I am grown wretchedli thin, I know; but I will 
not pain you by describ my anxiety; you have seen enough of it. I 
feel that I have betray myself perpetually--so unguard in speak 
of my partial for the church! but my secret I wa alway sure would 
be safe with you.” 

catherin felt that noth could have been safer; but asham of an 
ignor littl expected, she dare no longer contest the point, 
nor refus to have been as full of arch penetr and affection 
sympathi as isabella chose to consid her. her brother, she found, 
wa prepar to set off with all speed to fullerton, to make known hi 
situat and ask consent; and here wa a sourc of some real agit 
to the mind of isabella. catherin endeavour to persuad her, as she 
wa herself persuaded, that her father and mother would never oppos 
their son' wishes. “it is impossible,” said she, “for parent to be 
more kind, or more desir of their children' happiness; I have no 
doubt of their consent immediately.” 

“morland say exactli the same,” repli isabella; “and yet I dare not 
expect it; my fortun will be so small; they never can consent to it. 
your brother, who might marri anybody!” 

here catherin again discern the forc of love. 

“indeed, isabella, you are too humble. the differ of fortun can be 
noth to signify.” 

“oh! My sweet catherine, in your gener heart I know it would signifi 
nothing; but we must not expect such disinterested in many. As for 
myself, I am sure I onli wish our situat were reversed. had I the 
command of millions, were I mistress of the whole world, your brother 
would be my onli choice.” 

thi charm sentiment, recommend as much by sens as novelty, 
gave catherin a most pleas remembr of all the heroin of her 
acquaintance; and she thought her friend never look more love than 
in utter the grand idea. “I am sure they will consent,” wa her 
frequent declaration; “I am sure they will be delight with you.” 

“for my own part,” said isabella, “mi wish are so moder that the 
smallest incom in natur would be enough for me. where peopl are 
realli attached, poverti itself is wealth; grandeur I detest: I would 
not settl in london for the universe. A cottag in some retir villag 
would be ecstasy. there are some charm littl villa about richmond.” 

“richmond!” cri catherine. “you must settl near fullerton. you must 
be near us.” 

“I am sure I shall be miser if we do not. If I can but be near you, 
I shall be satisfied. but thi is idl talking! I will not allow myself 
to think of such things, till we have your father' answer. morland 
say that by send it tonight to salisbury, we may have it tomorrow. 
tomorrow? I know I shall never have courag to open the letter. I know 
it will be the death of me.” 

A reveri succeed thi conviction--and when isabella spoke again, it 
wa to resolv on the qualiti of her wedding-gown. 

their confer wa put an end to by the anxiou young lover himself, 
who came to breath hi part sigh befor he set off for wiltshire. 
catherin wish to congratul him, but knew not what to say, and her 
eloqu wa onli in her eyes. from them, however, the eight part of 
speech shone out most expressively, and jame could combin them with 
ease. impati for the realiz of all that he hope at home, hi 
adieu were not long; and they would have been yet shorter, had he not 
been frequent detain by the urgent entreati of hi fair one that 
he would go. twice wa he call almost from the door by her eager 
to have him gone. “indeed, morland, I must drive you away. consid how 
far you have to ride. I cannot bear to see you linger so. for heaven' 
sake, wast no more time. there, go, go--i insist on it.” 

the two friends, with heart now more unit than ever, were insepar 
for the day; and in scheme of sisterli happi the hour flew along. 
mrs. thorp and her son, who were acquaint with everything, and 
who seem onli to want mr. morland' consent, to consid isabella' 
engag as the most fortun circumst imagin for their 
family, were allow to join their counsels, and add their quota of 
signific look and mysteri express to fill up the measur 
of curios to be rais in the unprivileg younger sisters. To 
catherine' simpl feelings, thi odd sort of reserv seem neither 
kindli meant, nor consist supported; and it unkind she would 
hardli have forborn point out, had it inconsist been less their 
friend; but ann and maria soon set her heart at eas by the sagac of 
their “I know what”; and the even wa spent in a sort of war of wit, 
a display of famili ingenuity, on one side in the mysteri of an affect 
secret, on the other of undefin discovery, all equal acute. 

catherin wa with her friend again the next day, endeavour to 
support her spirit and while away the mani tediou hour befor 
the deliveri of the letters; a need exertion, for as the time 
of reason expect drew near, isabella becam more and more 
desponding, and befor the letter arrived, had work herself into a 
state of real distress. but when it did come, where could distress 
be found? “I have had no difficulti in gain the consent of my kind 
parents, and am promis that everyth in their power shall be done to 
forward my happiness,” were the first three lines, and in one moment 
all wa joy security. the brightest glow wa instantli spread over 
isabella' features, all care and anxieti seem removed, her spirit 
becam almost too high for control, and she call herself without 
scrupl the happiest of mortals. 

mrs. thorpe, with tear of joy, embrac her daughter, her son, her 
visitor, and could have embrac half the inhabit of bath with 
satisfaction. her heart wa overflow with tenderness. It wa “dear 
john” and “dear catherine” at everi word; “dear ann and dear maria” 
must immedi be made sharer in their felicity; and two “dears” at 
onc befor the name of isabella were not more than that belov child 
had now well earned. john himself wa no skulker in joy. He not onli 
bestow on mr. morland the high commend of be one of the finest 
fellow in the world, but swore off mani sentenc in hi praise. 

the letter, whenc sprang all thi felicity, wa short, contain 
littl more than thi assur of success; and everi particular wa 
defer till jame could write again. but for particular isabella 
could well afford to wait. the need wa compris in mr. morland' 
promise; hi honour wa pledg to make everyth easy; and by what 
mean their incom wa to be formed, whether land properti were to 
be resigned, or fund money made over, wa a matter in which her 
disinterest spirit took no concern. she knew enough to feel secur of 
an honour and speedi establishment, and her imagin took a rapid 
flight over it attend felicities. she saw herself at the end of 
a few weeks, the gaze and admir of everi new acquaint at 
fullerton, the envi of everi valu old friend in putney, with a 
carriag at her command, a new name on her tickets, and a brilliant 
exhibit of hoop ring on her finger. 

when the content of the letter were ascertained, john thorpe, who had 
onli wait it arriv to begin hi journey to london, prepar to set 
off. “well, miss morland,” said he, on find her alon in the parlour, 
“I am come to bid you good-bye.” catherin wish him a good journey. 
without appear to hear her, he walk to the window, fidget about, 
hum a tune, and seem wholli self-occupied. 

“shall not you be late at devizes?” said catherine. He made no answer; 
but after a minute' silenc burst out with, “A famou good thing thi 
marri scheme, upon my soul! A clever fanci of morland' and belle's. 
what do you think of it, miss morland? I say it is no bad notion.” 

“I am sure I think it a veri good one.” 

“do you? that' honest, by heavens! I am glad you are no enemi to 
matrimony, however. did you ever hear the old song 'go to one wed 
bring on another?' I say, you will come to belle' wedding, I hope.” 

“yes; I have promis your sister to be with her, if possible.” 

“and then you know”--twist himself about and forc a foolish 
laugh--“i say, then you know, we may tri the truth of thi same old 
song.” 

“may we? but I never sing. well, I wish you a good journey. I dine with 
miss tilney today, and must now be go home.” 

“nay, but there is no such confound hurry. who know when we may 
be togeth again? not but that I shall be down again by the end of a 
fortnight, and a devilish long fortnight it will appear to me.” 

“then whi do you stay away so long?” repli catherine--find that he 
wait for an answer. 

“that is kind of you, however--kind and good-natured. I shall not forget 
it in a hurry. but you have more good natur and all that, than anybodi 
living, I believe. A monstrou deal of good nature, and it is not onli 
good nature, but you have so much, so much of everything; and then you 
have such--upon my soul, I do not know anybodi like you.” 

“oh! dear, there are a great mani peopl like me, I dare say, onli a 
great deal better. good morn to you.” 

“but I say, miss morland, I shall come and pay my respect at fullerton 
befor it is long, if not disagreeable.” 

“pray do. My father and mother will be veri glad to see you.” 

“and I hope--i hope, miss morland, you will not be sorri to see me.” 

“oh! dear, not at all. there are veri few peopl I am sorri to see. 
compani is alway cheerful.” 

“that is just my way of thinking. give me but a littl cheer company, 
let me onli have the compani of the peopl I love, let me onli be where 
I like and with whom I like, and the devil take the rest, say I. and 
I am heartili glad to hear you say the same. but I have a notion, miss 
morland, you and I think pretti much alik upon most matters.” 

“perhap we may; but it is more than I ever thought of. and as to most 
matters, to say the truth, there are not mani that I know my own mind 
about.” 

“bi jove, no more do I. It is not my way to bother my brain with what 
doe not concern me. My notion of thing is simpl enough. let me onli 
have the girl I like, say I, with a comfort hous over my head, and 
what care I for all the rest? fortun is nothing. I am sure of a good 
incom of my own; and if she had not a penny, why, so much the better.” 

“veri true. I think like you there. If there is a good fortun on one 
side, there can be no occas for ani on the other. No matter which 
ha it, so that there is enough. I hate the idea of one great fortun 
look out for another. and to marri for money I think the wickedest 
thing in existence. good day. We shall be veri glad to see you at 
fullerton, whenev it is convenient.” and away she went. It wa not in 
the power of all hi gallantri to detain her longer. with such news to 
communicate, and such a visit to prepar for, her departur wa not 
to be delay by anyth in hi natur to urge; and she hurri away, 
leav him to the undivid conscious of hi own happi address, and 
her explicit encouragement. 

the agit which she had herself experienc on first learn her 
brother' engag made her expect to rais no inconsider emot 
in mr. and mrs. allen, by the commun of the wonder event. how 
great wa her disappointment! the import affair, which mani word of 
prepar usher in, had been foreseen by them both ever sinc 
her brother' arrival; and all that they felt on the occas wa 
comprehend in a wish for the young people' happiness, with a remark, 
on the gentleman' side, in favour of isabella' beauty, and on the 
lady's, of her great good luck. It wa to catherin the most surpris 
insensibility. the disclosure, however, of the great secret of james' 
go to fullerton the day before, did rais some emot in mrs. allen. 
she could not listen to that with perfect calmness, but repeatedli 
regret the necess of it concealment, wish she could have known 
hi intention, wish she could have seen him befor he went, as she 
should certainli have troubl him with her best regard to hi father 
and mother, and her kind compliment to all the skinners. 




chapter 16 


catherine' expect of pleasur from her visit in milsom street 
were so veri high that disappoint wa inevitable; and accordingly, 
though she wa most polit receiv by gener tilney, and kindli 
welcom by hi daughter, though henri wa at home, and no one els of 
the party, she found, on her return, without spend mani hour in 
the examin of her feelings, that she had gone to her appoint 
prepar for happi which it had not afforded. instead of find 
herself improv in acquaint with miss tilney, from the intercours 
of the day, she seem hardli so intim with her as before; instead 
of see henri tilney to greater advantag than ever, in the eas of a 
famili party, he had never said so little, nor been so littl agreeable; 
and, in spite of their father' great civil to her--in spite of hi 
thanks, invitations, and compliments--it had been a releas to get 
away from him. It puzzl her to account for all this. It could not 
be gener tilney' fault. that he wa perfectli agreeabl and 
good-natured, and altogeth a veri charm man, did not admit of a 
doubt, for he wa tall and handsome, and henry' father. He could not 
be account for hi children' want of spirits, or for her want of 
enjoy in hi company. the former she hope at last might have 
been accidental, and the latter she could onli attribut to her own 
stupidity. isabella, on hear the particular of the visit, gave 
a differ explanation: “it wa all pride, pride, insuffer 
haughti and pride! she had long suspect the famili to be veri 
high, and thi made it certain. such insol of behaviour as miss 
tilney' she had never heard of in her life! not to do the honour of 
her hous with common good breeding! To behav to her guest with such 
superciliousness! hardli even to speak to her!” 

“but it wa not so bad as that, isabella; there wa no superciliousness; 
she wa veri civil.” 

“oh! don't defend her! and then the brother, he, who had appear 
so attach to you! good heavens! well, some people' feel are 
incomprehensible. and so he hardli look onc at you the whole day?” 

“I do not say so; but he did not seem in good spirits.” 

“how contemptible! Of all thing in the world inconst is my 
aversion. let me entreat you never to think of him again, my dear 
catherine; inde he is unworthi of you.” 

“unworthy! I do not suppos he ever think of me.” 

“that is exactli what I say; he never think of you. such fickleness! 
oh! how differ to your brother and to mine! I realli believ john ha 
the most constant heart.” 

“but as for gener tilney, I assur you it would be imposs for 
anybodi to behav to me with greater civil and attention; it seem 
to be hi onli care to entertain and make me happy.” 

“oh! I know no harm of him; I do not suspect him of pride. I believ he 
is a veri gentleman-lik man. john think veri well of him, and john' 
judgment--” 

“well, I shall see how they behav to me thi evening; we shall meet 
them at the rooms.” 

“and must I go?” 

“do not you intend it? I thought it wa all settled.” 

“nay, sinc you make such a point of it, I can refus you nothing. but 
do not insist upon my be veri agreeable, for my heart, you know, will 
be some forti mile off. and as for dancing, do not mention it, I beg; 
that is quit out of the question. charl hodg will plagu me to 
death, I dare say; but I shall cut him veri short. ten to one but he 
guess the reason, and that is exactli what I want to avoid, so I shall 
insist on hi keep hi conjectur to himself.” 

isabella' opinion of the tilney did not influenc her friend; she wa 
sure there had been no insol in the manner either of brother or 
sister; and she did not credit there be ani pride in their hearts. 
the even reward her confidence; she wa met by one with the same 
kindness, and by the other with the same attention, as heretofore: miss 
tilney took pain to be near her, and henri ask her to dance. 

have heard the day befor in milsom street that their elder brother, 
captain tilney, wa expect almost everi hour, she wa at no loss for 
the name of a veri fashionable-looking, handsom young man, whom she had 
never seen before, and who now evid belong to their party. she 
look at him with great admiration, and even suppos it possibl that 
some peopl might think him handsom than hi brother, though, in her 
eyes, hi air wa more assuming, and hi counten less prepossessing. 
hi tast and manner were beyond a doubt decidedli inferior; for, 
within her hearing, he not onli protest against everi thought of 
danc himself, but even laugh openli at henri for find it 
possible. from the latter circumst it may be presum that, whatev 
might be our heroine' opinion of him, hi admir of her wa not 
of a veri danger kind; not like to produc animos between the 
brothers, nor persecut to the lady. He cannot be the instig of 
the three villain in horsemen' greatcoats, by whom she will hereaft 
be forc into a traveling-chais and four, which will drive off with 
incred speed. catherine, meanwhile, undisturb by presenti of 
such an evil, or of ani evil at all, except that of have but a short 
set to danc down, enjoy her usual happi with henri tilney, 
listen with sparkl eye to everyth he said; and, in find him 
irresistible, becom so herself. 

At the end of the first dance, captain tilney came toward them again, 
and, much to catherine' dissatisfaction, pull hi brother away. they 
retir whisper together; and, though her delic sensibl did 
not take immedi alarm, and lay it down as fact, that captain tilney 
must have heard some malevol misrepresent of her, which he now 
hasten to commun to hi brother, in the hope of separ them 
forever, she could not have her partner convey from her sight without 
veri uneasi sensations. her suspens wa of full five minutes' duration; 
and she wa begin to think it a veri long quarter of an hour, when 
they both returned, and an explan wa given, by henry' request 
to know if she thought her friend, miss thorpe, would have ani object 
to dancing, as hi brother would be most happi to be introduc to 
her. catherine, without hesitation, repli that she wa veri sure miss 
thorp did not mean to danc at all. the cruel repli wa pass on to 
the other, and he immedi walk away. 

“your brother will not mind it, I know,” said she, “becaus I heard him 
say befor that he hate dancing; but it wa veri good-natur in him 
to think of it. I suppos he saw isabella sit down, and fanci she 
might wish for a partner; but he is quit mistaken, for she would not 
danc upon ani account in the world.” 

henri smiled, and said, “how veri littl troubl it can give you to 
understand the motiv of other people' actions.” 

“why? what do you mean?” 

“with you, it is not, how is such a one like to be influenced, what 
is the induc most like to act upon such a person' feelings, age, 
situation, and probabl habit of life considered--but, how should I be 
influenced, what would be my induc in act so and so?” 

“I do not understand you.” 

“then we are on veri unequ terms, for I understand you perfectli 
well.” 

“me? yes; I cannot speak well enough to be unintelligible.” 

“bravo! An excel satir on modern language.” 

“but pray tell me what you mean.” 

“shall I indeed? Do you realli desir it? but you are not awar of the 
consequences; it will involv you in a veri cruel embarrassment, and 
certainli bring on a disagr between us.” 

“no, no; it shall not do either; I am not afraid.” 

“well, then, I onli meant that your attribut my brother' wish of 
danc with miss thorp to good natur alon convinc me of your be 
superior in good natur yourself to all the rest of the world.” 

catherin blush and disclaimed, and the gentleman' predict were 
verified. there wa a something, however, in hi word which repaid her 
for the pain of confusion; and that someth occupi her mind so much 
that she drew back for some time, forget to speak or to listen, and 
almost forget where she was; till, rous by the voic of isabella, 
she look up and saw her with captain tilney prepar to give them 
hand across. 

isabella shrug her shoulder and smiled, the onli explan of thi 
extraordinari chang which could at that time be given; but as it 
wa not quit enough for catherine' comprehension, she spoke her 
astonish in veri plain term to her partner. 

“I cannot think how it could happen! isabella wa so determin not to 
dance.” 

“and did isabella never chang her mind before?” 

“oh! but, because--and your brother! after what you told him from me, 
how could he think of go to ask her?” 

“I cannot take surpris to myself on that head. you bid me be surpris 
on your friend' account, and therefor I am; but as for my brother, hi 
conduct in the business, I must own, ha been no more than I believ 
him perfectli equal to. the fair of your friend wa an open 
attraction; her firmness, you know, could onli be understood by 
yourself.” 

“you are laughing; but, I assur you, isabella is veri firm in general.” 

“it is as much as should be said of anyone. To be alway firm must be 
to be often obstinate. when properli to relax is the trial of judgment; 
and, without refer to my brother, I realli think miss thorp ha by 
no mean chosen ill in fix on the present hour.” 

the friend were not abl to get togeth for ani confidenti discours 
till all the danc wa over; but then, as they walk about the room 
arm in arm, isabella thu explain herself: “I do not wonder at your 
surprise; and I am realli fatigu to death. He is such a rattle! 
amus enough, if my mind had been disengaged; but I would have given 
the world to sit still.” 

“then whi did not you?” 

“oh! My dear! It would have look so particular; and you know how I 
abhor do that. I refus him as long as I possibl could, but he 
would take no denial. you have no idea how he press me. I beg him 
to excus me, and get some other partner--but no, not he; after aspir 
to my hand, there wa nobodi els in the room he could bear to think of; 
and it wa not that he want mere to dance, he want to be with 
me. oh! such nonsense! I told him he had taken a veri unlik way to 
prevail upon me; for, of all thing in the world, I hate fine speech 
and compliments; and so--and so then I found there would be no peac if 
I did not stand up. besides, I thought mrs. hughes, who introduc him, 
might take it ill if I did not: and your dear brother, I am sure he 
would have been miser if I had sat down the whole evening. I am 
so glad it is over! My spirit are quit jade with listen to hi 
nonsense: and then, be such a smart young fellow, I saw everi eye wa 
upon us.” 

“he is veri handsom indeed.” 

“handsome! yes, I suppos he may. I dare say peopl would admir him 
in general; but he is not at all in my style of beauty. I hate a florid 
complexion and dark eye in a man. however, he is veri well. amazingli 
conceited, I am sure. I took him down sever times, you know, in my 
way.” 

when the young ladi next met, they had a far more interest subject 
to discuss. jame morland' second letter wa then received, and the 
kind intent of hi father fulli explained. A living, of which mr. 
morland wa himself patron and incumbent, of about four hundr pound 
yearli value, wa to be resign to hi son as soon as he should be 
old enough to take it; no trifl deduct from the famili income, no 
niggardli assign to one of ten children. An estat of at least equal 
value, moreover, wa assur as hi futur inheritance. 

jame express himself on the occas with becom gratitude; and 
the necess of wait between two and three year befor they could 
marry, being, howev unwelcome, no more than he had expected, wa born 
by him without discontent. catherine, whose expect had been as 
unfix as her idea of her father' income, and whose judgment wa now 
entir led by her brother, felt equal well satisfied, and heartili 
congratul isabella on have everyth so pleasantli settled. 

“it is veri charm indeed,” said isabella, with a grave face. “mr. 
morland ha behav vastli handsom indeed,” said the gentl mrs. 
thorpe, look anxious at her daughter. “I onli wish I could do as 
much. one could not expect more from him, you know. If he find he 
can do more by and by, I dare say he will, for I am sure he must be an 
excel good-heart man. four hundr is but a small incom to begin 
on indeed, but your wishes, my dear isabella, are so moderate, you do 
not consid how littl you ever want, my dear.” 

“it is not on my own account I wish for more; but I cannot bear to 
be the mean of injur my dear morland, make him sit down upon an 
incom hardli enough to find one in the common necessari of life. for 
myself, it is nothing; I never think of myself.” 

“I know you never do, my dear; and you will alway find your reward in 
the affect it make everybodi feel for you. there never wa a young 
woman so belov as you are by everybodi that know you; and I dare say 
when mr. morland see you, my dear child--but do not let us distress 
our dear catherin by talk of such things. mr. morland ha behav so 
veri handsome, you know. I alway heard he wa a most excel man; 
and you know, my dear, we are not to suppos but what, if you had had a 
suitabl fortune, he would have come down with someth more, for I am 
sure he must be a most liberal-mind man.” 

“nobodi can think better of mr. morland than I do, I am sure. but 
everybodi ha their failing, you know, and everybodi ha a right to 
do what they like with their own money.” catherin wa hurt by these 
insinuations. “I am veri sure,” said she, “that my father ha promis 
to do as much as he can afford.” 

isabella recollect herself. “a to that, my sweet catherine, there 
cannot be a doubt, and you know me well enough to be sure that a much 
smaller incom would satisfi me. It is not the want of more money that 
make me just at present a littl out of spirits; I hate money; and if 
our union could take place now upon onli fifti pound a year, I should 
not have a wish unsatisfied. ah! my catherine, you have found me out. 
there' the sting. the long, long, endless two year and half that are 
to pass befor your brother can hold the living.” 

“yes, yes, my darl isabella,” said mrs. thorpe, “we perfectli see 
into your heart. you have no disguise. We perfectli understand the 
present vexation; and everybodi must love you the better for such a 
nobl honest affection.” 

catherine' uncomfort feel began to lessen. she endeavour to 
believ that the delay of the marriag wa the onli sourc of isabella' 
regret; and when she saw her at their next interview as cheer and 
amiabl as ever, endeavour to forget that she had for a minut thought 
otherwise. jame soon follow hi letter, and wa receiv with the 
most gratifi kindness. 




chapter 17 


the allen had now enter on the sixth week of their stay in bath; and 
whether it should be the last wa for some time a question, to which 
catherin listen with a beat heart. To have her acquaint with 
the tilney end so soon wa an evil which noth could counterbalance. 
her whole happi seem at stake, while the affair wa in suspense, 
and everyth secur when it wa determin that the lodg should 
be taken for anoth fortnight. what thi addit fortnight wa to 
produc to her beyond the pleasur of sometim see henri tilney made 
but a small part of catherine' speculation. onc or twice indeed, sinc 
james' engag had taught her what could be done, she had got so 
far as to indulg in a secret “perhaps,” but in gener the felic of 
be with him for the present bound her views: the present wa now 
compris in anoth three weeks, and her happi be certain for 
that period, the rest of her life wa at such a distanc as to excit 
but littl interest. In the cours of the morn which saw thi 
busi arranged, she visit miss tilney, and pour forth her 
joy feelings. It wa doom to be a day of trial. No sooner had she 
express her delight in mr. allen' lengthen stay than miss tilney 
told her of her father' have just determin upon quit bath 
by the end of anoth week. here wa a blow! the past suspens of 
the morn had been eas and quiet to the present disappointment. 
catherine' counten fell, and in a voic of most sincer concern she 
echo miss tilney' conclud words, “bi the end of anoth week!” 

“yes, my father can seldom be prevail on to give the water what I 
think a fair trial. He ha been disappoint of some friends' arriv 
whom he expect to meet here, and as he is now pretti well, is in a 
hurri to get home.” 

“I am veri sorri for it,” said catherin dejectedly; “if I had known 
thi before--” 

“perhaps,” said miss tilney in an embarrass manner, “you would be so 
good--it would make me veri happi if--” 

the entranc of her father put a stop to the civility, which catherin 
wa begin to hope might introduc a desir of their corresponding. 
after address her with hi usual politeness, he turn to hi 
daughter and said, “well, eleanor, may I congratul you on be 
success in your applic to your fair friend?” 

“I wa just begin to make the request, sir, as you came in.” 

“well, proceed by all means. I know how much your heart is in it. My 
daughter, miss morland,” he continued, without leav hi daughter time 
to speak, “ha been form a veri bold wish. We leav bath, as she ha 
perhap told you, on saturday se'nnight. A letter from my steward tell 
me that my presenc is want at home; and be disappoint in my hope 
of see the marqui of longtown and gener courteney here, some of 
my veri old friends, there is noth to detain me longer in bath. and 
could we carri our selfish point with you, we should leav it without a 
singl regret. can you, in short, be prevail on to quit thi scene 
of public triumph and oblig your friend eleanor with your compani in 
gloucestershire? I am almost asham to make the request, though it 
presumpt would certainli appear greater to everi creatur in bath 
than yourself. modesti such as yours--but not for the world would I pain 
it by open praise. If you can be induc to honour us with a visit, 
you will make us happi beyond expression. 'ti true, we can offer you 
noth like the gaieti of thi live place; we can tempt you neither 
by amus nor splendour, for our mode of living, as you see, is plain 
and unpretending; yet no endeavour shall be want on our side to make 
northang abbey not wholli disagreeable.” 

northang abbey! these were thrill words, and wound up catherine' 
feel to the highest point of ecstasy. her grate and gratifi 
heart could hardli restrain it express within the languag of 
toler calmness. To receiv so flatter an invitation! To have her 
compani so warmli solicited! everyth honour and soothing, everi 
present enjoyment, and everi futur hope wa contain in it; and her 
acceptance, with onli the save claus of papa and mamma' approbation, 
wa eagerli given. “I will write home directly,” said she, “and if they 
do not object, as I dare say they will not--” 

gener tilney wa not less sanguine, have alreadi wait on her 
excel friend in pulteney street, and obtain their sanction of 
hi wishes. “sinc they can consent to part with you,” said he, “we may 
expect philosophi from all the world.” 

miss tilney wa earnest, though gentle, in her secondari civilities, and 
the affair becam in a few minut as nearli settl as thi necessari 
refer to fullerton would allow. 

the circumst of the morn had led catherine' feel through 
the varieti of suspense, security, and disappointment; but they were 
now safe lodg in perfect bliss; and with spirit elat to rapture, 
with henri at her heart, and northang abbey on her lips, she 
hurri home to write her letter. mr. and mrs. morland, reli on 
the discret of the friend to whom they had alreadi entrust their 
daughter, felt no doubt of the proprieti of an acquaint which had 
been form under their eye, and sent therefor by return of post their 
readi consent to her visit in gloucestershire. thi indulgence, though 
not more than catherin had hope for, complet her convict of be 
favour beyond everi other human creature, in friend and fortune, 
circumst and chance. everyth seem to cooper for her 
advantage. By the kind of her first friends, the allens, she had 
been introduc into scene where pleasur of everi kind had met her. 
her feelings, her preferences, had each known the happi of a return. 
wherev she felt attachment, she had been abl to creat it. the 
affect of isabella wa to be secur to her in a sister. the tilneys, 
they, by whom, abov all, she desir to be favour thought of, 
outstrip even her wish in the flatter measur by which their 
intimaci wa to be continued. she wa to be their chosen visitor, she 
wa to be for week under the same roof with the person whose societi 
she mostli prized--and, in addit to all the rest, thi roof wa to 
be the roof of an abbey! her passion for ancient edific wa next in 
degre to her passion for henri tilney--and castl and abbey made 
usual the charm of those reveri which hi imag did not fill. To see 
and explor either the rampart and keep of the one, or the cloister 
of the other, had been for mani week a darl wish, though to be more 
than the visitor of an hour had seem too nearli imposs for desire. 
and yet, thi wa to happen. with all the chanc against her of house, 
hall, place, park, court, and cottage, northang turn up an abbey, 
and she wa to be it inhabitant. it long, damp passages, it narrow 
cell and ruin chapel, were to be within her daili reach, and she 
could not entir subdu the hope of some tradit legends, some 
aw memori of an injur and ill-fat nun. 

It wa wonder that her friend should seem so littl elat by the 
possess of such a home, that the conscious of it should be so 
meekli borne. the power of earli habit onli could account for it. A 
distinct to which they had been born gave no pride. their superior 
of abod wa no more to them than their superior of person. 

mani were the inquiri she wa eager to make of miss tilney; but so 
activ were her thoughts, that when these inquiri were answered, she 
wa hardli more assur than before, of northang abbey have been 
a richli endow convent at the time of the reformation, of it have 
fallen into the hand of an ancestor of the tilney on it dissolution, 
of a larg portion of the ancient build still make a part of the 
present dwell although the rest wa decayed, or of it stand low 
in a valley, shelter from the north and east by rise wood of oak. 




chapter 18 


with a mind thu full of happiness, catherin wa hardli awar that two 
or three day had pass away, without her see isabella for more than 
a few minut together. she began first to be sensibl of this, and 
to sigh for her conversation, as she walk along the pump-room one 
morning, by mrs. allen' side, without anyth to say or to hear; and 
scarc had she felt a five minutes' long of friendship, befor the 
object of it appeared, and invit her to a secret conference, led the 
way to a seat. “thi is my favourit place,” said she as they sat 
down on a bench between the doors, which command a toler view of 
everybodi enter at either; “it is so out of the way.” 

catherine, observ that isabella' eye were continu bent toward 
one door or the other, as in eager expectation, and rememb how 
often she had been fals accus of be arch, thought the present a 
fine opportun for be realli so; and therefor gaili said, “do not 
be uneasy, isabella, jame will soon be here.” 

“psha! My dear creature,” she replied, “do not think me such a simpleton 
as to be alway want to confin him to my elbow. It would be hideou 
to be alway together; we should be the jest of the place. and so you 
are go to northanger! I am amazingli glad of it. It is one of the 
finest old place in england, I understand. I shall depend upon a most 
particular descript of it.” 

“you shall certainli have the best in my power to give. but who are you 
look for? are your sister coming?” 

“I am not look for anybody. one' eye must be somewhere, and you 
know what a foolish trick I have of fix mine, when my thought are an 
hundr mile off. I am amazingli absent; I believ I am the most absent 
creatur in the world. tilney say it is alway the case with mind of a 
certain stamp.” 

“but I thought, isabella, you had someth in particular to tell me?” 

“oh! yes, and so I have. but here is a proof of what I wa saying. My 
poor head, I had quit forgot it. well, the thing is this: I have just 
had a letter from john; you can guess the contents.” 

“no, indeed, I cannot.” 

“mi sweet love, do not be so abomin affected. what can he write 
about, but yourself? you know he is over head and ear in love with 
you.” 

“with me, dear isabella!” 

“nay, my sweetest catherine, thi is be quit absurd! modesty, and 
all that, is veri well in it way, but realli a littl common honesti is 
sometim quit as becoming. I have no idea of be so overstrained! 
It is fish for compliments. hi attent were such as a child must 
have noticed. and it wa but half an hour befor he left bath that you 
gave him the most posit encouragement. He say so in thi letter, 
say that he as good as made you an offer, and that you receiv hi 
advanc in the kindest way; and now he want me to urg hi suit, 
and say all manner of pretti thing to you. So it is in vain to affect 
ignorance.” 

catherine, with all the earnest of truth, express her astonish 
at such a charge, protest her innoc of everi thought of mr. 
thorpe' be in love with her, and the consequ imposs of 
her have ever intend to encourag him. “a to ani attent on hi 
side, I do declare, upon my honour, I never wa sensibl of them for a 
moment--except just hi ask me to danc the first day of hi coming. 
and as to make me an offer, or anyth like it, there must be some 
unaccount mistake. I could not have misunderstood a thing of that 
kind, you know! and, as I ever wish to be believed, I solemnli protest 
that no syllabl of such a natur ever pass between us. the last half 
hour befor he went away! It must be all and complet a mistake--for I 
did not see him onc that whole morning.” 

“but that you certainli did, for you spent the whole morn in edgar' 
buildings--it wa the day your father' consent came--and I am pretti 
sure that you and john were alon in the parlour some time befor you 
left the house.” 

“are you? well, if you say it, it wa so, I dare say--but for the life 
of me, I cannot recollect it. I do rememb now be with you, and 
see him as well as the rest--but that we were ever alon for five 
minutes--however, it is not worth argu about, for whatev might pass 
on hi side, you must be convinced, by my have no recollect of it, 
that I never thought, nor expected, nor wish for anyth of the kind 
from him. I am excess concern that he should have ani regard for 
me--but inde it ha been quit unintent on my side; I never had 
the smallest idea of it. pray undec him as soon as you can, and tell 
him I beg hi pardon--that is--i do not know what I ought to say--but 
make him understand what I mean, in the properest way. I would not speak 
disrespect of a brother of yours, isabella, I am sure; but you know 
veri well that if I could think of one man more than another--h is not 
the person.” isabella wa silent. “mi dear friend, you must not be angri 
with me. I cannot suppos your brother care so veri much about me. and, 
you know, we shall still be sisters.” 

“yes, yes” (with a blush), “there are more way than one of our be 
sisters. but where am I wander to? well, my dear catherine, the case 
seem to be that you are determin against poor john--i not it so?” 

“I certainli cannot return hi affection, and as certainli never meant 
to encourag it.” 

“sinc that is the case, I am sure I shall not teas you ani further. 
john desir me to speak to you on the subject, and therefor I have. 
but I confess, as soon as I read hi letter, I thought it a veri 
foolish, imprud business, and not like to promot the good of 
either; for what were you to live upon, suppos you came together? you 
have both of you something, to be sure, but it is not a trifl that will 
support a famili nowadays; and after all that romanc may say, there 
is no do without money. I onli wonder john could think of it; he 
could not have receiv my last.” 

“you do acquit me, then, of anyth wrong?--you are convinc that I 
never meant to deceiv your brother, never suspect him of like me 
till thi moment?” 

“oh! As to that,” answer isabella laughingly, “I do not pretend to 
determin what your thought and design in time past may have been. all 
that is best known to yourself. A littl harmless flirtat or so will 
occur, and one is often drawn on to give more encourag than one 
wish to stand by. but you may be assur that I am the last person in 
the world to judg you severely. all those thing should be allow for 
in youth and high spirits. what one mean one day, you know, one may not 
mean the next. circumst change, opinion alter.” 

“but my opinion of your brother never did alter; it wa alway the same. 
you are describ what never happened.” 

“mi dearest catherine,” continu the other without at all listen to 
her, “I would not for all the world be the mean of hurri you into an 
engag befor you knew what you were about. I do not think anyth 
would justifi me in wish you to sacrific all your happi mere 
to oblig my brother, becaus he is my brother, and who perhap after 
all, you know, might be just as happi without you, for peopl seldom 
know what they would be at, young men especially, they are so amazingli 
changeabl and inconstant. what I say is, whi should a brother' 
happi be dearer to me than a friend's? you know I carri my notion 
of friendship pretti high. but, abov all things, my dear catherine, do 
not be in a hurry. take my word for it, that if you are in too great 
a hurry, you will certainli live to repent it. tilney say there is 
noth peopl are so often deceiv in as the state of their own 
affections, and I believ he is veri right. ah! here he comes; never 
mind, he will not see us, I am sure.” 

catherine, look up, perceiv captain tilney; and isabella, 
earnestli fix her eye on him as she spoke, soon caught hi notice. He 
approach immediately, and took the seat to which her movement invit 
him. hi first address made catherin start. though spoken low, she 
could distinguish, “what! alway to be watched, in person or by proxy!” 

“psha, nonsense!” wa isabella' answer in the same half whisper. “whi 
do you put such thing into my head? If I could believ it--mi spirit, 
you know, is pretti independent.” 

“I wish your heart were independent. that would be enough for me.” 

“mi heart, indeed! what can you have to do with hearts? you men have 
none of you ani hearts.” 

“if we have not hearts, we have eyes; and they give us torment enough.” 

“do they? I am sorri for it; I am sorri they find anyth so 
disagre in me. I will look anoth way. I hope thi pleas you” 
(turn her back on him); “I hope your eye are not torment now.” 

“never more so; for the edg of a bloom cheek is still in view--at 
onc too much and too little.” 

catherin heard all this, and quit out of countenance, could listen 
no longer. amaz that isabella could endur it, and jealou for her 
brother, she rose up, and say she should join mrs. allen, propos 
their walking. but for thi isabella show no inclination. she wa so 
amazingli tired, and it wa so odiou to parad about the pump-room; 
and if she move from her seat she should miss her sisters; she wa 
expect her sister everi moment; so that her dearest catherin must 
excus her, and must sit quietli down again. but catherin could be 
stubborn too; and mrs. allen just then come up to propos their 
return home, she join her and walk out of the pump-room, leav 
isabella still sit with captain tilney. with much uneasi did 
she thu leav them. It seem to her that captain tilney wa fall 
in love with isabella, and isabella unconsci encourag him; 
unconsci it must be, for isabella' attach to jame wa as 
certain and well acknowledg as her engagement. To doubt her truth 
or good intent wa impossible; and yet, dure the whole of their 
convers her manner had been odd. she wish isabella had talk 
more like her usual self, and not so much about money, and had not 
look so well pleas at the sight of captain tilney. how strang that 
she should not perceiv hi admiration! catherin long to give her a 
hint of it, to put her on her guard, and prevent all the pain which 
her too live behaviour might otherwis creat both for him and her 
brother. 

the compliment of john thorpe' affect did not make amend for thi 
thoughtless in hi sister. she wa almost as far from believ as 
from wish it to be sincere; for she had not forgotten that he 
could mistake, and hi assert of the offer and of her encourag 
convinc her that hi mistak could sometim be veri egregious. 
In vanity, therefore, she gain but little; her chief profit wa in 
wonder. that he should think it worth hi while to fanci himself in love 
with her wa a matter of live astonishment. isabella talk of hi 
attentions; she had never been sensibl of any; but isabella had said 
mani thing which she hope had been spoken in haste, and would never 
be said again; and upon thi she wa glad to rest altogeth for present 
eas and comfort. 




chapter 19 


A few day pass away, and catherine, though not allow herself to 
suspect her friend, could not help watch her closely. the result of 
her observ wa not agreeable. isabella seem an alter creature. 
when she saw her, indeed, surround onli by their immedi friend 
in edgar' build or pulteney street, her chang of manner wa so 
trifl that, had it gone no farther, it might have pass unnoticed. 
A someth of languid indifference, or of that boast absenc of 
mind which catherin had never heard of before, would occasion come 
across her; but had noth wors appeared, that might onli have spread 
a new grace and inspir a warmer interest. but when catherin saw her 
in public, admit captain tilney' attent as readili as they were 
offered, and allow him almost an equal share with jame in her notic 
and smiles, the alter becam too posit to be pass over. what 
could be meant by such unsteadi conduct, what her friend could be at, 
wa beyond her comprehension. isabella could not be awar of the pain 
she wa inflicting; but it wa a degre of wil thoughtless which 
catherin could not but resent. jame wa the sufferer. she saw him 
grave and uneasy; and howev careless of hi present comfort the woman 
might be who had given him her heart, to her it wa alway an object. 
for poor captain tilney too she wa greatli concerned. though hi look 
did not pleas her, hi name wa a passport to her goodwill, and she 
thought with sincer compass of hi approach disappointment; for, 
in spite of what she had believ herself to overhear in the pump-room, 
hi behaviour wa so incompat with a knowledg of isabella' 
engag that she could not, upon reflection, imagin him awar of it. 
He might be jealou of her brother as a rival, but if more had seem 
implied, the fault must have been in her misapprehension. she wished, by 
a gentl remonstrance, to remind isabella of her situation, and make 
her awar of thi doubl unkindness; but for remonstrance, either 
opportun or comprehens wa alway against her. If abl to suggest 
a hint, isabella could never understand it. In thi distress, the 
intend departur of the tilney famili becam her chief consolation; 
their journey into gloucestershir wa to take place within a few days, 
and captain tilney' remov would at least restor peac to everi heart 
but hi own. but captain tilney had at present no intent of removing; 
he wa not to be of the parti to northanger; he wa to continu at bath. 
when catherin knew this, her resolut wa directli made. she spoke to 
henri tilney on the subject, regret hi brother' evid partial 
for miss thorpe, and entreat him to make known her prior engagement. 

“mi brother doe know it,” wa henry' answer. 

“doe he? then whi doe he stay here?” 

He made no reply, and wa begin to talk of someth else; but she 
eagerli continued, “whi do not you persuad him to go away? the longer 
he stays, the wors it will be for him at last. pray advis him for hi 
own sake, and for everybody' sake, to leav bath directly. absenc will 
in time make him comfort again; but he can have no hope here, and it 
is onli stay to be miserable.” 

henri smile and said, “I am sure my brother would not wish to do that.” 

“then you will persuad him to go away?” 

“persuas is not at command; but pardon me, if I cannot even endeavour 
to persuad him. I have myself told him that miss thorp is engaged. He 
know what he is about, and must be hi own master.” 

“no, he doe not know what he is about,” cri catherine; “he doe not 
know the pain he is give my brother. not that jame ha ever told me 
so, but I am sure he is veri uncomfortable.” 

“and are you sure it is my brother' doing?” 

“yes, veri sure.” 

“i it my brother' attent to miss thorpe, or miss thorpe' 
admiss of them, that give the pain?” 

“i not it the same thing?” 

“I think mr. morland would acknowledg a difference. No man is offend 
by anoth man' admir of the woman he loves; it is the woman onli 
who can make it a torment.” 

catherin blush for her friend, and said, “isabella is wrong. but I 
am sure she cannot mean to torment, for she is veri much attach to my 
brother. she ha been in love with him ever sinc they first met, and 
while my father' consent wa uncertain, she fret herself almost into 
a fever. you know she must be attach to him.” 

“I understand: she is in love with james, and flirt with frederick.” 

“oh! no, not flirts. A woman in love with one man cannot flirt with 
another.” 

“it is probabl that she will neither love so well, nor flirt so 
well, as she might do either singly. the gentlemen must each give up a 
little.” 

after a short pause, catherin resum with, “then you do not believ 
isabella so veri much attach to my brother?” 

“I can have no opinion on that subject.” 

“but what can your brother mean? If he know her engagement, what can he 
mean by hi behaviour?” 

“you are a veri close questioner.” 

“am I? I onli ask what I want to be told.” 

“but do you onli ask what I can be expect to tell?” 

“yes, I think so; for you must know your brother' heart.” 

“mi brother' heart, as you term it, on the present occasion, I assur 
you I can onli guess at.” 

“well?” 

“well! nay, if it is to be guesswork, let us all guess for ourselves. To 
be guid by second-hand conjectur is pitiful. the premis are befor 
you. My brother is a live and perhap sometim a thoughtless young 
man; he ha had about a week' acquaint with your friend, and he ha 
known her engag almost as long as he ha known her.” 

“well,” said catherine, after some moments' consideration, “you may be 
abl to guess at your brother' intent from all this; but I am sure 
I cannot. but is not your father uncomfort about it? doe not he 
want captain tilney to go away? sure, if your father were to speak to 
him, he would go.” 

“mi dear miss morland,” said henry, “in thi amiabl solicitud for your 
brother' comfort, may you not be a littl mistaken? are you not carri 
a littl too far? would he thank you, either on hi own account or 
miss thorpe's, for suppos that her affection, or at least her good 
behaviour, is onli to be secur by her see noth of captain 
tilney? Is he safe onli in solitude? Or is her heart constant to him 
onli when unsolicit by anyon else? He cannot think this--and you may 
be sure that he would not have you think it. I will not say, 'do not 
be uneasy,' becaus I know that you are so, at thi moment; but be as 
littl uneasi as you can. you have no doubt of the mutual attach 
of your brother and your friend; depend upon it, therefore, that 
real jealousi never can exist between them; depend upon it that no 
disagr between them can be of ani duration. their heart are open 
to each other, as neither heart can be to you; they know exactli what 
is requir and what can be borne; and you may be certain that one will 
never teas the other beyond what is known to be pleasant.” 

perceiv her still to look doubt and grave, he added, “though 
frederick doe not leav bath with us, he will probabl remain but a 
veri short time, perhap onli a few day behind us. hi leav of absenc 
will soon expire, and he must return to hi regiment. and what will then 
be their acquaintance? the mess-room will drink isabella thorp for 
a fortnight, and she will laugh with your brother over poor tilney' 
passion for a month.” 

catherin would contend no longer against comfort. she had resist it 
approach dure the whole length of a speech, but it now carri her 
captive. henri tilney must know best. she blame herself for the extent 
of her fears, and resolv never to think so serious on the subject 
again. 

her resolut wa support by isabella' behaviour in their part 
interview. the thorp spent the last even of catherine' stay in 
pulteney street, and noth pass between the lover to excit 
her uneasiness, or make her quit them in apprehension. jame wa in 
excel spirits, and isabella most engagingli placid. her tender 
for her friend seem rather the first feel of her heart; but that 
at such a moment wa allowable; and onc she gave her lover a flat 
contradiction, and onc she drew back her hand; but catherin rememb 
henry' instructions, and place it all to judici affection. the 
embraces, tears, and promis of the part fair one may be fancied. 




chapter 20 


mr. and mrs. allen were sorri to lose their young friend, whose good 
humour and cheer had made her a valuabl companion, and in the 
promot of whose enjoy their own had been gentli increased. her 
happi in go with miss tilney, however, prevent their wish 
it otherwise; and, as they were to remain onli one more week in bath 
themselves, her quit them now would not long be felt. mr. allen 
attend her to milsom street, where she wa to breakfast, and saw her 
seat with the kindest welcom among her new friends; but so great wa 
her agit in find herself as one of the family, and so fear 
wa she of not do exactli what wa right, and of not be abl to 
preserv their good opinion, that, in the embarrass of the first 
five minutes, she could almost have wish to return with him to 
pulteney street. 

miss tilney' manner and henry' smile soon did away some of her 
unpleas feelings; but still she wa far from be at ease; nor could 
the incess attent of the gener himself entir reassur her. 
nay, pervers as it seemed, she doubt whether she might not have felt 
less, had she been less attend to. hi anxieti for her comfort--hi 
continu solicit that she would eat, and hi often-express 
fear of her see noth to her taste--though never in her life 
befor had she beheld half such varieti on a breakfast-table--mad it 
imposs for her to forget for a moment that she wa a visitor. she 
felt utterli unworthi of such respect, and knew not how to repli to it. 
her tranquil wa not improv by the general' impati for the 
appear of hi eldest son, nor by the displeasur he express at hi 
lazi when captain tilney at last came down. she wa quit pain by 
the sever of hi father' reproof, which seem disproportion to 
the offence; and much wa her concern increas when she found herself 
the princip caus of the lecture, and that hi tardi wa chiefli 
resent from be disrespect to her. thi wa place her in a 
veri uncomfort situation, and she felt great compass for captain 
tilney, without be abl to hope for hi goodwill. 

He listen to hi father in silence, and attempt not ani defence, 
which confirm her in fear that the inquietud of hi mind, on 
isabella' account, might, by keep him long sleepless, have been 
the real caus of hi rise late. It wa the first time of her be 
decidedli in hi company, and she had hope to be now abl to form 
her opinion of him; but she scarc heard hi voic while hi father 
remain in the room; and even afterwards, so much were hi spirit 
affected, she could distinguish noth but these words, in a whisper to 
eleanor, “how glad I shall be when you are all off.” 

the bustl of go wa not pleasant. the clock struck ten while the 
trunk were carri down, and the gener had fix to be out of milsom 
street by that hour. hi greatcoat, instead of be brought for him 
to put on directly, wa spread out in the curricl in which he wa to 
accompani hi son. the middl seat of the chais wa not drawn out, 
though there were three peopl to go in it, and hi daughter' maid had 
so crowd it with parcel that miss morland would not have room to sit; 
and, so much wa he influenc by thi apprehens when he hand her 
in, that she had some difficulti in save her own new writing-desk from 
be thrown out into the street. At last, however, the door wa close 
upon the three females, and they set off at the sober pace in which 
the handsome, highli fed four hors of a gentleman usual perform a 
journey of thirti miles: such wa the distanc of northang from bath, 
to be now divid into two equal stages. catherine' spirit reviv as 
they drove from the door; for with miss tilney she felt no restraint; 
and, with the interest of a road entir new to her, of an abbey 
before, and a curricl behind, she caught the last view of bath without 
ani regret, and met with everi mileston befor she expect it. the 
tedious of a two hours' wait at petti france, in which there wa 
noth to be done but to eat without be hungry, and loiter about 
without anyth to see, next followed--and her admir of the style 
in which they travelled, of the fashion chais and four--postilion 
handsom liveried, rise so regularli in their stirrups, and 
numer outrid properli mounted, sunk a littl under thi consequ 
inconvenience. had their parti been perfectli agreeable, the delay would 
have been nothing; but gener tilney, though so charm a man, seem 
alway a check upon hi children' spirits, and scarc anyth wa 
said but by himself; the observ of which, with hi discont at 
whatev the inn afforded, and hi angri impati at the waiters, made 
catherin grow everi moment more in awe of him, and appear to lengthen 
the two hour into four. At last, however, the order of releas wa 
given; and much wa catherin then surpris by the general' propos 
of her take hi place in hi son' curricl for the rest of the 
journey: “the day wa fine, and he wa anxiou for her see as much of 
the countri as possible.” 

the remembr of mr. allen' opinion, respect young men' open 
carriages, made her blush at the mention of such a plan, and her first 
thought wa to declin it; but her second wa of greater defer for 
gener tilney' judgment; he could not propos anyth improp for 
her; and, in the cours of a few minutes, she found herself with henri 
in the curricle, as happi a be as ever existed. A veri short trial 
convinc her that a curricl wa the prettiest equipag in the world; 
the chais and four wheel off with some grandeur, to be sure, but it 
wa a heavi and troublesom business, and she could not easili forget 
it have stop two hour at petti france. half the time would 
have been enough for the curricle, and so nimbl were the light hors 
dispos to move, that, had not the gener chosen to have hi own 
carriag lead the way, they could have pass it with eas in half a 
minute. but the merit of the curricl did not all belong to the horses; 
henri drove so well--so quietly--without make ani disturbance, 
without parad to her, or swear at them: so differ from the onli 
gentleman-coachman whom it wa in her power to compar him with! and 
then hi hat sat so well, and the innumer cape of hi greatcoat 
look so becomingli important! To be driven by him, next to be 
danc with him, wa certainli the greatest happi in the world. In 
addit to everi other delight, she had now that of listen to her 
own praise; of be thank at least, on hi sister' account, for 
her kind in thu becom her visitor; of hear it rank as real 
friendship, and describ as creat real gratitude. hi sister, he 
said, wa uncomfort circumstanced--sh had no femal companion--and, 
in the frequent absenc of her father, wa sometim without ani 
companion at all. 

“but how can that be?” said catherine. “are not you with her?” 

“northang is not more than half my home; I have an establish at 
my own hous in woodston, which is nearli twenti mile from my father's, 
and some of my time is necessarili spent there.” 

“how sorri you must be for that!” 

“I am alway sorri to leav eleanor.” 

“yes; but besid your affect for her, you must be so fond of 
the abbey! after be use to such a home as the abbey, an ordinari 
parsonage-hous must be veri disagreeable.” 

He smiled, and said, “you have form a veri favour idea of the 
abbey.” 

“to be sure, I have. Is not it a fine old place, just like what one 
read about?” 

“and are you prepar to encount all the horror that a build such 
as 'what one read about' may produce? have you a stout heart? nerv 
fit for slide panel and tapestry?” 

“oh! yes--i do not think I should be easili frightened, becaus there 
would be so mani peopl in the house--and besides, it ha never been 
uninhabit and left desert for years, and then the famili come back 
to it unawares, without give ani notice, as gener happens.” 

“no, certainly. We shall not have to explor our way into a hall dimli 
light by the expir ember of a wood fire--nor be oblig to spread 
our bed on the floor of a room without windows, doors, or furniture. 
but you must be awar that when a young ladi is (bi whatev means) 
introduc into a dwell of thi kind, she is alway lodg apart from 
the rest of the family. while they snugli repair to their own end of the 
house, she is formal conduct by dorothy, the ancient housekeeper, up 
a differ staircase, and along mani gloomi passages, into an apart 
never use sinc some cousin or kin die in it about twenti year 
before. can you stand such a ceremoni as this? will not your mind 
misgiv you when you find yourself in thi gloomi chamber--too lofti and 
extens for you, with onli the feebl ray of a singl lamp to take 
in it size--it wall hung with tapestri exhibit figur as larg as 
life, and the bed, of dark green stuff or purpl velvet, present even 
a funer appearance? will not your heart sink within you?” 

“oh! but thi will not happen to me, I am sure.” 

“how fear will you examin the furnitur of your apartment! and 
what will you discern? not tables, toilettes, wardrobes, or drawers, 
but on one side perhap the remain of a broken lute, on the other a 
ponder chest which no effort can open, and over the fireplac 
the portrait of some handsom warrior, whose featur will so 
incomprehens strike you, that you will not be abl to withdraw your 
eye from it. dorothy, meanwhile, no less struck by your appearance, 
gaze on you in great agitation, and drop a few unintellig hints. 
To rais your spirits, moreover, she give you reason to suppos that 
the part of the abbey you inhabit is undoubtedli haunted, and inform 
you that you will not have a singl domest within call. with thi 
part cordial she curtsi off--you listen to the sound of her 
reced footstep as long as the last echo can reach you--and when, 
with faint spirits, you attempt to fasten your door, you discover, 
with increas alarm, that it ha no lock.” 

“oh! mr. tilney, how frightful! thi is just like a book! but it cannot 
realli happen to me. I am sure your housekeep is not realli dorothy. 
well, what then?” 

“noth further to alarm perhap may occur the first night. after 
surmount your unconquer horror of the bed, you will retir to 
rest, and get a few hours' unquiet slumber. but on the second, or at 
farthest the third night after your arrival, you will probabl have a 
violent storm. peal of thunder so loud as to seem to shake the edific 
to it foundat will roll round the neighbour mountains--and dure 
the fright gust of wind which accompani it, you will probabl think 
you discern (for your lamp is not extinguished) one part of the hang 
more violent agit than the rest. unabl of cours to repress your 
curios in so favour a moment for indulg it, you will instantli 
arise, and throw your dressing-gown around you, proceed to examin 
thi mystery. after a veri short search, you will discov a divis in 
the tapestri so art construct as to defi the minutest inspection, 
and on open it, a door will immedi appear--which door, be 
onli secur by massi bar and a padlock, you will, after a few efforts, 
succeed in opening--and, with your lamp in your hand, will pass through 
it into a small vault room.” 

“no, indeed; I should be too much frighten to do ani such thing.” 

“what! not when dorothi ha given you to understand that there is a 
secret subterran commun between your apart and the chapel 
of st. anthony, scarc two mile off? could you shrink from so simpl 
an adventure? no, no, you will proceed into thi small vault room, 
and through thi into sever others, without perceiv anyth veri 
remark in either. In one perhap there may be a dagger, in anoth 
a few drop of blood, and in a third the remain of some instrument of 
torture; but there be noth in all thi out of the common way, 
and your lamp be nearli exhausted, you will return toward your own 
apartment. In repass through the small vault room, however, your 
eye will be attract toward a large, old-fashion cabinet of eboni 
and gold, which, though narrowli examin the furnitur before, you 
had pass unnoticed. impel by an irresist presentiment, you will 
eagerli advanc to it, unlock it fold doors, and search into 
everi drawer--but for some time without discov anyth of 
importance--perhap noth but a consider hoard of diamonds. At 
last, however, by touch a secret spring, an inner compart will 
open--a roll of paper appears--y seiz it--it contain mani sheet of 
manuscript--y hasten with the preciou treasur into your own chamber, 
but scarc have you been abl to deciph 'oh! thou--whomsoev thou 
mayst be, into whose hand these memoir of the wretch matilda may 
fall'--when your lamp suddenli expir in the socket, and leav you in 
total darkness.” 

“oh! no, no--do not say so. well, go on.” 

but henri wa too much amus by the interest he had rais to be abl 
to carri it farther; he could no longer command solemn either of 
subject or voice, and wa oblig to entreat her to use her own fanci 
in the perus of matilda' woes. catherine, recollect herself, grew 
asham of her eagerness, and began earnestli to assur him that her 
attent had been fix without the smallest apprehens of realli 
meet with what he related. “miss tilney, she wa sure, would never 
put her into such a chamber as he had described! she wa not at all 
afraid.” 

As they drew near the end of their journey, her impati for a sight 
of the abbey--for some time suspend by hi convers on subject 
veri different--return in full force, and everi bend in the road wa 
expect with solemn awe to afford a glimps of it massi wall of grey 
stone, rise amidst a grove of ancient oaks, with the last beam of the 
sun play in beauti splendour on it high gothic windows. but so 
low did the build stand, that she found herself pass through the 
great gate of the lodg into the veri ground of northanger, without 
have discern even an antiqu chimney. 

she knew not that she had ani right to be surprised, but there wa a 
someth in thi mode of approach which she certainli had not expected. 
To pass between lodg of a modern appearance, to find herself with such 
eas in the veri precinct of the abbey, and driven so rapidli along a 
smooth, level road of fine gravel, without obstacle, alarm, or solemn 
of ani kind, struck her as odd and inconsistent. she wa not long 
at leisure, however, for such considerations. A sudden scud of rain, 
drive full in her face, made it imposs for her to observ anyth 
further, and fix all her thought on the welfar of her new straw 
bonnet; and she wa actual under the abbey walls, wa springing, with 
henry' assistance, from the carriage, wa beneath the shelter of the 
old porch, and had even pass on to the hall, where her friend and 
the gener were wait to welcom her, without feel one aw 
forebod of futur miseri to herself, or one moment' suspicion of ani 
past scene of horror be act within the solemn edifice. the breez 
had not seem to waft the sigh of the murder to her; it had waft 
noth wors than a thick mizzl rain; and have given a good shake 
to her habit, she wa readi to be shown into the common drawing-room, 
and capabl of consid where she was. 

An abbey! yes, it wa delight to be realli in an abbey! but she 
doubted, as she look round the room, whether anyth within her 
observ would have given her the consciousness. the furnitur wa in 
all the profus and eleg of modern taste. the fireplace, where she 
had expect the ampl width and ponder carv of former times, wa 
contract to a rumford, with slab of plain though handsom marble, and 
ornament over it of the prettiest english china. the windows, to which 
she look with peculiar dependence, from have heard the gener talk 
of hi preserv them in their gothic form with reverenti care, were 
yet less what her fanci had portrayed. To be sure, the point arch 
wa preserved--th form of them wa gothic--they might be even 
casements--but everi pane wa so large, so clear, so light! To an 
imagin which had hope for the smallest divisions, and the heaviest 
stone-work, for paint glass, dirt, and cobwebs, the differ wa 
veri distressing. 

the general, perceiv how her eye wa employed, began to talk of the 
small of the room and simplic of the furniture, where everything, 
be for daili use, pretend onli to comfort, etc.; flatter 
himself, however, that there were some apart in the abbey not 
unworthi her notice--and wa proceed to mention the costli gild 
of one in particular, when, take out hi watch, he stop short to 
pronounc it with surpris within twenti minut of five! thi seem 
the word of separation, and catherin found herself hurri away by miss 
tilney in such a manner as convinc her that the strictest punctual 
to the famili hour would be expect at northanger. 

return through the larg and lofti hall, they ascend a broad 
staircas of shine oak, which, after mani flight and mani 
landing-places, brought them upon a long, wide gallery. On one side it 
had a rang of doors, and it wa light on the other by window which 
catherin had onli time to discov look into a quadrangle, befor 
miss tilney led the way into a chamber, and scarc stay to hope she 
would find it comfortable, left her with an anxiou entreati that she 
would make as littl alter as possibl in her dress. 




chapter 21 


A moment' glanc wa enough to satisfi catherin that her apart 
wa veri unlik the one which henri had endeavour to alarm her by the 
descript of. It wa by no mean unreason large, and contain 
neither tapestri nor velvet. the wall were papered, the floor wa 
carpeted; the window were neither less perfect nor more dim than those 
of the drawing-room below; the furniture, though not of the latest 
fashion, wa handsom and comfortable, and the air of the room 
altogeth far from uncheerful. her heart instantan at eas on 
thi point, she resolv to lose no time in particular examin of 
anything, as she greatli dread disoblig the gener by ani delay. 
her habit therefor wa thrown off with all possibl haste, and she wa 
prepar to unpin the linen package, which the chaise-seat had convey 
for her immedi accommodation, when her eye suddenli fell on a larg 
high chest, stand back in a deep recess on one side of the fireplace. 
the sight of it made her start; and, forget everyth else, she 
stood gaze on it in motionless wonder, while these thought cross 
her: 

“thi is strang indeed! I did not expect such a sight as this! An 
immens heavi chest! what can it hold? whi should it be place here? 
push back too, as if meant to be out of sight! I will look into 
it--cost me what it may, I will look into it--and directli too--bi 
daylight. If I stay till even my candl may go out.” she advanc and 
examin it closely: it wa of cedar, curious inlaid with some darker 
wood, and raised, about a foot from the ground, on a carv stand of the 
same. the lock wa silver, though tarnish from age; at each end 
were the imperfect remain of handl also of silver, broken perhap 
prematur by some strang violence; and, on the centr of the lid, wa 
a mysteri cipher, in the same metal. catherin bent over it intently, 
but without be abl to distinguish anyth with certainty. she could 
not, in whatev direct she took it, believ the last letter to be 
a T; and yet that it should be anyth els in that hous wa 
a circumst to rais no common degre of astonishment. If not 
origin theirs, by what strang event could it have fallen into the 
tilney family? 

her fear curios wa everi moment grow greater; and seizing, 
with trembl hands, the hasp of the lock, she resolv at all hazard 
to satisfi herself at least as to it contents. with difficulty, for 
someth seem to resist her efforts, she rais the lid a few inches; 
but at that moment a sudden knock at the door of the room made her, 
starting, quit her hold, and the lid close with alarm violence. thi 
ill-tim intrud wa miss tilney' maid, sent by her mistress to be of 
use to miss morland; and though catherin immedi dismiss her, it 
recal her to the sens of what she ought to be doing, and forc her, 
in spite of her anxiou desir to penetr thi mystery, to proceed in 
her dress without further delay. her progress wa not quick, for her 
thought and her eye were still bent on the object so well calcul 
to interest and alarm; and though she dare not wast a moment upon 
a second attempt, she could not remain mani pace from the chest. At 
length, however, have slip one arm into her gown, her toilett 
seem so nearli finish that the impati of her curios might 
safe be indulged. one moment sure might be spared; and, so desper 
should be the exert of her strength, that, unless secur by 
supernatur means, the lid in one moment should be thrown back. with 
thi spirit she sprang forward, and her confid did not deceiv her. 
her resolut effort threw back the lid, and gave to her astonish eye 
the view of a white cotton counterpane, properli folded, repos at one 
end of the chest in undisput possession! 

she wa gaze on it with the first blush of surpris when miss tilney, 
anxiou for her friend' be ready, enter the room, and to the 
rise shame of have harbour for some minut an absurd expectation, 
wa then ad the shame of be caught in so idl a search. “that is 
a curiou old chest, is not it?” said miss tilney, as catherin hastili 
close it and turn away to the glass. “it is imposs to say how 
mani gener it ha been here. how it came to be first put in thi 
room I know not, but I have not had it moved, becaus I thought it might 
sometim be of use in hold hat and bonnets. the worst of it is that 
it weight make it difficult to open. In that corner, however, it is at 
least out of the way.” 

catherin had no leisur for speech, be at onc blushing, tie her 
gown, and form wise resolut with the most violent dispatch. miss 
tilney gentli hint her fear of be late; and in half a minut they 
ran downstair together, in an alarm not wholli unfounded, for gener 
tilney wa pace the drawing-room, hi watch in hi hand, and having, 
on the veri instant of their entering, pull the bell with violence, 
order “dinner to be on tabl directly!” 

catherin trembl at the emphasi with which he spoke, and sat pale 
and breathless, in a most humbl mood, concern for hi children, and 
detest old chests; and the general, recov hi polit as he 
look at her, spent the rest of hi time in scold hi daughter for 
so foolishli hurri her fair friend, who wa absolut out of breath 
from haste, when there wa not the least occas for hurri in the 
world: but catherin could not at all get over the doubl distress 
of have involv her friend in a lectur and been a great simpleton 
herself, till they were happili seat at the dinner-table, when the 
general' complac smiles, and a good appetit of her own, restor 
her to peace. the dining-parlour wa a nobl room, suitabl in it 
dimens to a much larger drawing-room than the one in common use, and 
fit up in a style of luxuri and expens which wa almost lost on the 
unpractis eye of catherine, who saw littl more than it spacious 
and the number of their attendants. Of the former, she spoke aloud 
her admiration; and the general, with a veri graciou countenance, 
acknowledg that it wa by no mean an ill-siz room, and further 
confess that, though as careless on such subject as most people, he 
did look upon a toler larg eating-room as one of the necessari 
of life; he supposed, however, “that she must have been use to much 
better-s apart at mr. allen's?” 

“no, indeed,” wa catherine' honest assurance; “mr. allen' 
dining-parlour wa not more than half as large,” and she had never 
seen so larg a room as thi in her life. the general' good humour 
increased. why, as he had such rooms, he thought it would be simpl not 
to make use of them; but, upon hi honour, he believ there might be 
more comfort in room of onli half their size. mr. allen' house, he wa 
sure, must be exactli of the true size for ration happiness. 

the even pass without ani further disturbance, and, in the 
occasion absenc of gener tilney, with much posit cheerfulness. 
It wa onli in hi presenc that catherin felt the smallest fatigu 
from her journey; and even then, even in moment of languor or 
restraint, a sens of gener happi preponderated, and she could 
think of her friend in bath without one wish of be with them. 

the night wa stormy; the wind had been rise at interv the whole 
afternoon; and by the time the parti broke up, it blew and rain 
violently. catherine, as she cross the hall, listen to the tempest 
with sensat of awe; and, when she heard it rage round a corner of 
the ancient build and close with sudden furi a distant door, felt 
for the first time that she wa realli in an abbey. yes, these were 
characterist sounds; they brought to her recollect a countless 
varieti of dread situat and horrid scenes, which such build 
had witnessed, and such storm usher in; and most heartili did she 
rejoic in the happier circumst attend her entranc within wall 
so solemn! she had noth to dread from midnight assassin or drunken 
gallants. henri had certainli been onli in jest in what he had told her 
that morning. In a hous so furnished, and so guarded, she could have 
noth to explor or to suffer, and might go to her bedroom as secur 
as if it had been her own chamber at fullerton. thu wise fortifi 
her mind, as she proceed upstairs, she wa enabled, especi on 
perceiv that miss tilney slept onli two door from her, to enter 
her room with a toler stout heart; and her spirit were immedi 
assist by the cheer blaze of a wood fire. “how much better is 
this,” said she, as she walk to the fender--“how much better to find a 
fire readi lit, than to have to wait shiver in the cold till all the 
famili are in bed, as so mani poor girl have been oblig to do, and 
then to have a faith old servant frighten one by come in with a 
faggot! how glad I am that northang is what it is! If it had been like 
some other places, I do not know that, in such a night as this, I could 
have answer for my courage: but now, to be sure, there is noth to 
alarm one.” 

she look round the room. the window curtain seem in motion. It 
could be noth but the violenc of the wind penetr through the 
divis of the shutters; and she step boldli forward, carelessli 
hum a tune, to assur herself of it be so, peep courag 
behind each curtain, saw noth on either low window seat to scare her, 
and on place a hand against the shutter, felt the strongest convict 
of the wind' force. A glanc at the old chest, as she turn away from 
thi examination, wa not without it use; she scorn the causeless 
fear of an idl fancy, and began with a most happi indiffer to 
prepar herself for bed. “she should take her time; she should not hurri 
herself; she did not care if she were the last person up in the house. 
but she would not make up her fire; that would seem cowardly, as if 
she wish for the protect of light after she were in bed.” the fire 
therefor die away, and catherine, have spent the best part of an 
hour in her arrangements, wa begin to think of step into bed, 
when, on give a part glanc round the room, she wa struck by the 
appear of a high, old-fashion black cabinet, which, though in 
a situat conspicu enough, had never caught her notic before. 
henry' words, hi descript of the eboni cabinet which wa to escap 
her observ at first, immedi rush across her; and though 
there could be noth realli in it, there wa someth whimsical, it 
wa certainli a veri remark coincidence! she took her candl and 
look close at the cabinet. It wa not absolut eboni and gold; but 
it wa japan, black and yellow japan of the handsomest kind; and as she 
held her candle, the yellow had veri much the effect of gold. the key 
wa in the door, and she had a strang fanci to look into it; not, 
however, with the smallest expect of find anything, but it wa 
so veri odd, after what henri had said. In short, she could not sleep 
till she had examin it. so, place the candl with great caution on 
a chair, she seiz the key with a veri tremul hand and tri to turn 
it; but it resist her utmost strength. alarmed, but not discouraged, 
she tri it anoth way; a bolt flew, and she believ herself 
successful; but how strang mysterious! the door wa still immovable. 
she paus a moment in breathless wonder. the wind roar down the 
chimney, the rain beat in torrent against the windows, and everyth 
seem to speak the aw of her situation. To retir to bed, 
however, unsatisfi on such a point, would be vain, sinc sleep must be 
imposs with the conscious of a cabinet so mysteri close 
in her immedi vicinity. again, therefore, she appli herself to the 
key, and after move it in everi possibl way for some instant with 
the determin celer of hope' last effort, the door suddenli yield 
to her hand: her heart leap with exult at such a victory, and 
have thrown open each fold door, the second be secur onli by 
bolt of less wonder construct than the lock, though in that her 
eye could not discern anyth unusual, a doubl rang of small drawer 
appear in view, with some larger drawer abov and below them; and in 
the centre, a small door, close also with a lock and key, secur in 
all probabl a caviti of importance. 

catherine' heart beat quick, but her courag did not fail her. with a 
cheek flush by hope, and an eye strain with curiosity, her finger 
grasp the handl of a drawer and drew it forth. It wa entir empty. 
with less alarm and greater eager she seiz a second, a third, a 
fourth; each wa equal empty. not one wa left unsearched, and in not 
one wa anyth found. well read in the art of conceal a treasure, 
the possibl of fals line to the drawer did not escap her, and 
she felt round each with anxiou acut in vain. the place in the 
middl alon remain now unexplored; and though she had “never from 
the first had the smallest idea of find anyth in ani part of the 
cabinet, and wa not in the least disappoint at her ill success thu 
far, it would be foolish not to examin it thoroughli while she wa 
about it.” It wa some time howev befor she could unfasten the door, 
the same difficulti occur in the manag of thi inner lock as of 
the outer; but at length it did open; and not vain, as hitherto, wa her 
search; her quick eye directli fell on a roll of paper push back 
into the further part of the cavity, appar for concealment, and 
her feel at that moment were indescribable. her heart fluttered, her 
knee trembled, and her cheek grew pale. she seized, with an unsteadi 
hand, the preciou manuscript, for half a glanc suffic to ascertain 
written characters; and while she acknowledg with aw sensat 
thi strike exemplif of what henri had foretold, resolv 
instantli to perus everi line befor she attempt to rest. 

the dim of the light her candl emit made her turn to it with 
alarm; but there wa no danger of it sudden extinction; it had yet some 
hour to burn; and that she might not have ani greater difficulti in 
distinguish the write than what it ancient date might occasion, 
she hastili snuf it. alas! It wa snuf and extinguish in one. A 
lamp could not have expir with more aw effect. catherine, for a 
few moments, wa motionless with horror. It wa done completely; not a 
remnant of light in the wick could give hope to the rekindl breath. 
dark impenetr and immov fill the room. A violent gust 
of wind, rise with sudden fury, ad fresh horror to the moment. 
catherin trembl from head to foot. In the paus which succeeded, a 
sound like reced footstep and the close of a distant door struck 
on her affright ear. human natur could support no more. A cold sweat 
stood on her forehead, the manuscript fell from her hand, and grope 
her way to the bed, she jump hastili in, and sought some suspens of 
agoni by creep far underneath the clothes. To close her eye in 
sleep that night, she felt must be entir out of the question. with 
a curios so justli awakened, and feel in everi way so agitated, 
repos must be absolut impossible. the storm too abroad so dreadful! 
she had not been use to feel alarm from wind, but now everi blast 
seem fraught with aw intelligence. the manuscript so wonder 
found, so wonder accomplish the morning' prediction, how wa it 
to be account for? what could it contain? To whom could it relate? 
By what mean could it have been so long concealed? and how singularli 
strang that it should fall to her lot to discov it! till she had made 
herself mistress of it contents, however, she could have neither repos 
nor comfort; and with the sun' first ray she wa determin to perus 
it. but mani were the tediou hour which must yet intervene. she 
shuddered, toss about in her bed, and envi everi quiet sleeper. the 
storm still raged, and variou were the noises, more terrif even 
than the wind, which struck at interv on her startl ear. the veri 
curtain of her bed seem at one moment in motion, and at anoth 
the lock of her door wa agitated, as if by the attempt of somebodi to 
enter. hollow murmur seem to creep along the gallery, and more than 
onc her blood wa chill by the sound of distant moans. hour after 
hour pass away, and the weari catherin had heard three proclaim 
by all the clock in the hous befor the tempest subsid or she 
unknowingli fell fast asleep. 




chapter 22 


the housemaid' fold back her window-shutt at eight o'clock the 
next day wa the sound which first rous catherine; and she open her 
eyes, wonder that they could ever have been closed, on object of 
cheerfulness; her fire wa alreadi burning, and a bright morn 
had succeed the tempest of the night. instantaneously, with the 
conscious of existence, return her recollect of the manuscript; 
and spring from the bed in the veri moment of the maid' go away, 
she eagerli collect everi scatter sheet which had burst from the 
roll on it fall to the ground, and flew back to enjoy the luxuri 
of their perus on her pillow. she now plainli saw that she must not 
expect a manuscript of equal length with the gener of what she had 
shudder over in books, for the roll, seem to consist entir of 
small disjoint sheets, wa altogeth but of trifl size, and much 
less than she had suppos it to be at first. 

her greedi eye glanc rapidli over a page. she start at it import. 
could it be possible, or did not her sens play her false? An inventori 
of linen, in coars and modern characters, seem all that wa befor 
her! If the evid of sight might be trusted, she held a washing-bil 
in her hand. she seiz anoth sheet, and saw the same articl with 
littl variation; a third, a fourth, and a fifth present noth 
new. shirts, stockings, cravats, and waistcoat face her in each. two 
others, pen by the same hand, mark an expenditur scarc more 
interesting, in letters, hair-powder, shoe-string, and breeches-ball. 
and the larger sheet, which had enclos the rest, seem by it first 
cramp line, “to poultic chestnut mare”--a farrier' bill! such wa the 
collect of paper (left perhaps, as she could then suppose, by the 
neglig of a servant in the place whenc she had taken them) which 
had fill her with expect and alarm, and rob her of half her 
night' rest! she felt humbl to the dust. could not the adventur of 
the chest have taught her wisdom? A corner of it, catch her eye as 
she lay, seem to rise up in judgment against her. noth could now 
be clearer than the absurd of her recent fancies. To suppos that a 
manuscript of mani gener back could have remain undiscov in 
a room such as that, so modern, so habitable!--or that she should be the 
first to possess the skill of unlock a cabinet, the key of which wa 
open to all! 

how could she have so impos on herself? heaven forbid that henri 
tilney should ever know her folly! and it wa in a great measur hi 
own doing, for had not the cabinet appear so exactli to agre with hi 
descript of her adventures, she should never have felt the smallest 
curios about it. thi wa the onli comfort that occurred. impati 
to get rid of those hate evid of her folly, those detest 
paper then scatter over the bed, she rose directly, and fold them 
up as nearli as possibl in the same shape as before, return them 
to the same spot within the cabinet, with a veri hearti wish that no 
untoward accid might ever bring them forward again, to disgrac her 
even with herself. 

whi the lock should have been so difficult to open, however, wa still 
someth remarkable, for she could now manag them with perfect ease. 
In thi there wa sure someth mysterious, and she indulg in the 
flatter suggest for half a minute, till the possibl of the 
door' have been at first unlocked, and of be herself it fastener, 
dart into her head, and cost her anoth blush. 

she got away as soon as she could from a room in which her conduct 
produc such unpleas reflections, and found her way with all speed 
to the breakfast-parlour, as it had been point out to her by miss 
tilney the even before. henri wa alon in it; and hi immedi hope 
of her have been undisturb by the tempest, with an arch refer 
to the charact of the build they inhabited, wa rather distressing. 
for the world would she not have her weak suspected, and yet, 
unequ to an absolut falsehood, wa constrain to acknowledg that 
the wind had kept her awak a little. “but we have a charm morn 
after it,” she added, desir to get rid of the subject; “and storm 
and sleepless are noth when they are over. what beauti 
hyacinths! I have just learnt to love a hyacinth.” 

“and how might you learn? By accid or argument?” 

“your sister taught me; I cannot tell how. mrs. allen use to take 
pains, year after year, to make me like them; but I never could, till 
I saw them the other day in milsom street; I am natur indiffer 
about flowers.” 

“but now you love a hyacinth. So much the better. you have gain a new 
sourc of enjoyment, and it is well to have as mani hold upon happi 
as possible. besides, a tast for flower is alway desir in your 
sex, as a mean of get you out of doors, and tempt you to more 
frequent exercis than you would otherwis take. and though the love 
of a hyacinth may be rather domestic, who can tell, the sentiment onc 
raised, but you may in time come to love a rose?” 

“but I do not want ani such pursuit to get me out of doors. the pleasur 
of walk and breath fresh air is enough for me, and in fine weather 
I am out more than half my time. mamma say I am never within.” 

“at ani rate, however, I am pleas that you have learnt to love 
a hyacinth. the mere habit of learn to love is the thing; and a 
teachabl of disposit in a young ladi is a great blessing. ha my 
sister a pleasant mode of instruction?” 

catherin wa save the embarrass of attempt an answer by the 
entranc of the general, whose smile compliment announc a happi 
state of mind, but whose gentl hint of sympathet earli rise did not 
advanc her composure. 

the eleg of the breakfast set forc itself on catherine' notic 
when they were seat at table; and, luckily, it had been the general' 
choice. He wa enchant by her approb of hi taste, confess it 
to be neat and simple, thought it right to encourag the manufactur of 
hi country; and for hi part, to hi uncrit palate, the tea wa as 
well flavour from the clay of staffordshire, as from that of dresden 
or save. but thi wa quit an old set, purchas two year ago. 
the manufactur wa much improv sinc that time; he had seen some 
beauti specimen when last in town, and had he not been perfectli 
without vaniti of that kind, might have been tempt to order a new 
set. He trusted, however, that an opportun might ere long occur of 
select one--though not for himself. catherin wa probabl the onli 
one of the parti who did not understand him. 

shortli after breakfast henri left them for woodston, where busi 
requir and would keep him two or three days. they all attend in 
the hall to see him mount hi horse, and immedi on re-ent the 
breakfast-room, catherin walk to a window in the hope of catch 
anoth glimps of hi figure. “thi is a somewhat heavi call upon your 
brother' fortitude,” observ the gener to eleanor. “woodston will 
make but a sombr appear today.” 

“i it a pretti place?” ask catherine. 

“what say you, eleanor? speak your opinion, for ladi can best tell the 
tast of ladi in regard to place as well as men. I think it would be 
acknowledg by the most imparti eye to have mani recommendations. the 
hous stand among fine meadow face the south-east, with an excel 
kitchen-garden in the same aspect; the wall surround which I built 
and stock myself about ten year ago, for the benefit of my son. It 
is a famili living, miss morland; and the properti in the place be 
chiefli my own, you may believ I take care that it shall not be a bad 
one. did henry' incom depend sole on thi living, he would not be 
ill-provid for. perhap it may seem odd, that with onli two younger 
children, I should think ani profess necessari for him; and certainli 
there are moment when we could all wish him disengag from everi tie 
of business. but though I may not exactli make convert of you young 
ladies, I am sure your father, miss morland, would agre with me in 
think it expedi to give everi young man some employment. the 
money is nothing, it is not an object, but employ is the thing. 
even frederick, my eldest son, you see, who will perhap inherit as 
consider a land properti as ani privat man in the county, ha hi 
profession.” 

the impos effect of thi last argument wa equal to hi wishes. the 
silenc of the ladi prove it to be unanswerable. 

someth had been said the even befor of her be shown over the 
house, and he now offer himself as her conductor; and though catherin 
had hope to explor it accompani onli by hi daughter, it wa a 
propos of too much happi in itself, under ani circumstances, not 
to be gladli accepted; for she had been alreadi eighteen hour in the 
abbey, and had seen onli a few of it rooms. the netting-box, just 
leisur drawn forth, wa close with joy haste, and she wa readi 
to attend him in a moment. “and when they had gone over the house, he 
promis himself moreov the pleasur of accompani her into the 
shrubberi and garden.” she curtsi her acquiescence. “but perhap 
it might be more agreeabl to her to make those her first object. 
the weather wa at present favourable, and at thi time of year the 
uncertainti wa veri great of it continu so. which would she prefer? 
He wa equal at her service. which did hi daughter think would most 
accord with her fair friend' wishes? but he thought he could discern. 
yes, he certainli read in miss morland' eye a judici desir of 
make use of the present smile weather. but when did she judg amiss? 
the abbey would be alway safe and dry. He yield implicitly, and 
would fetch hi hat and attend them in a moment.” He left the room, 
and catherine, with a disappointed, anxiou face, began to speak of her 
unwilling that he should be take them out of door against hi own 
inclination, under a mistaken idea of pleas her; but she wa stop 
by miss tilney' saying, with a littl confusion, “I believ it will be 
wisest to take the morn while it is so fine; and do not be uneasi on 
my father' account; he alway walk out at thi time of day.” 

catherin did not exactli know how thi wa to be understood. whi 
wa miss tilney embarrassed? could there be ani unwilling on the 
general' side to show her over the abbey? the propos wa hi own. and 
wa not it odd that he should alway take hi walk so early? neither her 
father nor mr. allen did so. It wa certainli veri provoking. she wa 
all impati to see the house, and had scarc ani curios about 
the grounds. If henri had been with them indeed! but now she should not 
know what wa picturesqu when she saw it. such were her thoughts, but 
she kept them to herself, and put on her bonnet in patient discontent. 

she wa struck, however, beyond her expectation, by the grandeur of 
the abbey, as she saw it for the first time from the lawn. the whole 
build enclos a larg court; and two side of the quadrangle, rich 
in gothic ornaments, stood forward for admiration. the remaind wa 
shut off by knoll of old trees, or luxuri plantations, and the steep 
woodi hill rise behind, to give it shelter, were beauti even in 
the leafless month of march. catherin had seen noth to compar with 
it; and her feel of delight were so strong, that without wait for 
ani better authority, she boldli burst forth in wonder and praise. the 
gener listen with assent gratitude; and it seem as if hi own 
estim of northang had wait unfix till that hour. 

the kitchen-garden wa to be next admired, and he led the way to it 
across a small portion of the park. 

the number of acr contain in thi garden wa such as catherin could 
not listen to without dismay, be more than doubl the extent of all 
mr. allen's, as well as her father's, includ church-yard and orchard. 
the wall seem countless in number, endless in length; a villag of 
hot-hous seem to aris among them, and a whole parish to be at 
work within the enclosure. the gener wa flatter by her look of 
surprise, which told him almost as plainly, as he soon forc her to 
tell him in words, that she had never seen ani garden at all equal to 
them before; and he then modestli own that, “without ani ambit of 
that sort himself--without ani solicitud about it--h did believ them 
to be unrival in the kingdom. If he had a hobby-horse, it wa that. 
He love a garden. though careless enough in most matter of eating, he 
love good fruit--or if he did not, hi friend and children did. there 
were great vexations, however, attend such a garden as his. the 
utmost care could not alway secur the most valuabl fruits. the pineri 
had yield onli one hundr in the last year. mr. allen, he supposed, 
must feel these inconveni as well as himself.” 

“no, not at all. mr. allen did not care about the garden, and never went 
into it.” 

with a triumphant smile of self-satisfaction, the gener wish he 
could do the same, for he never enter his, without be vex in some 
way or other, by it fall short of hi plan. 

“how were mr. allen' succession-hous worked?” describ the natur 
of hi own as they enter them. 

“mr. allen had onli one small hot-house, which mrs. allen had the use of 
for her plant in winter, and there wa a fire in it now and then.” 

“he is a happi man!” said the general, with a look of veri happi 
contempt. 

have taken her into everi division, and led her under everi wall, till 
she wa heartili weari of see and wondering, he suffer the girl 
at last to seiz the advantag of an outer door, and then express 
hi wish to examin the effect of some recent alter about the 
tea-house, propos it as no unpleas extens of their walk, if miss 
morland were not tired. “but where are you going, eleanor? whi do you 
choos that cold, damp path to it? miss morland will get wet. our best 
way is across the park.” 

“thi is so favourit a walk of mine,” said miss tilney, “that I alway 
think it the best and nearest way. but perhap it may be damp.” 

It wa a narrow wind path through a thick grove of old scotch firs; 
and catherine, struck by it gloomi aspect, and eager to enter it, 
could not, even by the general' disapprobation, be kept from step 
forward. He perceiv her inclination, and have again urg the plea 
of health in vain, wa too polit to make further opposition. He excus 
himself, however, from attend them: “the ray of the sun were not too 
cheer for him, and he would meet them by anoth course.” He turn 
away; and catherin wa shock to find how much her spirit were 
reliev by the separation. the shock, however, be less real than the 
relief, offer it no injury; and she began to talk with easi gaieti of 
the delight melancholi which such a grove inspired. 

“I am particularli fond of thi spot,” said her companion, with a sigh. 
“it wa my mother' favourit walk.” 

catherin had never heard mrs. tilney mention in the famili before, 
and the interest excit by thi tender remembr show itself 
directli in her alter countenance, and in the attent paus with 
which she wait for someth more. 

“I use to walk here so often with her!” ad eleanor; “though I never 
love it then, as I have love it since. At that time inde I use to 
wonder at her choice. but her memori endear it now.” 

“and ought it not,” reflect catherine, “to endear it to her husband? 
yet the gener would not enter it.” miss tilney continu silent, she 
ventur to say, “her death must have been a great affliction!” 

“A great and increas one,” repli the other, in a low voice. “I wa 
onli thirteen when it happened; and though I felt my loss perhap as 
strongli as one so young could feel it, I did not, I could not, then 
know what a loss it was.” she stop for a moment, and then added, with 
great firmness, “I have no sister, you know--and though henry--though my 
brother are veri affectionate, and henri is a great deal here, which I 
am most thank for, it is imposs for me not to be often solitary.” 

“to be sure you must miss him veri much.” 

“A mother would have been alway present. A mother would have been a 
constant friend; her influenc would have been beyond all other.” 

“wa she a veri charm woman? wa she handsome? wa there ani pictur 
of her in the abbey? and whi had she been so partial to that grove? wa 
it from deject of spirits?”--wer question now eagerli pour forth; 
the first three receiv a readi affirmative, the two other were pass 
by; and catherine' interest in the deceas mrs. tilney augment with 
everi question, whether answer or not. Of her unhappi in marriage, 
she felt persuaded. the gener certainli had been an unkind husband. He 
did not love her walk: could he therefor have love her? and besides, 
handsom as he was, there wa a someth in the turn of hi featur 
which spoke hi not have behav well to her. 

“her picture, I suppose,” blush at the consumm art of her own 
question, “hang in your father' room?” 

“no; it wa intend for the drawing-room; but my father wa 
dissatisfi with the painting, and for some time it had no place. 
soon after her death I obtain it for my own, and hung it in my 
bed-chamber--wher I shall be happi to show it you; it is veri like.” 
here wa anoth proof. A portrait--veri like--of a depart wife, not 
valu by the husband! He must have been dread cruel to her! 

catherin attempt no longer to hide from herself the natur of the 
feel which, in spite of all hi attentions, he had previous 
excited; and what had been terror and dislik before, wa now absolut 
aversion. yes, aversion! hi cruelti to such a charm woman made him 
odiou to her. she had often read of such characters, charact which 
mr. allen had been use to call unnatur and overdrawn; but here wa 
proof posit of the contrary. 

she had just settl thi point when the end of the path brought them 
directli upon the general; and in spite of all her virtuou indignation, 
she found herself again oblig to walk with him, listen to him, and 
even to smile when he smiled. be no longer able, however, to receiv 
pleasur from the surround objects, she soon began to walk with 
lassitude; the gener perceiv it, and with a concern for her health, 
which seem to reproach her for her opinion of him, wa most urgent 
for return with hi daughter to the house. He would follow them in 
a quarter of an hour. again they parted--but eleanor wa call back in 
half a minut to receiv a strict charg against take her friend round 
the abbey till hi return. thi second instanc of hi anxieti to delay 
what she so much wish for struck catherin as veri remarkable. 




chapter 23 


An hour pass away befor the gener came in, spent, on the part of 
hi young guest, in no veri favour consider of hi character. 
“thi lengthen absence, these solitari rambles, did not speak a mind 
at ease, or a conscienc void of reproach.” At length he appeared; and, 
whatev might have been the gloom of hi meditations, he could still 
smile with them. miss tilney, understand in part her friend' 
curios to see the house, soon reviv the subject; and her father 
being, contrari to catherine' expectations, unprovid with ani 
pretenc for further delay, beyond that of stop five minut to 
order refresh to be in the room by their return, wa at last readi 
to escort them. 

they set forward; and, with a grandeur of air, a dignifi step, 
which caught the eye, but could not shake the doubt of the well-read 
catherine, he led the way across the hall, through the common 
drawing-room and one useless antechamber, into a room magnific both 
in size and furniture--th real drawing-room, use onli with compani of 
consequence. It wa veri noble--veri grand--veri charming!--wa all that 
catherin had to say, for her indiscrimin eye scarc discern 
the colour of the satin; and all minut of praise, all prais 
that had much meaning, wa suppli by the general: the costli or 
eleg of ani room' fitting-up could be noth to her; she care for 
no furnitur of a more modern date than the fifteenth century. when the 
gener had satisfi hi own curiosity, in a close examin of everi 
well-known ornament, they proceed into the library, an apartment, in 
it way, of equal magnificence, exhibit a collect of books, on 
which an humbl man might have look with pride. catherin heard, 
admired, and wonder with more genuin feel than before--gath 
all that she could from thi storehous of knowledge, by run over 
the titl of half a shelf, and wa readi to proceed. but suit of 
apart did not spring up with her wishes. larg as wa the building, 
she had alreadi visit the greatest part; though, on be told that, 
with the addit of the kitchen, the six or seven room she had now 
seen surround three side of the court, she could scarc believ it, 
or overcom the suspicion of there be mani chamber secreted. It wa 
some relief, however, that they were to return to the room in common 
use, by pass through a few of less importance, look into the 
court, which, with occasion passages, not wholli unintricate, 
connect the differ sides; and she wa further sooth in her 
progress by be told that she wa tread what had onc been a 
cloister, have trace of cell point out, and observ sever 
door that were neither open nor explain to her--bi find herself 
success in a billiard-room, and in the general' privat apartment, 
without comprehend their connection, or be abl to turn aright 
when she left them; and lastly, by pass through a dark littl room, 
own henry' authority, and strew with hi litter of books, guns, 
and greatcoats. 

from the dining-room, of which, though alreadi seen, and alway to be 
seen at five o'clock, the gener could not forgo the pleasur of pace 
out the length, for the more certain inform of miss morland, as 
to what she neither doubt nor care for, they proceed by quick 
commun to the kitchen--th ancient kitchen of the convent, rich 
in the massi wall and smoke of former days, and in the stove and hot 
closet of the present. the general' improv hand had not loiter 
here: everi modern invent to facilit the labour of the cook had 
been adopt within this, their spaciou theatre; and, when the geniu 
of other had failed, hi own had often produc the perfect wanted. 
hi endow of thi spot alon might at ani time have place him high 
among the benefactor of the convent. 

with the wall of the kitchen end all the antiqu of the abbey; the 
fourth side of the quadrangl having, on account of it decay state, 
been remov by the general' father, and the present erect in it 
place. all that wa vener ceas here. the new build wa not 
onli new, but declar itself to be so; intend onli for offices, and 
enclos behind by stable-yards, no uniform of architectur had been 
thought necessary. catherin could have rave at the hand which had 
swept away what must have been beyond the valu of all the rest, for the 
purpos of mere domest economy; and would willingli have been spare 
the mortif of a walk through scene so fallen, had the gener 
allow it; but if he had a vanity, it wa in the arrang of hi 
offices; and as he wa convinc that, to a mind like miss morland's, 
a view of the accommod and comforts, by which the labour of her 
inferior were softened, must alway be gratifying, he should make 
no apolog for lead her on. they took a slight survey of all; and 
catherin wa impressed, beyond her expectation, by their multipl 
and their convenience. the purpos for which a few shapeless pantri 
and a comfortless sculleri were deem suffici at fullerton, were 
here carri on in appropri divisions, commodi and roomy. the 
number of servant continu appear did not strike her less than 
the number of their offices. wherev they went, some patten girl 
stop to curtsy, or some footman in dishabil sneak off. yet thi 
wa an abbey! how inexpress differ in these domest arrang 
from such as she had read about--from abbey and castles, in which, 
though certainli larger than northanger, all the dirti work of the hous 
wa to be done by two pair of femal hand at the utmost. how they could 
get through it all had often amaz mrs. allen; and, when catherin saw 
what wa necessari here, she began to be amaz herself. 

they return to the hall, that the chief staircas might be ascended, 
and the beauti of it wood, and ornament of rich carv might be 
point out: have gain the top, they turn in an opposit direct 
from the galleri in which her room lay, and shortli enter one on 
the same plan, but superior in length and breadth. she wa here shown 
success into three larg bed-chambers, with their dressing-rooms, 
most complet and handsom fit up; everyth that money and 
tast could do, to give comfort and eleg to apartments, had been 
bestow on these; and, be furnish within the last five years, they 
were perfect in all that would be gener pleasing, and want in all 
that could give pleasur to catherine. As they were survey the last, 
the general, after slightli name a few of the distinguish charact 
by whom they had at time been honoured, turn with a smile 
counten to catherine, and ventur to hope that henceforward some of 
their earliest tenant might be “our friend from fullerton.” she felt 
the unexpect compliment, and deepli regret the imposs of 
think well of a man so kindli dispos toward herself, and so full 
of civil to all her family. 

the galleri wa termin by fold doors, which miss tilney, 
advancing, had thrown open, and pass through, and seem on the point 
of do the same by the first door to the left, in anoth long reach 
of gallery, when the general, come forwards, call her hastily, and, 
as catherin thought, rather angrili back, demand whether she were 
going?--and what wa there more to be seen?--had not miss morland 
alreadi seen all that could be worth her notice?--and did she not 
suppos her friend might be glad of some refresh after so much 
exercise? miss tilney drew back directly, and the heavi door were 
close upon the mortifi catherine, who, have seen, in a momentari 
glanc beyond them, a narrow passage, more numer openings, and 
symptom of a wind staircase, believ herself at last within the 
reach of someth worth her notice; and felt, as she unwillingli pace 
back the gallery, that she would rather be allow to examin that end 
of the hous than see all the fineri of all the rest. the general' 
evid desir of prevent such an examin wa an addit 
stimulant. someth wa certainli to be concealed; her fancy, though 
it had trespass late onc or twice, could not mislead her here; 
and what that someth was, a short sentenc of miss tilney's, as they 
follow the gener at some distanc downstairs, seem to point out: 
“I wa go to take you into what wa my mother' room--th room 
in which she died--” were all her words; but few as they were, they 
convey page of intellig to catherine. It wa no wonder that the 
gener should shrink from the sight of such object as that room 
must contain; a room in all probabl never enter by him sinc the 
dread scene had passed, which releas hi suffer wife, and left 
him to the sting of conscience. 

she ventured, when next alon with eleanor, to express her wish of be 
permit to see it, as well as all the rest of that side of the house; 
and eleanor promis to attend her there, whenev they should have a 
conveni hour. catherin understood her: the gener must be watch 
from home, befor that room could be entered. “it remain as it was, I 
suppose?” said she, in a tone of feeling. 

“yes, entirely.” 

“and how long ago may it be that your mother died?” 

“she ha been dead these nine years.” and nine years, catherin knew, 
wa a trifl of time, compar with what gener elaps after the 
death of an injur wife, befor her room wa put to rights. 

“you were with her, I suppose, to the last?” 

“no,” said miss tilney, sighing; “I wa unfortun from home. her 
ill wa sudden and short; and, befor I arriv it wa all over.” 

catherine' blood ran cold with the horrid suggest which natur 
sprang from these words. could it be possible? could henry' father--? 
and yet how mani were the exampl to justifi even the blackest 
suspicions! and, when she saw him in the evening, while she work 
with her friend, slowli pace the drawing-room for an hour togeth in 
silent thoughtfulness, with downcast eye and contract brow, she felt 
secur from all possibl of wrong him. It wa the air and attitud 
of a montoni! what could more plainli speak the gloomi work of a 
mind not wholli dead to everi sens of humanity, in it fear review 
of past scene of guilt? unhappi man! and the anxious of her spirit 
direct her eye toward hi figur so repeatedly, as to catch miss 
tilney' notice. “mi father,” she whispered, “often walk about the room 
in thi way; it is noth unusual.” 

“so much the worse!” thought catherine; such ill-tim exercis wa of a 
piec with the strang unseason of hi morn walks, and bode 
noth good. 

after an evening, the littl varieti and seem length of which made 
her peculiarli sensibl of henry' import among them, she wa 
heartili glad to be dismissed; though it wa a look from the gener not 
design for her observ which sent hi daughter to the bell. 
when the butler would have lit hi master' candle, however, he wa 
forbidden. the latter wa not go to retire. “I have mani pamphlet to 
finish,” said he to catherine, “befor I can close my eyes, and perhap 
may be pore over the affair of the nation for hour after you are 
asleep. can either of us be more meetli employed? My eye will be 
blind for the good of others, and your prepar by rest for futur 
mischief.” 

but neither the busi alleged, nor the magnific compliment, 
could win catherin from think that some veri differ object must 
occas so seriou a delay of proper repose. To be kept up for hours, 
after the famili were in bed, by stupid pamphlet wa not veri likely. 
there must be some deeper cause: someth wa to be done which could 
be done onli while the household slept; and the probabl that mrs. 
tilney yet lived, shut up for caus unknown, and receiv from the 
pitiless hand of her husband a nightli suppli of coars food, wa the 
conclus which necessarili followed. shock as wa the idea, it 
wa at least better than a death unfairli hastened, as, in the natur 
cours of things, she must ere long be released. the sudden of her 
reput illness, the absenc of her daughter, and probabl of her other 
children, at the time--al favour the supposit of her imprisonment. 
it origin--jealousi perhaps, or wanton cruelty--wa yet to be 
unravelled. 

In revolv these matters, while she undressed, it suddenli struck her 
as not unlik that she might that morn have pass near the veri 
spot of thi unfortun woman' confinement--might have been within 
a few pace of the cell in which she languish out her days; for what 
part of the abbey could be more fit for the purpos than that which 
yet bore the trace of monast division? In the high-arch passage, 
pave with stone, which alreadi she had trodden with peculiar awe, she 
well rememb the door of which the gener had given no account. To 
what might not those door lead? In support of the plausibl of thi 
conjecture, it further occur to her that the forbidden gallery, in 
which lay the apart of the unfortun mrs. tilney, must be, as 
certainli as her memori could guid her, exactli over thi suspect 
rang of cells, and the staircas by the side of those apart of 
which she had caught a transient glimpse, commun by some 
secret mean with those cells, might well have favour the barbar 
proceed of her husband. down that staircas she had perhap been 
convey in a state of well-prepar insensibility! 

catherin sometim start at the bold of her own surmises, and 
sometim hope or fear that she had gone too far; but they were 
support by such appear as made their dismiss impossible. 

the side of the quadrangle, in which she suppos the guilti scene to be 
acting, being, accord to her belief, just opposit her own, it struck 
her that, if judici watched, some ray of light from the general' 
lamp might glimmer through the lower windows, as he pass to the prison 
of hi wife; and, twice befor she step into bed, she stole gentli 
from her room to the correspond window in the gallery, to see if it 
appeared; but all abroad wa dark, and it must yet be too early. the 
variou ascend nois convinc her that the servant must still be 
up. till midnight, she suppos it would be in vain to watch; but then, 
when the clock had struck twelve, and all wa quiet, she would, if not 
quit appal by darkness, steal out and look onc more. the clock 
struck twelve--and catherin had been half an hour asleep. 




chapter 24 


the next day afford no opportun for the propos examin of the 
mysteri apartments. It wa sunday, and the whole time between morn 
and afternoon servic wa requir by the gener in exercis abroad or 
eat cold meat at home; and great as wa catherine' curiosity, her 
courag wa not equal to a wish of explor them after dinner, either 
by the fade light of the sky between six and seven o'clock, or by the 
yet more partial though stronger illumin of a treacher lamp. 
the day wa unmark therefor by anyth to interest her imagin 
beyond the sight of a veri eleg monument to the memori of mrs. 
tilney, which immedi front the famili pew. By that her eye 
wa instantli caught and long retained; and the perus of the highli 
strain epitaph, in which everi virtu wa ascrib to her by the 
inconsol husband, who must have been in some way or other her 
destroyer, affect her even to tears. 

that the general, have erect such a monument, should be abl to face 
it, wa not perhap veri strange, and yet that he could sit so boldli 
collect within it view, maintain so elev an air, look so 
fearlessli around, nay, that he should even enter the church, seem 
wonder to catherine. not, however, that mani instanc of be 
equal harden in guilt might not be produced. she could rememb 
dozen who had persev in everi possibl vice, go on from crime to 
crime, murder whomsoev they chose, without ani feel of human 
or remorse; till a violent death or a religi retir close their 
black career. the erect of the monument itself could not in the 
smallest degre affect her doubt of mrs. tilney' actual decease. were 
she even to descend into the famili vault where her ash were suppos 
to slumber, were she to behold the coffin in which they were said to 
be enclosed--what could it avail in such a case? catherin had read too 
much not to be perfectli awar of the eas with which a waxen figur 
might be introduced, and a supposititi funer carri on. 

the succeed morn promis someth better. the general' earli 
walk, ill-tim as it wa in everi other view, wa favour here; and 
when she knew him to be out of the house, she directli propos to miss 
tilney the accomplish of her promise. eleanor wa readi to oblig 
her; and catherin remind her as they went of anoth promise, their 
first visit in consequ wa to the portrait in her bed-chamber. It 
repres a veri love woman, with a mild and pensiv countenance, 
justifying, so far, the expect of it new observer; but they were 
not in everi respect answered, for catherin had depend upon meet 
with features, hair, complexion, that should be the veri counterpart, 
the veri image, if not of henry's, of eleanor's--th onli portrait of 
which she had been in the habit of thinking, bear alway an equal 
resembl of mother and child. A face onc taken wa taken for 
generations. but here she wa oblig to look and consid and studi 
for a likeness. she contempl it, however, in spite of thi drawback, 
with much emotion, and, but for a yet stronger interest, would have left 
it unwillingly. 

her agit as they enter the great galleri wa too much for ani 
endeavour at discourse; she could onli look at her companion. eleanor' 
counten wa dejected, yet sedate; and it composur spoke her inur 
to all the gloomi object to which they were advancing. again she pass 
through the fold doors, again her hand wa upon the import lock, 
and catherine, hardli abl to breathe, wa turn to close the former 
with fear caution, when the figure, the dread figur of the gener 
himself at the further end of the gallery, stood befor her! the name of 
“eleanor” at the same moment, in hi loudest tone, resound through the 
building, give to hi daughter the first intim of hi presence, 
and to catherin terror upon terror. An attempt at conceal had been 
her first instinct movement on perceiv him, yet she could 
scarc hope to have escap hi eye; and when her friend, who with an 
apolog look dart hastili by her, had join and disappear 
with him, she ran for safeti to her own room, and, lock herself 
in, believ that she should never have courag to go down again. she 
remain there at least an hour, in the greatest agitation, deepli 
commiser the state of her poor friend, and expect a summon 
herself from the angri gener to attend him in hi own apartment. No 
summons, however, arrived; and at last, on see a carriag drive up 
to the abbey, she wa embolden to descend and meet him under the 
protect of visitors. the breakfast-room wa gay with company; and 
she wa name to them by the gener as the friend of hi daughter, in 
a complimentari style, which so well conceal hi resent ire, as to 
make her feel secur at least of life for the present. and eleanor, 
with a command of counten which did honour to her concern for hi 
character, take an earli occas of say to her, “mi father onli 
want me to answer a note,” she began to hope that she had either been 
unseen by the general, or that from some consider of polici she 
should be allow to suppos herself so. upon thi trust she dare still 
to remain in hi presence, after the compani left them, and noth 
occur to disturb it. 

In the cours of thi morning' reflections, she came to a resolut 
of make her next attempt on the forbidden door alone. It would be much 
better in everi respect that eleanor should know noth of the matter. 
To involv her in the danger of a second detection, to court her into 
an apart which must wring her heart, could not be the offic of a 
friend. the general' utmost anger could not be to herself what it might 
be to a daughter; and, besides, she thought the examin itself 
would be more satisfactori if made without ani companion. It would be 
imposs to explain to eleanor the suspicions, from which the other 
had, in all likelihood, been hitherto happili exempt; nor could she 
therefore, in her presence, search for those proof of the general' 
cruelty, which howev they might yet have escap discovery, she felt 
confid of somewher draw forth, in the shape of some fragment 
journal, continu to the last gasp. Of the way to the apart she wa 
now perfectli mistress; and as she wish to get it over befor henry' 
return, who wa expect on the morrow, there wa no time to be lost. 
the day wa bright, her courag high; at four o'clock, the sun wa now 
two hour abov the horizon, and it would be onli her retir to dress 
half an hour earlier than usual. 

It wa done; and catherin found herself alon in the galleri befor the 
clock had ceas to strike. It wa no time for thought; she hurri 
on, slip with the least possibl nois through the fold doors, 
and without stop to look or breathe, rush forward to the one in 
question. the lock yield to her hand, and, luckily, with no sullen 
sound that could alarm a human being. On tipto she entered; the room 
wa befor her; but it wa some minut befor she could advanc anoth 
step. she beheld what fix her to the spot and agit everi feature. 
she saw a large, well-proport apartment, an handsom dimiti bed, 
arrang as unoccupi with an housemaid' care, a bright bath stove, 
mahogani wardrobes, and neatli paint chairs, on which the warm beam 
of a western sun gaili pour through two sash windows! catherin had 
expect to have her feel worked, and work they were. astonish 
and doubt first seiz them; and a shortli succeed ray of common 
sens ad some bitter emot of shame. she could not be mistaken 
as to the room; but how grossli mistaken in everyth else!--in miss 
tilney' meaning, in her own calculation! thi apartment, to which she 
had given a date so ancient, a posit so awful, prove to be one end 
of what the general' father had built. there were two other door in 
the chamber, lead probabl into dressing-closets; but she had no 
inclin to open either. would the veil in which mrs. tilney had last 
walked, or the volum in which she had last read, remain to tell what 
noth els wa allow to whisper? no: whatev might have been the 
general' crimes, he had certainli too much wit to let them sue for 
detection. she wa sick of exploring, and desir but to be safe in her 
own room, with her own heart onli privi to it folly; and she wa on 
the point of retreat as softli as she had entered, when the sound of 
footsteps, she could hardli tell where, made her paus and tremble. 
To be found there, even by a servant, would be unpleasant; but by the 
gener (and he seem alway at hand when least wanted), much worse! 
she listened--th sound had ceased; and resolv not to lose a 
moment, she pass through and close the door. At that instant a door 
underneath wa hastili opened; someon seem with swift step to ascend 
the stairs, by the head of which she had yet to pass befor she could 
gain the gallery. she had no power to move. with a feel of terror 
not veri definable, she fix her eye on the staircase, and in a few 
moment it gave henri to her view. “mr. tilney!” she exclaim in a 
voic of more than common astonishment. He look astonish too. “good 
god!” she continued, not attend to hi address. “how came you here? 
how came you up that staircase?” 

“how came I up that staircase!” he replied, greatli surprised. “becaus 
it is my nearest way from the stable-yard to my own chamber; and whi 
should I not come up it?” 

catherin recollect herself, blush deeply, and could say no more. He 
seem to be look in her counten for that explan which her 
lip did not afford. she move on toward the gallery. “and may I not, 
in my turn,” said he, as he push back the fold doors, “ask how you 
came here? thi passag is at least as extraordinari a road from the 
breakfast-parlour to your apartment, as that staircas can be from the 
stabl to mine.” 

“I have been,” said catherine, look down, “to see your mother' 
room.” 

“mi mother' room! Is there anyth extraordinari to be seen there?” 

“no, noth at all. I thought you did not mean to come back till 
tomorrow.” 

“I did not expect to be abl to return sooner, when I went away; but 
three hour ago I had the pleasur of find noth to detain me. you 
look pale. I am afraid I alarm you by run so fast up those stairs. 
perhap you did not know--you were not awar of their lead from the 
offic in common use?” 

“no, I wa not. you have had a veri fine day for your ride.” 

“very; and doe eleanor leav you to find your way into all the room in 
the hous by yourself?” 

“oh! no; she show me over the greatest part on saturday--and we were 
come here to these rooms--but only”--drop her voice--“your father 
wa with us.” 

“and that prevent you,” said henry, earnestli regard her. “have you 
look into all the room in that passage?” 

“no, I onli want to see--i not it veri late? I must go and dress.” 

“it is onli a quarter past four” show hi watch--“and you are not now 
in bath. No theatre, no room to prepar for. half an hour at northang 
must be enough.” 

she could not contradict it, and therefor suffer herself to be 
detained, though her dread of further question made her, for the first 
time in their acquaintance, wish to leav him. they walk slowli up the 
gallery. “have you had ani letter from bath sinc I saw you?” 

“no, and I am veri much surprised. isabella promis so faith to 
write directly.” 

“promis so faithfully! A faith promise! that puzzl me. I have 
heard of a faith performance. but a faith promise--th fidel 
of promising! It is a power littl worth knowing, however, sinc it can 
deceiv and pain you. My mother' room is veri commodious, is it not? 
larg and cheerful-looking, and the dressing-closet so well disposed! 
It alway strike me as the most comfort apart in the house, and 
I rather wonder that eleanor should not take it for her own. she sent 
you to look at it, I suppose?” 

“no.” 

“it ha been your own do entirely?” catherin said nothing. after a 
short silence, dure which he had close observ her, he added, “a 
there is noth in the room in itself to rais curiosity, thi must 
have proceed from a sentiment of respect for my mother' character, 
as describ by eleanor, which doe honour to her memory. the world, I 
believe, never saw a better woman. but it is not often that virtu can 
boast an interest such as this. the domestic, unpretend merit of a 
person never known do not often creat that kind of fervent, vener 
tender which would prompt a visit like yours. eleanor, I suppose, 
ha talk of her a great deal?” 

“yes, a great deal. that is--no, not much, but what she did say wa veri 
interesting. her die so suddenly” (slowly, and with hesit it 
wa spoken), “and you--non of you be at home--and your father, I 
thought--perhap had not been veri fond of her.” 

“and from these circumstances,” he repli (hi quick eye 
fix on hers), “you infer perhap the probabl of some 
negligence--some”--(involuntarili she shook her head)--“or it may be--of 
someth still less pardonable.” she rais her eye toward him 
more fulli than she had ever done before. “mi mother' illness,” he 
continued, “the seizur which end in her death, wa sudden. the maladi 
itself, one from which she had often suffered, a biliou fever--it 
caus therefor constitutional. On the third day, in short, as soon as 
she could be prevail on, a physician attend her, a veri respect 
man, and one in whom she had alway place great confidence. upon hi 
opinion of her danger, two other were call in the next day, and 
remain in almost constant attend for four and twenti hours. On the 
fifth day she died. dure the progress of her disorder, frederick and I 
(we were both at home) saw her repeatedly; and from our own observ 
can bear wit to her have receiv everi possibl attent 
which could spring from the affect of those about her, or which her 
situat in life could command. poor eleanor wa absent, and at such a 
distanc as to return onli to see her mother in her coffin.” 

“but your father,” said catherine, “wa he afflicted?” 

“for a time, greatli so. you have er in suppos him not attach 
to her. He love her, I am persuaded, as well as it wa possibl for him 
to--w have not all, you know, the same tender of disposition--and 
I will not pretend to say that while she lived, she might not often have 
had much to bear, but though hi temper injur her, hi judgment never 
did. hi valu of her wa sincere; and, if not permanently, he wa truli 
afflict by her death.” 

“I am veri glad of it,” said catherine; “it would have been veri 
shocking!” 

“if I understand you rightly, you had form a surmis of such horror as 
I have hardli word to--dear miss morland, consid the dread natur 
of the suspicion you have entertained. what have you been judg from? 
rememb the countri and the age in which we live. rememb that we are 
english, that we are christians. consult your own understanding, your 
own sens of the probable, your own observ of what is pass 
around you. doe our educ prepar us for such atrocities? Do our 
law conniv at them? could they be perpetr without be known, in 
a countri like this, where social and literari intercours is on such a 
footing, where everi man is surround by a neighbourhood of voluntari 
spies, and where road and newspap lay everyth open? dearest miss 
morland, what idea have you been admitting?” 

they had reach the end of the gallery, and with tear of shame she ran 
off to her own room. 




chapter 25 


the vision of romanc were over. catherin wa complet awakened. 
henry' address, short as it had been, had more thoroughli open her 
eye to the extravag of her late fanci than all their sever 
disappoint had done. most grievous wa she humbled. most bitterli 
did she cry. It wa not onli with herself that she wa sunk--but with 
henry. her folly, which now seem even criminal, wa all expos to 
him, and he must despis her forever. the liberti which her imagin 
had dare to take with the charact of hi father--could he ever 
forgiv it? the absurd of her curios and her fears--could they 
ever be forgotten? she hate herself more than she could express. He 
had--sh thought he had, onc or twice befor thi fatal morning, shown 
someth like affect for her. but now--in short, she made herself as 
miser as possibl for about half an hour, went down when the 
clock struck five, with a broken heart, and could scarc give an 
intellig answer to eleanor' inquiri if she wa well. the formid 
henri soon follow her into the room, and the onli differ in hi 
behaviour to her wa that he paid her rather more attent than usual. 
catherin had never want comfort more, and he look as if he wa 
awar of it. 

the even wore away with no abat of thi sooth politeness; and 
her spirit were gradual rais to a modest tranquillity. she did not 
learn either to forget or defend the past; but she learn to hope that 
it would never transpir farther, and that it might not cost her henry' 
entir regard. her thought be still chiefli fix on what she had 
with such causeless terror felt and done, noth could shortli be 
clearer than that it had been all a voluntary, self-creat delusion, 
each trifl circumst receiv import from an imagin 
resolv on alarm, and everyth forc to bend to one purpos by 
a mind which, befor she enter the abbey, had been crave to be 
frightened. she rememb with what feel she had prepar for a 
knowledg of northanger. she saw that the infatu had been created, 
the mischief settled, long befor her quit bath, and it seem as if 
the whole might be trace to the influenc of that sort of read which 
she had there indulged. 

charm as were all mrs. radcliffe' works, and charm even as were 
the work of all her imitators, it wa not in them perhap that human 
nature, at least in the midland counti of england, wa to be look 
for. Of the alp and pyrenees, with their pine forest and their vices, 
they might give a faith delineation; and italy, switzerland, and 
the south of franc might be as fruit in horror as they were there 
represented. catherin dare not doubt beyond her own country, and even 
of that, if hard pressed, would have yield the northern and western 
extremities. but in the central part of england there wa sure some 
secur for the exist even of a wife not beloved, in the law of 
the land, and the manner of the age. murder wa not tolerated, servant 
were not slaves, and neither poison nor sleep potion to be procured, 
like rhubarb, from everi druggist. among the alp and pyrenees, perhaps, 
there were no mix characters. there, such as were not as spotless as 
an angel might have the disposit of a fiend. but in england it wa 
not so; among the english, she believed, in their heart and habits, 
there wa a gener though unequ mixtur of good and bad. upon thi 
conviction, she would not be surpris if even in henri and eleanor 
tilney, some slight imperfect might hereaft appear; and upon thi 
convict she need not fear to acknowledg some actual speck in 
the charact of their father, who, though clear from the grossli 
injuri suspicion which she must ever blush to have entertained, she 
did believe, upon seriou consideration, to be not perfectli amiable. 

her mind made up on these sever points, and her resolut formed, of 
alway judg and act in futur with the greatest good sense, she 
had noth to do but to forgiv herself and be happier than ever; and 
the lenient hand of time did much for her by insens gradat in 
the cours of anoth day. henry' astonish generos and nobl 
of conduct, in never allud in the slightest way to what had passed, 
wa of the greatest assist to her; and sooner than she could have 
suppos it possibl in the begin of her distress, her spirit 
becam absolut comfortable, and capable, as heretofore, of continu 
improv by anyth he said. there were still some subjects, indeed, 
under which she believ they must alway tremble--th mention of a 
chest or a cabinet, for instance--and she did not love the sight of 
japan in ani shape: but even she could allow that an occasion memento 
of past folly, howev painful, might not be without use. 

the anxieti of common life began soon to succeed to the alarm of 
romance. her desir of hear from isabella grew everi day greater. 
she wa quit impati to know how the bath world went on, and how the 
room were attended; and especi wa she anxiou to be assur of 
isabella' have match some fine netting-cotton, on which she had 
left her intent; and of her continu on the best term with james. her 
onli depend for inform of ani kind wa on isabella. jame had 
protest against write to her till hi return to oxford; and mrs. 
allen had given her no hope of a letter till she had got back to 
fullerton. but isabella had promis and promis again; and when she 
promis a thing, she wa so scrupul in perform it! thi made it 
so particularli strange! 

for nine success mornings, catherin wonder over the repetit 
of a disappointment, which each morn becam more severe: but, on 
the tenth, when she enter the breakfast-room, her first object wa a 
letter, held out by henry' will hand. she thank him as heartili 
as if he had written it himself. “'ti onli from james, however,” as she 
look at the direction. she open it; it wa from oxford; and to thi 
purpose: 


“dear catherine, 

“though, god knows, with littl inclin for writing, I think it my 
duti to tell you that everyth is at an end between miss thorp and 
me. I left her and bath yesterday, never to see either again. I shall 
not enter into particulars--they would onli pain you more. you will soon 
hear enough from anoth quarter to know where lie the blame; and I 
hope will acquit your brother of everyth but the folli of too easili 
think hi affect returned. thank god! I am undeceiv in time! 
but it is a heavi blow! after my father' consent had been so kindli 
given--but no more of this. she ha made me miser forever! let me 
soon hear from you, dear catherine; you are my onli friend; your love 
I do build upon. I wish your visit at northang may be over befor 
captain tilney make hi engag known, or you will be uncomfort 
circumstanced. poor thorp is in town: I dread the sight of him; hi 
honest heart would feel so much. I have written to him and my father. 
her duplic hurt me more than all; till the veri last, if I reason 
with her, she declar herself as much attach to me as ever, and 
laugh at my fears. I am asham to think how long I bore with it; 
but if ever man had reason to believ himself loved, I wa that man. I 
cannot understand even now what she would be at, for there could be no 
need of my be play off to make her secur of tilney. We part 
at last by mutual consent--happi for me had we never met! I can never 
expect to know such anoth woman! dearest catherine, bewar how you 
give your heart. 

“believ me,” &c. 


catherin had not read three line befor her sudden chang of 
countenance, and short exclam of sorrow wonder, declar her to 
be receiv unpleas news; and henry, earnestli watch her through 
the whole letter, saw plainli that it end no better than it began. He 
wa prevented, however, from even look hi surpris by hi father' 
entrance. they went to breakfast directly; but catherin could hardli 
eat anything. tear fill her eyes, and even ran down her cheek as she 
sat. the letter wa one moment in her hand, then in her lap, and then in 
her pocket; and she look as if she knew not what she did. the general, 
between hi cocoa and hi newspaper, had luckili no leisur for notic 
her; but to the other two her distress wa equal visible. As soon 
as she dare leav the tabl she hurri away to her own room; but the 
housemaid were busi in it, and she wa oblig to come down again. 
she turn into the drawing-room for privacy, but henri and eleanor had 
likewis retreat thither, and were at that moment deep in consult 
about her. she drew back, tri to beg their pardon, but was, with 
gentl violence, forc to return; and the other withdrew, after 
eleanor had affection express a wish of be of use or comfort 
to her. 

after half an hour' free indulg of grief and reflection, catherin 
felt equal to encount her friends; but whether she should make 
her distress known to them wa anoth consideration. perhaps, if 
particularli questioned, she might just give an idea--just distantli 
hint at it--but not more. To expos a friend, such a friend as isabella 
had been to her--and then their own brother so close concern in it! 
she believ she must waiv the subject altogether. henri and eleanor 
were by themselv in the breakfast-room; and each, as she enter it, 
look at her anxiously. catherin took her place at the table, and, 
after a short silence, eleanor said, “no bad news from fullerton, I 
hope? mr. and mrs. morland--your brother and sisters--i hope they are 
none of them ill?” 

“no, I thank you” (sigh as she spoke); “they are all veri well. My 
letter wa from my brother at oxford.” 

noth further wa said for a few minutes; and then speak through 
her tears, she added, “I do not think I shall ever wish for a letter 
again!” 

“I am sorry,” said henry, close the book he had just opened; “if I 
had suspect the letter of contain anyth unwelcome, I should have 
given it with veri differ feelings.” 

“it contain someth wors than anybodi could suppose! poor jame is 
so unhappy! you will soon know why.” 

“to have so kind-hearted, so affection a sister,” repli henri 
warmly, “must be a comfort to him under ani distress.” 

“I have one favour to beg,” said catherine, shortli afterwards, in an 
agit manner, “that, if your brother should be come here, you will 
give me notic of it, that I may go away.” 

“our brother! frederick!” 

“yes; I am sure I should be veri sorri to leav you so soon, but 
someth ha happen that would make it veri dread for me to be in 
the same hous with captain tilney.” 

eleanor' work wa suspend while she gaze with increas 
astonishment; but henri began to suspect the truth, and something, in 
which miss thorpe' name wa included, pass hi lips. 

“how quick you are!” cri catherine: “you have guess it, I declare! 
and yet, when we talk about it in bath, you littl thought of it 
end so. isabella--no wonder now I have not heard from her--isabella 
ha desert my brother, and is to marri yours! could you have believ 
there had been such inconst and fickleness, and everyth that is 
bad in the world?” 

“I hope, so far as concern my brother, you are misinformed. I hope 
he ha not had ani materi share in bring on mr. morland' 
disappointment. hi marri miss thorp is not probable. I think you 
must be deceiv so far. I am veri sorri for mr. morland--sorri that 
anyon you love should be unhappy; but my surpris would be greater at 
frederick' marri her than at ani other part of the story.” 

“it is veri true, however; you shall read james' letter yourself. 
stay--ther is one part--” recollect with a blush the last line. 

“will you take the troubl of read to us the passag which concern 
my brother?” 

“no, read it yourself,” cri catherine, whose second thought were 
clearer. “I do not know what I wa think of” (blush again that she 
had blush before); “jame onli mean to give me good advice.” 

He gladli receiv the letter, and, have read it through, with close 
attention, return it saying, “well, if it is to be so, I can onli 
say that I am sorri for it. frederick will not be the first man who ha 
chosen a wife with less sens than hi famili expected. I do not envi 
hi situation, either as a lover or a son.” 

miss tilney, at catherine' invitation, now read the letter likewise, 
and, have express also her concern and surprise, began to inquir 
into miss thorpe' connect and fortune. 

“her mother is a veri good sort of woman,” wa catherine' answer. 

“what wa her father?” 

“A lawyer, I believe. they live at putney.” 

“are they a wealthi family?” 

“no, not very. I do not believ isabella ha ani fortun at all: but 
that will not signifi in your family. your father is so veri liberal! 
He told me the other day that he onli valu money as it allow him to 
promot the happi of hi children.” the brother and sister look 
at each other. “but,” said eleanor, after a short pause, “would it be to 
promot hi happiness, to enabl him to marri such a girl? she must be 
an unprincipl one, or she could not have use your brother so. and how 
strang an infatu on frederick' side! A girl who, befor hi eyes, 
is violat an engag voluntarili enter into with anoth man! Is 
not it inconceivable, henry? frederick too, who alway wore hi heart so 
proudly! who found no woman good enough to be loved!” 

“that is the most unpromis circumstance, the strongest presumpt 
against him. when I think of hi past declarations, I give him up. 
moreover, I have too good an opinion of miss thorpe' prudenc to 
suppos that she would part with one gentleman befor the other 
wa secured. It is all over with frederick indeed! He is a deceas 
man--defunct in understanding. prepar for your sister-in-law, eleanor, 
and such a sister-in-law as you must delight in! open, candid, artless, 
guileless, with affect strong but simple, form no pretensions, 
and know no disguise.” 

“such a sister-in-law, henry, I should delight in,” said eleanor with a 
smile. 

“but perhaps,” observ catherine, “though she ha behav so ill by our 
family, she may behav better by yours. now she ha realli got the man 
she likes, she may be constant.” 

“inde I am afraid she will,” repli henry; “I am afraid she will 
be veri constant, unless a baronet should come in her way; that is 
frederick' onli chance. I will get the bath paper, and look over the 
arrivals.” 

“you think it is all for ambition, then? and, upon my word, there are 
some thing that seem veri like it. I cannot forget that, when she first 
knew what my father would do for them, she seem quit disappoint 
that it wa not more. I never wa so deceiv in anyone' charact in 
my life before.” 

“among all the great varieti that you have known and studied.” 

“mi own disappoint and loss in her is veri great; but, as for poor 
james, I suppos he will hardli ever recov it.” 

“your brother is certainli veri much to be piti at present; but we 
must not, in our concern for hi sufferings, undervalu yours. you feel, 
I suppose, that in lose isabella, you lose half yourself: you feel a 
void in your heart which noth els can occupy. societi is becom 
irksome; and as for the amus in which you were wont to share at 
bath, the veri idea of them without her is abhorrent. you would not, 
for instance, now go to a ball for the world. you feel that you have no 
longer ani friend to whom you can speak with unreserve, on whose regard 
you can place dependence, or whose counsel, in ani difficulty, you could 
reli on. you feel all this?” 

“no,” said catherine, after a few moments' reflection, “I do not--ought 
I? To say the truth, though I am hurt and grieved, that I cannot still 
love her, that I am never to hear from her, perhap never to see her 
again, I do not feel so very, veri much afflict as one would have 
thought.” 

“you feel, as you alway do, what is most to the credit of human nature. 
such feel ought to be investigated, that they may know themselves.” 

catherine, by some chanc or other, found her spirit so veri much 
reliev by thi convers that she could not regret her be led 
on, though so unaccountably, to mention the circumst which had 
produc it. 




chapter 26 


from thi time, the subject wa frequent canvass by the three young 
people; and catherin found, with some surprise, that her two young 
friend were perfectli agre in consid isabella' want of 
consequ and fortun as like to throw great difficulti in the way 
of her marri their brother. their persuas that the gener would, 
upon thi ground alone, independ of the object that might be 
rais against her character, oppos the connection, turn her feel 
moreov with some alarm toward herself. she wa as insignificant, 
and perhap as portionless, as isabella; and if the heir of the tilney 
properti had not grandeur and wealth enough in himself, at what point 
of interest were the demand of hi younger brother to rest? the veri 
pain reflect to which thi thought led could onli be dispers by 
a depend on the effect of that particular partiality, which, as she 
wa given to understand by hi word as well as hi actions, she had 
from the first been so fortun as to excit in the general; and by a 
recollect of some most gener and disinterest sentiment on the 
subject of money, which she had more than onc heard him utter, and 
which tempt her to think hi disposit in such matter misunderstood 
by hi children. 

they were so fulli convinced, however, that their brother would not 
have the courag to appli in person for hi father' consent, and so 
repeatedli assur her that he had never in hi life been less like to 
come to northang than at the present time, that she suffer her mind 
to be at eas as to the necess of ani sudden remov of her own. but 
as it wa not to be suppos that captain tilney, whenev he made hi 
application, would give hi father ani just idea of isabella' conduct, 
it occur to her as highli expedi that henri should lay the whole 
busi befor him as it realli was, enabl the gener by that mean 
to form a cool and imparti opinion, and prepar hi object on 
a fairer ground than inequ of situations. she propos it to him 
accordingly; but he did not catch at the measur so eagerli as she had 
expected. “no,” said he, “mi father' hand need not be strengthened, 
and frederick' confess of folli need not be forestalled. He must 
tell hi own story.” 

“but he will tell onli half of it.” 

“A quarter would be enough.” 

A day or two pass away and brought no tide of captain tilney. hi 
brother and sister knew not what to think. sometim it appear to 
them as if hi silenc would be the natur result of the suspect 
engagement, and at other that it wa wholli incompat with it. 
the general, meanwhile, though offend everi morn by frederick' 
remiss in writing, wa free from ani real anxieti about him, and had 
no more press solicitud than that of make miss morland' time at 
northang pass pleasantly. He often express hi uneasi on thi 
head, fear the same of everi day' societi and employ would 
disgust her with the place, wish the ladi fraser had been in the 
country, talk everi now and then of have a larg parti to dinner, 
and onc or twice began even to calcul the number of young danc 
peopl in the neighbourhood. but then it wa such a dead time of year, 
no wild-fowl, no game, and the ladi fraser were not in the country. 
and it all ended, at last, in hi tell henri one morn that when he 
next went to woodston, they would take him by surpris there some day 
or other, and eat their mutton with him. henri wa greatli honour and 
veri happy, and catherin wa quit delight with the scheme. “and when 
do you think, sir, I may look forward to thi pleasure? I must be at 
woodston on monday to attend the parish meeting, and shall probabl be 
oblig to stay two or three days.” 

“well, well, we will take our chanc some one of those days. there is 
no need to fix. you are not to put yourself at all out of your way. 
whatev you may happen to have in the hous will be enough. I think I 
can answer for the young ladi make allow for a bachelor' table. 
let me see; monday will be a busi day with you, we will not come on 
monday; and tuesday will be a busi one with me. I expect my surveyor 
from brockham with hi report in the morning; and afterward I cannot in 
decenc fail attend the club. I realli could not face my acquaint 
if I stay away now; for, as I am known to be in the country, it would 
be taken exceedingli amiss; and it is a rule with me, miss morland, 
never to give offenc to ani of my neighbours, if a small sacrific of 
time and attent can prevent it. they are a set of veri worthi men. 
they have half a buck from northang twice a year; and I dine with them 
whenev I can. tuesday, therefore, we may say is out of the question. 
but on wednesday, I think, henry, you may expect us; and we shall be 
with you early, that we may have time to look about us. two hour and 
three quarter will carri us to woodston, I suppose; we shall be in the 
carriag by ten; so, about a quarter befor one on wednesday, you may 
look for us.” 

A ball itself could not have been more welcom to catherin than 
thi littl excursion, so strong wa her desir to be acquaint with 
woodston; and her heart wa still bound with joy when henry, about an 
hour afterwards, came boot and greatcoat into the room where she 
and eleanor were sitting, and said, “I am come, young ladies, in a 
veri moral strain, to observ that our pleasur in thi world 
are alway to be paid for, and that we often purchas them at a great 
disadvantage, give ready-moni actual happi for a draft on the 
future, that may not be honoured. wit myself, at thi present hour. 
becaus I am to hope for the satisfact of see you at woodston on 
wednesday, which bad weather, or twenti other causes, may prevent, I 
must go away directly, two day befor I intend it.” 

“go away!” said catherine, with a veri long face. “and why?” 

“why! how can you ask the question? becaus no time is to be lost in 
frighten my old housekeep out of her wits, becaus I must go and 
prepar a dinner for you, to be sure.” 

“oh! not seriously!” 

“aye, and sadli too--for I had much rather stay.” 

“but how can you think of such a thing, after what the gener said? 
when he so particularli desir you not to give yourself ani trouble, 
becaus anyth would do.” 

henri onli smiled. “I am sure it is quit unnecessari upon your sister' 
account and mine. you must know it to be so; and the gener made such 
a point of your provid noth extraordinary: besides, if he had not 
said half so much as he did, he ha alway such an excel dinner 
at home, that sit down to a middl one for one day could not 
signify.” 

“I wish I could reason like you, for hi sake and my own. good-bye. As 
tomorrow is sunday, eleanor, I shall not return.” 

He went; and, it be at ani time a much simpler oper to catherin 
to doubt her own judgment than henry's, she wa veri soon oblig to 
give him credit for be right, howev disagre to her hi going. 
but the inexplic of the general' conduct dwelt much on her 
thoughts. that he wa veri particular in hi eating, she had, by her own 
unassist observation, alreadi discovered; but whi he should say 
one thing so positively, and mean anoth all the while, wa most 
unaccountable! how were people, at that rate, to be understood? who but 
henri could have been awar of what hi father wa at? 

from saturday to wednesday, however, they were now to be without henry. 
thi wa the sad final of everi reflection: and captain tilney' letter 
would certainli come in hi absence; and wednesday she wa veri sure 
would be wet. the past, present, and futur were all equal in gloom. 
her brother so unhappy, and her loss in isabella so great; and eleanor' 
spirit alway affect by henry' absence! what wa there to interest 
or amus her? she wa tire of the wood and the shrubberies--alway so 
smooth and so dry; and the abbey in itself wa no more to her now than 
ani other house. the pain remembr of the folli it had help 
to nourish and perfect wa the onli emot which could spring from a 
consider of the building. what a revolut in her ideas! she, who 
had so long to be in an abbey! now, there wa noth so charm 
to her imagin as the unpretend comfort of a well-connect 
parsonage, someth like fullerton, but better: fullerton had it 
faults, but woodston probabl had none. If wednesday should ever come! 

It did come, and exactli when it might be reason look for. It 
came--it wa fine--and catherin trod on air. By ten o'clock, the chais 
and four convey the trio from the abbey; and, after an agreeabl drive 
of almost twenti miles, they enter woodston, a larg and popul 
village, in a situat not unpleasant. catherin wa asham to say 
how pretti she thought it, as the gener seem to think an apolog 
necessari for the flat of the country, and the size of the village; 
but in her heart she prefer it to ani place she had ever been at, 
and look with great admir at everi neat hous abov the rank of 
a cottage, and at all the littl chandler' shop which they passed. At 
the further end of the village, and toler disengag from the rest 
of it, stood the parsonage, a new-built substanti stone house, with 
it semicircular sweep and green gates; and, as they drove up to the 
door, henry, with the friend of hi solitude, a larg newfoundland 
puppi and two or three terriers, wa readi to receiv and make much of 
them. 

catherine' mind wa too full, as she enter the house, for her either 
to observ or to say a great deal; and, till call on by the gener 
for her opinion of it, she had veri littl idea of the room in which she 
wa sitting. upon look round it then, she perceiv in a moment that 
it wa the most comfort room in the world; but she wa too guard 
to say so, and the cold of her prais disappoint him. 

“we are not call it a good house,” said he. “we are not compar 
it with fullerton and northanger--w are consid it as a mere 
parsonage, small and confined, we allow, but decent, perhaps, and 
habitable; and altogeth not inferior to the generality; or, in other 
words, I believ there are few countri parsonag in england half so 
good. It may admit of improvement, however. far be it from me to say 
otherwise; and anyth in reason--a bow thrown out, perhaps--though, 
between ourselves, if there is one thing more than anoth my aversion, 
it is a patched-on bow.” 

catherin did not hear enough of thi speech to understand or be pain 
by it; and other subject be studious brought forward and support 
by henry, at the same time that a tray full of refresh wa 
introduc by hi servant, the gener wa shortli restor to hi 
complacency, and catherin to all her usual eas of spirits. 

the room in question wa of a commodious, well-proport size, and 
handsom fit up as a dining-parlour; and on their quit it to 
walk round the grounds, she wa shown, first into a smaller apartment, 
belong peculiarli to the master of the house, and made unusu tidi 
on the occasion; and afterward into what wa to be the drawing-room, 
with the appear of which, though unfurnished, catherin wa 
delight enough even to satisfi the general. It wa a prettili shape 
room, the window reach to the ground, and the view from them 
pleasant, though onli over green meadows; and she express her 
admir at the moment with all the honest simplic with which she 
felt it. “oh! whi do not you fit up thi room, mr. tilney? what a piti 
not to have it fit up! It is the prettiest room I ever saw; it is the 
prettiest room in the world!” 

“I trust,” said the general, with a most satisfi smile, “that it will 
veri speedili be furnished: it wait onli for a lady' taste!” 

“well, if it wa my house, I should never sit anywher else. oh! what a 
sweet littl cottag there is among the trees--appl trees, too! It is 
the prettiest cottage!” 

“you like it--you approv it as an object--it is enough. henry, rememb 
that robinson is spoken to about it. the cottag remains.” 

such a compliment recal all catherine' consciousness, and silenc 
her directly; and, though pointedli appli to by the gener for her 
choic of the prevail colour of the paper and hangings, noth like 
an opinion on the subject could be drawn from her. the influenc of 
fresh object and fresh air, however, wa of great use in dissip 
these embarrass associations; and, have reach the ornament part 
of the premises, consist of a walk round two side of a meadow, on 
which henry' geniu had begun to act about half a year ago, she wa 
suffici recov to think it prettier than ani pleasure-ground she 
had ever been in before, though there wa not a shrub in it higher than 
the green bench in the corner. 

A saunter into other meadows, and through part of the village, with a 
visit to the stabl to examin some improvements, and a charm game 
of play with a litter of puppi just abl to roll about, brought them 
to four o'clock, when catherin scarc thought it could be three. At 
four they were to dine, and at six to set off on their return. never had 
ani day pass so quickly! 

she could not but observ that the abund of the dinner did not seem 
to creat the smallest astonish in the general; nay, that he wa 
even look at the side-t for cold meat which wa not there. hi 
son and daughter' observ were of a differ kind. they had 
seldom seen him eat so heartili at ani tabl but hi own, and never 
befor known him so littl disconcert by the melt butter' be 
oiled. 

At six o'clock, the gener have taken hi coffee, the carriag again 
receiv them; and so gratifi had been the tenor of hi conduct 
throughout the whole visit, so well assur wa her mind on the subject 
of hi expectations, that, could she have felt equal confid of the 
wish of hi son, catherin would have quit woodston with littl 
anxieti as to the how or the when she might return to it. 




chapter 27 


the next morn brought the follow veri unexpect letter from 
isabella: 


bath, april 

My dearest catherine, I receiv your two kind letter with the greatest 
delight, and have a thousand apolog to make for not answer them 
sooner. I realli am quit asham of my idleness; but in thi horrid 
place one can find time for nothing. I have had my pen in my hand to 
begin a letter to you almost everi day sinc you left bath, but have 
alway been prevent by some silli trifler or other. pray write to me 
soon, and direct to my own home. thank god, we leav thi vile place 
tomorrow. sinc you went away, I have had no pleasur in it--th dust 
is beyond anything; and everybodi one care for is gone. I believ if I 
could see you I should not mind the rest, for you are dearer to me than 
anybodi can conceive. I am quit uneasi about your dear brother, not 
have heard from him sinc he went to oxford; and am fear of some 
misunderstanding. your kind offic will set all right: he is the onli 
man I ever did or could love, and I trust you will convinc him of it. 
the spring fashion are partli down; and the hat the most fright you 
can imagine. I hope you spend your time pleasantly, but am afraid you 
never think of me. I will not say all that I could of the famili you are 
with, becaus I would not be ungenerous, or set you against those you 
esteem; but it is veri difficult to know whom to trust, and young men 
never know their mind two day together. I rejoic to say that the 
young man whom, of all others, I particularli abhor, ha left bath. you 
will know, from thi description, I must mean captain tilney, who, as 
you may remember, wa amazingli dispos to follow and teas me, befor 
you went away. afterward he got worse, and becam quit my shadow. mani 
girl might have been taken in, for never were such attentions; but I 
knew the fickl sex too well. He went away to hi regiment two day ago, 
and I trust I shall never be plagu with him again. He is the greatest 
coxcomb I ever saw, and amazingli disagreeable. the last two day he wa 
alway by the side of charlott davis: I piti hi taste, but took no 
notic of him. the last time we met wa in bath street, and I turn 
directli into a shop that he might not speak to me; I would not even 
look at him. He went into the pump-room afterwards; but I would not have 
follow him for all the world. such a contrast between him and your 
brother! pray send me some news of the latter--i am quit unhappi about 
him; he seem so uncomfort when he went away, with a cold, or 
someth that affect hi spirits. I would write to him myself, but 
have mislaid hi direction; and, as I hint above, am afraid he 
took someth in my conduct amiss. pray explain everyth to hi 
satisfaction; or, if he still harbour ani doubt, a line from himself 
to me, or a call at putney when next in town, might set all to rights. 
I have not been to the room thi age, nor to the play, except go in 
last night with the hodges, for a frolic, at half price: they teas 
me into it; and I wa determin they should not say I shut myself up 
becaus tilney wa gone. We happen to sit by the mitchells, and they 
pretend to be quit surpris to see me out. I knew their spite: at 
one time they could not be civil to me, but now they are all friendship; 
but I am not such a fool as to be taken in by them. you know I have a 
pretti good spirit of my own. ann mitchel had tri to put on a 
turban like mine, as I wore it the week befor at the concert, but made 
wretch work of it--it happen to becom my odd face, I believe, at 
least tilney told me so at the time, and said everi eye wa upon me; but 
he is the last man whose word I would take. I wear noth but purpl 
now: I know I look hideou in it, but no matter--it is your dear 
brother' favourit colour. lose no time, my dearest, sweetest 
catherine, in write to him and to me, who ever am, etc. 


such a strain of shallow artific could not impos even upon catherine. 
it inconsistencies, contradictions, and falsehood struck her from the 
veri first. she wa asham of isabella, and asham of have ever 
love her. her profess of attach were now as disgust as her 
excus were empty, and her demand impudent. “write to jame on her 
behalf! no, jame should never hear isabella' name mention by her 
again.” 

On henry' arriv from woodston, she made known to him and eleanor 
their brother' safety, congratul them with sincer on it, and 
read aloud the most materi passag of her letter with strong 
indignation. when she had finish it--“so much for isabella,” she 
cried, “and for all our intimacy! she must think me an idiot, or she 
could not have written so; but perhap thi ha serv to make her 
charact better known to me than mine is to her. I see what she ha 
been about. she is a vain coquette, and her trick have not answered. I 
do not believ she had ever ani regard either for jame or for me, and I 
wish I had never known her.” 

“it will soon be as if you never had,” said henry. 

“there is but one thing that I cannot understand. I see that she ha 
had design on captain tilney, which have not succeeded; but I do not 
understand what captain tilney ha been about all thi time. whi should 
he pay her such attent as to make her quarrel with my brother, and 
then fli off himself?” 

“I have veri littl to say for frederick' motives, such as I believ 
them to have been. He ha hi vaniti as well as miss thorpe, and the 
chief differ is, that, have a stronger head, they have not yet 
injur himself. If the effect of hi behaviour doe not justifi him 
with you, we had better not seek after the cause.” 

“then you do not suppos he ever realli care about her?” 

“I am persuad that he never did.” 

“and onli made believ to do so for mischief' sake?” 

henri bow hi assent. 

“well, then, I must say that I do not like him at all. though it ha 
turn out so well for us, I do not like him at all. As it happens, 
there is no great harm done, becaus I do not think isabella ha ani 
heart to lose. but, suppos he had made her veri much in love with him?” 

“but we must first suppos isabella to have had a heart to 
lose--consequ to have been a veri differ creature; and, in that 
case, she would have met with veri differ treatment.” 

“it is veri right that you should stand by your brother.” 

“and if you would stand by yours, you would not be much distress by 
the disappoint of miss thorpe. but your mind is warp by an innat 
principl of gener integrity, and therefor not access to the cool 
reason of famili partiality, or a desir of revenge.” 

catherin wa compliment out of further bitterness. frederick could 
not be unpardon guilty, while henri made himself so agreeable. she 
resolv on not answer isabella' letter, and tri to think no more 
of it. 




chapter 28 


soon after this, the gener found himself oblig to go to london for 
a week; and he left northang earnestli regret that ani necess 
should rob him even for an hour of miss morland' company, and anxious 
recommend the studi of her comfort and amus to hi children 
as their chief object in hi absence. hi departur gave catherin the 
first experiment convict that a loss may be sometim a gain. the 
happi with which their time now passed, everi employ voluntary, 
everi laugh indulged, everi meal a scene of eas and good humour, 
walk where they like and when they liked, their hours, pleasures, 
and fatigu at their own command, made her thoroughli sensibl of the 
restraint which the general' presenc had imposed, and most thank 
feel their present releas from it. such eas and such delight made her 
love the place and the peopl more and more everi day; and had it not 
been for a dread of it soon becom expedi to leav the one, and 
an apprehens of not be equal belov by the other, she would at 
each moment of each day have been perfectli happy; but she wa now in 
the fourth week of her visit; befor the gener came home, the fourth 
week would be turned, and perhap it might seem an intrus if she 
stay much longer. thi wa a pain consider whenev it 
occurred; and eager to get rid of such a weight on her mind, she veri 
soon resolv to speak to eleanor about it at once, propos go away, 
and be guid in her conduct by the manner in which her propos might 
be taken. 

awar that if she gave herself much time, she might feel it difficult to 
bring forward so unpleas a subject, she took the first opportun of 
be suddenli alon with eleanor, and of eleanor' be in the 
middl of a speech about someth veri different, to start forth her 
oblig of go away veri soon. eleanor look and declar herself 
much concerned. she had “hope for the pleasur of her compani for a 
much longer time--had been misl (perhap by her wishes) to suppos 
that a much longer visit had been promised--and could not but think that 
if mr. and mrs. morland were awar of the pleasur it wa to her to have 
her there, they would be too gener to hasten her return.” catherin 
explained: “oh! As to that, papa and mamma were in no hurri at all. As 
long as she wa happy, they would alway be satisfied.” 

“then why, might she ask, in such a hurri herself to leav them?” 

“oh! becaus she had been there so long.” 

“nay, if you can use such a word, I can urg you no farther. If you 
think it long--” 

“oh! no, I do not indeed. for my own pleasure, I could stay with you as 
long again.” and it wa directli settl that, till she had, her leav 
them wa not even to be thought of. In have thi caus of uneasi 
so pleasantli removed, the forc of the other wa likewis weakened. the 
kindness, the earnest of eleanor' manner in press her to stay, 
and henry' gratifi look on be told that her stay wa determined, 
were such sweet proof of her import with them, as left her onli 
just so much solicitud as the human mind can never do comfort 
without. she did--almost always--believ that henri love her, and quit 
alway that hi father and sister love and even wish her to belong 
to them; and believ so far, her doubt and anxieti were mere 
sportiv irritations. 

henri wa not abl to obey hi father' injunct of remain wholli 
at northang in attend on the ladies, dure hi absenc in london, 
the engag of hi curat at woodston oblig him to leav them on 
saturday for a coupl of nights. hi loss wa not now what it had been 
while the gener wa at home; it lessen their gaiety, but did not 
ruin their comfort; and the two girl agre in occupation, and 
improv in intimacy, found themselv so well suffici for the time 
to themselves, that it wa eleven o'clock, rather a late hour at 
the abbey, befor they quit the supper-room on the day of henry' 
departure. they had just reach the head of the stair when it seemed, 
as far as the thick of the wall would allow them to judge, that a 
carriag wa drive up to the door, and the next moment confirm the 
idea by the loud nois of the house-bell. after the first perturb 
of surpris had pass away, in a “good heaven! what can be the matter?” 
it wa quickli decid by eleanor to be her eldest brother, whose 
arriv wa often as sudden, if not quit so unseasonable, and 
accordingli she hurri down to welcom him. 

catherin walk on to her chamber, make up her mind as well as she 
could, to a further acquaint with captain tilney, and comfort 
herself under the unpleas impress hi conduct had given her, and 
the persuas of hi be by far too fine a gentleman to approv of 
her, that at least they should not meet under such circumst as 
would make their meet materi painful. she trust he would never 
speak of miss thorpe; and indeed, as he must by thi time be asham of 
the part he had acted, there could be no danger of it; and as long as 
all mention of bath scene were avoided, she thought she could behav 
to him veri civilly. In such consider time pass away, and it wa 
certainli in hi favour that eleanor should be so glad to see him, and 
have so much to say, for half an hour wa almost gone sinc hi arrival, 
and eleanor did not come up. 

At that moment catherin thought she heard her step in the gallery, and 
listen for it continuance; but all wa silent. scarcely, however, 
had she convict her fanci of error, when the nois of someth move 
close to her door made her start; it seem as if someon wa touch 
the veri doorway--and in anoth moment a slight motion of the lock 
prove that some hand must be on it. she trembl a littl at the idea 
of anyone' approach so cautiously; but resolv not to be again 
overcom by trivial appear of alarm, or misl by a rais 
imagination, she step quietli forward, and open the door. eleanor, 
and onli eleanor, stood there. catherine' spirits, however, were 
tranquil but for an instant, for eleanor' cheek were pale, and 
her manner greatli agitated. though evid intend to come in, it 
seem an effort to enter the room, and a still greater to speak when 
there. catherine, suppos some uneasi on captain tilney' account, 
could onli express her concern by silent attention, oblig her to be 
seated, rub her templ with lavender-water, and hung over her with 
affection solicitude. “mi dear catherine, you must not--you must not 
indeed--” were eleanor' first connect words. “I am quit well. 
thi kind distract me--i cannot bear it--i come to you on such an 
errand!” 

“errand! To me!” 

“how shall I tell you! oh! how shall I tell you!” 

A new idea now dart into catherine' mind, and turn as pale as her 
friend, she exclaimed, “'ti a messeng from woodston!” 

“you are mistaken, indeed,” return eleanor, look at her most 
compassionately; “it is no one from woodston. It is my father himself.” 
her voic faltered, and her eye were turn to the ground as she 
mention hi name. hi unlooked-for return wa enough in itself to make 
catherine' heart sink, and for a few moment she hardli suppos 
there were anyth wors to be told. she said nothing; and eleanor, 
endeavour to collect herself and speak with firmness, but with eye 
still cast down, soon went on. “you are too good, I am sure, to think 
the wors of me for the part I am oblig to perform. I am inde a most 
unwil messenger. after what ha so late passed, so late been 
settl between us--how joyfully, how thank on my side!--a to your 
continu here as I hope for many, mani week longer, how can I tell 
you that your kind is not to be accepted--and that the happi 
your compani ha hitherto given us is to be repaid by--but I must not 
trust myself with words. My dear catherine, we are to part. My father 
ha recollect an engag that take our whole famili away on 
monday. We are go to lord longtown's, near hereford, for a fortnight. 
explan and apolog are equal impossible. I cannot attempt 
either.” 

“mi dear eleanor,” cri catherine, suppress her feel as well as 
she could, “do not be so distressed. A second engag must give 
way to a first. I am very, veri sorri we are to part--so soon, and so 
suddenli too; but I am not offended, inde I am not. I can finish my 
visit here, you know, at ani time; or I hope you will come to me. can 
you, when you return from thi lord's, come to fullerton?” 

“it will not be in my power, catherine.” 

“come when you can, then.” 

eleanor made no answer; and catherine' thought recur to someth 
more directli interesting, she added, think aloud, “monday--so soon 
as monday; and you all go. well, I am certain of--i shall be abl to 
take leave, however. I need not go till just befor you do, you know. Do 
not be distressed, eleanor, I can go on monday veri well. My father 
and mother' have no notic of it is of veri littl consequence. the 
gener will send a servant with me, I dare say, half the way--and then 
I shall soon be at salisbury, and then I am onli nine mile from home.” 

“ah, catherine! were it settl so, it would be somewhat less 
intolerable, though in such common attent you would have receiv 
but half what you ought. but--how can I tell you?--tomorrow morn is 
fix for your leav us, and not even the hour is left to your choice; 
the veri carriag is ordered, and will be here at seven o'clock, and no 
servant will be offer you.” 

catherin sat down, breathless and speechless. “I could hardli believ 
my senses, when I heard it; and no displeasure, no resent that 
you can feel at thi moment, howev justli great, can be more than I 
myself--but I must not talk of what I felt. oh! that I could suggest 
anyth in extenuation! good god! what will your father and mother say! 
after court you from the protect of real friend to this--almost 
doubl distanc from your home, to have you driven out of the house, 
without the consider even of decent civility! dear, dear 
catherine, in be the bearer of such a message, I seem guilti myself 
of all it insult; yet, I trust you will acquit me, for you must have 
been long enough in thi hous to see that I am but a nomin mistress 
of it, that my real power is nothing.” 

“have I offend the general?” said catherin in a falter voice. 

“alas! for my feel as a daughter, all that I know, all that I 
answer for, is that you can have given him no just caus of offence. He 
certainli is greatly, veri greatli discomposed; I have seldom seen him 
more so. hi temper is not happy, and someth ha now occur to 
ruffl it in an uncommon degree; some disappointment, some vexation, 
which just at thi moment seem important, but which I can hardli 
suppos you to have ani concern in, for how is it possible?” 

It wa with pain that catherin could speak at all; and it wa onli for 
eleanor' sake that she attempt it. “I am sure,” said she, “I am veri 
sorri if I have offend him. It wa the last thing I would willingli 
have done. but do not be unhappy, eleanor. An engagement, you know, must 
be kept. I am onli sorri it wa not recollect sooner, that I might 
have written home. but it is of veri littl consequence.” 

“I hope, I earnestli hope, that to your real safeti it will be of none; 
but to everyth els it is of the greatest consequence: to comfort, 
appearance, propriety, to your family, to the world. were your friends, 
the allens, still in bath, you might go to them with compar ease; 
a few hour would take you there; but a journey of seventi miles, to be 
taken post by you, at your age, alone, unattended!” 

“oh, the journey is nothing. Do not think about that. and if we are to 
part, a few hour sooner or later, you know, make no difference. I 
can be readi by seven. let me be call in time.” eleanor saw that she 
wish to be alone; and believ it better for each that they should 
avoid ani further conversation, now left her with, “I shall see you in 
the morning.” 

catherine' swell heart need relief. In eleanor' presenc 
friendship and pride had equal restrain her tears, but no sooner wa 
she gone than they burst forth in torrents. turn from the house, and 
in such a way! without ani reason that could justify, ani apolog that 
could aton for the abruptness, the rudeness, nay, the insol of 
it. henri at a distance--not abl even to bid him farewell. everi hope, 
everi expect from him suspended, at least, and who could say how 
long? who could say when they might meet again? and all thi by such 
a man as gener tilney, so polite, so well bred, and heretofor 
so particularli fond of her! It wa as incomprehens as it wa 
mortifi and grievous. from what it could arise, and where it would 
end, were consider of equal perplex and alarm. the manner in 
which it wa done so grossli uncivil, hurri her away without ani 
refer to her own convenience, or allow her even the appear 
of choic as to the time or mode of her travelling; of two days, the 
earliest fix on, and of that almost the earliest hour, as if resolv 
to have her gone befor he wa stir in the morning, that he 
might not be oblig even to see her. what could all thi mean but 
an intent affront? By some mean or other she must have had the 
misfortun to offend him. eleanor had wish to spare her from so 
pain a notion, but catherin could not believ it possibl that ani 
injuri or ani misfortun could provok such ill will against a person 
not connected, or, at least, not suppos to be connect with it. 

heavili pass the night. sleep, or repos that deserv the name 
of sleep, wa out of the question. that room, in which her disturb 
imagin had torment her on her first arrival, wa again the scene 
of agit spirit and unquiet slumbers. yet how differ now the 
sourc of her inquietud from what it had been then--how mourn 
superior in realiti and substance! her anxieti had foundat in 
fact, her fear in probability; and with a mind so occupi in the 
contempl of actual and natur evil, the solitud of her situation, 
the dark of her chamber, the antiqu of the building, were felt 
and consid without the smallest emotion; and though the wind wa 
high, and often produc strang and sudden nois throughout the house, 
she heard it all as she lay awake, hour after hour, without curios or 
terror. 

soon after six eleanor enter her room, eager to show attent or give 
assist where it wa possible; but veri littl remain to be done. 
catherin had not loitered; she wa almost dressed, and her pack 
almost finished. the possibl of some conciliatori messag from the 
gener occur to her as hi daughter appeared. what so natural, as 
that anger should pass away and repent succeed it? and she onli 
want to know how far, after what had passed, an apolog might properli 
be receiv by her. but the knowledg would have been useless here; 
it wa not call for; neither clemenc nor digniti wa put to the 
trial--eleanor brought no message. veri littl pass between them on 
meeting; each found her greatest safeti in silence, and few and trivial 
were the sentenc exchang while they remain upstairs, catherin in 
busi agit complet her dress, and eleanor with more goodwil than 
experi intent upon fill the trunk. when everyth wa done they 
left the room, catherin linger onli half a minut behind her friend 
to throw a part glanc on everi well-known, cherish object, and 
went down to the breakfast-parlour, where breakfast wa prepared. she 
tri to eat, as well to save herself from the pain of be urg as 
to make her friend comfortable; but she had no appetite, and could not 
swallow mani mouthfuls. the contrast between thi and her last breakfast 
in that room gave her fresh misery, and strengthen her distast for 
everyth befor her. It wa not four and twenti hour ago sinc they 
had met there to the same repast, but in circumst how different! 
with what cheer ease, what happy, though false, security, had she 
then look around her, enjoy everyth present, and fear littl 
in future, beyond henry' go to woodston for a day! happy, happi 
breakfast! for henri had been there; henri had sat by her and help 
her. these reflect were long indulg undisturb by ani address 
from her companion, who sat as deep in thought as herself; and the 
appear of the carriag wa the first thing to startl and recal 
them to the present moment. catherine' colour rose at the sight of it; 
and the indign with which she wa treated, strike at that instant 
on her mind with peculiar force, made her for a short time sensibl onli 
of resentment. eleanor seem now impel into resolut and speech. 

“you must write to me, catherine,” she cried; “you must let me hear from 
you as soon as possible. till I know you to be safe at home, I shall 
not have an hour' comfort. for one letter, at all risks, all hazards, I 
must entreat. let me have the satisfact of know that you are safe 
at fullerton, and have found your famili well, and then, till I can ask 
for your correspond as I ought to do, I will not expect more. direct 
to me at lord longtown's, and, I must ask it, under cover to alice.” 

“no, eleanor, if you are not allow to receiv a letter from me, I am 
sure I had better not write. there can be no doubt of my get home 
safe.” 

eleanor onli replied, “I cannot wonder at your feelings. I will not 
importun you. I will trust to your own kind of heart when I am at 
a distanc from you.” but this, with the look of sorrow accompani 
it, wa enough to melt catherine' pride in a moment, and she instantli 
said, “oh, eleanor, I will write to you indeed.” 

there wa yet anoth point which miss tilney wa anxiou to settle, 
though somewhat embarrass in speak of. It had occur to her that 
after so long an absenc from home, catherin might not be provid with 
money enough for the expens of her journey, and, upon suggest it 
to her with most affection offer of accommodation, it prove to be 
exactli the case. catherin had never thought on the subject till that 
moment, but, upon examin her purse, wa convinc that but for 
thi kind of her friend, she might have been turn from the hous 
without even the mean of get home; and the distress in which she 
must have been therebi involv fill the mind of both, scarc 
anoth word wa said by either dure the time of their remain 
together. short, however, wa that time. the carriag wa soon announc 
to be ready; and catherine, instantli rising, a long and affection 
embrac suppli the place of languag in bid each other adieu; and, 
as they enter the hall, unabl to leav the hous without some mention 
of one whose name had not yet been spoken by either, she paus a 
moment, and with quiver lip just made it intellig that she left 
“her kind remembr for her absent friend.” but with thi approach to 
hi name end all possibl of restrain her feelings; and, hide 
her face as well as she could with her handkerchief, she dart across 
the hall, jump into the chaise, and in a moment wa driven from the 
door. 




chapter 29 


catherin wa too wretch to be fearful. the journey in itself had no 
terror for her; and she began it without either dread it length or 
feel it solitariness. lean back in one corner of the carriage, in 
a violent burst of tears, she wa convey some mile beyond the wall 
of the abbey befor she rais her head; and the highest point of ground 
within the park wa almost close from her view befor she wa capabl 
of turn her eye toward it. unfortunately, the road she now 
travel wa the same which onli ten day ago she had so happili pass 
along in go to and from woodston; and, for fourteen miles, everi 
bitter feel wa render more sever by the review of object on 
which she had first look under impress so different. everi mile, 
as it brought her nearer woodston, ad to her sufferings, and when 
within the distanc of five, she pass the turn which led to it, and 
thought of henry, so near, yet so unconscious, her grief and agit 
were excessive. 

the day which she had spent at that place had been one of the happiest 
of her life. It wa there, it wa on that day, that the gener had made 
use of such express with regard to henri and herself, had so 
spoken and so look as to give her the most posit convict of hi 
actual wish their marriage. yes, onli ten day ago had he 
elat her by hi point regard--had he even confus her by hi too 
signific reference! and now--what had she done, or what had she 
omit to do, to merit such a change? 

the onli offenc against him of which she could accus herself had been 
such as wa scarc possibl to reach hi knowledge. henri and her own 
heart onli were privi to the shock suspicion which she had so idli 
entertained; and equal safe did she believ her secret with each. 
designedly, at least, henri could not have betray her. if, indeed, by 
ani strang mischanc hi father should have gain intellig of 
what she had dare to think and look for, of her causeless fanci 
and injuri examinations, she could not wonder at ani degre of hi 
indignation. If awar of her have view him as a murderer, she could 
not wonder at hi even turn her from hi house. but a justif 
so full of tortur to herself, she trusted, would not be in hi power. 

anxiou as were all her conjectur on thi point, it wa not, however, 
the one on which she dwelt most. there wa a thought yet nearer, a more 
prevailing, more impetu concern. how henri would think, and feel, 
and look, when he return on the morrow to northang and heard of 
her be gone, wa a question of forc and interest to rise over everi 
other, to be never ceasing, altern irrit and soothing; it 
sometim suggest the dread of hi calm acquiescence, and at other 
wa answer by the sweetest confid in hi regret and resentment. To 
the general, of course, he would not dare to speak; but to eleanor--what 
might he not say to eleanor about her? 

In thi unceas recurr of doubt and inquiries, on ani one articl 
of which her mind wa incap of more than momentari repose, the hour 
pass away, and her journey advanc much faster than she look for. 
the press anxieti of thought, which prevent her from notic 
anyth befor her, when onc beyond the neighbourhood of woodston, 
save her at the same time from watch her progress; and though no 
object on the road could engag a moment' attention, she found no stage 
of it tedious. from this, she wa preserv too by anoth cause, by 
feel no eager for her journey' conclusion; for to return in such 
a manner to fullerton wa almost to destroy the pleasur of a meet 
with those she love best, even after an absenc such as hers--an eleven 
weeks' absence. what had she to say that would not humbl herself and 
pain her family, that would not increas her own grief by the confess 
of it, extend an useless resentment, and perhap involv the innoc 
with the guilti in undistinguish ill will? she could never do justic 
to henri and eleanor' merit; she felt it too strongli for expression; 
and should a dislik be taken against them, should they be thought of 
unfavourably, on their father' account, it would cut her to the heart. 

with these feelings, she rather dread than sought for the first view 
of that well-known spire which would announc her within twenti mile of 
home. salisburi she had known to be her point on leav northanger; but 
after the first stage she had been indebt to the post-mast for the 
name of the place which were then to conduct her to it; so great 
had been her ignor of her route. she met with nothing, however, 
to distress or frighten her. her youth, civil manners, and liber 
pay procur her all the attent that a travel like herself could 
require; and stop onli to chang horses, she travel on for 
about eleven hour without accid or alarm, and between six and seven 
o'clock in the even found herself enter fullerton. 

A heroin returning, at the close of her career, to her nativ village, 
in all the triumph of recov reputation, and all the digniti of 
a countess, with a long train of nobl relat in their sever 
phaetons, and three waiting-maid in a travel chais and four, 
behind her, is an event on which the pen of the contriv may well 
delight to dwell; it give credit to everi conclusion, and the author 
must share in the glori she so liber bestows. but my affair is 
wide different; I bring back my heroin to her home in solitud and 
disgrace; and no sweet elat of spirit can lead me into minuteness. 
A heroin in a hack post-chais is such a blow upon sentiment, as no 
attempt at grandeur or patho can withstand. swiftli therefor shall her 
post-boy drive through the village, amid the gaze of sunday groups, and 
speedi shall be her descent from it. 

but, whatev might be the distress of catherine' mind, as she thu 
advanc toward the parsonage, and whatev the humili of her 
biograph in relat it, she wa prepar enjoy of no everyday 
natur for those to whom she went; first, in the appear of her 
carriage--and secondly, in herself. the chais of a travel be 
a rare sight in fullerton, the whole famili were immedi at the 
window; and to have it stop at the sweep-gat wa a pleasur to brighten 
everi eye and occupi everi fancy--a pleasur quit unlook for by all 
but the two youngest children, a boy and girl of six and four year old, 
who expect a brother or sister in everi carriage. happi the glanc 
that first distinguish catherine! happi the voic that proclaim the 
discovery! but whether such happi were the law properti of georg 
or harriet could never be exactli understood. 

her father, mother, sarah, george, and harriet, all assembl at the 
door to welcom her with affection eagerness, wa a sight to awaken 
the best feel of catherine' heart; and in the embrac of each, as 
she step from the carriage, she found herself sooth beyond anyth 
that she had believ possible. So surrounded, so caressed, she wa even 
happy! In the joy of famili love everyth for a short time wa 
subdued, and the pleasur of see her, leav them at first littl 
leisur for calm curiosity, they were all seat round the tea-table, 
which mrs. morland had hurri for the comfort of the poor traveller, 
whose pale and jade look soon caught her notice, befor ani inquiri so 
direct as to demand a posit answer wa address to her. 

reluctantly, and with much hesitation, did she then begin what might 
perhaps, at the end of half an hour, be termed, by the courtesi of her 
hearers, an explanation; but scarcely, within that time, could they 
at all discov the cause, or collect the particulars, of her sudden 
return. they were far from be an irrit race; far from ani 
quick in catching, or bitter in resenting, affronts: but here, 
when the whole wa unfolded, wa an insult not to be overlooked, nor, 
for the first half hour, to be easili pardoned. without suffer ani 
romant alarm, in the consider of their daughter' long and lone 
journey, mr. and mrs. morland could not but feel that it might have been 
product of much unpleas to her; that it wa what they could 
never have voluntarili suffered; and that, in forc her on such 
a measure, gener tilney had act neither honour nor 
feelingly--neith as a gentleman nor as a parent. whi he had done it, 
what could have provok him to such a breach of hospitality, and so 
suddenli turn all hi partial regard for their daughter into actual 
ill will, wa a matter which they were at least as far from divin 
as catherin herself; but it did not oppress them by ani mean so long; 
and, after a due cours of useless conjecture, that “it wa a strang 
business, and that he must be a veri strang man,” grew enough for all 
their indign and wonder; though sarah inde still indulg in the 
sweet of incomprehensibility, exclaim and conjectur with youth 
ardour. “mi dear, you give yourself a great deal of needless trouble,” 
said her mother at last; “depend upon it, it is someth not at all 
worth understanding.” 

“I can allow for hi wish catherin away, when he recollect thi 
engagement,” said sarah, “but whi not do it civilly?” 

“I am sorri for the young people,” return mrs. morland; “they must 
have a sad time of it; but as for anyth else, it is no matter now; 
catherin is safe at home, and our comfort doe not depend upon gener 
tilney.” catherin sighed. “well,” continu her philosoph mother, “I 
am glad I did not know of your journey at the time; but now it is all 
over, perhap there is no great harm done. It is alway good for 
young peopl to be put upon exert themselves; and you know, my dear 
catherine, you alway were a sad littl scatter-brain creature; but 
now you must have been forc to have your wit about you, with so much 
chang of chais and so forth; and I hope it will appear that you 
have not left anyth behind you in ani of the pockets.” 

catherin hope so too, and tri to feel an interest in her own 
amendment, but her spirit were quit worn down; and, to be silent and 
alon becom soon her onli wish, she readili agre to her mother' 
next counsel of go earli to bed. her parents, see noth in 
her ill look and agit but the natur consequ of mortifi 
feelings, and of the unusu exert and fatigu of such a journey, 
part from her without ani doubt of their be soon slept away; and 
though, when they all met the next morning, her recoveri wa not equal 
to their hopes, they were still perfectli unsuspici of there be 
ani deeper evil. they never onc thought of her heart, which, for the 
parent of a young ladi of seventeen, just return from her first 
excurs from home, wa odd enough! 

As soon as breakfast wa over, she sat down to fulfil her promis to 
miss tilney, whose trust in the effect of time and distanc on her 
friend' disposit wa alreadi justified, for alreadi did catherin 
reproach herself with have part from eleanor coldly, with 
have never enough valu her merit or kindness, and never enough 
commiser her for what she had been yesterday left to endure. the 
strength of these feelings, however, wa far from assist her pen; 
and never had it been harder for her to write than in address eleanor 
tilney. To compos a letter which might at onc do justic to her 
sentiment and her situation, convey gratitud without servil regret, 
be guard without coldness, and honest without resentment--a letter 
which eleanor might not be pain by the perus of--and, abov all, 
which she might not blush herself, if henri should chanc to see, wa an 
undertak to frighten away all her power of performance; and, after 
long thought and much perplexity, to be veri brief wa all that she 
could determin on with ani confid of safety. the money therefor 
which eleanor had advanc wa enclos with littl more than grate 
thanks, and the thousand good wish of a most affection heart. 

“thi ha been a strang acquaintance,” observ mrs. morland, as the 
letter wa finished; “soon made and soon ended. I am sorri it happen 
so, for mrs. allen thought them veri pretti kind of young people; and 
you were sadli out of luck too in your isabella. ah! poor james! well, 
we must live and learn; and the next new friend you make I hope will be 
better worth keeping.” 

catherin colour as she warmli answered, “no friend can be better 
worth keep than eleanor.” 

“if so, my dear, I dare say you will meet again some time or other; do 
not be uneasy. It is ten to one but you are thrown togeth again in the 
cours of a few years; and then what a pleasur it will be!” 

mrs. morland wa not happi in her attempt at consolation. the hope 
of meet again in the cours of a few year could onli put into 
catherine' head what might happen within that time to make a meet 
dread to her. she could never forget henri tilney, or think of him 
with less tender than she did at that moment; but he might forget 
her; and in that case, to meet--! her eye fill with tear as she 
pictur her acquaint so renewed; and her mother, perceiv her 
comfort suggest to have had no good effect, proposed, as anoth 
expedi for restor her spirits, that they should call on mrs. 
allen. 

the two hous were onli a quarter of a mile apart; and, as they walked, 
mrs. morland quickli dispatch all that she felt on the score of 
james' disappointment. “we are sorri for him,” said she; “but otherwis 
there is no harm done in the match go off; for it could not be 
a desir thing to have him engag to a girl whom we had not the 
smallest acquaint with, and who wa so entir without fortune; and 
now, after such behaviour, we cannot think at all well of her. just at 
present it come hard to poor james; but that will not last forever; and 
I dare say he will be a discreet man all hi life, for the foolish 
of hi first choice.” 

thi wa just such a summari view of the affair as catherin could 
listen to; anoth sentenc might have endang her complaisance, 
and made her repli less rational; for soon were all her think power 
swallow up in the reflect of her own chang of feel and spirit 
sinc last she had trodden that well-known road. It wa not three month 
ago since, wild with joy expectation, she had there run backward 
and forward some ten time a day, with an heart light, gay, and 
independent; look forward to pleasur untast and unalloyed, and 
free from the apprehens of evil as from the knowledg of it. three 
month ago had seen her all this; and now, how alter a be did she 
return! 

she wa receiv by the allen with all the kind which her 
unlooked-for appearance, act on a steadi affection, would natur 
call forth; and great wa their surprise, and warm their displeasure, 
on hear how she had been treated--though mrs. morland' account of 
it wa no inflat representation, no studi appeal to their passions. 
“catherin took us quit by surpris yesterday evening,” said she. “she 
travel all the way post by herself, and knew noth of come till 
saturday night; for gener tilney, from some odd fanci or other, all 
of a sudden grew tire of have her there, and almost turn her out 
of the house. veri unfriendly, certainly; and he must be a veri odd 
man; but we are so glad to have her amongst us again! and it is a great 
comfort to find that she is not a poor helpless creature, but can shift 
veri well for herself.” 

mr. allen express himself on the occas with the reason 
resent of a sensibl friend; and mrs. allen thought hi express 
quit good enough to be immedi made use of again by herself. hi 
wonder, hi conjectures, and hi explan becam in success hers, 
with the addit of thi singl remark--“i realli have not patienc 
with the general”--to fill up everi accident pause. and, “I realli 
have not patienc with the general,” wa utter twice after mr. 
allen left the room, without ani relax of anger, or ani materi 
digress of thought. A more consider degre of wander attend 
the third repetition; and, after complet the fourth, she immedi 
added, “onli think, my dear, of my have got that fright great rent 
in my best mechlin so charmingli mended, befor I left bath, that one 
can hardli see where it was. I must show it you some day or other. bath 
is a nice place, catherine, after all. I assur you I did not abov half 
like come away. mrs. thorpe' be there wa such a comfort to us, 
wa not it? you know, you and I were quit forlorn at first.” 

“yes, but that did not last long,” said catherine, her eye brighten 
at the recollect of what had first given spirit to her exist 
there. 

“veri true: we soon met with mrs. thorpe, and then we want for 
nothing. My dear, do not you think these silk glove wear veri well? 
I put them on new the first time of our go to the lower rooms, you 
know, and I have worn them a great deal since. Do you rememb that 
evening?” 

“do I! oh! perfectly.” 

“it wa veri agreeable, wa not it? mr. tilney drank tea with us, and I 
alway thought him a great addition, he is so veri agreeable. I have a 
notion you danc with him, but am not quit sure. I rememb I had my 
favourit gown on.” 

catherin could not answer; and, after a short trial of other subjects, 
mrs. allen again return to--“i realli have not patienc with the 
general! such an agreeable, worthi man as he seem to be! I do not 
suppose, mrs. morland, you ever saw a better-br man in your life. hi 
lodg were taken the veri day after he left them, catherine. but no 
wonder; milsom street, you know.” 

As they walk home again, mrs. morland endeavour to impress on her 
daughter' mind the happi of have such steadi well-wish as mr. 
and mrs. allen, and the veri littl consider which the neglect or 
unkind of slight acquaint like the tilney ought to have with 
her, while she could preserv the good opinion and affect of her 
earliest friends. there wa a great deal of good sens in all this; but 
there are some situat of the human mind in which good sens ha 
veri littl power; and catherine' feel contradict almost everi 
posit her mother advanced. It wa upon the behaviour of these veri 
slight acquaint that all her present happi depended; and 
while mrs. morland wa success confirm her own opinion by the 
just of her own representations, catherin wa silent reflect 
that now henri must have arriv at northanger; now he must have heard 
of her departure; and now, perhaps, they were all set off for 
hereford. 




chapter 30 


catherine' disposit wa not natur sedentary, nor had her habit 
been ever veri industrious; but whatev might hitherto have been her 
defect of that sort, her mother could not but perceiv them now to be 
greatli increased. she could neither sit still nor employ herself for 
ten minut together, walk round the garden and orchard again and 
again, as if noth but motion wa voluntary; and it seem as if she 
could even walk about the hous rather than remain fix for ani time 
in the parlour. her loss of spirit wa a yet greater alteration. In her 
rambl and her idl she might onli be a caricatur of herself; but 
in her silenc and sad she wa the veri revers of all that she had 
been before. 

for two day mrs. morland allow it to pass even without a hint; 
but when a third night' rest had neither restor her cheerfulness, 
improv her in use activity, nor given her a greater inclin for 
needlework, she could no longer refrain from the gentl reproof of, “mi 
dear catherine, I am afraid you are grow quit a fine lady. I do not 
know when poor richard' cravat would be done, if he had no friend 
but you. your head run too much upon bath; but there is a time for 
everything--a time for ball and plays, and a time for work. you have 
had a long run of amusement, and now you must tri to be useful.” 

catherin took up her work directly, saying, in a deject voice, that 
“her head did not run upon bath--much.” 

“then you are fret about gener tilney, and that is veri simpl 
of you; for ten to one whether you ever see him again. you should never 
fret about trifles.” after a short silence--“i hope, my catherine, you 
are not get out of humour with home becaus it is not so grand 
as northanger. that would be turn your visit into an evil indeed. 
wherev you are you should alway be contented, but especi at home, 
becaus there you must spend the most of your time. I did not quit 
like, at breakfast, to hear you talk so much about the french bread at 
northanger.” 

“I am sure I do not care about the bread. It is all the same to me what 
I eat.” 

“there is a veri clever essay in one of the book upstair upon much 
such a subject, about young girl that have been spoilt for home by 
great acquaintance--th mirror, I think. I will look it out for you some 
day or other, becaus I am sure it will do you good.” 

catherin said no more, and, with an endeavour to do right, appli 
to her work; but, after a few minutes, sunk again, without know it 
herself, into languor and listlessness, move herself in her chair, 
from the irrit of weariness, much often than she move her 
needle. mrs. morland watch the progress of thi relapse; and seeing, 
in her daughter' absent and dissatisfi look, the full proof of that 
repin spirit to which she had now begun to attribut her want of 
cheerfulness, hastili left the room to fetch the book in question, 
anxiou to lose no time in attack so dread a malady. It wa some 
time befor she could find what she look for; and other famili matter 
occur to detain her, a quarter of an hour had elaps ere she 
return downstair with the volum from which so much wa hoped. her 
avoc abov have shut out all nois but what she creat herself, 
she knew not that a visitor had arriv within the last few minutes, 
till, on enter the room, the first object she beheld wa a young 
man whom she had never seen before. with a look of much respect, he 
immedi rose, and be introduc to her by her consciou daughter 
as “mr. henri tilney,” with the embarrass of real sensibl began 
to apolog for hi appear there, acknowledg that after what had 
pass he had littl right to expect a welcom at fullerton, and state 
hi impati to be assur of miss morland' have reach her home 
in safety, as the caus of hi intrusion. He did not address himself to 
an uncandid judg or a resent heart. far from comprehend him or 
hi sister in their father' misconduct, mrs. morland had been alway 
kindli dispos toward each, and instantly, pleas by hi appearance, 
receiv him with the simpl profess of unaffect benevolence; 
thank him for such an attent to her daughter, assur him that 
the friend of her children were alway welcom there, and entreat 
him to say not anoth word of the past. 

He wa not ill-inclin to obey thi request, for, though hi heart wa 
greatli reliev by such unlooked-for mildness, it wa not just at that 
moment in hi power to say anyth to the purpose. return in silenc 
to hi seat, therefore, he remain for some minut most civilli 
answer all mrs. morland' common remark about the weather and 
roads. catherin meanwhile--th anxious, agitated, happy, feverish 
catherine--said not a word; but her glow cheek and brighten eye 
made her mother trust that thi good-natur visit would at least set 
her heart at eas for a time, and gladli therefor did she lay asid the 
first volum of the mirror for a futur hour. 

desir of mr. morland' assistance, as well in give encouragement, 
as in find convers for her guest, whose embarrass on hi 
father' account she earnestli pitied, mrs. morland had veri earli 
dispatch one of the children to summon him; but mr. morland wa from 
home--and be thu without ani support, at the end of a quarter of 
an hour she had noth to say. after a coupl of minutes' unbroken 
silence, henry, turn to catherin for the first time sinc her 
mother' entrance, ask her, with sudden alacrity, if mr. and mrs. 
allen were now at fullerton? and on developing, from amidst all her 
perplex of word in reply, the meaning, which one short syllabl 
would have given, immedi express hi intent of pay hi 
respect to them, and, with a rise colour, ask her if she would 
have the good to show him the way. “you may see the hous from thi 
window, sir,” wa inform on sarah' side, which produc onli a 
bow of acknowledg from the gentleman, and a silenc nod from 
her mother; for mrs. morland, think it probable, as a secondari 
consider in hi wish of wait on their worthi neighbours, that he 
might have some explan to give of hi father' behaviour, which it 
must be more pleasant for him to commun onli to catherine, would 
not on ani account prevent her accompani him. they began their walk, 
and mrs. morland wa not entir mistaken in hi object in wish it. 
some explan on hi father' account he had to give; but hi first 
purpos wa to explain himself, and befor they reach mr. allen' 
ground he had done it so well that catherin did not think it could 
ever be repeat too often. she wa assur of hi affection; and that 
heart in return wa solicited, which, perhaps, they pretti equal 
knew wa alreadi entir hi own; for, though henri wa now sincer 
attach to her, though he felt and delight in all the excel 
of her charact and truli love her society, I must confess that hi 
affect origin in noth better than gratitude, or, in other 
words, that a persuas of her partial for him had been the onli 
caus of give her a seriou thought. It is a new circumst in 
romance, I acknowledge, and dread derogatori of an heroine' 
dignity; but if it be as new in common life, the credit of a wild 
imagin will at least be all my own. 

A veri short visit to mrs. allen, in which henri talk at random, 
without sens or connection, and catherine, rapt in the contempl of 
her own unutter happiness, scarc open her lips, dismiss them 
to the ecstasi of anoth tete-a-tete; and befor it wa suffer to 
close, she wa enabl to judg how far he wa sanction by parent 
author in hi present application. On hi return from woodston, two 
day before, he had been met near the abbey by hi impati father, 
hastili inform in angri term of miss morland' departure, and order 
to think of her no more. 

such wa the permiss upon which he had now offer her hi hand. 
the affright catherine, amidst all the terror of expectation, as she 
listen to thi account, could not but rejoic in the kind caution 
with which henri had save her from the necess of a conscienti 
rejection, by engag her faith befor he mention the subject; and 
as he proceed to give the particulars, and explain the motiv of 
hi father' conduct, her feel soon harden into even a triumphant 
delight. the gener had had noth to accus her of, noth to lay 
to her charge, but her be the involuntary, unconsci object of a 
decept which hi pride could not pardon, and which a better pride 
would have been asham to own. she wa guilti onli of be less rich 
than he had suppos her to be. under a mistaken persuas of her 
possess and claims, he had court her acquaint in bath, 
solicit her compani at northanger, and design her for hi 
daughter-in-law. On discov hi error, to turn her from the hous 
seem the best, though to hi feel an inadequ proof of hi 
resent toward herself, and hi contempt of her family. 

john thorp had first misl him. the general, perceiv hi son 
one night at the theatr to be pay consider attent to miss 
morland, had accident inquir of thorp if he knew more of her 
than her name. thorpe, most happi to be on speak term with a man 
of gener tilney' importance, had been joy and proudli 
communicative; and be at that time not onli in daili expect 
of morland' engag isabella, but likewis pretti well resolv upon 
marri catherin himself, hi vaniti induc him to repres the 
famili as yet more wealthi than hi vaniti and avaric had made him 
believ them. with whomsoev he was, or wa like to be connected, hi 
own consequ alway requir that their should be great, and as hi 
intimaci with ani acquaint grew, so regularli grew their fortune. 
the expect of hi friend morland, therefore, from the first 
overrated, had ever sinc hi introduct to isabella been gradual 
increasing; and by mere ad twice as much for the grandeur of the 
moment, by doubl what he chose to think the amount of mr. morland' 
preferment, trebl hi privat fortune, bestow a rich aunt, and 
sink half the children, he wa abl to repres the whole famili 
to the gener in a most respect light. for catherine, however, the 
peculiar object of the general' curiosity, and hi own speculations, 
he had yet someth more in reserve, and the ten or fifteen thousand 
pound which her father could give her would be a pretti addit to mr. 
allen' estate. her intimaci there had made him serious determin on 
her be handsom legaci hereafter; and to speak of her therefor 
as the almost acknowledg futur heiress of fullerton natur 
followed. upon such intellig the gener had proceeded; for never 
had it occur to him to doubt it authority. thorpe' interest in the 
family, by hi sister' approach connect with one of it members, 
and hi own view on anoth (circumst of which he boast with 
almost equal openness), seem suffici voucher for hi truth; and 
to these were ad the absolut fact of the allen be wealthi and 
childless, of miss morland' be under their care, and--a soon as hi 
acquaint allow him to judge--of their treat her with parent 
kindness. hi resolut wa soon formed. alreadi had he discern a 
like toward miss morland in the counten of hi son; and thank 
for mr. thorpe' communication, he almost instantli determin to spare 
no pain in weaken hi boast interest and ruin hi dearest 
hopes. catherin herself could not be more ignor at the time of all 
this, than hi own children. henri and eleanor, perceiv noth in 
her situat like to engag their father' particular respect, had 
seen with astonish the suddenness, continuance, and extent of hi 
attention; and though latterly, from some hint which had accompani an 
almost posit command to hi son of do everyth in hi power to 
attach her, henri wa convinc of hi father' believ it to be 
an advantag connection, it wa not till the late explan at 
northang that they had the smallest idea of the fals calcul 
which had hurri him on. that they were false, the gener had learnt 
from the veri person who had suggest them, from thorp himself, whom 
he had chanc to meet again in town, and who, under the influenc of 
exactli opposit feelings, irrit by catherine' refusal, and 
yet more by the failur of a veri recent endeavour to accomplish a 
reconcili between morland and isabella, convinc that they were 
separ forever, and spurn a friendship which could be no longer 
serviceable, hasten to contradict all that he had said befor to 
the advantag of the morlands--confess himself to have been total 
mistaken in hi opinion of their circumst and character, misl by 
the rhodomontad of hi friend to believ hi father a man of substanc 
and credit, wherea the transact of the two or three last week 
prove him to be neither; for after come eagerli forward on the first 
overtur of a marriag between the families, with the most liber 
proposals, he had, on be brought to the point by the shrewd of 
the relator, been constrain to acknowledg himself incap of 
give the young peopl even a decent support. they were, in fact, a 
necessit family; numerous, too, almost beyond example; by no mean 
respect in their own neighbourhood, as he had late had particular 
opportun of discovering; aim at a style of life which their 
fortun could not warrant; seek to better themselv by wealthi 
connections; a forward, bragging, scheme race. 

the terrifi gener pronounc the name of allen with an inquir 
look; and here too thorp had learnt hi error. the allens, he believed, 
had live near them too long, and he knew the young man on whom the 
fullerton estat must devolve. the gener need no more. enrag with 
almost everybodi in the world but himself, he set out the next day for 
the abbey, where hi perform have been seen. 

I leav it to my reader' sagac to determin how much of all thi 
it wa possibl for henri to commun at thi time to catherine, how 
much of it he could have learnt from hi father, in what point hi own 
conjectur might assist him, and what portion must yet remain to be 
told in a letter from james. I have unit for their eas what they must 
divid for mine. catherine, at ani rate, heard enough to feel that in 
suspect gener tilney of either murder or shut up hi wife, 
she had scarc sin against hi character, or magnifi hi cruelty. 

henry, in have such thing to relat of hi father, wa almost 
as pitiabl as in their first avow to himself. He blush for the 
narrow-mind counsel which he wa oblig to expose. the convers 
between them at northang had been of the most unfriendli kind. henry' 
indign on hear how catherin had been treated, on comprehend 
hi father' views, and be order to acquiesc in them, had been 
open and bold. the general, accustom on everi ordinari occas to 
give the law in hi family, prepar for no reluct but of feeling, 
no oppos desir that should dare to cloth itself in words, could ill 
brook the opposit of hi son, steadi as the sanction of reason and 
the dictat of conscienc could make it. but, in such a cause, hi 
anger, though it must shock, could not intimid henry, who wa 
sustain in hi purpos by a convict of it justice. He felt himself 
bound as much in honour as in affect to miss morland, and believ 
that heart to be hi own which he had been direct to gain, no unworthi 
retract of a tacit consent, no revers decre of unjustifi 
anger, could shake hi fidelity, or influenc the resolut it 
prompted. 

He steadili refus to accompani hi father into herefordshire, an 
engag form almost at the moment to promot the dismiss of 
catherine, and as steadili declar hi intent of offer her hi 
hand. the gener wa furiou in hi anger, and they part in dread 
disagreement. henry, in an agit of mind which mani solitari hour 
were requir to compose, had return almost instantli to woodston, 
and, on the afternoon of the follow day, had begun hi journey to 
fullerton. 




chapter 31 


mr. and mrs. morland' surpris on be appli to by mr. tilney for 
their consent to hi marri their daughter was, for a few minutes, 
considerable, it have never enter their head to suspect an 
attach on either side; but as nothing, after all, could be more 
natur than catherine' be beloved, they soon learnt to consid it 
with onli the happi agit of gratifi pride, and, as far as they 
alon were concerned, had not a singl object to start. hi pleas 
manner and good sens were self-evid recommendations; and have 
never heard evil of him, it wa not their way to suppos ani evil could 
be told. goodwil suppli the place of experience, hi charact 
need no attestation. “catherin would make a sad, heedless young 
housekeep to be sure,” wa her mother' forebod remark; but quick 
wa the consol of there be noth like practice. 

there wa but one obstacle, in short, to be mentioned; but till that one 
wa removed, it must be imposs for them to sanction the engagement. 
their temper were mild, but their principl were steady, and while 
hi parent so expressli forbad the connection, they could not allow 
themselv to encourag it. that the gener should come forward to 
solicit the alliance, or that he should even veri heartili approv it, 
they were not refin enough to make ani parad stipulation; but 
the decent appear of consent must be yielded, and that onc 
obtained--and their own heart made them trust that it could not be 
veri long denied--their will approb wa instantli to follow. hi 
consent wa all that they wish for. they were no more inclin than 
entitl to demand hi money. Of a veri consider fortune, hi son 
was, by marriag settlements, eventu secure; hi present incom wa 
an incom of independ and comfort, and under everi pecuniari view, 
it wa a match beyond the claim of their daughter. 

the young peopl could not be surpris at a decis like this. they 
felt and they deplored--but they could not resent it; and they parted, 
endeavour to hope that such a chang in the general, as each believ 
almost impossible, might speedili take place, to unit them again in 
the full of privileg affection. henri return to what wa now 
hi onli home, to watch over hi young plantations, and extend hi 
improv for her sake, to whose share in them he look anxious 
forward; and catherin remain at fullerton to cry. whether the 
torment of absenc were soften by a clandestin correspondence, let 
us not inquire. mr. and mrs. morland never did--they had been too kind 
to exact ani promise; and whenev catherin receiv a letter, as, at 
that time, happen pretti often, they alway look anoth way. 

the anxiety, which in thi state of their attach must be the portion 
of henri and catherine, and of all who love either, as to it final 
event, can hardli extend, I fear, to the bosom of my readers, who will 
see in the tell-tal compress of the page befor them, that we are 
all hasten togeth to perfect felicity. the mean by which their 
earli marriag wa effect can be the onli doubt: what probabl 
circumst could work upon a temper like the general's? the 
circumst which chiefli avail wa the marriag of hi daughter with 
a man of fortun and consequence, which took place in the cours of 
the summer--an access of digniti that threw him into a fit of good 
humour, from which he did not recov till after eleanor had obtain 
hi forgiv of henry, and hi permiss for him “to be a fool if he 
like it!” 

the marriag of eleanor tilney, her remov from all the evil of such 
a home as northang had been made by henry' banishment, to the home of 
her choic and the man of her choice, is an event which I expect to 
give gener satisfact among all her acquaintance. My own joy on the 
occas is veri sincere. I know no one more entitled, by unpretend 
merit, or better prepar by habitu suffering, to receiv and enjoy 
felicity. her partial for thi gentleman wa not of recent origin; 
and he had been long withheld onli by inferior of situat from 
address her. hi unexpect access to titl and fortun had 
remov all hi difficulties; and never had the gener love hi 
daughter so well in all her hour of companionship, utility, and patient 
endur as when he first hail her “your ladyship!” her husband wa 
realli deserv of her; independ of hi peerage, hi wealth, and 
hi attachment, be to a precis the most charm young man in the 
world. ani further definit of hi merit must be unnecessary; the 
most charm young man in the world is instantli befor the imagin 
of us all. concern the one in question, therefore, I have onli to 
add--awar that the rule of composit forbid the introduct of a 
charact not connect with my fable--that thi wa the veri 
gentleman whose neglig servant left behind him that collect of 
washing-bills, result from a long visit at northanger, by which my 
heroin wa involv in one of her most alarm adventures. 

the influenc of the viscount and viscountess in their brother' behalf 
wa assist by that right understand of mr. morland' circumst 
which, as soon as the gener would allow himself to be informed, they 
were qualifi to give. It taught him that he had been scarc 
more misl by thorpe' first boast of the famili wealth than by hi 
subsequ malici overthrow of it; that in no sens of the word were 
they necessit or poor, and that catherin would have three thousand 
pounds. thi wa so materi an amend of hi late expect that 
it greatli contribut to smooth the descent of hi pride; and by no 
mean without it effect wa the privat intelligence, which he wa at 
some pain to procure, that the fullerton estate, be entir at 
the dispos of it present proprietor, wa consequ open to everi 
greedi speculation. 

On the strength of this, the general, soon after eleanor' marriage, 
permit hi son to return to northanger, and thenc made him the 
bearer of hi consent, veri courteous word in a page full of empti 
profess to mr. morland. the event which it author soon followed: 
henri and catherin were married, the bell rang, and everybodi smiled; 
and, as thi took place within a twelvemonth from the first day of their 
meeting, it will not appear, after all the dread delay occas by 
the general' cruelty, that they were essenti hurt by it. To begin 
perfect happi at the respect age of twenty-six and eighteen is 
to do pretti well; and profess myself moreov convinc that the 
general' unjust interference, so far from be realli injuri to 
their felicity, wa perhap rather conduc to it, by improv their 
knowledg of each other, and ad strength to their attachment, 
I leav it to be settled, by whomsoev it may concern, whether the 
tendenc of thi work be altogeth to recommend parent tyranny, or 
reward filial disobedience. 



*vide a letter from mr. richardson, no. 97, vol. ii, rambler. 




A note ON the text 

northang abbey wa written in 1797-98 under a differ title. the 
manuscript wa revis around 1803 and sold to a london publisher, 
crosbi & co., who sold it back in 1816. the signet classic text 
is base on the first edition, publish by john murray, london, in 
1818--the year follow miss austen' death. spell and punctuat 
have been larg brought into conform with modern british usage. 






end of the project gutenberg ebook of northang abbey, by jane austen 

*** end OF thi project gutenberg ebook northang abbey *** 

***** thi file should be name 121-0.txt or 121-0.zip ***** 
thi and all associ file of variou format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/1/2/121/ 

produc by An anonym volunt 

updat edit will replac the previou one--th old edit 
will be renamed. 

creat the work from public domain print edit mean that no 
one own a unit state copyright in these works, so the foundat 
(and you!) can copi and distribut it in the unit state without 
permiss and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the gener term of use part of thi license, appli to 
copi and distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a regist trademark, and may not be use if you 
charg for the ebooks, unless you receiv specif permission. If you 
do not charg anyth for copi of thi ebook, compli with the 
rule is veri easy. you may use thi ebook for nearli ani purpos 
such as creation of deriv works, reports, perform and 
research. they may be modifi and print and given away--y may do 
practic anyth with public domain ebooks. redistribut is 
subject to the trademark license, especi commerci 
redistribution. 



*** start: full licens *** 

the full project gutenberg licens 
pleas read thi befor you distribut OR use thi work 

To protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promot the free 
distribut of electron works, by use or distribut thi work 
(or ani other work associ in ani way with the phrase “project 
gutenberg”), you agre to compli with all the term of the full project 
gutenberg-tm licens (avail with thi file or onlin at 
http://gutenberg.org/license). 


section 1. gener term of use and redistribut project gutenberg-tm 
electron work 

1.a. By read or use ani part of thi project gutenberg-tm 
electron work, you indic that you have read, understand, agre to 
and accept all the term of thi licens and intellectu properti 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agre to abid by all 
the term of thi agreement, you must ceas use and return or destroy 
all copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in your possession. 
If you paid a fee for obtain a copi of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work and you do not agre to be bound by the 
term of thi agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entiti to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. “project gutenberg” is a regist trademark. It may onli be 
use on or associ in ani way with an electron work by peopl who 
agre to be bound by the term of thi agreement. there are a few 
thing that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electron work 
even without compli with the full term of thi agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of thing you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electron work if you follow the term of thi agreement 
and help preserv free futur access to project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat (“the foundation” 
or pglaf), own a compil copyright in the collect of project 
gutenberg-tm electron works. nearli all the individu work in the 
collect are in the public domain in the unit states. If an 
individu work is in the public domain in the unit state and you are 
locat in the unit states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or creat deriv 
work base on the work as long as all refer to project gutenberg 
are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promot free access to electron work by 
freeli share project gutenberg-tm work in complianc with the term of 
thi agreement for keep the project gutenberg-tm name associ with 
the work. you can easili compli with the term of thi agreement by 
keep thi work in the same format with it attach full project 
gutenberg-tm licens when you share it without charg with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are locat also govern 
what you can do with thi work. copyright law in most countri are in 
a constant state of change. If you are outsid the unit states, check 
the law of your countri in addit to the term of thi agreement 
befor downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribut or 
creat deriv work base on thi work or ani other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundat make no represent concern 
the copyright statu of ani work in ani countri outsid the unit 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remov all refer to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the follow sentence, with activ link to, or other immedi 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm licens must appear promin 
whenev ani copi of a project gutenberg-tm work (ani work on which the 
phrase “project gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “project 
gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copi or distributed: 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.org 

1.e.2. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is deriv 
from the public domain (doe not contain a notic indic that it is 
post with permiss of the copyright holder), the work can be copi 
and distribut to anyon in the unit state without pay ani fee 
or charges. If you are redistribut or provid access to a work 
with the phrase “project gutenberg” associ with or appear on the 
work, you must compli either with the requir of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permiss for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is post 
with the permiss of the copyright holder, your use and distribut 
must compli with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and ani addit 
term impos by the copyright holder. addit term will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm licens for all work post with the 
permiss of the copyright holder found at the begin of thi work. 

1.e.4. Do not unlink or detach or remov the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens term from thi work, or ani file contain a part of thi 
work or ani other work associ with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribut or redistribut thi 
electron work, or ani part of thi electron work, without 
promin display the sentenc set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
activ link or immedi access to the full term of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribut thi work in ani binary, 
compressed, mark up, nonproprietari or proprietari form, includ ani 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provid access to or 
distribut copi of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
“plain vanilla ascii” or other format use in the offici version 
post on the offici project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org), 
you must, at no addit cost, fee or expens to the user, provid a 
copy, a mean of export a copy, or a mean of obtain a copi upon 
request, of the work in it origin “plain vanilla ascii” or other 
form. ani altern format must includ the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens as specifi in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. Do not charg a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copi or distribut ani project gutenberg-tm work 
unless you compli with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charg a reason fee for copi of or provid 
access to or distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work provid 
that 

- you pay a royalti fee of 20% of the gross profit you deriv from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm work calcul use the method 
you alreadi use to calcul your applic taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
ha agre to donat royalti under thi paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literari archiv foundation. royalti payment 
must be paid within 60 day follow each date on which you 
prepar (or are legal requir to prepare) your period tax 
returns. royalti payment should be clearli mark as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat at the 
address specifi in section 4, “inform about donat to 
the project gutenberg literari archiv foundation.” 

- you provid a full refund of ani money paid by a user who notifi 
you in write (or by e-mail) within 30 day of receipt that s/he 
doe not agre to the term of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must requir such a user to return or 
destroy all copi of the work possess in a physic medium 
and discontinu all use of and all access to other copi of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accord with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of ani 
money paid for a work or a replac copy, if a defect in the 
electron work is discov and report to you within 90 day 
of receipt of the work. 

- you compli with all other term of thi agreement for free 
distribut of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. If you wish to charg a fee or distribut a project gutenberg-tm 
electron work or group of work on differ term than are set 
forth in thi agreement, you must obtain permiss in write from 
both the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundat as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunt and employe expend consider 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcrib and proofread 
public domain work in creat the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despit these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electron 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
“defects,” such as, but not limit to, incomplete, inaccur or 
corrupt data, transcript errors, a copyright or other intellectu 
properti infringement, a defect or damag disk or other medium, a 
comput virus, or comput code that damag or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limit warranty, disclaim OF damag - except for the “right 
of replac or refund” describ in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and ani other parti distribut a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work under thi agreement, disclaim all 
liabil to you for damages, cost and expenses, includ legal 
fees. you agre that you have NO remedi for negligence, strict 
liability, breach OF warranti OR breach OF contract except those 
provid IN paragraph f3. you agre that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and ani distributor under thi agreement will not BE 
liabl TO you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punit OR 
incident damag even IF you give notic OF the possibl OF such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limit right OF replac OR refund - If you discov a 
defect in thi electron work within 90 day of receiv it, you can 
receiv a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explan to the person you receiv the work from. If you 
receiv the work on a physic medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entiti that provid you with 
the defect work may elect to provid a replac copi in lieu of a 
refund. If you receiv the work electronically, the person or entiti 
provid it to you may choos to give you a second opportun to 
receiv the work electron in lieu of a refund. If the second copi 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in write without further 
opportun to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limit right of replac or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, thi work is provid to you 'as-is' with NO other 
warranti OF ani kind, express OR implied, includ but not limit TO 
warranti OF merchant OR fit for ani purpose. 

1.f.5. some state do not allow disclaim of certain impli 
warranti or the exclus or limit of certain type of damages. 
If ani disclaim or limit set forth in thi agreement violat the 
law of the state applic to thi agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaim or limit permit by 
the applic state law. the invalid or unenforc of ani 
provis of thi agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemn - you agre to indemnifi and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, ani agent or employe of the foundation, anyon 
provid copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in accord 
with thi agreement, and ani volunt associ with the production, 
promot and distribut of project gutenberg-tm electron works, 
harmless from all liability, cost and expenses, includ legal fees, 
that aris directli or indirectli from ani of the follow which you do 
or caus to occur: (a) distribut of thi or ani project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addit or delet to ani 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) ani defect you cause. 


section 2. inform about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonym with the free distribut of 
electron work in format readabl by the widest varieti of comput 
includ obsolete, old, middle-ag and new computers. It exist 
becaus of the effort of hundr of volunt and donat from 
peopl in all walk of life. 

volunt and financi support to provid volunt with the 
assist they need, are critic to reach project gutenberg-tm' 
goal and ensur that the project gutenberg-tm collect will 
remain freeli avail for gener to come. In 2001, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundat wa creat to provid a secur 
and perman futur for project gutenberg-tm and futur generations. 
To learn more about the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat 
and how your effort and donat can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundat web page at http://www.pglaf.org. 


section 3. inform about the project gutenberg literari archiv 
foundat 

the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educ corpor organ under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt statu by the intern 
revenu service. the foundation' ein or feder tax identif 
number is 64-6221541. it 501(c)(3) letter is post at 
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contribut to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. feder law and your state' laws. 

the foundation' princip offic is locat at 4557 melan dr. S. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but it volunt and employe are scatter 
throughout numer locations. it busi offic is locat at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact link and up to date contact 
inform can be found at the foundation' web site and offici 
page at http://pglaf.org 

for addit contact information: 
dr. gregori B. newbi 
chief execut and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 


section 4. inform about donat to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot surviv without wide 
spread public support and donat to carri out it mission of 
increas the number of public domain and licens work that can be 
freeli distribut in machin readabl form access by the widest 
array of equip includ outdat equipment. mani small donat 
($1 to $5,000) are particularli import to maintain tax exempt 
statu with the irs. 

the foundat is commit to compli with the law regul 
chariti and charit donat in all 50 state of the unit 
states. complianc requir are not uniform and it take a 
consider effort, much paperwork and mani fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. We do not solicit donat in locat 
where we have not receiv written confirm of compliance. To 
send donat or determin the statu of complianc for ani 
particular state visit http://pglaf.org 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribut from state where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibit 
against accept unsolicit donat from donor in such state who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

intern donat are grate accepted, but we cannot make 
ani statement concern tax treatment of donat receiv from 
outsid the unit states. u.s. law alon swamp our small staff. 

pleas check the project gutenberg web page for current donat 
method and addresses. donat are accept in a number of other 
way includ checks, onlin payment and credit card donations. 
To donate, pleas visit: http://pglaf.org/don 


section 5. gener inform about project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. 

professor michael S. hart is the origin of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a librari of electron work that could be freeli share 
with anyone. for thirti years, he produc and distribut project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with onli a loos network of volunt support. 


project gutenberg-tm ebook are often creat from sever print 
editions, all of which are confirm as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notic is included. thus, we do not necessarili 
keep ebook in complianc with ani particular paper edition. 


most peopl start at our web site which ha the main PG search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.org 

thi web site includ inform about project gutenberg-tm, 
includ how to make donat to the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundation, how to help produc our new ebooks, and how to 
subscrib to our email newslett to hear about new ebooks. 
