the project gutenberg ebook, the castl of otranto, by horac walpole, 
edit by henri morley 


thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.org 





title: the castl of otranto 


author: horac walpol 

editor: henri morley 

releas date: may 5, 2012 [ebook #696] 
[thi file wa first post on octob 22, 1996] 

language: english 

charact set encoding: utf-8 


***start OF the project gutenberg ebook the castl OF otranto*** 


transcrib from the 1901 cassel and compani edit by david price, 
email ccx074@pglaf.org 

cassell’ nation librari 
(new series) 

* * * * * 





the 
castl OF otranto. 


* * * * * 

BY 
horac walpole. 

[picture: decor graphic] 

cassel and company, limit 
_london_, _paris_, _new york & melbourne_ 
1901 




introduct 
prefac 

horac walpol wa the youngest son of sir robert walpole, the great 
statesman, who die earl of orford. He wa born in 1717, the year in 
which hi father resign office, remain in opposit for almost 
three year befor hi return to a long tenur of power. horac walpol 
wa educ at eton, where he form a school friendship with thoma 
gray, who wa but a few month older. In 1739 gray wa 
travelling-companion with walpol in franc and itali until they differ 
and parted; but the friendship wa afterward renewed, and remain firm 
to the end. horac walpol went from eton to king’ college, cambridge, 
and enter parliament in 1741, the year befor hi father’ final 
resign and accept of an earldom. hi way of life wa made easi 
to him. As usher of the exchequer, comptrol of the pipe, and clerk of 
the estreat in the exchequer, he receiv nearli two thousand a year for 
do nothing, live with hi father, and amus himself. 

horac walpol idled, and amus himself with the small life of the 
fashion world to which he wa proud of belonging, though he had a 
quick eye for it vanities. He had social wit, and like to put it to 
small uses. but he wa not an empti idler, and there were season when 
he could becom a sharp judg of himself. “I am sensible,” he wrote to 
hi most intim friend, “I am sensibl of have more folli and 
weak and fewer real good qualiti than most men. I sometim 
reflect on this, though, I own, too seldom. I alway want to begin 
act like a man, and a sensibl one, which I think I might be if I 
would.” He had deep home affections, and, under mani polit 
affectations, plenti of good sense. 

horac walpole’ father die in 1745. the eldest son, who succeed to 
the earldom, die in 1751, and left a son, george, who wa for a time 
insane, and live until 1791. As georg left no child, the titl and 
estat pass to horac walpole, then seventy-four year old, and the 
onli uncl who survived. horac walpol thu becam earl of orford, 
dure the last six year of hi life. As to the title, he said that he 
felt himself be call name in hi old age. He die unmarried, in 
the year 1797, at the age of eighty. 

He had turn hi hous at strawberri hill, by the thames, near 
twickenham, into a gothic villa—eighteenth-centuri gothic—and amus 
himself by spend freeli upon it adorn with such thing as were 
then fashion as object of taste. but he delight also in hi 
flower and hi trellis of roses, and the quiet thames. when confin 
by gout to hi london hous in arlington street, flower from strawberri 
hill and a bird were necessari consolations. He set up also at 
strawberri hill a privat print press, at which he print hi friend 
gray’ poems, also in 1758 hi own “catalogu of the royal and nobl 
author of england,” and five volum of “anecdot of paint in 
england,” between 1762 and 1771. 

horac walpol produc _the castl of otranto_ in 1765, at the matur 
age of forty-eight. It wa suggest by a dream from which he said he 
wake one morning, and of which “all I could recov was, that I had 
thought myself in an ancient castl (a veri natur dream for a head like 
mine, fill with gothic story), and that on the uppermost banist of a 
great staircas I saw a gigant hand in armour. In the even I sat 
down and began to write, without know in the least what I intend to 
say or relate.” So began the tale which profess to be translat by 
“william marshal, gentleman, from the italian of onuphro muralto, canon 
of the church of st. nicholas, at otranto.” It wa written in two 
months. walpole’ friend gray report to him that at cambridg the book 
made “some of them cri a little, and all in gener afraid to go to bed 
o’ nights.” _the castl of otranto_ was, in it own way, an earli sign 
of the reaction toward romanc in the latter part of the last century. 
thi give it interest. but it ha had mani followers, and the hardi 
modern reader, when he read’ gray’ note from cambridge, need to be 
remind of it date. 

H. M. 




prefac TO the first edition. 


the follow work wa found in the librari of an ancient cathol famili 
in the north of england. It wa print at naples, in the black letter, 
in the year 1529. how much sooner it wa written doe not appear. the 
princip incid are such as were believ in the darkest age of 
christianity; but the languag and conduct have noth that savour of 
barbarism. the style is the purest italian. 

If the stori wa written near the time when it is suppos to have 
happened, it must have been between 1095, the era of the first crusade, 
and 1243, the date of the last, or not long afterwards. there is no 
other circumst in the work that can lead us to guess at the period in 
which the scene is laid: the name of the actor are evid 
fictitious, and probabl disguis on purpose: yet the spanish name of 
the domest seem to indic that thi work wa not compos until the 
establish of the arragonian king in napl had made spanish 
appel familiar in that country. the beauti of the diction, and 
the zeal of the author (moderated, however, by singular judgment) concur 
to make me think that the date of the composit wa littl anteced 
to that of the impression. letter were then in their most flourish 
state in italy, and contribut to dispel the empir of superstition, at 
that time so forcibl attack by the reformers. It is not unlik that 
an art priest might endeavour to turn their own arm on the 
innovators, and might avail himself of hi abil as an author to 
confirm the populac in their ancient error and superstitions. If thi 
wa hi view, he ha certainli act with signal address. such a work as 
the follow would enslav a hundr vulgar mind beyond half the book 
of controversi that have been written from the day of luther to the 
present hour. 

thi solut of the author’ motiv is, however, offer as a mere 
conjecture. whatev hi view were, or whatev effect the execut 
of them might have, hi work can onli be laid befor the public at 
present as a matter of entertainment. even as such, some apolog for it 
is necessary. miracles, visions, necromancy, dreams, and other 
preternatur events, are explod now even from romances. that wa not 
the case when our author wrote; much less when the stori itself is 
suppos to have happened. belief in everi kind of prodigi wa so 
establish in those dark ages, that an author would not be faith to 
the manner of the times, who should omit all mention of them. He is not 
bound to believ them himself, but he must repres hi actor as 
believ them. 

If thi air of the miracul is excused, the reader will find noth 
els unworthi of hi perusal. allow the possibl of the facts, and 
all the actor comport themselv as person would do in their situation. 
there is no bombast, no similes, flowers, digressions, or unnecessari 
descriptions. everyth tend directli to the catastrophe. never is 
the reader’ attent relaxed. the rule of the drama are almost 
observ throughout the conduct of the piece. the charact are well 
drawn, and still better maintained. terror, the author’ princip 
engine, prevent the stori from ever languishing; and it is so often 
contrast by pity, that the mind is kept up in a constant vicissitud of 
interest passions. 

some person may perhap think the charact of the domest too littl 
seriou for the gener cast of the story; but besid their opposit 
to the princip personages, the art of the author is veri observ in 
hi conduct of the subalterns. they discov mani passag essenti to 
the story, which could not be well brought to light but by their 
_naïveté_ and simplicity. In particular, the womanish terror and foibl 
of bianca, in the last chapter, conduc essenti toward advanc the 
catastrophe. 

It is natur for a translat to be prejud in favour of hi adopt 
work. more imparti reader may not be so much struck with the beauti 
of thi piec as I was. yet I am not blind to my author’ defects. I 
could wish he had ground hi plan on a more use moral than this: 
that “the sin of father are visit on their children to the third and 
fourth generation.” I doubt whether, in hi time, ani more than at 
present, ambit curb it appetit of dominion from the dread of so 
remot a punishment. and yet thi moral is weaken by that less direct 
insinuation, that even such anathema may be divert by devot to st. 
nicholas. here the interest of the monk plainli get the better of the 
judgment of the author. however, with all it faults, I have no doubt 
but the english reader will be pleas with a sight of thi performance. 
the pieti that reign throughout, the lesson of virtu that are 
inculcated, and the rigid puriti of the sentiments, exempt thi work from 
the censur to which romanc are but too liable. should it meet with 
the success I hope for, I may be encourag to reprint the origin 
italian, though it will tend to depreci my own labour. our languag 
fall far short of the charm of the italian, both for varieti and 
harmony. the latter is peculiarli excel for simpl narrative. It is 
difficult in english to relat without fall too low or rise too 
high; a fault obvious occas by the littl care taken to speak pure 
languag in common conversation. everi italian or frenchman of ani rank 
piqu himself on speak hi own tongu correctli and with choice. I 
cannot flatter myself with have done justic to my author in thi 
respect: hi style is as eleg as hi conduct of the passion is 
masterly. It is a piti that he did not appli hi talent to what they 
were evid proper for—th theatre. 

I will detain the reader no longer, but to make one short remark. though 
the machineri is invention, and the name of the actor imaginary, I 
cannot but believ that the groundwork of the stori is found on truth. 
the scene is undoubtedli laid in some real castle. the author seem 
frequently, without design, to describ particular parts. “the chamber,” 
say he, “on the right hand;” “the door on the left hand;” “the distanc 
from the chapel to conrad’ apartment:” these and other passag are 
strong presumpt that the author had some certain build in hi eye. 
curiou persons, who have leisur to employ in such researches, may 
possibl discov in the italian writer the foundat on which our 
author ha built. If a catastrophe, at all resembl that which he 
describes, is believ to have given rise to thi work, it will 
contribut to interest the reader, and will make the “castl of otranto” 
a still more move story. 




sonnet TO the right honour ladi mari coke. 


the gentl maid, whose hapless tale 
these melancholi page speak; 
say, graciou lady, shall she fail 
To draw the tear adown thi cheek? 

no; never wa thi piti breast 
insens to human woes; 
tender, tho’ firm, it melt distrest 
for weak it never knows. 

oh! guard the marvel I relat 
Of fell ambit scourg’d by fate, 
from reason’ peevish blame. 
blest with thi smile, my dauntless sail 
I dare expand to fancy’ gale, 
for sure thi smile are fame. 

H. W. 




chapter I. 


manfred, princ of otranto, had one son and one daughter: the latter, a 
most beauti virgin, age eighteen, wa call matilda. conrad, the 
son, wa three year younger, a home youth, sickly, and of no promis 
disposition; yet he wa the darl of hi father, who never show ani 
symptom of affect to matilda. manfr had contract a marriag for 
hi son with the marqui of vicenza’ daughter, isabella; and she had 
alreadi been deliv by her guardian into the hand of manfred, that 
he might celebr the wed as soon as conrad’ infirm state of health 
would permit. 

manfred’ impati for thi ceremoni wa remark by hi famili and 
neighbours. the former, indeed, apprehend the sever of their 
prince’ disposition, did not dare to utter their surmis on thi 
precipitation. hippolita, hi wife, an amiabl lady, did sometim 
ventur to repres the danger of marri their onli son so early, 
consid hi great youth, and greater infirmities; but she never 
receiv ani other answer than reflect on her own sterility, who had 
given him but one heir. hi tenant and subject were less cautiou in 
their discourses. they attribut thi hasti wed to the prince’ 
dread of see accomplish an ancient prophecy, which wa said to have 
pronounc that the castl and lordship of otranto “should pass from the 
present family, whenev the real owner should be grown too larg to 
inhabit it.” It wa difficult to make ani sens of thi prophecy; and 
still less easi to conceiv what it had to do with the marriag in 
question. yet these mysteries, or contradictions, did not make the 
populac adher the less to their opinion. 

young conrad’ birthday wa fix for hi espousals. the compani wa 
assembl in the chapel of the castle, and everyth readi for begin 
the divin office, when conrad himself wa missing. manfred, impati 
of the least delay, and who had not observ hi son retire, despatch 
one of hi attend to summon the young prince. the servant, who had 
not stay long enough to have cross the court to conrad’ apartment, 
came run back breathless, in a frantic manner, hi eye staring, and 
foam at the mouth. He said nothing, but point to the court. 

the compani were struck with terror and amazement. the princess 
hippolita, without know what wa the matter, but anxiou for her son, 
swoon away. manfred, less apprehens than enrag at the 
procrastin of the nuptials, and at the folli of hi domestic, ask 
imperi what wa the matter? the fellow made no answer, but 
continu point toward the courtyard; and at last, after repeat 
question put to him, cri out, “oh! the helmet! the helmet!” 

In the meantime, some of the compani had run into the court, from whenc 
wa heard a confus nois of shrieks, horror, and surprise. manfred, 
who began to be alarm at not see hi son, went himself to get 
inform of what occas thi strang confusion. matilda remain 
endeavour to assist her mother, and isabella stay for the same 
purpose, and to avoid show ani impati for the bridegroom, for 
whom, in truth, she had conceiv littl affection. 

the first thing that struck manfred’ eye wa a group of hi servant 
endeavour to rais someth that appear to him a mountain of sabl 
plumes. He gaze without believ hi sight. 

“what are ye doing?” cri manfred, wrathfully; “where is my son?” 

A volley of voic replied, “oh! my lord! the prince! the prince! the 
helmet! the helmet!” 

shock with these lament sounds, and dread he knew not what, he 
advanc hastily,—but what a sight for a father’ eyes!—h beheld hi 
child dash to pieces, and almost buri under an enorm helmet, an 
hundr time more larg than ani casqu ever made for human being, and 
shade with a proportion quantiti of black feathers. 

the horror of the spectacle, the ignor of all around how thi 
misfortun had happened, and abov all, the tremend phenomenon befor 
him, took away the prince’ speech. yet hi silenc last longer than 
even grief could occasion. He fix hi eye on what he wish in vain 
to believ a vision; and seem less attent to hi loss, than buri 
in medit on the stupend object that had occas it. He 
touched, he examin the fatal casque; nor could even the bleed 
mangl remain of the young princ divert the eye of manfr from the 
portent befor him. 

all who had known hi partial fond for young conrad, were as much 
surpris at their prince’ insensibility, as thunderstruck themselv at 
the miracl of the helmet. they convey the disfigur corps into the 
hall, without receiv the least direct from manfred. As littl wa 
he attent to the ladi who remain in the chapel. On the contrary, 
without mention the unhappi princesses, hi wife and daughter, the 
first sound that drop from manfred’ lip were, “take care of the 
ladi isabella.” 

the domestics, without observ the singular of thi direction, were 
guid by their affect to their mistress, to consid it as peculiarli 
address to her situation, and flew to her assistance. they convey 
her to her chamber more dead than alive, and indiffer to all the 
strang circumst she heard, except the death of her son. 

matilda, who dote on her mother, smother her own grief and amazement, 
and thought of noth but assist and comfort her afflict parent. 
isabella, who had been treat by hippolita like a daughter, and who 
return that tender with equal duti and affection, wa scarc less 
assidu about the princess; at the same time endeavour to partak 
and lessen the weight of sorrow which she saw matilda strove to suppress, 
for whom she had conceiv the warmest sympathi of friendship. yet her 
own situat could not help find it place in her thoughts. she felt 
no concern for the death of young conrad, except commiseration; and she 
wa not sorri to be deliv from a marriag which had promis her 
littl felicity, either from her destin bridegroom, or from the sever 
temper of manfred, who, though he had distinguish her by great 
indulgence, had imprint her mind with terror, from hi causeless rigour 
to such amiabl princess as hippolita and matilda. 

while the ladi were convey the wretch mother to her bed, manfr 
remain in the court, gaze on the omin casque, and regardless of 
the crowd which the strang of the event had now assembl around 
him. the few word he articulated, tend sole to inquiries, whether 
ani man knew from whenc it could have come? nobodi could give him the 
least information. however, as it seem to be the sole object of hi 
curiosity, it soon becam so to the rest of the spectators, whose 
conjectur were as absurd and improbable, as the catastroph itself wa 
unprecedented. In the midst of their senseless guesses, a young peasant, 
whom rumour had drawn thither from a neighbour village, observ that 
the miracul helmet wa exactli like that on the figur in black marbl 
of alfonso the good, one of their former princes, in the church of st. 
nicholas. 

“villain! what sayest thou?” cri manfred, start from hi tranc in 
a tempest of rage, and seiz the young man by the collar; “how darest 
thou utter such treason? thi life shall pay for it.” 

the spectators, who as littl comprehend the caus of the prince’ furi 
as all the rest they had seen, were at a loss to unravel thi new 
circumstance. the young peasant himself wa still more astonished, not 
conceiv how he had offend the prince. yet recollect himself, 
with a mixtur of grace and humility, he disengag himself from 
manfred’ grip, and then with an obeisance, which discov more 
jealousi of innoc than dismay, he asked, with respect, of what he wa 
guilty? manfred, more enrag at the vigour, howev decent exerted, 
with which the young man had shaken off hi hold, than appeas by hi 
submission, order hi attend to seiz him, and, if he had not been 
withheld by hi friend whom he had invit to the nuptials, would have 
poignard the peasant in their arms. 

dure thi altercation, some of the vulgar spectat had run to the 
great church, which stood near the castle, and came back open-mouthed, 
declar that the helmet wa miss from alfonso’ statue. manfred, at 
thi news, grew perfectli frantic; and, as if he sought a subject on 
which to vent the tempest within him, he rush again on the young 
peasant, crying— 

“villain! monster! sorcerer! ’ti thou hast done this! ’ti thou hast 
slain my son!” 

the mob, who want some object within the scope of their capacities, on 
whom they might discharg their bewild reasoning, caught the word 
from the mouth of their lord, and re-echoed— 

“ay, ay; ’ti he, ’ti he: he ha stolen the helmet from good alfonso’ 
tomb, and dash out the brain of our young princ with it,” never 
reflect how enorm the disproport wa between the marbl helmet 
that had been in the church, and that of steel befor their eyes; nor how 
imposs it wa for a youth seemingli not twenty, to wield a piec of 
armour of so prodigi a weight. 

the folli of these ejacul brought manfr to himself: yet whether 
provok at the peasant have observ the resembl between the two 
helmets, and therebi led to the farther discoveri of the absenc of that 
in the church, or wish to buri ani such rumour under so impertin a 
supposition, he grave pronounc that the young man wa certainli a 
necromancer, and that till the church could take cognis of the 
affair, he would have the magician, whom they had thu detected, kept 
prison under the helmet itself, which he order hi attend to 
raise, and place the young man under it; declar he should be kept 
there without food, with which hi own infern art might furnish him. 

It wa in vain for the youth to repres against thi preposter 
sentence: in vain did manfred’ friend endeavour to divert him from thi 
savag and ill-ground resolution. the gener were charm with 
their lord’ decision, which, to their apprehensions, carri great 
appear of justice, as the magician wa to be punish by the veri 
instrument with which he had offended: nor were they struck with the 
least compunct at the probabl of the youth be starved, for they 
firmli believ that, by hi diabol skill, he could easili suppli 
himself with nutriment. 

manfr thu saw hi command even cheer obeyed; and appoint a 
guard with strict order to prevent ani food be convey to the 
prisoner, he dismiss hi friend and attendants, and retir to hi own 
chamber, after lock the gate of the castle, in which he suffer none 
but hi domest to remain. 

In the meantime, the care and zeal of the young ladi had brought the 
princess hippolita to herself, who amidst the transport of her own 
sorrow frequent demand news of her lord, would have dismiss her 
attend to watch over him, and at last enjoin matilda to leav her, 
and visit and comfort her father. matilda, who want no affection 
duti to manfred, though she trembl at hi austerity, obey the order 
of hippolita, whom she tenderli recommend to isabella; and inquir of 
the domest for her father, wa inform that he wa retir to hi 
chamber, and had command that nobodi should have admitt to him. 
conclud that he wa immers in sorrow for the death of her brother, 
and fear to renew hi tear by the sight of hi sole remain child, 
she hesit whether she should break in upon hi affliction; yet 
solicitud for him, back by the command of her mother, encourag her 
to ventur disobey the order he had given; a fault she had never been 
guilti of before. 

the gentl timid of her natur made her paus for some minut at hi 
door. she heard him travers hi chamber backwards, and forward with 
disord steps; a mood which increas her apprehensions. she was, 
however, just go to beg admittance, when manfr suddenli open the 
door; and as it wa now twilight, concur with the disord of hi 
mind, he did not distinguish the person, but ask angrily, who it was? 
matilda replied, trembling— 

“mi dearest father, it is I, your daughter.” 

manfred, step back hastily, cried, “begone! I do not want a 
daughter;” and fling back abruptly, clap the door against the 
terrifi matilda. 

she wa too well acquaint with her father’ impetuos to ventur a 
second intrusion. when she had a littl recov the shock of so bitter 
a reception, she wipe away her tear to prevent the addit stab that 
the knowledg of it would give to hippolita, who question her in the 
most anxiou term on the health of manfred, and how he bore hi loss. 
matilda assur her he wa well, and support hi misfortun with manli 
fortitude. 

“but will he not let me see him?” said hippolita mournfully; “will he not 
permit me to blend my tear with his, and shed a mother’ sorrow in the 
bosom of her lord? Or do you deceiv me, matilda? I know how manfr 
dote on hi son: is not the stroke too heavi for him? ha he not sunk 
under it? you do not answer me—alas! I dread the worst!—rais me, my 
maidens; I will, I will see my lord. bear me to him instantly: he is 
dearer to me even than my children.” 

matilda made sign to isabella to prevent hippolita’ rising; and both 
those love young women were use their gentl violenc to stop and 
calm the princess, when a servant, on the part of manfred, arriv and 
told isabella that hi lord demand to speak with her. 

“with me!” cri isabella. 

“go,” said hippolita, reliev by a messag from her lord: “manfr 
cannot support the sight of hi own family. He think you less 
disord than we are, and dread the shock of my grief. consol him, 
dear isabella, and tell him I will smother my own anguish rather than add 
to his.” 

As it wa now even the servant who conduct isabella bore a torch 
befor her. when they came to manfred, who wa walk impati about 
the gallery, he started, and said hastily— 

“take away that light, and begone.” 

then shut the door impetuously, he flung himself upon a bench against 
the wall, and bade isabella sit by him. she obey trembling. 

“I sent for you, lady,” said he—and then stop under great appear 
of confusion. 

“mi lord!” 

“yes, I sent for you on a matter of great moment,” resum he. “dri your 
tears, young lady—y have lost your bridegroom. yes, cruel fate! and I 
have lost the hope of my race! but conrad wa not worthi of your 
beauty.” 

“how, my lord!” said isabella; “sure you do not suspect me of not feel 
the concern I ought: my duti and affect would have always—” 

“think no more of him,” interrupt manfred; “he wa a sickly, puni 
child, and heaven ha perhap taken him away, that I might not trust the 
honour of my hous on so frail a foundation. the line of manfr call 
for numer supports. My foolish fond for that boy blind the eye 
of my prudence—but it is better as it is. I hope, in a few years, to 
have reason to rejoic at the death of conrad.” 

word cannot paint the astonish of isabella. At first she 
apprehend that grief had disord manfred’ understanding. her next 
thought suggest that thi strang discours wa design to ensnar 
her: she fear that manfr had perceiv her indiffer for hi son: 
and in consequ of that idea she replied— 

“good my lord, do not doubt my tenderness: my heart would have 
accompani my hand. conrad would have engross all my care; and 
wherev fate shall dispos of me, I shall alway cherish hi memory, and 
regard your high and the virtuou hippolita as my parents.” 

“curs on hippolita!” cri manfred. “forget her from thi moment, as I 
do. In short, lady, you have miss a husband undeserv of your 
charms: they shall now be better dispos of. instead of a sickli boy, 
you shall have a husband in the prime of hi age, who will know how to 
valu your beauties, and who may expect a numer offspring.” 

“alas, my lord!” said isabella, “mi mind is too sadli engross by the 
recent catastroph in your famili to think of anoth marriage. If ever 
my father returns, and it shall be hi pleasure, I shall obey, as I did 
when I consent to give my hand to your son: but until hi return, 
permit me to remain under your hospit roof, and employ the melancholi 
hour in assuag yours, hippolita’s, and the fair matilda’ 
affliction.” 

“I desir you onc before,” said manfr angrily, “not to name that 
woman: from thi hour she must be a stranger to you, as she must be to 
me. In short, isabella, sinc I cannot give you my son, I offer you 
myself.” 

“heavens!” cri isabella, wake from her delusion, “what do I hear? 
you! my lord! you! My father-in-law! the father of conrad! the husband 
of the virtuou and tender hippolita!” 

“I tell you,” said manfr imperiously, “hippolita is no longer my wife; 
I divorc her from thi hour. too long ha she curs me by her 
unfruitfulness. My fate depend on have sons, and thi night I trust 
will give a new date to my hopes.” 

At those word he seiz the cold hand of isabella, who wa half dead 
with fright and horror. she shrieked, and start from him, manfr rose 
to pursu her, when the moon, which wa now up, and gleam in at the 
opposit casement, present to hi sight the plume of the fatal helmet, 
which rose to the height of the windows, wave backward and forward in 
a tempestu manner, and accompani with a hollow and rustl sound. 
isabella, who gather courag from her situation, and who dread 
noth so much as manfred’ pursuit of hi declaration, cried— 

“look, my lord! see, heaven itself declar against your impiou 
intentions!” 

“heaven nor hell shall imped my designs,” said manfred, advanc again 
to seiz the princess. 

At that instant the portrait of hi grandfather, which hung over the 
bench where they had been sitting, utter a deep sigh, and heav it 
breast. 

isabella, whose back wa turn to the picture, saw not the motion, nor 
knew whenc the sound came, but started, and said— 

“hark, my lord! what sound wa that?” and at the same time made toward 
the door. 

manfred, distract between the flight of isabella, who had now reach 
the stairs, and yet unabl to keep hi eye from the picture, which began 
to move, had, however, advanc some step after her, still look 
backward on the portrait, when he saw it quit it panel, and descend on 
the floor with a grave and melancholi air. 

“do I dream?” cri manfred, returning; “or are the devil themselv in 
leagu against me? speak, intern spectre! or, if thou art my 
grandsire, whi dost thou too conspir against thi wretch descendant, 
who too dearli pay for—” ere he could finish the sentence, the vision 
sigh again, and made a sign to manfr to follow him. 

“lead on!” cri manfred; “I will follow thee to the gulf of perdition.” 

the spectr march sedately, but dejected, to the end of the gallery, 
and turn into a chamber on the right hand. manfr accompani him at 
a littl distance, full of anxieti and horror, but resolved. As he would 
have enter the chamber, the door wa clap to with violenc by an 
invis hand. the prince, collect courag from thi delay, would 
have forcibl burst open the door with hi foot, but found that it 
resist hi utmost efforts. 

“sinc hell will not satisfi my curiosity,” said manfred, “I will use the 
human mean in my power for preserv my race; isabella shall not escap 
me.” 

the lady, whose resolut had given way to terror the moment she had 
quit manfred, continu her flight to the bottom of the princip 
staircase. there she stopped, not know whither to direct her steps, 
nor how to escap from the impetuos of the prince. the gate of the 
castle, she knew, were locked, and guard place in the court. should 
she, as her heart prompt her, go and prepar hippolita for the cruel 
destini that await her, she did not doubt but manfr would seek her 
there, and that hi violenc would incit him to doubl the injuri he 
meditated, without leav room for them to avoid the impetuos of hi 
passions. delay might give him time to reflect on the horrid measur he 
had conceived, or produc some circumst in her favour, if she 
could—for that night, at least—avoid hi odiou purpose. yet where 
conceal herself? how avoid the pursuit he would infal make 
throughout the castle? 

As these thought pass rapidli through her mind, she recollect a 
subterran passag which led from the vault of the castl to the 
church of st. nicholas. could she reach the altar befor she wa 
overtaken, she knew even manfred’ violenc would not dare to profan the 
sacred of the place; and she determined, if no other mean of 
deliver offered, to shut herself up for ever among the holi virgin 
whose convent wa contigu to the cathedral. In thi resolution, she 
seiz a lamp that burn at the foot of the staircase, and hurri 
toward the secret passage. 

the lower part of the castl wa hollow into sever intric 
cloisters; and it wa not easi for one under so much anxieti to find the 
door that open into the cavern. An aw silenc reign throughout 
those subterran regions, except now and then some blast of wind that 
shook the door she had passed, and which, grate on the rusti hinges, 
were re-echo through that long labyrinth of darkness. everi murmur 
struck her with new terror; yet more she dread to hear the wrath 
voic of manfr urg hi domest to pursu her. 

she trod as softli as impati would give her leave, yet frequent 
stop and listen to hear if she wa followed. In one of those 
moment she thought she heard a sigh. she shuddered, and recoil a few 
paces. In a moment she thought she heard the step of some person. her 
blood curdled; she conclud it wa manfred. everi suggest that 
horror could inspir rush into her mind. she condemn her rash 
flight, which had thu expos her to hi rage in a place where her cri 
were not like to draw anybodi to her assistance. yet the sound seem 
not to come from behind. If manfr knew where she was, he must have 
follow her. she wa still in one of the cloisters, and the step she 
had heard were too distinct to proceed from the way she had come. 
cheer with thi reflection, and hope to find a friend in whoever wa 
not the prince, she wa go to advance, when a door that stood ajar, at 
some distanc to the left, wa open gently: but ere her lamp, which she 
held up, could discov who open it, the person retreat precipit 
on see the light. 

isabella, whom everi incid wa suffici to dismay, hesit whether 
she should proceed. her dread of manfr soon outweigh everi other 
terror. the veri circumst of the person avoid her gave her a sort 
of courage. It could onli be, she thought, some domest belong to 
the castle. her gentl had never rais her an enemy, and consciou 
innoc made her hope that, unless sent by the prince’ order to seek 
her, hi servant would rather assist than prevent her flight. 
fortifi herself with these reflections, and believ by what she 
could observ that she wa near the mouth of the subterran cavern, 
she approach the door that had been opened; but a sudden gust of wind 
that met her at the door extinguish her lamp, and left her in total 
darkness. 

word cannot paint the horror of the princess’ situation. alon in so 
dismal a place, her mind imprint with all the terribl event of the 
day, hopeless of escaping, expect everi moment the arriv of manfred, 
and far from tranquil on know she wa within reach of somebody, she 
knew not whom, who for some caus seem conceal thereabouts; all these 
thought crowd on her distract mind, and she wa readi to sink under 
her apprehensions. she address herself to everi saint in heaven, and 
inwardli implor their assistance. for a consider time she remain 
in an agoni of despair. 

At last, as softli as wa possible, she felt for the door, and have 
found it, enter trembl into the vault from whenc she had heard the 
sigh and steps. It gave her a kind of momentari joy to perceiv an 
imperfect ray of cloud moonshin gleam from the roof of the vault, 
which seem to be fallen in, and from whenc hung a fragment of earth or 
building, she could not distinguish which, that appear to have been 
crush inwards. she advanc eagerli toward thi chasm, when she 
discern a human form stand close against the wall. 

she shrieked, believ it the ghost of her betroth conrad. the 
figure, advancing, said, in a submiss voice— 

“be not alarmed, lady; I will not injur you.” 

isabella, a littl encourag by the word and tone of voic of the 
stranger, and recollect that thi must be the person who had open 
the door, recov her spirit enough to reply— 

“sir, whoever you are, take piti on a wretch princess, stand on the 
brink of destruction. assist me to escap from thi fatal castle, or in 
a few moment I may be made miser for ever.” 

“alas!” said the stranger, “what can I do to assist you? I will die in 
your defence; but I am unacquaint with the castle, and want—” 

“oh!” said isabella, hastili interrupt him; “help me but to find a 
trap-door that must be hereabout, and it is the greatest servic you can 
do me, for I have not a minut to lose.” 

say a these words, she felt about on the pavement, and direct the 
stranger to search likewise, for a smooth piec of brass enclos in one 
of the stones. 

“that,” said she, “i the lock, which open with a spring, of which I 
know the secret. If we can find that, I may escape—if not, alas! 
courteou stranger, I fear I shall have involv you in my misfortunes: 
manfr will suspect you for the accomplic of my flight, and you will 
fall a victim to hi resentment.” 

“I valu not my life,” said the stranger, “and it will be some comfort to 
lose it in tri to deliv you from hi tyranny.” 

“gener youth,” said isabella, “how shall I ever requite—” 

As she utter those words, a ray of moonshine, stream through a 
cranni of the ruin above, shone directli on the lock they sought. 

“oh! transport!” said isabella; “here is the trap-door!” and, take out 
the key, she touch the spring, which, start aside, discov an 
iron ring. “lift up the door,” said the princess. 

the stranger obeyed, and beneath appear some stone step descend 
into a vault total dark. 

“we must go down here,” said isabella. “follow me; dark and dismal as it 
is, we cannot miss our way; it lead directli to the church of st. 
nicholas. but, perhaps,” ad the princess modestly, “you have no 
reason to leav the castle, nor have I farther occas for your service; 
in a few minut I shall be safe from manfred’ rage—onli let me know to 
whom I am so much obliged.” 

“I will never quit you,” said the stranger eagerly, “until I have place 
you in safety—nor think me, princess, more gener than I am; though you 
are my princip care—” 

the stranger wa interrupt by a sudden nois of voic that seem 
approaching, and they soon distinguish these words— 

“talk not to me of necromancers; I tell you she must be in the castle; I 
will find her in spite of enchantment.” 

“oh, heavens!” cri isabella; “it is the voic of manfred! make haste, 
or we are ruined! and shut the trap-door after you.” 

say this, she descend the step precipitately; and as the stranger 
hasten to follow her, he let the door slip out of hi hands: it fell, 
and the spring close over it. He tri in vain to open it, not have 
observ isabella’ method of touch the spring; nor had he mani 
moment to make an essay. the nois of the fall door had been heard 
by manfred, who, direct by the sound, hasten thither, attend by hi 
servant with torches. 

“it must be isabella,” cri manfred, befor he enter the vault. “she 
is escap by the subterran passage, but she cannot have got far.” 

what wa the astonish of the princ when, instead of isabella, the 
light of the torch discov to him the young peasant whom he thought 
confin under the fatal helmet! 

“traitor!” said manfred; “how camest thou here? I thought thee in 
duranc abov in the court.” 

“I am no traitor,” repli the young man boldly, “nor am I answer for 
your thoughts.” 

“presumptu villain!” cri manfred; “dost thou provok my wrath? tell 
me, how hast thou escap from above? thou hast corrupt thi guards, 
and their live shall answer it.” 

“mi poverty,” said the peasant calmly, “will disculp them: though the 
minist of a tyrant’ wrath, to thee they are faithful, and but too 
will to execut the order which you unjustli impos upon them.” 

“art thou so hardi as to dare my vengeance?” said the prince; “but 
tortur shall forc the truth from thee. tell me; I will know thi 
accomplices.” 

“there wa my accomplice!” said the youth, smiling, and point to the 
roof. 

manfr order the torch to be held up, and perceiv that one of the 
cheek of the enchant casqu had forc it way through the pavement of 
the court, as hi servant had let it fall over the peasant, and had 
broken through into the vault, leav a gap, through which the peasant 
had press himself some minut befor he wa found by isabella. 

“wa that the way by which thou didst descend?” said manfred. 

“it was,” said the youth. 

“but what nois wa that,” said manfred, “which I heard as I enter the 
cloister?” 

“A door clapped,” said the peasant; “I heard it as well as you.” 

“what door?” said manfr hastily. 

“I am not acquaint with your castle,” said the peasant; “thi is the 
first time I ever enter it, and thi vault the onli part of it within 
which I ever was.” 

“but I tell thee,” said manfr (wish to find out if the youth had 
discov the trap-door), “it wa thi way I heard the noise. My 
servant heard it too.” 

“mi lord,” interrupt one of them officiously, “to be sure it wa the 
trap-door, and he wa go to make hi escape.” 

“peace, blockhead!” said the princ angrily; “if he wa go to escape, 
how should he come on thi side? I will know from hi own mouth what 
nois it wa I heard. tell me truly; thi life depend on thi veracity.” 

“mi verac is dearer to me than my life,” said the peasant; “nor would 
I purchas the one by forfeit the other.” 

“indeed, young philosopher!” said manfr contemptuously; “tell me, then, 
what wa the nois I heard?” 

“ask me what I can answer,” said he, “and put me to death instantli if I 
tell you a lie.” 

manfred, grow impati at the steadi valour and indiffer of the 
youth, cried— 

“well, then, thou man of truth, answer! wa it the fall of the trap-door 
that I heard?” 

“it was,” said the youth. 

“it was!” said the prince; “and how didst thou come to know there wa a 
trap-door here?” 

“I saw the plate of brass by a gleam of moonshine,” repli he. 

“but what told thee it wa a lock?” said manfred. “how didst thou 
discov the secret of open it?” 

“providence, that deliv me from the helmet, wa abl to direct me to 
the spring of a lock,” said he. 

“provid should have gone a littl farther, and have place thee out 
of the reach of my resentment,” said manfred. “when provid had 
taught thee to open the lock, it abandon thee for a fool, who did not 
know how to make use of it favours. whi didst thou not pursu the path 
point out for thi escape? whi didst thou shut the trap-door befor 
thou hadst descend the steps?” 

“I might ask you, my lord,” said the peasant, “how I, total 
unacquaint with your castle, wa to know that those step led to ani 
outlet? but I scorn to evad your questions. wherev those step lead 
to, perhap I should have explor the way—i could not be in a wors 
situat than I was. but the truth is, I let the trap-door fall: your 
immedi arriv followed. I had given the alarm—what import it to me 
whether I wa seiz a minut sooner or a minut later?” 

“thou art a resolut villain for thi years,” said manfred; “yet on 
reflect I suspect thou dost but trifl with me. thou hast not yet 
told me how thou didst open the lock.” 

“that I will show you, my lord,” said the peasant; and, take up a 
fragment of stone that had fallen from above, he laid himself on the 
trap-door, and began to beat on the piec of brass that cover it, 
mean to gain time for the escap of the princess. thi presenc of 
mind, join to the frank of the youth, stagger manfred. He even 
felt a disposit toward pardon one who had been guilti of no crime. 
manfr wa not one of those savag tyrant who wanton in cruelti 
unprovoked. the circumst of hi fortun had given an asper to 
hi temper, which wa natur humane; and hi virtu were alway readi 
to operate, when hi passion did not obscur hi reason. 

while the princ wa in thi suspense, a confus nois of voic echo 
through the distant vaults. As the sound approached, he distinguish 
the clamour of some of hi domestics, whom he had dispers through the 
castl in search of isabella, call out— 

“where is my lord? where is the prince?” 

“here I am,” said manfred, as they came nearer; “have you found the 
princess?” 

the first that arrived, replied, “oh, my lord! I am glad we have found 
you.” 

“found me!” said manfred; “have you found the princess?” 

“we thought we had, my lord,” said the fellow, look terrified, “but—” 

“but, what?” cri the prince; “ha she escaped?” 

“jaquez and I, my lord—” 

“yes, I and diego,” interrupt the second, who came up in still greater 
consternation. 

“speak one of you at a time,” said manfred; “I ask you, where is the 
princess?” 

“we do not know,” said they both together; “but we are frighten out of 
our wits.” 

“so I think, blockheads,” said manfred; “what is it ha scare you thus?” 

“oh! my lord,” said jaquez, “diego ha seen such a sight! your high 
would not believ our eyes.” 

“what new absurd is this?” cri manfred; “give me a direct answer, 
or, by heaven—” 

“why, my lord, if it pleas your high to hear me,” said the poor 
fellow, “diego and i—” 

“yes, I and jaquez—” cri hi comrade. 

“did not I forbid you to speak both at a time?” said the prince: “you, 
jaquez, answer; for the other fool seem more distract than thou art; 
what is the matter?” 

“mi graciou lord,” said jaquez, “if it pleas your high to hear me; 
diego and I, accord to your highness’ orders, went to search for the 
young lady; but be comprehens that we might meet the ghost of my 
young lord, your highness’ son, god rest hi soul, as he ha not 
receiv christian burial—” 

“sot!” cri manfr in a rage; “i it onli a ghost, then, that thou hast 
seen?” 

“oh! worse! worse! my lord,” cri diego: “I had rather have seen ten 
whole ghosts.” 

“grant me patience!” said manfred; “these blockhead distract me. out of 
my sight, diego! and thou, jaquez, tell me in one word, art thou sober? 
art thou raving? thou wast wont to have some sense: ha the other sot 
frighten himself and thee too? speak; what is it he fanci he ha 
seen?” 

“why, my lord,” repli jaquez, trembling, “I wa go to tell your 
highness, that sinc the calamit misfortun of my young lord, god rest 
hi preciou soul! not one of us your highness’ faith servants—inde 
we are, my lord, though poor men—i say, not one of us ha dare to set a 
foot about the castle, but two together: so diego and I, think that my 
young ladi might be in the great gallery, went up there to look for her, 
and tell her your high want someth to impart to her.” 

“O blunder fools!” cri manfred; “and in the meantime, she ha made 
her escape, becaus you were afraid of goblins!—why, thou knave! she left 
me in the gallery; I came from thenc myself.” 

“for all that, she may be there still for aught I know,” said jaquez; 
“but the devil shall have me befor I seek her there again—poor diego! I 
do not believ he will ever recov it.” 

“recov what?” said manfred; “am I never to learn what it is ha 
terrifi these rascals?—but I lose my time; follow me, slave; I will see 
if she is in the gallery.” 

“for heaven’ sake, my dear, good lord,” cri jaquez, “do not go to the 
gallery. satan himself I believ is in the chamber next to the gallery.” 

manfred, who hitherto had treat the terror of hi servant as an idl 
panic, wa struck at thi new circumstance. He recollect the 
apparit of the portrait, and the sudden close of the door at the end 
of the gallery. hi voic faltered, and he ask with disorder— 

“what is in the great chamber?” 

“mi lord,” said jaquez, “when diego and I came into the gallery, he went 
first, for he said he had more courag than I. So when we came into the 
galleri we found nobody. We look under everi bench and stool; and 
still we found nobody.” 

“were all the pictur in their places?” said manfred. 

“yes, my lord,” answer jaquez; “but we did not think of look behind 
them.” 

“well, well!” said manfred; “proceed.” 

“when we came to the door of the great chamber,” continu jaquez, “we 
found it shut.” 

“and could not you open it?” said manfred. 

“oh! yes, my lord; would to heaven we had not!” repli he—“nay, it wa 
not I neither; it wa diego: he wa grown foolhardy, and would go on, 
though I advis him not—if ever I open a door that is shut again—” 

“trifl not,” said manfred, shuddering, “but tell me what you saw in the 
great chamber on open the door.” 

“i! my lord!” said jaquez; “I wa behind diego; but I heard the noise.” 

“jaquez,” said manfred, in a solemn tone of voice; “tell me, I adjur 
thee by the soul of my ancestors, what wa it thou sawest? what wa it 
thou heardest?” 

“it wa diego saw it, my lord, it wa not i,” repli jaquez; “I onli 
heard the noise. diego had no sooner open the door, than he cri out, 
and ran back. I ran back too, and said, ‘i it the ghost?’ ‘the ghost! 
no, no,’ said diego, and hi hair stood on end—‘it is a giant, I believe; 
he is all clad in armour, for I saw hi foot and part of hi leg, and 
they are as larg as the helmet below in the court.’ As he said these 
words, my lord, we heard a violent motion and the rattl of armour, as 
if the giant wa rising, for diego ha told me sinc that he believ the 
giant wa lie down, for the foot and leg were stretch at length on 
the floor. befor we could get to the end of the gallery, we heard the 
door of the great chamber clap behind us, but we did not dare turn back 
to see if the giant wa follow us—yet, now I think on it, we must have 
heard him if he had pursu us—but for heaven’ sake, good my lord, send 
for the chaplain, and have the castl exorcised, for, for certain, it is 
enchanted.” 

“ay, pray do, my lord,” cri all the servant at once, “or we must leav 
your highness’ service.” 

“peace, dotards!” said manfred, “and follow me; I will know what all thi 
means.” 

“we! my lord!” cri they with one voice; “we would not go up to the 
galleri for your highness’ revenue.” the young peasant, who had stood 
silent, now spoke. 

“will your highness,” said he, “permit me to tri thi adventure? My life 
is of consequ to nobody; I fear no bad angel, and have offend no 
good one.” 

“your behaviour is abov your seeming,” said manfred, view him with 
surpris and admiration—“hereaft I will reward your bravery—but now,” 
continu he with a sigh, “I am so circumstanced, that I dare trust no 
eye but my own. however, I give you leav to accompani me.” 

manfred, when he first follow isabella from the gallery, had gone 
directli to the apart of hi wife, conclud the princess had 
retir thither. hippolita, who knew hi step, rose with anxiou 
fond to meet her lord, whom she had not seen sinc the death of their 
son. she would have flown in a transport mix of joy and grief to hi 
bosom, but he push her rude off, and said— 

“where is isabella?” 

“isabella! my lord!” said the astonish hippolita. 

“yes, isabella,” cri manfr imperiously; “I want isabella.” 

“mi lord,” repli matilda, who perceiv how much hi behaviour had 
shock her mother, “she ha not been with us sinc your high 
summon her to your apartment.” 

“tell me where she is,” said the prince; “I do not want to know where she 
ha been.” 

“mi good lord,” say hippolita, “your daughter tell you the truth: 
isabella left us by your command, and ha not return since;—but, my 
good lord, compos yourself: retir to your rest: thi dismal day ha 
disord you. isabella shall wait your order in the morning.” 

“what, then, you know where she is!” cri manfred. “tell me directly, 
for I will not lose an instant—and you, woman,” speak to hi wife, 
“order your chaplain to attend me forthwith.” 

“isabella,” said hippolita calmly, “i retired, I suppose, to her 
chamber: she is not accustom to watch at thi late hour. graciou my 
lord,” continu she, “let me know what ha disturb you. ha isabella 
offend you?” 

“troubl me not with questions,” said manfred, “but tell me where she 
is.” 

“matilda shall call her,” said the princess. “sit down, my lord, and 
resum your wont fortitude.” 

“what, art thou jealou of isabella?” repli he, “that you wish to be 
present at our interview!” 

“good heavens! my lord,” said hippolita, “what is it your high 
means?” 

“thou wilt know ere mani minut are passed,” said the cruel prince. 
“send your chaplain to me, and wait my pleasur here.” 

At these word he flung out of the room in search of isabella, leav 
the amaz ladi thunderstruck with hi word and frantic deportment, 
and lost in vain conjectur on what he wa meditating. 

manfr wa now return from the vault, attend by the peasant and a 
few of hi servant whom he had oblig to accompani him. He ascend 
the staircas without stop till he arriv at the gallery, at the 
door of which he met hippolita and her chaplain. when diego had been 
dismiss by manfred, he had gone directli to the princess’ apart 
with the alarm of what he had seen. that excel lady, who no more 
than manfr doubt of the realiti of the vision, yet affect to treat 
it as a delirium of the servant. willing, however, to save her lord from 
ani addit shock, and prepar by a seri of grief not to trembl 
at ani access to it, she determin to make herself the first 
sacrifice, if fate had mark the present hour for their destruction. 
dismiss the reluct matilda to her rest, who in vain su for leav 
to accompani her mother, and attend onli by her chaplain, hippolita had 
visit the galleri and great chamber; and now with more seren of soul 
than she had felt for mani hours, she met her lord, and assur him that 
the vision of the gigant leg and foot wa all a fable; and no doubt an 
impress made by fear, and the dark and dismal hour of the night, on 
the mind of hi servants. she and the chaplain had examin the 
chamber, and found everyth in the usual order. 

manfred, though persuaded, like hi wife, that the vision had been no 
work of fancy, recov a littl from the tempest of mind into which so 
mani strang event had thrown him. ashamed, too, of hi inhuman 
treatment of a princess who return everi injuri with new mark of 
tender and duty, he felt return love forc itself into hi eyes; 
but not less asham of feel remors toward one against whom he wa 
inwardli medit a yet more bitter outrage, he curb the yearn of 
hi heart, and did not dare to lean even toward pity. the next 
transit of hi soul wa to exquisit villainy. 

presum on the unshaken submiss of hippolita, he flatter himself 
that she would not onli acquiesc with patienc to a divorce, but would 
obey, if it wa hi pleasure, in endeavour to persuad isabella to 
give him her hand—but ere he could indulg hi horrid hope, he reflect 
that isabella wa not to be found. come to himself, he gave order 
that everi avenu to the castl should be strictli guarded, and charg 
hi domest on pain of their live to suffer nobodi to pass out. the 
young peasant, to whom he spoke favourably, he order to remain in a 
small chamber on the stairs, in which there wa a pallet-bed, and the key 
of which he took away himself, tell the youth he would talk with him 
in the morning. then dismiss hi attendants, and bestow a sullen 
kind of half-nod on hippolita, he retir to hi own chamber. 




chapter ii. 


matilda, who by hippolita’ order had retir to her apartment, wa 
ill-dispos to take ani rest. the shock fate of her brother had 
deepli affect her. she wa surpris at not see isabella; but the 
strang word which had fallen from her father, and hi obscur menac to 
the princess hi wife, accompani by the most furiou behaviour, had 
fill her gentl mind with terror and alarm. she wait anxious for 
the return of bianca, a young damsel that attend her, whom she had sent 
to learn what wa becom of isabella. bianca soon appeared, and inform 
her mistress of what she had gather from the servants, that isabella 
wa nowher to be found. she relat the adventur of the young peasant 
who had been discov in the vault, though with mani simpl addit 
from the incoher account of the domestics; and she dwelt princip 
on the gigant leg and foot which had been seen in the gallery-chamber. 
thi last circumst had terrifi bianca so much, that she wa 
rejoic when matilda told her that she would not go to rest, but would 
watch till the princess should rise. 

the young princess weari herself in conjectur on the flight of 
isabella, and on the threat of manfr to her mother. “but what 
busi could he have so urgent with the chaplain?” said matilda, “doe 
he intend to have my brother’ bodi inter privat in the chapel?” 

“oh, madam!” said bianca, “now I guess. As you are becom hi heiress, 
he is impati to have you married: he ha alway been rave for more 
sons; I warrant he is now impati for grandsons. As sure as I live, 
madam, I shall see you a bride at last.—good madam, you won’t cast off 
your faith bianca: you won’t put donna rosara over me now you are a 
great princess.” 

“mi poor bianca,” said matilda, “how fast your thought amble! I a great 
princess! what hast thou seen in manfred’ behaviour sinc my brother’ 
death that bespeak ani increas of tender to me? no, bianca; hi 
heart wa ever a stranger to me—but he is my father, and I must not 
complain. nay, if heaven shut my father’ heart against me, it overpay 
my littl merit in the tender of my mother—o that dear mother! yes, 
bianca, ’ti there I feel the rug temper of manfred. I can support 
hi harsh to me with patience; but it wound my soul when I am 
wit to hi causeless sever toward her.” 

“oh! madam,” said bianca, “all men use their wive so, when they are 
weari of them.” 

“and yet you congratul me but now,” said matilda, “when you fanci 
my father intend to dispos of me!” 

“I would have you a great lady,” repli bianca, “come what will. I do 
not wish to see you mope in a convent, as you would be if you had your 
will, and if my lady, your mother, who know that a bad husband is better 
than no husband at all, did not hinder you.—bless me! what nois is that! 
st. nichola forgiv me! I wa but in jest.” 

“it is the wind,” said matilda, “whistl through the battlement in the 
tower above: you have heard it a thousand times.” 

“nay,” said bianca, “there wa no harm neither in what I said: it is no 
sin to talk of matrimony—and so, madam, as I wa saying, if my lord 
manfr should offer you a handsom young princ for a bridegroom, you 
would drop him a curtsey, and tell him you would rather take the veil?” 

“thank heaven! I am in no such danger,” said matilda: “you know how mani 
propos for me he ha rejected—” 

“and you thank him, like a duti daughter, do you, madam? but come, 
madam; suppose, to-morrow morning, he wa to send for you to the great 
council chamber, and there you should find at hi elbow a love young 
prince, with larg black eyes, a smooth white forehead, and manli curl 
lock like jet; in short, madam, a young hero resembl the pictur of 
the good alfonso in the gallery, which you sit and gaze at for hour 
together—” 

“do not speak lightli of that picture,” interrupt matilda sighing; “I 
know the ador with which I look at that pictur is uncommon—but I am 
not in love with a colour panel. the charact of that virtuou 
prince, the vener with which my mother ha inspir me for hi 
memory, the orison which, I know not why, she ha enjoin me to pour 
forth at hi tomb, all have concur to persuad me that somehow or 
other my destini is link with someth relat to him.” 

“lord, madam! how should that be?” said bianca; “I have alway heard that 
your famili wa in no way relat to his: and I am sure I cannot conceiv 
whi my lady, the princess, send you in a cold morn or a damp even 
to pray at hi tomb: he is no saint by the almanack. If you must pray, 
whi doe she not bid you address yourself to our great st. nicholas? I 
am sure he is the saint I pray to for a husband.” 

“perhap my mind would be less affected,” said matilda, “if my mother 
would explain her reason to me: but it is the mysteri she observes, that 
inspir me with this—i know not what to call it. As she never act from 
caprice, I am sure there is some fatal secret at bottom—nay, I know there 
is: in her agoni of grief for my brother’ death she drop some word 
that intim as much.” 

“oh! dear madam,” cri bianca, “what were they?” 

“no,” said matilda, “if a parent let fall a word, and wish it 
recalled, it is not for a child to utter it.” 

“what! wa she sorri for what she had said?” ask bianca; “I am sure, 
madam, you may trust me—” 

“with my own littl secret when I have any, I may,” said matilda; “but 
never with my mother’s: a child ought to have no ear or eye but as a 
parent directs.” 

“well! to be sure, madam, you were born to be a saint,” said bianca, “and 
there is no resist one’ vocation: you will end in a convent at last. 
but there is my ladi isabella would not be so reserv to me: she will 
let me talk to her of young men: and when a handsom cavali ha come to 
the castle, she ha own to me that she wish your brother conrad 
resembl him.” 

“bianca,” said the princess, “I do not allow you to mention my friend 
disrespectfully. isabella is of a cheer disposition, but her soul is 
pure as virtu itself. she know your idl babbl humour, and perhap 
ha now and then encourag it, to divert melancholy, and enliven the 
solitud in which my father keep us—” 

“bless mary!” said bianca, starting, “there it is again! dear madam, 
do you hear nothing? thi castl is certainli haunted!” 

“peace!” said matilda, “and listen! I did think I heard a voice—but it 
must be fancy: your terrors, I suppose, have infect me.” 

“indeed! indeed! madam,” said bianca, half-weep with agony, “I am 
sure I heard a voice.” 

“doe anybodi lie in the chamber beneath?” said the princess. 

“nobodi ha dare to lie there,” answer bianca, “sinc the great 
astrologer, that wa your brother’ tutor, drown himself. for certain, 
madam, hi ghost and the young prince’ are now met in the chamber 
below—for heaven’ sake let us fli to your mother’ apartment!” 

“I charg you not to stir,” said matilda. “if they are spirit in pain, 
we may eas their suffer by question them. they can mean no hurt 
to us, for we have not injur them—and if they should, shall we be more 
safe in one chamber than in another? reach me my beads; we will say a 
prayer, and then speak to them.” 

“oh! dear lady, I would not speak to a ghost for the world!” cri 
bianca. As she said those word they heard the casement of the littl 
chamber below matilda’ open. they listen attentively, and in a few 
minut thought they heard a person sing, but could not distinguish the 
words. 

“thi can be no evil spirit,” said the princess, in a low voice; “it is 
undoubtedli one of the family—open the window, and we shall know the 
voice.” 

“I dare not, indeed, madam,” said bianca. 

“thou art a veri fool,” said matilda, open the window gentli herself. 
the nois the princess made was, however, heard by the person beneath, 
who stopped; and they conclud had heard the casement open. 

“i anybodi below?” said the princess; “if there is, speak.” 

“yes,” said an unknown voice. 

“who is it?” said matilda. 

“A stranger,” repli the voice. 

“what stranger?” said she; “and how didst thou come there at thi unusu 
hour, when all the gate of the castl are locked?” 

“I am not here willingly,” answer the voice. “but pardon me, lady, if 
I have disturb your rest; I knew not that I wa overheard. sleep had 
forsaken me; I left a restless couch, and came to wast the irksom hour 
with gaze on the fair approach of morning, impati to be dismiss 
from thi castle.” 

“thi word and accents,” said matilda, “are of melancholi cast; if thou 
art unhappy, I piti thee. If poverti afflict thee, let me know it; I 
will mention thee to the princess, whose benefic soul ever melt for 
the distressed, and she will reliev thee.” 

“I am inde unhappy,” said the stranger; “and I know not what wealth is. 
but I do not complain of the lot which heaven ha cast for me; I am young 
and healthy, and am not asham of owe my support to myself—yet think 
me not proud, or that I disdain your gener offers. I will rememb 
you in my orisons, and will pray for bless on your graciou self and 
your nobl mistress—if I sigh, lady, it is for others, not for myself.” 

“now I have it, madam,” said bianca, whisper the princess; “thi is 
certainli the young peasant; and, by my conscience, he is in love—well! 
thi is a charm adventure!—do, madam, let us sift him. He doe not 
know you, but take you for one of my ladi hippolita’ women.” 

“art thou not ashamed, bianca!” said the princess. “what right have we 
to pri into the secret of thi young man’ heart? He seem virtuou and 
frank, and tell us he is unhappy. are those circumst that 
authoris us to make a properti of him? how are we entitl to hi 
confidence?” 

“lord, madam! how littl you know of love!” repli bianca; “why, lover 
have no pleasur equal to talk of their mistress.” 

“and would you have _me_ becom a peasant’ confidante?” said the 
princess. 

“well, then, let me talk to him,” said bianca; “though I have the honour 
of be your highness’ maid of honour, I wa not alway so great. 
besides, if love level ranks, it rais them too; I have a respect for 
ani young man in love.” 

“peace, simpleton!” said the princess. “though he said he wa unhappy, 
it doe not follow that he must be in love. think of all that ha 
happen to-day, and tell me if there are no misfortun but what love 
causes.—stranger,” resum the princess, “if thi misfortun have not 
been occas by thi own fault, and are within the compass of the 
princess hippolita’ power to redress, I will take upon me to answer that 
she will be thi protectress. when thou art dismiss from thi castle, 
repair to holi father jerome, at the convent adjoin to the church of 
st. nicholas, and make thi stori known to him, as far as thou thinkest 
meet. He will not fail to inform the princess, who is the mother of all 
that want her assistance. farewell; it is not seemli for me to hold 
farther convers with a man at thi unwont hour.” 

“may the saint guard thee, graciou lady!” repli the peasant; “but oh! 
if a poor and worthless stranger might presum to beg a minute’ audienc 
farther; am I so happy? the casement is not shut; might I ventur to 
ask—” 

“speak quickly,” said matilda; “the morn dawn apace: should the 
labour come into the field and perceiv us—what wouldst thou ask?” 

“I know not how, I know not if I dare,” said the young stranger, 
faltering; “yet the human with which you have spoken to me 
emboldens—lady! dare I trust you?” 

“heavens!” said matilda, “what dost thou mean? with what wouldst thou 
trust me? speak boldly, if thi secret is fit to be entrust to a 
virtuou breast.” 

“I would ask,” said the peasant, recollect himself, “whether what I 
have heard from the domest is true, that the princess is miss from 
the castle?” 

“what import it to thee to know?” repli matilda. “thi first word 
bespok a prudent and becom gravity. dost thou come hither to pri 
into the secret of manfred? adieu. I have been mistaken in thee.” 
say these word she shut the casement hastily, without give the 
young man time to reply. 

“I had act more wisely,” said the princess to bianca, with some 
sharpness, “if I had let thee convers with thi peasant; hi 
inquisit seem of a piec with thi own.” 

“it is not fit for me to argu with your highness,” repli bianca; “but 
perhap the question I should have put to him would have been more to 
the purpos than those you have been pleas to ask him.” 

“oh! no doubt,” said matilda; “you are a veri discreet personage! may I 
know what _you_ would have ask him?” 

“A bystand often see more of the game than those that play,” answer 
bianca. “doe your high think, madam, that thi question about my 
ladi isabella wa the result of mere curiosity? no, no, madam, there is 
more in it than you great folk are awar of. lopez told me that all the 
servant believ thi young fellow contriv my ladi isabella’ escape; 
now, pray, madam, observ you and I both know that my ladi isabella never 
much fanci the princ your brother. well! he is kill just in a 
critic minute—i accus nobody. A helmet fall from the moon—so, my 
lord, your father says; but lopez and all the servant say that thi 
young spark is a magician, and stole it from alfonso’ tomb—” 

“have done with thi rhapsodi of impertinence,” said matilda. 

“nay, madam, as you please,” cri bianca; “yet it is veri particular 
though, that my ladi isabella should be miss the veri same day, and 
that thi young sorcer should be found at the mouth of the trap-door. 
I accus nobody; but if my young lord came honestli by hi death—” 

“dare not on thi duty,” said matilda, “to breath a suspicion on the 
puriti of my dear isabella’ fame.” 

“purity, or not purity,” said bianca, “gone she is—a stranger is found 
that nobodi knows; you question him yourself; he tell you he is in love, 
or unhappy, it is the same thing—nay, he own he wa unhappi about 
others; and is anybodi unhappi about another, unless they are in love 
with them? and at the veri next word, he ask innocently, pour soul! if 
my ladi isabella is missing.” 

“to be sure,” said matilda, “thi observ are not total without 
foundation—isabella’ flight amaz me. the curios of the stranger is 
veri particular; yet isabella never conceal a thought from me.” 

“so she told you,” said bianca, “to fish out your secrets; but who knows, 
madam, but thi stranger may be some princ in disguise? do, madam, let 
me open the window, and ask him a few questions.” 

“no,” repli matilda, “I will ask him myself, if he know aught of 
isabella; he is not worthi I should convers farther with him.” she wa 
go to open the casement, when they heard the bell ring at the 
postern-g of the castle, which is on the right hand of the tower, 
where matilda lay. thi prevent the princess from renew the 
convers with the stranger. 

after continu silent for some time, “I am persuaded,” said she to 
bianca, “that whatev be the caus of isabella’ flight it had no 
unworthi motive. If thi stranger wa accessori to it, she must be 
satisfi with hi fidel and worth. I observed, did not you, bianca? 
that hi word were tinctur with an uncommon infus of piety. It wa 
no ruffian’ speech; hi phrase were becom a man of gentl birth.” 

“I told you, madam,” said bianca, “that I wa sure he wa some princ in 
disguise.” 

“yet,” said matilda, “if he wa privi to her escape, how will you account 
for hi not accompani her in her flight? whi expos himself 
unnecessarili and rashli to my father’ resentment?” 

“a for that, madam,” repli she, “if he could get from under the 
helmet, he will find way of elud your father’ anger. I do not doubt 
but he ha some talisman or other about him.” 

“you resolv everyth into magic,” said matilda; “but a man who ha ani 
intercours with infern spirits, doe not dare to make use of those 
tremend and holi word which he uttered. didst thou not observ with 
what fervour he vow to rememb _me_ to heaven in hi prayers? yes; 
isabella wa undoubtedli convinc of hi piety.” 

“commend me to the pieti of a young fellow and a damsel that consult to 
elope!” said bianca. “no, no, madam, my ladi isabella is of anoth 
guess mould than you take her for. she use inde to sigh and lift up 
her eye in your company, becaus she know you are a saint; but when 
your back wa turned—” 

“you wrong her,” said matilda; “isabella is no hypocrite; she ha a due 
sens of devotion, but never affect a call she ha not. On the 
contrary, she alway combat my inclin for the cloister; and though 
I own the mysteri she ha made to me of her flight confound me; though 
it seem inconsist with the friendship between us; I cannot forget the 
disinterest warmth with which she alway oppos my take the veil. 
she wish to see me married, though my dower would have been a loss to 
her and my brother’ children. for her sake I will believ well of thi 
young peasant.” 

“then you do think there is some like between them,” said bianca. 
while she wa speaking, a servant came hastili into the chamber and told 
the princess that the ladi isabella wa found. 

“where?” said matilda. 

“she ha taken sanctuari in st. nicholas’ church,” repli the servant; 
“father jerom ha brought the news himself; he is below with hi 
highness.” 

“where is my mother?” said matilda. 

“she is in her own chamber, madam, and ha ask for you.” 

manfr had risen at the first dawn of light, and gone to hippolita’ 
apartment, to inquir if she knew aught of isabella. while he wa 
question her, word wa brought that jerom demand to speak with him. 
manfred, littl suspect the caus of the friar’ arrival, and know 
he wa employ by hippolita in her charities, order him to be 
admitted, intend to leav them together, while he pursu hi search 
after isabella. 

“i your busi with me or the princess?” said manfred. 

“with both,” repli the holi man. “the ladi isabella—” 

“what of her?” interrupt manfred, eagerly. 

“i at st. nicholas’ altar,” repli jerome. 

“that is no busi of hippolita,” said manfr with confusion; “let us 
retir to my chamber, father, and inform me how she came thither.” 

“no, my lord,” repli the good man, with an air of firm and 
authority, that daunt even the resolut manfred, who could not help 
rever the saint-lik virtu of jerome; “mi commiss is to both, and 
with your highness’ good-liking, in the presenc of both I shall deliv 
it; but first, my lord, I must interrog the princess, whether she is 
acquaint with the caus of the ladi isabella’ retir from your 
castle.” 

“no, on my soul,” said hippolita; “doe isabella charg me with be 
privi to it?” 

“father,” interrupt manfred, “I pay due rever to your holi 
profession; but I am sovereign here, and will allow no meddl priest to 
interfer in the affair of my domestic. If you have aught to say attend 
me to my chamber; I do not use to let my wife be acquaint with the 
secret affair of my state; they are not within a woman’ province.” 

“mi lord,” said the holi man, “I am no intrud into the secret of 
families. My offic is to promot peace, to heal divisions, to preach 
repentance, and teach mankind to curb their headstrong passions. I 
forgiv your highness’ uncharit apostrophe; I know my duty, and am 
the minist of a mightier princ than manfred. hearken to him who 
speak through my organs.” 

manfr trembl with rage and shame. hippolita’ counten declar 
her astonish and impati to know where thi would end. her 
silenc more strongli spoke her observ of manfred. 

“the ladi isabella,” resum jerome, “commend herself to both your 
highnesses; she thank both for the kind with which she ha been 
treat in your castle: she deplor the loss of your son, and her own 
misfortun in not becom the daughter of such wise and nobl princes, 
whom she shall alway respect as parents; she pray for uninterrupt 
union and felic between you” [manfred’ colour changed]: “but as it is 
no longer possibl for her to be alli to you, she entreat your consent 
to remain in sanctuary, till she can learn news of her father, or, by the 
certainti of hi death, be at liberty, with the approb of her 
guardians, to dispos of herself in suitabl marriage.” 

“I shall give no such consent,” said the prince, “but insist on her 
return to the castl without delay: I am answer for her person to her 
guardians, and will not brook her be in ani hand but my own.” 

“your high will recollect whether that can ani longer be proper,” 
repli the friar. 

“I want no monitor,” said manfred, colouring; “isabella’ conduct leav 
room for strang suspicions—and that young villain, who wa at least the 
accomplic of her flight, if not the caus of it—” 

“the cause!” interrupt jerome; “wa a _young_ man the cause?” 

“thi is not to be borne!” cri manfred. “am I to be beard in my own 
palac by an insol monk? thou art privy, I guess, to their amours.” 

“I would pray to heaven to clear up your uncharit surmises,” said 
jerome, “if your high were not satisfi in your conscienc how 
unjustli you accus me. I do pray to heaven to pardon that 
uncharitableness: and I implor your high to leav the princess at 
peac in that holi place, where she is not liabl to be disturb by such 
vain and worldli fantasi as discours of love from ani man.” 

“cant not to me,” said manfred, “but return and bring the princess to her 
duty.” 

“it is my duti to prevent her return hither,” said jerome. “she is where 
orphan and virgin are safest from the snare and wile of thi world; 
and noth but a parent’ author shall take her thence.” 

“I am her parent,” cri manfred, “and demand her.” 

“she wish to have you for her parent,” said the friar; “but heaven that 
forbad that connect ha for ever dissolv all tie betwixt you: and I 
announc to your highness—” 

“stop! audaci man,” said manfred, “and dread my displeasure.” 

“holi father,” said hippolita, “it is your offic to be no respect of 
persons: you must speak as your duti prescribes: but it is my duti to 
hear noth that it pleas not my lord I should hear. attend the 
princ to hi chamber. I will retir to my oratory, and pray to the 
bless virgin to inspir you with her holi counsels, and to restor the 
heart of my graciou lord to it wont peac and gentleness.” 

“excel woman!” said the friar. “mi lord, I attend your pleasure.” 

manfred, accompani by the friar, pass to hi own apartment, where 
shut the door, “I perceive, father,” said he, “that isabella ha 
acquaint you with my purpose. now hear my resolve, and obey. reason 
of state, most urgent reasons, my own and the safeti of my people, demand 
that I should have a son. It is in vain to expect an heir from 
hippolita. I have made choic of isabella. you must bring her back; and 
you must do more. I know the influenc you have with hippolita: her 
conscienc is in your hands. she is, I allow, a faultless woman: her 
soul is set on heaven, and scorn the littl grandeur of thi world: you 
can withdraw her from it entirely. persuad her to consent to the 
dissolut of our marriage, and to retir into a monastery—sh shall 
endow one if she will; and she shall have the mean of be as liber 
to your order as she or you can wish. thu you will divert the 
calam that are hang over our heads, and have the merit of say 
the princip of otranto from destruction. you are a prudent man, and 
though the warmth of my temper betray me into some unbecom 
expressions, I honour your virtue, and wish to be indebt to you for the 
repos of my life and the preserv of my family.” 

“the will of heaven be done!” said the friar. “I am but it worthless 
instrument. It make use of my tongu to tell thee, prince, of thi 
unwarrant designs. the injuri of the virtuou hippolita have 
mount to the throne of pity. By me thou art reprimand for thi 
adulter intent of repudi her: by me thou art warn not to 
pursu the incestu design on thi contract daughter. heaven that 
deliv her from thi fury, when the judgment so recent fallen on thi 
hous ought to have inspir thee with other thoughts, will continu to 
watch over her. even I, a poor and despis friar, am abl to protect 
her from thi violence—i, sinner as I am, and uncharit revil by your 
high as an accomplic of I know not what amours, scorn the 
allur with which it ha pleas thee to tempt mine honesty. I love 
my order; I honour devout souls; I respect the pieti of thi princess—but 
I will not betray the confid she repos in me, nor serv even the 
caus of religion by foul and sin compliances—but forsooth! the 
welfar of the state depend on your high have a son! heaven mock 
the short-sight view of man. but yester-morn, whose hous wa so 
great, so flourish as manfred’s?—wher is young conrad now?—mi lord, I 
respect your tears—but I mean not to check them—let them flow, prince! 
they will weigh more with heaven toward the welfar of thi subjects, than 
a marriage, which, found on lust or policy, could never prosper. the 
sceptre, which pass from the race of alfonso to thine, cannot be 
preserv by a match which the church will never allow. If it is the 
will of the most high that manfred’ name must perish, resign yourself, 
my lord, to it decrees; and thu deserv a crown that can never pass 
away. come, my lord; I like thi sorrow—let us return to the princess: 
she is not appris of your cruel intentions; nor did I mean more than to 
alarm you. you saw with what gentl patience, with what effort of love, 
she heard, she reject hearing, the extent of your guilt. I know she 
long to fold you in her arms, and assur you of her unalter 
affection.” 

“father,” said the prince, “you mistak my compunction: true, I honour 
hippolita’ virtues; I think her a saint; and wish it were for my soul’ 
health to tie faster the knot that ha unit us—but alas! father, you 
know not the bitterest of my pangs! it is some time that I have had 
scrupl on the legal of our union: hippolita is relat to me in the 
fourth degree—it is true, we had a dispensation: but I have been inform 
that she had also been contract to another. thi it is that sit heavi 
at my heart: to thi state of unlaw wedlock I imput the visit 
that ha fallen on me in the death of conrad!—eas my conscienc of thi 
burden: dissolv our marriage, and accomplish the work of godliness—which 
your divin exhort have commenc in my soul.” 

how cut wa the anguish which the good man felt, when he perceiv 
thi turn in the wili prince! He trembl for hippolita, whose ruin he 
saw wa determined; and he fear if manfr had no hope of recov 
isabella, that hi impati for a son would direct him to some other 
object, who might not be equal proof against the temptat of 
manfred’ rank. for some time the holi man remain absorb in thought. 
At length, conceiv some hope from delay, he thought the wisest 
conduct would be to prevent the princ from despair of recov 
isabella. her the friar knew he could dispose, from her affect to 
hippolita, and from the avers she had express to him for manfred’ 
addresses, to second hi views, till the censur of the church could be 
fulmin against a divorce. with thi intention, as if struck with the 
prince’ scruples, he at length said: 

“mi lord, I have been ponder on what your high ha said; and if in 
truth it is delicaci of conscienc that is the real motiv of your 
repugn to your virtuou lady, far be it from me to endeavour to 
harden your heart. the church is an indulg mother: unfold your grief 
to her: she alon can administ comfort to your soul, either by 
satisfi your conscience, or upon examin of your scruples, by 
set you at liberty, and indulg you in the law mean of 
continu your lineage. In the latter case, if the ladi isabella can be 
brought to consent—” 

manfred, who conclud that he had either over-reach the good man, or 
that hi first warmth had been but a tribut paid to appearance, wa 
overjoy at thi sudden turn, and repeat the most magnific 
promises, if he should succeed by the friar’ mediation. the 
well-mean priest suffer him to deceiv himself, fulli determin to 
travers hi views, instead of second them. 

“sinc we now understand one another,” resum the prince, “I expect, 
father, that you satisfi me in one point. who is the youth that I found 
in the vault? He must have been privi to isabella’ flight: tell me 
truly, is he her lover? or is he an agent for another’ passion? I have 
often suspect isabella’ indiffer to my son: a thousand 
circumst crowd on my mind that confirm that suspicion. she herself 
wa so consciou of it, that while I discours her in the gallery, she 
outran my suspicious, and endeavour to justifi herself from cool to 
conrad.” 

the friar, who knew noth of the youth, but what he had learnt 
occasion from the princess, ignor what wa becom of him, and not 
suffici reflect on the impetuos of manfred’ temper, conceiv 
that it might not be amiss to sow the seed of jealousi in hi mind: they 
might be turn to some use hereafter, either by prejud the princ 
against isabella, if he persist in that union or by divert hi 
attent to a wrong scent, and employ hi thought on a visionari 
intrigue, prevent hi engag in ani new pursuit. with thi unhappi 
policy, he answer in a manner to confirm manfr in the belief of some 
connect between isabella and the youth. the prince, whose passion 
want littl fuel to throw them into a blaze, fell into a rage at the 
idea of what the friar suggested. 

“I will fathom to the bottom of thi intrigue,” cri he; and quit 
jerom abruptly, with a command to remain there till hi return, he 
hasten to the great hall of the castle, and order the peasant to be 
brought befor him. 

“thou harden young impostor!” said the prince, as soon as he saw the 
youth; “what becom of thi boast verac now? it wa providence, wa 
it, and the light of the moon, that discov the lock of the trap-door 
to thee? tell me, audaci boy, who thou art, and how long thou hast 
been acquaint with the princess—and take care to answer with less 
equivoc than thou didst last night, or tortur shall wring the 
truth from thee.” 

the young man, perceiv that hi share in the flight of the princess 
wa discovered, and conclud that anyth he should say could no 
longer be of ani servic or detriment to her, replied— 

“I am no impostor, my lord, nor have I deserv opprobri language. I 
answer to everi question your high put to me last night with the 
same verac that I shall speak now: and that will not be from fear of 
your tortures, but becaus my soul abhor a falsehood. pleas to repeat 
your questions, my lord; I am readi to give you all the satisfact in 
my power.” 

“you know my questions,” repli the prince, “and onli want time to 
prepar an evasion. speak directly; who art thou? and how long hast thou 
been known to the princess?” 

“I am a labour at the next village,” said the peasant; “mi name is 
theodore. the princess found me in the vault last night: befor that 
hour I never wa in her presence.” 

“I may believ as much or as littl as I pleas of this,” said manfred; 
“but I will hear thi own stori befor I examin into the truth of it. 
tell me, what reason did the princess give thee for make her escape? 
thi life depend on thi answer.” 

“she told me,” repli theodore, “that she wa on the brink of 
destruction, and that if she could not escap from the castle, she wa in 
danger in a few moment of be made miser for ever.” 

“and on thi slight foundation, on a silli girl’ report,” said manfred, 
“thou didst hazard my displeasure?” 

“I fear no man’ displeasure,” said theodore, “when a woman in distress 
put herself under my protection.” 

dure thi examination, matilda wa go to the apart of hippolita. 
At the upper end of the hall, where manfr sat, wa a board galleri 
with lattic windows, through which matilda and bianca were to pass. 
hear her father’ voice, and see the servant assembl round him, 
she stop to learn the occasion. the prison soon drew her attention: 
the steadi and compos manner in which he answered, and the gallantri of 
hi last reply, which were the first word she heard distinctly, 
interest her in hi flavour. hi person wa noble, handsome, and 
commanding, even in that situation: but hi counten soon engross 
her whole care. 

“heavens! bianca,” said the princess softly, “do I dream? or is not that 
youth the exact resembl of alfonso’ pictur in the gallery?” 

she could say no more, for her father’ voic grew louder at everi word. 

“thi bravado,” said he, “surpass all thi former insolence. thou shalt 
experi the wrath with which thou darest to trifle. seiz him,” 
continu manfred, “and bind him—th first news the princess hear of her 
champion shall be, that he ha lost hi head for her sake.” 

“the injustic of which thou art guilti toward me,” said theodore, 
“convinc me that I have done a good deed in deliv the princess 
from thi tyranny. may she be happy, whatev becom of me!” 

“thi is a lover!” cri manfr in a rage: “a peasant within sight of 
death is not anim by such sentiments. tell me, tell me, rash boy, 
who thou art, or the rack shall forc thi secret from thee.” 

“thou hast threaten me with death already,” said the youth, “for the 
truth I have told thee: if that is all the encourag I am to expect 
for sincerity, I am not tempt to indulg thi vain curios farther.” 

“then thou wilt not speak?” said manfred. 

“I will not,” repli he. 

“bear him away into the courtyard,” said manfred; “I will see hi head 
thi instant sever from hi body.” 

matilda faint at hear those words. bianca shrieked, and cried— 

“help! help! the princess is dead!” manfr start at thi ejaculation, 
and demand what wa the matter! the young peasant, who heard it too, 
wa struck with horror, and ask eagerli the same question; but manfr 
order him to be hurri into the court, and kept there for execution, 
till he had inform himself of the caus of bianca’ shrieks. when he 
learn the meaning, he treat it as a womanish panic, and order 
matilda to be carri to her apartment, he rush into the court, and 
call for one of hi guards, bade theodor kneel down, and prepar to 
receiv the fatal blow. 

the undaunt youth receiv the bitter sentenc with a resign that 
touch everi heart but manfred’s. He wish earnestli to know the 
mean of the word he had heard relat to the princess; but fear 
to exasper the tyrant more against her, he desisted. the onli boon he 
deign to ask was, that he might be permit to have a confessor, and 
make hi peac with heaven. manfred, who hope by the confessor’ mean 
to come at the youth’ history, readili grant hi request; and be 
convinc that father jerom wa now in hi interest, he order him to 
be call and shrive the prisoner. the holi man, who had littl foreseen 
the catastroph that hi imprud occasioned, fell on hi knee to the 
prince, and adjur him in the most solemn manner not to shed innoc 
blood. He accus himself in the bitterest term for hi indiscretion, 
endeavour to disculp the youth, and left no method untri to soften 
the tyrant’ rage. manfred, more incens than appeas by jerome’ 
intercession, whose retract now made him suspect he had been impos 
upon by both, command the friar to do hi duty, tell him he would 
not allow the prison mani minut for confession. 

“nor do I ask many, my lord,” said the unhappi young man. “mi sins, 
thank heaven, have not been numerous; nor exceed what might be expect 
at my years. dri your tears, good father, and let us despatch. thi is 
a bad world; nor have I had caus to leav it with regret.” 

“oh wretch youth!” said jerome; “how canst thou bear the sight of me 
with patience? I am thi murderer! it is I have brought thi dismal hour 
upon thee!” 

“I forgiv thee from my soul,” said the youth, “a I hope heaven will 
pardon me. hear my confession, father; and give me thi blessing.” 

“how can I prepar thee for thi passag as I ought?” said jerome. “thou 
canst not be save without pardon thi foes—and canst thou forgiv that 
impiou man there?” 

“I can,” said theodore; “I do.” 

“and doe not thi touch thee, cruel prince?” said the friar. 

“I sent for thee to confess him,” said manfred, sternly; “not to plead 
for him. thou didst first incens me against him—hi blood be upon thi 
head!” 

“it will! it will!” said the good man, in an agoni of sorrow. “thou and 
I must never hope to go where thi bless youth is going!” 

“despatch!” said manfred; “I am no more to be move by the whine of 
priest than by the shriek of women.” 

“what!” said the youth; “i it possibl that my fate could have 
occas what I heard! Is the princess then again in thi power?” 

“thou dost but rememb me of my wrath,” said manfred. “prepar thee, 
for thi moment is thi last.” 

the youth, who felt hi indign rise, and who wa touch with the 
sorrow which he saw he had infus into all the spectators, as well as 
into the friar, suppress hi emotions, and put off hi doublet, and 
unbuttoning, hi collar, knelt down to hi prayers. As he stooped, hi 
shirt slip down below hi shoulder, and discov the mark of a 
bloodi arrow. 

“graciou heaven!” cri the holi man, starting; “what do I see? It is 
my child! my theodore!” 

the passion that ensu must be conceived; they cannot be painted. the 
tear of the assist were suspend by wonder, rather than stop by 
joy. they seem to inquir in the eye of their lord what they ought to 
feel. surprise, doubt, tenderness, respect, succeed each other in the 
counten of the youth. He receiv with modest submiss the 
effus of the old man’ tear and embraces. yet afraid of give a 
loos to hope, and suspect from what had pass the inflex of 
manfred’ temper, he cast a glanc toward the prince, as if to say, 
canst thou be unmov at such a scene as this? 

manfred’ heart wa capabl of be touched. He forgot hi anger in hi 
astonishment; yet hi pride forbad hi own himself affected. He even 
doubt whether thi discoveri wa not a contriv of the friar to save 
the youth. 

“what may thi mean?” said he. “how can he be thi son? Is it consist 
with thi profess or reput sanctiti to avow a peasant’ offspr for 
the fruit of thi irregular amours!” 

“oh, god!” said the holi man, “dost thou question hi be mine? could 
I feel the anguish I do if I were not hi father? spare him! good 
prince! spare him! and revil me as thou pleasest.” 

“spare him! spare him!” cri the attendants; “for thi good man’ sake!” 

“peace!” said manfred, sternly. “I must know more ere I am dispos to 
pardon. A saint’ bastard may be no saint himself.” 

“injuri lord!” said theodore, “add not insult to cruelty. If I am 
thi vener man’ son, though no prince, as thou art, know the blood 
that flow in my veins—” 

“yes,” said the friar, interrupt him, “hi blood is noble; nor is he 
that abject thing, my lord, you speak him. He is my law son, and 
sicili can boast of few hous more ancient than that of falconara. but 
alas! my lord, what is blood! what is nobility! We are all reptiles, 
miserable, sin creatures. It is pieti alon that can distinguish us 
from the dust whenc we sprung, and whither we must return.” 

“truce to your sermon,” said manfred; “you forget you are no longer friar 
jerome, but the count of falconara. let me know your history; you will 
have time to moralis hereafter, if you should not happen to obtain the 
grace of that sturdi crimin there.” 

“mother of god!” said the friar, “i it possibl my lord can refus a 
father the life of hi only, hi long-lost, child! trampl me, my lord, 
scorn, afflict me, accept my life for his, but spare my son!” 

“thou canst feel, then,” said manfred, “what it is to lose an onli son! 
A littl hour ago thou didst preach up resign to me: _my_ house, if 
fate so pleased, must perish—but the count of falconara—” 

“alas! my lord,” said jerome, “I confess I have offended; but aggrav 
not an old man’ sufferings! I boast not of my family, nor think of such 
vanities—it is nature, that plead for thi boy; it is the memori of the 
dear woman that bore him. Is she, theodore, is she dead?” 

“her soul ha long been with the blessed,” said theodore. 

“oh! how?” cri jerome, “tell me—no—sh is happy! thou art all my care 
now!—most dread lord! will you—wil you grant me my poor boy’ life?” 

“return to thi convent,” answer manfred; “conduct the princess hither; 
obey me in what els thou knowest; and I promis thee the life of thi 
son.” 

“oh! my lord,” said jerome, “i my honesti the price I must pay for thi 
dear youth’ safety?” 

“for me!” cri theodore. “let me die a thousand deaths, rather than 
stain thi conscience. what is it the tyrant would exact of thee? Is the 
princess still safe from hi power? protect her, thou vener old man; 
and let all the weight of hi wrath fall on me.” 

jerom endeavour to check the impetuos of the youth; and ere manfr 
could reply, the trampl of hors wa heard, and a brazen trumpet, 
which hung without the gate of the castle, wa suddenli sounded. At the 
same instant the sabl plume on the enchant helmet, which still 
remain at the other end of the court, were tempestu agitated, and 
nod thrice, as if bow by some invis wearer. 




chapter iii. 


manfred’ heart misgav him when he beheld the plumag on the miracul 
casqu shaken in concert with the sound of the brazen trumpet. 

“father!” said he to jerome, whom he now ceas to treat as count of 
falconara, “what mean these portents? If I have offended—” the plume 
were shaken with greater violenc than before. 

“unhappi princ that I am,” cri manfred. “holi father! will you not 
assist me with your prayers?” 

“mi lord,” repli jerome, “heaven is no doubt displeas with your 
mockeri of it servants. submit yourself to the church; and ceas to 
persecut her ministers. dismiss thi innoc youth; and learn to 
respect the holi charact I wear. heaven will not be trifl with: you 
see—” the trumpet sound again. 

“I acknowledg I have been too hasty,” said manfred. “father, do you go 
to the wicket, and demand who is at the gate.” 

“do you grant me the life of theodore?” repli the friar. 

“I do,” said manfred; “but inquir who is without!” 

jerome, fall on the neck of hi son, discharg a flood of tears, that 
spoke the ful of hi soul. 

“you promis to go to the gate,” said manfred. 

“I thought,” repli the friar, “your high would excus my thank 
you first in thi tribut of my heart.” 

“go, dearest sir,” said theodore; “obey the prince. I do not deserv 
that you should delay hi satisfact for me.” 

jerome, inquir who wa without, wa answered, “A herald.” 

“from whom?” said he. 

“from the knight of the gigant sabre,” said the herald; “and I must 
speak with the usurp of otranto.” 

jerom return to the prince, and did not fail to repeat the messag in 
the veri word it had been uttered. the first sound struck manfr with 
terror; but when he heard himself style usurper, hi rage rekindled, and 
all hi courag revived. 

“usurper!—insol villain!” cri he; “who dare to question my title? 
retire, father; thi is no busi for monks: I will meet thi 
presumptu man myself. Go to your convent and prepar the princess’ 
return. your son shall be a hostag for your fidelity: hi life depend 
on your obedience.” 

“good heaven! my lord,” cri jerome, “your high did but thi instant 
freeli pardon my child—hav you so soon forgot the interposit of 
heaven?” 

“heaven,” repli manfred, “doe not send herald to question the titl 
of a law prince. I doubt whether it even notifi it will through 
friars—but that is your affair, not mine. At present you know my 
pleasure; and it is not a sauci herald that shall save your son, if you 
do not return with the princess.” 

It wa in vain for the holi man to reply. manfr command him to be 
conduct to the postern-gate, and shut out from the castle. and he 
order some of hi attend to carri theodor to the top of the black 
tower, and guard him strictly; scarc permit the father and son to 
exchang a hasti embrac at parting. He then withdrew to the hall, and 
seat himself in princ state, order the herald to be admit to 
hi presence. 

“well! thou insolent!” said the prince, “what wouldst thou with me?” 

“I come,” repli he, “to thee, manfred, usurp of the princip of 
otranto, from the renown and invinc knight, the knight of the 
gigant sabre: in the name of hi lord, frederic, marqui of vicenza, he 
demand the ladi isabella, daughter of that prince, whom thou hast base 
and traitor got into thi power, by bribe her fals guardian 
dure hi absence; and he requir thee to resign the princip of 
otranto, which thou hast usurp from the said lord frederic, the nearest 
of blood to the last right lord, alfonso the good. If thou dost not 
instantli compli with these just demands, he defi thee to singl combat 
to the last extremity.” and so say the herald cast down hi warder. 

“and where is thi braggart who send thee?” said manfred. 

“at the distanc of a league,” said the herald: “he come to make good 
hi lord’ claim against thee, as he is a true knight, and thou an 
usurp and ravisher.” 

injuri as thi challeng was, manfr reflect that it wa not hi 
interest to provok the marquis. He knew how well found the claim of 
freder was; nor wa thi the first time he had heard of it. frederic’ 
ancestor had assum the style of princ of otranto, from the death of 
alfonso the good without issue; but manfred, hi father, and grandfather, 
had been too power for the hous of vicenza to dispossess them. 
frederic, a martial and amor young prince, had marri a beauti 
young lady, of whom he wa enamoured, and who had die in childb of 
isabella. her death affect him so much that he had taken the cross and 
gone to the holi land, where he wa wound in an engag against the 
infidels, made prisoner, and report to be dead. when the news reach 
manfred’ ears, he bribe the guardian of the ladi isabella to deliv 
her up to him as a bride for hi son conrad, by which allianc he had 
propos to unit the claim of the two houses. thi motive, on conrad’ 
death, had co-oper to make him so suddenli resolv on espous her 
himself; and the same reflect determin him now to endeavour at 
obtain the consent of freder to thi marriage. A like polici 
inspir him with the thought of invit frederic’ champion into the 
castle, lest he should be inform of isabella’ flight, which he 
strictli enjoin hi domest not to disclos to ani of the knight’ 
retinue. 

“herald,” said manfred, as soon as he had digest these reflections, 
“return to thi master, and tell him, ere we liquid our differ by 
the sword, manfr would hold some convers with him. bid him welcom to 
my castle, where by my faith, as I am a true knight, he shall have 
courteou reception, and full secur for himself and followers. If we 
cannot adjust our quarrel by amic means, I swear he shall depart in 
safety, and shall have full satisfact accord to the law of arms: 
So help me god and hi holi trinity!” 

the herald made three obeis and retired. 

dure thi interview jerome’ mind wa agit by a thousand contrari 
passions. He trembl for the life of hi son, and hi first thought wa 
to persuad isabella to return to the castle. yet he wa scarc less 
alarm at the thought of her union with manfred. He dread hippolita’ 
unbound submiss to the will of her lord; and though he did not doubt 
but he could alarm her pieti not to consent to a divorce, if he could get 
access to her; yet should manfr discov that the obstruct came from 
him, it might be equal fatal to theodore. He wa impati to know 
whenc came the herald, who with so littl manag had question the 
titl of manfred: yet he did not dare absent himself from the convent, 
lest isabella should leav it, and her flight be imput to him. He 
return disconsol to the monastery, uncertain on what conduct to 
resolve. A monk, who met him in the porch and observ hi melancholi 
air, said— 

“alas! brother, is it then true that we have lost our excel princess 
hippolita?” 

the holi man started, and cried, “what meanest thou, brother? I come 
thi instant from the castle, and left her in perfect health.” 

“martelli,” repli the other friar, “pass by the convent but a quarter 
of an hour ago on hi way from the castle, and report that her high 
wa dead. all our brethren are gone to the chapel to pray for her happi 
transit to a better life, and will me to wait thi arrival. they know 
thi holi attach to that good lady, and are anxiou for the afflict 
it will caus in thee—inde we have all reason to weep; she wa a mother 
to our house. but thi life is but a pilgrimage; we must not murmur—w 
shall all follow her! may our end be like hers!” 

“good brother, thou dreamest,” said jerome. “I tell thee I come from the 
castle, and left the princess well. where is the ladi isabella?” 

“poor gentlewoman!” repli the friar; “I told her the sad news, and 
offer her spiritu comfort. I remind her of the transitori 
condit of mortality, and advis her to take the veil: I quot the 
exampl of the holi princess sanchia of arragon.” 

“thi zeal wa laudable,” said jerome, impatiently; “but at present it wa 
unnecessary: hippolita is well—at least I trust in the lord she is; I 
heard noth to the contrary—yet, methinks, the prince’ 
earnestness—well, brother, but where is the ladi isabella?” 

“I know not,” said the friar; “she wept much, and said she would retir 
to her chamber.” 

jerom left hi comrad abruptly, and hasten to the princess, but she 
wa not in her chamber. He inquir of the domest of the convent, but 
could learn no news of her. He search in vain throughout the monasteri 
and the church, and despatch messeng round the neighbourhood, to get 
intellig if she had been seen; but to no purpose. noth could 
equal the good man’ perplexity. He judg that isabella, suspect 
manfr of have precipit hi wife’ death, had taken the alarm, and 
withdrawn herself to some more secret place of concealment. thi new 
flight would probabl carri the prince’ furi to the height. the report 
of hippolita’ death, though it seem almost incredible, increas hi 
consternation; and though isabella’ escap bespok her avers of 
manfr for a husband, jerom could feel no comfort from it, while it 
endang the life of hi son. He determin to return to the castle, 
and made sever of hi brethren accompani him to attest hi innoc to 
manfred, and, if necessary, join their intercess with hi for 
theodore. 

the prince, in the meantime, had pass into the court, and order the 
gate of the castl to be flung open for the recept of the stranger 
knight and hi train. In a few minut the cavalcad arrived. first 
came two harbing with wands. next a herald, follow by two page and 
two trumpets. then a hundr foot-guards. these were attend by as 
mani horse. after them fifti footmen, cloth in scarlet and black, the 
colour of the knight. then a led horse. two herald on each side of a 
gentleman on horseback bear a banner with the arm of vicenza and 
otranto quarterly—a circumst that much offend manfred—but he 
stifl hi resentment. two more pages. the knight’ confessor tell 
hi beads. fifti more footmen clad as before. two knight habit in 
complet armour, their beaver down, comrad to the princip knight. 
the squir of the two knights, carri their shield and devices. the 
knight’ own squire. A hundr gentlemen bear an enorm sword, and 
seem to faint under the weight of it. the knight himself on a 
chestnut steed, in complet armour, hi lanc in the rest, hi face 
entir conceal by hi vizor, which wa surmount by a larg plume of 
scarlet and black feathers. fifti foot-guard with drum and trumpet 
close the procession, which wheel off to the right and left to make 
room for the princip knight. 

As soon as he approach the gate he stopped; and the herald advancing, 
read again the word of the challenge. manfred’ eye were fix on the 
gigant sword, and he scarc seem to attend to the cartel: but hi 
attent wa soon divert by a tempest of wind that rose behind him. 
He turn and beheld the plume of the enchant helmet agit in the 
same extraordinari manner as before. It requir intrepid like 
manfred’ not to sink under a concurr of circumst that seem to 
announc hi fate. yet scorn in the presenc of stranger to betray 
the courag he had alway manifested, he said boldly— 

“sir knight, whoever thou art, I bid thee welcome. If thou art of mortal 
mould, thi valour shall meet it equal: and if thou art a true knight, 
thou wilt scorn to employ sorceri to carri thi point. Be these omen 
from heaven or hell, manfr trust to the righteous of hi caus and 
to the aid of st. nicholas, who ha ever protect hi house. alight, 
sir knight, and repos thyself. to-morrow thou shalt have a fair field, 
and heaven befriend the juster side!” 

the knight made no reply, but dismounting, wa conduct by manfr to 
the great hall of the castle. As they travers the court, the knight 
stop to gaze on the miracul casque; and kneel down, seem to 
pray inwardli for some minutes. rising, he made a sign to the princ to 
lead on. As soon as they enter the hall, manfr propos to the 
stranger to disarm, but the knight shook hi head in token of refusal. 

“sir knight,” said manfred, “thi is not courteous, but by my good faith 
I will not cross thee, nor shalt thou have caus to complain of the 
princ of otranto. No treacheri is design on my part; I hope none is 
intend on thine; here take my gage” (give him hi ring): “your 
friend and you shall enjoy the law of hospitality. rest here until 
refresh are brought. I will but give order for the accommod 
of your train, and return to you.” the three knight bow as accept 
hi courtesy. manfr direct the stranger’ retinu to be conduct to 
an adjac hospital, found by the princess hippolita for the recept 
of pilgrims. As they made the circuit of the court to return toward the 
gate, the gigant sword burst from the supporters, and fall to the 
ground opposit to the helmet, remain immovable. manfred, almost 
harden to preternatur appearances, surmount the shock of thi new 
prodigy; and return to the hall, where by thi time the feast wa 
ready, he invit hi silent guest to take their places. manfred, 
howev ill hi heart wa at ease, endeavour to inspir the compani 
with mirth. He put sever question to them, but wa answer onli by 
signs. they rais their vizor but suffici to feed themselves, and 
that sparingly. 

“sirs” said the prince, “ye are the first guest I ever treat within 
these wall who scorn to hold ani intercours with me: nor ha it oft 
been customary, I ween, for princ to hazard their state and digniti 
against stranger and mutes. you say you come in the name of freder of 
vicenza; I have ever heard that he wa a gallant and courteou knight; 
nor would he, I am bold to say, think it beneath him to mix in social 
convers with a princ that is hi equal, and not unknown by deed in 
arms. still ye are silent—well! be it as it may—bi the law of 
hospit and chivalri ye are master under thi roof: ye shall do your 
pleasure. but come, give me a goblet of wine; ye will not refus to 
pledg me to the health of your fair mistresses.” 

the princip knight sigh and cross himself, and wa rise from the 
board. 

“sir knight,” said manfred, “what I said wa but in sport. I shall 
constrain you in nothing: use your good liking. sinc mirth is not your 
mood, let us be sad. busi may hit your fanci better. let us 
withdraw, and hear if what I have to unfold may be better relish than 
the vain effort I have made for your pastime.” 

manfr then conduct the three knight into an inner chamber, shut the 
door, and invit them to be seated, began thus, address himself to 
the chief personage:— 

“you come, sir knight, as I understand, in the name of the marqui of 
vicenza, to re-demand the ladi isabella, hi daughter, who ha been 
contract in the face of holi church to my son, by the consent of her 
legal guardians; and to requir me to resign my dominion to your lord, 
who give himself for the nearest of blood to princ alfonso, whose soul 
god rest! I shall speak to the latter articl of your demand first. 
you must know, your lord knows, that I enjoy the princip of otranto 
from my father, don manuel, as he receiv it from hi father, don 
ricardo. alfonso, their predecessor, die childless in the holi land, 
bequeath hi estat to my grandfather, don ricardo, in consider 
of hi faith services.” the stranger shook hi head. 

“sir knight,” said manfred, warmly, “ricardo wa a valiant and upright 
man; he wa a piou man; wit hi munific foundat of the 
adjoin church and two convents. He wa peculiarli patronis by st. 
nicholas—mi grandfath wa incapable—i say, sir, don ricardo wa 
incapable—excus me, your interrupt ha disord me. I vener the 
memori of my grandfather. well, sirs, he held thi estate; he held it by 
hi good sword and by the favour of st. nicholas—so did my father; and 
so, sirs, will I, come what come will. but frederic, your lord, is 
nearest in blood. I have consent to put my titl to the issu of the 
sword. doe that impli a viciou title? I might have asked, where is 
freder your lord? report speak him dead in captivity. you say, your 
action say, he lives—i question it not—i might, sirs, I might—but I do 
not. other princ would bid freder take hi inherit by force, if 
he can: they would not stake their digniti on a singl combat: they would 
not submit it to the decis of unknown mutes!—pardon me, gentlemen, I 
am too warm: but suppos yourselv in my situation: as ye are stout 
knights, would it not move your choler to have your own and the honour of 
your ancestor call in question?” 

“but to the point. Ye requir me to deliv up the ladi isabella. sirs, 
I must ask if ye are authoris to receiv her?” 

the knight nodded. 

“receiv her,” continu manfred; “well, you are authoris to receiv 
her, but, gentl knight, may I ask if you have full powers?” 

the knight nodded. 

“’ti well,” said manfred; “then hear what I have to offer. Ye see, 
gentlemen, befor you, the most unhappi of men!” (he began to weep); 
“afford me your compassion; I am entitl to it, inde I am. know, I 
have lost my onli hope, my joy, the support of my house—conrad die 
yester morning.” 

the knight discov sign of surprise. 

“yes, sirs, fate ha dispos of my son. isabella is at liberty.” 

“do you then restor her?” cri the chief knight, break silence. 

“afford me your patience,” said manfred. “I rejoic to find, by thi 
testimoni of your goodwill, that thi matter may be adjust without 
blood. It is no interest of mine dictat what littl I have farther to 
say. Ye behold in me a man disgust with the world: the loss of my son 
ha wean me from earthli cares. power and great have no longer ani 
charm in my eyes. I wish to transmit the sceptr I had receiv from 
my ancestor with honour to my son—but that is over! life itself is so 
indiffer to me, that I accept your defianc with joy. A good knight 
cannot go to the grave with more satisfact than when fall in hi 
vocation: whatev is the will of heaven, I submit; for alas! sirs, I am 
a man of mani sorrows. manfr is no object of envy, but no doubt you 
are acquaint with my story.” 

the knight made sign of ignorance, and seem curiou to have manfr 
proceed. 

“i it possible, sirs,” continu the prince, “that my stori should be a 
secret to you? have you heard noth relat to me and the princess 
hippolita?” 

they shook their heads. 

“no! thus, then, sirs, it is. you think me ambitious: ambition, alas! 
is compos of more rug materials. If I were ambitious, I should not 
for so mani year have been a prey to all the hell of conscienti 
scruples. but I weari your patience: I will be brief. know, then, that 
I have long been troubl in mind on my union with the princess 
hippolita. oh! sirs, if ye were acquaint with that excel woman! if 
ye knew that I ador her like a mistress, and cherish her as a friend—but 
man wa not born for perfect happiness! she share my scruples, and with 
her consent I have brought thi matter befor the church, for we are 
relat within the forbidden degrees. I expect everi hour the definit 
sentenc that must separ us for ever—i am sure you feel for me—i see 
you do—pardon these tears!” 

the knight gaze on each other, wonder where thi would end. 

manfr continued— 

“the death of my son betid while my soul wa under thi anxiety, I 
thought of noth but resign my dominions, and retir for ever from 
the sight of mankind. My onli difficulti wa to fix on a successor, who 
would be tender of my people, and to dispos of the ladi isabella, who is 
dear to me as my own blood. I wa will to restor the line of 
alfonso, even in hi most distant kindred. and though, pardon me, I am 
satisfi it wa hi will that ricardo’ lineag should take place of hi 
own relations; yet where wa I to search for those relations? I knew of 
none but frederic, your lord; he wa a captiv to the infidels, or dead; 
and were he living, and at home, would he quit the flourish state of 
vicenza for the inconsider princip of otranto? If he would not, 
could I bear the thought of see a hard, unfeeling, viceroy set over my 
poor faith people? for, sirs, I love my people, and thank heaven am 
belov by them. but ye will ask whither tend thi long discourse? 
briefly, then, thus, sirs. heaven in your arriv seem to point out a 
remedi for these difficulti and my misfortunes. the ladi isabella is 
at liberty; I shall soon be so. I would submit to anyth for the good 
of my people. were it not the best, the onli way to extinguish the feud 
between our families, if I wa to take the ladi isabella to wife? you 
start. but though hippolita’ virtu will ever be dear to me, a princ 
must not consid himself; he is born for hi people.” A servant at that 
instant enter the chamber appris manfr that jerom and sever of 
hi brethren demand immedi access to him. 

the prince, provok at thi interruption, and fear that the friar 
would discov to the stranger that isabella had taken sanctuary, wa 
go to forbid jerome’ entrance. but recollect that he wa 
certainli arriv to notifi the princess’ return, manfr began to 
excus himself to the knight for leav them for a few moments, but wa 
prevent by the arriv of the friars. manfr angrili reprimand them 
for their intrusion, and would have forc them back from the chamber; 
but jerom wa too much agit to be repulsed. He declar aloud the 
flight of isabella, with protest of hi own innocence. 

manfred, distract at the news, and not less at it come to the 
knowledg of the strangers, utter noth but incoher sentences, now 
upbraid the friar, now apologis to the knights, earnest to know 
what wa becom of isabella, yet equal afraid of their knowing; 
impati to pursu her, yet dread to have them join in the pursuit. 
He offer to despatch messeng in quest of her, but the chief knight, 
no longer keep silence, reproach manfr in bitter term for hi 
dark and ambigu dealing, and demand the caus of isabella’ first 
absenc from the castle. manfred, cast a stern look at jerome, 
impli a command of silence, pretend that on conrad’ death he had 
place her in sanctuari until he could determin how to dispos of her. 
jerome, who trembl for hi son’ life, did not dare contradict thi 
falsehood, but one of hi brethren, not under the same anxiety, declar 
frankli that she had fled to their church in the preced night. the 
princ in vain endeavour to stop thi discovery, which overwhelm him 
with shame and confusion. the princip stranger, amaz at the 
contradict he heard, and more than half persuad that manfr had 
secret the princess, notwithstand the concern he express at her 
flight, rush to the door, said— 

“thou traitor prince! isabella shall be found.” 

manfr endeavour to hold him, but the other knight assist their 
comrade, he broke from the prince, and hasten into the court, demand 
hi attendants. manfred, find it vain to divert him from the pursuit, 
offer to accompani him and summon hi attendants, and take jerom 
and some of the friar to guid them, they issu from the castle; 
manfr privat give order to have the knight’ compani secured, 
while to the knight he affect to despatch a messeng to requir their 
assistance. 

the compani had no sooner quit the castl than matilda, who felt 
herself deepli interest for the young peasant, sinc she had seen him 
condemn to death in the hall, and whose thought had been taken up with 
concert measur to save him, wa inform by some of the femal 
attend that manfr had despatch all hi men variou way in 
pursuit of isabella. He had in hi hurri given thi order in gener 
terms, not mean to extend it to the guard he had set upon theodore, 
but forget it. the domestics, offici to obey so peremptori a 
prince, and urg by their own curios and love of novelti to join in 
ani precipit chase, had to a man left the castle. matilda disengag 
herself from her women, stole up to the black tower, and unbolt the 
door, present herself to the astonish theodore. 

“young man,” said she, “though filial duti and womanli modesti condemn 
the step I am taking, yet holi charity, surmount all other ties, 
justifi thi act. fly; the door of thi prison are open: my father and 
hi domest are absent; but they may soon return. Be gone in safety; 
and may the angel of heaven direct thi course!” 

“thou art sure one of those angels!” said the enraptur theodore: 
“none but a bless saint could speak, could act—could look—lik thee. 
may I not know the name of my divin protectress? methought thou namedst 
thi father. Is it possible? can manfred’ blood feel holi pity! love 
lady, thou answerest not. but how art thou here thyself? whi dost thou 
neglect thi own safety, and wast a thought on a wretch like theodore? 
let us fli together: the life thou bestowest shall be dedic to thi 
defence.” 

“alas! thou mistakest,” said matilda, signing: “I am manfred’ daughter, 
but no danger await me.” 

“amazement!” said theodore; “but last night I bless myself for yield 
thee the servic thi graciou compass so charit return me now.” 

“still thou art in an error,” said the princess; “but thi is no time for 
explanation. fly, virtuou youth, while it is in my power to save thee: 
should my father return, thou and I both should inde have caus to 
tremble.” 

“how!” said theodore; “thinkest thou, charm maid, that I will accept 
of life at the hazard of aught calamit to thee? better I endur a 
thousand deaths.” 

“I run no risk,” said matilda, “but by thi delay. depart; it cannot be 
known that I have assist thi flight.” 

“swear by the saint above,” said theodore, “that thou canst not be 
suspected; els here I vow to await whatev can befal me.” 

“oh! thou art too generous,” said matilda; “but rest assur that no 
suspicion can alight on me.” 

“give me thi beauteou hand in token that thou dost not deceiv me,” said 
theodore; “and let me bath it with the warm tear of gratitude.” 

“forbear!” said the princess; “thi must not be.” 

“alas!” said theodore, “I have never known but calam until thi 
hour—perhap shall never know other fortun again: suffer the chast 
raptur of holi gratitude: ’ti my soul would print it effus on thi 
hand.” 

“forbear, and be gone,” said matilda. “how would isabella approv of 
see thee at my feet?” 

“who is isabella?” said the young man with surprise. 

“ah, me! I fear,” said the princess, “I am serv a deceit one. 
hast thou forgot thi curios thi morning?” 

“thi looks, thi actions, all thi beauteou self seem an eman of 
divinity,” said theodore; “but thi word are dark and mysterious. speak, 
lady; speak to thi servant’ comprehension.” 

“thou understandest but too well!” said matilda; “but onc more I command 
thee to be gone: thi blood, which I may preserve, will be on my head, if 
I wast the time in vain discourse.” 

“I go, lady,” said theodore, “becaus it is thi will, and becaus I would 
not bring the grey hair of my father with sorrow to the grave. say but, 
ador lady, that I have thi gentl pity.” 

“stay,” said matilda; “I will conduct thee to the subterran vault by 
which isabella escaped; it will lead thee to the church of st. nicholas, 
where thou mayst take sanctuary.” 

“what!” said theodore, “wa it another, and not thi love self that I 
assist to find the subterran passage?” 

“it was,” said matilda; “but ask no more; I trembl to see thee still 
abid here; fli to the sanctuary.” 

“to sanctuary,” said theodore; “no, princess; sanctuari are for 
helpless damsels, or for criminals. theodore’ soul is free from guilt, 
nor will wear the appear of it. give me a sword, lady, and thi 
father shall learn that theodor scorn an ignomini flight.” 

“rash youth!” said matilda; “thou wouldst not dare to lift thi 
presumptu arm against the princ of otranto?” 

“not against thi father; indeed, I dare not,” said theodore. “excus me, 
lady; I had forgotten. but could I gaze on thee, and rememb thou art 
sprung from the tyrant manfred! but he is thi father, and from thi 
moment my injuri are buri in oblivion.” 

A deep and hollow groan, which seem to come from above, startl the 
princess and theodore. 

“good heaven! we are overheard!” said the princess. they listened; but 
perceiv no further noise, they both conclud it the effect of pent-up 
vapours. and the princess, preced theodor softly, carri him to her 
father’ armoury, where, equip him with a complet suit, he wa 
conduct by matilda to the postern-gate. 

“avoid the town,” said the princess, “and all the western side of the 
castle. ’ti there the search must be make by manfr and the 
strangers; but hie thee to the opposit quarter. yonder behind that 
forest to the east is a chain of rocks, hollow into a labyrinth of 
cavern that reach to the sea coast. there thou mayst lie concealed, 
till thou canst make sign to some vessel to put on shore, and take thee 
off. go! heaven be thi guide!—and sometim in thi prayer 
remember—matilda!” 

theodor flung himself at her feet, and seiz her lili hand, which with 
struggl she suffer him to kiss, he vow on the earliest opportun 
to get himself knighted, and fervent entreat her permiss to swear 
himself etern her knight. ere the princess could reply, a clap of 
thunder wa suddenli heard that shook the battlements. theodore, 
regardless of the tempest, would have urg hi suit: but the princess, 
dismayed, retreat hastili into the castle, and command the youth to 
be gone with an air that would not be disobeyed. He sighed, and retired, 
but with eye fix on the gate, until matilda, close it, put an end to 
an interview, in which the heart of both had drunk so deepli of a 
passion, which both now tast for the first time. 

theodor went pensiv to the convent, to acquaint hi father with hi 
deliverance. there he learn the absenc of jerome, and the pursuit 
that wa make after the ladi isabella, with some particular of whose 
stori he now first becam acquainted. the gener gallantri of hi 
natur prompt him to wish to assist her; but the monk could lend him 
no light to guess at the rout she had taken. He wa not tempt to 
wander far in search of her, for the idea of matilda had imprint itself 
so strongli on hi heart, that he could not bear to absent himself at 
much distanc from her abode. the tender jerom had express for 
him concur to confirm thi reluctance; and he even persuad himself 
that filial affect wa the chief caus of hi hover between the 
castl and monastery. 

until jerom should return at night, theodor at length determin to 
repair to the forest that matilda had point out to him. arriv 
there, he sought the gloomiest shades, as best suit to the pleas 
melancholi that reign in hi mind. In thi mood he rove insens to 
the cave which had formerli serv as a retreat to hermits, and were now 
report round the countri to be haunt by evil spirits. He recollect 
to have heard thi tradition; and be of a brave and adventur 
disposition, he willingli indulg hi curios in explor the secret 
recess of thi labyrinth. He had not penetr far befor he thought 
he heard the step of some person who seem to retreat befor him. 

theodore, though firmli ground in all our holi faith enjoin to be 
believed, had no apprehens that good men were abandon without caus 
to the malic of the power of darkness. He thought the place more 
like to be infest by robber than by those infern agent who are 
report to molest and bewild travellers. He had long burn with 
impati to approv hi valour. draw hi sabre, he march sedat 
onwards, still direct hi step as the imperfect rustl sound befor 
him led the way. the armour he wore wa a like indic to the person 
who avoid him. theodore, now convinc that he wa not mistaken, 
redoubl hi pace, and evid gain on the person that fled, whose 
hast increasing, theodor came up just as a woman fell breathless befor 
him. He hast to rais her, but her terror wa so great that he 
apprehend she would faint in hi arms. He use everi gentl word to 
dispel her alarms, and assur her that far from injuring, he would 
defend her at the peril of hi life. the ladi recov her spirit 
from hi courteou demeanour, and gaze on her protector, said— 

“sure, I have heard that voic before!” 

“not to my knowledge,” repli theodore; “unless, as I conjecture, thou 
art the ladi isabella.” 

“merci heaven!” cri she. “thou art not sent in quest of me, art 
thou?” and say those words, she threw herself at hi feet, and 
besought him not to deliv her up to manfred. 

“to manfred!” cri theodore—“no, lady; I have onc alreadi deliv 
thee from hi tyranny, and it shall fare hard with me now, but I will 
place thee out of the reach of hi daring.” 

“i it possible,” said she, “that thou shouldst be the gener unknown 
whom I met last night in the vault of the castle? sure thou art not a 
mortal, but my guardian angel. On my knees, let me thank—” 

“hold! gentl princess,” said theodore, “nor demean thyself befor a poor 
and friendless young man. If heaven ha select me for thi deliverer, 
it will accomplish it work, and strengthen my arm in thi cause. but 
come, lady, we are too near the mouth of the cavern; let us seek it 
inmost recesses. I can have no tranquil till I have place thee 
beyond the reach of danger.” 

“alas! what mean you, sir?” said she. “though all your action are 
noble, though your sentiment speak the puriti of your soul, is it 
fit that I should accompani you alon into these perplex retreats? 
should we be found together, what would a censori world think of my 
conduct?” 

“I respect your virtuou delicacy,” said theodore; “nor do you harbour a 
suspicion that wound my honour. I meant to conduct you into the most 
privat caviti of these rocks, and then at the hazard of my life to guard 
their entranc against everi live thing. besides, lady,” continu he, 
draw a deep sigh, “beauteou and all perfect as your form is, and 
though my wish are not guiltless of aspiring, know, my soul is 
dedic to another; and although—” A sudden nois prevent theodor 
from proceeding. they soon distinguish these sounds— 

“isabella! what, ho! isabella!” the trembl princess relaps into her 
former agoni of fear. theodor endeavour to encourag her, but in 
vain. He assur her he would die rather than suffer her to return under 
manfred’ power; and beg her to remain concealed, he went forth to 
prevent the person in search of her from approaching. 

At the mouth of the cavern he found an arm knight, discours with a 
peasant, who assur him he had seen a ladi enter the pass of the rock. 
the knight wa prepar to seek her, when theodore, place himself in 
hi way, with hi sword drawn, sternli forbad him at hi peril to 
advance. 

“and who art thou, who darest to cross my way?” said the knight, 
haughtily. 

“one who doe not dare more than he will perform,” said theodore. 

“I seek the ladi isabella,” said the knight, “and understand she ha 
taken refug among these rocks. imped me not, or thou wilt repent 
have provok my resentment.” 

“thi purpos is as odiou as thi resent is contemptible,” said 
theodore. “return whenc thou camest, or we shall soon know whose 
resent is most terrible.” 

the stranger, who wa the princip knight that had arriv from the 
marqui of vicenza, had gallop from manfr as he wa busi in get 
inform of the princess, and give variou order to prevent her 
fall into the power of the three knights. their chief had suspect 
manfr of be privi to the princess’ absconding, and thi insult from 
a man, who he conclud wa station by that princ to secret her, 
confirm hi suspicions, he made no reply, but discharg a blow with 
hi sabr at theodore, would soon have remov all obstruction, if 
theodore, who took him for one of manfred’ captains, and who had no 
sooner given the provoc than prepar to support it, had not 
receiv the stroke on hi shield. the valour that had so long been 
smother in hi breast broke forth at once; he rush impetu on the 
knight, whose pride and wrath were not less power incent to hardi 
deeds. the combat wa furious, but not long. theodor wound the 
knight in three sever places, and at last disarm him as he faint by 
the loss of blood. 

the peasant, who had fled on the first onset, had given the alarm to some 
of manfred’ domestics, who, by hi orders, were dispers through the 
forest in pursuit of isabella. they came up as the knight fell, whom 
they soon discov to be the nobl stranger. theodore, notwithstand 
hi hatr to manfred, could not behold the victori he had gain without 
emot of piti and generosity. but he wa more touch when he learn 
the qualiti of hi adversary, and wa inform that he wa no retainer, 
but an enemy, of manfred. He assist the servant of the latter in 
disarm the knight, and in endeavour to stanch the blood that flow 
from hi wounds. the knight recov hi speech, said, in a faint and 
falter voice— 

“gener foe, we have both been in an error. I took thee for an 
instrument of the tyrant; I perceiv thou hast made the like mistake. It 
is too late for excuses. I faint. If isabella is at hand—cal her—i 
have import secret to—” 

“he is dying!” said one of the attendants; “ha nobodi a crucifix about 
them? andrea, do thou pray over him.” 

“fetch some water,” said theodore, “and pour it down hi throat, while I 
hasten to the princess.” 

say this, he flew to isabella, and in few word told her modestli that 
he had been so unfortun by mistak as to wound a gentleman from her 
father’ court, who wished, ere he died, to impart someth of 
consequ to her. 

the princess, who had been transport at hear the voic of theodore, 
as he call to her to come forth, wa astonish at what she heard. 
suffer herself to be conduct by theodore, the new proof of whose 
valour recal her dispers spirits, she came where the bleed knight 
lay speechless on the ground. but her fear return when she beheld the 
domest of manfred. she would again have fled if theodor had not made 
her observ that they were unarmed, and had not threaten them with 
instant death if they should dare to seiz the princess. 

the stranger, open hi eyes, and behold a woman, said, “art 
thou—pray tell me truly—art thou isabella of vicenza?” 

“I am,” said she: “good heaven restor thee!” 

“then thou—then thou”—said the knight, struggl for 
utterance—“seest—thi father. give me one—” 

“oh! amazement! horror! what do I hear! what do I see!” cri isabella. 
“mi father! you my father! how came you here, sir? for heaven’ sake, 
speak! oh! run for help, or he will expire!” 

“’ti most true,” said the wound knight, exert all hi force; “I am 
freder thi father. yes, I came to deliv thee. It will not be. give 
me a part kiss, and take—” 

“sir,” said theodore, “do not exhaust yourself; suffer us to convey you 
to the castle.” 

“to the castle!” said isabella. “i there no help nearer than the 
castle? would you expos my father to the tyrant? If he goe thither, I 
dare not accompani him; and yet, can I leav him!” 

“mi child,” said frederic, “it matter not for me whither I am carried. 
A few minut will place me beyond danger; but while I have eye to dote 
on thee, forsak me not, dear isabella! thi brave knight—i know not who 
he is—wil protect thi innocence. sir, you will not abandon my child, 
will you?” 

theodore, shed tear over hi victim, and vow to guard the 
princess at the expens of hi life, persuad freder to suffer himself 
to be conduct to the castle. they place him on a hors belong to 
one of the domestics, after bind up hi wound as well as they were 
able. theodor march by hi side; and the afflict isabella, who 
could not bear to quit him, follow mourn behind. 




chapter iv. 


the sorrow troop no sooner arriv at the castle, than they were met 
by hippolita and matilda, whom isabella had sent one of the domest 
befor to advertis of their approach. the ladi caus freder to be 
convey into the nearest chamber, retired, while the surgeon examin 
hi wounds. matilda blush at see theodor and isabella together; 
but endeavour to conceal it by embrac the latter, and condol with 
her on her father’ mischance. the surgeon soon came to acquaint 
hippolita that none of the marquis’ wound were dangerous; and that he 
wa desir of see hi daughter and the princesses. 

theodore, under pretenc of express hi joy at be freed from hi 
apprehens of the combat be fatal to frederic, could not resist the 
impuls of follow matilda. her eye were so often cast down on 
meet his, that isabella, who regard theodor as attent as he 
gaze on matilda, soon divin who the object wa that he had told her in 
the cave engag hi affections. while thi mute scene passed, hippolita 
demand of freder the caus of hi have taken that mysteri cours 
for reclaim hi daughter; and threw in variou apolog to excus her 
lord for the match contract between their children. 

frederic, howev incens against manfred, wa not insens to the 
courtesi and benevol of hippolita: but he wa still more struck with 
the love form of matilda. wish to detain them by hi bedside, he 
inform hippolita of hi story. He told her that, while prison to the 
infidels, he had dream that hi daughter, of whom he had learn no 
news sinc hi captivity, wa detain in a castle, where she wa in 
danger of the most dread misfortunes: and that if he obtain hi 
liberty, and repair to a wood near joppa, he would learn more. alarm 
at thi dream, and incap of obey the direct given by it, hi 
chain becam more grievou than ever. but while hi thought were 
occupi on the mean of obtain hi liberty, he receiv the agreeabl 
news that the confeder princ who were war in palestin had paid 
hi ransom. He instantli set out for the wood that had been mark in 
hi dream. 

for three day he and hi attend had wander in the forest without 
see a human form: but on the even of the third they came to a cell, 
in which they found a vener hermit in the agoni of death. appli 
rich cordials, they brought the faint man to hi speech. 

“mi sons,” said he, “I am bounden to your charity—but it is in vain—i am 
go to my etern rest—yet I die with the satisfact of perform 
the will of heaven. when first I repair to thi solitude, after see 
my countri becom a prey to unbelievers—it is alas! abov fifti year 
sinc I wa wit to that dread scene! st. nichola appear to me, 
and reveal a secret, which he bade me never disclos to mortal man, but 
on my death-bed. thi is that tremend hour, and ye are no doubt the 
chosen warrior to whom I wa order to reveal my trust. As soon as ye 
have done the last offic to thi wretch corse, dig under the seventh 
tree on the left hand of thi poor cave, and your pain will—oh! good 
heaven receiv my soul!” with those word the devout man breath hi 
last. 

“bi break of day,” continu frederic, “when we had commit the holi 
relic to earth, we dug accord to direction. but what wa our 
astonish when about the depth of six feet we discov an enorm 
sabre—th veri weapon yonder in the court. On the blade, which wa then 
partli out of the scabbard, though sinc close by our effort in 
remov it, were written the follow lines—no; excus me, madam,” 
ad the marquis, turn to hippolita; “if I forbear to repeat them: I 
respect your sex and rank, and would not be guilti of offend your ear 
with sound injuri to aught that is dear to you.” 

He paused. hippolita trembled. she did not doubt but freder wa 
destin by heaven to accomplish the fate that seem to threaten her 
house. look with anxiou fond at matilda, a silent tear stole 
down her cheek: but recollect herself, she said— 

“proceed, my lord; heaven doe noth in vain; mortal must receiv it 
divin behest with lowli and submission. It is our part to 
deprec it wrath, or bow to it decrees. repeat the sentence, my 
lord; we listen resigned.” 

freder wa griev that he had proceed so far. the digniti and 
patient firm of hippolita penetr him with respect, and the tender 
silent affect with which the princess and her daughter regard each 
other, melt him almost to tears. yet apprehens that hi forbear 
to obey would be more alarming, he repeat in a falter and low voic 
the follow lines: 

“where’ a casqu that suit thi sword is found, 
with peril is thi daughter compass’d round; 
_alfonso’s_ blood alon can save the maid, 
and quiet a long restless prince’ shade.” 

“what is there in these lines,” said theodor impatiently, “that affect 
these princesses? whi were they to be shock by a mysteri delicacy, 
that ha so littl foundation?” 

“your word are rude, young man,” said the marquis; “and though fortun 
ha favour you once—” 

“mi honour lord,” said isabella, who resent theodore’ warmth, which 
she perceiv wa dictat by hi sentiment for matilda, “discompos not 
yourself for the glose of a peasant’ son: he forget the rever he 
owe you; but he is not accustomed—” 

hippolita, concern at the heat that had arisen, check theodor for 
hi boldness, but with an air acknowledg hi zeal; and chang the 
conversation, demand of freder where he had left her lord? As the 
marqui wa go to reply, they heard a nois without, and rise to 
inquir the cause, manfred, jerome, and part of the troop, who had met an 
imperfect rumour of what had happened, enter the chamber. manfr 
advanc hastili toward frederic’ bed to condol with him on hi 
misfortune, and to learn the circumst of the combat, when start 
in an agoni of terror and amazement, he cried— 

“ha! what art thou? thou dread spectre! is my hour come?” 

“mi dearest, graciou lord,” cri hippolita, clasp him in her arms, 
“what is it you see! whi do you fix your eye-bal thus?” 

“what!” cri manfr breathless; “dost thou see nothing, hippolita? Is 
thi ghastli phantom sent to me alone—to rue, who did not—” 

“for mercy’ sweetest self, my lord,” said hippolita, “resum your soul, 
command your reason. there is none here, but us, your friends.” 

“what, is not that alfonso?” cri manfred. “dost thou not see him? can 
it be my brain’ delirium?” 

“this! my lord,” said hippolita; “thi is theodore, the youth who ha 
been so unfortunate.” 

“theodore!” said manfr mournfully, and strike hi forehead; “theodor 
or a phantom, he ha unhing the soul of manfred. but how come he 
here? and how come he in armour?” 

“I believ he went in search of isabella,” said hippolita. 

“of isabella!” said manfred, relaps into rage; “yes, yes, that is not 
doubtful—. but how did he escap from duranc in which I left him? wa 
it isabella, or thi hypocrit old friar, that procur hi 
enlargement?” 

“and would a parent be criminal, my lord,” said theodore, “if he 
medit the deliver of hi child?” 

jerome, amaz to hear himself in a manner accus by hi son, and 
without foundation, knew not what to think. He could not comprehend how 
theodor had escaped, how he came to be armed, and to encount frederic. 
still he would not ventur to ask ani question that might tend to 
inflam manfred’ wrath against hi son. jerome’ silenc convinc 
manfr that he had contriv theodore’ release. 

“and is it thus, thou ungrat old man,” said the prince, address 
himself to the friar, “that thou repayest mine and hippolita’ bounties? 
and not content with travers my heart’ nearest wishes, thou armest 
thi bastard, and bringest him into my own castl to insult me!” 

“mi lord,” said theodore, “you wrong my father: neither he nor I are 
capabl of harbour a thought against your peace. Is it insol thu 
to surrend myself to your highness’ pleasure?” ad he, lay hi 
sword respect at manfred’ feet. “behold my bosom; strike, my lord, 
if you suspect that a disloy thought is lodg there. there is not a 
sentiment engraven on my heart that doe not vener you and yours.” 

the grace and fervour with which theodor utter these word interest 
everi person present in hi favour. even manfr wa touched—yet still 
possess with hi resembl to alfonso, hi admir wa dash with 
secret horror. 

“rise,” said he; “thi life is not my present purpose. but tell me thi 
history, and how thou camest connect with thi old traitor here.” 

“mi lord,” said jerom eagerly. 

“peace! impostor!” said manfred; “I will not have him prompted.” 

“mi lord,” said theodore, “I want no assistance; my stori is veri brief. 
I wa carri at five year of age to algier with my mother, who had 
been taken by corsair from the coast of sicily. she die of grief in 
less than a twelvemonth;” the tear gush from jerome’ eyes, on whose 
counten a thousand anxiou passion stood expressed. “befor she 
died,” continu theodore, “she bound a write about my arm under my 
garments, which told me I wa the son of the count falconara.” 

“it is most true,” said jerome; “I am that wretch father.” 

“again I enjoin thee silence,” said manfred: “proceed.” 

“I remain in slavery,” said theodore, “until within these two years, 
when attend on my master in hi cruises, I wa deliv by a 
christian vessel, which overpow the pirate; and discov myself to 
the captain, he gener put me on shore in sicily; but alas! instead 
of find a father, I learn that hi estate, which wa situat on the 
coast, had, dure hi absence, been laid wast by the rover who had 
carri my mother and me into captivity: that hi castl had been burnt 
to the ground, and that my father on hi return had sold what remained, 
and wa retir into religion in the kingdom of naples, but where no man 
could inform me. destitut and friendless, hopeless almost of attain 
the transport of a parent’ embrace, I took the first opportun of 
set sail for naples, from whence, within these six days, I wander 
into thi province, still support myself by the labour of my hands; 
nor until yester-morn did I believ that heaven had reserv ani lot for 
me but peac of mind and content poverty. this, my lord, is theodore’ 
story. I am bless beyond my hope in find a father; I am unfortun 
beyond my desert in have incur your highness’ displeasure.” 

He ceased. A murmur of approb gentli aros from the audience. 

“thi is not all,” said frederic; “I am bound in honour to add what he 
suppresses. though he is modest, I must be generous; he is one of the 
bravest youth on christian ground. He is warm too; and from the short 
knowledg I have of him, I will pledg myself for hi veracity: if what 
he report of himself were not true, he would not utter it—and for me, 
youth, I honour a frank which becom thi birth; but now, and thou 
didst offend me: yet the nobl blood which flow in thi veins, may well 
be allow to boil out, when it ha so recent trace itself to it 
source. come, my lord,” (turn to manfred), “if I can pardon him, 
sure you may; it is not the youth’ fault, if you took him for a 
spectre.” 

thi bitter taunt gall the soul of manfred. 

“if be from anoth world,” repli he haughtily, “have power to 
impress my mind with awe, it is more than live man can do; nor could a 
stripling’ arm.” 

“mi lord,” interrupt hippolita, “your guest ha occas for repose: 
shall we not leav him to hi rest?” say this, and take manfr by 
the hand, she took leav of frederic, and led the compani forth. 

the prince, not sorri to quit a convers which recal to mind the 
discoveri he had made of hi most secret sensations, suffer himself to 
be conduct to hi own apartment, after permit theodore, though 
under engag to return to the castl on the morrow (a condit the 
young man gladli accepted), to retir with hi father to the convent. 
matilda and isabella were too much occupi with their own reflections, 
and too littl content with each other, to wish for farther convers that 
night. they separ each to her chamber, with more express of 
ceremoni and fewer of affect than had pass between them sinc their 
childhood. 

If they part with small cordiality, they did but meet with greater 
impatience, as soon as the sun wa risen. their mind were in a 
situat that exclud sleep, and each recollect a thousand question 
which she wish she had put to the other overnight. matilda reflect 
that isabella had been twice deliv by theodor in veri critic 
situations, which she could not believ accidental. hi eyes, it wa 
true, had been fix on her in frederic’ chamber; but that might have 
been to disguis hi passion for isabella from the father of both. It 
were better to clear thi up. she wish to know the truth, lest she 
should wrong her friend by entertain a passion for isabella’ lover. 
thu jealousi prompted, and at the same time borrow an excus from 
friendship to justifi it curiosity. 

isabella, not less restless, had better foundat for her suspicions. 
both theodore’ tongu and eye had told her hi heart wa engaged; it 
wa true—yet, perhaps, matilda might not correspond to hi passion; she 
had ever appear insens to love: all her thought were set on 
heaven. 

“whi did I dissuad her?” said isabella to herself; “I am punish for my 
generosity; but when did they meet? where? It cannot be; I have deceiv 
myself; perhap last night wa the first time they ever beheld each 
other; it must be some other object that ha prepossess hi 
affections—if it is, I am not so unhappi as I thought; if it is not my 
friend matilda—how! can I stoop to wish for the affect of a man, who 
rude and unnecessarili acquaint me with hi indifference? and that at 
the veri moment in which common courtesi demand at least express of 
civility. I will go to my dear matilda, who will confirm me in thi 
becom pride. man is false—i will advis with her on take the veil: 
she will rejoic to find me in thi disposition; and I will acquaint her 
that I no longer oppos her inclin for the cloister.” 

In thi frame of mind, and determin to open her heart entir to 
matilda, she went to that princess’ chamber, whom she found alreadi 
dressed, and lean pensiv on her arm. thi attitude, so 
correspond to what she felt herself, reviv isabella’ suspicions, 
and destroy the confid she had purpos to place in her friend. 
they blush at meeting, and were too much novic to disguis their 
sensat with address. after some unmean question and replies, 
matilda demand of isabella the caus of her flight? the latter, who 
had almost forgotten manfred’ passion, so entir wa she occupi by 
her own, conclud that matilda refer to her last escap from the 
convent, which had occas the event of the preced evening, 
replied— 

“martelli brought word to the convent that your mother wa dead.” 

“oh!” said matilda, interrupt her, “bianca ha explain that mistak 
to me: on see me faint, she cri out, ‘the princess is dead!’ and 
martelli, who had come for the usual dole to the castle—” 

“and what made you faint?” said isabella, indiffer to the rest. 
matilda blush and stammered— 

“mi father—h wa sit in judgment on a criminal—” 

“what criminal?” said isabella eagerly. 

“A young man,” said matilda; “I believe—” 

“I think it wa that young man that—” 

“what, theodore?” said isabella. 

“yes,” answer she; “I never saw him before; I do not know how he had 
offend my father, but as he ha been of servic to you, I am glad my 
lord ha pardon him.” 

“serv me!” repli isabella; “do you term it serv me, to wound my 
father, and almost occas hi death? though it is but sinc yesterday 
that I am bless with know a parent, I hope matilda doe not think I 
am such a stranger to filial tender as not to resent the bold of 
that audaci youth, and that it is imposs for me ever to feel ani 
affect for one who dare to lift hi arm against the author of my 
being. no, matilda, my heart abhor him; and if you still retain the 
friendship for me that you have vow from your infancy, you will detest 
a man who ha been on the point of make me miser for ever.” 

matilda held down her head and replied: “I hope my dearest isabella doe 
not doubt her matilda’ friendship: I never beheld that youth until 
yesterday; he is almost a stranger to me: but as the surgeon have 
pronounc your father out of danger, you ought not to harbour 
uncharit resent against one, who I am persuad did not know the 
marqui wa relat to you.” 

“you plead hi caus veri pathetically,” said isabella, “consid he 
is so much a stranger to you! I am mistaken, or he return your 
charity.” 

“what mean you?” said matilda. 

“nothing,” said isabella, repent that she had given matilda a hint of 
theodore’ inclin for her. then chang the discourse, she ask 
matilda what occas manfr to take theodor for a spectre? 

“bless me,” said matilda, “did not you observ hi extrem resembl to 
the portrait of alfonso in the gallery? I took notic of it to bianca 
even befor I saw him in armour; but with the helmet on, he is the veri 
imag of that picture.” 

“I do not much observ pictures,” said isabella: “much less have I 
examin thi young man so attent as you seem to have done. ah? 
matilda, your heart is in danger, but let me warn you as a friend, he ha 
own to me that he is in love; it cannot be with you, for yesterday wa 
the first time you ever met—wa it not?” 

“certainly,” repli matilda; “but whi doe my dearest isabella conclud 
from anyth I have said, that”—sh paused—then continuing: “he saw you 
first, and I am far from have the vaniti to think that my littl 
portion of charm could engag a heart devot to you; may you be happy, 
isabella, whatev is the fate of matilda!” 

“mi love friend,” said isabella, whose heart wa too honest to resist a 
kind expression, “it is you that theodor admires; I saw it; I am 
persuad of it; nor shall a thought of my own happi suffer me to 
interfer with yours.” 

thi frank drew tear from the gentl matilda; and jealousi that for 
a moment had rais a cool between these amiabl maiden soon gave 
way to the natur sincer and candour of their souls. each confess 
to the other the impress that theodor had made on her; and thi 
confid wa follow by a struggl of generosity, each insist on 
yield her claim to her friend. At length the digniti of isabella’ 
virtu remind her of the prefer which theodor had almost declar 
for her rival, made her determin to conquer her passion, and cede the 
belov object to her friend. 

dure thi contest of amity, hippolita enter her daughter’ chamber. 

“madam,” said she to isabella, “you have so much tender for matilda, 
and interest yourself so kindli in whatev affect our wretch house, 
that I can have no secret with my child which are not proper for you to 
hear.” 

the princess were all attent and anxiety. 

“know then, madam,” continu hippolita, “and you my dearest matilda, 
that be convinc by all the event of these two last omin days, 
that heaven purpos the sceptr of otranto should pass from manfred’ 
hand into those of the marqui frederic, I have been perhap inspir 
with the thought of avert our total destruct by the union of our 
rival houses. with thi view I have been propos to manfred, my lord, 
to tender thi dear, dear child to frederic, your father.” 

“me to lord frederic!” cri matilda; “good heavens! my graciou 
mother—and have you name it to my father?” 

“I have,” said hippolita; “he listen benignli to my proposal, and is 
gone to break it to the marquis.” 

“ah! wretch princess!” cri isabella; “what hast thou done! what ruin 
ha thi inadvert good been prepar for thyself, for me, and for 
matilda!” 

“ruin from me to you and to my child!” said hippolita “what can thi 
mean?” 

“alas!” said isabella, “the puriti of your own heart prevent your see 
the deprav of others. manfred, your lord, that impiou man—” 

“hold,” said hippolita; “you must not in my presence, young lady, mention 
manfr with disrespect: he is my lord and husband, and—” 

“will not long be so,” said isabella, “if hi wick purpos can be 
carri into execution.” 

“thi languag amaz me,” said hippolita. “your feeling, isabella, is 
warm; but until thi hour I never knew it betray you into intemperance. 
what deed of manfr authoris you to treat him as a murderer, an 
assassin?” 

“thou virtuous, and too credul princess!” repli isabella; “it is not 
thi life he aim at—it is to separ himself from thee! to divorc thee! 
to—” 

“to divorc me!” “to divorc my mother!” cri hippolita and matilda at 
once. 

“yes,” said isabella; “and to complet hi crime, he meditates—i cannot 
speak it!” 

“what can surpass what thou hast alreadi uttered?” said matilda. 

hippolita wa silent. grief choke her speech; and the recollect of 
manfred’ late ambigu discours confirm what she heard. 

“excellent, dear lady! madam! mother!” cri isabella, fling herself 
at hippolita’ feet in a transport of passion; “trust me, believ me, I 
will die a thousand death sooner than consent to injur you, than yield 
to so odious—oh!—” 

“thi is too much!” cri hippolita: “what crime doe one crime suggest! 
rise, dear isabella; I do not doubt your virtue. oh! matilda, thi 
stroke is too heavi for thee! weep not, my child; and not a murmur, I 
charg thee. remember, he is thi father still!” 

“but you are my mother too,” said matilda fervently; “and you are 
virtuous, you are guiltless!—oh! must not I, must not I complain?” 

“you must not,” said hippolita—“come, all will yet be well. manfred, in 
the agoni for the loss of thi brother, knew not what he said; perhap 
isabella misunderstood him; hi heart is good—and, my child, thou knowest 
not all! there is a destini hang over us; the hand of provid is 
stretch out; oh! could I but save thee from the wreck! yes,” continu 
she in a firmer tone, “perhap the sacrific of myself may aton for all; 
I will go and offer myself to thi divorce—it boot not what becom of 
me. I will withdraw into the neighbour monastery, and wast the 
remaind of life in prayer and tear for my child and—th prince!” 

“thou art as much too good for thi world,” said isabella, “a manfr is 
execrable; but think not, lady, that thi weak shall determin for me. 
I swear, hear me all ye angels—” 

“stop, I adjur thee,” cri hippolita: “rememb thou dost not depend on 
thyself; thou hast a father.” 

“mi father is too pious, too noble,” interrupt isabella, “to command an 
impiou deed. but should he command it; can a father enjoin a curs 
act? I wa contract to the son, can I wed the father? no, madam, no; 
forc should not drag me to manfred’ hate bed. I loath him, I abhor 
him: divin and human law forbid—and my friend, my dearest matilda! 
would I wound her tender soul by injur her ador mother? my own 
mother—i never have known another”— 

“oh! she is the mother of both!” cri matilda: “can we, can we, 
isabella, ador her too much?” 

“mi love children,” said the touch hippolita, “your tender 
overpow me—but I must not give way to it. It is not our to make 
elect for ourselves: heaven, our fathers, and our husband must decid 
for us. have patienc until you hear what manfr and freder have 
determined. If the marqui accept matilda’ hand, I know she will 
readili obey. heaven may interpos and prevent the rest. what mean my 
child?” continu she, see matilda fall at her feet with a flood of 
speechless tears—“but no; answer me not, my daughter: I must not hear a 
word against the pleasur of thi father.” 

“oh! doubt not my obedience, my dread obedi to him and to you!” 
said matilda. “but can I, most respect of women, can I experi all 
thi tenderness, thi world of goodness, and conceal a thought from the 
best of mothers?” 

“what art thou go to utter?” said isabella trembling. “recollect 
thyself, matilda.” 

“no, isabella,” said the princess, “I should not deserv thi 
incompar parent, if the inmost recess of my soul harbour a 
thought without her permission—nay, I have offend her; I have suffer 
a passion to enter my heart without her avowal—but here I disclaim it; 
here I vow to heaven and her—” 

“mi child! my child;” said hippolita, “what word are these! what new 
calam ha fate in store for us! thou, a passion? thou, in thi 
hour of destruction—” 

“oh! I see all my guilt!” said matilda. “I abhor myself, if I cost my 
mother a pang. she is the dearest thing I have on earth—oh! I will 
never, never behold him more!” 

“isabella,” said hippolita, “thou art consciou to thi unhappi secret, 
whatev it is. speak!” 

“what!” cri matilda, “have I so forfeit my mother’ love, that she 
will not permit me even to speak my own guilt? oh! wretched, wretch 
matilda!” 

“thou art too cruel,” said isabella to hippolita: “canst thou behold thi 
anguish of a virtuou mind, and not commiser it?” 

“not piti my child!” said hippolita, catch matilda in her arms—“oh! I 
know she is good, she is all virtue, all tenderness, and duty. I do 
forgiv thee, my excellent, my onli hope!” 

the princess then reveal to hippolita their mutual inclin for 
theodore, and the purpos of isabella to resign him to matilda. 
hippolita blame their imprudence, and show them the improb that 
either father would consent to bestow hi heiress on so poor a man, 
though nobli born. some comfort it gave her to find their passion of so 
recent a date, and that theodor had had but littl caus to suspect it 
in either. she strictli enjoin them to avoid all correspond with 
him. thi matilda fervent promised: but isabella, who flatter 
herself that she meant no more than to promot hi union with her friend, 
could not determin to avoid him; and made no reply. 

“I will go to the convent,” said hippolita, “and order new mass to be 
said for a deliver from these calamities.” 

“oh! my mother,” said matilda, “you mean to quit us: you mean to take 
sanctuary, and to give my father an opportun of pursu hi fatal 
intention. alas! on my knee I supplic you to forbear; will you leav 
me a prey to frederic? I will follow you to the convent.” 

“be at peace, my child,” said hippolita: “I will return instantly. I 
will never abandon thee, until I know it is the will of heaven, and for 
thi benefit.” 

“do not deceiv me,” said matilda. “I will not marri freder until thou 
commandest it. alas! what will becom of me?” 

“whi that exclamation?” said hippolita. “I have promis thee to 
return—” 

“ah! my mother,” repli matilda, “stay and save me from myself. A frown 
from thee can do more than all my father’ severity. I have given away 
my heart, and you alon can make me recal it.” 

“no more,” said hippolita; “thou must not relapse, matilda.” 

“I can quit theodore,” said she, “but must I wed another? let me attend 
thee to the altar, and shut myself from the world for ever.” 

“thi fate depend on thi father,” said hippolita; “I have ill-bestow my 
tenderness, if it ha taught thee to rever aught beyond him. adieu! my 
child: I go to pray for thee.” 

hippolita’ real purpos wa to demand of jerome, whether in conscienc 
she might not consent to the divorce. she had oft urg manfr to 
resign the principality, which the delicaci of her conscienc render an 
hourli burthen to her. these scrupl concur to make the separ 
from her husband appear less dread to her than it would have seem in 
ani other situation. 

jerome, at quit the castl overnight, had question theodor 
sever whi he had accus him to manfr of be privi to hi escape. 
theodor own it had been with design to prevent manfred’ suspicion 
from alight on matilda; and added, the holi of jerome’ life and 
charact secur him from the tyrant’ wrath. jerom wa heartili 
griev to discov hi son’ inclin for that princess; and leav 
him to hi rest, promis in the morn to acquaint him with import 
reason for conquer hi passion. 

theodore, like isabella, wa too recent acquaint with parent 
author to submit to it decis against the impuls of hi heart. 
He had littl curios to learn the friar’ reasons, and less 
disposit to obey them. the love matilda had made stronger 
impress on him than filial affection. all night he pleas himself 
with vision of love; and it wa not till late after the morning-office, 
that he recollect the friar’ command to attend him at alfonso’ tomb. 

“young man,” said jerome, when he saw him, “thi tardi doe not 
pleas me. have a father’ command alreadi so littl weight?” 

theodor made awkward excuses, and attribut hi delay to have 
overslept himself. 

“and on whom were thi dream employed?” said the friar sternly. hi son 
blushed. “come, come,” resum the friar, “inconsider youth, thi 
must not be; erad thi guilti passion from thi breast—” 

“guilti passion!” cri theodore: “can guilt dwell with innoc beauti 
and virtuou modesty?” 

“it is sinful,” repli the friar, “to cherish those whom heaven ha 
doom to destruction. A tyrant’ race must be swept from the earth to 
the third and fourth generation.” 

“will heaven visit the innoc for the crime of the guilty?” said 
theodore. “the fair matilda ha virtu enough—” 

“to undo thee:” interrupt jerome. “hast thou so soon forgotten that 
twice the savag manfr ha pronounc thi sentence?” 

“nor have I forgotten, sir,” said theodore, “that the chariti of hi 
daughter deliv me from hi power. I can forget injuries, but never 
benefits.” 

“the injuri thou hast receiv from manfred’ race,” said the friar, 
“are beyond what thou canst conceive. repli not, but view thi holi 
image! beneath thi marbl monument rest the ash of the good alfonso; 
a princ adorn with everi virtue: the father of hi people! the delight 
of mankind! kneel, headstrong boy, and list, while a father unfold a 
tale of horror that will expel everi sentiment from thi soul, but 
sensat of sacr vengeance—alfonso! much injur prince! let thi 
unsatisfi shade sit aw on the troubl air, while these trembl 
lips—ha! who come there?—” 

“the most wretch of women!” said hippolita, enter the choir. “good 
father, art thou at leisure?—but whi thi kneel youth? what mean the 
horror imprint on each countenance? whi at thi vener tomb—alas! 
hast thou seen aught?” 

“we were pour forth our orison to heaven,” repli the friar, with 
some confusion, “to put an end to the woe of thi deplor province. 
join with us, lady! thi spotless soul may obtain an exempt from the 
judgment which the portent of these day but too speakingli denounc 
against thi house.” 

“I pray fervent to heaven to divert them,” said the piou princess. 
“thou knowest it ha been the occup of my life to wrest a bless 
for my lord and my harmless children.—on alas! is taken from me! would 
heaven but hear me for my poor matilda! father! interced for her!” 

“everi heart will bless her,” cri theodor with rapture. 

“be dumb, rash youth!” said jerome. “and thou, fond princess, contend 
not with the power above! the lord giveth, and the lord taketh away: 
bless hi holi name, and submit to hi decrees.” 

“I do most devoutly,” said hippolita; “but will He not spare my onli 
comfort? must matilda perish too?—ah! father, I came—but dismiss thi 
son. No ear but thine must hear what I have to utter.” 

“may heaven grant thi everi wish, most excel princess!” said theodor 
retiring. jerom frowned. 

hippolita then acquaint the friar with the propos she had suggest 
to manfred, hi approb of it, and the tender of matilda that he wa 
gone to make to frederic. jerom could not conceal hi dislik of the 
notion, which he cover under pretenc of the improb that 
frederic, the nearest of blood to alfonso, and who wa come to claim hi 
succession, would yield to an allianc with the usurp of hi right. 
but noth could equal the perplex of the friar, when hippolita 
confess her readi not to oppos the separation, and demand hi 
opinion on the legal of her acquiescence. the friar caught eagerli at 
her request of hi advice, and without explain hi avers to the 
propos marriag of manfr and isabella, he paint to hippolita in the 
most alarm colour the sin of her consent, denounc judgment 
against her if she complied, and enjoin her in the severest term to 
treat ani such proposit with everi mark of indign and refusal. 

manfred, in the meantime, had broken hi purpos to frederic, and 
propos the doubl marriage. that weak prince, who had been struck with 
the charm of matilda, listen but too eagerli to the offer. He forgot 
hi enmiti to manfred, whom he saw but littl hope of dispossess by 
force; and flatter himself that no issu might succeed from the union 
of hi daughter with the tyrant, he look upon hi own success to the 
princip as facilit by wed matilda. He made faint opposit 
to the proposal; affecting, for form only, not to acquiesc unless 
hippolita should consent to the divorce. manfr took that upon himself. 

transport with hi success, and impati to see himself in a situat 
to expect sons, he hasten to hi wife’ apartment, determin to extort 
her compliance. He learn with indign that she wa absent at the 
convent. hi guilt suggest to him that she had probabl been inform 
by isabella of hi purpose. He doubt whether her retir to the 
convent did not import an intent of remain there, until she could 
rais obstacl to their divorce; and the suspicion he had alreadi 
entertain of jerome, made him apprehend that the friar would not onli 
travers hi views, but might have inspir hippolita with the resolut 
of talk sanctuary. impati to unravel thi clue, and to defeat it 
success, manfr hasten to the convent, and arriv there as the friar 
wa earnestli exhort the princess never to yield to the divorce. 

“madam,” said manfred, “what busi drew you hither? whi did you not 
await my return from the marquis?” 

“I came to implor a bless on your councils,” repli hippolita. 

“mi council do not need a friar’ intervention,” said manfred; “and of 
all men live is that hoari traitor the onli one whom you delight to 
confer with?” 

“profan prince!” said jerome; “i it at the altar that thou choosest to 
insult the servant of the altar?—but, manfred, thi impiou scheme are 
known. heaven and thi virtuou ladi know them—nay, frown not, prince. 
the church despis thi menaces. her thunder will be heard abov thi 
wrath. dare to proceed in thi curs purpos of a divorce, until her 
sentenc be known, and here I lanc her anathema at thi head.” 

“audaci rebel!” said manfred, endeavour to conceal the awe with 
which the friar’ word inspir him. “dost thou presum to threaten thi 
law prince?” 

“thou art no law prince,” said jerome; “thou art no prince—go, discuss 
thi claim with frederic; and when that is done—” 

“it is done,” repli manfred; “freder accept matilda’ hand, and is 
content to waiv hi claim, unless I have no male issue”—a he spoke 
those word three drop of blood fell from the nose of alfonso’ statue. 
manfr turn pale, and the princess sank on her knees. 

“behold!” said the friar; “mark thi miracul indic that the blood 
of alfonso will never mix with that of manfred!” 

“mi graciou lord,” said hippolita, “let us submit ourselv to heaven. 
think not thi ever obedi wife rebel against thi authority. I have no 
will but that of my lord and the church. To that rever tribun let us 
appeal. It doe not depend on us to burst the bond that unit us. If 
the church shall approv the dissolut of our marriage, be it so—i have 
but few years, and those of sorrow, to pass. where can they be worn away 
so well as at the foot of thi altar, in prayer for thine and matilda’ 
safety?” 

“but thou shalt not remain here until then,” said manfred. “repair with 
me to the castle, and there I will advis on the proper measur for a 
divorce;—but thi meddl friar come not thither; my hospit roof 
shall never more harbour a traitor—and for thi reverence’ offspring,” 
continu he, “I banish him from my dominions. he, I ween, is no sacr 
personage, nor under the protect of the church. whoever wed 
isabella, it shall not be father falconara’ started-up son.” 

“they start up,” said the friar, “who are suddenli beheld in the seat of 
law princes; but they wither away like the grass, and their place 
know them no more.” 

manfred, cast a look of scorn at the friar, led hippolita forth; but 
at the door of the church whisper one of hi attend to remain 
conceal about the convent, and bring him instant notice, if ani one 
from the castl should repair thither. 




chapter V. 


everi reflect which manfr made on the friar’ behaviour, conspir 
to persuad him that jerom wa privi to an amour between isabella and 
theodore. but jerome’ new presumption, so disson from hi former 
meekness, suggest still deeper apprehensions. the princ even 
suspect that the friar depend on some secret support from frederic, 
whose arrival, coincid with the novel appear of theodore, seem 
to bespeak a correspondence. still more wa he troubl with the 
resembl of theodor to alfonso’ portrait. the latter he knew had 
unquestion die without issue. freder had consent to bestow 
isabella on him. these contradict agit hi mind with numberless 
pangs. 

He saw but two method of extric himself from hi difficulties. the 
one wa to resign hi dominion to the marquis—pride, ambition, and hi 
relianc on ancient prophecies, which had point out a possibl of 
hi preserv them to hi posterity, combat that thought. the other 
wa to press hi marriag with isabella. after long rumin on these 
anxiou thoughts, as he march silent with hippolita to the castle, he 
at last discours with that princess on the subject of hi disquiet, and 
use everi insinu and plausibl argument to extract her consent to, 
even her promis of promot the divorce. hippolita need littl 
persuas to bend her to hi pleasure. she endeavour to win him over 
to the measur of resign hi dominions; but find her exhort 
fruitless, she assur him, that as far as her conscienc would allow, 
she would rais no opposit to a separation, though without better 
found scrupl than what he yet alleged, she would not engag to be 
activ in demand it. 

thi compliance, though inadequate, wa suffici to rais manfred’ 
hopes. He trust that hi power and wealth would easili advanc hi 
suit at the court of rome, whither he resolv to engag freder to take 
a journey on purpose. that princ had discov so much passion for 
matilda, that manfr hope to obtain all he wish by hold out or 
withdraw hi daughter’ charms, accord as the marqui should appear 
more or less dispos to co-oper in hi views. even the absenc of 
freder would be a materi point gained, until he could take further 
measur for hi security. 

dismiss hippolita to her apartment, he repair to that of the 
marquis; but cross the great hall through which he wa to pass he met 
bianca. the damsel he knew wa in the confid of both the young 
ladies. It immedi occur to him to sift her on the subject of 
isabella and theodore. call her asid into the recess of the oriel 
window of the hall, and sooth her with mani fair word and promises, 
he demand of her whether she knew aught of the state of isabella’ 
affections. 

“i! my lord! no my lord—y my lord—poor lady! she is wonder alarm 
about her father’ wounds; but I tell her he will do well; don’t your 
high think so?” 

“I do not ask you,” repli manfred, “what she think about her father; 
but you are in her secrets. come, be a good girl and tell me; is there 
ani young man—ha!—y understand me.” 

“lord bless me! understand your highness? no, not I. I told her a few 
vulnerari herb and repose—” 

“I am not talking,” repli the prince, impatiently, “about her father; I 
know he will do well.” 

“bless me, I rejoic to hear your high say so; for though I thought 
it not right to let my young ladi despond, methought hi great had a 
wan look, and a something—i rememb when young ferdinand wa wound by 
the venetian—” 

“thou answerest from the point,” interrupt manfred; “but here, take 
thi jewel, perhap that may fix thi attention—nay, no reverences; my 
favour shall not stop here—come, tell me truly; how stand isabella’ 
heart?” 

“well! your high ha such a way!” said bianca, “to be sure—but can 
your high keep a secret? if it should ever come out of your lips—” 

“it shall not, it shall not,” cri manfred. 

“nay, but swear, your highness.” 

“bi my halidame, if it should ever be known that I said it—” 

“why, truth is truth, I do not think my ladi isabella ever much 
affect my young lord your son; yet he wa a sweet youth as one 
should see; I am sure, if I had been a princess—but bless me! I must 
attend my ladi matilda; she will marvel what is becom of me.” 

“stay,” cri manfred; “thou hast not satisfi my question. hast thou 
ever carri ani message, ani letter?” 

“i! good gracious!” cri bianca; “I carri a letter? I would not to be a 
queen. I hope your high thinks, though I am poor, I am honest. did 
your high never hear what count marsigli offer me, when he came a 
woo to my ladi matilda?” 

“I have not leisure,” said manfred, “to listen to thi tale. I do not 
question thi honesty. but it is thi duti to conceal noth from me. 
how long ha isabella been acquaint with theodore?” 

“nay, there is noth can escap your highness!” said bianca; “not that 
I know ani thing of the matter. theodore, to be sure, is a proper young 
man, and, as my ladi matilda says, the veri imag of good alfonso. ha 
not your high remark it?” 

“yes, yes,—no—th torturest me,” said manfred. “where did they meet? 
when?” 

“who! my ladi matilda?” said bianca. 

“no, no, not matilda: isabella; when did isabella first becom acquaint 
with thi theodore!” 

“virgin mary!” said bianca, “how should I know?” 

“thou dost know,” said manfred; “and I must know; I will—” 

“lord! your high is not jealou of young theodore!” said bianca. 

“jealous! no, no. whi should I be jealous? perhap I mean to unit 
them—if I were sure isabella would have no repugnance.” 

“repugnance! no, i’ll warrant her,” said bianca; “he is as come a youth 
as ever trod on christian ground. We are all in love with him; there is 
not a soul in the castl but would be rejoic to have him for our 
prince—i mean, when it shall pleas heaven to call your high to 
itself.” 

“indeed!” said manfred, “ha it gone so far! oh! thi curs friar!—but I 
must not lose time—go, bianca, attend isabella; but I charg thee, not a 
word of what ha passed. find out how she is affect toward theodore; 
bring me good news, and that ring ha a companion. wait at the foot of 
the wind staircase: I am go to visit the marquis, and will talk 
further with thee at my return.” 

manfred, after some gener conversation, desir freder to dismiss the 
two knights, hi companions, have to talk with him on urgent affairs. 

As soon as they were alone, he began in art guis to sound the marqui 
on the subject of matilda; and find him dispos to hi wish, he let 
drop hint on the difficulti that would attend the celebr of their 
marriage, unless—at that instant bianca burst into the room with a 
wild in her look and gestur that spoke the utmost terror. 

“oh! my lord, my lord!” cri she; “we are all undone! it is come again! 
it is come again!” 

“what is come again?” cri manfr amazed. 

“oh! the hand! the giant! the hand!—support me! I am terrifi out of my 
senses,” cri bianca. “I will not sleep in the castl to-night. where 
shall I go? my thing may come after me to-morrow—would I had been 
content to wed francesco! thi come of ambition!” 

“what ha terrifi thee thus, young woman?” said the marquis. “thou art 
safe here; be not alarmed.” 

“oh! your great is wonder good,” said bianca, “but I dare 
not—no, pray let me go—i had rather leav everyth behind me, than stay 
anoth hour under thi roof.” 

“go to, thou hast lost thi senses,” said manfred. “interrupt us not; we 
were commun on import matters—mi lord, thi wench is subject to 
fits—com with me, bianca.” 

“oh! the saints! no,” said bianca, “for certain it come to warn your 
highness; whi should it appear to me else? I say my prayer morn and 
evening—oh! if your high had believ diego! ’ti the same hand that 
he saw the foot to in the gallery-chamber—fath jerom ha often told us 
the propheci would be out one of these days—‘bianca,’ said he, ‘mark my 
words—’” 

“thou ravest,” said manfred, in a rage; “be gone, and keep these 
fooleri to frighten thi companions.” 

“what! my lord,” cri bianca, “do you think I have seen nothing? go to 
the foot of the great stair yourself—a I live I saw it.” 

“saw what? tell us, fair maid, what thou hast seen,” said frederic. 

“can your high listen,” said manfred, “to the delirium of a silli 
wench, who ha heard stori of apparit until she believ them?” 

“thi is more than fancy,” said the marquis; “her terror is too natur 
and too strongli impress to be the work of imagination. tell us, fair 
maiden, what it is ha move thee thus?” 

“yes, my lord, thank your greatness,” said bianca; “I believ I look veri 
pale; I shall be better when I have recov myself—i wa go to my 
ladi isabella’ chamber, by hi highness’ order—” 

“we do not want the circumstances,” interrupt manfred. “sinc hi 
high will have it so, proceed; but be brief.” 

“lord! your high thwart one so!” repli bianca; “I fear my hair—i 
am sure I never in my life—well! as I wa tell your greatness, I wa 
go by hi highness’ order to my ladi isabella’ chamber; she lie in 
the watchet-colour chamber, on the right hand, one pair of stairs: so 
when I came to the great stairs—i wa look on hi highness’ present 
here—” 

“grant me patience!” said manfred, “will thi wench never come to the 
point? what import it to the marquis, that I gave thee a baubl for thi 
faith attend on my daughter? we want to know what thou sawest.” 

“I wa go to tell your highness,” said bianca, “if you would permit 
me. So as I wa rub the ring—i am sure I had not gone up three 
steps, but I heard the rattl of armour; for all the world such a 
clatter as diego say he heard when the giant turn him about in the 
gallery-chamber.” 

“what giant is this, my lord?” said the marquis; “i your castl haunt 
by giant and goblins?” 

“lord! what, ha not your great heard the stori of the giant in the 
gallery-chamber?” cri bianca. “I marvel hi high ha not told you; 
mayhap you do not know there is a prophecy—” 

“thi trifl is intolerable,” interrupt manfred. “let us dismiss 
thi silli wench, my lord! we have more import affair to discuss.” 

“bi your favour,” said frederic, “these are no trifles. the enorm 
sabr I wa direct to in the wood, yon casque, it fellow—ar these 
vision of thi poor maiden’ brain?” 

“so jaquez thinks, may it pleas your greatness,” said bianca. “he say 
thi moon will not be out without our see some strang revolution. 
for my part, I should not be surpris if it wa to happen to-morrow; 
for, as I wa saying, when I heard the clatter of armour, I wa all in 
a cold sweat. I look up, and, if your great will believ me, I saw 
upon the uppermost banist of the great stair a hand in armour as big 
as big. I thought I should have swooned. I never stop until I came 
hither—would I were well out of thi castle. My ladi matilda told me but 
yester-morn that her high hippolita know something.” 

“thou art an insolent!” cri manfred. “lord marquis, it much misgiv 
me that thi scene is concert to affront me. are my own domest 
suborn to spread tale injuri to my honour? pursu your claim by 
manli daring; or let us buri our feuds, as wa proposed, by the 
intermarriag of our children. but trust me, it ill becom a princ of 
your bear to practis on mercenari wenches.” 

“I scorn your imputation,” said frederic. “until thi hour I never set 
eye on thi damsel: I have given her no jewel. My lord, my lord, your 
conscience, your guilt accus you, and would throw the suspicion on me; 
but keep your daughter, and think no more of isabella. the judgment 
alreadi fallen on your hous forbid me match into it.” 

manfred, alarm at the resolut tone in which freder deliv these 
words, endeavour to pacifi him. dismiss bianca, he made such 
submiss to the marquis, and threw in such art encomium on 
matilda, that freder wa onc more staggered. however, as hi passion 
wa of so recent a date, it could not at onc surmount the scrupl he 
had conceived. He had gather enough from bianca’ discours to 
persuad him that heaven declar itself against manfred. the propos 
marriag too remov hi claim to a distance; and the princip of 
otranto wa a stronger temptat than the conting revers of it 
with matilda. still he would not absolut reced from hi engagements; 
but purpos to gain time, he demand of manfr if it wa true in fact 
that hippolita consent to the divorce. the prince, transport to find 
no other obstacle, and depend on hi influenc over hi wife, assur 
the marqui it wa so, and that he might satisfi himself of the truth 
from her own mouth. 

As they were thu discoursing, word wa brought that the banquet wa 
prepared. manfr conduct freder to the great hall, where they were 
receiv by hippolita and the young princesses. manfr place the 
marqui next to matilda, and seat himself between hi wife and 
isabella. hippolita comport herself with an easi gravity; but the 
young ladi were silent and melancholy. manfred, who wa determin to 
pursu hi point with the marqui in the remaind of the evening, push 
on the feast until it wax late; affect unrestrain gaiety, and 
pli freder with repeat goblet of wine. the latter, more upon hi 
guard than manfr wished, declin hi frequent challenges, on pretenc 
of hi late loss of blood; while the prince, to rais hi own disord 
spirits, and to counterfeit unconcern, indulg himself in plenti 
draughts, though not to the intox of hi senses. 

the even be far advanced, the banquet concluded. manfr would 
have withdrawn with frederic; but the latter plead weak and want 
of repose, retir to hi chamber, gallantli tell the princ that hi 
daughter should amus hi high until himself could attend him. 
manfr accept the party, and to the no small grief of isabella, 
accompani her to her apartment. matilda wait on her mother to enjoy 
the fresh of the even on the rampart of the castle. 

soon as the compani were dispers their sever ways, frederic, quit 
hi chamber, inquir if hippolita wa alone, and wa told by one of her 
attendants, who had not notic her go forth, that at that hour she 
gener withdrew to her oratory, where he probabl would find her. the 
marquis, dure the repast, had beheld matilda with increas of passion. 
He now wish to find hippolita in the disposit her lord had promised. 
the portent that had alarm him were forgotten in hi desires. 
steal softli and unobserv to the apart of hippolita, he enter 
it with a resolut to encourag her acquiesc to the divorce, have 
perceiv that manfr wa resolv to make the possess of isabella an 
unalter condition, befor he would grant matilda to hi wishes. 

the marqui wa not surpris at the silenc that reign in the 
princess’ apartment. conclud her, as he had been advertised, in her 
oratory, he pass on. the door wa ajar; the even gloomi and 
overcast. push open the door gently, he saw a person kneel befor 
the altar. As he approach nearer, it seem not a woman, but one in a 
long woollen weed, whose back wa toward him. the person seem 
absorb in prayer. the marqui wa about to return, when the figure, 
rising, stood some moment fix in meditation, without regard him. 
the marquis, expect the holi person to come forth, and mean to 
excus hi uncivil interruption, said, 

“reverend father, I sought the ladi hippolita.” 

“hippolita!” repli a hollow voice; “camest thou to thi castl to seek 
hippolita?” and then the figure, turn slowli round, discov to 
freder the fleshless jaw and empti socket of a skeleton, wrapt in a 
hermit’ cowl. 

“angel of grace protect me!” cri frederic, recoiling. 

“deserv their protection!” said the spectre. frederic, fall on hi 
knees, adjur the phantom to take piti on him. 

“dost thou not rememb me?” said the apparition. “rememb the wood of 
joppa!” 

“art thou that holi hermit?” cri frederic, trembling. “can I do aught 
for thi etern peace?” 

“wast thou deliv from bondage,” said the spectre, “to pursu carnal 
delights? hast thou forgotten the buri sabre, and the behest of heaven 
engraven on it?” 

“I have not, I have not,” said frederic; “but say, blest spirit, what is 
thi errand to me? what remain to be done?” 

“to forget matilda!” said the apparition; and vanished. 

frederic’ blood froze in hi veins. for some minut he remain 
motionless. then fall prostrat on hi face befor the altar, he 
besought the intercess of everi saint for pardon. A flood of tear 
succeed to thi transport; and the imag of the beauteou matilda 
rush in spite of him on hi thoughts, he lay on the ground in a 
conflict of penit and passion. ere he could recov from thi agoni 
of hi spirits, the princess hippolita with a taper in her hand enter 
the oratori alone. see a man without motion on the floor, she gave a 
shriek, conclud him dead. her fright brought freder to himself. 
rise suddenly, hi face bedew with tears, he would have rush from 
her presence; but hippolita stop him, conjur him in the most 
plaintiv accent to explain the caus of hi disorder, and by what 
strang chanc she had found him there in that posture. 

“ah, virtuou princess!” said the marquis, penetr with grief, and 
stopped. 

“for the love of heaven, my lord,” said hippolita, “disclos the caus of 
thi transport! what mean these dole sounds, thi alarm 
exclam on my name? what woe ha heaven still in store for the 
wretch hippolita? yet silent! By everi piti angel, I adjur thee, 
nobl prince,” continu she, fall at hi feet, “to disclos the 
purport of what lie at thi heart. I see thou feelest for me; thou 
feelest the sharp pang that thou inflictest—speak, for pity! doe aught 
thou knowest concern my child?” 

“I cannot speak,” cri frederic, burst from her. “oh, matilda!” 

quit the princess thu abruptly, he hasten to hi own apartment. 
At the door of it he wa accost by manfred, who flush by wine and 
love had come to seek him, and to propos to wast some hour of the 
night in music and revelling. frederic, offend at an invit so 
disson from the mood of hi soul, push him rude aside, and 
enter hi chamber, flung the door intemper against manfred, and 
bolt it inwards. the haughti prince, enrag at thi unaccount 
behaviour, withdrew in a frame of mind capabl of the most fatal 
excesses. As he cross the court, he wa met by the domest whom he 
had plant at the convent as a spi on jerom and theodore. thi man, 
almost breathless with the hast he had made, inform hi lord that 
theodore, and some ladi from the castl were, at that instant, in privat 
confer at the tomb of alfonso in st. nicholas’ church. He had 
dog theodor thither, but the gloomi of the night had prevent 
hi discov who the woman was. 

manfred, whose spirit were inflamed, and whom isabella had driven from 
her on hi urg hi passion with too littl reserve, did not doubt but 
the inquietud she had express had been occas by her impati to 
meet theodore. provok by thi conjecture, and enrag at her father, 
he hasten secretli to the great church. glide softli between the 
aisles, and guid by an imperfect gleam of moonshin that shone faintli 
through the illumin windows, he stole toward the tomb of alfonso, to 
which he wa direct by indistinct whisper of the person he sought. 
the first sound he could distinguish were— 

“doe it, alas! depend on me? manfr will never permit our union.” 

“no, thi shall prevent it!” cri the tyrant, draw hi dagger, and 
plung it over her shoulder into the bosom of the person that spoke. 

“ah, me, I am slain!” cri matilda, sinking. “good heaven, receiv my 
soul!” 

“savage, inhuman monster, what hast thou done!” cri theodore, rush 
on him, and wrench hi dagger from him. 

“stop, stop thi impiou hand!” cri matilda; “it is my father!” 

manfred, wake as from a trance, beat hi breast, twist hi hand in 
hi locks, and endeavour to recov hi dagger from theodor to 
despatch himself. theodore, scarc less distracted, and onli master 
the transport of hi grief to assist matilda, had now by hi cri drawn 
some of the monk to hi aid. while part of them endeavoured, in concert 
with the afflict theodore, to stop the blood of the die princess, the 
rest prevent manfr from lay violent hand on himself. 

matilda, resign herself patient to her fate, acknowledg with look 
of grate love the zeal of theodore. yet oft as her faint would 
permit her speech it way, she beg the assist to comfort her 
father. jerome, by thi time, had learnt the fatal news, and reach the 
church. hi look seem to reproach theodore, but turn to manfred, 
he said, 

“now, tyrant! behold the complet of woe fulfil on thi impiou and 
devot head! the blood of alfonso cri to heaven for vengeance; and 
heaven ha permit it altar to be pollut by assassination, that thou 
mightest shed thi own blood at the foot of that prince’ sepulchre!” 

“cruel man!” cri matilda, “to aggrav the woe of a parent; may 
heaven bless my father, and forgiv him as I do! My lord, my graciou 
sire, dost thou forgiv thi child? indeed, I came not hither to meet 
theodore. I found him pray at thi tomb, whither my mother sent me to 
interced for thee, for her—dearest father, bless your child, and say you 
forgiv her.” 

“forgiv thee! murder monster!” cri manfred, “can assassin 
forgive? I took thee for isabella; but heaven direct my bloodi hand to 
the heart of my child. oh, matilda!—i cannot utter it—canst thou forgiv 
the blind of my rage?” 

“I can, I do; and may heaven confirm it!” said matilda; “but while I have 
life to ask it—oh! my mother! what will she feel? will you comfort her, 
my lord? will you not put her away? inde she love you! oh, I am 
faint! bear me to the castle. can I live to have her close my eyes?” 

theodor and the monk besought her earnestli to suffer herself to be 
born into the convent; but her instanc were so press to be carri 
to the castle, that place her on a litter, they convey her thither as 
she requested. theodore, support her head with hi arm, and hang 
over her in an agoni of despair love, still endeavour to inspir her 
with hope of life. jerome, on the other side, comfort her with 
discours of heaven, and hold a crucifix befor her, which she bath 
with innoc tears, prepar her for her passag to immortality. 
manfred, plung in the deepest affliction, follow the litter in 
despair. 

ere they reach the castle, hippolita, inform of the dread 
catastrophe, had flown to meet her murder child; but when she saw the 
afflict procession, the mighti of her grief depriv her of her 
senses, and she fell lifeless to the earth in a swoon. isabella and 
frederic, who attend her, were overwhelm in almost equal sorrow. 
matilda alon seem insens to her own situation: everi thought wa 
lost in tender for her mother. 

order the litter to stop, as soon as hippolita wa brought to herself, 
she ask for her father. He approached, unabl to speak. matilda, 
seiz hi hand and her mother’s, lock them in her own, and then 
clasp them to her heart. manfr could not support thi act of 
pathet piety. He dash himself on the ground, and curs the day he 
wa born. isabella, apprehens that these struggl of passion were 
more than matilda could support, took upon herself to order manfr to be 
born to hi apartment, while she caus matilda to be convey to the 
nearest chamber. hippolita, scarc more aliv than her daughter, wa 
regardless of everyth but her; but when the tender isabella’ care 
would have likewis remov her, while the surgeon examin matilda’ 
wound, she cried, 

“remov me! never, never! I live but in her, and will expir with her.” 

matilda rais her eye at her mother’ voice, but close them again 
without speaking. her sink puls and the damp cold of her hand 
soon dispel all hope of recovery. theodor follow the surgeon 
into the outer chamber, and heard them pronounc the fatal sentenc with 
a transport equal to frenzy. 

“sinc she cannot live mine,” cri he, “at least she shall be mine in 
death! father! jerome! will you not join our hands?” cri he to the 
friar, who, with the marquis, had accompani the surgeons. 

“what mean thi distract rashness?” said jerome. “i thi an hour for 
marriage?” 

“it is, it is,” cri theodore. “alas! there is no other!” 

“young man, thou art too unadvised,” said frederic. “dost thou think we 
are to listen to thi fond transport in thi hour of fate? what 
pretens hast thou to the princess?” 

“those of a prince,” said theodore; “of the sovereign of otranto. thi 
reverend man, my father, ha inform me who I am.” 

“thou ravest,” said the marquis. “there is no princ of otranto but 
myself, now manfred, by murder, by sacrilegi murder, ha forfeit all 
pretensions.” 

“mi lord,” said jerome, assum an air of command, “he tell you true. 
It wa not my purpos the secret should have been divulg so soon, but 
fate press onward to it work. what hi hot-head passion ha 
revealed, my tongu confirms. know, prince, that when alfonso set sail 
for the holi land—” 

“i thi a season for explanations?” cri theodore. “father, come and 
unit me to the princess; she shall be mine! In everi other thing I will 
duti obey you. My life! my ador matilda!” continu theodore, 
rush back into the inner chamber, “will you not be mine? will you not 
bless your—” 

isabella made sign to him to be silent, apprehend the princess wa 
near her end. 

“what, is she dead?” cri theodore; “i it possible!” 

the violenc of hi exclam brought matilda to herself. lift up 
her eyes, she look round for her mother. 

“life of my soul, I am here!” cri hippolita; “think not I will quit 
thee!” 

“oh! you are too good,” said matilda. “but weep not for me, my mother! 
I am go where sorrow never dwells—isabella, thou hast love me; 
wouldst thou not suppli my fond to thi dear, dear woman? inde I 
am faint!” 

“oh! my child! my child!” said hippolita in a flood of tears, “can I not 
withhold thee a moment?” 

“it will not be,” said matilda; “commend me to heaven—wher is my father? 
forgiv him, dearest mother—forg him my death; it wa an error. oh! 
I had forgotten—dearest mother, I vow never to see theodor 
more—perhap that ha drawn down thi calamity—but it wa not 
intentional—can you pardon me?” 

“oh! wound not my agonis soul!” said hippolita; “thou never couldst 
offend me—alas! she faints! help! help!” 

“I would say someth more,” said matilda, struggling, “but it cannot 
be—isabella—theodore—for my sake—oh!—” she expired. 

isabella and her women tore hippolita from the corse; but theodor 
threaten destruct to all who attempt to remov him from it. He 
print a thousand kiss on her clay-cold hands, and utter everi 
express that despair love could dictate. 

isabella, in the meantime, wa accompani the afflict hippolita to 
her apartment; but, in the middl of the court, they were met by manfred, 
who, distract with hi own thoughts, and anxiou onc more to behold 
hi daughter, wa advanc to the chamber where she lay. As the moon 
wa now at it height, he read in the counten of thi unhappi 
compani the event he dreaded. 

“what! is she dead?” cri he in wild confusion. A clap of thunder at 
that instant shook the castl to it foundations; the earth rocked, and 
the clank of more than mortal armour wa heard behind. freder and 
jerom thought the last day wa at hand. the latter, forc theodor 
along with them, rush into the court. the moment theodor appeared, 
the wall of the castl behind manfr were thrown down with a mighti 
force, and the form of alfonso, dilat to an immens magnitude, appear 
in the centr of the ruins. 

“behold in theodor the true heir of alfonso!” said the vision: and 
have pronounc those words, accompani by a clap of thunder, it 
ascend solemnli toward heaven, where the cloud part asunder, the 
form of st. nichola wa seen, and receiv alfonso’ shade, they were 
soon wrapt from mortal eye in a blaze of glory. 

the behold fell prostrat on their faces, acknowledg the divin 
will. the first that broke silenc wa hippolita. 

“mi lord,” said she to the despond manfred, “behold the vaniti of 
human greatness! conrad is gone! matilda is no more! In theodor we 
view the true princ of otranto. By what miracl he is so I know 
not—suffic it to us, our doom is pronounced! shall we not, can we but 
dedic the few deplor hour we have to live, in deprec the 
further wrath of heaven? heaven eject us—whith can we fly, but to yon 
holi cell that yet offer us a retreat.” 

“thou guiltless but unhappi woman! unhappi by my crimes!” repli 
manfred, “mi heart at last is open to thi devout admonitions. oh! 
could—but it cannot be—y are lost in wonder—let me at last do justic on 
myself! To heap shame on my own head is all the satisfact I have left 
to offer to offend heaven. My stori ha drawn down these judgments: 
let my confess atone—but, ah! what can aton for usurp and a 
murder child? a child murder in a consecr place? list, sirs, and 
may thi bloodi record be a warn to futur tyrants!” 

“alfonso, ye all know, die in the holi land—y would interrupt me; ye 
would say he came not fairli to hi end—it is most true—whi els thi 
bitter cup which manfr must drink to the dregs. ricardo, my 
grandfather, wa hi chamberlain—i would draw a veil over my ancestor’ 
crimes—but it is in vain! alfonso die by poison. A fictiti will 
declar ricardo hi heir. hi crime pursu him—yet he lost no conrad, 
no matilda! I pay the price of usurp for all! A storm overtook 
him. haunt by hi guilt he vow to st. nichola to found a church and 
two convents, if he live to reach otranto. the sacrific wa accepted: 
the saint appear to him in a dream, and promis that ricardo’ 
poster should reign in otranto until the right owner should be 
grown too larg to inhabit the castle, and as long as issu male from 
ricardo’ loin should remain to enjoy it—alas! alas! nor male nor 
female, except myself, remain of all hi wretch race! I have done—th 
woe of these three day speak the rest. how thi young man can be 
alfonso’ heir I know not—yet I do not doubt it. hi are these 
dominions; I resign them—yet I knew not alfonso had an heir—i question 
not the will of heaven—poverti and prayer must fill up the woeful space, 
until manfr shall be summon to ricardo.” 

“what remain is my part to declare,” said jerome. “when alfonso set 
sail for the holi land he wa driven by a storm to the coast of sicily. 
the other vessel, which bore ricardo and hi train, as your lordship must 
have heard, wa separ from him.” 

“it is most true,” said manfred; “and the titl you give me is more than 
an outcast can claim—well! be it so—proceed.” 

jerom blushed, and continued. “for three month lord alfonso wa 
wind-bound in sicily. there he becam enamour of a fair virgin name 
victoria. He wa too piou to tempt her to forbidden pleasures. they 
were married. yet deem thi amour incongru with the holi vow of 
arm by which he wa bound, he determin to conceal their nuptial until 
hi return from the crusade, when he purpos to seek and acknowledg her 
for hi law wife. He left her pregnant. dure hi absenc she wa 
deliv of a daughter. but scarc had she felt a mother’ pang ere 
she heard the fatal rumour of her lord’ death, and the success of 
ricardo. what could a friendless, helpless woman do? would her 
testimoni avail?—yet, my lord, I have an authent writing—” 

“it need not,” said manfred; “the horror of these days, the vision we 
have but now seen, all corrobor thi evid beyond a thousand 
parchments. matilda’ death and my expulsion—” 

“be composed, my lord,” said hippolita; “thi holi man did not mean to 
recal your griefs.” jerom proceeded. 

“I shall not dwell on what is needless. the daughter of which victoria 
wa delivered, wa at her matur bestow in marriag on me. victoria 
died; and the secret remain lock in my breast. theodore’ narr 
ha told the rest.” 

the friar ceased. the disconsol compani retir to the remain part 
of the castle. In the morn manfr sign hi abdic of the 
principality, with the approb of hippolita, and each took on them 
the habit of religion in the neighbour convents. freder offer hi 
daughter to the new prince, which hippolita’ tender for isabella 
concur to promote. but theodore’ grief wa too fresh to admit the 
thought of anoth love; and it wa not until after frequent discours 
with isabella of hi dear matilda, that he wa persuad he could know no 
happi but in the societi of one with whom he could for ever indulg 
the melancholi that had taken possess of hi soul. 




***end OF the project gutenberg ebook the castl OF otranto*** 


******* thi file should be name 696-0.txt or 696-0.zip ******* 


thi and all associ file of variou format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/6/9/696 



updat edit will replac the previou one--th old edit 
will be renamed. 

creat the work from public domain print edit mean that no 
one own a unit state copyright in these works, so the foundat 
(and you!) can copi and distribut it in the unit state without 
permiss and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the gener term of use part of thi license, appli to 
copi and distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a regist trademark, and may not be use if you 
charg for the ebooks, unless you receiv specif permission. If you 
do not charg anyth for copi of thi ebook, compli with the 
rule is veri easy. you may use thi ebook for nearli ani purpos 
such as creation of deriv works, reports, perform and 
research. they may be modifi and print and given away--y may do 
practic anyth with public domain ebooks. redistribut is 
subject to the trademark license, especi commerci 
redistribution. 



*** start: full licens *** 

the full project gutenberg licens 
pleas read thi befor you distribut OR use thi work 

To protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promot the free 
distribut of electron works, by use or distribut thi work 
(or ani other work associ in ani way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agre to compli with all the term of the full project 
gutenberg-tm licens avail with thi file or onlin at 
www.gutenberg.org/license. 


section 1. gener term of use and redistribut project gutenberg-tm 
electron work 

1.a. By read or use ani part of thi project gutenberg-tm 
electron work, you indic that you have read, understand, agre to 
and accept all the term of thi licens and intellectu properti 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agre to abid by all 
the term of thi agreement, you must ceas use and return or destroy 
all copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in your possession. 
If you paid a fee for obtain a copi of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work and you do not agre to be bound by the 
term of thi agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entiti to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a regist trademark. It may onli be 
use on or associ in ani way with an electron work by peopl who 
agre to be bound by the term of thi agreement. there are a few 
thing that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electron work 
even without compli with the full term of thi agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of thing you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electron work if you follow the term of thi agreement 
and help preserv free futur access to project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compil copyright in the collect of project 
gutenberg-tm electron works. nearli all the individu work in the 
collect are in the public domain in the unit states. If an 
individu work is in the public domain in the unit state and you are 
locat in the unit states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or creat deriv 
work base on the work as long as all refer to project gutenberg 
are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promot free access to electron work by 
freeli share project gutenberg-tm work in complianc with the term of 
thi agreement for keep the project gutenberg-tm name associ with 
the work. you can easili compli with the term of thi agreement by 
keep thi work in the same format with it attach full project 
gutenberg-tm licens when you share it without charg with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are locat also govern 
what you can do with thi work. copyright law in most countri are in 
a constant state of change. If you are outsid the unit states, check 
the law of your countri in addit to the term of thi agreement 
befor downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribut or 
creat deriv work base on thi work or ani other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundat make no represent concern 
the copyright statu of ani work in ani countri outsid the unit 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remov all refer to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the follow sentence, with activ link to, or other immedi 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm licens must appear promin 
whenev ani copi of a project gutenberg-tm work (ani work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copi or distributed: 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.org 

1.e.2. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is deriv 
from the public domain (doe not contain a notic indic that it is 
post with permiss of the copyright holder), the work can be copi 
and distribut to anyon in the unit state without pay ani fee 
or charges. If you are redistribut or provid access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associ with or appear on the 
work, you must compli either with the requir of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permiss for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is post 
with the permiss of the copyright holder, your use and distribut 
must compli with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and ani addit 
term impos by the copyright holder. addit term will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm licens for all work post with the 
permiss of the copyright holder found at the begin of thi work. 

1.e.4. Do not unlink or detach or remov the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens term from thi work, or ani file contain a part of thi 
work or ani other work associ with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribut or redistribut thi 
electron work, or ani part of thi electron work, without 
promin display the sentenc set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
activ link or immedi access to the full term of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribut thi work in ani binary, 
compressed, mark up, nonproprietari or proprietari form, includ ani 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provid access to or 
distribut copi of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the offici version 
post on the offici project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org), 
you must, at no addit cost, fee or expens to the user, provid a 
copy, a mean of export a copy, or a mean of obtain a copi upon 
request, of the work in it origin "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. ani altern format must includ the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens as specifi in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. Do not charg a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copi or distribut ani project gutenberg-tm work 
unless you compli with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charg a reason fee for copi of or provid 
access to or distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work provid 
that 

- you pay a royalti fee of 20% of the gross profit you deriv from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm work calcul use the method 
you alreadi use to calcul your applic taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
ha agre to donat royalti under thi paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literari archiv foundation. royalti payment 
must be paid within 60 day follow each date on which you 
prepar (or are legal requir to prepare) your period tax 
returns. royalti payment should be clearli mark as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat at the 
address specifi in section 4, "inform about donat to 
the project gutenberg literari archiv foundation." 

- you provid a full refund of ani money paid by a user who notifi 
you in write (or by e-mail) within 30 day of receipt that s/he 
doe not agre to the term of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must requir such a user to return or 
destroy all copi of the work possess in a physic medium 
and discontinu all use of and all access to other copi of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accord with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of ani 
money paid for a work or a replac copy, if a defect in the 
electron work is discov and report to you within 90 day 
of receipt of the work. 

- you compli with all other term of thi agreement for free 
distribut of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. If you wish to charg a fee or distribut a project gutenberg-tm 
electron work or group of work on differ term than are set 
forth in thi agreement, you must obtain permiss in write from 
both the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundat as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunt and employe expend consider 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcrib and proofread 
public domain work in creat the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despit these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electron 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limit to, incomplete, inaccur or 
corrupt data, transcript errors, a copyright or other intellectu 
properti infringement, a defect or damag disk or other medium, a 
comput virus, or comput code that damag or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limit warranty, disclaim OF damag - except for the "right 
of replac or refund" describ in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and ani other parti distribut a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work under thi agreement, disclaim all 
liabil to you for damages, cost and expenses, includ legal 
fees. you agre that you have NO remedi for negligence, strict 
liability, breach OF warranti OR breach OF contract except those 
provid IN paragraph 1.f.3. you agre that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and ani distributor under thi agreement will not BE 
liabl TO you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punit OR 
incident damag even IF you give notic OF the possibl OF such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limit right OF replac OR refund - If you discov a 
defect in thi electron work within 90 day of receiv it, you can 
receiv a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explan to the person you receiv the work from. If you 
receiv the work on a physic medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entiti that provid you with 
the defect work may elect to provid a replac copi in lieu of a 
refund. If you receiv the work electronically, the person or entiti 
provid it to you may choos to give you a second opportun to 
receiv the work electron in lieu of a refund. If the second copi 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in write without further 
opportun to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limit right of replac or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, thi work is provid to you 'as-is', with NO other 
warranti OF ani kind, express OR implied, includ but not limit TO 
warranti OF merchant OR fit for ani purpose. 

1.f.5. some state do not allow disclaim of certain impli 
warranti or the exclus or limit of certain type of damages. 
If ani disclaim or limit set forth in thi agreement violat the 
law of the state applic to thi agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaim or limit permit by 
the applic state law. the invalid or unenforc of ani 
provis of thi agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemn - you agre to indemnifi and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, ani agent or employe of the foundation, anyon 
provid copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in accord 
with thi agreement, and ani volunt associ with the production, 
promot and distribut of project gutenberg-tm electron works, 
harmless from all liability, cost and expenses, includ legal fees, 
that aris directli or indirectli from ani of the follow which you do 
or caus to occur: (a) distribut of thi or ani project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addit or delet to ani 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) ani defect you cause. 


section 2. inform about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonym with the free distribut of 
electron work in format readabl by the widest varieti of comput 
includ obsolete, old, middle-ag and new computers. It exist 
becaus of the effort of hundr of volunt and donat from 
peopl in all walk of life. 

volunt and financi support to provid volunt with the 
assist they need are critic to reach project gutenberg-tm' 
goal and ensur that the project gutenberg-tm collect will 
remain freeli avail for gener to come. In 2001, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundat wa creat to provid a secur 
and perman futur for project gutenberg-tm and futur generations. 
To learn more about the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat 
and how your effort and donat can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundat inform page at www.gutenberg.org 


section 3. inform about the project gutenberg literari archiv 
foundat 

the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educ corpor organ under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt statu by the intern 
revenu service. the foundation' ein or feder tax identif 
number is 64-6221541. contribut to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. feder law and your state' laws. 

the foundation' princip offic is locat at 4557 melan dr. S. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but it volunt and employe are scatter 
throughout numer locations. it busi offic is locat at 809 
north 1500 west, salt lake city, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. email 
contact link and up to date contact inform can be found at the 
foundation' web site and offici page at www.gutenberg.org/contact 

for addit contact information: 
dr. gregori B. newbi 
chief execut and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 

section 4. inform about donat to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot surviv without wide 
spread public support and donat to carri out it mission of 
increas the number of public domain and licens work that can be 
freeli distribut in machin readabl form access by the widest 
array of equip includ outdat equipment. mani small donat 
($1 to $5,000) are particularli import to maintain tax exempt 
statu with the irs. 

the foundat is commit to compli with the law regul 
chariti and charit donat in all 50 state of the unit 
states. complianc requir are not uniform and it take a 
consider effort, much paperwork and mani fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. We do not solicit donat in locat 
where we have not receiv written confirm of compliance. To 
send donat or determin the statu of complianc for ani 
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/don 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribut from state where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibit 
against accept unsolicit donat from donor in such state who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

intern donat are grate accepted, but we cannot make 
ani statement concern tax treatment of donat receiv from 
outsid the unit states. u.s. law alon swamp our small staff. 

pleas check the project gutenberg web page for current donat 
method and addresses. donat are accept in a number of other 
way includ checks, onlin payment and credit card donations. 
To donate, pleas visit: www.gutenberg.org/don 


section 5. gener inform about project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. 

professor michael S. hart wa the origin of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a librari of electron work that could be freeli share 
with anyone. for forti years, he produc and distribut project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with onli a loos network of volunt support. 

project gutenberg-tm ebook are often creat from sever print 
editions, all of which are confirm as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notic is included. thus, we do not necessarili 
keep ebook in complianc with ani particular paper edition. 

most peopl start at our web site which ha the main PG search facility: 

www.gutenberg.org 

thi web site includ inform about project gutenberg-tm, 
includ how to make donat to the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundation, how to help produc our new ebooks, and how to 
subscrib to our email newslett to hear about new ebooks. 
