the project gutenberg ebook of the trial, by franz kafka 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.org 

** thi is a copyright project gutenberg ebook, detail below ** 
** pleas follow the copyright guidelin in thi file. ** 

title: the trial 

author: franz kafka 

translator: david wylli 

releas date: april, 2005 [ebook #7849] 
first posted: may 16, 2003 
last updated: octob 18, 2018 

language: english 


*** start OF thi project gutenberg ebook the trial *** 














the trial 
franz kafka 

translat copyright (c) by david wylli 
translat contact email: dandelion@post.cz 




chapter one 
arrest - convers with mrs. grubach - then miss bürstner 
prefac 
someon must have been tell lie about josef k., he knew he had 
done noth wrong but, one morning, he wa arrested. everi day at 
eight in the morn he wa brought hi breakfast by mrs. grubach' 
cook - mrs. grubach wa hi landladi - but today she didn't come. that 
had never happen before. K. wait a littl while, look from hi 
pillow at the old woman who live opposit and who wa watch him with 
an inquisit quit unusu for her, and finally, both hungri and 
disconcerted, rang the bell. there wa immedi a knock at the door 
and a man entered. He had never seen the man in thi hous before. He 
wa slim but firmli built, hi cloth were black and close-fitting, 
with mani fold and pockets, buckl and button and a belt, all of 
which gave the impress of be veri practic but without make it 
veri clear what they were actual for. "who are you?" ask k., 
sit half upright in hi bed. the man, however, ignor the question 
as if hi arriv simpli had to be accepted, and mere replied, "you 
rang?" "anna should have brought me my breakfast," said K. He tri to 
work out who the man actual was, first in silence, just through 
observ and by think about it, but the man didn't stay still to 
be look at for veri long. instead he went over to the door, open it 
slightly, and said to someon who wa clearli stand immedi 
behind it, "he want anna to bring him hi breakfast." there wa a 
littl laughter in the neighbour room, it wa not clear from the 
sound of it whether there were sever peopl laughing. the strang man 
could not have learn anyth from it that he hadn't known already, 
but now he said to k., as if make hi report "it is not possible." 
"it would be the first time that' happened," said k., as he jump out 
of bed and quickli pull on hi trousers. "I want to see who that is 
in the next room, and whi it is that mrs. grubach ha let me be 
disturb in thi way." It immedi occur to him that he needn't 
have said thi out loud, and that he must to some extent have 
acknowledg their author by do so, but that didn't seem import 
to him at the time. that, at least, is how the stranger took it, as he 
said, "don't you think you'd better stay where you are?" "I want 
neither to stay here nor to be spoken to by you until you'v introduc 
yourself." "I meant it for your own good," said the stranger and open 
the door, thi time without be asked. the next room, which K. 
enter more slowli than he had intended, look at first glanc exactli 
the same as it had the previou evening. It wa mrs. grubach' live 
room, over-fil with furniture, tablecloths, porcelain and 
photographs. perhap there wa a littl more space in there than usual 
today, but if so it wa not immedi obvious, especi as the main 
differ wa the presenc of a man sit by the open window with a 
book from which he now look up. "you should have stay in your room! 
didn't franz tell you?" "and what is it you want, then?" said k., 
look back and forth between thi new acquaint and the one name 
franz, who had remain in the doorway. through the open window he 
notic the old woman again, who had come close to the window opposit 
so that she could continu to see everything. she wa show an 
inquisit that realli made it seem like she wa go senile. "I 
want to see mrs. grubach ...," said k., make a movement as if tear 
himself away from the two men - even though they were stand well away 
from him - and want to go. "no," said the man at the window, who 
threw hi book down on a coffe tabl and stood up. "you can't go away 
when you'r under arrest." "that' how it seems," said K. "and whi am 
I under arrest?" he then asked. "that' someth we'r not allow to 
tell you. Go into your room and wait there. proceed are underway 
and you'll learn about everyth all in good time. it' not realli 
part of my job to be friendli toward you like this, but I hope no-one, 
apart from franz, will hear about it, and he' been more friendli 
toward you than he should have been, under the rules, himself. If you 
carri on have as much good luck as you have been with your arrest 
offic then you can reckon on thing go well with you." K. want 
to sit down, but then he saw that, apart from the chair by the window, 
there wa nowher anywher in the room where he could sit. "you'll get 
the chanc to see for yourself how true all thi is," said franz and 
both men then walk up to K. they were significantli bigger than him, 
especi the second man, who frequent slap him on the shoulder. 
the two of them felt k.' nightshirt, and said he would now have to wear 
one that wa of much lower quality, but that they would keep the 
nightshirt along with hi other undercloth and return them to him if 
hi case turn out well. "it' better for you if you give us the 
thing than if you leav them in the storeroom," they said. "thing 
have a tendenc to go miss in the storeroom, and after a certain 
amount of time they sell thing off, whether the case involv ha come 
to an end or not. and case like thi can last a long time, especi 
the one that have been come up lately. they'd give you the money 
they got for them, but it wouldn't be veri much as it' not what they'r 
offer for them when they sell them that counts, it' how much they get 
slip on the side, and thing like that lose their valu anyway when 
they get pass on from hand to hand, year after year." K. paid hardli 
ani attent to what they were saying, he did not place much valu on 
what he may have still possess or on who decid what happen to 
them. It wa much more import to him to get a clear understand of 
hi position, but he could not think clearli while these peopl were 
here, the second policeman' belli - and they could onli be policemen - 
look friendli enough, stick out toward him, but when K. look up 
and saw hi dry, boney face it did not seem to fit with the body. hi 
strong nose twist to one side as if ignor K. and share an 
understand with the other policeman. what sort of peopl were these? 
what were they talk about? what offic did they belong to? K. wa 
live in a free country, after all, everywher wa at peace, all law 
were decent and were upheld, who wa it who dare accost him in hi own 
home? He wa alway inclin to take life as lightli as he could, to 
cross bridg when he came to them, pay no heed for the future, even 
when everyth seem under threat. but here that did not seem the 
right thing to do. He could have taken it all as a joke, a big joke set 
up by hi colleagu at the bank for some unknown reason, or also 
perhap becaus today wa hi thirtieth birthday, it wa all possibl of 
course, mayb all he had to do wa laugh in the policemen' face in some 
way and they would laugh with him, mayb they were tradesmen from the 
corner of the street, they look like they might be - but he wa 
nonetheless determined, ever sinc he first caught sight of the one 
call franz, not to lose ani slight advantag he might have had over 
these people. there wa a veri slight risk that peopl would later say 
he couldn't understand a joke, but - although he wasn't normal in the 
habit of learn from experi - he might also have had a few 
unimport occas in mind when, unlik hi more cautiou friends, he 
had act with no thought at all for what might follow and had been made 
to suffer for it. He didn't want that to happen again, not thi time at 
least; if they were play-act he would act along with them. 

He still had time. "allow me," he said, and hurri between the 
two policemen through into hi room. "he seem sensibl enough," he 
heard them say behind him. onc in hi room, he quickli pull open the 
drawer of hi write desk, everyth in it wa veri tidi but in hi 
agit he wa unabl to find the identif document he wa 
look for straight away. He final found hi bicycl permit and wa 
about to go back to the policemen with it when it seem to him too 
petty, so he carri on search until he found hi birth certificate. 
just as he got back in the adjoin room the door on the other side 
open and mrs. grubach wa about to enter. He onli saw her for an 
instant, for as soon as she recognis K. she wa clearli embarrassed, 
ask for forgiv and disappeared, close the door behind her veri 
carefully. "do come in," K. could have said just then. but now he stood 
in the middl of the room with hi paper in hi hand and still look 
at the door which did not open again. He stay like that until he wa 
startl out of it by the shout of the policeman who sat at the littl 
tabl at the open window and, as K. now saw, wa eat hi breakfast. 
"whi didn't she come in?" he asked. "she' not allow to," said the 
big policeman. "you'r under arrest, aren't you." "but how can I be 
under arrest? and how come it' like this?" "now you'r start 
again," said the policeman, dip a piec of butter bread in the 
honeypot. "we don't answer question like that." "you will have to 
answer them," said K. "here are my identif papers, now show me 
your and I certainli want to see the arrest warrant." "oh, my god!" 
said the policeman. "in a posit like yours, and you think you can 
start give orders, do you? It won't do you ani good to get us on the 
wrong side, even if you think it will - we'r probabl more on your side 
that anyon els you know!" "that' true, you know, you'd better 
believ it," said franz, hold a cup of coffe in hi hand which he 
did not lift to hi mouth but look at K. in a way that wa probabl 
meant to be full of mean but could not actual be understood. K. 
found himself, without intend it, in a mute dialogu with franz, but 
then slap hi hand down on hi paper and said, "here are my ident 
documents." "and what do you want us to do about it?" repli the big 
policeman, loudly. "the way you'r carri on, it' wors than a 
child. what is it you want? Do you want to get thi great, bloodi trial 
of your over with quickli by talk about ID and arrest warrant with 
us? we'r just coppers, that' all we are. junior offic like us 
hardli know one end of an ID card from another, all we'v got to do with 
you is keep an eye on you for ten hour a day and get paid for it. 
that' all we are. mind you, what we can do is make sure that the high 
offici we work for find out just what sort of person it is they'r 
go to arrest, and whi he should be arrested, befor they issu the 
warrant. there' no mistak there. our author as far as I know, 
and I onli know the lowest grades, don't go out look for guilt among 
the public; it' the guilt that draw them out, like it say in the law, 
and they have to send us polic offic out. that' the law. where 
d'you think there'd be ani mistak there?" "I don't know thi law," 
said K. "so much the wors for you, then," said the policeman. "it' 
probabl exist onli in your heads," said k., he wanted, in some way, to 
insinu hi way into the thought of the policemen, to re-shap those 
thought to hi benefit or to make himself at home there. but the 
policeman just said dismissively, "you'll find out when it affect you." 
franz join in, and said, "look at this, willem, he admit he doesn't 
know the law and at the same time insist he' innocent." "you'r quit 
right, but we can't get him to understand a thing," said the other. K. 
stop talk with them; do I, he thought to himself, do I realli have 
to carri on get tangl up with the chatter of base functionari 
like this? - and they admit themselv that they are of the lowest 
position. they'r talk about thing of which they don't have the 
slightest understanding, anyway. it' onli becaus of their stupid 
that they'r abl to be so sure of themselves. I just need few word 
with someon of the same social stand as myself and everyth will 
be incompar clearer, much clearer than a long convers with 
these two can make it. He walk up and down the free space in the room 
a coupl of times, across the street he could see the old woman who, 
now, had pull an old man, much older than herself, up to the window 
and had her arm around him. K. had to put an end to thi display, 
"take me to your superior," he said. "a soon as he want to see you. 
not before," said the policeman, the one call willem. "and now my 
advic to you," he added, "i to go into your room, stay calm, and wait 
and see what' to be done with you. If you take our advice, you won't 
tire yourself out think about thing to no purpose, you need to pull 
yourself togeth as there' a lot that' go to requir of you. 
you'v not behav toward us the way we deserv after be so good to 
you, you forget that we, whatev we are, we'r still free men and 
you'r not, and that' quit an advantage. but in spite of all that 
we'r still willing, if you'v got the money, to go and get you some 
breakfast from the café over the road." 

without give ani answer to thi offer, K. stood still for some 
time. perhaps, if he open the door of the next room or even the front 
door, the two of them would not dare to stand in hi way, perhap that 
would be the simplest way to settl the whole thing, by bring it to a 
head. but mayb they would grab him, and if he were thrown down on the 
ground he would lose all the advantag he, in a certain respect, had 
over them. So he decid on the more certain solution, the way thing 
would go in the natur cours of events, and went back in hi room 
without anoth word either from him or from the policemen. 

He threw himself down on hi bed, and from the dress tabl he 
took the nice appl that he had put there the previou even for hi 
breakfast. now it wa all the breakfast he had and anyway, as he 
confirm as soon as he took hi first, big bite of it, it wa far 
better than a breakfast he could have had through the good will of the 
policemen from the dirti café. He felt well and confident, he had 
fail to go into work at the bank thi morn but that could easili be 
excus becaus of the rel high posit he held there. should 
he realli send in hi explanation? He wonder about it. If nobodi 
believ him, and in thi case that would be understandable, he could 
bring mrs. grubach in as a witness, or even the old pair from across the 
street, who probabl even now were on their way over to the window 
opposite. It puzzl k., at least it puzzl him look at it from the 
policemen' point of view, that they had made him go into the room and 
left him alon there, where he had ten differ way of kill 
himself. At the same time, though, he ask himself, thi time look 
at it from hi own point of view, what reason he could have to do so. 
becaus those two were sit there in the next room and had taken hi 
breakfast, perhaps? It would have been so pointless to kill himself 
that, even if he had want to, the pointless would have made him 
unable. maybe, if the policemen had not been so obvious limit in 
their mental abilities, it could have been suppos that they had come 
to the same conclus and saw no danger in leav him alon becaus of 
it. they could watch now, if they wanted, and see how he went over to 
the cupboard in the wall where he kept a bottl of good schnapps, how he 
first empti a glass of it in place of hi breakfast and how he then 
took a second glass in order to give himself courage, the last one 
just as a precaut for the unlik chanc it would be needed. 

then he wa so startl by a shout to him from the other room that 
he struck hi teeth against the glass. "the supervisor want to see 
you!" a voic said. It wa onli the shout that startl him, thi curt, 
abrupt, militari shout, that he would not have expect from the 
policeman call franz. In itself, he found the order veri welcome. 
"at last!" he call back, lock the cupboard and, without delay, 
hurri into the next room. the two policemen were stand there and 
chase him back into hi bedroom as if that were a matter of course. 
"what d'you think you'r doing?" they cried. "think you'r go to see 
the supervisor dress in just your shirt, do you? he'd see to it you 
got a right thumping, and us and all!" "let go of me for god' sake!" 
call k., who had alreadi been push back as far as hi wardrobe, "if 
you accost me when i'm still in bed you can't expect to find me in my 
even dress." "that won't help you," said the policemen, who alway 
becam veri quiet, almost sad, when K. began to shout, and in that way 
confus him or, to some extent, brought him to hi senses. "ridicul 
formalities!" he grumbled, as he lift hi coat from the chair and kept 
it in both hi hand for a littl while, as if hold it out for the 
policemen' inspection. they shook their heads. "it' got to be a 
black coat," they said. At that, K. threw the coat to the floor and 
said - without know even himself what he meant by it - "well it' not 
go to be the main trial, after all." the policemen laughed, but 
continu to insist, "it' got to be a black coat." "well that' 
alright by me if it make thing go ani faster," said K. He open the 
wardrob himself, spent a long time search through all the clothes, 
and chose hi best black suit which had a short jacket that had greatli 
surpris those who knew him, then he also pull out a fresh shirt and 
began, carefully, to get dressed. He secretli told himself that he had 
succeed in speed thing up by let the policemen forget to make 
him have a bath. He watch them to see if they might rememb after 
all, but of cours it never occur to them, although willem did not 
forget to send franz up to the supervisor with the messag say that 
K. wa get dressed. 

onc he wa properli dressed, K. had to pass by willem as he went 
through the next room into the one beyond, the door of which wa alreadi 
wide open. K. knew veri well that thi room had recent been let to a 
typist call 'miss bürstner'. she wa in the habit of go out to 
work veri earli and come back home veri late, and K. had never 
exchang more than a few word of greet with her. now, her bedsid 
tabl had been pull into the middl of the room to be use as a desk 
for these proceedings, and the supervisor sat behind it. He had hi 
leg crossed, and had thrown one arm over the backrest of the chair. 

In one corner of the room there were three young peopl look at 
the photograph belong to miss bürstner that had been put into a 
piec of fabric on the wall. hung up on the handl of the open window 
wa a white blouse. At the window across the street, there wa the old 
pair again, although now their number had increased, as behind them, and 
far taller than they were, stood a man with an open shirt that show 
hi chest and a reddish goate beard which he squeez and twist with 
hi fingers. "josef k.?" ask the supervisor, perhap mere to 
attract k.' attent as he look round the room. K. nodded. "I 
daresay you were quit surpris by all that' been take place thi 
morning," said the supervisor as, with both hands, he push away the 
few item on the bedsid tabl - the candl and box of matches, a book 
and a pin cushion which lay there as if they were thing he would need 
for hi own business. "certainly," said k., and he began to feel 
relax now that, at last, he stood in front of someon with some sense, 
someon with whom he would be abl to talk about hi situation. 
"certainli i'm surprised, but i'm not in ani way veri surprised." 
"you'r not veri surprised?" ask the supervisor, as he posit the 
candl in the middl of the tabl and the other thing in a group around 
it. "perhap you don't quit understand me," K. hurriedli point out. 
"what I mean is ..." here K. broke off what he wa say and look 
round for somewher to sit. "I may sit down, mayn't i?" he asked. 
"that' not usual," the supervisor answered. "what I mean is...," said 
K. without delay a second time, "that, yes, I am veri surpris but 
when you'v been in the world for thirti year alreadi and had to make 
your own way through everyth yourself, which ha been my lot, then 
you becom harden to surpris and don't take them too hard. 
especi not what' happen today." "whi especi not what' 
happen today?" "I wouldn't want to say that I see all of thi as a 
joke, you seem to have gone to too much troubl make all these 
arrang for that. everyon in the hous must be take part in it 
as well as all of you, that would be go beyond what could be a joke. 
So I don't want to say that thi is a joke." "quit right," said the 
supervisor, look to see how mani match were left in the box. "but 
on the other hand," K. went on, look round at everyon there and even 
wish he could get the attent of the three who were look at the 
photographs, "on the other hand thi realli can't be all that 
important. that follow from the fact that i'v been indicted, but 
can't think of the slightest offenc for which I could be indicted. 
but even that is all besid the point, the main question is: who is 
issu the indictment? what offic is conduct thi affair? are you 
officials? none of you is wear a uniform, unless what you are 
wearing" - here he turn toward franz - "i meant to be a uniform, 
it' actual more of a travel suit. I requir a clear answer to 
all these questions, and i'm quit sure that onc thing have been made 
clear we can take our leav of each other on the best of terms." the 
supervisor slam the box of match down on the table. "you'r make 
a big mistake," he said. "these gentlemen and I have got noth to do 
with your business, in fact we know almost noth about you. We could 
be wear uniform as proper and exact as you like and your situat 
wouldn't be ani the wors for it. As to whether you'r on a charge, I 
can't give you ani sort of clear answer to that, I don't even know 
whether you are or not. you'r under arrest, you'r quit right about 
that, but I don't know ani more than that. mayb these offic have 
been chit-chat with you, well if they have that' all it is, chit- 
chat. I can't give you an answer to your questions, but I can give you 
a bit of advice: you'd better think less about us and what' go to 
happen to you, and think a bit more about yourself. and stop make all 
thi fuss about your sens of innocence; you don't make such a bad 
impression, but with all thi fuss you'r damag it. and you ought to 
do a bit less talking, too. almost everyth you'v said so far ha 
been thing we could have taken from your behaviour, even if you'd said 
no more than a few words. and what you have said ha not exactli been 
in your favour." 

K. stare at the supervisor. wa thi man, probabl younger than 
he was, lectur him like a schoolmaster? wa he be punish for 
hi honesti with a tell off? and wa he to learn noth about the 
reason for hi arrest or those who were arrest him? He becam 
somewhat cross and began to walk up and down. no-on stop him do 
thi and he push hi sleev back, felt hi chest, straighten hi 
hair, went over to the three men, said, "it make no sense," at which 
these three turn round to face him and came toward him with seriou 
expressions. He final came again to a halt in front of the 
supervisor' desk. "state attorney haster is a good friend of mine," 
he said, "can I telephon him?" "certainly," said the supervisor, "but 
I don't know what the point of that will be, I suppos you must have 
some privat matter you want to discuss with him." "what the point is?" 
shout k., more disconcert that cross. "who do you think you are? 
you want to see some point in it while you'r carri out someth as 
pointless as it could be? it' enough to make you cry! these gentlemen 
first accost me, and now they sit or stand about in here and let me be 
haul up in front of you. what point there would be, in telephon a 
state attorney when i'm ostens under arrest? veri well, I won't 
make the telephon call." "you can call him if you want to," said the 
supervisor, stretch hi hand out toward the outer room where the 
telephon was, "please, go on, do make your phone call." "no, I don't 
want to ani more," said k., and went over to the window. across the 
street, the peopl were still there at the window, and it wa onli now 
that K. had gone up to hi window that they seem to becom uneasi 
about quietli watch what wa go on. the old coupl want to get 
up but the man behind them calm them down. "we'v got some kind of 
audienc over there," call K. to the supervisor, quit loudly, as he 
point out with hi forefinger. "go away," he then call across to 
them. and the three of them did immedi retreat a few steps, the 
old pair even found themselv behind the man who then conceal them 
with the breadth of hi bodi and seemed, go by the movement of hi 
mouth, to be say someth incomprehens into the distance. they 
did not disappear entirely, though, but seem to be wait for the 
moment when they could come back to the window without be noticed. 
"intrusive, thoughtless people!" said K. as he turn back into the 
room. the supervisor may have agre with him, at least K. thought that 
wa what he saw from the corner of hi eye. but it wa just as possibl 
that he had not even been listen as he had hi hand press firmli 
down on the tabl and seem to be compar the length of hi fingers. 
the two policemen were sit on a chest cover with a colour 
blanket, rub their knees. the three young peopl had put their 
hand on their hip and were look round aimlessly. everyth wa 
still, like in some offic that ha been forgotten about. "now, 
gentlemen," call out k., and for a moment it seem as if he wa 
carri all of them on hi shoulders, "it look like your busi with 
me is over with. In my opinion, it' best now to stop wonder about 
whether you'r proceed correctli or incorrectly, and to bring the 
matter to a peac close with a mutual handshake. If you are of the 
same opinion, then please..." and he walk up to the supervisor' desk 
and held out hi hand to him. the supervisor rais hi eyes, bit hi 
lip and look at k.' outstretch hand; K still believ the 
supervisor would do as he suggested. but instead, he stood up, pick 
up a hard round hat that wa lay on miss bürstner' bed and put it 
care onto hi head, use both hand as if tri on a new hat. 
"everyth seem so simpl to you, doesn't it," he said to K. as he did 
so, "so you think we should bring the matter to a peac close, do 
you. no, no, that won't do. mind you, on the other hand I certainli 
wouldn't want you to think there' no hope for you. no, whi should you 
think that? you'r simpli under arrest, noth more than that. that' 
what I had to tell you, that' what i'v done and now i'v seen how 
you'v taken it. that' enough for one day and we can take our leav of 
each other, for the time be at least. I expect you'll want to go in 
to the bank now, won't you." "in to the bank?" ask k., "I thought I 
wa under arrest." K. said thi with a certain amount of defianc as, 
although hi handshak had not been accepted, he wa feel more 
independ of all these people, especi sinc the supervisor had 
stood up. He wa play with them. If they left, he had decid he 
would run after them and offer to let them arrest him. that' whi he 
even repeated, "how can I go in to the bank when i'm under arrest?" "I 
see you'v misunderstood me," said the supervisor who wa alreadi at the 
door. "it' true that you'r under arrest, but that shouldn't stop you 
from carri out your job. and there shouldn't be anyth to stop you 
carri on with your usual life." "in that case it' not too bad, 
be under arrest," said k., and went up close to the supervisor. "I 
never meant it should be anyth else," he replied. "it hardli seem 
to have been necessari to notifi me of the arrest in that case," said k., 
and went even closer. the other had also come closer. all of them had 
gather togeth into a narrow space by the door. "that wa my duty," 
said the supervisor. "A silli duty," said k., unyielding. "mayb so," 
repli the supervisor, "onli don't let' wast our time talk on like 
this. I had assum you'd be want to go to the bank. As you'r 
pay close attent to everi word i'll add this: i'm not forc you 
to go to the bank, i'd just assum you want to. and to make thing 
easier for you, and to let you get to the bank with as littl fuss as 
possibl i'v put these three gentlemen, colleagu of yours, at your 
disposal." "what' that?" exclaim k., and look at the three in 
astonishment. He could onli rememb see them in their group by the 
photographs, but these characterless, anaem young peopl were inde 
offici from hi bank, not colleagu of his, that wa put it too 
high and it show a gap in the omnisci of the supervisor, but they 
were nonetheless junior member of staff at the bank. how could K. have 
fail to see that? how occupi he must have been with the supervisor 
and the policemen not to have recognis these three! rabensteiner, 
with hi stiff demeanour and swing hands, kullich, with hi blond 
hair and deep-set eyes, and kaminer, with hi involuntari grin caus by 
chronic muscl spasms. "good morning," said K. after a while, extend 
hi hand to the gentlemen as they bow correctli to him. "I didn't 
recognis you at all. so, we'll go into work now, shall we?" the 
gentlemen laugh and nod enthusiastically, as if that wa what they 
had been wait for all the time, except that K. had left hi hat in 
hi room so they all dashed, one after another, into the room to fetch 
it, which caus a certain amount of embarrassment. K. stood where he 
wa and watch them through the open doubl doorway, the last to go, of 
course, wa the apathet rabenstein who had broken into no more than 
an eleg trot. kamin got to the hat and k., as he often had to do 
at the bank, forcibl remind himself that the grin wa not deliberate, 
that he in fact wasn't abl to grin deliberately. At that moment mrs. 
grubach open the door from the hallway into the live room where all 
the peopl were. she did not seem to feel guilti about anyth at all, 
and k., as often before, look down at the belt of her apron which, for 
no reason, cut so deepli into her hefti body. onc downstairs, k., with 
hi watch in hi hand, decid to take a taxi - he had alreadi been 
delay by half an hour and there wa no need to make the delay ani 
longer. kamin ran to the corner to summon it, and the two other were 
make obviou effort to keep K. divert when kullich point to the 
doorway of the hous on the other side of the street where the larg man 
with the blond goate beard appear and, a littl embarrass at first 
at let himself be seen in hi full height, step back to the wall 
and leant against it. the old coupl were probabl still on the stairs. 
K. wa cross with kullich for point out thi man whom he had alreadi 
seen himself, in fact whom he had been expecting. "don't look at him!" 
he snapped, without notic how odd it wa to speak to free men in thi 
way. but there wa no explan need anyway as just then the taxi 
arrived, they sat insid and set off. insid the taxi, K. rememb 
that he had not notic the supervisor and the policemen leav - the 
supervisor had stop him notic the three bank staff and now the 
three bank staff had stop him notic the supervisor. thi show 
that K. wa not veri attentive, and he resolv to watch himself more 
care in thi respect. nonetheless, he gave it no thought as he 
twist himself round and leant over onto the rear shelf of the car to 
catch sight of the supervisor and the policemen if he could. but he 
turn back round straight away and leant comfort into the corner of 
the taxi without even have made the effort to see anyone. although it 
did not seem like it, now wa just the time when he need some 
encouragement, but the gentlemen seem tire just then, rabenstein 
look out of the car to the right, kullich to the left and onli kamin 
wa there with hi grin at k.' service. It would have been inhuman to 
make fun of that. 

that spring, whenev possible, K. usual spent hi even 
after work - he usual stay in the offic until nine o'clock - with a 
short walk, either by himself or in the compani of some of the bank 
officials, and then he would go into a pub where he would sit at the 
regulars' tabl with mostli older men until eleven. there were, 
however, also except to thi habit, times, for instance, when K. wa 
invit by the bank' manag (whom he greatli respect for hi 
industri and trustworthiness) to go with him for a ride in hi car or to 
eat dinner with him at hi larg house. K. would also go, onc a week, 
to see a girl call elsa who work as a waitress in a wine bar through 
the night until late in the morning. dure the daytim she onli 
receiv visitor while still in bed. 

that evening, though, - the day had pass quickli with a lot of 
hard work and mani respect and friendli birthday greet - K. 
want to go straight home. each time he had ani small break from the 
day' work he considered, without know exactli what he had in mind, 
that mrs. grubach' flat seem to have been put into great disarray by 
the event of that morning, and that it wa up to him to put it back 
into order. onc order had been restored, everi trace of those event 
would have been eras and everyth would take it previou cours 
onc more. In particular, there wa noth to fear from the three bank 
officials, they had immers themselv back into their paperwork and 
there wa no alter to be seen in them. K. had call each of them, 
separ or all together, into hi offic that day for no other reason 
than to observ them; he wa alway satisfi and had alway been abl 
to let them go again. 

At half past nine that evening, when he arriv back in front of 
the build where he lived, he met a young lad in the doorway who wa 
stand there, hi leg apart and smoke a pipe. "who are you?" 
immedi ask k., bring hi face close to the lad's, as it wa 
hard to see in the half light of the landing. "i'm the landlord' son, 
sir," answer the lad, take the pipe from hi mouth and step to 
one side. "the landlord' son?" ask k., and impati knock on 
the ground with hi stick. "did you want anything, sir? would you like 
me to fetch my father?" "no, no," said k., there wa someth 
forgiv in hi voice, as if the boy had harm him in some way and he 
wa excus him. "it' alright," he said then, and went on, but befor 
go up the stair he turn round onc more. 

He could have gone directli to hi room, but as he want to speak 
with mrs. grubach he went straight to her door and knocked. she wa sat 
at the tabl with a knit stock and a pile of old stock in 
front of her. K. apologised, a littl embarrass at come so late, 
but mrs. grubach wa veri friendli and did not want to hear ani apology, 
she wa alway readi to speak to him, he knew veri well that he wa her 
best and her favourit tenant. K. look round the room, it look 
exactli as it usual did, the breakfast dishes, which had been on the 
tabl by the window that morning, had alreadi been clear away. "A 
woman' hand will do mani thing when no-one' looking," he thought, he 
might himself have smash all the dish on the spot but certainli 
would not have been abl to carri it all out. He look at mrs. grubach 
with some gratitude. "whi are you work so late?" he asked. they 
were now both sit at the table, and K. now and then sank hi hand 
into the pile of stockings. "there' a lot of work to do," she said, 
"dure the day I belong to the tenants; if i'm to sort out my own 
thing there are onli the even left to me." "I fear I may have 
caus you some except work today." "how do you mean, mr. k.?" she 
asked, becom more interest and leav her work in her lap. "I 
mean the men who were here thi morning." "oh, I see," she said, and 
went peac back to what she wa doing, "that wa no trouble, not 
especially." K. look on in silenc as she took up the knit 
stock onc more. she seem surpris at my mention it, he 
thought, she seem to think it' improp for me to mention it. all the 
more import for me to do so. An old woman is the onli person I can 
speak about it with. "but it must have caus some work for you," he 
said then, "but it won't happen again." "no, it can't happen again," she 
agreed, and smile at K. in a way that wa almost pained. "do you mean 
that seriously?" ask K. "yes," she said, more gently, "but the 
import thing is you mustn't take it too hard. there are so mani 
aw thing happen in the world! As you'r be so honest with me, 
mr. k., I can admit to you that I listen to a littl of what wa go 
on from behind the door, and that those two policemen told me one or two 
thing as well. it' all to do with your happiness, and that' 
someth that' quit close to my heart, perhap more than it should be 
as I am, after all, onli your landlady. anyway, so I heard one or two 
thing but I can't realli say that it' about anyth veri serious. 
no. you have been arrested, but it' not in the same way as when they 
arrest a thief. If you'r arrest in the same way as a thief, then 
it' bad, but an arrest like thi ... . It seem to me that it' 
someth veri complic - forgiv me if i'm say someth stupid - 
someth veri complic that I don't understand, but someth that 
you don't realli need to understand anyway." 

"there' noth stupid about what you'v said, mrs. grubach, or 
at least I partli agre with you, only, the way I judg the whole thing 
is harsher than yours, and think it' not onli not someth complic 
but simpli a fuss about nothing. I wa just caught unawares, that' 
what happened. If I had got up as soon as I wa awak without let 
myself get confus becaus anna wasn't there, if i'd got up and paid no 
regard to anyon who might have been in my way and come straight to you, 
if i'd done someth like have my breakfast in the kitchen as an 
exception, ask you to bring my cloth from my room, in short, if I 
had behav sensibl then noth more would have happened, everyth 
that wa wait to happen would have been stifled. peopl are so often 
unprepared. In the bank, for example, I am well prepared, noth of 
thi sort could possibl happen to me there, I have my own assist 
there, there are telephon for intern and extern call in front of 
me on the desk, I continu receiv visit from people, 
representatives, officials, but besid that, and most importantly, i'm 
alway occupi with my work, that' to say i'm alway alert, it would 
even be a pleasur for me to find myself face with someth of that 
sort. but now it' over with, and I didn't realli even want to talk 
about it ani more, onli I want to hear what you, as a sensibl woman, 
thought about it all, and i'm veri glad to hear that we'r in agreement. 
but now you must give me your hand, an agreement of thi sort need to 
be confirm with a handshake." 

will she shake hand with me? the supervisor didn't shake hands, 
he thought, and look at the woman differ from before, examin 
her. she stood up, as he had also stood up, and wa a littl self- 
conscious, she hadn't been abl to understand everyth that K. 
said. As a result of thi self conscious she said someth that 
she certainli did not intend and certainli wa not appropriate. "don't 
take it so hard, mr. k.," she said, with tear in her voic and also, of 
course, forget the handshake. "I didn't know I wa take it hard," 
said k., feel suddenli tire and see that if thi woman did agre 
with him it wa of veri littl value. 

befor go out the door he asked, "i miss bürstner home?" 
"no," said mrs. grubach, smile as she gave thi simpl piec of 
information, say someth sensibl at last. "she' at the theatre. 
did you want to see her? should I give her a message?" "i, er, I just 
want to have a few word with her." "i'm afraid I don't know when 
she' come in; she usual get back late when she' been to the 
theatre." "it realli doesn't matter," said K. hi head hang as he 
turn to the door to leave, "I just want to give her my apolog for 
take over her room today." "there' no need for that, mr. k., you'r 
too conscientious, the young ladi doesn't know anyth about it, she 
hasn't been home sinc earli thi morn and everything' been tidi 
up again, you can see for yourself." and she open the door to miss 
bürstner' room. "thank you, i'll take your word for it," said K, but 
went nonetheless over to the open door. the moon shone quietli into the 
unlit room. As far as could be seen, everyth wa inde in it 
place, not even the blous wa hang on the window handle. the 
pillow on the bed look remark plump as they lay half in the 
moonlight. "miss bürstner often come home late," said k., look at 
mrs. grubach as if that were her responsibility. "that' how young 
peopl are!" said mrs. grubach to excus herself. "of course, of 
course," said k., "but it can be taken too far." "yes, it can be," said 
mrs. grubach, "you'r so right, mr. K. perhap it is in thi case. I 
certainli wouldn't want to say anyth nasti about miss bürstner, she 
is a good, sweet girl, friendly, tidy, punctual, work hard, I 
appreci all that veri much, but one thing is true, she ought to have 
more pride, be a bit less forthcoming. twice thi month already, in the 
street over the way, i'v seen her with a differ gentleman. I realli 
don't like say this, you'r the onli one i'v said thi to, mr. k., I 
swear to god, but i'm go to have no choic but to have a few word 
with miss bürstner about it myself. and it' not the onli thing about 
her that i'm worri about." "mrs. grubach, you are on quit the wrong 
track," said k., so angri that he wa hardli abl to hide it, "and you 
have moreov misunderstood what I wa say about miss bürstner, that 
is not what I meant. In fact I warn you quit directli not to say 
anyth to her, you are quit mistaken, I know miss bürstner veri well 
and there is no truth at all in what you say. and what' more, perhap 
i'm go to far, I don't want to get in your way, say to her whatev 
you see fit. good night." "mr. k.," said mrs. grubach as if ask him 
for someth and hurri to hi door which he had alreadi opened, "I 
don't want to speak to miss bürstner at all, not yet, of cours i'll 
continu to keep an eye on her but you'r the onli one i'v told what I 
know. and it is, after all someth that everyon who let room ha 
to do if she' to keep the hous decent, that' all i'm tri to do." 
"decent!" call out K. through the crack in the door, "if you want to 
keep the hous decent you'll first have to give me notice." then he 
slam the door shut, there wa a gentl knock to which he paid no 
more attention. 

He did not feel at all like go to bed, so he decid to stay 
up, and thi would also give him the chanc to find out when miss 
bürstner would arriv home. perhap it would also still be possible, 
even if a littl inappropriate, to have a few word with her. As he lay 
there by the window, press hi hand to hi tire eyes, he even 
thought for a moment that he might punish mrs. grubach by persuad 
miss bürstner to give in her notic at the same time as he would. but 
he immedi realis that that would be shockingli excessive, and 
there would even be the suspicion that he wa move hous becaus of 
the incid of that morning. noth would have been more nonsens 
and, abov all, more pointless and contemptible. 

when he had becom tire of look out onto the empti street he 
slightli open the door to the live room so that he could see anyon 
who enter the flat from where he wa and lay down on the couch. He 
lay there, quietli smoke a cigar, until about eleven o'clock. He 
wasn't abl to hold out longer than that, and went a littl way into the 
hallway as if in that way he could make miss bürstner arriv sooner. He 
had no particular desir for her, he could not even rememb what she 
look like, but now he want to speak to her and it irrit him that 
her late arriv home meant thi day would be full of uneas and 
disord right to it veri end. It wa also her fault that he had not 
had ani dinner that even and that he had been unabl to visit elsa as 
he had intended. He could still make up for both of those things, 
though, if he went to the wine bar where elsa worked. He want to do 
so even later, after the discuss with miss bürstner. 

It wa alreadi gone half past eleven when someon could be heard 
in the stairway. k., who had been lost in hi thought in the hallway, 
walk up and down loudli as if it were hi own room, fled behind hi 
door. miss bürstner had arrived. shivering, she pull a silk shawl 
over her slender shoulder as she lock the door. the next moment she 
would certainli go into her room, where K. ought not to intrud in the 
middl of the night; that meant he would have to speak to her now, but, 
unfortunately, he had not put the electr light on in hi room so that 
when he step out of the dark it would give the impress of be an 
attack and would certainly, at the veri least, have been quit alarming. 
there wa no time to lose, and in hi helpless he whisper through 
the crack of the door, "miss bürstner." It sound like he wa plead 
with her, not call to her. "i there someon there?" ask miss 
bürstner, look round with her eye wide open. "it' me," said K. and 
came out. "oh, mr. k.!" said miss bürstner with a smile. "good 
evening," and offer him her hand. "I want to have a word with you, 
if you would allow me?" "now?" ask miss bürstner, "doe it have to be 
now? It is a littl odd, isn't it?" "i'v been wait for you sinc 
nine o'clock." "well, I wa at the theatre, I didn't know anyth 
about you wait for me." "the reason I need to speak to you onli came 
up today" "I see, well I don't see whi not, I suppose, apart from be 
so tire I could drop. come into my room for a few minut then. We 
certainli can't talk out here, we'd wake everyon up and I think that 
would be more unpleas for us than for them. wait here till i'v put 
the light on in my room, and then turn the light down out here." K. did 
as he wa told, and then even wait until miss bürstner came out of her 
room and quietli invit him, onc more, to come in. "sit down," she 
said, indic the ottoman, while she herself remain stand by the 
bedpost despit the tired she had spoken of; she did not even take 
off her hat, which wa small but decor with an abund of flowers. 
"what is it you wanted, then? i'm realli quit curious." she gentli 
cross her legs. 
"I expect you'll say," K. began, "that the matter realli isn't all that 
urgent and we don't need to talk about it right now, but ..." "I never 
listen to introductions," said miss bürstner. "that make my job so 
much easier," said K. "thi morning, to some extent through my fault, 
your room wa made a littl untidy, thi happen becaus of peopl I 
did not know and against my will but, as I said, becaus of my fault; I 
want to apologis for it." "mi room?" ask miss bürstner, and 
instead of look round the room scrutinis K. "it is true," said k., 
and now, for the first time, they look each other in the eyes, 
"there' no point in say exactli how thi came about." "but that' 
the interest thing about it," said miss bürstner. "no," said K. 
"well then," said miss bürstner, "I don't want to forc my way into ani 
secrets, if you insist that it' of no interest I won't insist. i'm 
quit happi to forgiv you for it, as you ask, especi as I can't see 
anyth at all that' been left untidy." with her hand laid flat on 
her lower hip, she made a tour around the room. At the mat where the 
photograph were she stopped. "look at this!" she cried. "mi 
photograph realli have been put in the wrong places. oh, that' 
horrible. someon realli ha been in my room without permission." K. 
nodded, and quietli curs kamin who work at hi bank and who wa 
alway activ do thing that had neither use nor purpose. "it is 
odd," said miss bürstner, "that i'm forc to forbid you to do someth 
that you ought to have forbidden yourself to do, name to come into my 
room when i'm not here." "but I did explain to you," said k., and went 
over to join her by the photographs, "that it wasn't me who interf 
with your photographs; but as you don't believ me i'll have to admit 
that the investig committe brought along three bank employe with 
them, one of them must have touch your photograph and as soon as I 
get the chanc i'll ask to have him dismiss from the bank. yes, there 
wa an investig committe here," ad k., as the young ladi wa 
look at him enquiringly. "becaus of you?" she asked. "yes," 
answer K. "no!" the ladi cri with a laugh. "yes, they were," said 
k., "you believ that i'm innoc then, do you?" "well now, innoc 
..." said the lady, "I don't want to start make ani pronounc 
that might have seriou consequences, I don't realli know you after all, 
it mean they'r deal with a seriou crimin if they send an 
investig committe straight out to get him. but you'r not in 
custodi now - at least I take it you'v not escap from prison 
consid that you seem quit calm - so you can't have commit ani 
crime of that sort." "yes," said k., "but it might be that the 
investig committe could see that i'm innocent, or not so guilti as 
had been supposed." "yes, that' certainli a possibility," said miss 
bürstner, who seem veri interested. "listen," said k., "you don't 
have much experi in legal matters." "no, that' true, I don't," 
said miss bürstner, "and i'v often regret it, as i'd like to know 
everyth and i'm veri interest in legal matters. there' someth 
peculiarli attract about the law, isn't there? but i'll certainli be 
perfect my knowledg in thi area, as next month I start work in a 
legal office." "that' veri good," said k., "that mean you'll be abl 
to give me some help with my trial." "that could well be," said miss 
bürstner, "whi not? I like to make use of what I know." "I mean it 
quit seriously," said k., "or at least, half seriously, as you do. 
thi affair is too petti to call in a lawyer, but I could make good use 
of someon who could give me advice." "yes, but if i'm to give you 
advic i'll have to know what it' all about," said miss bürstner. 
"that' exactli the problem," said k., "I don't know that myself." "so 
you have been make fun of me, then," said miss bürstner exceedingli 
disappointed, "you realli ought not to tri someth like that on at 
thi time of night." and she step away from the photograph where 
they had stood so long together. "miss bürstner, no," said k., "i'm not 
make fun of you. pleas believ me! i'v alreadi told you everyth 
I know. more than I know, in fact, as it actual wasn't even an 
investig committee, that' just what I call them becaus I don't 
know what els to call them. there wa no cross question at all, I 
wa mere arrested, but by a committee." miss bürstner sat on the 
ottoman and laugh again. "what wa it like then?" she asked. "it wa 
terrible" said k., although hi mind wa no longer on the subject, he 
had becom total absorb by miss bürstner' gaze who wa support 
her chin on one hand - the elbow rest on the cushion of the ottoman - 
and slowli stroke her hip with the other. "that' too vague," said 
miss bürstner. "what' too vague?" ask K. then he rememb himself 
and asked, "would you like me to show you what it wa like?" He want 
to move in some way but did not want to leave. "i'm alreadi tired," 
said miss bürstner. "you arriv back so late," said K. "now you'v 
start tell me off. well I suppos I deserv it as I shouldn't have 
let you in here in the first place, and it turn out there wasn't even 
ani point." "oh, there wa a point, you'll see now how import a 
point it was," said K. "may I move thi tabl away from your bedsid 
and put it here?" "what do you think you'r doing?" said miss bürstner. 
"of cours you can't!" "in that case I can't show you," said k., quit 
upset, as if miss bürstner had commit some incomprehens offenc 
against him. "alright then, if you need it to show what you mean, just 
take the bedsid tabl then," said miss bürstner, and after a short 
paus ad in a weak voice, "i'm so tire i'm allow more than I 
ought to." K. put the littl tabl in the middl of the room and sat 
down behind it. "you have to get a proper idea of where the peopl were 
situated, it is veri interesting. i'm the supervisor, sit over 
there on the chest are two policemen, stand next to the photograph 
there are three young people. hang on the handl of the window is a 
white blous - I just mention that by the way. and now it begins. Ah 
yes, i'm forget myself, the most import person of all, so i'm 
stand here in front of the table. the supervisor is sit 
extrem comfort with hi leg cross and hi arm hang over the 
backrest here like some layabout. and now it realli doe begin. the 
supervisor call out as if he had to wake me up, in fact he shout at 
me, i'm afraid, if i'm to make it clear to you, i'll have to shout as 
well, and it' noth more than my name that he shout out." miss 
bürstner, laugh as she listen to him, laid her forefing on her 
mouth so that K. would not shout, but it wa too late. K. wa too 
engross in hi role and slowli call out, "josef k.!". It wa not as 
loud as he had threatened, but nonetheless, onc he had suddenli call 
it out, the cri seem gradual to spread itself all round the room. 

there wa a seri of loud, curt and regular knock at the door of 
the adjoin room. miss bürstner went pale and laid her hand on her 
heart. K. wa especi startled, as for a moment he had been quit 
unabl to think of anyth other than the event of that morn and 
the girl for whom he wa perform them. He had hardli pull himself 
togeth when he jump over to miss bürstner and took her hand. "don't 
be afraid," he whispered, "i'll put everyth right. but who can it 
be? it' onli the live room next door, nobodi sleep in there." "ye 
they do," whisper miss bürstner into k.' ear, "a nephew of mrs. 
grubach's, an captain in the army, ha been sleep there sinc 
yesterday. there' no other room free. i'd forgotten about it too. 
whi did you have to shout like that? you'v made me quit upset." 
"there is no reason for it," said k., and, now as she sank back onto the 
cushion, kiss her forehead. "go away, go away," she said, hurriedli 
sit back up, "get out of here, go, what is it you want, he' 
listen at the door he can hear everything. you'r caus me so much 
trouble!" "I won't go," said k., "until you'v calm down a bit. come 
over into the other corner of the room, he won't be abl to hear us 
there." she let him lead her there. "don't forget," he said, "although 
thi might be unpleas for you you'r not in ani real danger. you 
know how much esteem mrs. grubach ha for me, she' the one who will 
make all the decis in this, especi as the captain is her nephew, 
but she believ everyth I say without question. what' more, she 
ha borrow a larg sum of money from me and that make her depend 
on me. I will confirm whatev you say to explain our be here 
together, howev inappropri it might be, and I guarante to make 
sure that mrs. grubach will not onli say she believ the explan in 
public but will believ it truli and sincerely. you will have no need 
to consid me in ani way. If you wish to let it be known that I have 
attack you then mrs. grubach will be inform of such and she will 
believ it without even lose her trust in me, that' how much respect 
she ha for me." miss bürstner look at the floor in front of her, 
quiet and a littl sunk in on herself. "whi would mrs. grubach not 
believ that i'v attack you?" ad K. He look at her hair in front 
of him, parted, bunch down, reddish and firmli held in place. He 
thought she would look up at him, but without chang her manner she 
said, "forgiv me, but it wa the sudden of the knock that 
startl me so much, not so much what the consequ of the captain 
be here might be. It wa all so quiet after you'd shouted, and then 
there wa the knocking, that' wa made me so shocked, and I wa sit 
right by the door, the knock wa right next to me. thank you for 
your suggestions, but I won't accept them. I can bear the 
respons for anyth that happen in my room myself, and I can do 
so with anyone. i'm surpris you don't realis just how insult your 
suggest are and what they impli about me, although I certainli 
acknowledg your good intentions. but now, pleas go, leav me alone, I 
need you to go now even more than I did earlier. the coupl of minut 
you ask for have grown into half an hour, more than half an hour now." 
K. took hold of her hand, and then of her wrist, "you'r not cross with 
me, though?" he said. she pull her hand away and answered, "no, no, 
i'm never cross with anyone." He grasp her wrist onc more, she 
toler it now and, in that way, lead him to the door. He had fulli 
intend to leave. but when he reach the door he came to a halt as if 
he hadn't expect to find a door there, miss bürstner made use of that 
moment to get herself free, open the door, slip out into the hallway and 
gentli say to K. from there, "now, come along, please. look," she 
point to the captain' door, from under which there wa a light 
shining, "he' put a light on and he' laugh at us." "alright, i'm 
coming," said k., move forward, took hold of her, kiss her on the 
mouth and then over her whole face like a thirsti anim lap with 
it tongu when it eventu find water. He final kiss her on her 
neck and her throat and left hi lip press there for a long time. He 
did not look up until there wa a nois from the captain' room. "i'll 
go now," he said, he want to address miss bürstner by her christian 
name, but did not know it. she gave him a tire nod, offer him her 
hand to kiss as she turn away as if she did not know what she wa 
doing, and went back into her room with her head bowed. A short while 
later, K. wa lie in hi bed. He veri soon went to sleep, but befor 
he did he thought a littl while about hi behaviour, he wa satisfi 
with it but felt some surpris that he wa not more satisfied; he wa 
serious worri about miss bürstner becaus of the captain. 




chapter two 
first cross-examin 

K. wa inform by telephon that there would be a small hear 
concern hi case the follow sunday. He wa made awar that these 
cross examin would follow one anoth regularly, perhap not everi 
week but quit frequently. On the one hand it wa in everyone' interest 
to bring proceed quickli to their conclusion, but on the other hand 
everi aspect of the examin had to be carri out thoroughli 
without last too long becaus of the associ stress. for these 
reasons, it had been decid to hold a seri of brief examin 
follow on one after another. sunday had been chosen as the day for 
the hear so that K. would not be disturb in hi profession work. 
It wa assum that he would be in agreement with this, but if he wish 
for anoth date then, as far as possible, he would be accommodated. 
cross-examin could even be held in the night, for instance, but K. 
would probabl not be fresh enough at that time. anyway, as long as K. 
made no objection, the hear would be left on sundays. It wa a 
matter of cours that he would have to appear without fail, there wa 
probabl no need to point thi out to him. He would be given the number 
of the build where he wa to present himself, which wa in a street 
in a suburb well away from the citi centr which K. had never been to 
before. 

onc he had receiv thi notice, K. hung up the receiv without 
give an answer; he had decid immedi to go there that sunday, it 
wa certainli necessary, proceed had begun and he had to face up to 
it, and thi first examin would probabl also be the last. He wa 
still stand in thought by the telephon when he heard the voic of 
the deputi director behind him - he want to use the telephon but K. 
stood in hi way. "bad news?" ask the deputi director casually, not 
in order to find anyth out but just to get K. away from the device. 
"no, no," said k., he step to one side but did not go away entirely. 
the deputi director pick up the receiv and, as he wait for hi 
connection, turn away from it and said to k., "one question, mr. k.: 
would you like to give me the pleasur of join me on my sail boat 
on sunday morning? there' quit a few peopl coming, you'r bound to 
know some of them. one of them is hasterer, the state attorney. would 
you like to come along? Do come along!" K. tri to pay attent to 
what the deputi director wa saying. It wa of no small import for 
him, as thi invit from the deputi director, with whom he had never 
got on veri well, meant that he wa tri to improv hi relat with 
him. It show how import K. had becom in the bank and how it 
second most import offici seem to valu hi friendship, or at 
least hi impartiality. He wa onli speak at the side of the 
telephon receiv while he wait for hi connection, but in give 
thi invit the deputi director wa humbl himself. but K. would 
have to humili him a second time as a result, he said, "thank you 
veri much, but i'm afraid I will have no time on sunday, I have a 
previou obligation." "pity," said the deputi director, and turn to 
the telephon convers that had just been connected. It wa not a 
short conversation, but k., remain stand confus by the instrument 
all the time it wa go on. It wa onli when the deputi director hung 
up that he wa shock into awar and said, in order to partial 
excus hi stand there for no reason, "i'v just receiv a telephon 
call, there' somewher I need to go, but they forgot to tell me what 
time." "ask them then," said the deputi director. "it' not that 
important," said k., although in that way hi earlier excuse, alreadi 
weak enough, wa made even weaker. As he went, the deputi director 
continu to speak about other things. K. forc himself to answer, but 
hi thought were mainli about that sunday, how it would be best to get 
there for nine o'clock in the morn as that wa the time that court 
alway start work on weekdays. 

the weather wa dull on sunday. K. wa veri tired, as he had 
stay out drink until late in the night celebr with some of the 
regulars, and he had almost overslept. He dress hurriedly, without 
the time to think and assembl the variou plan he had work out 
dure the week. with no breakfast, he rush to the suburb he had been 
told about. oddli enough, although he had littl time to look around 
him, he came across the three bank offici involv in hi case, 
rabensteiner, kullich and kaminer. the first two were travel in a 
tram that went across k.' route, but kamin sat on the terrac of a 
café and leant curious over the wall as K. came over. all of them 
seem to be look at him, surpris at see their superior running; 
it wa a kind of pride that made K. want to go on foot, thi wa hi 
affair and the idea of ani help from strangers, howev slight, wa 
repuls to him, he also want to avoid ask for anyone' help 
becaus that would initi them into the affair even if onli slightly. 
and after all, he had no wish at all to humili himself befor the 
committe by be too punctual. anyway, now he wa run so that he 
would get there by nine o'clock if at all possible, even though he had 
no appoint for thi time. 

He had thought that he would recognis the build from a 
distanc by some kind of sign, without know exactli what the sign 
would look like, or from some particular kind of activ outsid the 
entrance. K. had been told that the build wa in juliusstrasse, but 
when he stood at the street' entranc it consist on each side of 
almost noth but monotonous, grey constructions, tall block of flat 
occupi by poor people. now, on a sunday morning, most of the window 
were occupied, men in their shirtsleev leant out smoking, or care 
and gentli held small children on the sills. other window were pile 
up with bedding, abov which the dishevel head of a woman would 
briefli appear. peopl call out to each other across the street, one 
of the call provok a loud laugh about K. himself. It wa a long 
street, and space evenli along it were small shop below street level, 
sell variou kind of foodstuffs, which you reach by go down a 
few steps. women went in and out of them or stood chat on the 
steps. A fruitmonger, take hi good up to the windows, wa just as 
inattent as K. and nearli knock him down with hi cart. just then, 
a gramophone, which in better part of town would have been seen as worn 
out, began to play some murder tune. 

K. went further into the street, slowly, as if he had plenti of 
time now, or as if the examin magistr were look at him from one 
of the window and therefor knew that K. had found hi way there. It 
wa shortli after nine. the build wa quit far down the street, it 
cover so much area it wa almost extraordinary, and the gateway in 
particular wa tall and long. It wa clearli intend for deliveri 
wagon belong to the variou warehous all round the yard which were 
now lock up and carri the name of compani some of which K. knew 
from hi work at the bank. In contrast with hi usual habits, he 
remain stand a while at the entranc to the yard take in all 
these extern details. near him, there wa a bare-foot man sit 
on a crate and read a newspaper. there were two lad swing on a 
hand cart. In front of a pump stood a weak, young girl in a bedjacket 
who, as the water flow into her can, look at K. there wa a piec 
of rope stretch between two window in a corner of the yard, with some 
wash hang on it to dry. A man stood below it call out 
instruct to direct the work be done. 

K. went over to the stairway to get to the room where the hear 
wa to take place, but then stood still again as besid these step he 
could see three other stairway entrances, and there also seem to be a 
small passageway at the end of the yard lead into a second yard. It 
irrit him that he had not been given more precis direct to the 
room, it meant they were either be especi neglect with him or 
especi indifferent, and he decid to make that clear to them veri 
loudli and veri unambiguously. In the end he decid to climb up the 
stairs, hi thought play on someth that he rememb the 
policeman, willem, say to him; that the court is attract by the 
guilt, from which it follow that the courtroom must be on the stairway 
that K. select by chance. 

As he went up he disturb a larg group of children play on 
the stair who look at him as he step through their rows. "next 
time I come here," he said to himself, "I must either bring sweet with 
me to make them like me or a stick to hit them with." just befor he 
reach the first land he even had to wait a littl while until a 
ball had finish it movement, two small lad with sli face like 
grown-up scoundrel held him by hi trouser-leg until it had; if he 
were to shake them off he would have to hurt them, and he wa afraid of 
what nois they would make by shouting. 

On the first floor, hi search began for real. He still felt 
unabl to ask for the investig committee, and so he invent a 
joiner call lanz - that name occur to him becaus the captain, mrs. 
grubach' nephew, wa call lanz - so that he could ask at everi flat 
whether lanz the joiner live there and thu obtain a chanc to look 
into the rooms. It turn out, though, that that wa mostli possibl 
without further ado, as almost all the door were left open and the 
children ran in and out. most of them were small, one-window room 
where they also did the cooking. mani women held babi in one arm and 
work at the stove with the other. half grown girls, who seem to be 
dress in just their pinafor work hardest run to and fro. In 
everi room, the bed were still in use by peopl who were ill, or still 
asleep, or peopl stretch out on them in their clothes. K. knock at 
the flat where the door were close and ask whether lanz the joiner 
live there. It wa usual a woman who open the door, heard the 
enquiri and turn to somebodi in the room who would rais himself from 
the bed. "the gentleman' ask if a joiner call lanz, live here." 
"A joiner, call lanz?" he would ask from the bed." "that' right," K. 
would say, although it wa clear that the investig committe wa 
not to be found there, and so hi task wa at an end. there were mani 
who thought it must be veri import for K. to find lanz the joiner and 
thought long about it, name a joiner who wa not call lanz or give 
a name that had some vagu similar with lanz, or they ask 
neighbour or accompani K. to a door a long way away where they 
thought someon of that sort might live in the back part of the build 
or where someon would be who could advis K. better than they could 
themselves. K. eventu had to give up ask if he did not want to 
be led all round from floor to floor in thi way. He regret hi 
initi plan, which had at first seem so practic to him. As he 
reach the fifth floor, he decid to give up the search, took hi 
leav of a friendly, young worker who want to lead him on still 
further and went down the stairs. but then the thought of how much time 
he wa wast made him cross, he went back again and knock at the 
first door on the fifth floor. the first thing he saw in the small room 
wa a larg clock on the wall which alreadi show ten o'clock. "i 
there a joiner call lanz who live here?" he asked. "pardon?" said a 
young woman with black, shine eye who was, at that moment, wash 
children' undercloth in a bucket. she point her wet hand toward 
the open door of the adjoin room. 

K. thought he had step into a meeting. A medium sized, two 
window room wa fill with the most divers crowd of peopl - nobodi 
paid ani attent to the person who had just entered. close under it 
ceil it wa surround by a galleri which wa also fulli occupi and 
where the peopl could onli stand bent down with their head and their 
back touch the ceiling. k., who found the air too stuffy, step 
out again and said to the young woman, who had probabl misunderstood 
what he had said, "I ask for a joiner, someon by the name of lanz." 
"yes," said the woman, "pleas go on in." K. would probabl not have 
follow her if the woman had not gone up to him, taken hold of the door 
handl and said, "i'll have to close the door after you, no-on els 
will be allow in." "veri sensible," said k., "but it' too full 
already." but then he went back in anyway. He pass through between 
two men who were talk besid the door - one of them held both hand 
far out in front of himself make the movement of count out money, 
the other look him close in the eye - and someon took him by the 
hand. It wa a small, red-fac youth. "come in, come in," he said. 
K. let himself be led by him, and it turn out that there wa - 
surprisingli in a dens pack crowd of peopl move to and fro - a 
narrow passag which may have been the divis between two factions; 
thi idea wa reinforc by the fact that in the first few row to the 
left and the right of him there wa hardli ani face look in hi 
direction, he saw noth but the back of peopl direct their speech 
and their movement onli toward member of their own side. most of 
them were dress in black, in old, long, formal frock coat that hung 
down loos around them. these cloth were the onli thing that 
puzzl k., as he would otherwis have taken the whole assembl for a 
local polit meeting. 

At the other end of the hall where K. had been led there wa a 
littl tabl set at an angl on a veri low podium which wa as 
overcrowd as everywher else, and behind the table, near the edg of 
the podium, sat a small, fat, wheez man who wa talk with someon 
behind him. thi second man wa stand with hi leg cross and hi 
elbow on the backrest of the chair, provok much laughter. from time 
to time he threw hi arm in the air as if do a caricatur of someone. 
the youth who wa lead K. had some difficulti in report to the 
man. He had alreadi tri twice to tell him something, stand on tip- 
toe, but without get the man' attent as he sat there abov him. 
It wa onli when one of the peopl up on the podium drew hi attent 
to the youth that the man turn to him and leant down to hear what it 
wa he quietli said. then he pull out hi watch and quickli look 
over at K. "you should have been here one hour and five minut ago," 
he said. K. wa go to give him a repli but had no time to do so, as 
hardli had the man spoken than a gener mutter aros all over the 
right hand side of the hall. "you should have been here one hour and 
five minut ago," the man now repeated, rais hi voic thi time, 
and quickli look round the hall beneath him. the mutter also 
becam immedi louder and, as the man said noth more, die away 
onli gradually. now the hall wa much quieter than when K. had entered. 
onli the peopl up in the galleri had not stop pass remarks. As 
far as could be distinguished, up in the half-darkness, dust and haze, 
they seem to be less well dress than those below. mani of them had 
brought pillow that they had put between their head and the ceil so 
that they would not hurt themselv press against it. 

K. had decid he would do more watch than talking, so he did 
not defend himself for supposedli have come late, and simpli said, 
"well mayb I have arriv late, i'm here now." there follow loud 
applause, onc more from the right hand side of the hall. easi peopl 
to get on your side, thought k., and wa bother onli by the quiet from 
the left hand side which wa directli behind him and from which there 
wa applaus from onli a few individuals. He wonder what he could say 
to get all of them to support him togeth or, if that were not 
possible, to at least get the support of the other for a while. 

"yes," said the man, "but i'm now no longer under ani oblig 
to hear your case" - there wa onc more a muttering, but thi time it 
wa mislead as the man wave the people' object asid with hi 
hand and continu - "I will, however, as an exception, continu with it 
today. but you should never arriv late like thi again. and now, step 
forward!" someon jump down from the podium so that there would be a 
place free for k., and K. step up onto it. He stood press close 
against the table, the press of the crowd behind him wa so great that 
he had to press back against it if he did not want to push the judge' 
desk down off the podium and perhap the judg along with it. 

the judge, however, paid no attent to that but sat veri 
comfort on hi chair and, after say a few word to close hi 
discuss with the man behind him, reach for a littl note book, the 
onli item on hi desk. It wa like an old school exercis book and had 
becom quit misshapen from much thumbing. "now then," said the judge, 
thumb through the book. He turn to K. with the tone of someon who 
know hi fact and said, "you are a hous painter?" "no," said k., "I 
am the chief clerk in a larg bank." thi repli wa follow by 
laughter among the right hand faction down in the hall, it wa so hearti 
that K. couldn't stop himself join in with it. the peopl support 
themselv with their hand on their knee and shook as if suffer a 
seriou attack of coughing. even some of those in the galleri were 
laughing. the judg had becom quit cross but seem to have no power 
over those below him in the hall, he tri to reduc what harm had been 
done in the galleri and jump up threaten them, hi eyebrows, until 
then hardli remarkable, push themselv up and becam big, black and 
bushi over hi eyes. 

the left hand side of the hall wa still quiet, though, the peopl 
stood there in row with their face look toward the podium 
listen to what wa be said there, they observ the nois from the 
other side of the hall with the same quiet and even allow some 
individu from their own ranks, here and there, to go forward into the 
other faction. the peopl in the left faction were not onli fewer in 
number than the right but probabl were no more import than them, 
although their behaviour wa calmer and that made it seem like they 
were. when K. now began to speak he wa convinc he wa do it in 
the same way as them. 

"your question, My lord, as to whether I am a hous painter - in 
fact even more than that, you did not ask at all but mere impos it 
on me - is symptomat of the whole way these proceed against me are 
be carri out. perhap you will object that there are no 
proceed against me. you will be quit right, as there are 
proceed onli if I acknowledg that there are. but, for the moment, 
I do acknowledg it, out of piti for yourselv to a larg extent. it' 
imposs not to observ all thi busi without feel pity. I 
don't say thing are be done without due care but I would like to 
make it clear that it is I who make the acknowledgement." 

K. stop speak and look down into the hall. He had spoken 
sharply, more sharpli than he had intended, but he had been quit right. 
It should have been reward with some applaus here and there but 
everyth wa quiet, they were all clearli wait for what would 
follow, perhap the quiet wa lay the ground for an outbreak of 
activ that would bring thi whole affair to an end. It wa somewhat 
disturb that just then the door at the end of the hall opened, the 
young washerwoman, who seem to have finish her work, came in and, 
despit all her caution, attract the attent of some of the peopl 
there. It wa onli the judg who gave K. ani direct pleasure, as he 
seem to have been immedi struck by k.' words. until then, he 
had listen to him standing, as k.' speech had taken him by surpris 
while he wa direct hi attent to the gallery. now, in the pause, 
he sat down veri slowly, as if he did not want anyon to notice. He 
took out the notebook again, probabl so that he could give the 
impress of be calmer. 

"that won't help you, sir," continu k., "even your littl book 
will onli confirm what I say." K. wa satisfi to hear noth but hi 
own quiet word in thi room full of strangers, and he even dare 
casual to pick up the examin judge' notebook and, touch it onli 
with the tip of hi finger as if it were someth revolting, lift 
it in the air, hold it just by one of the middl page so that the 
other on each side of it, close written, blot and yellowing, 
flap down. "those are the offici note of the examin judge," he 
said, and let the notebook fall down onto the desk. "you can read in 
your book as much as you like, sir, I realli don't have anyth in thi 
charg book to be afraid of, even though I don't have access to it as I 
wouldn't want it in my hand, I can onli touch it with two fingers." the 
judg grab the notebook from where it had fallen on the desk - which 
could onli have been a sign of hi deep humiliation, or at least that is 
how it must have been perceiv - tri to tidi it up a little, and held 
it onc more in front of himself in order to read from it. 

the peopl in the front row look up at him, show such tension 
on their face that he look back down at them for some time. everi 
one of them wa an old man, some of them with white beards. could they 
perhap be the crucial group who could turn the whole assembl one way 
or the other? they had sunk into a state of motionless while K. 
gave hi oration, and it had not been possibl to rais them from thi 
passiv even when the judg wa be humiliated. "what ha happen 
to me," continu k., with less of the vigour he had had earlier, he 
continu scan the face in the first row, and thi gave hi 
address a somewhat nervou and distract character, "what ha happen 
to me is not just an isol case. If it were it would not be of much 
import as it' not of much import to me, but it is a symptom of 
proceed which are carri out against many. it' on behalf of them 
that I stand here now, not for myself alone." 

without have intend it, he had rais hi voice. somewher in 
the hall, someon rais hi hand and applaud him shouting, "bravo! 
whi not then? bravo! again I say, bravo!" some of the men in the 
first row grope around in their beards, none of them look round to 
see who wa shouting. not even K. thought him of ani import but it 
did rais hi spirits; he no longer thought it at all necessari that all 
of those in the hall should applaud him, it wa enough if the major 
of them began to think about the matter and if onli one of them, now 
and then, wa persuaded. 

"i'm not tri to be a success orator," said K. after thi 
thought, "that' probabl more than i'm capabl of anyway. i'm sure the 
examin judg can speak far better than I can, it is part of hi job 
after all. all that I want is a public discuss of a public wrong. 
listen: ten day ago I wa place under arrest, the arrest itself is 
someth I laugh about but that' besid the point. they came for me 
in the morn when I wa still in bed. mayb the order had been given 
to arrest some hous painter - that seem possibl after what the judg 
ha said - someon who is as innoc as I am, but it wa me they chose. 
there were two polic thug occupi the next room. they could not 
have taken better precaut if I had been a danger robber. and 
these policemen were unprincipl riff-raff, they talk at me till I 
wa sick of it, they want bribes, they want to trick me into give 
them my clothes, they want money, supposedli so that they could bring 
me my breakfast after they had blatantli eaten my own breakfast in front 
of my eyes. and even that wa not enough. I wa led in front of the 
supervisor in anoth room. thi wa the room of a ladi who I have a 
lot of respect for, and I wa forc to look on while the supervisor and 
the policemen made quit a mess of thi room becaus of me, although not 
through ani fault of mine. It wa not easi to stay calm, but I manag 
to do so and wa complet calm when I ask the supervisor whi it wa 
that I wa under arrest. If he were here he would have to confirm what 
I say. I can see him now, sit on the chair belong to that ladi I 
mention - a pictur of dull-wit arrogance. what do you think he 
answered? what he told me, gentlemen, wa basic noth at all; 
perhap he realli did know nothing, he had place me under arrest and 
wa satisfied. In fact he had done more than that and brought three 
junior employe from the bank where I work into the lady' room; they 
had made themselv busi interf with some photograph that belong 
to the ladi and caus a mess. there was, of course, anoth reason 
for bring these employees; they, just like my landladi and her maid, 
were expect to spread the news of my arrest and damag my public 
reput and in particular to remov me from my posit at the bank. 
well they didn't succeed in ani of that, not in the slightest, even my 
landlady, who is quit a simpl person - and I will give you here her 
name in full respect, her name is mrs. grubach - even mrs. grubach wa 
understand enough to see that an arrest like thi ha no more 
signific than an attack carri out on the street by some youth who 
are not kept under proper control. I repeat, thi whole affair ha 
caus me noth but unpleas and temporari irritation, but could 
it not also have had some far wors consequences?" 

K. broke off here and look at the judge, who said nothing. As 
he did so he thought he saw the judg use a movement of hi eye to give 
a sign to someon in the crowd. K. smile and said, "and now the judge, 
right next to me, is give a secret sign to someon among you. there 
seem to be someon among you who is take direct from above. I 
don't know whether the sign is meant to produc boo or applause, but 
i'll resist tri to guess what it mean is too soon. It realli 
doesn't matter to me, and I give hi lordship the judg my full and 
public permiss to stop give secret sign to hi paid subordin 
down there and give hi order in word instead; let him just say "boo 
now!," and then the next time "clap now!". 

whether it wa embarrass or impatience, the judg rock 
backward and forward on hi seat. the man behind him, whom he had 
been talk with earlier, leant forward again, either to give him a few 
gener word of encourag or some specif piec of advice. below 
them in the hall the peopl talk to each other quietli but animatedly. 
the two faction had earlier seem to hold view strongli oppos to 
each other but now they began to intermingle, a few individu point 
up at k., other point at the judge. the air in the room wa fuggi 
and extrem oppressive, those who were stand furthest away could 
hardli even be seen through it. It must have been especi 
troublesom for those visitor who were in the gallery, as they were 
forc to quietli ask the particip in the assembl what exactli wa 
happening, albeit with timid glanc at the judge. the repli they 
receiv were just as quiet, and given behind the protect of a rais 
hand. 

"I have nearli finish what I have to say," said k., and as there 
wa no bell avail he struck the desk with hi fist in a way that 
startl the judg and hi advisor and made them look up from each 
other. "none of thi concern me, and I am therefor abl to make a calm 
assess of it, and, assum that thi so-cal court is of ani real 
importance, it will be veri much to your advantag to listen to what I 
have to say. If you want to discuss what I say, pleas don't bother to 
write it down until later on, I don't have ani time to wast and i'll 
soon be leaving." 

there wa immedi silence, which show how well K. wa in 
control of the crowd. there were no shout among them as there had been 
at the start, no-on even applauded, but if they weren't alreadi 
persuad they seem veri close to it. 

K wa pleas at the tension among all the peopl there as they 
listen to him, a rustl rose from the silenc which wa more 
invigor than the most ecstat applaus could have been. "there is 
no doubt," he said quietly, "that there is some enorm organis 
determin what is said by thi court. In my case thi includ my 
arrest and the examin take place here today, an organis that 
employ policemen who can be bribed, oafish supervisor and judg of 
whom noth better can be said than that they are not as arrog as 
some others. thi organis even maintain a high-level judiciari 
along with it train of countless servants, scribes, policemen and all 
the other assist that it needs, perhap even execution and 
tortur - i'm not afraid of use those words. and what, gentlemen, is 
the purpos of thi enorm organisation? it purpos is to arrest 
innoc peopl and wage pointless prosecut against them which, as 
in my case, lead to no result. how are we to avoid those in offic 
becom deepli corrupt when everyth is devoid of meaning? that is 
impossible, not even the highest judg would be abl to achiev that for 
himself. that is whi policemen tri to steal the cloth off the back of 
those they arrest, that is whi supervisor break into the home of 
peopl they do not know, that is whi innoc peopl are humili in 
front of crowd rather than be given a proper trial. the policemen 
onli talk about the warehous where they put the properti of those 
they arrest, I would like to see these warehous where the hard won 
possess of peopl under arrest is left to decay, if, that is, it' 
not stolen by the thiev hand of the warehous workers." 

K. wa interrupt by a screech from the far end of the hall, 
he shade hi eye to see that far, as the dull light of day made the 
smoke whitish and hard to see through. It wa the washerwoman whom K. 
had recognis as a like sourc of disturb as soon as she had 
entered. It wa hard to see now whether it wa her fault or not. K. 
could onli see that a man had pull her into a corner by the door and 
wa press himself against her. but it wa not her who wa screaming, 
but the man, he had open hi mouth wide and look up at the ceiling. 
A small circl had form around the two of them, the visitor near him 
in the galleri seem delight that the seriou tone K. had introduc 
into the gather had been disturb in thi way. k.' first thought 
wa to run over there, and he also thought that everyon would want to 
bring thing back into order there or at least to make the pair leav 
the room, but the first row of peopl in front of him stay were they 
were, no-on move and no-on let K. through. On the contrary, they 
stood in hi way, old men held out their arm in front of him and a hand 
from somewher - he did not have the time to turn round - took hold of 
hi collar. k., by thi time, had forgotten about the pair, it seem 
to him that hi freedom wa be limit as if hi arrest wa be 
taken seriously, and, without ani thought for what he wa doing, he 
jump down from the podium. now he stood face to face with the crowd. 
had he judg the peopl properly? had he put too much faith in the 
effect of hi speech? had they been put up a pretenc all the time 
he had been speaking, and now that he come to the end and to what must 
follow, were they tire of pretending? what face they were, all around 
him! dark, littl eye flicker here and there, cheek droop down 
like on drunken men, their long beard were thin and stiff, if they took 
hold of them it wa more like they were make their hand into claws, 
not as if they were take hold of their own beards. but underneath 
those beard - and thi wa the real discoveri made by K. - there were 
badg of variou size and colour shine on the collar of their 
coats. As far as he could see, everi one of them wa wear one of 
these badges. all of them belong to the same group, even though they 
seem to be divid to the right and the left of him, and when he 
suddenli turn round he saw the same badg on the collar of the 
examin judg who calmli look down at him with hi hand in hi lap. 
"so," call out K, throw hi arm in the air as if thi sudden 
realis need more room, "all of you are work for thi 
organisation, I see now that you are all the veri bunch of cheat and 
liar i'v just been speak about, you'v all press yourselv in 
here in order to listen in and snoop on me, you gave the impress of 
have form into factions, one of you even applaud me to test me 
out, and you want to learn how to trap an innoc man! well, I hope 
you haven't come here for nothing, I hope you'v either had some fun 
from someon who expect you to defend hi innoc or els - let go 
of me or i'll hit you," shout K. to a quiveri old man who had press 
himself especi close to him - "or els that you'v actual learn 
something. and so I wish you good luck in your trade." He briskli took 
hi hat from where it lay on the edg of the tabl and, surround by a 
silenc caus perhap by the complet of their surprise, push hi 
way to the exit. however, the examin judg seem to have move even 
more quickli than k., as he wa wait for him at the doorway. "one 
moment," he said. K. stood where he was, but look at the door with 
hi hand alreadi on it handl rather than at the judge. "I mere 
want to draw your attention," said the judge, "to someth you seem 
not yet to be awar of: today, you have rob yourself of the 
advantag that a hear of thi sort alway give to someon who is 
under arrest." K. laugh toward the door. "you bunch of louts," he 
called, "you can keep all your hear as a present from me," then 
open the door and hurri down the steps. behind him, the nois of 
the assembl rose as it becam live onc more and probabl began to 
discuss these event as if make a scientif studi of them. 




chapter three 
In the empti courtroom - the student - the offic 

everi day over the follow week, K. expect anoth summon to 
arrive, he could not believ that hi reject of ani more hear had 
been taken literally, and when the expect summon realli had not come 
by saturday even he took it to mean that he wa expected, without 
be told, to appear at the same place at the same time. So on sunday, 
he set out onc more in the same direction, go without hesit up 
the step and through the corridors; some of the peopl rememb him 
and greet him from their doorways, but he no longer need to ask 
anyon the way and soon arriv at the right door. It wa open as 
soon as he knock and, pay no attent to the woman he had seen 
last time who wa stand at the doorway, he wa about to go straight 
into the adjoin room when she said to him "there' no session today". 
"what do you mean; no session?" he asked, unabl to believ it. but the 
woman persuad him by open the door to the next room. It wa inde 
empty, and look even more dismal empti than it had the previou 
sunday. On the podium stood the tabl exactli as it had been befor 
with a few book lay on it. "can I have a look at those books?" 
ask k., not becaus he wa especi curiou but so that he would not 
have come for nothing. "no," said the woman as she re-clos the door, 
"that' not allowed. those book belong to the examin judge." "I 
see," said k., and nodded, "those book must be law books, and that' 
how thi court doe things, not onli to tri peopl who are innoc but 
even to tri them without let them know what' go on." "I expect 
you'r right," said the woman, who had not understood exactli what he 
meant. "i'd better go away again, then," said K. 
"should I give a messag to the examin judge?" ask the woman. "do 
you know him, then?" ask K. "of cours I know him," said the woman, 
"mi husband is the court usher." It wa onli now that K. notic that 
the room, which befor had held noth but a wash-tub, had been fit 
out as a live room. the woman saw how surpris he wa and said, 
"yes, we'r allow to live here as we like, onli we have to clear the 
room out when the court' in session. there' lot of disadvantag to 
my husband' job." "it' not so much the room that surpris me," said 
k., look at her crossly, "it' your be marri that shock me." 
"are you think about what happen last time the court wa in 
session, when I disturb what you were saying?" ask the woman. "of 
course," said k., "it' in the past now and i'v nearli forgotten about 
it, but at the time it made me furious. and now you tell me yourself 
that you are a marri woman." "it wasn't ani disadvantag for you to 
have your speech interrupted. the way they talk about you after you'd 
gone wa realli bad." "that could well be," said k., turn away, "but 
it doe not excus you." "there' no-on I know who'd hold it against 
me," said the woman. "him, who put hi arm around me, he' been chase 
after me for a long time. I might not be veri attract for most 
people, but I am for him. i'v got no protect from him, even my 
husband ha had to get use to it; if he want to keep hi job he' got 
to put up with it as that man' a student and he'll almost certainli be 
veri power later on. he' alway after me, he'd onli just left when 
you arrived." "that fit in with everyth else," said k., "i'm not 
surprised." "do you want to make thing a bit better here?" the woman 
ask slowly, watch him as if she were say someth that could be 
as danger for K. as for herself. "that' what I thought when I heard 
you speak, I realli like what you said. mind you, I onli heard part of 
it, I miss the begin of it and at the end I wa lie on the floor 
with the student - it' so horribl here," she said after a pause, and 
took hold of k.' hand. "do you believ you realli will be abl to make 
thing better?" K. smile and twist hi hand round a littl in her 
soft hands. "it' realli not my job to make thing better here, as you 
put it," he said, "and if you said that to the examin judg he would 
laugh at you or punish you for it. I realli would not have becom 
involv in thi matter if I could have help it, and I would have lost 
no sleep worri about how thi court need to be made better. but 
becaus i'm told that I have been arrest - and I am under arrest - it 
forc me to take some action, and to do so for my own sake. however, 
if I can be of some servic to you in the process I will, of course, be 
glad to do so. and I will be glad to do so not onli for the sake of 
chariti but also becaus you can be of some help to me." "how could I 
help you, then?" said the woman. "you could, for example, show me the 
book on the tabl there." "yes, certainly," the woman cried, and 
pull K. along behind her as she rush to them. the book were old 
and well worn, the cover of one of them had nearli broken through in it 
middle, and it wa held togeth with a few threads. "everyth is so 
dirti here," said k., shake hi head, and befor he could pick the 
book up the woman wipe some of the dust off with her apron. K. took 
hold of the book that lay on top and threw it open, an indec pictur 
appeared. A man and a woman sat nake on a sofa, the base intent of 
whoever drew it wa easi to see but he had been so grossli lack in 
skill that all that anyon could realli make out were the man and the 
woman who domin the pictur with their bodies, sit in overli 
upright postur that creat a fals perspect and made it difficult 
for them to approach each other. K. didn't thumb through that book ani 
more, but just threw open the next one at it titl page, it wa a novel 
with the title, what grete suffer from her husband, hans. "so thi is 
the sort of law book they studi here," said k., "thi is the sort of 
person sit in judgement over me." "I can help you," said the woman, 
"would you like me to?" "could you realli do that without place 
yourself in danger? you did say earlier on that your husband is wholli 
depend on hi superiors." "I still want to help you," said the 
woman, "come over here, we'v got to talk about it. don't say ani more 
about what danger i'm in, I onli fear danger where I want to fear it. 
come over here." she point to the podium and invit him to sit down 
on the step with her. "you'v got love dark eyes," she said after 
they had sat down, look up into k.' face, "peopl say i'v got nice 
eye too, but your are much nicer. It wa the first thing I notic 
when you first came here. that' even whi I came in here, into the 
assembl room, afterwards, i'd never normal do that, i'm not realli 
even allow to." So that' what all thi is about, thought k., she' 
offer herself to me, she' as degener as everyth els around 
here, she' had enough of the court officials, which is understand I 
suppose, and so she approach ani stranger and make compliment about 
hi eyes. with that, K. stood up in silenc as if he had spoken hi 
thought out loud and thu explain hi action to the woman. "I don't 
think you can be of ani assist to me," he said, "to be of ani real 
assist you would need to be in contact with high officials. but i'm 
sure you onli know the lower employees, and there are crowd of them 
mill about here. i'm sure you'r veri familiar with them and could 
achiev a great deal through them, i'v no doubt of that, but the most 
that could be done through them would have no bear at all on the 
final outcom of the trial. you, on the other hand, would lose some of 
your friend as a result, and I have no wish of that. carri on with 
these peopl in the same way as you have been, as it doe seem to me to 
be someth you cannot do without. I have no regret in say thi 
as, in return for your compliment to me, I also find you rather 
attractive, especi when you look at me as sadli as you are now, 
although you realli have no reason to do so. you belong to the peopl I 
have to combat, and you'r veri comfort among them, you'r even in 
love with the student, or if you don't love him you do at least prefer 
him to your husband. it' easi to see that from what you'v been 
saying." "no!" she shouted, remain sit where she wa and grasp 
k.' hand, which he fail to pull away fast enough. "you can't go away 
now, you can't go away when you'v misjudg me like that! are you 
realli capabl of go away now? Am I realli so worthless that you 
won't even do me the favour of stay a littl bit longer?" "you 
misunderstand me," said k., sit back down, "if it' realli import 
to you for me to stay here then i'll be glad to do so, I have plenti of 
time, I came here think there would be a trial take place. all I 
meant with what I said just now wa to ask you not to do anyth on my 
behalf in the proceed against me. but even that is noth for you 
to worri about when you consid that there' noth hang on the 
outcom of thi trial, and that, whatev the verdict, I will just laugh 
at it. and that' even presuppos it ever even reach ani 
conclusion, which I veri much doubt. I think it' much more like that 
the court offici will be too lazy, too forgetful, or even to fear 
ever to continu with these proceed and that they will soon be 
abandon if they haven't been abandon already. it' even possibl 
that they will pretend to be carri on with the trial in the hope of 
receiv a larg bribe, although I can tell you now that that will be 
quit in vain as I pay bribe to no-one. perhap one favour you could 
do me would be to tell the examin judge, or anyon els who like to 
spread import news, that I will never be induc to pay ani sort of 
bribe through ani stratagem of their - and i'm sure they have mani 
stratagem at their disposal. there is no prospect of that, you can 
tell them that quit openly. and what' more, I expect they have 
alreadi notic themselves, or even if they haven't, thi affair is 
realli not so import to me as they think. those gentlemen would onli 
save some work for themselves, or at least some unpleas for me, 
which, however, I am glad to endur if I know that each piec of 
unpleas for me is a blow against them. and I will make quit 
sure it is a blow against them. Do you actual know the judge?" 
"cours I do," said the woman, "he wa the first one I thought of when I 
offer to help you. I didn't know he' onli a minor official, but if 
you say so it must be true. mind you, I still think the report he give 
to hi superior must have some influence. and he write so mani 
reports. you say these offici are lazy, but they'r certainli not 
all lazy, especi thi examin judge, he write ever such a lot. 
last sunday, for instance, that session went on till the evening. 
everyon had gone, but the examin judge, he stay in the hall, I had 
to bring him a lamp in, all I had wa a littl kitchen lamp but he wa 
veri satisfi with it and start to write straight away. meantim my 
husband arrived, he alway ha the day off on sundays, we got the 
furnitur back in and got our room sort out and then a few of the 
neighbour came, we sat and talk for a bit by a candle, in short, we 
forgot all about the examin judg and went to bed. all of a sudden 
in the night, it must have been quit late in the night, I wake up, 
next to the bed, there' the examin judg shade the lamp with hi 
hand so that there' no light from it fall on my husband, he didn't 
need to be as care as that, the way my husband sleep the light 
wouldn't have woken him up anyway. I wa quit shock and nearli 
screamed, but the judg wa veri friendly, warn me I should be 
careful, he whisper to me he' been write all thi time, and now 
he' brought me the lamp back, and he'll never forget how I look when 
he found me there asleep. what I mean, with all this, I just want to 
tell you how the examin judg realli doe write lot of reports, 
especi about you as question you wa definit one of the main 
thing on the agenda that sunday. If he write report as long as that 
they must be of some importance. and besid all that, you can see 
from what happen that the examin judg is after me, and it' right 
now, when he' first begun to notic me, that I can have a lot of 
influenc on him. and i'v got other proof I mean a lot to him, too. 
yesterday, he sent that student to me, the one he realli trust and who 
he work with, he sent him with a present for me, silk stockings. He 
said it wa becaus I clear up in the courtroom but that' onli a 
pretence, that job' no more than what i'm suppos to do, it' what my 
husband get paid for. nice stockings, they are, look," - she stretch 
out her leg, drew her skirt up to her knee and looked, herself, at the 
stock - "they are nice stockings, but they'r too good for me, 
really." 

she suddenli interrupt herself and lay her hand on k.' as if 
she want to calm him down, and whispered, "be quiet, berthold is 
watch us." K. slowli look up. In the doorway to the courtroom 
stood a young man, he wa short, hi leg were not quit straight, and 
he continu move hi finger round in a short, thin, red beard with 
which he hope to make himself look dignified. K. look at him with 
some curiosity, he wa the first student he had ever met of the 
unfamiliar disciplin of jurisprudence, face to face at least, a man who 
would even most like attain high offic one day. the student, in 
contrast, seem to take no notic of K. at all, he mere withdrew hi 
finger from hi beard long enough to beckon to the woman and went over 
to the window, the woman leant over to K. and whispered, "don't be cross 
with me, pleas don't, and pleas don't think ill of me either, i'v got 
to go to him now, to thi horribl man, just look at hi bent legs. but 
i'll come straight back and then i'll go with you if you'll take me, 
i'll go wherev you want, you can do whatev you like with me, i'll be 
happi if I can be away from here for as long as possible, it'd be best 
if I could get away from here for good." she stroke k.' hand onc 
more, jump up and ran over to the window. befor he realis it, K. 
grasp for her hand but fail to catch it. He realli wa attract 
to the woman, and even after think hard about it could find no good 
reason whi he should not give in to her allure. It briefli cross hi 
mind that the woman meant to entrap him on behalf of the court, but that 
wa an object he had no difficulti in fend off. In what way could 
she entrap him? wa he not still free, so free that he could crush the 
entir court whenev he wanted, as least where it concern him? could 
he not have that much confid in himself? and her offer of help 
sound sincere, and mayb it wasn't quit worthless. and mayb there 
wa no better reveng against the examin judg and hi croni than 
to take thi woman from him and have her for himself. mayb then, after 
much hard work write dishonest report about k., the judg would go to 
the woman' bed late one night and find it empty. and it would be empti 
becaus she belong to k., becaus thi woman at the window, thi lush, 
supple, warm bodi in it sombr cloth of rough, heavi materi 
belong to him, total to him and to him alone. onc he had settl 
hi thought toward the woman in thi way, he began to find the quiet 
convers at the window wa take too long, he rap on the podium 
with hi knuckles, and then even with hi fist. the student briefli 
look away from the woman to glanc at K. over hi shoulder but did 
allow himself to be disturbed, in fact he even press himself close to 
the woman and put hi arm around her. she drop her head down low as 
if listen to him carefully, as she did so he kiss her right on the 
neck, hardli even interrupt what he wa saying. K. saw thi as 
confirm of the tyranni the student held over the woman and which 
she had alreadi complain about, he stood up and walk up and down the 
room. glanc sideway at the student, he wonder what would be the 
quickest possibl way to get rid of him, and so it wa not unwelcom to 
him when the student, clearli disturb by k.' to-e and fro-e which 
K. had now develop into a stamp up and down, said to him, 
"you don't have to stay here, you know, if you'r get impatient. 
you could have gone earlier, no-on would have miss you. In fact you 
should have gone, you should have left as quickli as possibl as soon as 
I got here." thi comment could have caus all possibl rage to break 
out between them, but K. also bore in mind that thi wa a prospect 
court offici speak to a disfavour defendant, and he might well 
have been take pride in speak in thi way. K. remain stand 
quit close to him and said with a smile, "you'r quit right, I am 
impatient, but the easiest way to settl thi impati would be if you 
left us. On the other hand, if you'v come here to studi - you are a 
student, I hear - i'll be quit happi to leav the room to you and go 
away with the woman. i'm sure you'll still have a lot of studi to do 
befor you'r made into a judge. it' true that i'm still not all that 
familiar with your branch of jurisprud but I take it it involv a 
lot more than speak roughli - and I see you have no shame in do 
that extrem well." "he shouldn't have been allow to move about so 
freely," said the student, as if he want to give the woman an 
explan for k.' insults, "that wa a mistake. i'v told the 
examin judg so. He should at least have been detain in hi room 
between hearings. sometim it' imposs to understand what the 
judg think he' doing." 
"you'r wast your breath," said k., then he reach hi hand out 
toward the woman and said, "come with me." "so that' it," said the 
student, "oh no, you'r not go to get her," and with a strength you 
would not have expect from him, he glanc tenderli at her, lift her 
up on one arm and, hi back bent under the weight, ran with her to the 
door. In thi way he showed, unmistakeably, that he wa to some extent 
afraid of k., but he nonetheless dare to provok him still further by 
stroke and squeez the woman' arm with hi free hand. K. ran the 
few step up to him, but when he had reach him and wa about to take 
hold of him and, if necessary, throttl him, the woman said, "it' no 
good, it' the examin judg who' sent for me, I daren't go with you, 
thi littl bastard..." and here she ran her hand over the student' 
face, "thi littl bastard won't let me." "and you don't want to be set 
free!" shout k., lay hi hand on the student' shoulder, who then 
snap at it with hi teeth. "no!" shout the woman, push K. away 
with both hands, "no, no don't do that, what d'you think you'r doing!? 
that'd be the end of me. let go of him, pleas just let go of him. 
he' onli carri out the judge' orders, he' carri me to him." 
"let him take you then, and I want to see noth more of you," said k., 
enrag by hi disappoint and give the student a thump in the back 
so that he briefli stumbl and then, glad that he had not fallen, 
immedi jump up all the higher with hi burden. K. follow them 
slowly. He realis that thi wa the first unambigu setback he had 
suffer from these people. It wa of cours noth to worri about, he 
accept the setback onli becaus he wa look for a fight. If he 
stay at home and carri on with hi normal life he would be a 
thousand time superior to these peopl and could get ani of them out of 
hi way just with a kick. and he imagin the most laughabl scene 
possibl as an exampl of this, if thi contempt student, thi 
inflat child, thi knock-kne redbeard, if he were kneel at elsa' 
bed wring hi hand and beg for forgiveness. K. so enjoy 
imagin thi scene that he decid to take the student along to elsa 
with him if ever he should get the opportunity. 

K. wa curiou to see where the woman would be taken and he 
hurri over to the door, the student wa not like to carri her 
through the street on hi arm. It turn out that the journey wa far 
shorter. directli opposit the flat there wa a narrow flight of wooden 
step which probabl led up to the attic, they turn as they went so 
that it wa not possibl to see where they ended. the student carri 
the woman up these steps, and after the exert of run with her he 
wa soon groan and move veri slowly. the woman wave down at K. 
and by rais and lower her shoulder she tri to show that she wa 
an innoc parti in thi abduction, although the gestur did not show a 
lot of regret. K. watch her without express like a stranger, he 
want to show neither that he wa disappoint nor that he would easili 
get over hi disappointment. 

the two of them had disappeared, but K. remain stand in the 
doorway. He had to accept that the woman had not onli cheat him but 
that she had also lie to him when she said she wa be taken to the 
examin judge. the examin judg certainli wouldn't be sit and 
wait in the attic. the wooden stair would explain noth to him 
howev long he stare at them. then K. notic a small piec of paper 
next to them, went across to it and read, in a childish and unpractis 
hand, "entranc to the court offices". were the court offic here, in 
the attic of thi tenement, then? If that wa how they were 
accommod it did not attract much respect, and it wa some comfort 
for the accus to realis how littl money thi court had at it 
dispos if it had to locat it offic in a place where the tenant of 
the building, who were themselv among the poorest of people, would 
throw their unneed junk. On the other hand, it wa possibl that the 
offici had enough money but that they squander it on themselv 
rather than use it for the court' purposes. go by k.' experi 
of them so far, that even seem probable, except that if the court were 
allow to decay in that way it would not just humili the accus but 
also give him more encourag than if the court were simpli in a 
state of poverty. K. also now understood that the court wa asham to 
summon those it accus to the attic of thi build for the initi 
hearing, and whi it prefer to impos upon them in their own homes. 
what a posit it wa that K. found himself in, compar with the judg 
sit up in the attic! k., at the bank, had a big offic with an 
ante-room, and had an enorm window through which he could look down 
at the activ in the square. It wa true, though, that he had no 
secondari incom from bribe and fraud, and he couldn't tell a servant 
to bring him a woman up to the offic on hi arm. k., however, wa 
quit will to do without such things, in thi life at least. K. wa 
still look at the notic when a man came up the stairs, look 
through the open door into the live room where it wa also possibl to 
see the courtroom, and final ask K. whether he had just seen a woman 
there. "you'r the court usher, aren't you?" ask K. "that' right," 
said the man, "oh, yes, you'r defend k., I recognis you now as 
well. nice to see you here." and he offer K. hi hand, which wa far 
from what K. had expected. and when K. said nothing, he added, "there' 
no court session plan for today, though." "I know that," said K. as 
he look at the usher' civilian coat which, besid it ordinari 
buttons, display two gild one as the onli sign of hi offic and 
seem to have been taken from an old armi officer' coat. "I wa 
speak with your wife a littl while ago. she is no longer here. the 
student ha carri her off to the examin judge." "listen to this," 
said the usher, "they'r alway carri her away from me. it' sunday 
today, and it' not part of my job to do ani work today, but they send 
me off with some messag which isn't even necessari just to get me away 
from here. what they do is they send me off not too far away so that I 
can still hope to get back on time if I realli hurry. So off I go 
run as fast as I can, shout the messag through the crack in the 
door of the offic i'v been sent to, so out of breath they'll hardli be 
abl to understand it, run back here again, but the student' been even 
faster than I have - well he' got less far to go, he' onli got to run 
down the steps. If I wasn't so depend on them i'd have squash the 
student against the wall here a long time ago. right here, next to the 
sign. i'm alway dream of do that. just here, just abov the 
floor, that' where he' crush onto the wall, hi arm stretch out, 
hi finger spread apart, hi crook leg twist round into a circl 
and blood squirt out all around him. it' onli ever been a dream so 
far, though." "i there noth els you do?" ask K. with a smile. 
"noth that I know of," said the usher. "and it' go to get even 
wors now, up till now he' onli been carri her off for himself, now 
he' start carri her off for the judg and all, just like i'd 
alway said he would." "doe your wife, then, not share some of the 
responsibility?" ask K. He had to forc himself as he ask thi 
question, as he, too, felt so jealou now. "cours she does," said the 
usher, "it' more her fault than theirs. It wa her who attach 
herself to him. all he did, he just chase after ani woman. there' 
five flat in thi block alon where he' been thrown out after work 
hi way in there. and my wife is the best look woman in the whole 
building, but it' me who' not even allow to defend himself." "if 
that' how thing are, then there' noth that can be done," said K. 
"well whi not?" ask the usher. "he' a coward that student, if he 
want to lay a finger on my wife all you'd have to do is give him such a 
good hide he'd never dare do it again. but i'm not allow to do 
that, and nobodi els is go to do me the favour as they'r all afraid 
of hi power. the onli one who could do it is a man like you." "what, 
how could I do it?" ask K. in astonishment. 
"well you'r face a charge, aren't you," said the usher. "yes, but 
that' all the more reason for me to be afraid. even if he ha no 
influenc on the outcom of the trial he probabl ha some on the 
initi examination." "yes, exactly," said the usher, as if k.' view 
had been just as correct as hi own. "onli we don't usual get ani 
trial heard here with no hope at all." "I am not of the same opinion", 
said k., "although that ought not to prevent me from deal with the 
student if the opportun arises." "I would be veri grate to you," 
said the usher of the court, somewhat formally, not realli seem to 
believ that hi highest wish could be fulfilled. "perhaps," continu 
k., "perhap there are some other offici of your here, perhap all 
of them, who would deserv the same." "oh yes, yes," said the usher, as 
if thi wa a matter of course. then he look at K. trustingli which, 
despit all hi friendliness, he had not done until then, and added, 
"they'r alway rebelling." but the convers seem to have becom 
a littl uncomfort for him, as he broke it off by saying, "now I 
have to report to the office. would you like to come with me?" 
"there' noth for me to do there," said K. 
"you'd be abl to have a look at it. no-on will take ani notic of 
you." "i it worth see then?" ask K. hesitatingly, although he 
felt veri keen to go with him. "well," said the usher, "I thought you'd 
be interest in it." "alright then," said K. finally, "i'll come with 
you." and, quicker than the usher himself, he ran up the steps. 

At the entranc he nearli fell over, as behind the door there wa 
anoth step. "they don't show much concern for the public," he said. 
"they don't show ani concern at all," said the usher, "just look at the 
wait room here." It consist of a long corridor from which roughli 
made door led out to the separ depart of the attic. there wa 
no direct sourc of light but it wa not entir dark as mani of the 
departments, instead of solid walls, had just wooden bar reach up to 
the ceil to separ them from the corridor. the light made it way 
in through them, and it wa also possibl to see individu offici 
through them as they sat write at their desk or stood up at the 
wooden framework and watch the peopl on the corridor through the 
gaps. there were onli a few peopl in the corridor, probabl becaus it 
wa sunday. they were not veri impressive. they sat, equal spaced, 
on two row of long wooden bench which had been place along both 
side of the corridor. all of them were carelessli dress although the 
express on their faces, their bearing, the style of their beard and 
mani detail which were hard to identifi show that they belong to 
the upper classes. there were no coat hook for them to use, and so 
they had place their hat under the bench, each probabl have 
follow the exampl of the others. when those who were sit nearest 
the door saw K. and the usher of the court they stood up to greet them, 
and when the other saw that, they also thought they had to greet them, 
so that as the two of them went by all the peopl there stood up. none 
of them stood properli upright, their back were bowed, their knee 
bent, they stood like beggar on the street. K. wait for the usher, 
who wa follow just behind him. "they must all be veri dispirited," 
he said. "yes," said the usher, "they are the accused, everyon you see 
here ha been accused." "really!" said K. "they'r colleagu of mine 
then." and he turn to the nearest one, a tall, thin man with hair 
that wa nearli grey. "what is it you are wait for here?" ask k., 
politely, but the man wa startl at be spoken to unexpectedly, 
which wa all the more piti to see becaus the man clearli had some 
experi of the world and elsewher would certainli have been abl to 
show hi superior and would not have easili given up the advantag he 
had acquired. here, though, he did not know what answer to give to such 
a simpl question and look round at the other as if they were under 
some oblig to help him, and as if no-on could expect ani answer 
from him without thi help. then the usher of the court step forward 
to him and, in order to calm him down and rais hi spirits, said, "the 
gentleman here' onli ask what it is you'r wait for. you can 
give him an answer." the voic of the usher wa probabl familiar to 
him, and had a better effect than k.'s. "i'm ... i'm wait ..." he 
began, and then came to a halt. He had clearli chosen thi begin so 
that he could give a precis answer to the question, but now he didn't 
know how to continue. some of the other wait had come closer and 
stood round the group, the usher of the court said to them, "get out the 
way, keep the gangway free." they move back slightly, but not as far 
as where they had been sit before. In the meantime, the man whom K. 
had first approach had pull himself togeth and even answer him 
with a smile. 
"A month ago I made some applic for evid to be heard in my 
case, and i'm wait for it to be settled." "you certainli seem to be 
go to a lot of effort," said K. "yes," said the man, "it is my 
affair after all." "not everyon think the same way as you do," said 
K. "i'v been indict as well but I swear on my soul that i'v neither 
submit evid nor done anyth els of the sort. Do you realli 
think that' necessary?" "I don't realli know, exactly," said the man, 
onc more total unsur of himself; he clearli thought K. wa joke 
with him and therefor probabl thought it best to repeat hi earlier 
answer in order to avoid make ani new mistakes. with K. look at 
him impatiently, he just said, "a far as i'm concerned, i'v appli to 
have thi evid heard." "perhap you don't believ i'v been 
indicted?" ask K. "oh, please, I certainli do," said the man, 
step slightli to one side, but there wa more anxieti in hi answer 
than belief. "you don't believ me then?" ask k., and took hold of 
hi arm, unconsci prompt by the man' humbl demeanour, and as if 
he want to forc him to believ him. but he did not want to hurt the 
man and had onli taken hold of him veri lightly. nonetheless, the man 
cri out as if K. had grasp him not with two finger but with red hot 
tongs. shout in thi ridicul way final made K. tire of him, if 
he didn't believ he wa indict then so much the better; mayb he even 
thought K. wa a judge. and befor leaving, he held him a lot harder, 
shove him back onto the bench and walk on. "these defend are so 
sensitive, most of them," said the usher of the court. almost all of 
those who had been wait had now assembl around the man who, by now, 
had stop shout and they seem to be ask him lot of precis 
question about the incident. K. wa approach by a secur guard, 
identifi mainli by hi sword, of which the scabbard seem to be 
made of aluminium. thi greatli surpris k., and he reach out for it 
with hi hand. the guard had come becaus of the shout and ask 
what had been happening. the usher of the court said a few word to tri 
and calm him down but the guard explain that he had to look into it 
himself, saluted, and hurri on, walk with veri short steps, 
probabl becaus of gout. 

K. didn't concern himself long with the guard or these people, 
especi as he saw a turn off the corridor, about half way along it 
on the right hand side, where there wa no door to stop him go that 
way. He ask the usher whether that wa the right way to go, the usher 
nodded, and that is the way that K. went. the usher remain alway one 
or two step behind K, which he found irrit as in a place like thi 
it could give the impress that he wa be driven along by someon 
who had arrest him, so he frequent wait for the usher to catch up, 
but the usher alway remain behind him. In order to put an end to hi 
discomfort, K. final said, "now that i'v seen what it look like 
here, i'd like to go." "you haven't seen everyth yet," said the 
usher ingenuously. 
"I don't want to see everything," said k., who wa also feel veri 
tired, "I want to go, what is the way to the exit?" "you haven't got 
lost, have you?" ask the usher in amazement, "you go down thi way to 
the corner, then right down the corridor straight ahead as far as the 
door." "come with me," said k., "show me the way, i'll miss it, there 
are so mani differ way here." "it' the onli way there is," said 
the usher, who had now start to sound quit reproachful, "I can't go 
back with you again, i'v got to hand in my report, and i'v alreadi 
lost a lot of time becaus of you as it is." "come with me!" K. 
repeated, now somewhat sharper as if he had final caught the usher out 
in a lie. "don't shout like that," whisper the usher, "there' 
offic all round us here. If you don't want to go back by yourself 
come on a bit further with me or els wait here till i'v sort out my 
report, then i'll be glad to go back with you again." "no, no," said 
k., "I will not wait and you must come with me now." K. had still not 
look round at anyth at all in the room where he found himself, and 
it wa onli when one of the mani wooden door all around him open that 
he notic it. A young woman, probabl summon by the loud of k.' 
voice, enter and asked, "what is it the gentleman wants?" In the 
dark behind her there wa also a man approaching. K. look at the 
usher. He had, after all, said that no-on would take ani notic of k., 
and now there were two peopl coming, it onli need a few and everyon 
in the offic would becom awar of him and ask for explan as 
to whi he wa there. the onli understand and accept thing to 
say wa that he wa accus of someth and want to know the date of 
hi next hearing, but thi wa an explan he did not want to give, 
especi as it wa not true - he had onli come out of curiosity. Or 
else, an explan even less usable, he could say that he want to 
ascertain that the court wa as revolt on the insid as it wa on the 
outside. and it did seem that he had been quit right in thi 
supposition, he had no wish to intrud ani deeper, he wa disturb 
enough by what he had seen already, he wa not in the right frame of 
mind just then to face a high offici such as might appear from behind 
ani door, and he want to go, either with the usher of the court or, if 
need be, alone. 

but he must have seem veri odd stand there in silence, and 
the young woman and the usher were inde look at him as if they 
thought he would go through some major metamorphosi ani second which 
they didn't want to miss seeing. and in the doorway stood the man whom 
K. had notic in the background earlier, he held firmli on to the beam 
abov the low door swing a littl on the tip of hi feet as if 
becom impati as he watched. but the young woman wa the first to 
recognis that k.' behaviour wa caus by hi feel slightli unwell, 
she brought a chair and asked, 
"would you not like to sit down?" K. sat down immedi and, in order 
to keep hi place better, put hi elbow on the armrests. "you'r a 
littl bit dizzy, aren't you?" she ask him. her face wa now close in 
front of him, it bore the sever express that mani young women have 
just when they'r in the bloom of their youth. "it' noth for you to 
worri about," she said, "that' noth unusu here, almost everyon 
get an attack like that the first time they come here. thi is your 
first time is it? yes, it' noth unusu then. the sun burn down 
on the roof and the hot wood make the air so thick and heavy. It make 
thi place rather unsuit for offices, whatev other advantag it 
might offer. but the air is almost imposs to breath on day when 
there' a lot of business, and that' almost everi day. and when you 
think that there' a lot of wash put out to dri here as well - and we 
can't stop the tenant do that - it' not surpris you start to 
feel unwell. but you get use to the air alright in the end. when 
you'r here for the second or third time you'll hardli notic how 
oppress the air is. are you feel ani better now?" K. made no 
answer, he felt too embarrass at be put at the merci of these 
peopl by hi sudden weakness, and learn the reason for feel ill 
made him feel not better but a littl worse. the girl notic it 
straight away, and to make the air fresher for k., she took a window 
pole that wa lean against the wall and push open a small hatch 
directli abov k.' head that led to the outside. but so much soot fell 
in that the girl had to immedi close the hatch again and clean the 
soot off k.' hand with her handkerchief, as K. wa too tire to do 
that for himself. He would have like just to sit quietli where he wa 
until he had enough strength to leave, and the less fuss peopl made 
about him the sooner that would be. but then the girl said, "you can't 
stay here, we'r in people' way here ..." K. look at her as if to 
ask whose way they were impeding. "if you like, I can take you to the 
sick room," and turn to the man in the doorway said, "pleas help 
me". the man immedi came over to them, but K. did not want to go 
to the sick room, that wa just what he want to avoid, be led 
further from place to place, the further he went the more difficult it 
must become. So he said, "I am abl to walk now," and stood up, shake 
after becom use to sit so comfortably. but then he wa unabl 
to stay upright. "I can't manag it," he said shake hi head, and sat 
down again with a sigh. He rememb the usher who, despit 
everything, would have been abl to lead him out of there but who seem 
to have gone long before. K. look out between the man and the young 
woman who were stand in front of him but wa unabl to find the 
usher. "I think," said the man, who wa elegantli dress and whose 
appear wa made especi impress with a grey waistcoat that had 
two long, sharpli tailor points, "the gentleman is feel unwel 
becaus of the atmospher here, so the best thing, and what he would 
most prefer, would be not to take him to the sick room but get him out 
of the offic altogether." "that' right," exclaim k., with such joy 
that he nearli interrupt what the man wa saying, "i'm sure that'll 
make me feel better straight away, i'm realli not that weak, all I need 
is a littl support under my arms, I won't caus you much trouble, it' 
not such a long way anyway, lead me to the door and then i'll sit on the 
stair for a while and soon recover, as I don't suffer from attack like 
thi at all, i'm surpris at it myself. I also work in an offic and 
i'm quit use to offic air, but here it seem to be too strong, you'v 
said so yourselves. So please, be so kind as to help me on my way a 
little, i'm feel dizzy, you see, and it'll make me ill if I stand up 
by myself." and with that he rais hi shoulder to make it easier for 
the two of them to take him by the arms. 

the man, however, didn't follow thi suggest but just stood 
there with hi hand in hi trouser pocket and laugh out loud. 
"there, you see," he said to the girl, "I wa quit right. the 
gentleman is onli unwel here, and not in general." the young woman 
smile too, but lightli tap the man' arm with the tip of her 
finger as if he had allow himself too much fun with K. "so what do 
you think, then?" said the man, still laughing, "I realli do want to 
lead the gentleman out of here." "that' alright, then," said the girl, 
briefli inclin her charm head. "don't worri too much about him 
laughing," said the girl to k., who had becom unhappi onc more and 
stare quietli in front of himself as if need no further explanation. 
"thi gentleman - may I introduc you?" - (the man gave hi permiss 
with a wave of the hand) - "so, thi gentleman' job is to give out 
information. He give all the inform they need to peopl who are 
waiting, as our court and it offic are not veri well known among the 
public he get ask for quit a lot. He ha an answer for everi 
question, you can tri him out if you feel like it. but that' not hi 
onli distinction, hi other distinct is hi eleg of dress. we, 
that' to say all of us who work in the offic here, we decid that 
the information-giv would have to be elegantli dress as he 
continu ha to deal with the litig and he' the first one they 
meet, so he need to give a dignifi first impression. the rest of us 
i'm afraid, as you can see just by look at me, dress veri badli and 
old-fashioned; and there' not much point in spend much on cloth 
anyway, as we hardli ever leav the offices, we even sleep here. but, 
as I said, we decid that the information-giv would have to have nice 
clothes. As the manag here is rather peculiar in thi respect, and 
they would get them for us, we had a collect - some of the litig 
contribut too - and bought him these love cloth and some other 
besides. So everyth would be readi for him to give a good 
impression, except that he spoil it again by laugh and frighten 
people." "that' how it is," said the man, mock her, "but I don't 
understand whi it is that you'r explain all our intim fact to 
the gentleman, or rather whi it is that you'r press them on him, as 
i'm sure he' not all interested. just look at him sit there, it' 
clear he' occupi with hi own affairs." K. just did not feel like 
contradict him.. the girl' intent may have been good, perhap she 
wa under instruct to distract him or to give him the chanc to 
collect himself, but the attempt had not worked. "I had to explain to 
him whi you were laughing," said the girl. "I suppos it wa 
insulting." "I think he would forgiv even wors insult if I final 
took him outside." K. said nothing, did not even look up, he toler 
the two of them negoti over him like an object, that wa even what 
suit him best. but suddenli he felt the information-giver' hand on 
one arm and the young woman' hand on the other. "up you get then, 
weakling," said the information-giver. "thank you both veri much," said 
k., pleasantli surprised, as he slowli rose and person guid these 
unfamiliar hand to the place where he most need support. 
As they approach the corridor, the girl said quietli into k.' ear, "I 
must seem to think it' veri import to show the information-giv in 
a good light, but you shouldn't doubt what I say, I just want to say the 
truth. He isn't hard-hearted. it' not realli hi job to help 
litig outsid if they'r unwel but he' do it anyway, as you can 
see. I don't suppos ani of us is hard-hearted, perhap we'd all like 
to be helpful, but work for the court offic it' easi for us to 
give the impress we are hard-heart and don't want to help anyone. 
It make me quit sad." "would you not like to sit down here a while?" 
ask the information-giver, there were alreadi in the corridor and just 
in front of the defend whom K. had spoken to earlier. K. felt almost 
asham to be seen by him, earlier he had stood so upright in front of 
him and now he had to be support by two others, hi hat wa held up by 
the information-giv balanc on outstretch fingers, hi hair wa 
dishevel and hung down onto the sweat on hi forehead. but the 
defend seem to notic noth of what wa go on and just stood 
there humbly, as if want to apologis to the information-giv for 
be there. the information-giv look past him. "I know," he said, 
"that my case can't be settl today, not yet, but i'v come in anyway, 
I thought, I thought I could wait here anyway, it' sunday today, i'v 
got plenti of time, and i'm not disturb anyon here." "there' no 
need to be so apologetic," said the information-giver, "it' veri 
commend for you to be so attentive. you are take up space here 
when you don't need to but as long as you don't get in my way I will do 
noth to stop you follow the progress of your case as close as 
you like. when one ha seen so mani peopl who shame neglect their 
case one learn to show patienc with peopl like you. Do sit down." 
"he' veri good with the litigants," whisper the girl. K. nodded, but 
start to move off again when the information-giv repeated, "would 
you not like to sit down here a while?" "no," said k., "I don't want to 
rest." He had said that as decis as he could, but in fact it 
would have done him a lot of good to sit down. It wa as if he were 
suffer sea-sickness. He felt as if he were on a ship in a rough sea, 
as if the water were hit against the wooden walls, a thunder from 
the depth of the corridor as if the torrent were crash over it, as 
if the corridor were sway and the wait litig on each side of 
it rise and sinking. It made the calm of the girl and the man 
lead him all the more incomprehensible. He wa at their mercy, if 
they let go of him he would fall like a board. their littl eye 
glanc here and there, K. could feel the even of their step but 
could not do the same, as from step to step he wa virtual be 
carried. He final notic they were speak to him but he did not 
understand them, all he heard wa a nois that fill all the space and 
through which there seem to be an unchang higher note sounding, 
like a siren. "louder," he whisper with hi head sunk low, asham at 
have to ask them to speak louder when he knew they had spoken loudli 
enough, even if it had been, for him, incomprehensible. At last, a 
draught of cool air blew in hi face as if a gap had been torn out in 
the wall in front of him, and next to him he heard someon say, "first 
he say he want to go, and then you can tell him a hundr time that 
thi is the way out and he doesn't move." K. becam awar that he wa 
stand in front of the way out, and that the young woman had open 
the door. It seem to him that all hi strength return to him at 
once, and to get a foretast of freedom he step straight on to one of 
the stair and took hi leav there of hi companions, who bow to him. 
"thank you veri much," he repeated, shook their hand onc more and did 
not let go until he thought he saw that they found it hard to bear the 
compar fresh air from the stairway after be so long use to 
the air in the offices. they were hardli abl to reply, and the young 
woman might even have fallen over if K. had not shut the door extrem 
fast. K. then stood still for a while, comb hi hair with the help of 
a pocket mirror, pick up hi hat from the next stair - the 
information-giv must have thrown it down there - and then he ran down 
the step so fresh and in such long leap that the contrast with hi 
previou state nearli frighten him. hi normal sturdi state of 
health had never prepar him for surpris such as this. did hi bodi 
want to revolt and caus him a new trial as he wa bear the old one 
with such littl effort? He did not quit reject the idea that he 
should see a doctor the next time he had the chance, but whatev he did 
- and thi wa someth on which he could advis himself - he want to 
spend all sunday morn in futur better than he had spent thi one. 




chapter four 
miss bürstner' friend 

for some time after this, K. found it imposs to exchang even 
just a few word with miss bürstner. He tri to reach her in mani and 
variou way but she alway found a way to avoid it. He would come 
straight home from the office, remain in her room without the light on, 
and sit on the sofa with noth more to distract him than keep watch 
on the empti hallway. If the maid went by and close the door of the 
appar empti room he would get up after a while and open it again. 
He got up an hour earlier than usual in the morn so that he might 
perhap find miss bürstner alon as she went to the office. but none of 
these effort brought ani success. then he wrote her a letter, both to 
the offic and the flat, attempt onc more to justifi hi behaviour, 
offer to make whatev amend he could, promis never to cross 
whatev boundari she might set him and beg mere to have the chanc 
to speak to her some time, especi as he wa unabl to do anyth 
with mrs. grubach either until he had spoken with miss bürstner, he 
final inform her that the follow sunday he would stay in hi room 
all day wait for a sign from her that there wa some hope of hi 
request be fulfilled, or at least that she would explain to him whi 
she could not fulfil it even though he had promis to observ whatev 
stipul she might make. the letter were not returned, but there 
wa no answer either. however, on the follow sunday there wa a sign 
that seem clear enough. It wa still earli when K. noticed, through 
the keyhole, that there wa an unusu level of activ in the hallway 
which soon abated. A french teacher, although she wa german and call 
montag, a pale and febril girl with a slight limp who had previous 
occupi a room of her own, wa move into miss bürstner' room. she 
could be seen shuffl through the hallway for sever hours, there wa 
alway anoth piec of cloth or a blanket or a book that she had 
forgotten and had to be fetch special and brought into the new home. 

when mrs. grubach brought K. hi breakfast - ever sinc the time 
when she had made K. so cross she didn't trust the maid to do the 
slightest job - he had no choic but to speak to her, for the first time 
in five days. "whi is there so much nois in the hallway today?" he 
ask as she pour hi coffe out, "can't someth be done about it? 
doe thi clear out have to be done on a sunday?" K. did not look up 
at mrs. grubach, but he saw nonetheless that she seem to feel some 
relief as she breath in. even sharp question like thi from mr. K. 
she perceiv as forgiveness, or as the begin of forgiveness. 
"we'r not clear anyth out, mr. k.," she said, "it' just that 
miss montag is move in with miss bürstner and is move her thing 
across." she said noth more, but just wait to see how K. would 
take it and whether he would allow her to carri on speaking. but K. 
kept her in uncertainty, took the spoon and pensiv stir hi coffe 
while he remain silent. then he look up at her and said, "what 
about the suspicion you had earlier about miss bürstner, have you given 
them up?" "mr. k.," call mrs. grubach, who had been wait for thi 
veri question, as she put her hand togeth and held them out toward 
him. "I just made a chanc remark and you took it so badly. I didn't 
have the slightest intent of offend anyone, not you or anyon 
else. you'v known me for long enough, mr. k., i'm sure you'r 
convinc of that. you don't know how i'v been suffer for the past 
few days! that I should tell lie about my tenants! and you, mr. k., 
you believ it! and said I should give you notice! give you notice!" 
At thi last outcry, mrs. grubach wa alreadi choke back her tears, 
she rais her apron to her face and blubber out loud. 

"oh, don't cri mrs. grubach," said k., look out the window, he 
wa think onli of miss bürstner and how she wa accept an unknown 
girl into her room. "now don't cry," he said again as he turn hi 
look back into the room where mrs. grubach wa still crying. "I meant 
no harm either when I said that. It wa simpli a misunderstand 
between us. that can happen even between old friend sometimes." mrs. 
grubach pull her apron down to below her eye to see whether K. realli 
wa attempt a reconciliation. "well, yes, that' how it is," said 
k., and as mrs. grubach' behaviour indic that the captain had said 
noth he dare to add, "do you realli think, then, that i'd want to 
make an enemi of you for the sake of a girl we hardli know?" "yes, 
you'r quit right, mr. k.," said mrs. grubach, and then, to her 
misfortune, as soon as she felt just a littl freer to speak, she ad 
someth rather inept. "I kept ask myself whi it wa that mr. K. 
took such an interest in miss bürstner. whi doe he quarrel with me 
over her when he know that ani cross word from him and I can't sleep 
that night? and I didn't say anyth about miss bürstner that I hadn't 
seen with my own eyes." K. said noth in reply, he should have chase 
her from the room as soon as she had open her mouth, and he didn't 
want to do that. He content himself with mere drink hi coffe 
and let mrs. grubach feel that she wa superfluous. outside, the 
drag step of miss montag could still be heard as she went from one 
side of the hallway to the other. "do you hear that?" ask K. point 
hi hand at the door. "yes," said mrs. grubach with a sigh, "I want 
to give her some help and I want the maid to help her too but she' 
stubborn, she want to move everyth in herself. I wonder at miss 
bürstner. I often feel it' a burden for me to have miss montag as a 
tenant but miss bürstner accept her into her room with herself." 
"there' noth there for you to worri about" said k., crush the 
remain of a sugar lump in hi cup. "doe she caus you ani trouble?" 
"no," said mrs. grubach, "in itself it' veri good to have her there, it 
make anoth room free for me and I can let my nephew, the captain, 
occupi it. I began to worri he might be disturb you when I had to 
let him live in the live room next to you over the last few days. 
he' not veri considerate." "what an idea!" said K. stand up, 
"there' no question of that. you seem to think that becaus I can't 
stand thi to-e and fro-e of miss montag that i'm over-sensit - 
and there she goe back again." mrs. grubach appear quit powerless. 
"should I tell her to leav move the rest of her thing over till 
later, then, mr. k.? If that' what you want i'll do it immediately." 
"but she ha to move in with miss bürstner!" said K. "yes," said mrs. 
grubach, without quit understand what K. meant. "so she ha to take 
her thing over there." mrs. grubach just nodded. K. wa irrit all 
the more by thi dumb helpless which, seen from the outside, could 
have seem like a kind of defianc on her part. He began to walk up 
and down the room between the window and the door, thu depriv mrs. 
grubach of the chanc to leave, which she otherwis probabl would have 
done. 

just as K. onc more reach the door, someon knock at it. It 
wa the maid, to say that miss montag would like to have a few word 
with mr. k., and therefor request that he come to the dine room 
where she wa wait for him. K. heard the maid out thoughtfully, and 
then look back at the shock mrs. grubach in a way that wa almost 
contemptuous. hi look seem to be say that K. had been expect 
thi invit for miss montag for a long time, and that it wa 
confirm of the suffer he had been made to endur that sunday 
morn from mrs. grubach' tenants. He sent the maid back with the 
repli that he wa on hi way, then he went to the wardrob to chang hi 
coat, and in answer to mrs. grubach' gentl whine about the nuisanc 
miss montag wa caus mere ask her to clear away the breakfast 
things. "but you'v hardli touch it," said mrs. grubach. "oh just 
take it away!" shout K. It seem to him that miss montag wa mix 
up in everyth and made it repuls to him. 

As he went through the hallway he look at the close door of 
miss bürstner' room. but it wasn't there that he wa invited, but the 
dine room, to which he yank the door open without knocking. 

the room wa long but narrow with one window. there wa onli 
enough space avail to put two cupboard at an angl in the corner by 
the door, and the rest of the room wa entir taken up with the long 
dine tabl which start by the door and reach all the way to the 
great window, which wa thu made almost inaccessible. the tabl wa 
alreadi laid for a larg number of people, as on sunday almost all the 
tenant ate their dinner here at midday. 

when K. entered, miss montag came toward him from the window 
along one side of the table. they greet each other in silence. then 
miss montag, her head unusu erect as always, said, "i'm not sure 
whether you know me." K. look at her with a frown. "of cours I do," 
he said, "you'v been live here with mrs. grubach for quit some time 
now." "but I get the impress you don't pay much attent to what' 
go on in the lodg house," said miss montag. "no," said K. 
"would you not like to sit down?" said miss montag. In silence, the two 
of them drew chair out from the farthest end of the tabl and sat down 
face each other. but miss montag stood straight up again as she had 
left her handbag on the window sill and went to fetch it; she shuffl 
down the whole length of the room. when she came back, the handbag 
lightli swinging, she said, "i'd like just to have a few word with you 
on behalf of my friend. she would have come herself, but she' feel 
a littl unwel today. perhap you'll be kind enough to forgiv her and 
listen to me instead. there' anyway noth that she could have said 
that I won't. On the contrary, in fact, I think I can say even more 
than her becaus i'm rel impartial. would you not agree?" "what 
is there to say, then?" answer k., who wa tire of miss montag 
continu watch hi lips. In that way she took control of what he 
want to say befor he said it. "miss bürstner clearli refus to 
grant me the person meet that I ask her for." "that' how it 
is," said miss montag, "or rather, that' not at all how it is, the way 
you put it is remark severe. gener speaking, meet are 
neither grant nor the opposite. but it can be that meet are 
consid unnecessary, and that' how it is here. now, after your 
comment, I can speak openly. you ask my friend, verbal or in 
writing, for the chanc to speak with her. now my friend is awar of 
your reason for ask for thi meet - or at least I suppos she is 
- and so, for reason I know noth about, she is quit sure that it 
would be of no benefit to anyon if thi meet actual took place. 
moreover, it wa onli yesterday, and onli veri briefly, that she made it 
clear to me that such a meet could be of no benefit for yourself 
either, she feel that it can onli have been a matter of chanc that 
such an idea came to you, and that even without ani explan from 
her, you will veri soon come to realis yourself, if you have not done 
so already, the futil of your idea. My answer to that is that 
although it may be quit right, I consid it advantageous, if the 
matter is to be made perfectli clear, to give you an explicit answer. I 
offer my servic in take on the task, and after some hesit my 
friend conceded. I hope, however, also to have act in your interests, 
as even the slightest uncertainti in the least signific of matter 
will alway remain a caus of suffer and if, as in thi case, it can 
be remov without substanti effort, then it is better if that is done 
without delay." "I thank you," said K. as soon as miss montag had 
finished. He stood slowli up, look at her, then across the table, 
then out the window - the hous opposit stood there in the sun - and 
went to the door. miss montag follow him a few paces, as if she did 
not quit trust him. At the door, however, both of them had to step 
back as it open and captain lanz entered. thi wa the first time 
that K. had seen him close up. He wa a larg man of about forti with a 
tanned, fleshi face. He bow slightly, intend it also for k., and 
then went over to miss montag and deferenti kiss her hand. He wa 
veri eleg in the way he moved. the courtesi he show toward miss 
montag made a strike contrast with the way she had been treat by K. 
nonetheless, miss montag did not seem to be cross with K. as it even 
seem to him that she want to introduc the captain. K. however, did 
not want to be introduced, he would not have been abl to show ani sort 
of friendli either to miss montag or to the captain, the kiss on the 
hand had, for k., bound them into a group which would keep him at a 
distanc from miss bürstner whilst at the same time seem to be 
total harmless and unselfish. K. thought, however, that he saw more 
than that, he thought he also saw that miss montag had chosen a mean of 
do it that wa good, but two-edged. she exagger the import 
of the relationship between K. and miss bürstner, and abov all she 
exagger the import of ask to speak with her and she tri at 
the same time to make out that K. wa exagger everything. she 
would be disappointed, K. did not want to exagger anything, he wa 
awar that miss bürstner wa a littl typist who would not offer him 
much resist for long. In do so he deliber took no account 
of what mrs. grubach had told him about miss bürstner. all these thing 
were go through hi mind as he left the room with hardli a polit 
word. He want to go straight to hi room, but a littl laugh from 
miss montag that he heard from the dine room behind him brought him to 
the idea that he might prepar a surpris for the two of them, the 
captain and miss montag. He look round and listen to find out if 
there might be ani disturb from ani of the surround rooms, 
everywher wa quiet, the onli thing to be heard wa the convers 
from the dine room and mrs. grubach' voic from the passag lead 
to the kitchen. thi seem an opportun time, K. went to miss 
bürstner' room and knock gently. there wa no sound so he knock 
again but there wa still no answer in reply. wa she asleep? Or wa 
she realli unwell? Or wa she just pretend as she realis it could 
onli be K. knock so gently? K. assum she wa pretend and 
knock harder, eventually, when the knock brought no result, he 
care open the door with the sens of do someth that wa not 
onli improp but also pointless. In the room there wa no-one. what' 
more, it look hardli at all like the room K. had known before. 
against the wall there were now two bed behind one another, there were 
cloth pile up on three chair near the door, a wardrob stood open. 
miss bürstner must have gone out while miss montag wa speak to him 
in the dine room. K. wa not greatli bother by this, he had hardli 
expect to be abl to find miss bürstner so easili and had made thi 
attempt for littl more reason than to spite miss montag. but that made 
it all the more embarrass for him when, as he wa close the door 
again, he saw miss montag and the captain talk in the open doorway of 
the dine room. they had probabl been stand there ever sinc K. 
had open the door, they avoid seem to observ K. but chat 
lightli and follow hi movement with glances, the absent mind 
glanc to the side such as you make dure a conversation. but these 
glanc were heavi for k., and he rush alongsid the wall back into 
hi own room. 




chapter five 
the whip-man 

one evening, a few day later, K. wa walk along one of the 
corridor that separ hi offic from the main stairway - he wa 
nearli the last one to leav for home that evening, there remain onli 
a coupl of worker in the light of a singl bulb in the dispatch 
depart - when he heard a sigh from behind a door which he had 
himself never open but which he had alway thought just led into a 
junk room. He stood in amaz and listen again to establish 
whether he might not be mistaken. for a while there wa silence, but 
then came some more sighs. hi first thought wa to fetch one of the 
servitors, it might well have been worth have a wit present, but 
then he wa taken by an uncontrol curios that make him simpli 
yank the door open. It was, as he had thought, a junk room. old, 
unus forms, empti stone ink-bottl lay scatter behind the 
entrance. but in the cupboard-lik room itself stood three men, 
crouch under the low ceiling. A candl fix on a shelf gave them 
light. "what are you do here?" ask K. quietly, but crossli and 
without thinking. one of the men wa clearli in charge, and attract 
attent by be dress in a kind of dark leather costum which left 
hi neck and chest and hi arm exposed. He did not answer. but the 
other two call out, "mr. k.! we'r to be beaten becaus you made a 
complaint about us to the examin judge." and now, K. final 
realis that it wa actual the two policemen, franz and willem, and 
that the third man held a cane in hi hand with which to beat them. 
"well," said k., stare at them, "I didn't make ani complaint, I onli 
said what took place in my home. and your behaviour wa not entir 
unobjectionable, after all." "mr. k.," said willem, while franz clearli 
tri to shelter behind him as protect from the third man, "if you 
knew how badli we get paid you wouldn't think so badli of us. i'v got 
a famili to feed, and franz here want to get married, you just have to 
get more money where you can, you can't do it just by work hard, not 
howev hard you try. I wa sore tempt by your fine clothes, 
policemen aren't allow to do that sort of thing, cours they aren't, 
and it wasn't right of us, but it' tradit that the cloth go to the 
officers, that' how it' alway been, believ me; and it' 
understand too, isn't it, what can thing like that mean for anyon 
unlucki enough to be arrested? but if he start talk about it openli 
then the punish ha to follow." "I didn't know about ani of thi 
that you'v been tell me, and I made no sort of request that you be 
punished, I wa simpli act on principle." "franz," said willem, 
turn to the other policeman, "didn't I tell you that the gentleman 
didn't say he want us to be punished? now you can hear for yourself, 
he didn't even know we'd have to be punished." "don't you let them 
persuad you, talk like that," said the third man to k., "thi 
punish is both just and unavoidable." "don't listen to him," said 
willem, interrupt himself onli to quickli bring hi hand to hi mouth 
when it had receiv a stroke of the cane, "we'r onli be punish 
becaus you made a complaint against us. noth would have happen to 
us otherwise, not even if they'd found out what we'd done. can you call 
that justice? both of us, me especially, we'd prove our worth as good 
polic offic over a long period - you'v got to admit yourself that 
as far as offici work wa concern we did the job well - thing 
look good for us, we had prospects, it' quit certain that we 
would'v been made whip-men too, like thi one, onli he had the luck not 
to have anyon make a complaint about him, as you realli don't get mani 
complaint like that. onli that' all finish now, mr. k., our career 
are at an end, we'r go to have to do work now that' far inferior to 
polic work and besid all thi we'r go to get thi terrible, 
pain beating." "can the cane realli caus so much pain, then?" ask 
k., test the cane that the whip-man swang in front of him. "we'r 
go to have to strip off total naked," said willem. "oh, I see," 
said k., look straight at the whip-man, hi skin wa burn brown 
like a sailor's, and hi face show health and vigour. "i there 
then no possibl of spare these two their beating?" he ask him. 
"no," said the whip-man, shake hi head with a laugh. "get 
undressed!" he order the policemen. and to K. he said, "you shouldn't 
believ everyth they tell you, it' the fear of be beaten, it' 
alreadi made them a bit weak in the head. thi one here, for instance," 
he point at willem, "all that he told you about hi career prospects, 
it' just ridiculous. look at him, look how fat he is - the first 
stroke of the cane will just get lost in all that fat. Do you know 
what it is that' made him so fat? he' in the habit of, everyon that 
get arrest by him, he eat their breakfast. didn't he eat up your 
breakfast? yeah, I thought as much. but a man with a belli like that 
can't be made into a whip-man and never will be, that is quit out of 
the question." "there are whip-men like that," willem insisted, who had 
just releas the belt of thi trousers. "no," said the whip-man, 
strike him such a blow with the cane on hi neck that it made him 
wince, "you shouldn't be listen to this, just get undressed." "I 
would make it well worth your while if you would let them go," said k., 
and without look at the whip-man again - as such matter are best 
carri on with both pair of eye turn down - he pull out hi 
wallet. "and then you'd tri and put in a complaint against me, too," 
said the whip-man, "and get me flogged. no, no!" "now, do be 
reasonable," said k., "if I had want to get these two punish I would 
not now be tri to buy their freedom, would I. I could simpli close 
the door here behind me, go home and see or hear noth more of it. 
but that' not what i'm doing, it realli is of much more import to 
me to let them go free; if I had realis they would be punished, or 
even that they might be punished, I would never have name them in the 
first place as they are not the one I hold responsible. it' the 
organis that' to blame, the high offici are the one to blame." 
"that' how it is!" shout the policemen, who then immedi receiv 
anoth blow on their backs, which were by now exposed. "if you had a 
senior judg here beneath your stick," said k., press down the cane 
as he spoke to stop it be rais onc more, "I realli would do 
noth to stop you, on the contrary, I would even pay you money to give 
you all the more strength." "yeah, that' all veri plausible, what 
you'r say there," said the whip-man, "onli i'm not the sort of 
person you can bribe. it' my job to flog people, so I flog them." 
franz, the policeman, had been fairli quiet so far, probabl in 
expect of a good result from k.' intervention, but now he step 
forward to the door wear just hi trousers, kneel down hang on 
to k.' arm and whispered, "even if you can't get merci shown for both 
of us, at least tri and get me set free. willem is older than me, he' 
less sensit than me in everi way, he even got a light beat a 
coupl of year ago, but my record' still clean, I onli did thing the 
way I did becaus willem led me on to it, he' been my teacher both for 
good and bad. down in front of the bank my poor bride is wait for me 
at the entrance, i'm so asham of myself, it' pitiful." hi face wa 
flow over with tears, and he wipe it dri on k.' coat. "i'm not 
go to wait ani longer," said the whip-man, take hold of the cane in 
both hand and lay in to franz while willem cower back in a corner 
and look on secretly, not even dare to turn hi head. then, the 
sudden scream that shot out from franz wa long and irrevocable, it 
seem to come not from a human be but from an instrument that wa 
be tortured, the whole corridor rang with it, it must have been heard 
by everyon in the building. "don't shout like that!", call out k., 
unabl to prevent himself, and, as he look anxious in the direct 
from which the servitor would come, he gave franz a shove, not hard, but 
hard enough for him to fall down unconscious, claw at the ground with 
hi hand by reflex; he still did not avoid be hit; the rod still 
found him on the floor; the tip of the rod swang regularli up and down 
while he roll to and fro under it blows. and now one of the 
servitor appear in the distance, with anoth a few step behind him. 
K. had quickli thrown the door shut, gone over to one of the window 
overlook the yard and open it. the scream had complet stopped. 
So that the servitor wouldn't come in, he call out, "it' onli me!" 
"good evening, chief clerk," somebodi call back. "i there anyth 
wrong?" "no, no," answer k., "it' onli a dog yelp in the yard." 
there wa no sound from the servitor so he added, "you can go back to 
what you were doing." He did not want to becom involv with a 
convers with them, and so he leant out of the window. A littl 
while later, when he look out in the corridor, they had alreadi gone. 
now, K. remain at the window, he did not dare go back into the junk 
room, and he did not want to go home either. the yard he look down 
into wa small and rectangular, all around it were offices, all the 
window were now dark and onli those at the veri top caught a reflect 
of the moon. K tri hard to see into the dark of one corner of the 
yard, where a few handcart had been left behind one another. He felt 
anguish at not have been abl to prevent the flogging, but that wa 
not hi fault, if franz had not scream like that - clearli it must 
have caus a great deal of pain but it' import to maintain control 
of oneself at import moment - if franz had not scream then it wa 
at least highli probabl that K. would have been abl to dissuad the 
whip-man. If all the junior offic were contempt whi would the 
whip-man, whose posit wa the most inhuman of all, be ani exception, 
and K. had notic veri clearli how hi eye had lit up when he saw the 
banknotes, he had obvious onli seem seriou about the flog to 
rais the level of the bribe a little. and K. had not been ungenerous, 
he realli had want to get the policemen freed; if he realli had now 
begun to do someth against the degeneraci of the court then it wa a 
matter of cours that he would have to do someth here as well. but 
of course, it becam imposs for him to do anyth as soon as franz 
start screaming. K. could not possibl have let the junior bank 
staff, and perhap even all sort of other people, come along and catch 
him by surpris as he haggl with those peopl in the junk room. 
nobodi could realli expect that sort of sacrific of him. If that had 
been hi intent then it would almost have been easier, K. would have 
taken hi own cloth off and offer himself to the whip-man in the 
policemen' place. the whip-man would certainli not have accept thi 
substitut anyway, as in that way he would have serious violat hi 
duti without gain ani benefit. He would most like have violat 
hi duti twice over, as court employe were probabl under order not 
to caus ani harm to K. while he wa face charges, although there may 
have been special condit in forc here. howev thing stood, K. 
wa abl to do no more than throw the door shut, even though that would 
still do noth to remov all the danger he faced. It wa regrett 
that he had given franz a shove, and it could onli be excus by the 
heat of the moment. 

In the distance, he heard the step of the servitors; he did not 
want them to be too awar of hi presence, so he close the window and 
walk toward the main staircase. At the door of the junk room he 
stop and listen for a littl while. all wa silent. the two 
policemen were entir at the whip-man' mercy; he could have beaten 
them to death. K. reach hi hand out for the door handl but drew it 
suddenli back. He wa no longer in ani posit to help anyone, and the 
servitor would soon be back; he did, though, promis himself that he 
would rais the matter again with somebodi and see that, as far as it 
wa in hi power, those who realli were guilty, the high offici whom 
nobodi had so far dare point out to him, receiv their due punishment. 
As he went down the main stairway at the front of the bank, he look 
care round at everyon who wa passing, but there wa no girl to be 
seen who might have been wait for somebody, not even within some 
distanc from the bank. franz' claim that hi bride wa wait for 
him wa thu shown to be a lie, albeit one that wa forgiv and 
intend onli to elicit more sympathy. 

the policemen were still on k.' mind all through the follow 
day; he wa unabl to concentr on hi work and had to stay in hi 
offic a littl longer than the previou day so that he could finish it. 
On the way home, as he pass by the junk room again, he open it door 
as if that had been hi habit. instead of the dark he expected, he 
saw everyth unchang from the previou evening, and did not know how 
he should respond. everyth wa exactli the same as he had seen it 
when he had open the door the previou evening. the form and 
bottl of ink just insid the doorway, the whip-man with hi cane, the 
two policemen, still undressed, the candl on the shelf, and the two 
policemen began to wail and call out "mr. k.!" K. slam the door 
immedi shut, and even thump on it with hi fist as if that would 
shut it all the firmer. almost in tears, he ran to the servitor 
work quietli at the copi machine. "go and get that junk room 
clear out!" he shouted, and, in amazement, they stop what they were 
doing. "it should have been done long ago, we'r sink in dirt!" they 
would be abl to do the job the next day, K. nodded, it wa too late in 
the even to make them do it there and then as he had origin 
intended. He sat down briefli in order to keep them near him for a 
littl longer, look through a few of the copi to give the impress 
that he wa check them and then, as he saw that they would not dare 
to leav at the same time as himself, went home tire and with hi mind 
numb. 




chapter six 
k.' uncl - leni 

one afternoon - K. wa veri busi at the time, get the post 
readi - k.' uncl karl, a small countri land owner, came into the room, 
push hi way between two of the staff who were bring in some 
papers. K. had long expect hi uncl to appear, but the sight of him 
now shock K. far less than the prospect of it had done a long time 
before. hi uncl wa bound to come, K. had been sure of that for about 
a month. He alreadi thought at the time he could see how hi uncl 
would arrive, slightli bowed, hi batter panama hat in hi left hand, 
hi right hand alreadi stretch out over the desk long befor he wa 
close enough as he rush carelessli toward K. knock over everyth 
that wa in hi way. k.' uncl wa alway in a hurry, as he suffer 
from the unfortun belief that he had a number of thing to do while he 
wa in the big citi and had to settl all of them in one day - hi 
visit were onli ever for one day - and at the same time thought he 
could not forgo ani convers or piec of busi or pleasur that 
might aris by chance. uncl karl wa k.' former guardian, and so K. 
wa duty-bound to help him in all of thi as well as to offer him a bed 
for the night. 'i'm haunt by a ghost from the country', he would say. 

As soon as they had greet each other - K. had invit him to sit 
in the armchair but uncl karl had no time for that - he said he want 
to speak briefli with K. in private. "it is necessary," he said with a 
tire gulp, "it is necessari for my peac of mind." K. immedi 
sent the junior staff from the room and told them to let no-on in. 
"what' thi that i'v been hearing, josef?" cri k.' uncl when they 
were alone, as he sat on the tabl shove variou paper under himself 
without look at them to make himself more comfortable. K. said 
nothing, he knew what wa coming, but, suddenli reliev from the effort 
of the work he had been doing, he gave way to a pleasant lassitud and 
look out the window at the other side of the street. from where he 
sat, he could see just a small, triangular section of it, part of the 
empti wall of hous between two shop windows. "you'r stare out the 
window!" call out hi uncle, rais hi arms, "for god' sake, josef, 
give me an answer! Is it true, can it realli be true?" "uncl karl," 
said k., wrench himself back from hi daydreaming, "I realli don't 
know what it is you want of me." "josef," said hi uncl in a warn 
tone, "a far as I know, you'v alway told the truth. Am I to take 
what you'v just said as a bad sign?" "I think I know what it is you 
want," said K. obediently, "I expect you'v heard about my trial." 
"that' right," answer hi uncl with a slow nod, "i'v heard about 
your trial." "who did you hear it from, then?" ask K. "erna wrote to 
me," said hi uncle, "she doesn't have much contact with you, it' true, 
you don't pay veri much attent to her, i'm afraid to say, but she 
learn about it nonetheless. I got her letter today and, of course, I 
came straight here. and for no other reason, but it seem to me that 
thi is reason enough. I can read you out the part of the letter that 
concern you." He drew the letter out from hi wallet. "here it is. 
she writes; 'I have not seen josef for a long time, I wa in the bank 
last week but josef wa so busi that they would not let me through; I 
wait there for nearli an hour but then I had to go home as I had my 
piano lesson. I would have like to have spoken to him, mayb there 
will be a chanc anoth time. He sent me a big box of chocol for 
my name-day, that wa veri nice and attent of him. I forgot to tell 
you about it when I wrote, and I onli rememb now that you ask me about 
it. chocolate, as I am sure you are aware, disappear straight away in 
thi lodg house, almost as soon as you know somebodi ha given you 
chocol it is gone. but there is someth els I want to tell you 
about josef. like I said, they would not let me through to see him at 
the bank becaus he wa negoti with some gentleman just then. 
after I had been wait quietli for quit a long time I ask one of 
the staff whether hi meet would last much longer. He said it might 
well do, as it wa probabl about the legal proceedings, he said, that 
were be conduct against him. I ask what sort of legal 
proceed it wa that were be conduct against the chief clerk, 
and whether he wa not make some mistake, but he said he wa not 
make ani mistake, there were legal proceed underway and even that 
they were about someth quit serious, but he did not know ani more 
about it. He would have like to have been of some help to the chief 
clerk himself, as the chief clerk wa a gentleman, good and honest, but 
he did not know what it wa he could do and mere hope there would be 
some influenti gentlemen who would take hi side. i'm sure that is 
what will happen and that everyth will turn out for the best in the 
end, but in the mean time thing do not look at all good, and you can 
see that from the mood of the chief clerk himself. Of course, I did not 
place too much import on thi conversation, and even did my best to 
put the bank clerk' mind at rest, he wa quit a simpl man. I told 
him he wa not to speak to anyon els about this, and I think it is all 
just a rumour, but I still think it might be good if you, dear father, 
if you look into the matter the next time you visit. It will be easi 
for you to find out more detail and, if it is realli necessary, to do 
someth about it through the great and influenti peopl you know. 
but if it is not necessary, and that is what seem most likely, then at 
least your daughter will soon have the chanc to embrac you and I look 
forward to it.' - she' a good child," said k.' uncl when he had 
finish reading, and wipe a few tear from hi eyes. K. nodded. with 
all the differ disrupt he had had recent he had complet 
forgotten about erna, even her birthday, and the stori of the chocol 
had clearli just been invent so that he wouldn't get in troubl with 
hi aunt and uncle. It wa veri touching, and even the theatr tickets, 
which he would regularli send her from then on, would not be enough to 
repay her, but he realli did not feel, now, that it wa right for him 
to visit her in her lodg and hold convers with a little, 
eighteen year old schoolgirl. "and what do you have to say about that?" 
ask hi uncle, who had forgotten all hi rush and excit as he read 
the letter, and seem to be about to read it again. "yes, uncle," said 
k., "it is true." "true!" call out hi uncle. "what is true? how can 
thi be true? what sort of trial is it? not a crimin trial, I hope?" 
"it' a crimin trial," answer K. "and you sit quietli here while 
you'v got a crimin trial round your neck?" shout hi uncle, get 
ever louder. "the more calm I am, the better it will be for the 
outcome," said K. in a tire voice, "don't worry." "how can I help 
worrying?!" shout hi uncle, "josef, my dear josef, think about 
yourself, about your family, think about our good name! Up till now, 
you'v alway been our pride, don't now becom our disgrace. I don't 
like the way you'r behaving," he said, look at K. with hi head at 
an angle, "that' not how an innoc man behav when he' accus of 
something, not if he' still got ani strength in him. just tell me what 
it' all about so that I can help you. it' someth to do with the 
bank, I take it?" "no," said K. as he stood up, "and you'r speak 
too loud, uncle, I expect one of the staff is listen at the door and 
I find that rather unpleasant. it' best if we go somewher else, then 
I can answer all your questions, as far as I can. and I know veri well 
that I have to account to the famili for what I do." "you certainli 
do!" hi uncl shouted, "quit right, you do. now just get a move on, 
josef, hurri up now!" "I still have a few document I need to prepare," 
said k., and, use the intercom, he summon hi deputi who enter a 
few moment later. k.' uncle, still angri and excited, gestur with 
hi hand to show that K. had summon him, even though there wa no need 
whatev to do so. K. stood in front of the desk and explain to the 
young man, who listen calm and attentive, what would need to be done 
that day in hi absence, speak in a calm voic and make use of 
variou documents. the presenc of k.' uncl while thi wa go on 
wa quit disturbing; he did not listen to what wa be said, but at 
first he stood there with eye wide open and nervous bite hi lips. 
then he began to walk up and down the room, stop now and then at the 
window, or stood in front of a pictur alway make variou 
exclam such as, "that is total incomprehens to me!" or "now 
just tell me, what are you suppos to make of that?!" the young man 
pretend to notic noth of thi and listen to k.' instruct 
through to the end, he made a few notes, bow to both K. and hi uncl 
and then left the room. k.' uncl had turn hi back to him and wa 
look out the window, bunch up the curtain with hi outstretch 
hands. the door had hardli close when he call out, "at last! now 
that he' stop jump about we can go too!" onc they were in the 
front hall of the bank, where sever member of staff were stand 
about and where, just then, the deputi director wa walk across, 
there wa unfortun no way of stop k.' uncl from continu 
ask question about the trial. "now then, josef," he began, lightli 
acknowledg the bow from those around them as they passed, "tell me 
everyth about thi trial; what sort of trial is it?" K. made a few 
comment which convey littl information, even laugh a little, and 
it wa onli when they reach the front step that he explain to hi 
uncl that he had not want to talk openli in front of those people. 
"quit right," said hi uncle, "but now start talking." with hi head 
to one side, and smoke hi cigar in short, impati draughts, he 
listened. "first of all, uncle," said k., "it' not a trial like you'd 
have in a normal courtroom." "so much the worse," said hi uncle. 
"how' that?" ask k., look at him. "what I mean is, that' for the 
worse," he repeated. they were stand on the front step of the bank; 
as the doorkeep seem to be listen to what they were say K. 
drew hi uncl down further, where they were absorb into the bustl of 
the street. hi uncl took k.' arm and stop ask question with 
such urgenc about the trial, they walk on for a while in silence. 
"but how did all thi come about?" he eventu asked, stop 
abruptli enough to startl the peopl walk behind, who had to avoid 
walk into him. "thing like thi don't come all of a sudden, they 
start develop a long time beforehand, there must have been warn 
sign of it, whi didn't you write to me? you know i'd do anyth for 
you, to some extent I am still your guardian, and until today that' 
someth I wa proud of. i'll still help you, of cours I will, onli 
now, now that the trial is alreadi underway, it make it veri difficult. 
but whatever; the best thing now is for you to take a short holiday 
stay with us in the country. you'v lost weight, I can see that now. 
the countri life will give you strength, that will be good, there' 
bound to be a lot of hard work ahead of you. but besid that it'll be 
a way of get you away from the court, to some extent. here they'v 
got everi mean of show the power at their dispos and they'r 
automat bound to use them against you; in the countri they'll 
either have to deleg author to differ bodi or just have to 
tri and bother you by letter, telegram or telephone. and that' bound 
to weaken the effect, it won't releas you from them but it'll give you 
room to breathe." "you could forbid me to leave," said k., who had been 
drawn slightli into hi uncle' way of think by what he had been 
saying. "I didn't think you would do it," said hi uncl thoughtfully, 
"you won't suffer too much loss of power by move away." K. grasp 
hi uncl under the arm to prevent him stop still and said, "I 
thought you'd think all thi is less import than I do, and now you'r 
take it so hard." "josef," call hi uncl tri to disentangl 
himself from him so that he could stop walking, but K. did not let go, 
"you'v complet changed, you use to be so astute, are you lose it 
now? Do you want to lose the trial? Do you realis what that would 
mean? that would mean you would be simpli destroyed. and that everyon 
you know would be pull down with you or at the veri least humiliated, 
disgrac right down to the ground. josef, pull yourself together. the 
way you'r so indiffer about it, it' drive me mad. look at you 
I can almost believ that old saying: 'have a trial like that mean 
lose a trial like that'." "mi dear uncle," said k., "it won't do ani 
good to get excited, it' no good for you to do it and it'd be no good 
for me to do it. the case won't be won by get excited, and pleas 
admit that my practic experi count for something, just as I have 
alway and still do respect your experience, even when it surpris me. 
you say that the famili will also be affect by thi trial; I realli 
can't see how, but that' besid the point and i'm quit will to 
follow your instruct in all of this. only, I don't see ani 
advantag in stay in the country, not even for you, as that would 
indic flight and a sens of guilt. and besides, although I am more 
subject to persecut if I stay in the citi I can also press the matter 
forward better here." "you'r right," said hi uncl in a tone that 
seem to indic they were final come closer to each other, "I 
just made the suggest because, as I saw it, if you stay in the citi 
the case will be put in danger by your indiffer to it, and I thought 
it wa better if I did the work for you. but will you push thing 
forward yourself with all your strength, if so, that will natur be 
far better." "we'r agre then," said K. "and do you have ani 
suggest for what I should do next?" "well, natur i'll have to 
think about it," said hi uncle, "you must bear in mind that i'v been 
live in the countri for twenti year now, almost without a break, you 
lose your abil to deal with matter like this. but I do have some 
import connect with sever peopl who, I expect, know their way 
around these thing better than I do, and to contact them is a matter of 
course. out there in the countri i'v been get out of condition, 
i'm sure you'r alreadi awar of that. it' onli at time like thi 
that you notic it yourself. and thi affair of your came larg 
unexpected, although, oddli enough, I had expect someth of the sort 
after i'd read erna' letter, and today when I saw your face I knew it 
with almost total certainty. but all that is by the by, the import 
thing now is, we have no time to lose." even while he wa still 
speaking, k.' uncl had stood on tipto to summon a taxi and now he 
pull K. into the car behind himself as he call out an address to the 
driver. "we'r go now to see dr. huld, the lawyer," he said, "we 
were at school together. i'm sure you know the name, don't you? no? 
well that is odd. he' got a veri good reput as a defenc 
barrist and for work with the poor. but I esteem him especi as 
someon you can trust." "it' alright with me, whatev you do," said 
k., although he wa made uneasi by the rush and urgent way hi uncl 
wa deal with the matter. It wa not veri encouraging, as the 
accused, be to taken to a lawyer for poor people. "I didn't know," he 
said, "that you could take on a lawyer in matter like this." "well of 
cours you can," said hi uncle, "that goe without saying. whi 
wouldn't you take on a lawyer? and now, so that i'm properli instruct 
in thi matter, tell me what' been happen so far." K. instantli 
began tell hi uncl about what had been happening, hold noth 
back - be complet open with him wa the onli way that K. could 
protest at hi uncle' belief that the trial wa a great disgrace. He 
mention miss bürstner' name just onc and in passing, but that did 
noth to diminish hi open about the trial as miss bürstner had no 
connect with it. As he spoke, he look out the window and saw how, 
just then, they were get closer to the suburb where the court 
offic were. He drew thi to hi uncle' attention, but he did not 
find the coincid especi remarkable. the taxi stop in front 
of a dark building. k.' uncl knock at the veri first door at ground 
level; while they wait he smiled, show hi big teeth, and 
whispered, "eight o'clock; not the usual sort of time to be visit a 
lawyer, but huld won't mind it from me." two large, black eye appear 
in the spy-hatch in the door, they stare at the two visitor for a 
while and then disappeared; the door, however, did not open. K. and hi 
uncl confirm to each other the fact that they had seen the two eyes. 
"A new maid, afraid of strangers," said k.' uncle, and knock again. 
the eye appear onc more. thi time they seem almost sad, but the 
open ga flame that burn with a hiss close abov their head gave off 
littl light and that may have mere creat an illusion. "open the 
door," call k.' uncle, rais hi fist against it, "we are friend 
of dr. huld, the lawyer!" "dr. huld is ill," whisper someon behind 
them. In a doorway at the far end of a narrow passag stood a man in 
hi dress gown, give them thi inform in an extrem quiet 
voice. k.' uncle, who had alreadi been made veri angri by the long 
wait, turn abruptli round and retorted, "ill? you say he' ill?" and 
strode toward the gentleman in a way that seem almost threatening, as 
if he were the ill himself. "they'v open the door for you, now," 
said the gentleman, point at the door of the lawyer. He pull hi 
dress gown togeth and disappeared. the door had inde been 
opened, a young girl - K. recognis the dark, slightli bulg eye - 
stood in the hallway in a long white apron, hold a candl in her 
hand. "next time, open up sooner!" said k.' uncl instead of a 
greeting, while the girl made a slight curtsey. "come along, josef," he 
then said to K. who wa slowli move over toward the girl. "dr. huld 
is unwell," said the girl as k.' uncle, without stopping, rush 
toward one of the doors. K. continu to look at the girl in amaz 
as she turn round to block the way into the live room, she had a 
round face like a puppy's, not onli the pale cheek and the chin were 
round but the templ and the hairlin were too. "josef!" call hi 
uncl onc more, and he ask the girl, "it' troubl with hi heart, is 
it?" "I think it is, sir," said the girl, who by now had found time to 
go ahead with the candl and open the door into the room. In one corner 
of the room, where the light of the candl did not reach, a face with a 
long beard look up from the bed. "leni, who' thi come in?" ask 
the lawyer, unabl to recognis hi guest becaus he wa dazzl by the 
candle. "it' your old friend, albert," said k.' uncle. "oh, albert," 
said the lawyer, fall back onto hi pillow as if thi visit meant he 
would not need to keep up appearances. "i it realli as bad as that?" 
ask k.' uncle, sit on the edg of the bed. "I don't believ it 
is. it' a recurr of your heart troubl and it'll pass over like 
the other times." "maybe," said the lawyer quietly, "but it' just as 
much troubl as it' ever been. I can hardli breathe, I can't sleep at 
all and i'm get weaker by the day." "I see," said k.' uncle, 
press hi panama hat firmli against hi knee with hi big hand. 
"that is bad news. but are you get the right sort of care? and 
it' so depress in here, it' so dark. it' a long time sinc I wa 
last here, but it seem to me friendlier then. even your young ladi 
here doesn't seem to have much life in her, unless she' just 
pretending." the maid wa still stand by the door with the candle; 
as far as could be made out, she wa watch K. more than she wa 
watch hi uncl even while the latter wa still speak about her. 
K. leant against a chair that he had push near to the girl. "when 
you'r as ill as I am," said the lawyer, "you need to have peace. I 
don't find it depressing." after a short paus he added, "and leni 
look after me well, she' a good girl." but that wa not enough to 
persuad k.' uncle, he had visibl taken against hi friend' carer 
and, even though he did not contradict the invalid, he persecut her 
with hi scowl as she went over to the bed, put the candl on the 
bedsid tabl and, lean over the bed, made a fuss of him by tidi 
the pillows. k.' uncl nearli forgot the need to show ani 
consider for the man who lay ill in bed, he stood up, walk up and 
down behind the carer, and K. would not have been surpris if he had 
grab hold of her skirt behind her and drag her away from the bed. 
K. himself look on calmly, he wa not even disappoint at find the 
lawyer unwell, he had been abl to do noth to oppos the enthusiasm 
hi uncl had develop for the matter, he wa glad that thi enthusiasm 
had now been distract without hi have to do anyth about it. hi 
uncle, probabl simpli wish to be offens to the lawyer' 
attendant, then said, "young lady, now pleas leav us alon for a 
while, I have some person matter to discuss with my friend." dr. 
huld' carer wa still leant far over the invalid' bed and smooth 
out the cloth cover the wall next to it, she mere turn her head 
and then, in strike contrast with the anger that first stop k.' 
uncl from speak and then let the word out in a gush, she said veri 
quietly, "you can see that dr. huld is so ill that he can't discuss ani 
matter at all." It wa probabl just for the sake of conveni that 
she had repeat the word spoken by k.' uncle, but an onlook might 
even have perceiv it as mock him and he, of course, jump up as if 
he had just been stabbed. "you damn ...," in the first gurgl of 
hi excit hi word could hardli be understood, K. wa startl 
even though he had been expect someth of the sort and ran to hi 
uncl with the intention, no doubt, of close hi mouth with both hi 
hands. fortunately, though, behind the girl, the invalid rais himself 
up, k.' uncl made an ugli face as if swallow someth disgust 
and then, somewhat calmer, said, "we have natur not lost our senses, 
not yet; if what I am ask for were not possibl I would not be ask 
for it. now please, go!" the carer stood up straight by the bed 
directli face k.' uncle, K. thought he notic that with one hand she 
wa stroke the lawyer' hand. "you can say anyth in front of 
leni," said the invalid, in a tone that wa unmistak imploring. 
"it' not my business," said k.' uncle, "and it' not my secrets." and 
he twist himself round as if want to go into no more negoti 
but give himself a littl more time to think. "whose busi is it 
then?" ask the lawyer in an exhaust voic as he leant back again. 
"mi nephew's," said k.' uncle, "and i'v brought him along with me." 
and he introduc him, "chief clerk josef k." "oh!" said the invalid, 
now with much more life in him, and reach out hi hand toward K. "do 
forgiv me, I didn't notic you there at all." then he then said to hi 
carer, "leni, go," stretch hi hand out to her as if thi were a 
farewel that would have to last for a long time. thi time the girl 
offer no resistance. "so you," he final said to k.' uncle, who had 
also calm down and step closer, "you haven't come to visit me 
becaus i'm ill but you'v come on business." the lawyer now look so 
much stronger that it seem the idea of be visit becaus he wa 
ill had somehow made him weak, he remain support himself of one 
elbow, which must have been rather tiring, and continu pull at a 
lock of hair in the middl of hi beard. "you alreadi look much 
better," said k.' uncle, "now that that witch ha gone outside." He 
interrupt himself, whispered, "I bet you she' listening!" and sprang 
over to the door. but behind the door there wa no-one, k.' uncl came 
back not disappointed, as her not listen seem to him wors than if 
she had been, but probabl somewhat embittered. "you'r mistaken about 
her," said the lawyer, but did noth more to defend her; perhap that 
wa hi way of indic that she did not need defending. but in a 
tone that wa much more commit he went on, "a far as your nephew' 
affair are concerned, thi will be an extrem difficult undertak 
and i'd count myself lucki if my strength last out long enough for it; 
i'm greatli afraid it won't do, but anyway I don't want to leav 
anyth untried; if I don't last out you can alway get somebodi else. 
To be honest, thi matter interest me too much, and I can't bring 
myself to give up the chanc of take some part in it. If my heart 
doe total give out then at least it will have found a worthi affair 
to fail in." K. believ he understood not a word of thi entir 
speech, he look at hi uncl for an explan but hi uncl sat on 
the bedsid tabl with the candl in hi hand, a medicin bottl had 
roll off the tabl onto the floor, he nod to everyth the lawyer 
said, agre to everything, and now and then look at K. urg him to 
show the same compliance. mayb k.' uncl had alreadi told the lawyer 
about the trial. but that wa impossible, everyth that had happen 
so far spoke against it. So he said, 
"I don't understand ..." "well, mayb i'v misunderstood what you'v 
been saying," said the lawyer, just as astonish and embarrass as K. 
"perhap i'v been go too fast. what wa it you want to speak to 
me about? I thought it wa to do with your trial." "of cours it is," 
said k.' uncle, who then ask k., "so what is it you want?" "yes, but 
how is it that you know anyth about me and my case?" ask K. "oh, I 
see," said the lawyer with a smile. "I am a lawyer, I move in court 
circles, peopl talk about variou differ case and the more 
interest one stay in your mind, especi when they concern the 
nephew of a friend. there' noth veri remark about that." "what 
is it you want, then?" ask k.' uncl onc more, "you seem so uneasi 
about it" "you move in thi court' circles?" ask K. "yes," said the 
lawyer. "you'r ask question like a child," said k.' uncle. "what 
circl should I move in, then, if not with member of my own 
discipline?" the lawyer added. It sound so indisput that K. gave 
no answer at all. "but you work in the high court, not that court in 
the attic," he had want to say but could not bring himself to actual 
utter it. "you have to realise," the lawyer continued, in a tone as if 
he were explain someth obvious, unnecessari and incidental, "you 
have to realis that I also deriv great advantag for my client from 
mix with those people, and do so in mani differ ways, it' not 
someth you can keep talk about all the time. i'm at a bit of a 
disadvantag now, of course, becaus of my illness, but I still get 
visit from some good friend of mine at the court and I learn one or 
two things. It might even be that I learn more than mani of those who 
are in the best of health and spend all day in court. and i'm receiv 
a veri welcom visit right now, for instance." and he point into a 
dark corner of the room. "where?" ask k., almost uncouth in hi 
surprise. He look round uneasily; the littl candl gave off far too 
littl light to reach as far as the wall opposite. and then, someth 
did inde begin to move there in the corner. In the light of the 
candl held up by k.' uncl an elderli gentleman could be seen sit 
besid a small table. He had been sit there for so long without 
be notic that he could hardli have been breathing. now he stood up 
with a great deal of fuss, clearli unhappi that attent had been drawn 
to him. It wa as if, by flap hi hand about like short wings, he 
hope to deflect ani introduct and greetings, as if he want on no 
account to disturb the other by hi presenc and seem to be exhort 
them to leav him back in the dark and forget about hi be there. 
that, however, wa someth that could no longer be grant him. "you 
took us by surprise, you see," said the lawyer in explanation, 
cheer indic to the gentleman that he should come closer, 
which, slowly, hesitatingly, look all around him, but with a certain 
dignity, he did. "the offic director - oh, yes, forgiv me, I haven't 
introduc you - thi is my friend albert k., thi is hi nephew, the 
chief clerk josef k., and thi is the offic director - so, the offic 
director wa kind enough to pay me a visit. it' onli possibl to 
appreci just how valuabl a visit like thi is if you'v been let 
into the secret of what a pile of work the offic director ha heap 
over him. well, he came anyway, we were have a peac chat, as far 
as I wa abl when i'm so weak, and although we hadn't told leni she 
mustn't let anyon in as we weren't expect anyone, we still would 
rather have remain alone, but then along came you, albert, thump 
your fist on the door, the offic director move over into the corner 
pull hi tabl and chair with him, but now it turn out we might 
have, that is, if that' what you wish, we might have someth to 
discuss with each other and it would be good if we can all come back 
togeth again. - offic director ...," he said with hi head on one 
side, point with a humbl smile to an armchair near the bed. "i'm 
afraid i'll onli be abl to stay a few minut more," smile the offic 
director as he spread himself out in the armchair and look at the 
clock. "busi calls. but I wouldn't want to miss the chanc of 
meet a friend of my friend." He inclin hi head slightli toward 
k.' uncle, who seem veri happi with hi new acquaintance, but he wa 
not the sort of person to express hi feel of defer and 
respond to the offic director' word with embarrassed, but loud, 
laughter. A horribl sight! K. wa abl to quietli watch everyth as 
nobodi paid ani attent to him, the offic director took over as 
leader of the convers as seem to be hi habit onc he had been 
call forward, the lawyer listen attent with hi hand to hi 
ear, hi initi weak have perhap onli had the function of 
drive away hi new visitors, k.' uncl serv as candle-bear - 
balanc the candl on hi thigh while the offic director frequent 
glanc nervous at it - and wa soon free of hi embarrass and wa 
quickli enchant not onli by the offic director' speak manner but 
also by the gentle, wave hand-mov with which he accompani it. 
k., lean against the bedpost, wa total ignor by the offic 
director, perhap deliberately, and serv the old man onli as audience. 
and besides, he had hardli ani idea what the convers wa about and 
hi thought soon turn to the care assist and the ill treatment she 
had suffer from hi uncle. soon after, he began to wonder whether he 
had not seen the offic director somewher before, perhap among the 
peopl who were at hi first hearing. He may have been mistaken, but 
thought the offic director might well have been among the old gentlemen 
with the thin beard in the first row. 

there wa then a nois that everyon heard from the hallway as if 
someth of porcelain were be broken. "i'll go and see what' 
happened," said k., who slowli left the room as if give the other the 
chanc to stop him. He had hardli step into the hallway, find hi 
bear in the dark with hi hand still firmli hold the door, 
when anoth small hand, much smaller than k.' own, place itself on 
hi and gentli shut the door. It wa the carer who had been wait 
there. "noth ha happened," she whisper to him, "I just threw a 
plate against the wall to get you out of there." "I wa think about 
you, as well," repli K. uneasily. "so much the better," said the 
carer. "come with me". A few step along, they came to a frost glass 
door which the carer open for him. "come in here," she said. It wa 
clearli the lawyer' office, fit out with old, heavi furniture, as 
far as could be seen in the moonlight which now illumin just a 
small, rectangular section of the floor by each of the three big 
windows. "thi way," said the carer, point to a dark trunk with a 
carved, wooden backrest. when he had sat down, K. continu to look 
round the room, it wa a larg room with a high ceiling, the client of 
thi lawyer for the poor must have felt quit lost in it. K. thought he 
could see the littl step with which visitor would approach the 
massiv desk. but then he forgot about all of thi and had eye onli 
for the carer who sat veri close besid him, almost press him against 
the armrest. "I did think," she said "you would come out here to me by 
yourself without me have to call you first. It wa odd. first you stare 
at me as soon as you come in, and then you keep me waiting. and you 
ought to call me leni, too," she ad quickli and suddenly, as if no 
moment of thi convers should be lost. "gladly," said K. "but as 
for it be odd, leni, that' easi to explain. firstly, I had to 
listen to what the old men were say and couldn't leav without a good 
reason, but secondli i'm not a bold person, if anyth i'm quit shy, 
and you, leni, you didn't realli look like you could be won over in one 
stroke, either." "that' not it," said leni, lay one arm on the 
armrest and look at k., "you didn't like me, and I don't suppos you 
like me now, either." "like wouldn't be veri much," said k., 
evasively. "oh!" she exclaim with a smile, thu make use of k.' 
comment to gain an advantag over him. So K. remain silent for a 
while. By now, he had becom use to the dark in the room and wa 
abl to make out variou fixtur and fittings. He wa especi 
impress by a larg pictur hang to the right of the door, he leant 
forward in order to see it better. It depict a man wear a judge' 
robes; he wa sit on a lofti throne gild in a way that shone forth 
from the picture. the odd thing about the pictur wa that thi judg 
wa not sit there in dignifi calm but had hi left arm press 
against the back and armrest, hi right arm, however, wa complet 
free and onli grasp the armrest with hi hand, as if about to jump up 
ani moment in vigor outrag and make some decis comment or even to 
pass sentence. the accus wa probabl meant to be imagin at the 
foot of the steps, the top one of which could be seen in the picture, 
cover with a yellow carpet. "that might be my judge," said k., 
point to the pictur with one finger. "I know him," said leni 
look up at the picture, "he come here quit often. that pictur is 
from when he wa young, but he can never have look anyth like it, 
as he' tiny, minut almost. but despit that, he had himself made to 
look bigger in the pictur as he' madli vain, just like everyon round 
here. but even i'm vain and that make me veri unhappi that you don't 
like me." K. repli to that last comment mere by embrac leni and 
draw her toward him, she lay her head quietli on hi shoulder. To 
the rest of it, though, he said, "what rank is he?" "he' an examin 
judge," she said, take hold of the hand with which K. held her and 
play with hi fingers. "just an examin judg onc again," said K. 
in disappointment, "the senior offici keep themselv hidden. but 
here he is sit on a throne." "that' all just made up," said leni 
with her face bent over k.' hand, "realli he' sit on a kitchen 
chair with an old hors blanket fold over it. but do you have to be 
alway think about your trial?" she ad slowly. "no, not at all," 
said k., "I probabl even think too littl about it." "that' not the 
mistak you'r making," said leni, "you'r too unyielding, that' what 
i'v heard." "who said that?" ask k., he felt her bodi against hi 
chest and look down on her rich, dark, tightly-bound hair. "i'd be 
say too much if I told you that," answer leni. "pleas don't ask 
for names, but do stop make these mistak of yours, stop be so 
unyielding, there' noth you can do to defend yourself from thi 
court, you have to confess. So confess to them as soon as you get the 
chance. it' onli then that they give you the chanc to get away, not 
till then. only, without help from outsid even that' impossible, but 
you needn't worri about get thi help as I want to help you myself." 
"you understand a lot about thi court and what sort of trick are 
needed," said K. as he lift her, sinc she wa press in much too 
close to him, onto hi lap. "that' alright, then," she said, and made 
herself comfort on hi lap by smooth out her skirt and adjust 
her blouse. then she hung both her arm around hi neck, leant back and 
took a long look at him. "and what if I don't confess, could you not 
help me then?" ask K. to test her out. i'm accumul women to help 
me, he thought to himself almost in amazement, first miss bürstner, then 
the court usher' wife, and now thi littl care assist who seem to 
have some incomprehens need for me. the way she sit on my lap as 
if it were her proper place! "no," answer leni, slowli shake her 
head, "I couldn't help you then. but you don't want my help anyway, it 
mean noth to you, you'r too stubborn and won't be persuaded." 
then, after a while she asked, "do you have a lover?" "no," said K. 
"oh, you must have," she said. "well, I have really," said K. "just 
think, i'v even betray her while i'm carri her photograph with 
me." leni insist he show her a photograph of elsa, and then, hunch 
on hi lap, studi the pictur closely. the photograph wa not one 
that had been taken while elsa wa pose for it, it show her just 
after she had been in a wild danc such as she like to do in wine bars, 
her skirt wa still flung out as she span round, she had place her 
hand on her firm hip and, with her neck held taut, look to one side 
with a laugh; you could not see from the pictur whom her laugh wa 
intend for. "she' veri tightli laced," said leni, point to the 
place where she thought thi could be seen. "I don't like her, she' 
clumsi and crude. but mayb she' gentl and friendli toward you, 
that' the impress you get from the picture. big, strong girl like 
that often don't know how to be anyth but gentl and friendly. would 
she be capabl of sacrif herself for you, though?" "no," said k., 
"she isn't gentl or friendly, and nor would she be capabl of 
sacrif herself for me. but i'v never yet ask ani of those 
thing of her. i'v never look at thi pictur as close as you." 
"you can't think much of her, then," said leni. "she can't be your lover 
after all." "ye she is," said k., "i'm not go to take my word back 
on that." "well she might be your lover now, then," said leni, "but you 
wouldn't miss her much if you lost her or if you exchang her for 
somebodi else, me for instance." "that is certainli conceivable," said 
K. with a smile, "but she doe have one major advantag over you, she 
know noth about my trial, and even if she did she wouldn't think 
about it. she wouldn't tri to persuad me to be less unyielding." "well 
that' no advantage," said leni. "if she' got no advantag other than 
that, I can keep on hoping. ha she got ani bodili defects?" "'bodili 
defects'?" ask K. "yeah," said leni, "a I do have a bodili defect, 
just a littl one. look." she spread the middl and ring finger of 
her right hand apart from each other. between those finger the flap of 
skin connect them reach up almost as far as the top joint of the 
littl finger. In the darkness, K. did not see at first what it wa she 
want to show him, so she led hi hand to it so that he could feel. 
"what a freak of nature," said k., and when he had taken a look at the 
whole hand he added, "what a pretti claw!" leni look on with a kind 
of pride as K. repeatedli open and close her two finger in 
amazement, until, finally, he briefli kiss them and let go. "oh!" she 
immedi exclaimed, "you kiss me!" hurriedly, and with her mouth 
open, she clamber up k.' lap with her knees. He wa almost aghast as 
he look up at her, now that she wa so close to him there wa a 
bitter, irrit smell from her, like pepper, she grasp hi head, 
leant out over him, and bit and kiss hi neck, even bite into hi 
hair. "i'v taken her place!" she exclaim from time to time. "just 
look, now you'v taken me instead of her!" just then, her knee slip 
out and, with a littl cry, she nearli fell down onto the carpet, K. 
tri to hold her by put hi arm around her and wa pull down 
with her. "now you'r mine," she said. her last word to him as he 
left were, "here' the key to the door, come whenev you want", and she 
plant an undirect kiss on hi back. when he step out the front 
door there wa a light rain falling, he wa about to go to the middl of 
the street to see if he could still glimps leni at the window when k.' 
uncl leapt out of a car that k., think of other things, had not seen 
wait outsid the building. He took hold of K. by both arm and 
shove him against the door as if he want to nail him to it. "young 
man," he shouted, "how could you do a thing like that?! thing were 
go well with thi busi of yours, now you'v caus it terribl 
damage. you slip off with some dirty, littl thing who, moreover, is 
obvious the lawyer' beloved, and stay away for hours. you don't even 
tri to find an excuse, don't tri to hide anything, no, you'r quit open 
about it, you run off with her and stay there. and meanwhil we'r 
sit there, your uncl who' go to such effort for you, the lawyer 
who need to be won over to your side, and abov all the offic 
director, a veri import gentleman who is in direct command of your 
affair in it present stage. We want to discuss how best to help you, 
I had to handl the lawyer veri carefully, he had to handl the offic 
director carefully, and you had most reason of all to at least give me 
some support. instead of which you stay away. eventu we couldn't 
keep up the pretenc ani longer, but these are polit and highli capabl 
men, they didn't say anyth about it so as to spare my feel but in 
the end not even they could continu to forc themselv and, as they 
couldn't speak about the matter in hand, they becam silent. We sat 
there for sever minutes, listen to see whether you wouldn't final 
come back. all in vain. In the end the offic director stood up, as he 
had stay far longer than he had origin intended, made hi 
farewell, look at me in sympathi without be abl to help, he wait 
at the door for a long time although it' more than I can understand whi 
he wa be so good, and then he went. I, of course, wa glad he'd 
gone, i'd been hold my breath all thi time. all thi had even more 
affect on the lawyer lie there ill, when I took my leav of him, the 
good man, he wa quit unabl to speak. you have probabl contribut 
to hi total collaps and so brought the veri man who you are depend 
on closer to hi death. and me, your own uncle, you leav me here in 
the rain - just feel this, i'm wet right through - wait here for 
hours, sick with worry." 




chapter seven 
lawyer - manufactur - painter 

one winter morn - snow wa fall in the dull light outsid - 
K. wa sit in hi office, alreadi extrem tire despit the earli 
hour. He had told the servitor he wa engag in a major piec of work 
and none of the junior staff should be allow in to see him, so he 
would not be disturb by them at least. but instead of work he 
turn round in hi chair, slowli move variou item around hi desk, 
but then, without be awar of it, he lay hi arm stretch out on the 
desk top and sat there immobil with hi head sunk down on hi chest. 

He wa no longer abl to get the thought of the trial out of hi 
head. He had often wonder whether it might not be a good idea to work 
out a written defenc and hand it in to the court. It would contain a 
short descript of hi life and explain whi he had act the way he 
had at each event that wa in ani way important, whether he now 
consid he had act well or ill, and hi reason for each. there 
wa no doubt of the advantag a written defenc of thi sort would have 
over reli on the lawyer, who wa anyway not without hi shortcomings. 
K. had no idea what action the lawyer wa taking; it wa certainli not 
a lot, it wa more than a month sinc the lawyer had summon him, and 
none of the previou discuss had given K. the impress that thi 
man would be abl to do much for him. most importantly, he had ask 
him hardli ani questions. and there were so mani question here to be 
asked. ask question were the most import thing. K. had the 
feel that he would be abl to ask all the question need here 
himself. the lawyer, in contrast, did not ask question but did all the 
talk himself or sat silent face him, leant forward slightli over 
the desk, probabl becaus he wa hard of hearing, pull on a strand of 
hair in the middl of hi beard and look down at the carpet, perhap 
at the veri spot where K. had lain with leni. now and then he would 
give K. some vagu warn of the sort you give to children. hi 
speech were as pointless as they were boring, and K. decid that when 
the final bill came he would pay not a penni for them. onc the lawyer 
thought he had humili K. sufficiently, he usual start someth 
that would rais hi spirit again. He had already, he would then say, 
won mani such cases, partli or in whole, case which may not realli have 
been as difficult as thi one but which, on the face of it, had even 
less hope of success. He had a list of these case here in the drawer - 
here he would tap on one or other of the drawer in hi desk - but 
could, unfortunately, not show them to K. as they dealt with offici 
secrets. nonetheless, the great experi he had acquir through all 
these case would, of course, be of benefit to K. He had, of course, 
begun work straight away and wa nearli readi to submit the first 
documents. they would be veri import becaus the first impress 
made by the defenc will often determin the whole cours of the 
proceedings. unfortunately, though, he would still have to make it 
clear to K. that the first document submit are sometim not even 
read by the court. they simpli put them with the other document and 
point out that, for the time being, question and observ the 
accus are much more import than anyth written. If the applic 
becom insistent, then they add that befor they come to ani decision, 
as soon as all the materi ha been brought together, with due regard, 
of course, to all the documents, then these first document to have been 
submit will also be check over. but unfortunately, even thi is 
not usual true, the first document submit are usual mislaid or 
lost completely, and even if they do keep them right to the end they are 
hardli read, although the lawyer onli knew about thi from rumour. thi 
is all veri regrettable, but not entir without it justifications. 
but K. should not forget that the trial would not be public, if the 
court deem it necessari it can be made public but there is no law that 
say it ha to be. As a result, the accus and hi defenc don't have 
access even to the court records, and especi not to the indictment, 
and that mean we gener don't know - or at least not precis - 
what the first document need to be about, which mean that if they do 
contain anyth of relev to the case it' onli by a lucki 
coincidence. If anyth about the individu charg and the reason 
for them come out clearli or can be guess at while the accus is 
be questioned, then it' possibl to work out and submit document 
that realli direct the issu and present proof, but not before. 
condit like this, of course, place the defenc in a veri 
unfavour and difficult position. but that is what they intend. In 
fact, defenc is not realli allow under the law, it' onli tolerated, 
and there is even some disput about whether the relev part of the 
law impli even that. So strictli speaking, there is no such thing as a 
counsel acknowledg by the court, and anyon who come befor thi 
court as counsel is basic no more than a barrack room lawyer. the 
effect of all this, of course, is to remov the digniti of the whole 
procedure, the next time K. is in the court offic he might like to 
have a look in at the lawyers' room, just so that he' seen it. He 
might well be quit shock by the peopl he see assembl there. the 
room they'v been allocated, with it narrow space and low ceiling, will 
be enough to show what contempt the court ha for these people. the 
onli light in the room come through a littl window that is so high up 
that, if you want to look out of it, you first have to get one of your 
colleagu to support you on hi back, and even then the smoke from the 
chimney just in front of it will go up your nose and make your face 
black. In the floor of thi room - to give yet anoth exampl of the 
condit there - there is a hole that' been there for more than a 
year, it' not so big that a man could fall through, but it is big 
enough for your foot to disappear through it. the lawyers' room is on 
the second floor of the attic; if your foot doe go through it will hang 
down into the first floor of the attic underneath it, and right in the 
corridor where the litig are waiting. it' no exagger when 
lawyer say that condit like that are a disgrace. complaint to the 
manag don't have the slightest effect, but the lawyer are strictli 
forbidden to alter anyth in the room at their own expense. but even 
treat the lawyer in thi way ha it reasons. they want, as far as 
possible, to prevent ani kind of defence, everyth should be made the 
respons of the accused. not a bad point of view, basically, but 
noth could be more mistaken than to think from that that lawyer are 
not necessari for the accus in thi court. On the contrary, there is 
no court where they are less need than here. thi is becaus 
proceed are gener kept secret not onli from the public but also 
from the accused. onli as far as that is possible, of course, but it is 
possibl to a veri larg extent. and the accus doesn't get to see the 
court record either, and it' veri difficult to infer what' in the 
court record from what' been said dure question base on them, 
especi for the accus who is in a difficult situat and is face 
with everi possibl worri to distract him. thi is when the defenc 
begins. counsel for the defenc are not normal allow to be present 
while the accus is be questioned, so afterwards, and if possibl 
still at the door of the interview room, he ha to learn what he can 
about it from him and extract whatev he can that might be of use, even 
though what the accus ha to report is often veri confused. but that 
is not the most import thing, as there' realli not a lot that can be 
learn in thi way, although in this, as with anyth else, a 
compet man will learn more than another. nonetheless, the most 
import thing is the lawyer' person connections, that' where the 
real valu of take counsel lies. now K. will most like have alreadi 
learn from hi own experi that, among it veri lowest orders, the 
court organis doe have it imperfections, the court is strictli 
close to the public, but staff who forget their duti or who take bribe 
do, to some extent, show where the gap are. thi is where most lawyer 
will push their way in, thi is where bribe are paid and inform 
extracted, there have even, in earlier time at least, been incid 
where document have been stolen. there' no deni that some 
surprisingli favour result have been attain for the accus in 
thi way, for a limit time, and these petti advoc then strut to 
and fro on the basi of them and attract new clients, but for the 
further cours of the proceed it signifi either noth or noth 
good. the onli thing of real valu are honest person contacts, 
contact with higher officials, albeit higher offici of the lower 
grades, you understand. that is the onli way the progress of the trial 
can be influenced, hardli notic at first, it' true, but from then 
on it becom more and more visible. there are, of course, not mani 
lawyer who can do this, and K. ha made a veri good choic in thi 
matter. there were probabl no more than one or two who had as mani 
contact as dr. huld, but they don't bother with the compani of the 
lawyers' room and have noth to do with it. thi mean they have all 
the less contact with the court officials. It is not at all necessari 
for dr. huld to go to the court, wait in the ante-room for the 
examin judg to turn up, if they turn up, and tri to achiev 
someth which, accord to the judges' mood is usual more appar 
than real and most often not even that. no, K. ha seen for himself 
that the court officials, includ some who are quit high up, come 
forward without be asked, are glad to give inform which is fulli 
open or at least easi to understand, they discuss the next stage in the 
proceedings, in fact in some case they can be won over and are quit 
will to adopt the other person' point of view. however, when thi 
happens, you should never trust them too far, as howev firmli they may 
have declar thi new point of view in favour of the defend they 
might well go straight back to their offic and write a report for the 
court that say just the opposite, and might well be even harder on the 
defend than the origin view, the one they insist they'v been fulli 
dissuad from. and, of course, there' no way of defend yourself 
from this, someth said in privat is inde in privat and cannot 
then be use in public, it' not someth that make it easi for the 
defenc to keep those gentlemen' favour. On the other hand, it' also 
true that the gentlemen don't becom involv with the defenc - which 
will of cours be done with great expertis - just for philanthrop 
reason or in order to be friendly, in some respect it would be truer 
to say that they, too, have it alloc to them. thi is where the 
disadvantag of a court structur that, right from the start, 
stipul that all proceed take place in private, come into force. 
In normal, mediocr trial it offici have contact with the public, 
and they'r veri well equip for it, but here they don't; normal 
trial run their cours all by themselves, almost, and just need a nudg 
here and there; but when they'r face with case that are especi 
difficult they'r as lost as they often are with one that are veri 
simple; they'r forc to spend all their time, day and night, with 
their laws, and so they don't have the right feel for human 
relationships, and that' a seriou shortcom in case like this. 
that' when they come for advic to the lawyer, with a servant behind 
them carri the document which normal are kept so secret. you 
could have seen mani gentlemen at thi window, gentlemen of whom you 
would least expect it, stare out thi window in despair on the street 
below while the lawyer is at hi desk studi the document so that he 
can give them good advice. and at time like that it' also possibl to 
see how except serious these gentlemen take their profess 
and how they are thrown into great confus by difficulti which it' 
just not in their natur to overcome. but they'r not in an easi 
position, to regard their posit as easi would be to do them an 
injustice. the differ rank and hierarchi of the court are 
endless, and even someon who know hi way around them cannot alway 
tell what' go to happen. but even for the junior officials, the 
proceed in the courtroom are usual kept secret, so they are 
hardli abl to see how the case they work with proceed, court affair 
appear in their rang of vision often without their know where they 
come from and they move on further without their learn where they go. 
So civil servant like thi are not abl to learn the thing you can 
learn from studi the success stage that individu trial go 
through, the final verdict or the reason for it. they'r onli allow 
to deal with that part of the trial which the law alloc them, and 
they usual know less about the result of their work after it' left 
them than the defenc does, even though the defenc will usual stay in 
contact with the accus until the trial is nearli at it end, so that 
the court offici can learn mani use thing from the defence. 
bear all thi in mind, doe it still surpris K. that the offici 
are irrit and often express themselv about the litig in 
unflatt way - which is an experi share by everyone. all the 
offici are irritated, even when they appear calm. thi caus mani 
difficulti for the junior advocates, of course. there is a story, for 
instance, that ha veri much the ring of truth about it. It goe like 
this: one of the older officials, a good and peac man, wa deal 
with a difficult matter for the court which had becom veri confused, 
especi thank to the contribut from the lawyers. He had been 
studi it for a day and a night without a break - as these offici 
are inde hard working, no-on work as hard as they do. when it wa 
nearli morning, and he had been work for twenty-four hour with 
probabl veri littl result, he went to the front entrance, wait there 
in ambush, and everi time a lawyer tri to enter the build he would 
throw him down the steps. the lawyer gather togeth down in front 
of the step and discuss with each other what they should do; on the 
one hand they had actual no right to be allow into the build so 
that there wa hardli anyth that they could legal do to the 
offici and, as i'v alreadi mentioned, they would have to be care 
not to set all the offici against them. On the other hand, ani day 
not spent in court is a day lost for them and it wa a matter of some 
import to forc their way inside. In the end, they agre that they 
would tri to tire the old man out. one lawyer after anoth wa sent 
out to run up the step and let himself be thrown down again, offer 
what resist he could as long as it wa passiv resistance, and hi 
colleagu would catch him at the bottom of the steps. that went on for 
about an hour until the old gentleman, who wa alreadi exhaust from 
work all night, wa veri tire and went back to hi office. those 
who were at the bottom of the step could not believ it at first, so 
they sent somebodi out to go and look behind the door to see if there 
realli wa no-on there, and onli then did they all gather togeth and 
probabl didn't even dare to complain, as it' far from be the 
lawyers' job to introduc ani improv in the court system, or even 
to want to. even the most junior lawyer can understand the relationship 
there to some extent, but one signific point is that almost everi 
defendant, even veri simpl people, begin to think of suggest for 
improv the court as soon as hi proceed have begun, mani of them 
often even spend time and energi on the matter that could be spent far 
better elsewhere. the onli right thing to do is to learn how to deal 
with the situat as it is. even if it were possibl to improv ani 
detail of it - which is anyway no more than superstiti nonsens - the 
best that they could achieve, although do themselv incalcul 
harm in the process, is that they will have attract the special 
attent of the offici for ani case that come up in the future, and 
the offici are alway readi to seek revenge. never attract attent 
to yourself! stay calm, howev much it goe against your character! 
tri to gain some insight into the size of the court organ and how, to 
some extent, it remain in a state of suspension, and that even if you 
alter someth in one place you'll draw the ground out from under your 
feet and might fall, wherea if an enorm organ like the court is 
disrupt in ani one place it find it easi to provid a substitut for 
itself somewher else. everyth is connect with everyth els and 
will continu without ani chang or else, which is quit probable, even 
more closed, more attentive, more strict, more malevolent. So it' best 
to leav the work to the lawyer and not to keep disturb them. It 
doesn't do much good to make accusations, especi if you can't make 
it clear what they'r base on and their full significance, but it must 
be said that K. caus a great deal of harm to hi own case by hi 
behaviour toward the offic director, he wa a veri influenti man but 
now he might as well be struck off the list of those who might do 
anyth for K. If the trial is mentioned, even just in passing, it' 
quit obviou that he' ignor it. these offici are in mani way 
just like children. often, someth quit harmless - although k.' 
behaviour could unfortun not be call harmless - will leav them 
feel so offend that they will even stop talk with good friend 
of theirs, they turn away when they see them and do everyth they can 
to oppos them. but then, with no particular reason, surprisingli 
enough, some littl joke that wa onli ever attempt becaus everyth 
seem so hopeless will make them laugh and they'll be reconciled. 
it' both difficult and hard at the same time to deal with them, and 
there' hardli ani reason for it. it' sometim quit astonish that 
a single, averag life is enough to encompass so much that it' at all 
possibl ever to have ani success in one' work here. On the other 
hand, there are also dark moments, such as everyon has, when you think 
you'v achiev noth at all, when it seem that the onli trial to 
come to a good end are those that were determin to have a good end 
from the start and would do so without ani help, while all the other 
are lost despit all the run to and fro, all the effort, all the 
little, appar success that gave such joy. then you no longer feel 
veri sure of anyth and, if ask about a trial that wa do well by 
it own natur but which wa turn for the wors becaus you assist 
in it, would not even dare deni that. and even that is a kind of self- 
confidence, but then it' the onli one that' left. lawyer are 
especi vulner to fit of depress of that sort - and they are 
no more than fit of depress of cours - when a case is suddenli 
taken out of their hand after they'v been conduct it satisfactorili 
for some time. that' probabl the worst that can happen to a lawyer. 
it' not that the accus take the case away from him, that hardli ever 
happens, onc a defend ha taken on a certain lawyer he ha to stay 
with him whatev happens. how could he ever carri on by himself after 
he' taken on help from a lawyer? no, that just doesn't happen, but 
what doe sometim happen is that the trial take on a cours where the 
lawyer may not go along with it. client and trial are both simpli taken 
away from the lawyer; and then even contact with the court offici 
won't help, howev good they are, as they don't know anyth 
themselves. the trial will have enter a stage where no more help can 
be given, where it' be process in court to which no-on ha ani 
access, where the defend cannot even be contact by hi lawyer. you 
come home one day and find all the document you'v submitted, which 
you'v work hard to creat and which you had the best hope for, lie 
on the desk, they'v been sent back as they can't be carri through to 
the next stage in the trial, they'r just worthless scrap of paper. It 
doesn't mean that the case ha been lost, not at all, or at least there 
is no decis reason for suppos so, it' just that you don't know 
anyth more about the case and won't be told anyth of what' 
happening. well, case like that are the exceptions, i'm glad to say, 
and even if k.' trial is one of them, it' still, for the time being, a 
long way off. but there wa still plenti of opportun for lawyer to 
get to work, and K. could be sure they would be made use of. As he had 
said, the time for submit document wa still in the futur and 
there wa no rush to prepar them, it wa much more import to start 
the initi discuss with the appropri officials, and they had 
alreadi taken place. with vari degre of success, it must be said. 
It wa much better not to give away ani detail befor their time, as in 
that way K. could onli be influenc unfavour and hi hope might be 
rais or he might be made too anxious, better just to say that some 
individu have spoken veri favour and shown themselv veri 
will to help, although other have spoken less favourably, but even 
they have not in ani way refus to help. So all in all, the result 
are veri encouraging, onli you should certainli not draw ani particular 
conclus as all preliminari proceed begin in the same way and it 
wa onli the way they develop further that would show what the valu 
of these preliminari proceed ha been. anyway, noth ha been 
lost yet, and if we can succeed in get the offic director, despit 
everything, on our side - and sever action have been undertaken to 
thi end - then everyth is a clean wound, as a surgeon would say, and 
we can wait for the result with some comfort. 

when he start talk on in thi way the lawyer wa quit 
tireless. He went through it all again everi time K. went to see him. 
there wa alway some progress, but he could never be told what sort of 
progress it was. the first set of document to be submit were be 
work on but still not ready, which usual turn out to be a great 
advantag the next time K. went to see him as the earlier occas would 
have been a veri bad time to put them in, which they could not then have 
known. If k., stupefi from all thi talking, ever point out that 
even consid all these difficulti progress wa veri slow, the 
lawyer would object that progress wa not slow at all, but that they 
might have progress far further if K. had come to him at the right 
time. but he had come to him late and that late would bring still 
further difficulties, and not onli where time wa concerned. the onli 
welcom interrupt dure these visit wa alway when leni contriv 
to bring the lawyer hi tea while K. wa there. then she would stand 
behind K. - pretend to watch the lawyer as he bent greedili over hi 
cup, pour the tea in and drank - and secretli let K. hold her hand. 
there wa alway complet silence. the lawyer drank. K. squeez 
leni' hand and leni would sometim dare to gentli stroke k.' hair. 
"still here, are you?" the lawyer would ask when he wa ready. "I 
want to take the dish away," said leni, they would give each other' 
hand a final squeeze, the lawyer would wipe hi mouth and then start 
talk at K. again with renew energy. 

wa the lawyer tri to comfort K. or to confus him? K. could 
not tell, but it seem clear to him that hi defenc wa not in good 
hands. mayb everyth the lawyer said wa quit right, even though he 
obvious want to make himself as conspicu as possibl and probabl 
had never even taken on a case as import as he said k.' was. but it 
wa still suspici how he continu mention hi person contact 
with the civil servants. were they to be exploit sole for k.' 
benefit? the lawyer never forgot to mention that they were deal onli 
with junior officials, which meant offici who were depend on 
others, and the direct taken in each trial could be import for 
their own furtherment. could it be that they were make use of the 
lawyer to turn trial in a certain direction, which would, of course, 
alway be at the cost of the defendant? It certainli did not mean that 
they would do that in everi trial, that wa not like at all, and there 
were probabl also trial where they gave the lawyer advantag and all 
the room he need to turn it in the direct he wanted, as it would 
also be to their advantag to keep hi reput intact. If that 
realli wa their relationship, how would they direct k.' trial which, 
as the lawyer had explained, wa especi difficult and therefor 
import enough to attract great attent from the veri first time it 
came to court? there could not be much doubt about what they would do. 
the first sign of it could alreadi be seen in the fact that the first 
document still had not been submit even though the trial had alreadi 
last sever months, and that, accord to the lawyer, everyth wa 
still in it initi stages, which wa veri effective, of course, in 
make the defend passiv and keep him helpless. then he could be 
suddenli surpris with the verdict, or at least with a notif 
that the hear had not decid in hi favour and the matter would be 
pass on to a higher office. 

It wa essenti that K. take a hand in it himself. On winter' 
morn such as this, when he wa veri tire and everyth drag 
itself letharg through hi head, thi belief of hi seem 
irrefutable. He no longer felt the contempt for the trial that he had 
had earlier. If he had been alon in the world it would have been easi 
for him to ignor it, although it wa also certain that, in that case, 
the trial would never have arisen in the first place. but now, hi 
uncl had alreadi drag him to see the lawyer, he had to take account 
of hi family; hi job wa no longer total separ from the progress 
of the trial, he himself had carelessli - with a certain, inexplic 
complac - mention it to acquaint and other had learn about 
it in way he did not know, hi relationship with miss bürstner seem 
to be in troubl becaus of it. In short, he no longer had ani choic 
whether he would accept the trial or turn it down, he wa in the middl 
of it and had to defend himself. If he wa tired, then that wa bad. 

but there wa no reason to worri too much befor he need to. He 
had been capabl of work himself up to hi high posit in the bank 
in a rel short time and to retain it with respect from everyone, 
now he simpli had to appli some of the talent that had made that 
possibl for him to the trial, and there wa no doubt that it had to 
turn out well. the most import thing, if someth wa to be 
achieved, wa to reject in advanc ani idea that he might be in ani way 
guilty. there wa no guilt. the trial wa noth but a big piec of 
business, just like he had alreadi conclud to the benefit of the bank 
mani times, a piec of busi that conceal mani lurk danger 
wait in ambush for him, as they usual did, and these danger would 
need to be defend against. If that wa to be achiev then he must 
not entertain ani idea of guilt, whatev he did, he would need to look 
after hi own interest as close as he could. seen in thi way, there 
wa no choic but to take hi represent away from the lawyer veri 
soon, at best that veri evening. the lawyer had told him, as he talk 
to him, that that wa someth unheard of and would probabl do him a 
great deal of harm, but K. could not toler ani impedi to hi 
effort where hi trial wa concerned, and these impedi were 
probabl caus by the lawyer himself. but onc he had shaken off the 
lawyer the document would need to be submit straight away and, if 
possible, he would need to see to it that they were be dealt with 
everi day. It would of cours not be enough, if that wa to be done, 
for K. to sit in the corridor with hi hat under the bench like the 
others. day after day, he himself, or one of the women or somebodi els 
on hi behalf, would have to run after the offici and forc them to 
sit at their desk and studi k.' document instead of look out on 
the corridor through the grating. there could be no let-up in these 
efforts, everyth would need to be organis and supervised, it wa 
about time that the court came up against a defend who knew how to 
defend and make use of hi rights. 

but when K. had the confid to tri and do all thi the 
difficulti of compos the document wa too much for him. earlier, 
just a week or so before, he could onli have felt shame at the thought 
of be made to write out such document himself; it had never enter 
hi head that the task could also be difficult. He rememb one 
morn when, alreadi pile up with work, he suddenli shove everyth 
to one side and took a pad of paper on which he sketch out some of hi 
thought on how document of thi sort should proceed. perhap he would 
offer them to that slow-wit lawyer, but just then the door of the 
manager' offic open and the deputy-director enter the room with a 
loud laugh. K. wa veri embarrassed, although the deputy-director, of 
course, wa not laugh at k.' documents, which he knew noth about, 
but at a joke he had just heard about the stock-exchange, a joke which 
need an illustr if it wa to be understood, and now the deputy- 
director leant over k.' desk, took hi pencil from hi hand, and drew 
the illustr on the write pad that K. had intend for hi idea 
about hi case. 

K. now had no more thought of shame, the document had to be 
prepar and submitted. if, as wa veri likely, he could find no time 
to do it in the offic he would have to do it at home at night. If the 
night weren't enough he would have to take a holiday. abov all, he could 
not stop half way, that wa nonsens not onli in busi but alway and 
everywhere. needless to say, the document would mean an almost endless 
amount of work. It wa easi to come to the belief, not onli for those 
of an anxiou disposition, that it wa imposs ever to finish it. 
thi wa not becaus of lazi or deceit, which were the onli thing 
that might have hinder the lawyer in prepar it, but becaus he did 
not know what the charg wa or even what consequ it might bring, 
so that he had to rememb everi tini action and event from the whole of 
hi life, look at them from all side and check and reconsid 
them. It wa also a veri dishearten job. It would have been more 
suitabl as a way of pass the long day after he had retir and 
becom senile. but now, just when K. need to appli all hi thought 
to hi work, when he wa still rise and alreadi pose a threat to the 
deputy-director, when everi hour pass so quickli and he want to 
enjoy the brief even and night as a young man, thi wa the time he 
had to start work out these documents. onc more, he began to feel 
resentment. almost involuntarily, onli to put an end to it, hi finger 
felt for the button of the electr bell in the ante-room. As he 
press it he glanc up to the clock. It wa eleven o'clock, two 
hours, he had spent a great deal of hi costli time just dream and 
hi wit were, of course, even more dull than they had been before. 
but the time had, nonetheless, not been wasted, he had come to some 
decis that could be of value. As well as variou piec of mail, 
the servitor brought two visit card from gentlemen who had alreadi 
been wait for K. for some time. they were actual veri import 
client of the bank who should not realli have been kept wait under 
ani circumstances. whi had they come at such an awkward time, and why, 
the gentlemen on the other side of the close door seem to be asking, 
wa the industri K. use up the best busi time for hi privat 
affairs? tire from what had gone before, and tire in anticip of 
what wa to follow, K. stood up to receiv the first of them. 

He wa a short, jolli man, a manufactur who K. knew well. He 
apologis for disturb K. at some import work, and k., for hi 
part, apologis for have kept the manufactur wait for so long. 
but even thi apolog wa spoken in such a mechan way and with such 
fals inton that the manufactur would certainli have notic if 
he had not been fulli preoccupi with hi busi affairs. instead, 
he hurriedli pull calcul and tabl out from all hi pockets, 
spread them out in front of k., explain sever items, correct a 
littl mistak in the arithmet that he notic as he quickli glanc 
over it all, and remind K. of a similar piec of busi he'd 
conclud with him about a year before, mention in pass that thi 
time there wa anoth bank spend great effort to get hi business, 
and final stop speak in order to learn k.' opinion on the 
matter. and K. had indeed, at first, been close follow what the 
manufactur wa saying, he too wa awar of how import the deal was, 
but unfortun it did not last, he soon stop listening, nod at 
each of the manufacturer' louder exclam for a short while, but 
eventu he stop do even that and did no more than stare at the 
bald head bent over the papers, ask himself when the manufactur 
would final realis that everyth he wa say wa useless. when 
he did stop talking, K. realli thought at first that thi wa so that he 
would have the chanc to confess that he wa incap of listening. 
instead, see the anticip on the manufacturer' face, obvious 
readi to counter ani object made, he wa sorri to realis that the 
busi discuss had to be continued. So he bent hi head as if he'd 
been given an order and began slowli to move hi pencil over the papers, 
now and then he would stop and stare at one of the figures. the 
manufactur thought there must be some objection, perhap hi figur 
weren't realli sound, perhap they weren't the decis issue, whatev 
he thought, the manufactur cover the paper with hi hand and began 
onc again, move veri close to k., to explain what the deal wa all 
about. "it is difficult," said k., purs hi lips. the onli thing 
that could offer him ani guidanc were the papers, and the manufactur 
had cover them from hi view, so he just sank back against the arm of 
the chair. even when the door of the manager' offic open and 
reveal not veri clearly, as if through a veil, the deputi director, he 
did no more than look up weakly. K. thought no more about the matter, 
he mere watch the immedi effect of the deputi director' 
appear and, for him, the effect wa veri pleasing; the manufactur 
immedi jump up from hi seat and hurri over to meet the deputi 
director, although K. would have like to make him ten time liveli as 
he fear the deputi director might disappear again. He need not have 
worried, the two gentlemen met each other, shook each other' hand and 
went togeth over to k.' desk. the manufactur said he wa sorri to 
find the chief clerk so littl inclin to do business, point to K. 
who, under the view of the deputi director, had bent back down over the 
papers. As the two men leant over the desk and the manufactur made 
some effort to gain and keep the deputi director' attention, K. felt as 
if they were much bigger than they realli were and that their 
negoti were about him. care and slowli turn hi eye 
upwards, he tri to learn what wa take place abov him, took one of 
the paper from hi desk without look to see what it was, lay it on 
the flat of hi hand and rais it slowli up as he rose up to the level 
of the two men himself. He had no particular plan in mind as he did 
this, but mere felt thi wa how he would act if onli he had finish 
prepar that great document that wa to remov hi burden entirely. 
the deputi director had been pay all hi attent to the 
convers and did no more than glanc at the paper, he did not read 
what wa written on it at all as what wa import for the chief clerk 
wa not import for him, he took it from k.' hand saying, "thank you, 
i'm alreadi familiar with everything", and lay it calmli back on the 
desk. K. gave him a bitter, sideway look. but the deputi director did 
not notic thi at all, or if he did notic it it onli rais hi 
spirits, he frequent laugh out loud, one time he clearli embarrass 
the manufactur when he rais an object in a witti way but drew him 
immedi back out of hi embarrass by comment advers on 
himself, and final invit him into hi offic where they could bring 
the matter to it conclusion. "it' a veri import matter," said the 
manufacturer. "I understand that completely. and i'm sure the chief 
clerk ..." - even as he said thi he wa actual speak onli to the 
manufactur - "will be veri glad to have us take it off hi hands. 
thi is someth that need calm consideration. but he seem to be 
over-burden today, there are even some peopl in the room outsid 
who'v been wait there for hour for him." K. still had enough 
control of himself to turn away from the deputi director and direct hi 
friendly, albeit stiff, smile onli at the manufacturer, he made no other 
retaliation, bent down slightli and support himself with both hand on 
hi desk like a clerk, and watch as the two gentlemen, still talking, 
took the paper from hi desk and disappear into the manager' office. 
In the doorway, the manufactur turn and said he wouldn't make hi 
farewel with K. just yet, he would of cours let the chief clerk know 
about the success of hi discuss but he also had a littl someth 
to tell him about. 

At last, K. wa by himself. It did not enter hi head to show 
anyon els into hi offic and onli becam vagu awar of how nice it 
wa that the peopl outsid thought he wa still negoti with the 
manufactur and, for thi reason, he could not let anyon in to see 
him, not even the servitor. He went over to the window, sat down on the 
ledg besid it, held firmli on to the handl and look down onto the 
squar outside. the snow wa still falling, the weather still had not 
brighten up at all. 

He remain a long time sit in thi way, not know what it 
actual wa that made him so anxious, onli occasion did he glance, 
slightli startled, over hi shoulder at the door to the outer room 
where, mistakenly, he thought he'd heard some noise. no-on came, and 
that made him feel calmer, he went over to the wash stand, rins hi 
face with cold water and, hi head somewhat clearer, went back to hi 
place by the window. the decis to take hi defenc into hi own 
hand now seem more of a burden than he had origin assumed. all 
the while he had left hi defenc up to the lawyer hi trial had had 
littl basic affect on him, he had observ it from afar as someth 
that wa scarc abl to reach him directly, when it suit him he 
look to see how thing stood but he wa also abl to draw hi head 
back again whenev he wanted. now, in contrast, if he wa to conduct 
hi defenc himself, he would have to devot himself entir to the 
court - for the time being, at least - success would mean, later on, hi 
complet and conclus liberation, but if he wa to achiev thi he 
would have to place himself, to start with, in far greater danger than 
he had been in so far. If he ever felt tempt to doubt this, then hi 
experi with the deputi director and the manufactur that day would 
be quit enough to convinc him of it. how could he have sat there 
total convinc of the need to do hi own defence? how would it be 
later? what would hi life be like in the day ahead? would he find 
the way through it all to a happi conclusion? did a care work 
out defenc - and ani other sort would have made no sens - did a 
care work out defenc not also mean he would need to shut himself 
off from everyth els as much as he could? would he surviv that? 
and how wa he to succeed in conduct all thi at the bank? It 
involv much more than just submit some document that he could 
probabl prepar in a few days' leave, although it would have been great 
temer to ask for time off from the bank just at that time, it wa a 
whole trial and there wa no way of see how long it might last. thi 
wa an enorm difficulti that had suddenli been thrown into k.' life! 

and wa he suppos to be do the bank' work at a time like 
this? He look down at hi desk. wa he suppos to let peopl in to 
see him and go into negoti with them at a time like this? while 
hi trial trundl on, while the court offici upstair in the attic 
room sat look at the paper for thi trial, should he be worri 
about the busi of the bank? did thi not seem like a kind of 
torture, acknowledg by the court, connect with the trial and which 
follow him around? and is it like that anyon in the bank, when 
judg hi work, would take ani account of hi peculiar situation? no- 
one and never. there were those who knew about hi trial, although it 
wa not quit clear who knew about it or how much. but he hope rumour 
had not reach as far as the deputi director, otherwis he would 
obvious soon find a way of make use of it to harm k., he would show 
neither comradeship nor humaneness. and what about the director? It 
wa true that he wa well dispos toward k., and as soon as he heard 
about the trial he would probabl tri to do everyth he could to make 
it easier for him, but he would certainli not devot himself to it. K. 
at one time had provid the counter-bal to what the deputi director 
said but the director wa now come more and more under hi influence, 
and the deputi director would also exploit the weaken condit of the 
director to strengthen hi own power. So what could K. hope for? mayb 
consider of thi sort weaken hi power of resistance, but it wa 
still necessari not to deceiv oneself and to see everyth as clearli 
as it could be seen at that moment. 

for no particular reason, just to avoid return to hi desk 
for a while, he open the window. It wa difficult to open and he had 
to turn the handl with both hi hands. then, through the whole height 
and breadth of the window, the mixtur of fog and smoke wa drawn into 
the room, fill it with a slight smell of burning. A few flake of 
snow were blown in with it. "it' a horribl autumn," said the 
manufacturer, who had come into the room unnot after see the 
deputi director and now stood behind K. K. nod and look uneasili 
at the manufacturer' briefcase, from which he would now probabl take 
the paper and inform K. of the result of hi negoti with the 
deputi director. however, the manufactur saw where K. wa looking, 
knock on hi briefcas and without open it said, "you'll be want 
to hear how thing turn out. i'v alreadi got the contract in my 
pocket, almost. he' a charm man, your deputi director - he' got 
hi dangers, though." He laugh as he shook k.' hand and want to 
make him laugh with him. but to k., it onc more seem suspici that 
the manufactur did not want to show him the paper and saw noth 
about hi comment to laugh at. "chief clerk," said the manufacturer, 
"I expect the weather' been affect your mood, ha it? you'r look 
so worri today." "yes," said k., rais hi hand and hold the 
templ of hi head, "headaches, worri in the family." "quit right," 
said the manufacturer, who wa alway in a hurri and could never listen 
to anyon for veri long, "everyon ha hi cross to bear." K. had 
unconsci made a step toward the door as if want to show the 
manufactur out, but the manufactur said, "chief clerk, there' 
someth els i'd like to mention to you. i'm veri sorri if it' 
someth that'll be a burden to you today of all day but i'v been to 
see you twice already, lately, and each time I forgot all about it. If 
I delay it ani longer it might well lose it point altogether. that 
would be a pity, as I think what i'v got to say doe have some value." 
befor K. had had the time to answer, the manufactur came up close to 
him, tap hi knuckl lightli on hi chest and said quietly, "you'v 
got a trial go on, haven't you?" K. step back and immedi 
exclaimed, "that' what the deputi director' been tell you!" "no, 
no," said the manufacturer, "how would the deputi director know about 
it?" "and what about you?" ask k., alreadi more in control of 
himself. "I hear thing about the court here and there," said the 
manufacturer, "and that even appli to what it is that I want to tell 
you about." "there are so mani peopl who have connect with the 
court!" said K. with lower head, and he led the manufactur over to 
hi desk. they sat down where they had been before, and the 
manufactur said, "i'm afraid it' not veri much that i'v got to tell 
you about. only, in matter like this, it' best not to overlook the 
tiniest details. besides, I realli want to help you in some way, 
howev modest my help might be. we'v been good busi partner up 
till now, haven't we? well then." K. want to apologis for hi 
behaviour in the convers earlier that day, but the manufactur 
would toler no interruption, shove hi briefcas up high in hi 
armpit to show that he wa in a hurry, and carri on. "I know about 
your case through a certain titorelli. he' a painter, titorelli' just 
hi artist name, I don't even know what hi real name is. he' been 
come to me in my offic for year from time to time, and bring littl 
pictur with him which I buy more or less just for the sake of chariti 
as he' hardli more than a beggar. and they'r nice pictures, too, 
moorland landscap and that sort of thing. we'd both got use to do 
busi in thi way and it alway went smoothly. only, one time these 
visit becam a bit too frequent, I began to tell him off for it, we 
start talk and I becam interest how it wa that he could earn a 
live just by painting, and then I learn to my amaz that hi 
main sourc of incom wa paint portraits. 'I work for the court,' 
he said, 'what court?' said I. and that' when he told me about the 
court. i'm sure you can imagin how amaz I wa at be told all 
this. ever sinc then I learn someth new about the court everi time 
he come to visit, and so littl by littl I get to understand someth 
of how it works. anyway, titorelli talk a lot and I often have to push 
him away, not onli becaus he' bound to be lie but also, most of all, 
becaus a businessman like me who' alreadi close to break point 
under the weight of hi own busi worri can't pay too much 
attent to other people's. but all that' just by the by. perhap - 
thi is what i'v been think - perhap titorelli might be abl to 
help you in some small way, he know lot of judg and even if he can't 
have much influenc himself he can give you some advic about how to get 
some influenti peopl on your side. and even if thi advic doesn't 
turn out to make all the differ I still think it'll be veri 
import onc you'v got it. you'r nearli a lawyer yourself. that' 
what I alway say, mr. K. the chief clerk is nearli a lawyer. Oh i'm 
sure thi trial of your will turn out all right. So do you want to go 
and see titorelli, then? If I ask him to he'll certainli do everyth 
he possibl can. I realli do think you ought to go. It needn't be 
today, of course, just some time, when you get the chance. and anyway - 
I want to tell you thi too - you don't actual have to go and see 
titorelli, thi advic from me doesn't place you under ani oblig at 
all. no, if you think you can get by without titorelli it'll certainli 
be better to leav him complet out of it. mayb you'v alreadi got a 
clear idea of what you'r do and titorelli could upset your plans. 
no, if that' the case then of cours you shouldn't go there under ani 
circumstances! and it certainli won't be easi to take advic from a lad 
like that. still, it' up to you. here' the letter of recommend 
and here' the address." 

disappointed, K. took the letter and put it in hi pocket. even 
at best, the advantag he might deriv from thi recommend wa 
incompar smaller than the damag that lay in the fact of the 
manufactur know about hi trial, and that the painter wa spread 
the news about. It wa all he could manag to give the manufacturer, who 
wa alreadi on hi way to the door, a few word of thanks. "i'll go 
there," he said as he took hi leav of the manufactur at the door, 
"or, as i'm veri busi at present, i'll write to him, perhap he would 
like to come to me in my offic some time." "I wa sure you'd find the 
best solution," said the manufacturer. "although I had thought you'd 
prefer to avoid invit peopl like thi titorelli to the bank and 
talk about the trial here. and it' not alway a good idea to send 
letter to peopl like titorelli, you don't know what might happen to 
them. but you'r bound to have thought everyth through and you know 
what you can and can't do." K. nod and accompani the manufactur 
on through the ante-room. but despit seem calm on the outsid he 
wa actual veri shocked; he had told the manufactur he would write 
to titorelli onli to show him in some way that he valu hi 
recommend and would consid the opportun to speak with 
titorelli without delay, but if he had thought titorelli could offer ani 
worthwhil assist he would not have delayed. but it wa onli the 
manufacturer' comment that made K. realis what danger that could lead 
to. wa he realli abl to reli on hi own understand so little? If 
it wa possibl that he might invit a question charact into the 
bank with a clear letter, and ask advic from him about hi trial, 
separ from the deputi director by no more than a door, wa it not 
possibl or even veri like that there were also other danger he had 
fail to see or that he wa even run towards? there wa not alway 
someon besid him to warn him. and just now, just when he would have 
to act with all the strength he could muster, now a number of doubt of 
a sort he had never befor known had present themselv and affect 
hi own vigilance! the difficulti he had been feel in carri out 
hi offic work; were they now go to affect the trial too? now, at 
least, he found himself quit unabl to understand how he could have 
intend to write to titorelli and invit him into the bank. 

He shook hi head at the thought of it onc more as the servitor 
came up besid him and drew hi attent to the three gentlemen who 
were wait on a bench in the ante-room. they had alreadi been wait 
to see K. for a long time. now that the servitor wa speak with K. 
they had stood up and each of them want to make use of the opportun 
to see K. befor the others. It had been neglig of the bank to let 
them wast their time here in the wait room, but none of them want 
to draw attent to this. "mr. k., ..." one of them wa saying, but K. 
had told the servitor to fetch hi winter coat and said to the three of 
them, as the servitor help him to put it on, "pleas forgiv me, 
gentlemen, i'm afraid I have no time to see you at present. pleas do 
forgiv me but I have some urgent busi to settl and have to leav 
straight away. you'v alreadi seen yourselv how long i'v been 
delayed. would you be so kind as to come back tomorrow or some time? 
Or perhap we could settl your affair by telephone? Or perhap you 
would like to tell me now, briefly, what it' about and I can then give 
you a full answer in writing. whatever, the best thing will be for you 
to come here again." the gentlemen now saw that their wait had been 
total pointless, and these suggest of k.' left them so astound 
that they look at each other without a word. "that' agre then, is 
it?" ask k., who had turn toward the servitor bring him hi hat. 
through the open door of k.' offic they could see that the snowfal 
outsid had becom much heavier. So K. turn the collar of hi coat up 
and button it up high under hi chin. just then the deputi director 
came out of the adjoin room, smile as he saw K. negoti with the 
gentlemen in hi winter coat, and asked, "are you about to go out?" 
"yes," said k., stand more upright, "I have to go out on some 
business." but the deputi director had alreadi turn toward the 
gentlemen. "and what about these gentlemen?" he asked. "I think 
they'v alreadi been wait quit a long time." "we'v alreadi come to 
an understanding," said K. but now the gentlemen could be held back no 
longer, they surround K. and explain that they would not have been 
wait for hour if it had not been about someth import that had 
to be discuss now, at length and in private. the deputi director 
listen to them for a short while, he also look at K. as he held hi 
hat in hi hand clean the dust off it here and there, and then he 
said, "gentlemen, there is a veri simpl way to solv this. If you 
would prefer it, i'll be veri glad to take over these negoti 
instead of the chief clerk. your busi does, of course, need to be 
discuss without delay. We are businessmen like yourselv and know 
the valu of a businessman' time. would you like to come thi way?" 
and he open the door lead to the ante-room of hi own office. 

the deputi director seem veri good at appropri everyth 
that K. wa now forc to give up! but wa K. not give up more than 
he absolut had to? By run off to some unknown painter, with, as 
he had to admit, veri littl hope of ani vagu benefit, hi renown wa 
suffer damag that could not be repaired. It would probabl be much 
better to take off hi winter coat again and, at the veri least, tri to 
win back the two gentlemen who were certainli still wait in the next 
room. If K. had not then glimps the deputi director in hi office, 
look for someth from hi bookshelv as if they were hi own, he 
would probabl even have made the attempt. As k., somewhat agitated, 
approach the door the deputi director call out, "oh, you'v still 
not left!" He turn hi face toward him - it mani deep fold seem 
to show strength rather than age - and immedi began onc more to 
search. "i'm look for a copi of a contract," he said, "which thi 
gentleman insist you must have. could you help me look for it, do you 
think?" K. made a step forward, but the deputi director said, "thank 
you, i'v alreadi found it," and with a big packag of papers, which 
certainli must have includ mani more document than just the copi of 
the contract, he turn and went back into hi own office. 

"I can't deal with him right now," K. said to himself, "but onc 
my person difficulti have been settled, then he'll certainli be the 
first to get the effect of it, and he certainli won't like it." 
slightli calm by these thoughts, K. gave the servitor, who had alreadi 
long been hold the door to the corridor open for him, the task of 
tell the director, when he wa able, that K. wa go out of the 
bank on a busi matter. As he left the bank he felt almost happi at 
the thought of be abl to devot more of himself to hi own busi 
for a while. 

He went straight to the painter, who live in an outli part of 
town which wa veri near to the court offices, although thi area wa 
even poorer, the hous were darker, the street were full of dirt that 
slowli blew about over the half-melt snow. In the great gateway to 
the build where the painter live onli one of the two door wa open, 
a hole had been broken open in the wall by the other door, and as K. 
approach it a repulsive, yellow, steam liquid shot out caus some 
rat to scurri away into the nearbi canal. down by the staircas there 
wa a small child lie on it belli crying, but it could hardli be 
heard becaus of the nois from a metal-workshop on the other side of 
the entranc hall, drown out ani other sound. the door to the 
workshop wa open, three worker stood in a circl around some piec of 
work that they were beat with hammers. A larg tin plate hung on the 
wall, cast a pale light that push it way in between two of the 
workers, light up their face and their work-aprons. K. did no more 
than glanc at ani of these things, he want to get thing over with 
here as soon as possible, to exchang just a few word to find out how 
thing stood with the painter and go straight back to the bank. even if 
he had just some tini success here it would still have a good effect on 
hi work at the bank for that day. On the third floor he had to slow 
down hi pace, he wa quit out of breath - the steps, just like the 
height of each floor, were much higher than they need to be and he'd 
been told that the painter live right up in the attic. the air wa 
also quit oppressive, there wa no proper stairwel and the narrow 
step were close in by wall on both side with no more than a small, 
high window here and there. just as K. paus for a while some young 
girl ran out of one of the flat and rush higher up the stairs, 
laughing. K. follow them slowly, caught up with one of the girl who 
had stumbl and been left behind by the others, and ask her as they 
went up side by side, "i there a painter, titorelli, who live here?" 
the girl, hardli thirteen year old and somewhat hunchbacked, jab him 
with her elbow and look at him sideways. her youth and her bodili 
defect had done noth to stop her be alreadi quit depraved. she 
did not smile once, but look at K. earnestly, with sharp, acquisit 
eyes. K. pretend not to notic her behaviour and asked, "do you know 
titorelli, the painter?" she nod and ask in reply, "what d'you 
want to see him for?" K. thought it would be to hi advantag quickli 
to find out someth more about titorelli. "I want to have him paint 
my portrait," he said. "paint your portrait?" she asked, open her 
mouth too wide and lightli hit K. with her hand as if he had said 
someth extraordinarili surpris or clumsy, with both hand she 
lift her skirt, which wa alreadi veri short, and, as fast as she 
could, she ran off after the other girl whose indistinct shout lost 
themselv in the heights. At the next turn of the stairs, however, K. 
encount all the girl onc more. the hunchback girl had clearli 
told them about k.' intent and they were wait for him. they 
stood on both side of the stairs, press themselv against the wall 
so that K. could get through between them, and smooth their apron 
down with their hands. all their faces, even in thi guard of honour, 
show a mixtur of childish and depravity. Up at the head of the 
line of girls, who now, laughing, began to close in around k., wa the 
hunchback who had taken on the role of leader. It wa thank to her 
that K. found the right direct without delay - he would have 
continu up the stair straight in front of him, but she show him 
that to reach titorelli he would need to turn off to one side. 
the step that led up to the painter were especi narrow, veri long 
without ani turning, the whole length could be seen in one glanc and, 
at the top, at titorelli' close door, it came to it end. thi door 
wa much better illumin than the rest of the stairway by the light 
from a small skylight set obliqu abov it, it had been put togeth 
from unpaint plank of wood and the name 'titorelli' wa paint on it 
in broad, red brushstrokes. K. wa no more than half way up the steps, 
accompani by hi retinu of girls, when, clearli the result of the 
nois of all those footsteps, the door open slightli and in the crack 
a man who seem to be dress in just hi nightshirt appeared. "oh!" 
he cried, when he saw the approach crowd, and vanished. the 
hunchback girl clap her hand in glee and the other girl crowd 
in behind K. to push him faster forward. 

they still had not arriv at the top, however, when the painter 
up abov them suddenli pull the door wide open and, with a deep bow, 
invit K. to enter. the girls, on the other hand, he tri to keep 
away, he did not want to let ani of them in howev much they beg him 
and howev much they tri to get in - if they could not get in with 
hi permiss they would tri to forc their way in against hi will. 
the onli one to succeed wa the hunchback when she slip through under 
hi outstretch arm, but the painter chase after her, grab her by 
the skirt, span her onc round and set her down again by the door with 
the other girl who, unlik the first, had not dare to cross the 
doorstep while the painter had left hi post. K. did not know what he 
wa to make of all this, as they all seem to be have fun. one 
behind the other, the girl by the door stretch their neck up high 
and call out variou word to the painter which were meant in jest but 
which K. did not understand, and even the painter laugh as the 
hunchback whirl round in hi hand. then he shut the door, bow onc 
more to k., offer him hi hand and introduc himself, saying, 
"titorelli, painter". K. point to the door, behind which the girl 
were whispering, and said, "you seem to be veri popular in thi 
building." "ach, those brats!" said the painter, tri in vain to 
fasten hi nightshirt at the neck. He wa also bare-foot and, apart 
from that, wa wear noth more than a loos pair of yellowish linen 
trouser held up with a belt whose free end whip to and fro. "those 
kid are a real burden for me," he continued. the top button of hi 
nightshirt came off and he gave up tri to fasten it, fetch a chair 
for K. and made him sit down on it. "I paint one of them onc - she' 
not here today - and ever sinc then they'v been follow me about. 
If i'm here they onli come in when I allow it, but as soon as i'v gone 
out there' alway at least one of them in here. they had a key made to 
my door and lend it round to each other. it' hard to imagin what a 
pain that is. suppos I come back home with a ladi i'm go to paint, 
I open the door with my own key and find the hunchback there or 
something, by the tabl paint her lip red with my paintbrush, and 
meanwhil her littl sister will be keep guard for her, move about 
and caus chao in everi corner of the room. Or else, like happen 
yesterday, I might come back home late in the even - pleas forgiv 
my appear and the room be in a mess, it is to do with them - so, 
I might come home late in the even and want to go to bed, then I feel 
someth pinch my leg, look under the bed and pull anoth of them 
out from under it. I don't know whi it is they bother me like this, I 
expect you'v just seen that I do noth to encourag them to come near 
me. and they make it hard for me to do my work too, of course. If I 
didn't get thi studio for noth i'd have move out a long time ago." 
just then, a littl voice, tender and anxious, call out from under the 
door, "titorelli, can we come in now?" "no," answer the painter. 
"not even just me, by myself?" the voic ask again. "not even just 
you," said the painter, as he went to the door and lock it. 

meanwhile, K. had been look round the room, if it had not been 
point out it would never have occur to him that thi wretch 
littl room could be call a studio. It wa hardli long enough or 
broad enough to make two steps. everything, floor, wall and ceiling, 
wa made of wood, between the plank narrow gap could be seen. across 
from where K. was, the bed stood against the wall under a cover of 
mani differ colours. In the middl of the room a pictur stood on an 
easel, cover over with a shirt whose arm dangl down to the ground. 
behind K. wa the window through which the fog made it imposs to see 
further than the snow cover roof of the neighbour building. 

the turn of the key in the lock remind K. that he had not 
want to stay too long. So he drew the manufacturer' letter out from 
hi pocket, held it out to the painter and said, "I learn about you 
from thi gentleman, an acquaint of yours, and it' on hi advic 
that i'v come here". the painter glanc through the letter and threw 
it down onto the bed. If the manufactur had not said veri clearli 
that titorelli wa an acquaint of his, a poor man who wa depend 
on hi charity, then it would realli have been quit possibl to believ 
that titorelli did not know him or at least that he could not rememb 
him. thi impress wa augment by the painter' asking, "were you 
want to buy some pictur or did you want to have yourself painted?" 
K. look at the painter in astonishment. what did the letter actual 
say? K. had taken it as a matter of cours that the manufactur had 
explain to the painter in hi letter that K. want noth more with 
him than to find out more about hi trial. He had been far too rash in 
come here! but now he had to give the painter some sort of answer 
and, glanc at the easel, said, "are you work on a pictur 
currently?" "yes," said the painter, and he took the shirt hang over 
the easel and threw it onto the bed after the letter. "it' a portrait. 
quit a good piec of work, although it' not quit finish yet." thi 
wa a conveni coincid for k., it gave him a good opportun to 
talk about the court as the pictur showed, veri clearly, a judge. 
what' more, it wa remark similar to the pictur in the lawyer' 
office, although thi one show a quit differ judge, a heavi man 
with a full beard which wa black and bushi and extend to the side 
far up the man' cheeks. the lawyer' pictur wa also an oil painting, 
wherea thi one had been made with pastel colour and wa pale and 
unclear. but everyth els about the pictur wa similar, as thi 
judge, too, wa hold tightli to the arm of hi throne and seem 
omin about to rise from it. At first K. wa about to say, "he 
certainli is a judge," but he held himself back for the time be and 
went closer to the pictur as if he want to studi it in detail. there 
wa a larg figur shown in middl of the throne' back rest which K. 
could not understand and ask the painter about it. that'll need some 
more work done on it, the painter told him, and take a pastel crayon 
from a small tabl he ad a few stroke to the edg of the figur but 
without make it ani clearer as far as K. could make out. "that' the 
figur of justice," said the painter, finally. "now I see," said k., 
"here' the blindfold and here are the scales. but aren't those wing 
on her heels, and isn't she moving?" "yes," said the painter, "I had to 
paint it like that accord to the contract. it' actual the figur 
of justic and the goddess of victori all in one." "that is not a good 
combination," said K. with a smile. "justic need to remain still, 
otherwis the scale will move about and it won't be possibl to make a 
just verdict." "i'm just do what the client wanted," said the 
painter. "yes, certainly," said k., who had not meant to criticis 
anyon by that comment. "you'v paint the figur as it actual 
appear on the throne." "no," said the painter, "i'v never seen that 
figur or that throne, it' all just invention, but they told me what it 
wa I had to paint." "how' that?" ask K. pretend not fulli to 
understand what the painter said. "that is a judg sit on the 
judge' chair, isn't it?" "yes," said the painter, "but that judg 
isn't veri high up and he' never sat on ani throne like that." "and he 
ha himself paint in such a grand pose? he' sit there just like 
the presid of the court." "yeah, gentlemen like thi are veri vain," 
said the painter. "but they have permiss from higher up to get 
themselv paint like this. it' laid down quit strictli just what 
sort of portrait each of them can get for himself. onli it' a piti 
that you can't make out the detail of hi costum and pose in thi 
picture, pastel colour aren't realli suitabl for show peopl like 
this." "yes," said k., "it doe seem odd that it' in pastel colours." 
"that' what the judg wanted," said the painter, "it' meant to be for 
a woman." the sight of the pictur seem to make him feel like 
working, he roll up hi shirtsleeves, pick up a few of the crayons, 
and K. watch as a reddish shadow built up around the head of the judg 
under their quiver tip and radiat out the to edg of the picture. 
thi shadow play slowli surround the head like a decor or lofti 
distinction. but around the figur of justice, apart from some 
color that wa bare noticeable, it remain light, and in thi 
bright the figur seem to shine forward so that it now look like 
neither the god of justic nor the god of victory, it seem now, 
rather, to be a perfect depict of the god of the hunt. K. found the 
painter' work more engross than he had wanted; but final he 
reproach himself for stay so long without have done anyth 
relev to hi own affair. "what' the name of thi judge?" he ask 
suddenly. "i'm not allow to tell you that," the painter answered. He 
wa bent deepli over the pictur and clearli neglect hi guest who, 
at first, he had receiv with such care. K. took thi to be just a 
foibl of the painter's, and it irrit him as it made him lose time. 
"I take it you must be a truste of the court," he said. the painter 
immedi put hi crayon down, stood upright, rub hi hand 
togeth and look at K. with a smile. "alway straight out with the 
truth," he said. "you want to learn someth about the court, like it 
say in your letter of recommendation, but then you start talk about 
my pictur to get me on your side. still, I won't hold it against you, 
you weren't to know that that wa entir the wrong thing to tri with 
me. oh, please!" he said sharply, repel k.' attempt to make some 
objection. He then continued, "and besides, you'r quit right in your 
comment that i'm a truste of the court." He made a pause, as if 
want to give K. the time to come to term with thi fact. the girl 
could onc more be heard from behind the door. they were probabl 
press around the keyhole, perhap they could even see into the room 
through the gap in the planks. K. forew the opportun to excus 
himself in some way as he did not wish to distract the painter from what 
he wa saying, or els perhap he didn't want him to get too far abov 
himself and in thi way make himself to some extent unattainable, so he 
asked, "i that a publicli acknowledg position?" "no," wa the 
painter' curt reply, as if the question prevent him say ani more. 
but K. want him to continu speak and said, "well, posit like 
that, that aren't offici acknowledged, can often have more influenc 
than those that are." "and that' how it is with me," said the painter, 
and nod with a frown. "I wa talk about your case with the 
manufactur yesterday, and he ask me if I wouldn't like to help you, 
and I answered: 'he can come and see me if he likes', and now i'm 
pleas to see you here so soon. thi busi seem to be quit 
import to you, and, of course, i'm not surpris at that. would you 
not like to take your coat off now?" K. had intend to stay for onli a 
veri short time, but the painter' invit wa nonetheless veri 
welcome. the air in the room had slowli becom quit oppress for 
him, he had sever time look in amaz at a small, iron stove in 
the corner that certainli could not have been lit, the heat of the room 
wa inexplicable. As he took off hi winter overcoat and also 
unbutton hi frock coat the painter said to him in apology, "I must 
have warmth. and it is veri cosi here, isn't it. thi room' veri good 
in that respect." K. made no reply, but it wa actual not the heat 
that made him uncomfort but, much more, the stuffiness, the air that 
almost made it more difficult to breathe, the room had probabl not been 
ventil for a long time. the unpleas of thi wa made all the 
stronger for K. when the painter invit him to sit on the bed while he 
himself sat down on the onli chair in the room in front of the easel. 
the painter even seem to misunderstand whi K. remain at the edg of 
the bed and urg K. to make himself comfortable, and as he hesit he 
went over to the bed himself and press K. deep down into the 
bedcloth and pillows. then he went back to hi seat and at last he 
ask hi first object question, which made K. forget everyth 
else. "you'r innocent, are you?" he asked. "yes," said K. He felt a 
simpl joy at answer thi question, especi as the answer wa 
given to a privat individu and therefor would have no consequences. 
Up till then no-on had ask him thi question so openly. To make the 
most of hi pleasur he added, "I am total innocent." "so," said the 
painter, and he lower hi head and seem to be thinking. suddenli he 
rais hi head again and said, "well if you'r innoc it' all veri 
simple." K. began to scowl, thi suppos truste of the court wa 
talk like an ignor child. "mi be innoc doe not make thing 
simple," said K. despit everything, he couldn't help smile and 
slowli shook hi head. "there are mani fine detail in which the court 
get lost, but in the end it reach into some place where origin 
there wa noth and pull enorm guilt out of it." "yeah, yeah, 
sure," said the painter, as if K. had been disturb hi train of 
thought for no reason. "but you are innocent, aren't you?" "well of 
cours I am," said K. "that' the main thing," said the painter. there 
wa no counter-argu that could influenc him, but although he had 
made up hi mind it wa not clear whether he wa talk thi way 
becaus of convict or indifference. k., then, want to find out and 
said therefore, "i'm sure you'r more familiar with the court than I am, 
I know hardli more about it than what i'v heard, and that' been from 
mani veri differ people. but they were all agre on one thing, and 
that wa that when ill thought-out accus are made they are not 
ignored, and that onc the court ha made an accus it is convinc 
of the guilt of the defend and it' veri hard to make it think 
otherwise." "veri hard?" the painter asked, throw one hand up in the 
air. "it' imposs to make it think otherwise. If I paint all the 
judg next to each other here on canvas, and you were tri to defend 
yourself in front of it, you'd have more success with them than you'd 
ever have with the real court." "yes," said K. to himself, forget 
that he had onli gone there to investig the painter. 

one of the girl behind the door start up again, and asked, 
"titorelli, is he go to go soon?" "quiet!" shout the painter at 
the door, "can't you see i'm talk with the gentleman?" but thi wa 
not enough to satisfi the girl and she asked, "you go to paint hi 
picture?" and when the painter didn't answer she added, "pleas don't 
paint him, he' an 'orribl bloke." there follow an incomprehensible, 
interwoven babbl of shout and repli and call of agreement. the 
painter leapt over to the door, open it veri slightli - the girls' 
clasp hand could be seen stretch through the crack as if they 
want someth - and said, "if you'r not quiet i'll throw you all 
down the stairs. sit down here on the step and be quiet." they 
probabl did not obey him immediately, so that he had to command, "down 
on the steps!" onli then it becam quiet. 

"i'm sorri about that," said the painter as he return to K. K. 
had hardli turn toward the door, he had left it complet up to the 
painter whether and how he would place him under hi protect if he 
want to. even now, he made hardli ani movement as the painter bent 
over him and, whisper into hi ear in order not to be heard outside, 
said, "these girl belong to the court as well." "how' that?" ask 
k., as he leant hi head to one side and look at the painter. but the 
painter sat back down on hi chair and, half in jest, half in 
explanation, "well, everyth belong to the court." "that is 
someth I had never notic until now," said K. curtly, thi gener 
comment of the painter' made hi comment about the girl far less 
disturbing. nonetheless, K. look for a while at the door, behind 
which the girl were now sit quietli on the steps. except, that one 
of them had push a drink straw through a crack between the plank 
and wa move it slowli up and down. "you still don't seem to have 
much gener idea of what the court' about", said the painter, who had 
stretch hi leg wide apart and wa tap loudli on the floor with 
the tip of hi foot. "but as you'r innoc you won't need it anyway. 
i'll get you out of thi by myself." "how do you intend to do that?" 
ask K. "you did say yourself not long ago that it' quit imposs 
to go to the court with reason and proofs." "onli imposs for 
reason and proof you take to the court yourself" said the painter, 
rais hi forefing as if K. had fail to notic a fine distinction. 
"it goe differ if you tri to do someth behind the public court, 
that' to say in the consult rooms, in the corridor or here, for 
instance, in my studio." K. now began to find it far easier to believ 
what the painter wa saying, or rather it wa larg in agreement with 
what he had also been told by others. In fact it wa even quit 
promising. If it realli wa so easi to influenc the judg through 
person contact as the lawyer had said then the painter' contact 
with these vain judg wa especi important, and at the veri least 
should not be undervalued. and the painter would fit in veri well in 
the circl of assist that K. wa slowli gather around himself. 
He had been note at the bank for hi talent in organising, here, where 
he wa place entir on hi own resources, would be a good opportun 
to test that talent to it limits. the painter observ the effect hi 
explan had had on K. and then, with a certain unease, said, "doe 
it not occur to you that the way i'm speak is almost like a lawyer? 
it' the incess contact with the gentlemen of the court ha that 
influenc on me. I gain a lot by it, of course, but I lose a lot, 
artist speaking." "how did you first come into contact with the 
judges, then?" ask k., he want first to gain the painter' trust 
befor he took him into hi service. "that wa veri easy," said the 
painter, "I inherit these contacts. My father wa court painter 
befor me. it' a posit that' alway inherited. they can't use new 
peopl for it, the rule govern how the variou grade of offici 
are paint are so mani and varied, and, abov all, so secret that no- 
one outsid of certain famili even know them. In the drawer there, 
for instance, i'v got my father' notes, which I don't show to anyone. 
but you'r onli abl to paint judg if you know what they say. 
although, even if I lost them no-on could ever disput my posit 
becaus of all the rule I just carri round in my head. all the judg 
want to be paint like the old, great judg were, and i'm the onli one 
who can do that." "you are to be envied," said k., think of hi 
posit at the bank. "your posit is quit unassailable, then?" 
"yes, quit unassailable," said the painter, and he rais hi shoulder 
in pride. "that' how I can even afford to help some poor man face 
trial now and then." "and how do you do that?" ask k., as if the 
painter had not just describ him as a poor man. the painter did not 
let himself be distracted, but said, "in your case, for instance, as 
you'r total innocent, thi is what i'll do." the repeat mention of 
k.' innoc wa becom irksom to him. It sometim seem to him 
as if the painter wa use these comment to make a favour outcom 
to the trial a precondit for hi help, which of cours would make the 
help itself unnecessary. but despit these doubt K. forc himself not 
to interrupt the painter. He did not want to do without the painter' 
help, that wa what he had decided, and thi help did not seem in ani 
way less question than that of the lawyer. K. valu the painter' 
help far more highli becaus it wa offer in a way that wa more 
harmless and open. 

the painter had pull hi seat closer to the bed and continu in 
a subdu voice: "I forgot to ask you; what sort of acquitt is it you 
want? there are three possibilities; absolut acquittal, appar 
acquitt and deferment. absolut acquitt is the best, of course, 
onli there' noth I could do to get that sort of outcome. I don't 
think there' anyon at all who could do anyth to get an absolut 
acquittal. probabl the onli thing that could do that is if the accus 
is innocent. As you are innoc it could actual be possibl and you 
could depend on your innoc alone. In that case you won't need me or 
ani other kind of help." 

At first, K. wa astonish at thi orderli explanation, but then, 
just as quietli as the painter, he said, "I think you'r contradict 
yourself." "how' that?" ask the painter patiently, lean back with 
a smile. thi smile made K. feel as if he were examin not the word 
of the painter but seek out inconsist in the procedur of the 
court itself. nonetheless, he continu unabash and said, "you 
remark earlier that the court cannot be approach with reason 
proofs, you later restrict thi to the open court, and now you go so 
far as to say that an innoc man need no assist in court. that 
entail a contradiction. moreover, you said earlier that the judg can 
be influenc person but now you insist that an absolut acquittal, 
as you call it, can never be attain through person influence. that 
entail a second contradiction." "it' quit easi to clear up these 
contradictions," said the painter. "we'r talk about two differ 
thing here, there' what it say in the law and there' what I know 
from my own experience, you shouldn't get the two confused. i'v never 
seen it in writing, but the law does, of course, say on the one hand 
that the innoc will be set free, but on the other hand it doesn't say 
that the judg can be influenced. but in my experi it' the other 
way round. I don't know of ani absolut acquitt but I do know of 
mani time when a judg ha been influenced. it' possible, of course, 
that there wa no innoc in ani of the case I know about. but is 
that likely? not a singl innoc defend in so mani cases? when I 
wa a boy I use to listen close to my father when he told us about 
court case at home, and the judg that came to hi studio talk about 
the court, in our circl nobodi talk about anyth else; I hardli 
ever got the chanc to go to court myself but alway made use of it when 
I could, i'v listen to countless trial at import stage in their 
development, i'v follow them close as far as they could be 
followed, and I have to say that i'v never seen a singl acquittal." 
"so. not a singl acquittal," said k., as if talk to himself and hi 
hopes. "that confirm the impress I alreadi have of the court. So 
there' no point in it from thi side either. they could replac the 
whole court with a singl hangman." "you shouldn't generalise," said 
the painter, dissatisfied, "i'v onli been talk about my own 
experience." "well that' enough," said k., "or have you heard of ani 
acquitt that happen earlier?" "they say there have been some 
acquitt earlier," the painter answered, "but it' veri hard to be 
sure about it. the court don't make their final conclus public, 
not even the judg are allow to know about them, so that all we know 
about these earlier case are just legends. but most of them did 
involv absolut acquittals, you can believ that, but they can't be 
proved. On the other hand, you shouldn't forget all about them either, 
i'm sure there is some truth to them, and they are veri beautiful, i'v 
paint a few pictur myself depict these legends." "mi assess 
will not be alter by mere legends," said K. "I don't suppos it' 
possibl to cite these legend in court, is it?" the painter laughed. 
"no, you can't cite them in court," he said. "then there' no point in 
talk about them," said k., he wanted, for the time being, to accept 
anyth the painter told him, even if he thought it unlik or 
contradict what he had been told by others. He did not now have the 
time to examin the truth of everyth the painter said or even to 
disprov it, he would have achiev as much as he could if the painter 
would help him in ani way even if hi help would not be decisive. As a 
result, he said, "so let' pay no more attent to absolut acquittal, 
but you mention two other possibilities." "appar acquitt and 
deferment. they'r the onli possibilities," said the painter. "but 
befor we talk about them, would you not like to take your coat off? 
you must be hot." "yes," said k., who until then had paid attent to 
noth but the painter' explanations, but now that he had had the heat 
point out to him hi brow began to sweat heavily. "it' almost 
unbearable." the painter nod as if he understood k.' discomfort 
veri well. "could we not open the window?" ask K. "no," said the 
painter. "it' onli a fix pane of glass, it can't be opened." K. now 
realis that all thi time he had been hope the painter would 
suddenli go over to the window and pull it open. He had prepar 
himself even for the fog that he would breath in through hi open 
mouth. the thought that here he wa entir cut off from the air made 
him feel dizzy. He tap lightli on the bedspread besid him and, with 
a weak voice, said, "that is veri inconveni and unhealthy." "oh no," 
said the painter in defenc of hi window, "a it can't be open thi 
room retain the heat better than if the window were doubl glazed, even 
though it' onli a singl pane. there' not much need to air the room 
as there' so much ventil through the gap in the wood, but when I 
do want to I can open one of my doors, or even both of them." K. wa 
slightli consol by thi explan and look around to see where the 
second door was. the painter saw him do so and said, "it' behind you, 
I had to hide it behind the bed." onli then wa K. abl to see the 
littl door in the wall. "it' realli much too small for a studio 
here," said the painter, as if he want to anticip an object K. 
would make. "I had to arrang thing as well as I could. that' 
obvious a veri bad place for the bed, in front of the door. for 
instanc when the judg i'm paint at present come he alway come 
through the door by the bed, and i'v even given him a key to thi door 
so that he can wait for me here in the studio when i'm not home. 
although nowaday he usual come earli in the morn when i'm still 
asleep. and of course, it alway wake me up when I hear the door 
open besid the bed, howev fast asleep I am. If you could hear the 
way I curs him as he climb over my bed in the morn you'd lose all 
respect for judges. I suppos I could take the key away from him but 
that'd onli make thing worse. It onli take a tini effort to break ani 
of the door here off their hinges." all the time the painter wa 
speaking, K. wa consid whether he should take off hi coat, but he 
final realis that, if he didn't do so, he would be quit unabl to 
stay here ani longer, so he took off hi frock coat and lay it on hi 
knee so that he could put it back on again as soon as the convers 
wa over. He had hardli done thi when one of the girl call out, 
"now he' taken hi coat off!" and they could all be heard press 
around the gap in the plank to see the spectacl for themselves. "the 
girl think i'm go to paint your portrait," said the painter, "and 
that' whi you'r take your coat off." "I see," said k., onli 
slightli amus by this, as he felt littl better than he had befor 
even though he now sat in hi shirtsleeves. with some irrit he 
asked, "what did you say the two other possibl were?" He had 
alreadi forgotten the term used. "appar acquitt and deferment," 
said the painter. "it' up to you which one you choose. you can get 
either of them if I help you, but it'll take some effort of course, the 
differ between them is that appar acquitt need concentr 
effort for a while and that defer take much less effort but it ha 
to be sustained. now then, appar acquittal. If that' what you want 
i'll write down an assert of your innoc on a piec of paper. the 
text for an assert of thi sort wa pass down to me from my father 
and it' quit unassailable. I take thi assert round to the judg 
I know. So i'll start off with the one i'm current painting, and put 
the assert to him when he come for hi sit thi evening. i'll 
lay the assert in front of him, explain that you'r innoc and give 
him my person guarante of it. and that' not just a superfici 
guarantee, it' a real one and it' binding." the painter' eye seem 
to show some reproach of K. for want to impos that sort of 
respons on him. "that would be veri kind of you", said K. "and 
would the judg then believ you and nonetheless not pass an absolut 
acquittal?" "it' like I just said," answer the painter. "and 
anyway, it' not entir sure that all the judg would believ me, 
mani of them, for instance, might want me to bring you to see them 
personally. So then you'd have to come along too. but at least then, 
if that happens, the matter is half way won, especi as i'd teach you 
in advanc exactli how you'd need to act with the judg concerned, of 
course. what also happens, though, is that there are some judg who'll 
turn me down in advance, and that' worse. i'll certainli make sever 
attempts, but still, we'll have to forget about them, but at least we 
can afford to do that as no one judg can pass the decis verdict. 
then when i'v got enough judges' signatur on thi document I take it 
to the judg who' concern with your case. I might even have hi 
signatur already, in which case thing develop a bit quicker than they 
would do otherwise. but there aren't usual mani hold up from then 
on, and that' the time that the defend can feel most confident. 
it' odd, but true, that peopl feel more confid in thi time than 
they do after they'v been acquitted. there' no particular exert 
need now. when he ha the document assert the defendant' 
innocence, guarante by a number of other judges, the judg can acquit 
you without ani worries, and although there are still sever 
formal to be gone through there' no doubt that that' what he'll 
do as a favour to me and sever other acquaintances. you, however, 
walk out the court and you'r free." "so, then i'll be free," said k., 
hesitantly. "that' right," said the painter, "but onli appar free 
or, to put it a better way, temporarili free, as the most junior judges, 
the one I know, they don't have the right to give the final acquittal. 
onli the highest judg can do that, in the court that' quit out of reach 
for you, for me and for all of us. We don't know how thing look there 
and, incidentally, we don't want to know. the right to acquit peopl 
is a major privileg and our judg don't have it, but they do have the 
right to free peopl from the indictment. that' to say, if they'r 
freed in thi way then for the time be the charg is withdrawn but 
it' still hang over their head and it onli take an order from 
higher up to bring it back into force. and as i'm in such good contact 
with the court I can also tell you how the differ between absolut 
and appar acquitt is described, just in a superfici way, in the 
direct to the court offices. If there' an absolut acquitt all 
proceed should stop, everyth disappear from the process, not 
just the indict but the trial and even the acquitt disappears, 
everyth just disappears. with an appar acquitt it' different. 
when that happens, noth ha chang except that the case for your 
innocence, for your acquitt and the ground for the acquitt have 
been made stronger. apart from that, proceed go on as before, the 
court offic continu their busi and the case get pass to higher 
courts, get pass back down to the lower court and so on, backward 
and forwards, sometim faster, sometim slower, to and fro. it' 
imposs to know exactli what' happen while thi is go on. 
seen from outsid it can sometim seem that everyth ha been long 
sinc forgotten, the document have been lost and the acquitt is 
complete. no-on familiar with the court would believ it. No 
document ever get lost, the court forget nothing. one day - no-on 
expect it - some judg or other pick up the document and look more 
close at them, he notic that thi particular case is still active, 
and order the defendant' immedi arrest. i'v been talk here as 
if there' a long delay between appar acquitt and re-arrest, that 
is quit possibl and I do know of case like that, but it' just as 
like that the defend goe home after he' been acquit and find 
somebodi there wait to re-arrest him. then, of course, hi life as a 
free man is at an end." "and doe the trial start over again?" ask 
k., find it hard to believe. "the trial will alway start over 
again," said the painter, "but there is, onc again as before, the 
possibl of get an appar acquittal. onc again, the accus 
ha to muster all hi strength and mustn't give up." the painter said 
that last phrase possibl as a result of the impress that k., whose 
shoulder had drop somewhat, gave on him. "but to get a second 
acquittal," ask k., as if in anticip of further revel by 
the painter, "i that not harder to get than the first time?" "a far 
as that' concerned," answer the painter, "there' noth you can say 
for certain. you mean, do you, that the second arrest would have an 
advers influenc on the judg and the verdict he pass on the 
defendant? that' not how it happens. when the acquitt is pass the 
judg are alreadi awar that re-arrest is likely. So when it happen 
it ha hardli ani effect. but there are countless other reason whi the 
judges' mood and their legal acumen in the case can be altered, and 
effort to obtain the second acquitt must therefor be suit to the 
new conditions, and gener just as vigor as the first." "but thi 
second acquitt will onc again not be final," said k., shake hi 
head. "of cours not," said the painter, "the second acquitt is 
follow by the third arrest, the third acquitt by the fourth arrest 
and so on. that' what is meant by the term appar acquittal." K. 
wa silent. "you clearli don't think an appar acquitt offer much 
advantage," said the painter, "perhap defer would suit you better. 
would you like me to explain what defer is about?" K. nodded. the 
painter had leant back and spread himself out in hi chair, hi 
nightshirt wa wide open, he had push hi hand insid and wa stroke 
hi breast and hi sides. "deferment," said the painter, look 
vagu in front of himself for a while as if tri to find a perfectli 
appropri explanation, "defer consist of keep proceed 
perman in their earliest stages. To do that, the accus and those 
help him need to keep in continu person contact with the court, 
especi those help him. I repeat, thi doesn't requir so much 
effort as get an appar acquittal, but it probabl requir a lot 
more attention. you must never let the trial out of your sight, you 
have to go and see the appropri judg at regular interv as well as 
when someth in particular come up and, whatev you do, you have to 
tri and remain friendli with him; if you don't know the judg person 
you have to influenc him through the judg you do know, and you have 
to do it without give up on the direct discussions. As long as you 
don't fail to do ani of these thing you can be reason sure the 
trial won't get past it first stages. the trial doesn't stop, but the 
defend is almost as certain of avoid convict as if he'd been 
acquitted. compar with an appar acquittal, defer ha the 
advantag that the defendant' futur is less uncertain, he' safe from 
the shock of be suddenli re-arrest and doesn't need to fear the 
exert and stress involv in get an appar acquitt just when 
everyth els in hi life would make it most difficult. defer 
doe have certain disadvantag of it own though, too, and they 
shouldn't be under-estimated. I don't mean by thi that the defend 
is never free, he' never free in the proper sens of the word with an 
appar acquitt either. there' anoth disadvantage. proceed 
can't be prevent from move forward unless there are some at least 
ostens reason given. So someth need to seem to be happen 
when look at from the outside. thi mean that from time to time 
variou injunct have to be obeyed, the accus ha to be questioned, 
investig have to take place and so on. the trial' been 
artifici constrain insid a tini circle, and it ha to be 
continu spun round within it. and that, of course, bring with it 
certain unpleas for the accused, although you shouldn't imagin 
they'r all that bad. all of thi is just for show, the interrogations, 
for instance, they'r onli veri short, if you ever don't have the time 
or don't feel like go to them you can offer an excuse, with some 
judg you can even arrang the injunct togeth a long time in 
advance, in essenc all it mean is that, as the accused, you have to 
report to the judg from time to time." even while the painter wa 
speak those last word K. had laid hi coat over hi arm and had 
stood up. immediately, from outsid the door, there wa a cri of 'he' 
stand up now!'. "are you leav already?" ask the painter, who 
had also stood up. "it must be the air that' drive you out. i'm 
veri sorri about that. there' still a lot I need to tell you. I had 
to put everyth veri briefli but I hope at least it wa all clear." 
"oh yes," said k., whose head wa ach from the effort of listening. 
despit thi affirm the painter sum it all up onc more, as if 
he want to give K. someth to consol him on hi way home. "both 
have in common that they prevent the defend be convicted," he 
said. "but they also prevent hi be properli acquitted," said K. 
quietly, as if asham to acknowledg it. "you'v got it, in essence," 
said the painter quickly. K. place hi hand on hi winter overcoat but 
could not bring himself to put it on. most of all he would have like 
to pack everyth togeth and run out to the fresh air. not even the 
girl could induc him to put hi coat on, even though they were alreadi 
loudli tell each other that he wa do so. the painter still had 
to interpret k.' mood in some way, so he said, "I expect you'v 
deliber avoid decid between my suggest yet. that' good. 
I would even have advis against make a decis straight away. 
there' no more than a hair' breadth of differ between the 
advantag and disadvantages. everyth ha to be care weigh 
up. but the most import thing is you shouldn't lose too much time." 
"i'll come back here again soon," said k., who had suddenli decid to 
put hi frock coat on, threw hi overcoat over hi shoulder and hurri 
over to the door behind which the girl now began to scream. K. thought 
he could even see the scream girl through the door. "well, you'll 
have to keep your word," said the painter, who had not follow him, 
"otherwis i'll come to the bank to ask about it myself." "will you open 
thi door for me," said K. pull at the handl which, as he notic 
from the resistance, wa be held tightli by the girl on the other 
side. "do you want to be bother by the girls?" ask the painter. 
"it' better if you use the other way out," he said, point to the 
door behind the bed. K. agre to thi and jump back to the bed. but 
instead of open that door the painter crawl under the bed and from 
underneath it ask k., "just a moment more, would you not like to see a 
pictur I could sell to you?" K. did not want to be impolite, the 
painter realli had taken hi side and promis to help him more in the 
future, and becaus of k.' forget there had been no mention of 
ani payment for the painter' help, so K. could not turn him down now 
and allow him to show him the picture, even though he wa quiver 
with impati to get out of the studio. from under the bed, the 
painter withdrew a pile of unfram paintings. they were so cover in 
dust that when the painter tri to blow it off the one on top the dust 
swirl around in front of k.' eyes, rob him of breath for some 
time. "moorland landscape," said the painter pass the pictur to K. 
It show two sickli trees, well separ from each other in dark 
grass. In the background there wa a multi-colour sunset. "that' 
nice," said K. "i'll buy it." K. express himself in thi curt way 
without ani thought, so he wa glad when the painter did not take thi 
amiss and pick up a second paint from the floor. "thi is a 
counterpart to the first picture," said the painter. perhap it had 
been intend as a counterpart, but there wa not the slightest 
differ to be seen between it and the first picture, there were the 
trees, there the grass and there the sunset. but thi wa of littl 
import to K. "they are beauti landscapes," he said, "i'll buy 
them both and hang them in my office." "you seem to like thi subject," 
said the painter, pick up a third painting, "good job i'v still got 
another, similar pictur here." the pictur though, wa not similar, 
rather it wa exactli the same moorland landscape. the painter wa 
fulli exploit thi opportun to sell off hi old pictures. "i'll 
take thi one too," said K. "how much do the three paint cost?" 
"we can talk about that next time," said the painter. "you'r in a 
hurri now, and we'll still be in contact. and besides, i'm glad you 
like the paintings, i'll give you all the paint i'v got down here. 
they'r all moorland landscapes, i'v paint a lot of moorland 
landscapes. A lot of peopl don't like that sort of pictur becaus 
they'r too gloomy, but there are others, and you'r one of them, who 
love gloomi themes." but K. wa not in the mood to hear about the 
profession experi of thi painter cum beggar. "wrap them all 
up!" he call out, interrupt the painter as he wa speaking, "mi 
servant will come to fetch them in the morning." "there' no need for 
that," said the painter. "I expect I can find a porter for you who can 
go with you now." and, at last, he leant over the bed and unlock the 
door. "just step on the bed, don't worri about that," said the painter, 
"that' what everyon doe who come in here." even without thi 
invitation, K. had shown no compunct in alreadi place hi foot in 
the middl of the bed covers, then he look out through the open door 
and drew hi foot back again. "what is that?" he ask the painter. 
"what are you so surpris at?" he asked, surpris in hi turn. "those 
are court offices. didn't you know there are court offic here? there 
are court offic in almost everi attic, whi should thi build be ani 
different? even my studio is actual one of the court offic but the 
court put it at my disposal." It wa not so much find court offic 
even here that shock k., he wa mainli shock at himself, at hi own 
naïveti in court matters. It seem to him that one of the most basic 
rule govern how a defend should behav wa alway to be prepared, 
never allow surprises, never to look, unsuspecting, to the right when 
the judg stood besid him to hi left - and thi wa the veri basic 
rule that he wa continu violating. A long corridor extend in 
front of him, air blew in from it which, compar with the air in the 
studio, wa refreshing. there were bench set along each side of the 
corridor just as in the wait area for the offic he went to himself. 
there seem to be precis rule govern how offic should be 
equipped. there did not seem to be mani peopl visit the offic 
that day. there wa a man there, half sitting, half laying, hi face 
wa buri in hi arm on the bench and he seem to be sleeping; anoth 
man wa stand in the half-dark at the end of the corridor. K. now 
climb over the bed, the painter follow him with the pictures. they 
soon came across a servant of the court - K. wa now abl to recognis 
all the servant of the court from the gold button they wore on their 
civilian cloth below the normal button - and the painter instruct 
him to go with K. carri the pictures. K. stagger more than he 
walked, hi handkerchief press over hi mouth. they had nearli 
reach the exit when the girl storm in on them, so K. had not been 
abl to avoid them. they had clearli seen that the second door of the 
studio had been open and had gone around to impos themselv on him 
from thi side. "I can't come with you ani further!" call out the 
painter with a laugh as the girl press in. "goodbye, and don't 
hesit too long!" K. did not even look round at him. onc on the 
street he took the first cab he came across. He now had to get rid of 
the servant, whose gold button continu caught hi eye even if it 
caught no-on else's. As a servant, the servant of the court wa go 
to sit on the coach-box. but K. chase him down from there. It wa 
alreadi well into the afternoon when K. arriv in front of the bank. 
He would have like to leav the pictur in the cab but fear there 
might be some occas when he would have to let the painter see he 
still had them. So he had the pictur taken to hi offic and lock 
them in the lowest drawer of hi desk so that he could at least keep 
them safe from the deputi director' view for the next few days. 




chapter eight 
block, the businessman - dismiss the lawyer 

K. had at last made the decis to withdraw hi defenc from the 
lawyer. It wa imposs to remov hi doubt as to whether thi wa 
the right decision, but thi wa outweigh by hi belief in it 
necessity. thi decision, on the day he intend to go to see the 
lawyer, took a lot of the strength he need for hi work, he work 
except slowly, he had to remain in hi offic a long time, and it 
wa alreadi past ten o'clock when he final stood in front of the 
lawyer' front door. even befor he rang he consid whether it might 
not be better to give the lawyer notic by letter or telephone, a 
person convers would certainli be veri difficult. nonetheless, 
K. did not actual want to do without it, if he gave notic by ani 
other mean it would be receiv in silenc or with a few formul 
words, and unless leni could discov anyth K. would never learn how 
the lawyer had taken hi dismiss and what it consequ might be, 
in the lawyer' not unimport opinion. but sit in front of him 
and taken by surpris by hi dismissal, K. would be abl easili to infer 
everyth he want from the lawyer' face and behaviour, even if he 
could not be induc to say veri much. It wa not even out of the 
question that K. might, after all, be persuad that it would be best to 
leav hi defenc to the lawyer and withdraw hi dismissal. 

As usual, there wa at first no respons to k.' ring at the door. 
"leni could be a bit quicker," thought K. but he could at least be glad 
there wa nobodi els interf as usual happened, be it the man in 
hi nightshirt or anyon els who might bother him. As K. press on 
the button for the second time he look back at the other door, but 
thi time it, too, remain closed. At last, two eye appear at the 
spy-hatch in the lawyer' door, although they weren't leni' eyes. 
someon unlock the door, but kept himself press against it as he 
call back inside, "it' him!", and onli then did he open the door 
properly. K. push against the door, as behind him he could alreadi 
hear the key be hurriedli turn in the lock of the door to the other 
flat. when the door in front of him final opened, he storm straight 
into the hallway. through the corridor which led between the room he 
saw leni, to whom the warn cri of the door open had been directed, 
still run away in her nightshirt. He look at her for a moment 
and then look round at the person who had open the door. It wa a 
small, wizen man with a full beard, he held a candl in hi hand. "do 
you work here?" ask K. "no," answer the man, "I don't belong here 
at all, the lawyer is onli repres me, i'm here on legal business." 
"without your coat?" ask k., indic the man' defici of dress 
with a gestur of hi hand. "oh, do forgiv me!" said the man, and he 
look at himself in the light of the candl he wa hold as if he had 
not known about hi appear until then. 
"i leni your lover?" ask K. curtly. He had set hi leg slightli 
apart, hi hands, in which he held hi hat, were behind hi back. 
mere by be in possess of a thick overcoat he felt hi advantag 
over thi thin littl man. "oh god," he said and, shocked, rais one 
hand in front of hi face as if in defence, "no, no, what can you be 
thinking?" "you look honest enough," said K. with a smile, "but come 
along anyway." K. indic with hi hat which way the man wa to go 
and let him go ahead of him. "what is your name then?" ask K. on the 
way. "block. i'm a businessman," said the small man, twist himself 
round as he thu introduc himself, although K. did not allow him to 
stop moving. "i that your real name?" ask K. "of cours it is," wa 
the man' reply, "whi do you doubt it?" "I thought you might have some 
reason to keep your name secret," said K. He felt himself as much at 
liberti as is normal onli felt in foreign part when speak with 
peopl of lower standing, keep everyth about himself to himself, 
speak onli casual about the interest of the other, abl to rais 
him to a level abov one' own, but also able, at will, to let him drop 
again. K. stop at the door of the lawyer' office, open it and, to 
the businessman who had obedi gone ahead, called, "not so fast! 
bring some light here!" K. thought leni might have hidden in here, he 
let the businessman search in everi corner, but the room wa empty. In 
front of the pictur of the judg K. took hold of the businessman' 
brace to stop him move on. "do you know him?" he asked, point 
upward with hi finger. the businessman lift the candle, blink as 
he look up and said, "it' a judge." "an import judge?" ask k., 
and stood to the side and in front of the businessman so that he could 
observ what impress the pictur had on him. the businessman wa 
look up in admiration. "he' an import judge." "you don't have 
much insight," said K. "he is the lowest of the lowest examin 
judges." "I rememb now," said the businessman as he lower the 
candle, "that' what i'v alreadi been told." "well of cours you 
have," call out k., "i'd forgotten about it, of cours you would 
alreadi have been told." "but why, why?" ask the businessman as he 
move forward toward the door, propel by the hand of K. outsid 
in the corridor K. said, 
"you know where leni' hidden, do you?" "hidden?" said the businessman, 
"no, but she might be in the kitchen cook soup for the lawyer." "whi 
didn't you say that immediately?" ask K. "I wa go to take you 
there, but you call me back again," answer the businessman, as if 
confus by the contradictori commands. "you think you'r veri clever, 
don't you," said K, "now take me there!" K. had never been in the 
kitchen, it wa surprisingli big and veri well equipped. the stove 
alon wa three time bigger than normal stoves, but it wa not possibl 
to see ani detail beyond thi as the kitchen wa at the time illumin 
by no more than a small lamp hang by the entrance. At the stove 
stood leni, in a white apron as always, break egg into a pot 
stand on a spirit lamp. 
"good evening, josef," she said with a glanc sideways. "good evening," 
said k., point with one hand to a chair in a corner which the 
businessman wa to sit on, and he did inde sit down on it. K. howev 
went veri close behind leni' back, leant over her shoulder and asked, 
"who is thi man?" leni put one hand around K. as she stir the soup 
with the other, she drew him forward toward herself and said, "he' a 
piti character, a poor businessman by the name of block. just look 
at him." the two of them look back over their shoulders. the 
businessman wa sit on the chair that K. had direct him to, he had 
extinguish the candl whose light wa no longer need and press on 
the wick with hi finger to stop the smoke. "you were in your 
nightshirt," said k., put hi hand on her head and turn it back 
toward the stove. she wa silent. "i he your lover?" ask K. she 
wa about to take hold of the pot of soup, but K. took both her hand 
and said, "answer me!" she said, "come into the office, i'll explain 
everyth to you." "no," said k., "I want you to explain it here." 
she put her arm around him and want to kiss him. k., though, push 
her away and said, "I don't want you to kiss me now." "josef," said 
leni, look at K. imploringli but frankli in the eyes, "you'r not 
go to be jealou of mr. block now, are you? rudi," she then said, 
turn to the businessman, "help me out will you, i'm be suspect 
of something, you can see that, leav the candl alone." It had look 
as though mr. block had not been pay attent but he had been 
follow closely. "I don't even know whi you might be jealous," he 
said ingenuously. "nor do I, actually," said k., look at the 
businessman with a smile. leni laugh out loud and while K. wa not 
pay attent took the opportun of embrac him and whispering, 
"leav him alone, now, you can see what sort of person he is. i'v been 
help him a littl bit becaus he' an import client of the 
lawyer's, and no other reason. and what about you? Do you want to 
speak to the lawyer at thi time of day? he' veri unwel today, but if 
you want i'll tell him you'r here. but you can certainli spend the 
night with me. it' so long sinc you were last here, even the lawyer 
ha been ask about you. don't neglect your case! and i'v got some 
thing to tell you that i'v learn about. but now, befor anyth 
else, take your coat off!" she help him off with hi coat, took the 
hat off hi head, ran with the thing into the hallway to hang them up, 
then she ran back and saw to the soup. "do you want me to tell him 
you'r here straight away or take him hi soup first?" "tell him i'm 
here first," said K. He wa in a bad mood, he had origin intend a 
detail discuss of hi busi with leni, especi the question 
of hi give the lawyer notice, but now he no longer want to becaus 
of the presenc of the businessman. now he consid hi affair too 
import to let thi littl businessman take part in it and perhap 
chang some of hi decisions, and so 
he call leni back even though she wa alreadi on her way to the 
lawyer. "bring him hi soup first," he said, "I want him to get hi 
strength up for the discuss with me, he'll need it." "you'r a 
client of the lawyer' too, aren't you," said the businessman quietli 
from hi corner as if he were tri to find thi out. It wa not, 
however, taken well. "what busi is that of yours?" said k., and 
leni said, 
"will you be quiet. - i'll take him hi soup first then, shall i?" and 
she pour the soup into a dish. "the onli worri then is that he might 
go to sleep soon after he' eaten." "what i'v got to say to him will 
keep him awake," said k., who still want to intim that he intend 
some import negoti with the lawyer, he want leni to ask him 
what it wa and onli then to ask her advice. but instead, she just 
promptli carri out the order he had given her. when she went over to 
him with the dish she deliber brush against him and whispered, 
"i'll tell him you'r here as soon as he' eaten the soup so that I can 
get you back as soon as possible." "just go," said k., "just go." "be 
a bit more friendly," she said and, still hold the dish, turn 
complet round onc more in the doorway. 

K. watch her as she went; the decis had final been made 
that the lawyer wa to be dismissed, it wa probabl better that he had 
not been abl to discuss the matter ani more with leni beforehand; she 
hardli understood the complex of the matter, she would certainli have 
advis him against it and perhap would even have prevent him from 
dismiss the lawyer thi time, he would have remain in doubt and 
uneas and eventu have carri out hi decis after a while anyway 
as thi decis wa someth he could not avoid. the sooner it wa 
carri out the more harm would be avoided. and moreover, perhap the 
businessman had someth to say on the matter. 

K. turn round, the businessman hardli notic it as he wa about 
to stand up. "stay where you are," said K. and pull up a chair besid 
him. "have you been a client of the lawyer' for a long time?" ask K. 
"yes," said the businessman, "a veri long time." "how mani year ha he 
been repres you so far, then?" ask K. "I don't know how you 
mean," said the businessman, "he' been my busi lawyer - I buy and 
sell cereal - he' been my busi lawyer sinc I took the busi 
over, and that' about twenti year now, but perhap you mean my own 
trial and he' been repres me in that sinc it started, and that' 
been more than five years. yes, well over five years," he then added, 
pull out an old briefcase, "i'v got everyth written down; I can 
tell you the exact date if you like. it' so hard to rememb 
everything. probably, my trial' been go on much longer than that, 
it start soon after the death of my wife, and that' been more than 
five and a half year now." K. move in closer to him. "so the lawyer 
take on ordinari legal business, doe he?" he asked. thi combin 
of crimin and commerci busi seem surprisingli reassur for 
K. "oh yes," said the businessman, and then he whispered, "they even 
say he' more effici in jurisprud than he is in other matters." 
but then he seem to regret say this, and he laid a hand on k.' 
shoulder and said, "pleas don't betray me to him, will you." K. pat 
hi thigh to reassur him and said, "no, I don't betray people." "he 
can be so vindictive, you see," said the businessman. 
"i'm sure he won't do anyth against such a faith client as you," 
said K. "oh, he might do," said the businessman, "when he get cross it 
doesn't matter who it is, and anyway, i'm not realli faith to him." 
"how' that then?" ask K. "i'm not sure I should tell you about it," 
said the businessman hesitantly. "I think it'll be alright," said K. 
"well then," said the businessman, "i'll tell you about some of it, but 
you'll have to tell me a secret too, then we can support each other with 
the lawyer." "you are veri careful," said k., "but i'll tell you a 
secret that will set your mind complet at ease. now tell me, in what 
way have you been unfaith to the lawyer?" "i'v ..." said the 
businessman hesitantly, and in a tone as if he were confess someth 
dishonourable, "i'v taken on other lawyer besid him." "that' not 
so serious," said k., a littl disappointed. "it is, here," said the 
businessman, who had had some difficulti breath sinc make hi 
confess but who now, after hear k.' comment, began to feel more 
trust for him. "that' not allowed. and it' allow least of all to 
take on petti lawyer when you'v alreadi got a proper one. and that' 
just what I have done, besid him i'v got five petti lawyers." 
"five!" exclaim k., astonish at thi number, "five lawyer besid 
thi one?" the businessman nodded. "i'm even negoti with a sixth 
one." "but whi do you need so mani lawyers?" ask K. "I need all of 
them," said the businessman. "would you mind explain that to me?" 
ask K. "i'd be glad to," said the businessman. "most of all, I don't 
want to lose my case, well that' obvious. So that mean I mustn't 
neglect anyth that might be of use to me; even if there' veri littl 
hope of a particular thing be of ani use I can't just throw it away. 
So everyth I have i'v put to use in my case. i'v taken all the 
money out of my business, for example, the offic for my busi use 
to occupi nearli a whole floor, but now all I need is a littl room at 
the back where I work with one apprentice. It wasn't just use up the 
money that caus the difficulty, of course, it wa much more to do with 
me not work at the busi as much as I use to. If you want to do 
someth about your trial you don't have much time for anyth else." 
"so you'r also work at the court yourself?" ask K. "that' just 
what I want to learn more about." "I can't tell you veri much about 
that," said the businessman, "at first I tri to do that too but I soon 
had to give it up again. It wear you out too much, and it' realli not 
much use. and it turn out to be quit imposs to work there 
yourself and to negotiate, at least for me it was. it' a heavi strain 
there just sit and waiting. you know yourself what the air is like 
in those offices." "how do you know i'v been there, then?" ask K. 
"I wa in the wait room myself when you went through." "what a 
coincid that is!" exclaim k., total engross and forget how 
ridicul the businessman had seem to him earlier. "so you saw me! 
you were in the wait room when I went through. yes, I did go through 
it one time." "it isn't such a big coincidence," said the businessman, 
"i'm there nearli everi day." "I expect i'll have to go there quit 
often myself now," said k., "although I can hardli expect to be shown 
the same respect as I wa then. they all stood up for me. they must 
have thought I wa a judge." "no," said the businessman, "we were 
greet the servant of the court. We knew you were a defendant. that 
sort of news spread veri quickly." "so you alreadi knew about that," 
said k., "the way I behav must have seem veri arrog to you. did 
you criticis me for it afterwards?" "no," said the businessman, "quit 
the opposite. that wa just stupidity." "what do you mean, 
'stupidity'?" ask K. "whi are you ask about it?" said the 
businessman in some irritation. "you still don't seem to know the 
peopl there and you might take it wrong. don't forget in proceed 
like thi there are alway lot of differ thing come up to talk 
about, thing that you just can't understand with reason alone, you just 
get too tire and distract for most thing and so, instead, peopl 
reli on superstition. i'm talk about the others, but i'm no better 
myself. one of these superstitions, for example, is that you can learn 
a lot about the outcom of a defendant' case by look at hi face, 
especi the shape of hi lips. there are lot who believ that, and 
they said they could see from the shape of your lip that you'd 
definit be found guilti veri soon. I repeat that all thi is just a 
ridicul superstition, and in most case it' complet disprov by 
the facts, but when you live in that societi it' hard to hold yourself 
back from belief like that. just think how much effect that 
superstit can have. you spoke to one of them there, didn't you? He 
wa hardli abl to give you an answer. there are lot of thing there 
that can make you confused, of course, but one of them, for him, wa the 
appear of your lips. He told us all later he thought he could see 
someth in your lip that meant he'd be convict himself." "on my 
lips?" ask k., pull out a pocket mirror and examin himself. "I 
can see noth special about my lips. can you?" "nor can i," said the 
businessman, "noth at all." "these peopl are so superstitious!" 
exclaim K. "isn't that what I just told you?" ask the businessman. 
"do you then have that much contact with each other, exchang each 
other' opinions?" said K. "i'v kept myself complet apart so far." 
"they don't normal have much contact with each other," said the 
businessman, "that would be impossible, there are so mani of them. and 
they don't have much in common either. If a group of them ever think 
they have found someth in common it soon turn out they were 
mistaken. there' noth you can do as a group where the court' 
concerned. each case is examin separately, the court is veri 
painstaking. So there' noth to be achiev by form into a group, 
onli sometim an individu will achiev someth in secret; and it' 
onli when that' been done the other learn about it; nobodi know how 
it wa done. So there' no sens of togetherness, you meet peopl now 
and then in the wait rooms, but we don't talk much there. the 
superstiti belief were establish a long time ago and they spread 
all by themselves." "I saw those gentlemen in the wait room," said 
k., "it seem so pointless for them to be wait in that way." 
"wait is not pointless," said the businessman, "it' onli pointless 
if you tri and interfer yourself. I told you just now i'v got five 
lawyer besid thi one. you might think - I thought it myself at 
first - you might think I could leav the whole thing entir up to 
them now. that would be entir wrong. I can leav it up to them less 
than when I had just the one. mayb you don't understand that, do you?" 
"no," said k., and to slow the businessman down, who had been speak 
too fast, he laid hi hand on the businessman' to reassur him, "but 
i'd like just to ask you to speak a littl more slowly, these are mani 
veri import thing for me, and I can't follow exactli what you'r 
saying." "you'r quit right to remind me of that," said the 
businessman, "you'r new to all this, a junior. your trial is six 
month old, isn't it? yes, i'v heard about it. such a new case! but 
i'v alreadi thought all these thing through countless times, to me 
they'r the most obviou thing in the world." "you must be glad your 
trial ha alreadi progress so far, are you?" ask k., he did not wish 
to ask directli how the businessman' affair stood, but receiv no 
clear answer anyway. "yes, i'v been work at my trial for five year 
now," said the businessman as hi head sank, "that' no small 
achievement." then he wa silent for a while. K. listen to hear 
whether leni wa on her way back. On the one hand he did not want her 
to come back too soon as he still had mani question to ask and did not 
want her to find him in thi intim discuss with the businessman, 
but on the other hand it irrit him that she stay so long with the 
lawyer when K. wa there, much longer than she need to give him hi 
soup. "I still rememb it exactly," the businessman began again, and 
K. immedi gave him hi full attention, "when my case wa as old as 
your is now. I onli had thi one lawyer at that time but I wasn't veri 
satisfi with him." now i'll find out everything, thought k., nod 
vigor as if he could therebi encourag the businessman to say 
everyth worth knowing. "mi case," the businessman continued, "didn't 
move on at all, there were some hear that took place and I went to 
everi one of them, collect materials, hand all my busi book to 
the court - which I later found wa entir unnecessari - I ran back 
and forth to the lawyer, and he submit variou document to the court 
too ..." "variou documents?" ask K. "yes, that' right," said the 
businessman. "that' veri import for me," said k., "in my case he' 
still work on the first set of documents. He still hasn't done 
anything. I see now that he' been neglect me quit disgracefully." 
"there can be lot of good reason whi the first document still aren't 
ready," said the businessman, "and anyway, it turn out later on that 
the one he submit for me were entir worthless. I even read one 
of them myself, one of the offici at the court wa veri helpful. It 
wa veri learned, but it didn't actual say anything. most of all, 
there wa lot of latin, which I can't understand, then page and page 
of gener appeal to the court, then lot of flatteri for particular 
officials, they weren't named, these officials, but anyon familiar with 
the court must have been abl to guess who they were, then there wa 
self-prais by the lawyer where he humili himself to the court in a 
way that wa downright dog-like, and then endless investig of 
case from the past which were suppos to be similar to mine. 
although, as far as I wa abl to follow them, these investig had 
been carri out veri carefully. now, I don't mean to criticis the 
lawyer' work with all of this, and the document I read wa onli one of 
many, but even so, and thi is someth I will say, at that time I 
couldn't see ani progress in my trial at all." "and what sort of 
progress had you been hope for?" ask K. "that' a veri sensibl 
question," said the businessman with a smile, "it' onli veri rare that 
you see ani progress in these proceed at all. but I didn't know 
that then. i'm a businessman, much more in those day than now, I 
want to see some tangibl progress, it should have all been move to 
some conclus or at least should have been move on in some way 
accord to the rules. instead of which there were just more hearings, 
and most of them went through the same thing anyway; I had all the 
answer off pat like in a church service; there were messeng from the 
court come to me at work sever time a week, or they came to me at 
home or anywher els they could find me; and that wa veri disturb 
of cours (but at least now thing are better in that respect, it' much 
less disturb when they contact you by telephone), and rumour about 
my trial even start to spread among some of the peopl I do busi 
with, and especi my relations, so I wa be made to suffer in mani 
differ way but there wa still not the slightest sign that even the 
first hear would take place soon. So I went to the lawyer and 
complain about it. He explain it all to me at length, but refus 
to do anyth I ask for, no-on ha ani influenc on the way the 
trial proceeds, he said, to tri and insist on it in ani of the document 
submit - like I wa ask - wa simpli unheard of and would do harm 
to both him and me. I thought to myself: what thi lawyer can't or 
won't do anoth lawyer will. So I look round for other lawyers. and 
befor you say anything: none of them ask for a definit date for the 
main trial and none of them got one, and anyway, apart from one 
except which i'll talk about in a minute, it realli is impossible, 
that' one thing thi lawyer didn't mislead me about; but besides, I had 
no reason to regret turn to other lawyers. perhap you'v alreadi 
heard how dr. huld talk about the petti lawyers, he probabl made them 
sound veri contempt to you, and he' right, they are contemptible. 
but when he talk about them and compar them with himself and hi 
colleagu there' a small error run through what he says, and, just 
for your interest, i'll tell you about it. when he talk about the 
lawyer he mix with he set them apart by call them the 'great 
lawyers'. that' wrong, anyon can call himself 'great' if he want to, 
of course, but in thi case onli the usag of the court can make that 
distinction. you see, the court say that besid the petti lawyer 
there are also minor lawyer and great lawyers. thi one and hi 
colleagu are onli minor lawyers, and the differ in rank between 
them and the great lawyers, who i'v onli ever heard about and never 
seen, is incompar greater than between the minor lawyer and the 
despis petti lawyers." "the great lawyers?" ask K. "who are they 
then? how do you contact them?" "you'v never heard about them, then?" 
said the businessman. "there' hardli anyon who' been accus who 
doesn't spend a lot of time dream about the great lawyer onc he' 
heard about them. it' best if you don't let yourself be misl in that 
way. I don't know who the great lawyer are, and there' probabl no 
way of contact them. I don't know of ani case I can talk about with 
certainti where they'v taken ani part. they do defend a lot of people, 
but you can't get hold of them by your own efforts, they onli defend 
those who they want to defend. and I don't suppos they ever take on 
case that haven't alreadi got past the lower courts. anyway, it' best 
not to think about them, as if you do it make the discuss with the 
other lawyers, all their advic and all that they do manag to achieve, 
seem so unpleas and useless, I had that experi myself, just 
want to throw everyth away and lay at home in bed and hear noth 
more about it. but that, of course, would be the stupidest thing you 
could do, and you wouldn't be left in peac in bed for veri long 
either." "so you weren't think about the great lawyer at that 
time?" ask K. "not for veri long," said the businessman, and smile 
again, "you can't forget about them entirely, i'm afraid, especi in 
the night when these thought come so easily. but I want immedi 
result in those days, so I went to the petti lawyers." 

"well look at you two sat huddl together!" call leni as she 
came back with the dish and stood in the doorway. they were inde sat 
close together, if either of them turn hi head even slightli it would 
have knock against the other's, the businessman wa not onli veri 
small but also sat hunch down, so that K. wa also forc to bend down 
low if he want to hear everything. "not quit yet!" call out k., to 
turn leni away, hi hand, still rest on the businessman' hand, 
twitch with impatience. "he want me to tell him about my trial," 
said the businessman to leni. "carri on, then, carri on," she said. 
she spoke to the businessman with affect but, at the same time, with 
condescension. K. did not like that, he had begun to learn that the man 
wa of some valu after all, he had experi at least, and he wa 
will to share it. leni wa probabl wrong about him. He watch her 
in irrit as leni now took the candl from the businessman' hand - 
which he had been hold on to all thi time - wipe hi hand with her 
apron and then knelt besid him to scratch off some wax that had drip 
from the candl onto hi trousers. "you were about to tell me about the 
petti lawyers," said k., shove leni' hand away with no further 
comment. "what' wrong with you today?" ask leni, tap him gentli 
and carri on with what she had been doing. "yes, the petti lawyers," 
said the businessman, put hi hand to hi brow as if think hard. 
K. want to help him and said, "you want immedi result and so 
went to the petti lawyers." 
"yes, that' right," said the businessman, but did not continu with 
what he'd been saying. "mayb he doesn't want to speak about it in 
front of leni," thought k., suppress hi impati to hear the rest 
straight away, and stop tri to press him. 

"have you told him i'm here?" he ask leni. "cours I have," she 
said, "he' wait for you. leav block alon now, you can talk to 
block later, he'll still be here." K. still hesitated. "you'll still 
be here?" he ask the businessman, want to hear the answer from him 
and not want leni to speak about the businessman as if he weren't 
there, he wa full of secret resent toward leni today. and onc 
more it wa onli leni who answered. "he often sleep here." "he sleep 
here?" exclaim k., he had thought the businessman would just wait 
there for him while he quickli settl hi busi with the lawyer, and 
then they would leav togeth to discuss everyth thoroughli and 
undisturbed. "yes," said leni, "not everyone' like you, josef, allow 
to see the lawyer at ani time you like. don't even seem surpris 
that the lawyer, despit be ill, still receiv you at eleven o'clock 
at night. you take it far too much for granted, what your friend do 
for you. well, your friends, or at least I do, we like to do thing for 
you. I don't want or need ani more thank than that you'r fond of me." 
"fond of you?" thought K. at first, and onli then it occur to him, 
"well, yes, I am fond of her." nonetheless, what he said, forget all 
the rest, was, "he receiv me becaus I am hi client. If I need 
anyon else' help i'd have to beg and show gratitud whenev I do 
anything." "he' realli nasti today, isn't he?" leni ask the 
businessman. "now it' me who' not here," thought k., and nearli lost 
hi temper with the businessman when, with the same rude as leni, he 
said, "the lawyer also ha other reason to receiv him. hi case is 
much more interest than mine. and it' onli in it earli stage too, 
it probabl hasn't progress veri far so the lawyer still like to deal 
with him. that'll all chang later on." "yeah, yeah," said leni, 
look at the businessman and laughing. "he doesn't half talk!" she 
said, turn to face K. "you can't believ a word he says. he' as 
talk as he is sweet. mayb that' whi the lawyer can't stand him. 
At least, he onli see him when he' in the right mood. i'v alreadi 
tri hard to chang that but it' impossible. just think, there are 
time when I tell him block' here and he doesn't receiv him until 
three day later. and if block isn't on the spot when he' call then 
everything' lost and it all ha to start all over again. that' whi I 
let block sleep here, it wouldn't be the first time dr. huld ha want 
to see him in the night. So now block is readi for that. sometimes, 
when he know block is still here, he'll even chang hi mind about 
let him in to see him." K. look questioningli at the businessman. 
the latter nod and, although he had spoken quit openli with K. 
earlier, seem to be confus with shame as he said, "yes, later on you 
becom veri depend on your lawyer." "he' onli pretend to mind," 
said leni. "he like to sleep here really, he' often said so." she 
went over to a littl door and shove it open. "do you want to see hi 
bedroom?" she asked. K. went over to the low, windowless room and 
look in from the doorway. the room contain a narrow bed which 
fill it completely, so that to get into the bed you would need to 
climb over the bedpost. At the head of the bed there wa a nich in the 
wall where, fastidi tidy, stood a candle, a bottl of ink, and a 
pen with a bundl of paper which were probabl to do with the trial. 
"you sleep in the maid' room?" ask k., as he went back to the 
businessman. "leni' let me have it," answer the businessman, "it ha 
mani advantages." K. look long at him; hi first impress of the 
businessman had perhap not been right; he had experi as hi trial 
had alreadi last a long time, but he had paid a heavi price for thi 
experience. K. wa suddenli unabl to bear the sight of the businessman 
ani longer. "bring him to bed, then!" he call out to leni, who seem 
to understand him. for himself, he want to go to the lawyer and, by 
dismiss him, free himself from not onli the lawyer but also from leni 
and the businessman. but befor he had reach the door the businessman 
spoke to him gently. "excus me, sir," he said, and K. look round 
crossly. "you'v forgotten your promise," said the businessman, 
stretch hi hand out to K. imploringli from where he sat. "you were 
go to tell me a secret." "that is true," said k., as he glanc at 
leni, who wa watch him carefully, to check on her. "so listen; it' 
hardli a secret now anyway. i'm go to see the lawyer now to sack 
him." "he' sack him!" yell the businessman, and he jump up from 
hi chair and ran around the kitchen with hi arm in the air. He kept 
on shouting, "he' sack hi lawyer!" leni tri to rush at K. but 
the businessman got in her way so that she shove him away with her 
fists. then, still with her hand ball into fists, she ran after K. 
who, however, had been given a long start. He wa alreadi insid the 
lawyer' room by the time leni caught up with him. He had almost close 
the door behind himself, but leni held the door open with her foot, 
grab hi arm and tri to pull him back. but he put such pressur on 
her wrist that, with a sigh, she wa forc to releas him. she did not 
dare go into the room straight away, and K. lock the door with the 
key. 

"i'v been wait for you a veri long time," said the lawyer from 
hi bed. He had been read someth by the light of a candl but now 
he laid it onto the bedsid tabl and put hi glass on, look at K. 
sharpli through them. instead of apologis K. said, "i'll be leav 
again soon." As he had not apologis the lawyer ignor what K. said, 
and replied, "I won't let you in thi late again next time." "I find 
that quit acceptable," said K. the lawyer look at him quizzically. 
"sit down," he said. "a you wish," said k., draw a chair up to the 
bedsid tabl and sit down. 
"it seem to me that you lock the door," said the lawyer. "yes," 
said k., "it wa becaus of leni." He had no intent of let 
anyon off lightly. but the lawyer ask him, "wa she be 
importun again?" "importunate?" ask K. "yes," said the lawyer, 
laugh as he did so, had a fit of cough and then, onc it had 
passed, began to laugh again. "i'm sure you must have notic how 
importun she can be sometimes," he said, and pat k.' hand which 
K. had rest on the bedsid tabl and which he now snatch back. "you 
don't attach much import to it, then," said the lawyer when K. wa 
silent, "so much the better. otherwis I might have need to apologis 
to you. It is a peculiar of leni's. i'v long sinc forgiven her 
for it, and I wouldn't be talk of it now, if you hadn't lock the 
door just now. anyway, perhap I should at least explain thi 
peculiar of her to you, but you seem rather disturbed, the way 
you'r look at me, and so that' whi i'll do it, thi peculiar of 
her consist in this; leni find most of the accus attractive. she 
attach herself to each of them, love each of them, even seem to be 
love by each of them; then she sometim entertain me by tell me 
about them when I allow her to. I am not so astonish by all of thi 
as you seem to be. If you look at them in the right way the accus 
realli can be attractive, quit often. but that is a remark and to 
some extent scientif phenomenon. be indict doe not caus ani 
clear, precis defin chang in a person' appearance, of course. 
but it' not like with other legal matters, most of them remain in their 
usual way of life and, if they have a good lawyer look after them, 
the trial doesn't get in their way. but there are nonetheless those who 
have experi in these matter who can look at a crowd, howev big, 
and tell you which among them is face a charge. how can they do that, 
you will ask. My answer will not pleas you. It is simpli that those 
who are face a charg are the most attractive. It cannot be their 
guilt that make them attract as not all of them are guilti - at 
least that' what I, as a lawyer, have to say - and nor can it be the 
proper punish that ha made them attract as not all of them are 
punished, so it can onli be that the proceed level against them 
take some kind of hold on them. whatev the reason, some of these 
attract peopl are inde veri attractive. but all of them are 
attractive, even block, piti worm that he is." As the lawyer 
finish what he wa saying, K. wa fulli in control of himself, he had 
even nod conspicu at hi last few word in order to confirm to 
himself the view he had alreadi formed; that the lawyer wa tri to 
confus him, as he alway did, by make gener and irrelev 
observations, and thu distract him from the main question of what he 
wa actual do for k.' trial. the lawyer must have notic that K. 
wa offer him more resist than before, as he becam silent, 
give K. the chanc to speak himself, and then, as K. also remain 
silent, he asked, "did you have a particular reason for come to see me 
today?" "yes," said k., put hi hand up to slightli shade hi eye 
from the light of the candl so that he could see the lawyer better, "I 
want to tell you that i'm withdraw my represent from you, with 
immedi effect." "do I understand you rightly?" ask the lawyer as 
he half rais himself in hi bed and support himself with one hand on 
the pillow. "I think you do," said k., sit stiffli upright as if 
wait in ambush. "well we can certainli discuss thi plan of yours," 
said the lawyer after a pause. "it' not a plan ani more," said K. 
"that may be," said the lawyer, "but we still mustn't rush anything." 
He use the word 'we', as if he had no intent of let K. go free, 
and as if, even if he could no longer repres him, he could still at 
least continu as hi adviser. "noth is be rushed," said k., 
stand slowli up and go behind hi chair, "everyth ha been well 
thought out and probabl even for too long. the decis is final." 
"then allow me to say a few words," said the lawyer, throw the bed 
cover to one side and sit on the edg of the bed. hi naked, white- 
hair leg shiver in the cold. He ask K. to pass him a blanket 
from the couch. K. pass him the blanket and said, "you are run 
the risk of catch cold for no reason." "the circumst are 
import enough," said the lawyer as he wrap the bed cover around 
the top half of hi bodi and then the blanket around hi legs. "your 
uncl is my friend and in the cours of time i'v becom fond of you as 
well. I admit that quit openly. there' noth in that for me to be 
asham of." It wa veri unwelcom for K. to hear the old man speak in 
thi touch way, as it forc him to explain himself more fully, which 
he would rather have avoided, and he wa awar that it also confus him 
even though it could never make him revers hi decision. "thank you 
for feel so friendli toward me," he said, "and I also realis how 
deepli involv you'v been in my case, as deepli as possibl for 
yourself and to bring as much advantag as possibl to me. nonetheless, 
I have recent come to the convict that it is not enough. I would 
natur never attempt, consid that you are so much older and more 
experienc than I am, to convinc you of my opinion; if I have ever 
unintent done so then I beg your forgiveness, but, as you have 
just said yourself, the circumst are import enough and it is my 
belief that my trial need to be approach with much more vigour than 
ha so far been the case." "I see," said the lawyer, "you'v becom 
impatient." "I am not impatient," said k., with some irrit and he 
stop pay so much attent to hi choic of words. "when I first 
came here with my uncl you probabl notic I wasn't greatli concern 
about my case, and if I wasn't remind of it by force, as it were, I 
would forget about it completely. but my uncl insist I should allow 
you to repres me and I did so as a favour to him. I could have 
expect the case to be less of a burden than it had been, as the point 
of take on a lawyer is that he should take on some of it weight. but 
what actual happen wa the opposite. before, the trial wa never 
such a worri for me as it ha been sinc you'v been repres me. 
when I wa by myself I never did anyth about my case, I wa hardli 
awar of it, but then, onc there wa someon repres me, 
everyth wa set for someth to happen, I wa always, without cease, 
wait for you to do something, get more and more tense, but you 
did nothing. I did get some inform about the court from you that I 
probabl could not have got anywher else, but that can't be enough when 
the trial, supposedli in secret, is get closer and closer to me." 
K. had push the chair away and stood erect, hi hand in the pocket 
of hi frock coat. "after a certain point in the proceedings," said the 
lawyer quietli and calmly, "noth new of ani import ever happens. 
So mani litigants, at the same stage in their trials, have stood befor 
me just like you are now and spoken in the same way." "then these other 
litigants," said k., "have all been right, just as I am. that doe not 
show that i'm not." "I wasn't tri to show that you were mistaken," 
said the lawyer, "but I want to add that I expect better judgement 
from you than from the others, especi as i'v given you more insight 
into the work of the court and my own activ than I normal do. 
and now i'm forc to accept that, despit everything, you have too 
littl trust in me. you don't make it easi for me." how the lawyer wa 
humili himself to k.! He wa show no regard for the digniti of 
hi position, which on thi point, must have been at it most sensitive. 
and whi did he do that? He did seem to be veri busi as a lawyer as well 
a rich man, neither the loss of incom nor the loss of a client could 
have been of much import to him in themselves. He wa moreov 
unwel and should have been think of pass work on to others. and 
despit all that he held on tightli to K. why? wa it someth 
person for hi uncle' sake, or did he realli see k.' case as one 
that wa except and hope to be abl to distinguish himself with 
it, either for k.' sake or - and thi possibl could never be 
exclud - for hi friend at the court? It wa not possibl to learn 
anyth by look at him, even though K. wa scrutin him quit 
brazenly. It could almost be suppos he wa deliber hide hi 
thought as he wait to see what effect hi word would have. but he 
clearli deem k.' silenc to be favour for himself and he 
continued, "you will have notic the size of my office, but that I 
don't employ ani staff to help me. that use to be quit different, 
there wa a time when sever young lawyer were work for me but now 
I work alone. thi is partli to do with chang in the way I do 
business, in that I concentr nowaday more and more on matter such 
as your own case, and partli to do with the ever deeper understand 
that I acquir from these legal matters. I found that I could never let 
anyon els deal with thi sort of work unless I want to harm both the 
client and the job I had taken on. but the decis to do all the work 
myself had it obviou result: I wa forc to turn almost everyon away 
who ask me to repres them and could onli accept those I wa 
especi interest in - well there are enough creatur who leap at 
everi crumb I throw down, and they'r not so veri far away. most 
importantly, I becam ill from over-work. but despit that I don't 
regret my decision, quit possibl I should have turn more case away 
than I did, but it did turn out to be entir necessari for me to 
devot myself fulli to the case I did take on, and the success 
result show that it wa worth it. I onc read a descript of the 
differ between repres someon in ordinari legal matter and in 
legal matter of thi sort, and the writer express it veri well. thi 
is what he said: some lawyer lead their client on a thread until 
judgement is passed, but there are other who immedi lift their 
client onto their shoulder and carri them all the way to the judgement 
and beyond. that' just how it is. but it wa quit true when I said I 
never regret all thi work. but if, as in your case, they are so fulli 
misunderstood, well, then I come veri close to regret it." all thi 
talk did more to make K. impati than to persuad him. from the 
way the lawyer wa speaking, K. thought he could hear what he could 
expect if he gave in, the delay and excus would begin again, report 
of how the document were progressing, how the mood of the court 
offici had improved, as well as all the enorm difficulti - in 
short all that he had heard so mani time befor would be brought out 
again even more fully, he would tri to mislead K. with hope that were 
never specifi and to make him suffer with threat that were never 
clear. He had to put a stop to that, so he said, "what will you 
undertak on my behalf if you continu to repres me?" the lawyer 
quietli accept even thi insult question, and answered, "I should 
continu with what i'v alreadi been do for you." "that' just what 
I thought," said k., "and now you don't need to say anoth word." "I 
will make one more attempt," said the lawyer as if whatev had been 
make K. so annoy wa affect him too. "you see, I have the 
impress that you have not onli misjudg the legal assist I have 
given you but also that that misjudg ha led you to behav in thi 
way, you seem, although you are the accused, to have been treat too 
well or, to put it a better way, handl with neglect, with appar 
neglect. even that ha it reason; it is often better to be in chain 
than to be free. but I would like to show you how other defend are 
treated, perhap you will succeed in learn someth from it. what I 
will do is I will call block in, unlock the door and sit down here 
besid the bedsid table." "be glad to," said k., and did as the lawyer 
suggested; he wa alway readi to learn someth new. but to make sure 
of himself for ani event he added, "but you do realis that you are no 
longer to be my lawyer, don't you?" "yes," said the lawyer. "but you 
can still chang your mind today if you want to." He lay back down in 
the bed, pull the quilt up to hi chin and turn to face the wall. 
then he rang. 

leni appear almost the moment he had done so. she look 
hurriedli at K. and the lawyer to tri and find out what had happened; 
she seem to be reassur by the sight of K. sit calmli at the 
lawyer' bed. she smile and nod to k., K. look blankli back at 
her. "fetch block," said the lawyer. but instead of go to fetch 
him, leni just went to the door and call out, "block! To the lawyer!" 
then, probabl becaus the lawyer had turn hi face to the wall and 
wa pay no attention, she slip in behind k.' chair. from then 
on, she bother him by lean forward over the back of the chair or, 
albeit veri tenderli and carefully, she would run her hand through hi 
hair and over hi cheeks. K. eventu tri to stop her by take 
hold of one hand, and after some resist leni let him keep hold of 
it. block came as soon as he wa called, but he remain stand in 
the doorway and seem to be wonder whether he should enter or not. 
He rais hi eyebrow and lower hi head as if listen to find out 
whether the order to attend the lawyer would be repeated. K. could have 
encourag to enter, but he had decid to make a final break not onli 
with the lawyer but with everyth in hi home, so he kept himself 
motionless. leni wa also silent. block notic that at least no-on 
wa chase him away, and, on tiptoe, he enter the room, hi face wa 
tense, hi hand were clench behind hi back. He left the door open 
in case he need to go back again. K. did not even glanc at him, he 
look instead onli at the thick quilt under which the lawyer could not 
be seen as he had squeez up veri close to the wall. then hi voic 
wa heard: "block here?" he asked. block had alreadi crept some way 
into the room but thi question seem to give him first a shove in the 
breast and then anoth in the back, he seem about to fall but 
remain standing, deepli bowed, and said, "at your service, sir." 
"what do you want?" ask the lawyer, "you'v come at a bad time." 
"wasn't I summoned?" ask block, more to himself than the lawyer. He 
held hi hand in front of himself as protect and would have been 
readi to run away ani moment. "you were summoned," said the lawyer, 
"but you have still come at a bad time." then, after a paus he added, 
"you alway come at a bad time." when the lawyer start speak block 
had stop look at the bed but stare rather into one of the 
corners, just listening, as if the light from the speaker were brighter 
than block could bear to look at. but it wa also difficult for him to 
listen, as the lawyer wa speak into the wall and speak quickli 
and quietly. "would you like me to go away again, sir?" ask block. 
"well you'r here now," said the lawyer. "stay!" It wa as if the 
lawyer had not done as block had want but instead threaten him with 
a stick, as now block realli began to shake. "I went to see," said the 
lawyer, "the third judg yesterday, a friend of mine, and slowli brought 
the convers round to the subject of you. Do you want to know what 
he said?" "oh, ye please," said block. the lawyer did not answer 
immediately, so block repeat hi request and lower hi head as if 
about to kneel down. but then K. spoke to him: "what do you think 
you'r doing?" he shouted. leni had want to stop him from call out 
and so he took hold of her other hand. It wa not love that made him 
squeez it and hold on to it so tightly, she sigh frequent and tri 
to disengag her hand from him. but block wa punish for k.' 
outburst, as the lawyer ask him, "who is your lawyer?" "you are, 
sir," said block. "and who besid me?" the lawyer asked. "no-on 
besid you, sir," said block. "and let there be no-on besid me," 
said the lawyer. block fulli understood what that meant, he glower at 
k., shake hi head violently. If these action had been translat 
into word they would have been coars insults. K. had been friendli 
and will to discuss hi own case with someon like this! "I won't 
disturb you ani more," said k., lean back in hi chair. "you can 
kneel down or creep on all fours, whatev you like. I won't bother 
with you ani more." but block still had some sens of pride, at least 
where K. wa concerned, and he went toward him wave hi fists, 
shout as loudli as he dare while the lawyer wa there. "you 
shouldn't speak to me like that, that' not allowed. whi are you 
insult me? especi here in front of the lawyer, where both of us, 
you and me, we'r onli toler becaus of hi charity. you'r not a 
better person than me, you'v been accus of someth too, you'r 
face a charg too. if, in spite of that, you'r still a gentleman 
then i'm just as much a gentleman as you are, if not even more so. and 
I want to be spoken to as a gentleman, especi by you. If you think 
be allow to sit there and quietli listen while I creep on all four 
as you put it make you someth better than me, then there' an old 
legal say you ought to bear in mind: If you'r under suspicion it' 
better to be move than still, as if you'r still you can be in the pan 
of the scale without know it and be weigh along with your sins." 
K. said nothing. He mere look in amaz at thi distract 
being, hi eye complet still. He had gone through such chang in 
just the last few hours! wa it the trial that wa throw him from 
side to side in thi way and stop him know who wa friend and who 
wa foe? could he not see the lawyer wa deliber humili him 
and had no other purpos today than to show off hi power to k., and 
perhap even therebi subjug k.? but if block wa incap of see 
that, or if he so fear the lawyer that no such insight would even be 
of ani use to him, how wa it that he wa either so sli or so bold as to 
lie to the lawyer and conceal from him the fact that he had other 
lawyer work on hi behalf? and how did he dare to attack k., who 
could betray hi secret ani time he liked? but he dare even more than 
this, he went to the lawyer' bed and began there to make complaint 
about K. "dr. huld, sir," he said, "did you hear the way thi man spoke 
to me? you can count the length of hi trial in hours, and he want to 
tell me what to do when i'v been involv in a legal case for five 
years. He even insult me. He doesn't know anything, but he insult 
me, when I, as far as my weak abil allows, when i'v made a close 
studi of how to behav with the court, what we ought to do and what the 
court practic are." "don't let anyon bother you," said the lawyer, 
"and do what seem to you to be right." "I will," said block, as if 
speak to himself to give himself courage, and with a quick glanc to 
the side he kneel down close besid the bed. "i'm kneel now dr. 
huld, sir," he said. but the lawyer remain silent. with one hand, 
block care stroke the bed cover. In the silenc while he did so, 
leni, as she freed herself from k.' hands, said, "you'r hurt me. 
let go of me. i'm go over to block." she went over to him and sat 
on the edg of the bed. block wa veri pleas at thi and with lively, 
but silent, gestur he immedi urg her to interced for him with 
the lawyer. It wa clear that he desper need to be told 
someth by the lawyer, although perhap onli so that he could make use 
of the inform with hi other lawyers. leni probabl knew veri well 
how the lawyer could be brought round, point to hi hand and purs 
her lip as if make a kiss. block immedi perform the hand-kiss 
and, at further urg from leni, repeat it twice more. but the 
lawyer continu to be silent. then leni leant over the lawyer, as she 
stretch out, the attract shape of her bodi could be seen, and, bent 
over close to hi face, she stroke hi long white hair. that now 
forc him to give an answer. "i'm rather wari of tell him," said 
the lawyer, and hi head could be seen shake slightly, perhap so that 
he would feel the pressur of leni' hand better. block listen 
close with hi head lowered, as if by listen he were break an 
order. "what make you so wari about it?" ask leni. K. had the 
feel he wa listen to a contriv dialogu that had been repeat 
mani times, that would be repeat mani time more, and that for block 
alon it would never lose it freshness. "what ha hi behaviour been 
like today?" ask the lawyer instead of an answer. befor leni said 
anyth she look down at block and watch him a short while as he 
rais hi hand toward her and rub them togeth imploringly. 
final she gave a seriou nod, turn back to the lawyer and said, 
"he' been quiet and industrious." thi wa an elderli businessman, a 
man whose beard wa long, and he wa beg a young girl to speak on 
hi behalf. even if there wa some plan behind what he did, there wa 
noth that could reinstat him in the eye of hi fellow man. K. 
could not understand how the lawyer could have thought thi perform 
would win him over. even if he had done noth earlier to make him 
want to leav then thi scene would have done so. It wa almost 
humili even for the onlooker. So these were the lawyer' methods, 
which K. fortun had not been expos to for long, to let the client 
forget about the whole world and leav him with noth but the hope of 
reach the end of hi trial by thi delud means. He wa no longer a 
client, he wa the lawyer' dog. If the lawyer had order him to crawl 
under the bed as if it were a kennel and to bark out from under it, then 
he would have done so with enthusiasm. K. listen to all of this, 
test it and think it over as if he had been given the task of 
close observ everyth spoken here, inform a higher offic about 
it and write a report. "and what ha he been do all day?" ask the 
lawyer. "I kept him lock in the maid' room all day," said leni, "so 
that he wouldn't stop me do my work. that' where he usual stays. 
from time to time I look in through the spyhol to see what he wa 
doing, and each time he wa kneel on the bed and read the paper 
you gave him, prop up on the window sill. that made a good 
impress on me; as the window onli open onto an air shaft and give 
hardli ani light. It show how obedi he is that he wa even read 
in those conditions." "i'm pleas to hear it," said the lawyer. "but 
did he understand what he wa reading?" while thi convers wa 
go on, block continu move hi lip and wa clearli formul 
the answer he hope leni would give. "well I can't give you ani 
certain answer to that of course," said leni, "but I could see that he 
wa read thoroughly. He spent all day read the same page, run 
hi finger along the lines. whenev I look in on him he sigh as if 
thi read wa a lot of work for him. I expect the paper you gave 
him were veri hard to understand." "yes," said the lawyer, "they 
certainli are that. and I realli don't think he understood anyth of 
them. but they should at least give him some inkl of just how hard a 
struggl it is and how much work it is for me to defend him. and who am 
I do all thi hard work for? i'm do it - it' laughabl even to 
say it - i'm do it for block. He ought to realis what that means, 
too. did he studi without a pause?" "almost without a pause," answer 
leni. "just the onc he ask me for a drink of water, so I gave him a 
glass through the window. then at eight o'clock I let him out and 
gave him someth to eat." block glanc sideway at k., as if he were 
be prais and had to impress K. as well. He now seem more 
optimistic, he move more freeli and rock back and forth on hi knees. 
thi made hi astonish all the more obviou when he heard the 
follow word from the lawyer: "you speak well of him," said the 
lawyer, "but that' just what make it difficult for me. you see, the 
judg did not speak well of him at all, neither about block nor about 
hi case." "didn't speak well of him?" ask leni. "how is that 
possible?" block look at her with such tension he seem to think 
that although the judge' word had been spoken so long befor she would 
be abl to chang them in hi favour. "not at all," said the lawyer. 
"in fact he becam quit cross when I start to talk about block to 
him. 'don't talk to me about block,' he said. 'he is my client,' said 
I. 'you'r let him abus you,' he said. 'I don't think hi case is 
lost yet,' said I. 'you'r let him abus you,' he repeated. 'I 
don't think so,' said I. 'block work hard in hi case and alway know 
where it stands. He practic live with me so that he alway know 
what' happening. you don't alway find such enthusiasm as that. he' 
not veri pleasant personally, I grant you, hi manner are terribl and 
he' dirty, but as far as the trial' concern he' quit immaculate.' 
I said immaculate, but I wa deliber exaggerating. then he said, 
'block is sly, that' all. he' accumul plenti of experi and 
know how to delay proceedings. but there' more that he doesn't know 
than he does. what do you think he'd say if he learn hi trial still 
hasn't begun, if you told him they haven't even rung the bell to 
announc the start of proceedings?' alright block, alright," said the 
lawyer, as at these word block had begun to rais himself on hi 
trembl knee and clearli want to plead for some explanation. It 
wa the first time the lawyer had spoken ani clear word directli to 
block. He look down with hi tire eyes, half blankli and half at 
block, who slowli sank back down on hi knee under thi gaze. "what 
the judg said ha no mean for you," said the lawyer. "you needn't 
be frighten at everi word. If you do it again I won't tell you 
anyth els at all. it' imposs to start a sentenc without you 
look at me as if you were receiv your final judgement. you should 
be asham of yourself here in front of my client! and you'r 
destroy the trust he ha for me. just what is it you want? you'r 
still alive, you'r still under my protection. there' no point in 
worrying! somewher you'v read that the final judgement can often come 
without warning, from anyon at ani time. and, in the right 
circumstances, that' basic true, but it' also true that I dislik 
your anxieti and fear and see that you don't have the trust in me you 
should have. now what have I just said? I repeat someth said by 
one of the judges. you know that there are so mani variou opinion 
about the procedur that they form into a great big pile and nobodi can 
make ani sens of them. thi judge, for instance, see proceed as 
start at a differ point from where I do. A differ of opinion, 
noth more. At a certain stage in the proceed tradit ha it 
that a sign is given by ring a bell. thi judg see that as the 
point at which proceed begin. I can't set out all the opinion 
oppos to that view here, and you wouldn't understand it anyway, 
suffic it to say that there are mani reason to disagre with him." 
embarrassed, block ran hi finger through the pile of the carpet, hi 
anxieti about what the judg had said had let him forget hi inferior 
statu toward the lawyer for a while, he thought onli about himself and 
turn the judg word round to examin them from all sides. "block," 
said leni, as if reprimand him, and, take hold of the collar of hi 
coat, pull him up slightli higher. "leav the carpet alon and listen 
to what the lawyer is saying." 

thi chapter wa left unfinished. 




chapter nine 
In the cathedr 

A veri import italian busi contact of the bank had come to 
visit the citi for the first time and K. wa given the task of show 
him some of it cultur sights. At ani other time he would have seen 
thi job as an honour but now, when he wa find it hard even to 
maintain hi current posit in the bank, he accept it onli with 
reluctance. everi hour that he could not be in the offic wa a caus 
of concern for him, he wa no longer abl to make use of hi time in the 
offic anyth like as well as he had previously, he spent mani hour 
mere pretend to do import work, but that onli increas hi 
anxieti about not be in the office. then he sometim thought he saw 
the deputi director, who wa alway watching, come into k.' office, sit 
at hi desk, look through hi papers, receiv client who had almost 
becom old friend of k., and lure them away from him, perhap he even 
discov mistakes, mistak that seem to threaten K. from a thousand 
direct when he wa at work now, and which he could no longer avoid. 
So now, if he wa ever ask to leav the offic on busi or even 
need to make a short busi trip, howev much an honour it seem - 
and task of thi sort happen to have increas substanti recent 
- there wa alway the suspicion that they want to get him out of hi 
offic for a while and check hi work, or at least the idea that they 
thought he wa dispensable. It would not have been difficult for him to 
turn down most of these jobs, but he did not dare to do so because, if 
hi fear had the slightest foundation, turn the job down would have 
been an acknowledg of them. for thi reason, he never demur 
from accept them, and even when he wa ask to go on a tire 
busi trip last two day he said noth about have to go out in 
the raini autumn weather when he had a sever chill, just in order to 
avoid the risk of not be ask to go. when, with a rage headache, 
he arriv back from thi trip he learn that he had been chosen to 
accompani the italian busi contact the follow day. the 
temptat for onc to turn the job down wa veri great, especi as 
it had no direct connect with business, but there wa no deni that 
social oblig toward thi busi contact were in themselv 
import enough, onli not for k., who knew quit well that he need 
some success at work if he wa to maintain hi posit there and 
that, if he fail in that, it would not help him even if thi italian 
somehow found him quit charming; he did not want to be remov from hi 
workplac for even one day, as the fear of not be allow back in wa 
too great, he knew full well that the fear wa exagger but it still 
made him anxious. however, in thi case it wa almost imposs to 
think of an accept excuse, hi knowledg of italian wa not great 
but still good enough; the decid factor wa that K. had earlier known 
a littl about art histori and thi had becom wide known around the 
bank in extrem exagger form, and that K. had been a member of the 
societi for the preserv of citi monuments, albeit onli for busi 
reasons. It wa said that thi italian wa an art lover, so the choic 
of K. to accompani him wa a matter of course. 

It wa a veri raini and stormi morn when k., in a foul temper 
at the thought of the day ahead of him, arriv earli at seven o'clock 
in the offic so that he could at least do some work befor hi visitor 
would prevent him. He had spent half the night studi a book of 
italian grammar so that he would be somewhat prepar and wa veri 
tired; hi desk wa less attract to him than the window where he had 
spent far too much time sit of late, but he resist the temptat 
and sat down to hi work. unfortunately, just then the servitor came in 
and report that the director had sent him to see whether the chief 
clerk wa alreadi in hi office; if he was, then would he pleas be so 
kind as to come to hi recept room as the gentleman from itali wa 
alreadi there. "i'll come straight away," said K. He put a small 
dictionari in hi pocket, took a guid to the city' tourist site under 
hi arm that he had compil for strangers, and went through the deputi 
director' offic into that of the director. He wa glad he had come 
into the offic so earli and wa abl to be of servic immediately, 
nobodi could serious have expect that of him. the deputi director' 
offic was, of course, still as empti as the middl of the night, the 
servitor had probabl been ask to summon him too but without success. 
As K. enter the recept room two men stood up from the deep 
armchair where they had been sitting. the director gave him a friendli 
smile, he wa clearli veri glad that K. wa there, he immedi 
introduc him to the italian who shook k.' hand vigor and joke 
that somebodi wa an earli riser. K. did not quit understand whom he 
had in mind, it wa moreov an odd express to use and it took K. a 
littl while to guess it meaning. He repli with a few bland phrase 
which the italian receiv onc more with a laugh, pass hi hand 
nervous and repeatedli over hi blue-grey, bushi moustache. thi 
moustach wa obvious perfumed, it wa almost tempt to come close 
to it and sniff. when they had all sat down and begun a light 
preliminari conversation, K. wa disconcert to notic that he 
understood no more than fragment of what the italian said. when he 
spoke veri calmli he understood almost everything, but that wa veri 
infrequent, mostli the word gush from hi mouth and he seem to be 
enjoy himself so much hi head shook. when he wa talk in thi 
way hi speech wa usual wrap up in some kind of dialect which 
seem to K. to have noth to do with italian but which the director 
not onli understood but also spoke, although K. ought to have foreseen 
thi as the italian came from the south of hi countri where the 
director had also spent sever years. whatev the cause, K. realis 
that the possibl of commun with the italian had been larg 
taken from him, even hi french wa difficult to understand, and hi 
moustach conceal the movement of hi lip which might have offer 
some help in understand what he said. K. began to anticip mani 
difficulties, he gave up tri to understand what the italian said - 
with the director there, who could understand him so easily, it would 
have been pointless effort - and for the time be did no more than 
scowl at the italian as he relax sit deep but comfort in the 
armchair, as he frequent pull at hi short, sharpli tailor jacket 
and at one time lift hi arm in the air and move hi hand freeli to 
tri and depict someth that K. could not grasp, even though he wa 
lean forward and did not let the hand out of hi sight. K. had 
noth to occupi himself but mechan watch the exchang between 
the two men and hi tired final made itself felt, to hi alarm, 
although fortun in good time, he onc caught himself nearli get 
up, turn round and leaving. eventu the italian look at the 
clock and jump up. after take hi leav from the director he turn 
to k., press himself so close to him that K. had to push hi chair 
back just so that he could move. the director had, no doubt, seen the 
anxieti in k.' eye as he tri to cope with thi dialect of italian, 
he join in with thi convers in a way that wa so adroit and 
unobtrus that he seem to be ad no more than minor comments, 
wherea in fact he wa swiftli and patient break into what the 
italian said so that K. could understand. K. learn in thi way that 
the italian first had a few busi matter to settle, that he 
unfortun had onli a littl time at hi disposal, that he certainli 
did not intend to rush round to see everi monument in the city, that he 
would much rather - at least as long as K. would agree, it wa entir 
hi decis - just see the cathedr and to do so thoroughly. He wa 
extrem pleas to be accompani by someon who wa so learn and so 
pleasant - by thi he meant k., who wa occupi not with listen to 
the italian but the director - and ask if he would be so kind, if the 
time wa suitable, to meet him in the cathedr in two hours' time at 
about ten o'clock. He hope he would certainli be abl to be there at 
that time. K. made an appropri reply, the italian shook first the 
director' hand and then k.'s, then the director' again and went to the 
door, half turn to the two men who follow him and continu to talk 
without a break. K. remain togeth with the director for a short 
while, although the director look especi unhappi today. He 
thought he need to apologis to K. for someth and told him - they 
were stand intim close togeth - he had thought at first he 
would accompani the italian himself, but then - he gave no more precis 
reason than thi - then he decid it would be better to send K. with 
him. He should not be surpris if he could not understand the italian 
at first, he would be abl to veri soon, and even if he realli could not 
understand veri much he said it wa not so bad, as it wa realli not so 
import for the italian to be understood. and anyway, k.' knowledg 
of italian wa surprisingli good, the director wa sure he would get by 
veri well. and with that, it wa time for K. to go. He spent the time 
still remain to him with a dictionary, copi out obscur word he 
would need to guid the italian round the cathedral. It wa an 
extrem irksom task, servitor brought him the mail, bank staff came 
with variou queri and, when they saw that K. wa busy, stood by the 
door and did not go away until he had listen to them, the deputi 
director did not miss the opportun to disturb K. and came in 
frequently, took the dictionari from hi hand and flick through it 
pages, clearli for no purpose, when the door to the ante-room open 
even client would appear from the half dark and bow timidli to him 
- they want to attract hi attent but were not sure whether he had 
seen them - all thi activ wa circl around K. with him at it 
centr while he compil the list of word he would need, then look 
them up in the dictionary, then wrote them out, then practis their 
pronunci and final tri to learn them by heart. the good 
intent he had had earlier, though, seem to have left him 
completely, it wa the italian who had caus him all thi effort and 
sometim he becam so angri with him that he buri the dictionari 
under some paper firmli intend to do no more preparation, but then 
he realis he could not walk up and down in the cathedr with the 
italian without say a word, so, in an even greater rage, he 
pull the dictionari back out again. 

At exactli half past nine, just when he wa about to leave, there 
wa a telephon call for him, leni wish him good morn and ask how 
he was, K. thank her hurriedli and told her it wa imposs for him 
to talk now as he had to go to the cathedral. "to the cathedral?" ask 
leni. "yes, to the cathedral." "what do you have to go to the 
cathedr for?" said leni. K. tri to explain it to her briefly, but 
he had hardli begun when leni suddenli said, "they'r harass you." 
one thing that K. could not bear wa piti that he had not want or 
expected, he took hi leav of her with two words, but as he put the 
receiv back in it place he said, half to himself and half to the girl 
on the other end of the line who could no longer hear him, "yes, they'r 
harass me." 

By now the time wa late and there wa almost a danger he would 
not be on time. He took a taxi to the cathedral, at the last moment he 
had rememb the album that he had had no opportun to give to the 
italian earlier and so took it with him now. He held it on hi knee 
and drum impati on it dure the whole journey. the rain had 
eas off slightli but it wa still damp chilli and dark, it would be 
difficult to see anyth in the cathedr but stand about on cold 
flagston might well make k.' chill much worse. the squar in front 
of the cathedr wa quit empty, K. rememb how even as a small 
child he had notic that nearli all the hous in thi narrow squar 
had the curtain at their window close most of the time, although 
today, with the weather like this, it wa more understandable. the 
cathedr also seem quit empty, of cours no-on would think of go 
there on a day like this. K. hurri along both the side nave but saw 
no-on but an old woman who, wrap up in a warm shawl, wa kneel at 
a pictur of the virgin mari and stare up at it. then, in the 
distance, he saw a church offici who limp away through a doorway in 
the wall. K. had arriv on time, it had struck ten just as he wa 
enter the building, but the italian still wa not there. K. went 
back to the main entrance, stood there indecis for a while, and 
then walk round the cathedr in the rain in case the italian wa 
wait at anoth entrance. He wa nowher to be found. could the 
director have misunderstood what time they had agre on? how could 
anyon understand someon like that properli anyway? whatev had 
happened, K. would have to wait for him for at least half an hour. As 
he wa tire he want to sit down, he went back insid the cathedral, 
he found someth like a small carpet on one of the steps, he move it 
with hi foot to a nearbi pew, wrap himself up tighter in hi coat, 
put the collar up and sat down. To pass the time he open the album 
and flick through the page a littl but soon had to give up as it 
becam so dark that when he look up he could hardli make out anyth 
in the side nave next to him. 

In the distanc there wa a larg triangl of candl flicker 
on the main altar, K. wa not certain whether he had seen them earlier. 
perhap they had onli just been lit. church staff creep silent as 
part of their job, you don't notic them. when K. happen to turn 
round he also saw a tall, stout candl attach to a column not far 
behind him. It wa all veri pretty, but total inadequ to 
illumin the pictur which were usual left in the dark of the 
side altars, and seem to make the dark all the deeper. It wa 
discourt of the italian not to come but it wa also sensibl of him, 
there would have been noth to see, they would have had to content 
themselv with seek out a few pictur with k.' electr pocket 
torch and look at them one small part at a time. K. went over to a 
nearbi side chapel to see what they could have hope for, he went up a 
few step to a low marbl rail and leant over it to look at the altar 
pictur by the light of hi torch. the etern light hung disturbingli 
in front of it. the first thing that K. partli saw and partli guess 
at wa a larg knight in armour who wa shown at the far edg of the 
painting. He wa lean on hi sword that he had stuck into the nake 
ground in front of him where onli a few blade of grass grew here and 
there. He seem to be pay close attent to someth that wa 
be play out in front of him. It wa astonish to see how he 
stood there without go ani closer. perhap it wa hi job to stand 
guard. It wa a long time sinc K. had look at ani pictur and he 
studi the knight for a long time even though he had continu to 
blink as he found it difficult to bear the green light of hi torch. 
then when he move the light to the other part of the pictur he found 
an inter of christ shown in the usual way, it wa also a 
compar new painting. He put hi torch away and went back to hi 
place. 

there seem to be no point in wait for the italian ani longer, 
but outsid it wa certainli rain heavily, and as it wa not so cold 
in the cathedr as K. had expect he decid to stay there for the 
time being. close by him wa the great pulpit, there were two plain 
golden cross attach to it littl round roof which were lie almost 
flat and whose tip cross over each other. the outsid of the 
pulpit' balustrad wa cover in green foliag which continu down to 
the column support it, littl angel could be seen among the leaves, 
some of them live and some of them still. K. walk up to the pulpit 
and examin it from all sides, it stonework had been sculpt with 
great care, it seem as if the foliag had trap a deep dark 
between and behind it leav and held it there prisoner, K. lay hi 
hand in one of these gap and cautious felt the stone, until then he 
had been total unawar of thi pulpit' existence. then K. happen 
to notic one of the church staff stand behind the next row of pews, 
he wore a loose, creased, black cassock, he held a snuff box in hi left 
hand and he wa watch K. now what doe he want? thought K. Do I 
seem suspici to him? doe he want a tip? but when the man in the 
cassock saw that K. had notic him he rais hi right hand, a pinch of 
snuff still held between two fingers, and point in some vagu 
direction. It wa almost imposs to understand what thi behaviour 
meant, K. wait a while longer but the man in the cassock did not stop 
gestur with hi hand and even augment it by nod hi head. "now 
what doe he want?" ask K. quietly, he did not dare call out loud 
here; but then he drew out hi purs and push hi way through the 
nearest pew to reach the man. he, however, immedi gestur to 
turn down thi offer, shrug hi shoulder and limp away. As a 
child K. had imit ride on a hors with the same sort of movement 
as thi limp. "thi old man is like a child," thought k., "he doesn't 
have the sens for anyth more than serv in a church. look at the 
way he stop when I stop, and how he wait to see whether i'll 
continue." with a smile, K. follow the old man all the way up the 
side nave and almost as far as the main altar, all thi time the old man 
continu to point at someth but K. deliber avoid look 
round, he wa onli point in order to make it harder for K. to follow 
him. eventually, K. did stop following, he did not want to worri the 
old man too much, and he also did not want to frighten him away 
complet in case the italian turn up after all. 

when he enter the central nave to go back to where he had left 
the album, he notic a small secondari pulpit on a column almost next 
to the stall by the altar where the choir sat. It wa veri simple, 
made of plain white stone, and so small that from a distanc it look 
like an empti nich where the statu of a saint ought to have been. It 
certainli would have been imposs for the priest to take a full step 
back from the balustrade, and, although there wa no decor on it, 
the top of the pulpit curv in except low so that a man of 
averag height would not be abl stand upright and would have to remain 
bent forward over the balustrade. In all, it look as if it had been 
intend to make the priest suffer, it wa imposs to understand whi 
thi pulpit would be need as there were also the other one avail 
which were larg and so artist decorated. 

and K. would certainli not have notic thi littl pulpit if 
there had not been a lamp fasten abov it, which usual meant there 
wa a sermon about to be given. So wa a sermon to be given now? In 
thi empti church? K. look down at the step which, press close 
against the column, led up to the pulpit. they were so narrow they 
seem to be there as decor on the column rather than for anyon to 
use. but under the pulpit - K. grin in astonish - there realli 
wa a priest stand with hi hand on the handrail readi to climb the 
step and look at K. then he nod veri slightly, so that K. 
cross himself and genuflect as he should have done earlier. with a 
littl swing, the priest went up into the pulpit with short fast steps. 
wa there realli a sermon about to begin? mayb the man in the cassock 
had not been realli so demented, and had meant to lead k.' way to the 
preacher, which in thi empti church would have been veri necessary. 
and there wa also, somewher in front of a pictur of the virgin mary, 
an old woman who should have come to hear the sermon. and if there wa 
to be a sermon whi had it not been introduc on the organ? but the 
organ remain quiet and mere look out weakli from the dark of 
it great height. 

K. now consid whether he should leav as quickli as possible, 
if he did not do it now there would be no chanc of do so dure the 
sermon and he would have to stay there for as long as it lasted, he had 
lost so much time when he should have been in hi office, there had long 
been no need for him to wait for the italian ani longer, he look at 
hi watch, it wa eleven. but could there realli be a sermon given? 
could K. constitut the entir congregation? how could he when he wa 
just a stranger who want to look at the church? that, basically, wa 
all he was. the idea of a sermon, now, at eleven o'clock, on a workday, 
in hideou weather, wa nonsense. the priest - there wa no doubt that 
he wa a priest, a young man with a smooth, dark face - wa clearli 
go up there just to put the lamp out after somebodi had lit it by 
mistake. 

but there had been no mistake, the priest seem rather to check 
that the lamp wa lit and turn it a littl higher, then he slowli 
turn to face the front and leant down on the balustrad grip it 
angular rail with both hands. He stood there like that for a while and, 
without turn hi head, look around. K. had move back a long way 
and leant hi elbow on the front pew. somewher in the church - he 
could not have said exactli where - he could make out the man in the 
cassock hunch under hi bent back and at peace, as if hi work were 
completed. In the cathedr it wa now veri quiet! but K. would have 
to disturb that silence, he had no intent of stay there; if it wa 
the priest' duti to preach at a certain time regardless of the 
circumst then he could, and he could do it without k.' take 
part, and k.' presenc would do noth to augment the effect of it. 
So K. began slowli to move, felt hi way on tipto along the pew, 
arriv at the broad aisl and went along it without be disturbed, 
except for the sound of hi steps, howev light, which rang out on the 
stone floor and resound from the vaulting, quiet but continu at a 
repeating, regular pace. K. felt slightli abandon as, probabl 
observ by the priest, he walk by himself between the empti pews, and 
the size of the cathedr seem to be just at the limit of what a man 
could bear. when he arriv back at where he had been sit he did 
not hesit but simpli reach out for the album he had left there and 
took it with him. He had nearli left the area cover by pew and wa 
close to the empti space between himself and the exit when, for the 
first time, he heard the voic of the priest. A power and 
experienc voice. It pierc through the reach of the cathedr 
readi wait for it! but the priest wa not call out to the 
congregation, hi cri wa quit unambigu and there wa no escap from 
it, he call "josef k.!" 

K. stood still and look down at the floor. In theori he wa 
still free, he could have carri on walking, through one of three dark 
littl wooden door not far in front of him and away from there. It 
would simpli mean he had not understood, or that he had understood but 
chose not to pay attent to it. but if he onc turn round he would 
be trapped, then he would have acknowledg that he had understood 
perfectli well, that he realli wa the josef K. the priest had call to 
and that he wa will to follow. If the priest had call out again 
K. would certainli have carri on out the door, but everyth wa 
silent as K. also waited, he turn hi head slightli as he want to 
see what the priest wa do now. He wa mere stand in the pulpit 
as before, but it wa obviou that he had seen K. turn hi head. If K. 
did not now turn round complet it would have been like a child 
play hide and seek. He did so, and the priest beckon him with hi 
finger. As everyth could now be done openli he ran - becaus of 
curios and the wish to get it over with - with long fli leap 
toward the pulpit. At the front pew he stopped, but to the priest he 
still seem too far away, he reach out hi hand and point sharpli 
down with hi finger to a place immedi in front of the pulpit. and 
K. did as he wa told, stand in that place he had to bend hi head a 
long way back just to see the priest. "you are josef k.," said the 
priest, and rais hi hand from the balustrad to make a gestur whose 
mean wa unclear. "yes," said k., he consid how freeli he had 
alway given hi name in the past, for some time now it had been a 
burden to him, now there were peopl who knew hi name whom he had never 
seen before, it had been so nice first to introduc yourself and onli 
then for peopl to know who you were. "you have been accused," said the 
priest, especi gently. "yes," said k., "so I have been informed." 
"then you are the one I am look for," said the priest. "I am the 
prison chaplain." "I see," said K. "I had you summon here," said the 
priest, "becaus I want to speak to you." "I knew noth of that," 
said K. "I came here to show the cathedr to a gentleman from italy." 
"that is besid the point," said the priest. "what are you hold in 
your hand? Is it a prayer book?" "no," answer k., "it' an album of 
the city' tourist sights." "put it down," said the priest. K. threw 
it away with such forc that it flap open and roll across the 
floor, tear it pages. "do you know your case is go badly?" ask 
the priest. "that' how it seem to me too," said K. "i'v expend a 
lot of effort on it, but so far with no result. although I do still 
have some document to submit." "how do you imagin it will end?" ask 
the priest. "at first I thought it wa bound to end well," said k., 
"but now I have my doubt about it. I don't know how it will end. Do 
you know?" "I don't," said the priest, "but I fear it will end badly. 
you are consid guilty. your case will probabl not even go beyond a 
minor court. provision at least, your guilt is seen as proven." 
"but i'm not guilty," said k., "there' been a mistake. how is it even 
possibl for someon to be guilty. we'r all human be here, one 
like the other." "that is true," said the priest, "but that is how the 
guilti speak." "do you presum i'm guilti too?" ask K. "I make no 
presumpt about you," said the priest. "I thank you for that," said 
K. "but everyon els involv in these proceed ha someth 
against me and presum i'm guilty. they even influenc those who 
aren't involved. My posit get harder all the time." "you don't 
understand the facts," said the priest, "the verdict doe not come 
suddenly, proceed continu until a verdict is reach gradually." 
"I see," said k., lower hi head. "what do you intend to do about 
your case next?" ask the priest. "I still need to find help," said 
k., rais hi head to see what the priest thought of this. "there are 
still certain possibl I haven't yet made use of." "you look for 
too much help from peopl you don't know," said the priest 
disapprovingly, "and especi from women. can you realli not see 
that' not the help you need?" "sometimes, in fact quit often, I could 
believ you'r right," said k., "but not always. women have a lot of 
power. If I could persuad some of the women I know to work togeth 
with me then I would be certain to succeed. especi in a court like 
thi that seem to consist of noth but woman-chasers. show the 
examin judg a woman in the distanc and he'll run right over the 
desk, and the accused, just to get to her as soon as he can." the 
priest lower hi head down to the balustrade, onli now did the roof 
over the pulpit seem to press him down. what sort of dread weather 
could it be outside? It wa no longer just a dull day, it wa deepest 
night. none of the stain glass in the main window shed even a flicker 
of light on the dark of the walls. and thi wa the moment when the 
man in the cassock chose to put out the candl on the main altar, one 
by one. "are you cross with me?" ask K. "mayb you don't know what 
sort of court it is you serve." He receiv no answer. "well, it' 
just my own experience," said K. abov him there wa still silence. "I 
didn't mean to insult you," said K. At that, the priest scream down 
at k.: "can you not see two step in front of you?" He shout in 
anger, but it wa also the scream of one who see anoth fall and, 
shock and without thinking, scream against hi own will. 

the two men, then, remain silent for a long time. In the 
dark beneath him, the priest could not possibl have seen K. 
distinctly, although K. wa abl to see him clearli by the light of the 
littl lamp. whi did the priest not come down? He had not given a 
sermon, he had onli told K. a few thing which, if he follow them 
closely, would probabl caus him more harm than good. but the priest 
certainli seem to mean well, it might even be possible, if he would 
come down and cooper with him, it might even be possibl for him to 
obtain some accept piec of advic that could make all the 
difference, it might, for instance, be abl to show him not so much to 
influenc the proceed but how to break free of them, how to evad 
them, how to live away from them. K. had to admit that thi wa 
someth he had had on hi mind quit a lot of late. If the priest 
knew of such a possibl he might, if K. ask him, let him know about 
it, even though he wa part of the court himself and even though, when 
K. had criticis the court, he had held down hi gentl natur and 
actual shout at K. 

"would you not like to come down here?" ask K. "if you'r not 
go to give a sermon come down here with me." "now I can come down," 
said the priest, perhap he regret have shout at K. As he took 
down the lamp from it hook he said, "to start off with I had to speak 
to you from a distance. otherwis i'm too easili influenc and forget 
my duty." 

K. wait for him at the foot of the steps. while he wa still on 
one of the higher step as he came down them the priest reach out hi 
hand for K. to shake. "can you spare me a littl of your time?" ask 
K. "a much time as you need," said the priest, and pass him the 
littl lamp for him to carry. even at close distanc the priest did not 
lose a certain solemn that seem to be part of hi character. "you 
are veri friendli toward me," said k., as they walk up and down 
besid each other in the dark of one of the side naves. "that make 
you an except among all those who belong to the court. I can trust 
you more than ani of the other i'v seen. I can speak openli with 
you." "don't fool yourself," said the priest. "how would I be fool 
myself?" ask K. "you fool yourself in the court," said the priest, 
"it talk about thi self-deceit in the open paragraph to the law. 
In front of the law there is a doorkeeper. A man from the countrysid 
come up to the door and ask for entry. but the doorkeep say he 
can't let him in to the law right now. the man think about this, and 
then he ask if he'll be abl to go in later on. 'that' possible,' 
say the doorkeeper, 'but not now'. the gateway to the law is open as 
it alway is, and the doorkeep ha step to one side, so the man 
bend over to tri and see in. when the doorkeep notic thi he 
laugh and says, 'if you'r tempt give it a try, tri and go in even 
though I say you can't. care though: i'm powerful. and i'm onli the 
lowliest of all the doormen. but there' a doorkeep for each of the 
room and each of them is more power than the last. it' more than I 
can stand just to look at the third one.' the man from the countri had 
not expect difficulti like this, the law wa suppos to be 
access for anyon at ani time, he thinks, but now he look more 
close at the doorkeep in hi fur coat, see hi big hook nose, hi 
long thin tartar-beard, and he decid it' better to wait until he ha 
permiss to enter. the doorkeep give him a stool and let him sit 
down to one side of the gate. He sit there for day and years. He 
tri to be allow in time and again and tire the doorkeep with hi 
requests. the doorkeep often question him, ask about where he' 
from and mani other things, but these are disinterest question such 
as great men ask, and he alway end up by tell him he still can't 
let him in. the man had come well equip for hi journey, and use 
everything, howev valuable, to bribe the doorkeeper. He accept 
everything, but as he doe so he says, 'i'll onli accept thi so that 
you don't think there' anyth you'v fail to do'. over mani years, 
the man watch the doorkeep almost without a break. He forget about 
the other doormen, and begin to think thi one is the onli thing 
stop him from gain access to the law. over the first few year he 
curs hi unhappi condit out loud, but later, as he becom old, he 
just grumbl to himself. He becom senile, and as he ha come to know 
even the flea in the doorkeeper' fur collar over the year that he ha 
been studi him he even ask them to help him and chang the 
doorkeeper' mind. final hi eye grow dim, and he no longer know 
whether it' realli get darker or just hi eye that are deceiv 
him. but he seem now to see an inextinguish light begin to shine 
from the dark behind the door. He doesn't have long to live now. 
just befor he dies, he bring togeth all hi experi from all thi 
time into one question which he ha still never put to the doorkeeper. 
He beckon to him, as he' no longer abl to rais hi stiff body. the 
doorkeep ha to bend over deepli as the differ in their size ha 
chang veri much to the disadvantag of the man. 'what is it you want 
to know now?' ask the doorkeeper, 'you'r insatiable.' 'everyon want 
access to the law,' say the man, 'how come, over all these years, no- 
one but me ha ask to be let in?' the doorkeep can see the man' 
come to hi end, hi hear ha faded, and so, so that he can be heard, 
he shout to him: 'nobodi els could have got in thi way, as thi 
entranc wa meant onli for you. now i'll go and close it'." 

"so the doorkeep cheat the man," said K. immediately, who had 
been captiv by the story. "don't be too quick," said the priest, 
"don't take somebodi else' opinion without check it. I told you the 
stori exactli as it wa written. there' noth in there about 
cheating." "but it' quit clear," said k., "and your first 
interpret of it wa quit correct. the doorkeep gave him the 
inform that would releas him onli when it could be of no more 
use." "he didn't ask him befor that," said the priest, "and don't 
forget he wa onli a doorkeeper, and as doorkeep he did hi duty." 
"what make you think he did hi duty?" ask k., "he didn't. It might 
have been hi duti to keep everyon els away, but thi man is who the 
door wa intend for and he ought to have let him in." "you'r not 
pay enough attent to what wa written and you'r chang the 
story," said the priest. "accord to the story, there are two 
import thing that the doorkeep explain about access to the law, 
one at the beginning, one at the end. At one place he say he can't 
allow him in now, and at the other he say thi entranc wa intend 
for him alone. If one of the statement contradict the other you 
would be right and the doorkeep would have cheat the man from the 
country. but there is no contradiction. On the contrary, the first 
statement even hint at the second. you could almost say the doorkeep 
went beyond hi duti in that he offer the man some prospect of be 
admit in the future. throughout the story, hi duti seem to have 
been mere to turn the man away, and there are mani comment who 
are surpris that the doorkeep offer thi hint at all, as he seem 
to love exactitud and keep strict guard over hi position. He stay 
at hi post for mani year and doesn't close the gate until the veri 
end, he' veri consciou of the import of hi service, as he says, 
'i'm powerful,' he ha respect for hi superiors, as he says, 'i'm onli 
the lowliest of the doormen', he' not talkative, as through all these 
year the onli question he ask are 'disinterested', he' not 
corruptible, as when he' offer a gift he says, 'i'll onli accept thi 
so that you don't think there' anyth you'v fail to do,' as far as 
fulfil hi duti goe he can be neither ruffl nor begged, as it 
say about the man that, 'he tire the doorkeep with hi requests', 
even hi extern appear suggest a pedant character, the big 
hook nose and the long, thin, black tartar-beard. how could ani 
doorkeep be more faith to hi duty? but in the doorkeeper' 
charact there are also other featur which might be veri use for 
those who seek entri to the law, and when he hint at some possibl 
in the futur it alway seem to make it clear that he might even go 
beyond hi duty. there' no deni he' a littl simpl minded, and 
that make him a littl conceited. even if all he said about hi power 
and the power of the other doorkeep and how not even he could bear 
the sight of them - I say even if all these assert are right, the 
way he make them show that he' too simpl and arrog to understand 
properly. the comment say about thi that, 'correct understand 
of a matter and a misunderstand of the same matter are not mutual 
exclusive'. whether they'r right or not, you have to conced that hi 
simplic and arrogance, howev littl they show, do weaken hi 
function of guard the entrance, they are defect in the doorkeeper' 
character. you also have to consid that the doorkeep seem to be 
friendli by nature, he isn't alway just an official. He make a joke 
right at the beginning, in that he invit the man to enter at the same 
time as maintain the ban on hi entering, and then he doesn't send 
him away but give him, as it say in the text, a stool to sit on and 
let him stay by the side of the door. the patienc with which he put 
up with the man' request through all these years, the littl 
question sessions, accept the gifts, hi polit when he put 
up with the man curs hi fate even though it wa the doorkeep who 
caus that fate - all these thing seem to want to arous our sympathy. 
not everi doorkeep would have behav in the same way. and finally, 
he let the man beckon him and he bend deep down to him so that he can 
put hi last question. there' no more than some slight impati - 
the doorkeep know everything' come to it end - shown in the words, 
'you'r insatiable'. there are mani comment who go even further in 
explain it in thi way and think the words, 'you'r insatiable' are 
an express of friendli admiration, albeit with some condescension. 
howev you look at it the figur of the doorkeep come out 
differ from how you might think." "you know the stori better than 
I do and you'v known it for longer," said K. they were silent for a 
while. and then K. said, "so you think the man wa not cheated, do 
you?" "don't get me wrong," said the priest, "i'm just point out the 
differ opinion about it. you shouldn't pay too much attent to 
people' opinions. the text cannot be altered, and the variou opinion 
are often no more than an express of despair over it. there' even 
one opinion which say it' the doorkeep who' been cheated." "that 
doe seem to take thing too far," said K. "how can they argu the 
doorkeep ha been cheated?" "their argument," answer the priest, 
"i base on the simplic of the doorkeeper. they say the doorkeep 
doesn't know the insid of the law, onli the way into it where he just 
walk up and down. they see hi idea of what' insid the law as 
rather childish, and suppos he' afraid himself of what he want to 
make the man frighten of. yes, he' more afraid of it than the man, 
as the man want noth but to go insid the law, even after he' heard 
about the terribl doormen there, in contrast to the doorkeep who 
doesn't want to go in, or at least we don't hear anyth about it. On 
the other hand, there are those who say he must have alreadi been insid 
the law as he ha been taken on into it servic and that could onli 
have been done inside. that can be counter by suppos he could have 
been given the job of doorkeep by somebodi call out from inside, 
and that he can't have gone veri far insid as he couldn't bear the 
sight of the third doorkeeper. nor, through all those years, doe the 
stori say the doorkeep told the man anyth about the inside, other 
than hi comment about the other doorkeepers. He could have been 
forbidden to do so, but he hasn't said anyth about that either. all 
thi seem to show he doesn't know anyth about what the insid look 
like or what it means, and that that' whi he' be deceived. but 
he' also be deceiv by the man from the countri as he' thi man' 
subordin and doesn't know it. there' a lot to indic that he 
treat the man as hi subordinate, I expect you remember, but those who 
hold thi view would say it' veri clear that he realli is hi 
subordinate. abov all, the free man is superior to the man who ha to 
serv another. now, the man realli is free, he can go wherev he 
wants, the onli thing forbidden to him is entri into the law and, what' 
more, there' onli one man forbid him to do so - the doorkeeper. If 
he take the stool and sit down besid the door and stay there all hi 
life he doe thi of hi own free will, there' noth in the stori to 
say he wa forc to do it. On the other hand, the doorkeep is kept 
to hi post by hi employment, he' not allow to go away from it and 
it seem he' not allow to go insid either, not even if he want to. 
also, although he' in the servic of the law he' onli there for thi 
one entrance, therefor he' there onli in the servic of thi one man 
who the door' intend for. thi is anoth way in which he' hi 
subordinate. We can take it that he' been perform thi somewhat 
empti servic for mani years, through the whole of a man' life, as it 
say that a man will come, that mean someon old enough to be a man. 
that mean the doorkeep will have to wait a long time befor hi 
function is fulfilled, he will have to wait for as long as the man 
liked, who came to the door of hi own free will. even the end of the 
doorkeeper' servic is determin by when the man' life ends, so the 
doorkeep remain hi subordin right to the end. and it' point 
out repeatedli that the doorkeep seem to know noth of ani of this, 
although thi is not seen as anyth remarkable, as those who hold thi 
view see the doorkeep as delud in a way that' far worse, a way 
that' to do with hi service. At the end, speak about the entranc 
he says, 'now i'll go and close it', although at the begin of the 
stori it say the door to the law is open as it alway is, but if it' 
alway open - alway - that mean it' open independ of the 
lifespan of the man it' intend for, and not even the doorkeep will 
be abl to close it. there are variou opinion about this, some say 
the doorkeep wa onli answer a question or show hi devot to 
duti or, just when the man wa in hi last moments, the doorkeep 
want to caus him regret and sorrow. there are mani who agre that he 
wouldn't be abl to close the door. they even believe, at the end at 
least, the doorkeep is aware, deep down, that he' the man' 
subordinate, as the man see the light that shine out of the entri to 
the law wherea the doorkeep would probabl have hi back to it and 
say noth at all to show there' been ani change." "that is well 
substantiated," said k., who had been repeat some part of the 
priest' explan to himself in a whisper. "it is well 
substantiated, and now I too think the doorkeep must have been 
deceived. although that doe not mean i'v abandon what I thought 
earlier as the two version are, to some extent, not incompatible. it' 
not clear whether the doorkeep see clearli or is deceived. I said 
the man had been cheated. If the doorkeep understand clearly, then 
there could be some doubt about it, but if the doorkeep ha been 
deceiv then the man is bound to believ the same thing. that would 
mean the doorkeep is not a cheat but so simple-mind that he ought to 
be dismiss from hi job immediately; if the doorkeep is mistaken it 
will do him no harm but the man will be harm immensely." "there 
you'v found anoth opinion," said the priest, "a there are mani who 
say the stori doesn't give anyon the right to judg the doorkeeper. 
howev he might seem to us he is still in the servic of the law, so he 
belong to the law, so he' beyond what man ha a right to judge. In 
thi case we can't believ the doorkeep is the man' subordinate. 
even if he ha to stay at the entranc into the law hi servic make 
him incompar more than if he live freeli in the world. the man ha 
come to the law for the first time and the doorkeep is alreadi there. 
he' been given hi posit by the law, to doubt hi worth would be to 
doubt the law." "I can't say i'm in complet agreement with thi view," 
said K. shake hi head, "a if you accept it you'll have to accept 
that everyth said by the doorkeep is true. but you'v alreadi 
explain veri fulli that that' not possible." "no," said the priest, 
"you don't need to accept everyth as true, you onli have to accept it 
as necessary." "depress view," said K. "the lie made into the rule 
of the world." 

K. said that as if it were hi final word but it wa not hi 
conclusion. He wa too tire to think about all the ramif of 
the story, and the sort of thought they led him into were not familiar 
to him, unrealist things, thing better suit for offici of the 
court to discuss than for him. the simpl stori had lost it shape, he 
want to shake it off, and the priest who now felt quit compassion 
allow thi and accept k.' remark without comment, even though hi 
view wa certainli veri differ from k.'s. 

In silence, they carri on walk for some time, K. stay close 
besid the priest without know where he was. the lamp in hi hand 
had long sinc gone out. once, just in front of him, he thought he 
could see the statu of a saint by the glitter of the silver on it, 
although it quickli disappear back into the darkness. So that he 
would not remain entir depend on the priest, K. ask him, "we'r 
now near the main entrance, are we?" "no," said the priest, "we'r a 
long way from it. Do you alreadi want to go?" K. had not thought of 
go until then, but he immedi said, 
"yes, certainly, I have to go. i'm the chief clerk in a bank and there 
are peopl wait for me, I onli came here to show a foreign busi 
contact round the cathedral." "alright," said the priest offer him 
hi hand, "go then." "but I can't find my way round in thi dark by 
myself," said K. "go to your left as far as the wall," said the priest, 
"then continu alongsid the wall without leav it and you'll find a 
way out." the priest had onli gone a few pace from him, but K. wa 
alreadi shout loudly, "please, wait!" "i'm waiting," said the 
priest. "i there anyth els you want from me?" ask K. "no," said 
the priest. "you were so friendli to me earlier on," said k., "and you 
explain everything, but now you abandon me as if I were noth to 
you." "you have to go," said the priest. 
"well, yes," said k., "you need to understand that." "first, you need 
to understand who I am," said the priest. "you'r the prison chaplain," 
said k., and went closer to the priest, it wa not so import for him 
to go straight back to the bank as he had made out, he could veri well 
stay where he was. "so that mean I belong to the court," said the 
priest. "so whi would I want anyth from you? the court doesn't want 
anyth from you. It accept you when you come and it let you go when 
you leave." 




chapter ten 
end 

the even befor k.' thirty-first birthday - it wa about nine 
o'clock in the evening, the time when the street were quiet - two men 
came to where he lived. In frock coats, pale and fat, wear top hat 
that look like they could not be taken off their heads. after some 
brief formal at the door of the flat when they first arrived, the 
same formal were repeat at greater length at k.' door. He had 
not been notifi they would be coming, but K. sat in a chair near the 
door, dress in black as they were, and slowli put on new glove which 
stretch tightli over hi finger and behav as if he were expect 
visitors. He immedi stood up and look at the gentlemen 
inquisitively. "you'v come for me then, have you?" he asked. the 
gentlemen nodded, one of them indic the other with the top hand now 
in hi hand. K. told them he had been expect a differ visitor. 
He went to the window and look onc more down at the dark street. 
most of the window on the other side of the street were also dark 
already, mani of them had the curtain closed. In one of the window on 
the same floor where there wa a light on, two small children could be 
seen play with each other insid a playpen, unabl to move from where 
they were, reach out for each other with their littl hands. "some 
ancient, unimport actor - that' what they'v sent for me," said K. 
to himself, and look round onc again to confirm thi to himself. 
"they want to sort me out as cheapli as they can." K. suddenli turn 
round to face the two men and asked, "what theatr do you play in?" 
"theatre?" ask one of the gentlemen, turn to the other for 
assist and pull in the corner of hi mouth. the other made a 
gestur like someon who wa dumb, as if he were struggl with some 
organ caus him trouble. "you'r not properli prepar to answer 
questions," said K. and went to fetch hi hat. 

As soon as they were on the stair the gentlemen want to take 
k.' arms, but K. said "wait till we'r in the street, i'm not ill." 
but they wait onli until the front door befor they took hi arm in a 
way that K. had never experienc before. they kept their shoulder 
close behind his, did not turn their arm in but twist them around the 
entir length of k.' arm and took hold of hi hand with a grasp that 
wa formal, experienc and could not be resisted. K. wa held stiff 
and upright between them, they form now a singl unit so that if ani 
one of them had been knock down all of them must have fallen. they 
form a unit of the sort that normal can be form onli by matter 
that is lifeless. 

whenev they pass under a lamp K. tri to see hi companion 
more clearly, as far as wa possibl when they were press so close 
together, as in the dim light of hi room thi had been hardli possible. 
"mayb they'r tenors," he thought as he saw their big doubl chins. 
the cleanli of their face disgust him. He could see the hand 
that clean them, pass over the corner of their eyes, rub at 
their upper lips, scratch out the creas on those chins. 

when K. notic that, he stopped, which meant the other had to 
stop too; they were at the edg of an open square, devoid of peopl but 
decor with flower beds. "whi did they send you, of all people!" he 
cri out, more a shout than a question. the two gentleman clearli knew 
no answer to give, they waited, their free arm hang down, like 
nurs when the patient need to rest. "I will go no further," said K. 
as if to see what would happen. the gentlemen did not need to make ani 
answer, it wa enough that they did not loosen their grip on K. and 
tri to move him on, but K. resist them. "i'll soon have no need of 
much strength, i'll use all of it now," he thought. He thought of the 
fli that tear their leg off struggl to get free of the flypaper. 
"these gentleman will have some hard work to do". 

just then, miss bürstner came up into the squar in front of them 
from the step lead from a small street at a lower level. It wa not 
certain that it wa her, although the similar was, of course, great. 
but it did not matter to K. whether it wa certainli her anyway, he just 
becam suddenli awar that there wa no point in hi resistance. there 
would be noth heroic about it if he resisted, if he now caus 
troubl for these gentlemen, if in defend himself he sought to enjoy 
hi last glimmer of life. He start walking, which pleas the 
gentlemen and some of their pleasur convey itself to him. now they 
permit him to decid which direct they took, and he decid to 
take the direct that follow the young woman in front of them, not 
so much becaus he want to catch up with her, nor even becaus he 
want to keep her in sight for as long as possible, but onli so that he 
would not forget the reproach she repres for him. "the onli thing 
I can do now," he said to himself, and hi thought wa confirm by the 
equal length of hi own step with the step of the two others, "the 
onli thing I can do now is keep my common sens and do what' need 
right till the end. I alway want to go at the world and tri and do 
too much, and even to do it for someth that wa not too cheap. that 
wa wrong of me. should I now show them I learn noth from face 
trial for a year? should I go out like someon stupid? should I let 
anyon say, after i'm gone, that at the start of the proceed I 
want to end them, and that now that they'v end I want to start them 
again? I don't want anyon to say that. i'm grate they sent these 
unspeaking, uncomprehend men to go with me on thi journey, and that 
it' been left up to me to say what' necessary". 

meanwhile, the young woman had turn off into a side street, but 
K. could do without her now and let hi companion lead him. all three 
of them now, in complet agreement, went over a bridg in the light of 
the moon, the two gentlemen were will to yield to each littl 
movement made by K. as he move slightli toward the edg and direct 
the group in that direct as a singl unit. the moonlight glitter 
and quiver in the water, which divid itself around a small island 
cover in a densely-pil mass of foliag and tree and bushes. 
beneath them, now invisible, there were gravel path with comfort 
bench where K. had stretch himself out on mani summer' days. "I 
didn't actual want to stop here," he said to hi companions, shame by 
their complianc with hi wishes. behind k.' back one of them seem 
to quietli criticis the other for the misunderstand about stopping, 
and then they went on. they went on up through sever street where 
policemen were walk or stand here and there; some in the distanc 
and then some veri close. one of them with a bushi moustache, hi hand 
on the grip of hi sword, seem to have some purpos in approach 
the group, which wa hardli unsuspicious. the two gentlemen stopped, 
the policeman seem about to open hi mouth, and then K. drove hi 
group forc forward. sever time he look back cautious to 
see if the policeman wa following; but when they had a corner between 
themselv and the policeman K. began to run, and the two gentlemen, 
despit be serious short of breath, had to run with him. 

In thi way they quickli left the built up area and found 
themselv in the field which, in thi part of town, began almost 
without ani transit zone. there wa a quarry, empti and abandoned, 
near a build which wa still like those in the city. here the men 
stopped, perhap becaus thi had alway been their destin or 
perhap becaus they were too exhaust to run ani further. here they 
releas their hold on k., who just wait in silence, and took their 
top hat off while they look round the quarri and wipe the sweat off 
their brow with their handkerchiefs. the moonlight lay everywher with 
the natur peac that is grant to no other light. 

after exchang a few courtesi about who wa to carri out the 
next task - the gentlemen did not seem to have been alloc specif 
function - one of them went to K. and took hi coat, hi waistcoat, and 
final hi shirt off him. K. made an involuntari shiver, at which the 
gentleman gave him a gentle, reassur tap on the back. then he 
care fold the thing up as if they would still be needed, even if 
not in the near future. He did not want to expos K. to the chilli 
night air without move though, so he took him under the arm and walk 
up and down with him a littl way while the other gentleman look round 
the quarri for a suitabl place. when he had found it he made a sign 
and the other gentleman escort him there. It wa near the rockface, 
there wa a stone lie there that had broken loose. the gentlemen sat 
K. down on the ground, leant him against the stone and settl hi head 
down on the top of it. despit all the effort they went to, and despit 
all the co-oper shown by k., hi demeanour seem veri forc and 
hard to believe. So one of the gentlemen ask the other to grant him a 
short time while he put K. in posit by himself, but even that did 
noth to make it better. In the end they left K. in a posit that 
wa far from the best of the one they had tri so far. then one of 
the gentlemen open hi frock coat and from a sheath hang on a belt 
stretch across hi waistcoat he withdrew a long, thin, double-edg 
butcher' knife which he held up in the light to test it sharpness. 
the repuls courtesi began onc again, one of them pass the knife 
over K. to the other, who then pass it back over K. to the first. K. 
now knew it would be hi duti to take the knife as it pass from hand 
to hand abov him and thrust it into himself. but he did not do it, 
instead he twist hi neck, which wa still free, and look around. 
He wa not abl to show hi full worth, wa not abl to take all the 
work from the offici bodies, he lack the rest of the strength he 
need and thi final shortcom wa the fault of whoever had deni it 
to him. As he look round, he saw the top floor of the build next 
to the quarry. He saw how a light flicker on and the two halv of a 
window open out, somebody, made weak and thin by the height and the 
distance, leant suddenli far out from it and stretch hi arm out even 
further. who wa that? A friend? A good person? somebodi who wa 
take part? somebodi who want to help? wa he alone? wa it 
everyone? would anyon help? were there object that had been 
forgotten? there must have been some. the logic cannot be refuted, but 
someon who want to live will not resist it. where wa the judg he'd 
never seen? where wa the high court he had never reached? He rais 
both hand and spread out all hi fingers. 

but the hand of one of the gentleman were laid on k.' throat, 
while the other push the knife deep into hi heart and twist it 
there, twice. As hi eyesight failed, K. saw the two gentlemen cheek by 
cheek, close in front of hi face, watch the result. "like a dog!" he 
said, it wa as if the shame of it should outliv him. 








end of the project gutenberg ebook of the trial, by franz kafka 

*** end OF thi project gutenberg ebook the trial *** 

***** thi file should be name 7849-8.txt or 7849-8.zip ***** 
thi and all associ file of variou format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/7/8/4/7849/ 



updat edit will replac the previou one--th old edit 
will be renamed. 

creat the work from public domain print edit mean that no 
one own a unit state copyright in these works, so the foundat 
(and you!) can copi and distribut it in the unit state without 
permiss and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the gener term of use part of thi license, appli to 
copi and distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a regist trademark, and may not be use if you 
charg for the ebooks, unless you receiv specif permission. If you 
do not charg anyth for copi of thi ebook, compli with the 
rule is veri easy. you may use thi ebook for nearli ani purpos 
such as creation of deriv works, reports, perform and 
research. they may be modifi and print and given away--y may do 
practic anyth with public domain ebooks. redistribut is 
subject to the trademark license, especi commerci 
redistribution. 



*** start: full licens *** 

the full project gutenberg licens 
pleas read thi befor you distribut OR use thi work 

To protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promot the free 
distribut of electron works, by use or distribut thi work 
(or ani other work associ in ani way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agre to compli with all the term of the full project 
gutenberg-tm licens avail with thi file or onlin at 
www.gutenberg.org/license. 


section 1. gener term of use and redistribut project gutenberg-tm 
electron work 

1.a. By read or use ani part of thi project gutenberg-tm 
electron work, you indic that you have read, understand, agre to 
and accept all the term of thi licens and intellectu properti 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agre to abid by all 
the term of thi agreement, you must ceas use and return or destroy 
all copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in your possession. 
If you paid a fee for obtain a copi of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work and you do not agre to be bound by the 
term of thi agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entiti to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a regist trademark. It may onli be 
use on or associ in ani way with an electron work by peopl who 
agre to be bound by the term of thi agreement. there are a few 
thing that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electron work 
even without compli with the full term of thi agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of thing you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electron work if you follow the term of thi agreement 
and help preserv free futur access to project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compil copyright in the collect of project 
gutenberg-tm electron works. nearli all the individu work in the 
collect are in the public domain in the unit states. If an 
individu work is in the public domain in the unit state and you are 
locat in the unit states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or creat deriv 
work base on the work as long as all refer to project gutenberg 
are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promot free access to electron work by 
freeli share project gutenberg-tm work in complianc with the term of 
thi agreement for keep the project gutenberg-tm name associ with 
the work. you can easili compli with the term of thi agreement by 
keep thi work in the same format with it attach full project 
gutenberg-tm licens when you share it without charg with others. 

thi particular work is one of the few copyright individu work 
includ with the permiss of the copyright holder. inform on 
the copyright owner for thi particular work and the term of use 
impos by the copyright holder on thi work are set forth at the 
begin of thi work. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are locat also govern 
what you can do with thi work. copyright law in most countri are in 
a constant state of change. If you are outsid the unit states, check 
the law of your countri in addit to the term of thi agreement 
befor downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribut or 
creat deriv work base on thi work or ani other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundat make no represent concern 
the copyright statu of ani work in ani countri outsid the unit 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remov all refer to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the follow sentence, with activ link to, or other immedi 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm licens must appear promin 
whenev ani copi of a project gutenberg-tm work (ani work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copi or distributed: 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.org 

1.e.2. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is deriv 
from the public domain (doe not contain a notic indic that it is 
post with permiss of the copyright holder), the work can be copi 
and distribut to anyon in the unit state without pay ani fee 
or charges. If you are redistribut or provid access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associ with or appear on the 
work, you must compli either with the requir of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permiss for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is post 
with the permiss of the copyright holder, your use and distribut 
must compli with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and ani addit 
term impos by the copyright holder. addit term will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm licens for all work post with the 
permiss of the copyright holder found at the begin of thi work. 

1.e.4. Do not unlink or detach or remov the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens term from thi work, or ani file contain a part of thi 
work or ani other work associ with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribut or redistribut thi 
electron work, or ani part of thi electron work, without 
promin display the sentenc set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
activ link or immedi access to the full term of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribut thi work in ani binary, 
compressed, mark up, nonproprietari or proprietari form, includ ani 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provid access to or 
distribut copi of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the offici version 
post on the offici project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org), 
you must, at no addit cost, fee or expens to the user, provid a 
copy, a mean of export a copy, or a mean of obtain a copi upon 
request, of the work in it origin "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. ani altern format must includ the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens as specifi in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. Do not charg a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copi or distribut ani project gutenberg-tm work 
unless you compli with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charg a reason fee for copi of or provid 
access to or distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work provid 
that 

- you pay a royalti fee of 20% of the gross profit you deriv from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm work calcul use the method 
you alreadi use to calcul your applic taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
ha agre to donat royalti under thi paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literari archiv foundation. royalti payment 
must be paid within 60 day follow each date on which you 
prepar (or are legal requir to prepare) your period tax 
returns. royalti payment should be clearli mark as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat at the 
address specifi in section 4, "inform about donat to 
the project gutenberg literari archiv foundation." 

- you provid a full refund of ani money paid by a user who notifi 
you in write (or by e-mail) within 30 day of receipt that s/he 
doe not agre to the term of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must requir such a user to return or 
destroy all copi of the work possess in a physic medium 
and discontinu all use of and all access to other copi of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accord with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of ani 
money paid for a work or a replac copy, if a defect in the 
electron work is discov and report to you within 90 day 
of receipt of the work. 

- you compli with all other term of thi agreement for free 
distribut of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. If you wish to charg a fee or distribut a project gutenberg-tm 
electron work or group of work on differ term than are set 
forth in thi agreement, you must obtain permiss in write from 
both the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundat as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunt and employe expend consider 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcrib and proofread 
public domain work in creat the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despit these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electron 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limit to, incomplete, inaccur or 
corrupt data, transcript errors, a copyright or other intellectu 
properti infringement, a defect or damag disk or other medium, a 
comput virus, or comput code that damag or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limit warranty, disclaim OF damag - except for the "right 
of replac or refund" describ in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and ani other parti distribut a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work under thi agreement, disclaim all 
liabil to you for damages, cost and expenses, includ legal 
fees. you agre that you have NO remedi for negligence, strict 
liability, breach OF warranti OR breach OF contract except those 
provid IN paragraph 1.f.3. you agre that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and ani distributor under thi agreement will not BE 
liabl TO you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punit OR 
incident damag even IF you give notic OF the possibl OF such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limit right OF replac OR refund - If you discov a 
defect in thi electron work within 90 day of receiv it, you can 
receiv a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explan to the person you receiv the work from. If you 
receiv the work on a physic medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entiti that provid you with 
the defect work may elect to provid a replac copi in lieu of a 
refund. If you receiv the work electronically, the person or entiti 
provid it to you may choos to give you a second opportun to 
receiv the work electron in lieu of a refund. If the second copi 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in write without further 
opportun to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limit right of replac or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, thi work is provid to you 'as-is', with NO other 
warranti OF ani kind, express OR implied, includ but not limit TO 
warranti OF merchant OR fit for ani purpose. 

1.f.5. some state do not allow disclaim of certain impli 
warranti or the exclus or limit of certain type of damages. 
If ani disclaim or limit set forth in thi agreement violat the 
law of the state applic to thi agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaim or limit permit by 
the applic state law. the invalid or unenforc of ani 
provis of thi agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemn - you agre to indemnifi and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, ani agent or employe of the foundation, anyon 
provid copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in accord 
with thi agreement, and ani volunt associ with the production, 
promot and distribut of project gutenberg-tm electron works, 
harmless from all liability, cost and expenses, includ legal fees, 
that aris directli or indirectli from ani of the follow which you do 
or caus to occur: (a) distribut of thi or ani project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addit or delet to ani 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) ani defect you cause. 


section 2. inform about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonym with the free distribut of 
electron work in format readabl by the widest varieti of comput 
includ obsolete, old, middle-ag and new computers. It exist 
becaus of the effort of hundr of volunt and donat from 
peopl in all walk of life. 

volunt and financi support to provid volunt with the 
assist they need are critic to reach project gutenberg-tm' 
goal and ensur that the project gutenberg-tm collect will 
remain freeli avail for gener to come. In 2001, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundat wa creat to provid a secur 
and perman futur for project gutenberg-tm and futur generations. 
To learn more about the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat 
and how your effort and donat can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundat inform page at www.gutenberg.org 


section 3. inform about the project gutenberg literari archiv 
foundat 

the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educ corpor organ under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt statu by the intern 
revenu service. the foundation' ein or feder tax identif 
number is 64-6221541. contribut to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. feder law and your state' laws. 

the foundation' princip offic is locat at 4557 melan dr. S. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but it volunt and employe are scatter 
throughout numer locations. it busi offic is locat at 809 
north 1500 west, salt lake city, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. email 
contact link and up to date contact inform can be found at the 
foundation' web site and offici page at www.gutenberg.org/contact 

for addit contact information: 
dr. gregori B. newbi 
chief execut and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 

section 4. inform about donat to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot surviv without wide 
spread public support and donat to carri out it mission of 
increas the number of public domain and licens work that can be 
freeli distribut in machin readabl form access by the widest 
array of equip includ outdat equipment. mani small donat 
($1 to $5,000) are particularli import to maintain tax exempt 
statu with the irs. 

the foundat is commit to compli with the law regul 
chariti and charit donat in all 50 state of the unit 
states. complianc requir are not uniform and it take a 
consider effort, much paperwork and mani fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. We do not solicit donat in locat 
where we have not receiv written confirm of compliance. To 
send donat or determin the statu of complianc for ani 
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/don 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribut from state where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibit 
against accept unsolicit donat from donor in such state who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

intern donat are grate accepted, but we cannot make 
ani statement concern tax treatment of donat receiv from 
outsid the unit states. u.s. law alon swamp our small staff. 

pleas check the project gutenberg web page for current donat 
method and addresses. donat are accept in a number of other 
way includ checks, onlin payment and credit card donations. 
To donate, pleas visit: www.gutenberg.org/don 


section 5. gener inform about project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. 

professor michael S. hart wa the origin of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a librari of electron work that could be freeli share 
with anyone. for forti years, he produc and distribut project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with onli a loos network of volunt support. 

project gutenberg-tm ebook are often creat from sever print 
editions, all of which are confirm as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notic is included. thus, we do not necessarili 
keep ebook in complianc with ani particular paper edition. 

most peopl start at our web site which ha the main PG search facility: 

www.gutenberg.org 

thi web site includ inform about project gutenberg-tm, 
includ how to make donat to the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundation, how to help produc our new ebooks, and how to 
subscrib to our email newslett to hear about new ebooks. 
