the project gutenberg ebook of the great god pan, by arthur machen 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.net 


title: the great god pan 

author: arthur machen 

post date: august 12, 2008 [ebook #389] 
releas date: january, 1996 
last updated: juli 3, 2013 

language: english 


*** start OF thi project gutenberg ebook the great god pan *** 




produc by brandi weed. html version by Al haines. 









the great god pan 

by 

arthur machen 



content 

I the experi 
II mr. clarke' memoir 
iii the citi OF resurrect 
IV the discoveri IN paul street 
V the letter OF advic 
VI the suicid 
vii the encount IN soho 
viii the fragment 




I 
prefac 
the experi 

"I am glad you came, clarke; veri glad indeed. I wa not sure you 
could spare the time." 

"I wa abl to make arrang for a few days; thing are not veri 
live just now. but have you no misgivings, raymond? Is it 
absolut safe?" 

the two men were slowli pace the terrac in front of dr. raymond' 
house. the sun still hung abov the western mountain-line, but it 
shone with a dull red glow that cast no shadows, and all the air wa 
quiet; a sweet breath came from the great wood on the hillsid above, 
and with it, at intervals, the soft murmur call of the wild doves. 
below, in the long love valley, the river wound in and out between 
the lone hills, and, as the sun hover and vanish into the west, a 
faint mist, pure white, began to rise from the hills. dr. raymond 
turn sharpli to hi friend. 

"safe? Of cours it is. In itself the oper is a perfectli simpl 
one; ani surgeon could do it." 

"and there is no danger at ani other stage?" 

"none; absolut no physic danger whatsoever, I give you my word. 
you are alway timid, clarke, always; but you know my history. I have 
devot myself to transcendent medicin for the last twenti years. I 
have heard myself call quack and charlatan and impostor, but all the 
while I knew I wa on the right path. five year ago I reach the 
goal, and sinc then everi day ha been a prepar for what we shall 
do tonight." 

"I should like to believ it is all true." clark knit hi brows, and 
look doubt at dr. raymond. "are you perfectli sure, raymond, 
that your theori is not a phantasmagoria--a splendid vision, certainly, 
but a mere vision after all?" 

dr. raymond stop in hi walk and turn sharply. He wa a 
middle-ag man, gaunt and thin, of a pale yellow complexion, but as he 
answer clark and face him, there wa a flush on hi cheek. 

"look about you, clarke. you see the mountain, and hill follow 
after hill, as wave on wave, you see the wood and orchard, the field 
of ripe corn, and the meadow reach to the reed-b by the river. 
you see me stand here besid you, and hear my voice; but I tell you 
that all these things--yes, from that star that ha just shone out in 
the sky to the solid ground beneath our feet--i say that all these are 
but dream and shadows; the shadow that hide the real world from our 
eyes. there is a real world, but it is beyond thi glamour and thi 
vision, beyond these 'chase in arras, dream in a career,' beyond them 
all as beyond a veil. I do not know whether ani human be ha ever 
lift that veil; but I do know, clarke, that you and I shall see it 
lift thi veri night from befor another' eyes. you may think thi 
all strang nonsense; it may be strange, but it is true, and the 
ancient knew what lift the veil means. they call it see the 
god pan." 

clark shivered; the white mist gather over the river wa chilly. 

"it is wonder indeed," he said. "we are stand on the brink of a 
strang world, raymond, if what you say is true. I suppos the knife 
is absolut necessary?" 

"yes; a slight lesion in the grey matter, that is all; a trifl 
rearrang of certain cells, a microscop alter that would 
escap the attent of ninety-nin brain specialist out of a hundred. 
I don't want to bother you with 'shop,' clarke; I might give you a mass 
of technic detail which would sound veri imposing, and would leav 
you as enlighten as you are now. but I suppos you have read, 
casually, in out-of-the-way corner of your paper, that immens stride 
have been made recent in the physiolog of the brain. I saw a 
paragraph the other day about digby' theory, and brown faber' 
discoveries. theori and discoveries! where they are stand now, I 
stood fifteen year ago, and I need not tell you that I have not been 
stand still for the last fifteen years. It will be enough if I say 
that five year ago I made the discoveri that I allud to when I said 
that ten year ago I reach the goal. after year of labour, after 
year of toil and grope in the dark, after day and night of 
disappoint and sometim of despair, in which I use now and then 
to trembl and grow cold with the thought that perhap there were 
other seek for what I sought, at last, after so long, a pang of 
sudden joy thrill my soul, and I knew the long journey wa at an end. 
By what seem then and still seem a chance, the suggest of a 
moment' idl thought follow up upon familiar line and path that I 
had track a hundr time already, the great truth burst upon me, and 
I saw, map out in line of sight, a whole world, a sphere unknown; 
contin and islands, and great ocean in which no ship ha sail 
(to my belief) sinc a man first lift up hi eye and beheld the sun, 
and the star of heaven, and the quiet earth beneath. you will think 
thi all high-flown language, clarke, but it is hard to be literal. 
and yet; I do not know whether what I am hint at cannot be set forth 
in plain and lone terms. for instance, thi world of our is pretti 
well gird now with the telegraph wire and cables; thought, with 
someth less than the speed of thought, flash from sunris to 
sunset, from north to south, across the flood and the desert places. 
suppos that an electrician of today were suddenli to perceiv that he 
and hi friend have mere been play with pebbl and mistak 
them for the foundat of the world; suppos that such a man saw 
uttermost space lie open befor the current, and word of men flash 
forth to the sun and beyond the sun into the system beyond, and the 
voic of articulate-speak men echo in the wast void that bound our 
thought. As analog go, that is a pretti good analog of what I have 
done; you can understand now a littl of what I felt as I stood here 
one evening; it wa a summer evening, and the valley look much as it 
doe now; I stood here, and saw befor me the unutterable, the 
unthink gulf that yawn profound between two worlds, the world of 
matter and the world of spirit; I saw the great empti deep stretch dim 
befor me, and in that instant a bridg of light leapt from the earth 
to the unknown shore, and the abyss wa spanned. you may look in 
brown faber' book, if you like, and you will find that to the present 
day men of scienc are unabl to account for the presence, or to 
specifi the function of a certain group of nerve-cel in the brain. 
that group is, as it were, land to let, a mere wast place for fanci 
theories. I am not in the posit of brown faber and the 
specialists, I am perfectli instruct as to the possibl function of 
those nerve-cent in the scheme of things. with a touch I can bring 
them into play, with a touch, I say, I can set free the current, with a 
touch I can complet the commun between thi world of sens 
and--w shall be abl to finish the sentenc later on. yes, the knife 
is necessary; but think what that knife will effect. It will level 
utterli the solid wall of sense, and probably, for the first time sinc 
man wa made, a spirit will gaze on a spirit-world. clarke, mari will 
see the god pan!" 

"but you rememb what you wrote to me? I thought it would be 
requisit that she--" 

He whisper the rest into the doctor' ear. 

"not at all, not at all. that is nonsense. I assur you. indeed, it 
is better as it is; I am quit certain of that." 

"consid the matter well, raymond. it' a great responsibility. 
someth might go wrong; you would be a miser man for the rest of 
your days." 

"no, I think not, even if the worst happened. As you know, I rescu 
mari from the gutter, and from almost certain starvation, when she wa 
a child; I think her life is mine, to use as I see fit. come, it' 
get late; we had better go in." 

dr. raymond led the way into the house, through the hall, and down a 
long dark passage. He took a key from hi pocket and open a heavi 
door, and motion clark into hi laboratory. It had onc been a 
billiard-room, and wa light by a glass dome in the centr of the 
ceiling, whenc there still shone a sad grey light on the figur of the 
doctor as he lit a lamp with a heavi shade and place it on a tabl in 
the middl of the room. 

clark look about him. scarc a foot of wall remain bare; there 
were shelv all around laden with bottl and phial of all shape and 
colours, and at one end stood a littl chippendal book-case. raymond 
point to this. 

"you see that parchment oswald crollius? He wa one of the first to 
show me the way, though I don't think he ever found it himself. that 
is a strang say of his: 'in everi grain of wheat there lie hidden 
the soul of a star.'" 

there wa not much furnitur in the laboratory. the tabl in the 
centre, a stone slab with a drain in one corner, the two armchair on 
which raymond and clark were sitting; that wa all, except an 
odd-look chair at the furthest end of the room. clark look at 
it, and rais hi eyebrows. 

"yes, that is the chair," said raymond. "we may as well place it in 
position." He got up and wheel the chair to the light, and began 
rais and lower it, let down the seat, set the back at 
variou angles, and adjust the foot-rest. It look comfort 
enough, and clark pass hi hand over the soft green velvet, as the 
doctor manipul the levers. 

"now, clarke, make yourself quit comfortable. I have a coupl hours' 
work befor me; I wa oblig to leav certain matter to the last." 

raymond went to the stone slab, and clark watch him drearili as he 
bent over a row of phial and lit the flame under the crucible. the 
doctor had a small hand-lamp, shade as the larger one, on a ledg 
abov hi apparatus, and clarke, who sat in the shadows, look down at 
the great shadowi room, wonder at the bizarr effect of brilliant 
light and undefin dark contrast with one another. soon he 
becam consciou of an odd odour, at first the merest suggest of 
odour, in the room, and as it grew more decid he felt surpris that 
he wa not remind of the chemist' shop or the surgery. clark found 
himself idli endeavour to analys the sensation, and half conscious, 
he began to think of a day, fifteen year ago, that he had spent 
roam through the wood and meadow near hi own home. It wa a 
burn day at the begin of august, the heat had dim the 
outlin of all thing and all distanc with a faint mist, and peopl 
who observ the thermomet spoke of an abnorm register, of a 
temperatur that wa almost tropical. strang that wonder hot day 
of the fifti rose up again in clarke' imagination; the sens of 
dazzl all-pervad sunlight seem to blot out the shadow and the 
light of the laboratory, and he felt again the heat air beat in 
gust about hi face, saw the shimmer rise from the turf, and heard 
the myriad murmur of the summer. 

"I hope the smell doesn't annoy you, clarke; there' noth 
unwholesom about it. It may make you a bit sleepy, that' all." 

clark heard the word quit distinctly, and knew that raymond wa 
speak to him, but for the life of him he could not rous himself 
from hi lethargy. He could onli think of the lone walk he had taken 
fifteen year ago; it wa hi last look at the field and wood he had 
known sinc he wa a child, and now it all stood out in brilliant 
light, as a picture, befor him. abov all there came to hi nostril 
the scent of summer, the smell of flower mingled, and the odour of the 
woods, of cool shade places, deep in the green depths, drawn forth by 
the sun' heat; and the scent of the good earth, lie as it were with 
arm stretch forth, and smile lips, overpow all. hi fanci 
made him wander, as he had wander long ago, from the field into the 
wood, track a littl path between the shine undergrowth of 
beech-trees; and the trickl of water drop from the limeston rock 
sound as a clear melodi in the dream. thought began to go astray 
and to mingl with other thoughts; the beech alley wa transform to a 
path between ilex-trees, and here and there a vine climb from bough 
to bough, and sent up wave tendril and droop with purpl grapes, 
and the spars grey-green leav of a wild olive-tre stood out against 
the dark shadow of the ilex. clarke, in the deep fold of dream, wa 
consciou that the path from hi father' hous had led him into an 
undiscov country, and he wa wonder at the strang of it 
all, when suddenly, in place of the hum and murmur of the summer, an 
infinit silenc seem to fall on all things, and the wood wa hushed, 
and for a moment in time he stood face to face there with a presence, 
that wa neither man nor beast, neither the live nor the dead, but 
all thing mingled, the form of all thing but devoid of all form. and 
in that moment, the sacrament of bodi and soul wa dissolved, and a 
voic seem to cri "let us go hence," and then the dark of 
dark beyond the stars, the dark of everlasting. 

when clark woke up with a start he saw raymond pour a few drop of 
some oili fluid into a green phial, which he stopper tightly. 

"you have been dozing," he said; "the journey must have tire you out. 
It is done now. I am go to fetch mary; I shall be back in ten 
minutes." 

clark lay back in hi chair and wondered. It seem as if he had but 
pass from one dream into another. He half expect to see the wall 
of the laboratori melt and disappear, and to awak in london, 
shudder at hi own sleep fancies. but at last the door opened, 
and the doctor returned, and behind him came a girl of about seventeen, 
dress all in white. she wa so beauti that clark did not wonder 
at what the doctor had written to him. she wa blush now over face 
and neck and arms, but raymond seem unmoved. 

"mary," he said, "the time ha come. you are quit free. are you 
will to trust yourself to me entirely?" 

"yes, dear." 

"do you hear that, clarke? you are my witness. here is the chair, 
mary. It is quit easy. just sit in it and lean back. are you ready?" 

"yes, dear, quit ready. give me a kiss befor you begin." 

the doctor stoop and kiss her mouth, kindli enough. "now shut your 
eyes," he said. the girl close her eyelids, as if she were tired, and 
long for sleep, and raymond place the green phial to her nostrils. 
her face grew white, whiter than her dress; she struggl faintly, and 
then with the feel of submiss strong within her, cross her arm 
upon her breast as a littl child about to say her prayers. the bright 
light of the lamp fell full upon her, and clark watch chang 
fleet over her face as the chang of the hill when the summer 
cloud float across the sun. and then she lay all white and still, and 
the doctor turn up one of her eyelids. she wa quit unconscious. 
raymond press hard on one of the lever and the chair instantli sank 
back. clark saw him cut away a circle, like a tonsure, from her 
hair, and the lamp wa move nearer. raymond took a small glitter 
instrument from a littl case, and clark turn away shudderingly. 
when he look again the doctor wa bind up the wound he had made. 

"she will awak in five minutes." raymond wa still perfectli cool. 
"there is noth more to be done; we can onli wait." 

the minut pass slowly; they could hear a slow, heavy, ticking. 
there wa an old clock in the passage. clark felt sick and faint; hi 
knee shook beneath him, he could hardli stand. 

suddenly, as they watched, they heard a long-drawn sigh, and suddenli 
did the colour that had vanish return to the girl' cheeks, and 
suddenli her eye opened. clark quail befor them. they shone with 
an aw light, look far away, and a great wonder fell upon her 
face, and her hand stretch out as if to touch what wa invisible; 
but in an instant the wonder faded, and gave place to the most aw 
terror. the muscl of her face were hideous convulsed, she shook 
from head to foot; the soul seem struggl and shudder within the 
hous of flesh. It wa a horribl sight, and clark rush forward, as 
she fell shriek to the floor. 

three day later raymond took clark to mary' bedside. she wa lie 
wide-awake, roll her head from side to side, and grin vacantly. 

"yes," said the doctor, still quit cool, "it is a great pity; she is a 
hopeless idiot. however, it could not be helped; and, after all, she 
ha seen the great god pan." 



II 

mr. clarke' memoir 

mr. clarke, the gentleman chosen by dr. raymond to wit the strang 
experi of the god pan, wa a person in whose charact caution and 
curios were oddli mingled; in hi sober moment he thought of the 
unusu and eccentr with undisguis aversion, and yet, deep in hi 
heart, there wa a wide-ey inquisit with respect to all the 
more recondit and esoter element in the natur of men. the latter 
tendenc had prevail when he accept raymond' invitation, for 
though hi consid judgment had alway repudi the doctor' 
theori as the wildest nonsense, yet he secretli hug a belief in 
fantasy, and would have rejoic to see that belief confirmed. the 
horror that he wit in the dreari laboratori were to a certain 
extent salutary; he wa consciou of be involv in an affair not 
altogeth reputable, and for mani year afterward he clung brave to 
the commonplace, and reject all occas of occult investigation. 
indeed, on some homeopath principle, he for some time attend the 
seanc of distinguish mediums, hope that the clumsi trick of 
these gentlemen would make him altogeth disgust with mystic of 
everi kind, but the remedy, though caustic, wa not efficacious. clark 
knew that he still pine for the unseen, and littl by little, the old 
passion began to reassert itself, as the face of mary, shudder and 
convuls with an unknown terror, fade slowli from hi memory. 
occupi all day in pursuit both seriou and lucrative, the temptat 
to relax in the even wa too great, especi in the winter months, 
when the fire cast a warm glow over hi snug bachelor apartment, and a 
bottl of some choic claret stood readi by hi elbow. hi dinner 
digested, he would make a brief pretenc of read the even paper, 
but the mere catalogu of news soon pall upon him, and clark would 
find himself cast glanc of warm desir in the direct of an old 
japanes bureau, which stood at a pleasant distanc from the hearth. 
like a boy befor a jam-closet, for a few minut he would hover 
indecisive, but lust alway prevailed, and clark end by draw up 
hi chair, light a candle, and sit down befor the bureau. it 
pigeon-hol and drawer teem with document on the most morbid 
subjects, and in the well repos a larg manuscript volume, in which 
he had pain enter the gem of hi collection. clark had a fine 
contempt for publish literature; the most ghostli stori ceas to 
interest him if it happen to be printed; hi sole pleasur wa in the 
reading, compiling, and rearrang what he call hi "memoir to 
prove the exist of the devil," and engag in thi pursuit the 
even seem to fli and the night appear too short. 

On one particular evening, an ugli decemb night, black with fog, and 
raw with frost, clark hurri over hi dinner, and scarc deign to 
observ hi customari ritual of take up the paper and lay it down 
again. He pace two or three time up and down the room, and open 
the bureau, stood still a moment, and sat down. He leant back, 
absorb in one of those dream to which he wa subject, and at length 
drew out hi book, and open it at the last entry. there were three 
or four page dens cover with clarke' round, set penmanship, and 
at the begin he had written in a somewhat larger hand: 

singular narr told me by my friend, dr. phillips. 
He assur me that all the fact relat 
therein are strictli and wholli true, but 
refus to give either the surnam of the 
person concerned, or the place where these 
extraordinari event occurred. 

mr. clark began to read over the account for the tenth time, glanc 
now and then at the pencil note he had made when it wa told him by 
hi friend. It wa one of hi humour to pride himself on a certain 
literari ability; he thought well of hi style, and took pain in 
arrang the circumst in dramat order. He read the follow 
story:-- 


the person concern in thi statement are helen v., who, if she is 
still alive, must now be a woman of twenty-three, rachel m., sinc 
deceased, who wa a year younger than the above, and trevor w., an 
imbecile, age eighteen. these person were at the period of the stori 
inhabit of a villag on the border of wales, a place of some 
import in the time of the roman occupation, but now a scatter 
hamlet, of not more than five hundr souls. It is situat on rise 
ground, about six mile from the sea, and is shelter by a larg and 
picturesqu forest. 

some eleven year ago, helen V. came to the villag under rather 
peculiar circumstances. It is understood that she, be an orphan, 
wa adopt in her infanc by a distant relative, who brought her up in 
hi own hous until she wa twelv year old. thinking, however, that 
it would be better for the child to have playmat of her own age, he 
advertis in sever local paper for a good home in a comfort 
farmhous for a girl of twelve, and thi advertis wa answer by 
mr. r., a well-to-do farmer in the above-ment village. hi 
refer prove satisfactory, the gentleman sent hi adopt 
daughter to mr. r., with a letter, in which he stipul that the girl 
should have a room to herself, and state that her guardian need be at 
no troubl in the matter of education, as she wa alreadi suffici 
educ for the posit in life which she would occupy. In fact, mr. 
R. wa given to understand that the girl be allow to find her own 
occup and to spend her time almost as she liked. mr. R. duli 
met her at the nearest station, a town seven mile away from hi house, 
and seem to have remark noth extraordinari about the child except 
that she wa retic as to her former life and her adopt father. she 
was, however, of a veri differ type from the inhabit of the 
village; her skin wa a pale, clear olive, and her featur were 
strongli marked, and of a somewhat foreign character. she appear to 
have settl down easili enough into farmhous life, and becam a 
favourit with the children, who sometim went with her on her rambl 
in the forest, for thi wa her amusement. mr. R. state that he ha 
known her to go out by herself directli after their earli breakfast, 
and not return till after dusk, and that, feel uneasi at a young 
girl be out alon for so mani hours, he commun with her 
adopt father, who repli in a brief note that helen must do as she 
chose. In the winter, when the forest path are impassable, she spent 
most of her time in her bedroom, where she slept alone, accord to 
the instruct of her relative. It wa on one of these expedit to 
the forest that the first of the singular incid with which thi 
girl is connect occurred, the date be about a year after her 
arriv at the village. the preced winter had been remark 
severe, the snow drift to a great depth, and the frost continu 
for an unexampl period, and the summer follow wa as noteworthi 
for it extrem heat. On one of the veri hottest day in thi summer, 
helen V. left the farmhous for one of her long rambl in the forest, 
take with her, as usual, some bread and meat for lunch. she wa seen 
by some men in the field make for the old roman road, a green 
causeway which travers the highest part of the wood, and they were 
astonish to observ that the girl had taken off her hat, though the 
heat of the sun wa alreadi tropical. As it happened, a labourer, 
joseph W. by name, wa work in the forest near the roman road, and 
at twelv o'clock hi littl son, trevor, brought the man hi dinner of 
bread and cheese. after the meal, the boy, who wa about seven year 
old at the time, left hi father at work, and, as he said, went to look 
for flower in the wood, and the man, who could hear him shout with 
delight at hi discoveries, felt no uneasiness. suddenly, however, he 
wa horrifi at hear the most dread screams, evid the 
result of great terror, proceed from the direct in which hi son 
had gone, and he hastili threw down hi tool and ran to see what had 
happened. trace hi path by the sound, he met the littl boy, who 
wa run headlong, and wa evid terribl frightened, and on 
question him the man elicit that after pick a posi of flower 
he felt tired, and lay down on the grass and fell asleep. He wa 
suddenli awakened, as he stated, by a peculiar noise, a sort of sing 
he call it, and on peep through the branch he saw helen V. 
play on the grass with a "strang nake man," who he seem unabl 
to describ more fully. He said he felt dread frighten and ran 
away cri for hi father. joseph W. proceed in the direct 
indic by hi son, and found helen V. sit on the grass in the 
middl of a glade or open space left by charcoal burners. He angrili 
charg her with frighten hi littl boy, but she entir deni 
the accus and laugh at the child' stori of a "strang man," to 
which he himself did not attach much credence. joseph W. came to the 
conclus that the boy had woke up with a sudden fright, as children 
sometim do, but trevor persist in hi story, and continu in such 
evid distress that at last hi father took him home, hope that hi 
mother would be abl to sooth him. for mani weeks, however, the boy 
gave hi parent much anxiety; he becam nervou and strang in hi 
manner, refus to leav the cottag by himself, and constantli 
alarm the household by wake in the night with cri of "the man in 
the wood! father! father!" 

In cours of time, however, the impress seem to have worn off, and 
about three month later he accompani hi father to the home of a 
gentleman in the neighborhood, for whom joseph W. occasion did 
work. the man wa shown into the study, and the littl boy wa left 
sit in the hall, and a few minut later, while the gentleman wa 
give W. hi instructions, they were both horrifi by a pierc 
shriek and the sound of a fall, and rush out they found the child 
lie senseless on the floor, hi face contort with terror. the 
doctor wa immedi summoned, and after some examin he 
pronounc the child to be suffer form a kind of fit, appar 
produc by a sudden shock. the boy wa taken to one of the bedrooms, 
and after some time recov consciousness, but onli to pass into a 
condit describ by the medic man as one of violent hysteria. the 
doctor exhibit a strong sedative, and in the cours of two hour 
pronounc him fit to walk home, but in pass through the hall the 
paroxysm of fright return and with addit violence. the father 
perceiv that the child wa point at some object, and heard the old 
cry, "the man in the wood," and look in the direct indic saw 
a stone head of grotesqu appearance, which had been built into the 
wall abov one of the doors. It seem the owner of the hous had 
recent made alter in hi premises, and on dig the 
foundat for some offices, the men had found a curiou head, 
evid of the roman period, which had been place in the manner 
described. the head is pronounc by the most experienc 
archaeologist of the district to be that of a faun or satyr. [dr. 
phillip tell me that he ha seen the head in question, and assur me 
that he ha never receiv such a vivid present of intens evil.] 

from whatev caus arising, thi second shock seem too sever for 
the boy trevor, and at the present date he suffer from a weak of 
intellect, which give but littl promis of amending. the matter 
caus a good deal of sensat at the time, and the girl helen wa 
close question by mr. r., but to no purpose, she steadfastli 
deni that she had frighten or in ani way molest trevor. 

the second event with which thi girl' name is connect took place 
about six year ago, and is of a still more extraordinari character. 

At the begin of the summer of 1882, helen contract a friendship 
of a peculiarli intim charact with rachel m., the daughter of a 
prosper farmer in the neighbourhood. thi girl, who wa a year 
younger than helen, wa consid by most peopl to be the prettier of 
the two, though helen' featur had to a great extent soften as she 
becam older. the two girls, who were togeth on everi avail 
opportunity, present a singular contrast, the one with her clear, 
oliv skin and almost italian appearance, and the other of the 
proverbi red and white of our rural districts. It must be state 
that the payment made to mr. R. for the mainten of helen were 
known in the villag for their excess liberality, and the impress 
wa gener that she would one day inherit a larg sum of money from 
her relative. the parent of rachel were therefor not avers from 
their daughter' friendship with the girl, and even encourag the 
intimacy, though they now bitterli regret have done so. helen still 
retain her extraordinari fond for the forest, and on sever 
occas rachel accompani her, the two friend set out earli in 
the morning, and remain in the wood until dusk. onc or twice after 
these excurs mrs. M. thought her daughter' manner rather peculiar; 
she seem languid and dreamy, and as it ha been expressed, "differ 
from herself," but these peculiar seem to have been thought too 
trifl for remark. one evening, however, after rachel had come home, 
her mother heard a nois which sound like suppress weep in the 
girl' room, and on go in found her lying, half undressed, upon the 
bed, evid in the greatest distress. As soon as she saw her 
mother, she exclaimed, "ah, mother, mother, whi did you let me go to 
the forest with helen?" mrs. M. wa astonish at so strang a 
question, and proceed to make inquiries. rachel told her a wild 
story. she said-- 

clark close the book with a snap, and turn hi chair toward the 
fire. when hi friend sat one even in that veri chair, and told hi 
story, clark had interrupt him at a point a littl subsequ to 
this, had cut short hi word in a paroxysm of horror. "mi god!" he 
had exclaimed, "think, think what you are saying. It is too 
incredible, too monstrous; such thing can never be in thi quiet 
world, where men and women live and die, and struggle, and conquer, or 
mayb fail, and fall down under sorrow, and griev and suffer strang 
fortun for mani a year; but not this, phillips, not such thing as 
this. there must be some explanation, some way out of the terror. 
why, man, if such a case were possible, our earth would be a nightmare." 

but phillip had told hi stori to the end, concluding: 

"her flight remain a mysteri to thi day; she vanish in broad 
sunlight; they saw her walk in a meadow, and a few moment later she 
wa not there." 

clark tri to conceiv the thing again, as he sat by the fire, and 
again hi mind shudder and shrank back, appal befor the sight of 
such awful, unspeak element enthron as it were, and triumphant 
in human flesh. befor him stretch the long dim vista of the green 
causeway in the forest, as hi friend had describ it; he saw the 
sway leav and the quiver shadow on the grass, he saw the 
sunlight and the flowers, and far away, far in the long distance, the 
two figur move toward him. one wa rachel, but the other? 

clark had tri hi best to disbeliev it all, but at the end of the 
account, as he had written it in hi book, he had place the 
inscription: 

ET diabolu incarn est. ET homo factu est. 



iii 

the citi OF resurrect 

"herbert! good god! Is it possible?" 

"yes, my name' herbert. I think I know your face, too, but I don't 
rememb your name. My memori is veri queer." 

"don't you recollect villier of wadham?" 

"so it is, so it is. I beg your pardon, villiers, I didn't think I wa 
beg of an old colleg friend. good-night." 

"mi dear fellow, thi hast is unnecessary. My room are close by, but 
we won't go there just yet. suppos we walk up shaftesburi avenu a 
littl way? but how in heaven' name have you come to thi pass, 
herbert?" 

"it' a long story, villiers, and a strang one too, but you can hear 
it if you like." 

"come on, then. take my arm, you don't seem veri strong." 

the ill-assort pair move slowli up rupert street; the one in dirty, 
evil-look rags, and the other attir in the regul uniform of a 
man about town, trim, glossy, and emin well-to-do. villier had 
emerg from hi restaur after an excel dinner of mani courses, 
assist by an ingrati littl flask of chianti, and, in that frame 
of mind which wa with him almost chronic, had delay a moment by the 
door, peer round in the dimly-light street in search of those 
mysteri incid and person with which the street of london teem 
in everi quarter and everi hour. villier pride himself as a 
practis explor of such obscur maze and byway of london life, and 
in thi unprofit pursuit he display an assidu which wa worthi 
of more seriou employment. thu he stood by the lamp-post survey 
the passers-bi with undisguis curiosity, and with that graviti known 
onli to the systemat diner, had just enunci in hi mind the 
formula: "london ha been call the citi of encounters; it is more 
than that, it is the citi of resurrections," when these reflect 
were suddenli interrupt by a piteou whine at hi elbow, and a 
deplor appeal for alms. He look around in some irritation, and 
with a sudden shock found himself confront with the embodi proof of 
hi somewhat stilt fancies. there, close besid him, hi face 
alter and disfigur by poverti and disgrace, hi bodi bare cover 
by greasi ill-fit rags, stood hi old friend charl herbert, who 
had matricul on the same day as himself, with whom he had been 
merri and wise for twelv revolv terms. differ occup and 
vari interest had interrupt the friendship, and it wa six year 
sinc villier had seen herbert; and now he look upon thi wreck of a 
man with grief and dismay, mingl with a certain inquisit as to 
what dreari chain of circumst had drag him down to such a 
dole pass. villier felt togeth with compass all the relish of 
the amateur in mysteries, and congratul himself on hi leisur 
specul outsid the restaurant. 

they walk on in silenc for some time, and more than one passer-bi 
stare in astonish at the unaccustom spectacl of a well-dress 
man with an unmistak beggar hang on to hi arm, and, observ 
this, villier led the way to an obscur street in soho. here he 
repeat hi question. 

"how on earth ha it happened, herbert? I alway understood you would 
succeed to an excel posit in dorsetshire. did your father 
disinherit you? sure not?" 

"no, villiers; I came into all the properti at my poor father' death; 
he die a year after I left oxford. He wa a veri good father to me, 
and I mourn hi death sincer enough. but you know what young men 
are; a few month later I came up to town and went a good deal into 
society. Of cours I had excel introductions, and I manag to 
enjoy myself veri much in a harmless sort of way. I play a little, 
certainly, but never for heavi stakes, and the few bet I made on race 
brought me in money--onli a few pounds, you know, but enough to pay for 
cigar and such petti pleasures. It wa in my second season that the 
tide turned. Of cours you have heard of my marriage?" 

"no, I never heard anyth about it." 

"yes, I married, villiers. I met a girl, a girl of the most wonder 
and most strang beauty, at the hous of some peopl whom I knew. I 
cannot tell you her age; I never knew it, but, so far as I can guess, I 
should think she must have been about nineteen when I made her 
acquaintance. My friend had come to know her at florence; she told 
them she wa an orphan, the child of an english father and an italian 
mother, and she charm them as she charm me. the first time I saw 
her wa at an even party. I wa stand by the door talk to a 
friend, when suddenli abov the hum and babbl of convers I heard 
a voic which seem to thrill to my heart. she wa sing an italian 
song. I wa introduc to her that evening, and in three month I 
marri helen. villiers, that woman, if I can call her woman, 
corrupt my soul. the night of the wed I found myself sit in 
her bedroom in the hotel, listen to her talk. she wa sit up in 
bed, and I listen to her as she spoke in her beauti voice, spoke 
of thing which even now I would not dare whisper in the blackest 
night, though I stood in the midst of a wilderness. you, villiers, 
you may think you know life, and london, and what goe on day and night 
in thi dread city; for all I can say you may have heard the talk of 
the vilest, but I tell you you can have no concept of what I know, 
not in your most fantastic, hideou dream can you have imag forth 
the faintest shadow of what I have heard--and seen. yes, seen. I have 
seen the incredible, such horror that even I myself sometim stop in 
the middl of the street and ask whether it is possibl for a man to 
behold such thing and live. In a year, villiers, I wa a ruin man, 
in bodi and soul--in bodi and soul." 

"but your property, herbert? you had land in dorset." 

"I sold it all; the field and woods, the dear old house--everything." 

"and the money?" 

"she took it all from me." 

"and then left you?" 

"yes; she disappear one night. I don't know where she went, but I am 
sure if I saw her again it would kill me. the rest of my stori is of no 
interest; sordid misery, that is all. you may think, villiers, that I 
have exagger and talk for effect; but I have not told you half. 
I could tell you certain thing which would convinc you, but you would 
never know a happi day again. you would pass the rest of your life, as 
I pass mine, a haunt man, a man who ha seen hell." 

villier took the unfortun man to hi rooms, and gave him a meal. 
herbert could eat little, and scarc touch the glass of wine set 
befor him. He sat moodi and silent by the fire, and seem reliev 
when villier sent him away with a small present of money. 

"bi the way, herbert," said villiers, as they part at the door, "what 
wa your wife' name? you said helen, I think? helen what?" 

"the name she pass under when I met her wa helen vaughan, but what 
her real name wa I can't say. I don't think she had a name. no, no, 
not in that sense. onli human be have names, villiers; I can't say 
anymore. good-bye; yes, I will not fail to call if I see ani way in 
which you can help me. good-night." 

the man went out into the bitter night, and villier return to hi 
fireside. there wa someth about herbert which shock him 
inexpressibly; not hi poor rag nor the mark which poverti had set 
upon hi face, but rather an indefinit terror which hung about him 
like a mist. He had acknowledg that he himself wa not devoid of 
blame; the woman, he had avowed, had corrupt him bodi and soul, and 
villier felt that thi man, onc hi friend, had been an actor in 
scene evil beyond the power of words. hi stori need no 
confirmation: he himself wa the embodi proof of it. villier muse 
curious over the stori he had heard, and wonder whether he had 
heard both the first and the last of it. "no," he thought, "certainli 
not the last, probabl onli the beginning. A case like thi is like a 
nest of chines boxes; you open one after the other and find a quainter 
workmanship in everi box. most like poor herbert is mere one of 
the outsid boxes; there are stranger one to follow." 

villier could not take hi mind away from herbert and hi story, which 
seem to grow wilder as the night wore on. the fire seem to burn 
low, and the chilli air of the morn crept into the room; villier 
got up with a glanc over hi shoulder, and, shiver slightly, went 
to bed. 

A few day later he saw at hi club a gentleman of hi acquaintance, 
name austin, who wa famou for hi intim knowledg of london life, 
both in it tenebr and lumin phases. villiers, still full of hi 
encount in soho and it consequences, thought austin might possibl 
be abl to shed some light on herbert' history, and so after some 
casual talk he suddenli put the question: 

"do you happen to know anyth of a man name herbert--charl 
herbert?" 

austin turn round sharpli and stare at villier with some 
astonishment. 

"charl herbert? weren't you in town three year ago? no; then you 
have not heard of the paul street case? It caus a good deal of 
sensat at the time." 

"what wa the case?" 

"well, a gentleman, a man of veri good position, wa found dead, stark 
dead, in the area of a certain hous in paul street, off tottenham 
court road. Of cours the polic did not make the discovery; if you 
happen to be sit up all night and have a light in your window, the 
constabl will ring the bell, but if you happen to be lie dead in 
somebody' area, you will be left alone. In thi instance, as in mani 
others, the alarm wa rais by some kind of vagabond; I don't mean a 
common tramp, or a public-hous loafer, but a gentleman, whose busi 
or pleasure, or both, made him a spectat of the london street at 
five o'clock in the morning. thi individu was, as he said, 'go 
home,' it did not appear whenc or whither, and had occas to pass 
through paul street between four and five a.m. someth or other 
caught hi eye at number 20; he said, absurdli enough, that the hous 
had the most unpleas physiognomi he had ever observed, but, at ani 
rate, he glanc down the area and wa a good deal astonish to see a 
man lie on the stones, hi limb all huddl together, and hi face 
turn up. our gentleman thought hi face look peculiarli ghastly, 
and so set off at a run in search of the nearest policeman. the 
constabl wa at first inclin to treat the matter lightly, suspect 
common drunkenness; however, he came, and after look at the man' 
face, chang hi tone, quickli enough. the earli bird, who had pick 
up thi fine worm, wa sent off for a doctor, and the policeman rang 
and knock at the door till a slatternli servant girl came down 
look more than half asleep. the constabl point out the content 
of the area to the maid, who scream loudli enough to wake up the 
street, but she knew noth of the man; had never seen him at the 
house, and so forth. meanwhile, the origin discover had come back 
with a medic man, and the next thing wa to get into the area. the 
gate wa open, so the whole quartet stump down the steps. the doctor 
hardli need a moment' examination; he said the poor fellow had been 
dead for sever hours, and it wa then the case began to get 
interesting. the dead man had not been robbed, and in one of hi 
pocket were paper identifi him as--well, as a man of good famili 
and means, a favourit in society, and nobody' enemy, as far as could 
be known. I don't give hi name, villiers, becaus it ha noth to 
do with the story, and becaus it' no good rake up these affair 
about the dead when there are no relat living. the next curiou 
point wa that the medic men couldn't agre as to how he met hi 
death. there were some slight bruis on hi shoulders, but they were 
so slight that it look as if he had been push roughli out of the 
kitchen door, and not thrown over the rail from the street or even 
drag down the steps. but there were posit no other mark of 
violenc about him, certainli none that would account for hi death; 
and when they came to the autopsi there wasn't a trace of poison of ani 
kind. Of cours the polic want to know all about the peopl at 
number 20, and here again, so I have heard from privat sources, one or 
two other veri curiou point came out. It appear that the occup 
of the hous were a mr. and mrs. charl herbert; he wa said to be a 
land proprietor, though it struck most peopl that paul street wa 
not exactli the place to look for countri gentry. As for mrs. herbert, 
nobodi seem to know who or what she was, and, between ourselves, I 
fanci the diver after her histori found themselv in rather strang 
waters. Of cours they both deni know anyth about the 
deceased, and in default of ani evid against them they were 
discharged. but some veri odd thing came out about them. though it 
wa between five and six in the morn when the dead man wa removed, 
a larg crowd had collected, and sever of the neighbour ran to see 
what wa go on. they were pretti free with their comments, by all 
accounts, and from these it appear that number 20 wa in veri bad 
odour in paul street. the detect tri to trace down these rumour 
to some solid foundat of fact, but could not get hold of anything. 
peopl shook their head and rais their eyebrow and thought the 
herbert rather 'queer,' 'would rather not be seen go into their 
house,' and so on, but there wa noth tangible. the author 
were moral certain the man met hi death in some way or anoth in 
the hous and wa thrown out by the kitchen door, but they couldn't 
prove it, and the absenc of ani indic of violenc or poison 
left them helpless. An odd case, wasn't it? but curious enough, 
there' someth more that I haven't told you. I happen to know one 
of the doctor who wa consult as to the caus of death, and some 
time after the inquest I met him, and ask him about it. 'do you 
realli mean to tell me,' I said, 'that you were baffl by the case, 
that you actual don't know what the man die of?' 'pardon me,' he 
replied, 'I know perfectli well what caus death. blank die of 
fright, of sheer, aw terror; I never saw featur so hideous 
contort in the entir cours of my practice, and I have seen the 
face of a whole host of dead.' the doctor wa usual a cool custom 
enough, and a certain vehem in hi manner struck me, but I couldn't 
get anyth more out of him. I suppos the treasuri didn't see their 
way to prosecut the herbert for frighten a man to death; at ani 
rate, noth wa done, and the case drop out of men' minds. Do 
you happen to know anyth of herbert?" 

"well," repli villiers, "he wa an old colleg friend of mine." 

"you don't say so? have you ever seen hi wife?" 

"no, I haven't. I have lost sight of herbert for mani years." 

"it' queer, isn't it, part with a man at the colleg gate or at 
paddington, see noth of him for years, and then find him pop 
up hi head in such an odd place. but I should like to have seen mrs. 
herbert; peopl said extraordinari thing about her." 

"what sort of things?" 

"well, I hardli know how to tell you. everyon who saw her at the 
polic court said she wa at onc the most beauti woman and the most 
repuls they had ever set eye on. I have spoken to a man who saw 
her, and I assur you he posit shudder as he tri to describ 
the woman, but he couldn't tell why. she seem to have been a sort of 
enigma; and I expect if that one dead man could have told tales, he 
would have told some uncommonli queer ones. and there you are again in 
anoth puzzle; what could a respect countri gentleman like mr. 
blank (we'll call him that if you don't mind) want in such a veri queer 
hous as number 20? it' altogeth a veri odd case, isn't it?" 

"it is indeed, austin; an extraordinari case. I didn't think, when I 
ask you about my old friend, I should strike on such strang metal. 
well, I must be off; good-day." 

villier went away, think of hi own conceit of the chines boxes; 
here wa quaint workmanship indeed. 



IV 

the discoveri IN paul street 

A few month after villiers' meet with herbert, mr. clark wa 
sitting, as usual, by hi after-dinn hearth, resolut guard hi 
fanci from wander in the direct of the bureau. for more than a 
week he had succeed in keep away from the "memoirs," and he 
cherish hope of a complet self-reformation; but, in spite of hi 
endeavours, he could not hush the wonder and the strang curios that 
the last case he had written down had excit within him. He had put 
the case, or rather the outlin of it, conjectur to a scientif 
friend, who shook hi head, and thought clark get queer, and on 
thi particular even clark wa make an effort to ration the 
story, when a sudden knock at the door rous him from hi meditations. 

"mr. villier to see you sir." 

"dear me, villiers, it is veri kind of you to look me up; I have not 
seen you for mani months; I should think nearli a year. come in, come 
in. and how are you, villiers? want ani advic about investments?" 

"no, thanks, I fanci everyth I have in that way is pretti safe. no, 
clarke, I have realli come to consult you about a rather curiou matter 
that ha been brought under my notic of late. I am afraid you will 
think it all rather absurd when I tell my tale. I sometim think so 
myself, and that' just what I made up my mind to come to you, as I 
know you'r a practic man." 

mr. villier wa ignor of the "memoir to prove the exist of the 
devil." 

"well, villiers, I shall be happi to give you my advice, to the best of 
my ability. what is the natur of the case?" 

"it' an extraordinari thing altogether. you know my ways; I alway 
keep my eye open in the streets, and in my time I have chanc upon 
some queer customers, and queer case too, but this, I think, beat 
all. I wa come out of a restaur one nasti winter night about 
three month ago; I had had a capit dinner and a good bottl of 
chianti, and I stood for a moment on the pavement, think what a 
mysteri there is about london street and the compani that pass along 
them. A bottl of red wine encourag these fancies, clarke, and I 
dare say I should have thought a page of small type, but I wa cut 
short by a beggar who had come behind me, and wa make the usual 
appeals. Of cours I look round, and thi beggar turn out to be 
what wa left of an old friend of mine, a man name herbert. I ask 
him how he had come to such a wretch pass, and he told me. We walk 
up and down one of those long and dark soho streets, and there I 
listen to hi story. He said he had marri a beauti girl, some 
year younger than himself, and, as he put it, she had corrupt him 
bodi and soul. He wouldn't go into details; he said he dare not, that 
what he had seen and heard haunt him by night and day, and when I 
look in hi face I knew he wa speak the truth. there wa 
someth about the man that made me shiver. I don't know why, but it 
wa there. I gave him a littl money and sent him away, and I assur 
you that when he wa gone I gasp for breath. hi presenc seem to 
chill one' blood." 

"isn't thi all just a littl fanciful, villiers? I suppos the poor 
fellow had made an imprud marriage, and, in plain english, gone to 
the bad." 

"well, listen to this." villier told clark the stori he had heard 
from austin. 

"you see," he concluded, "there can be but littl doubt that thi mr. 
blank, whoever he was, die of sheer terror; he saw someth so awful, 
so terrible, that it cut short hi life. and what he saw, he most 
certainli saw in that house, which, somehow or other, had got a bad 
name in the neighbourhood. I had the curios to go and look at the 
place for myself. it' a sadden kind of street; the hous are old 
enough to be mean and dreary, but not old enough to be quaint. As far 
as I could see most of them are let in lodgings, furnish and 
unfurnished, and almost everi door ha three bell to it. here and 
there the ground floor have been made into shop of the commonest 
kind; it' a dismal street in everi way. I found number 20 wa to let, 
and I went to the agent' and got the key. Of cours I should have 
heard noth of the herbert in that quarter, but I ask the man, 
fair and square, how long they had left the hous and whether there had 
been other tenant in the meanwhile. He look at me queerli for a 
minute, and told me the herbert had left immedi after the 
unpleasantness, as he call it, and sinc then the hous had been 
empty." 

mr. villier paus for a moment. 

"I have alway been rather fond of go over empti houses; there' a 
sort of fascin about the desol empti rooms, with the nail 
stick in the walls, and the dust thick upon the window-sills. but I 
didn't enjoy go over number 20, paul street. I had hardli put my 
foot insid the passag when I notic a queer, heavi feel about the 
air of the house. Of cours all empti hous are stuffy, and so forth, 
but thi wa someth quit different; I can't describ it to you, but 
it seem to stop the breath. I went into the front room and the back 
room, and the kitchen downstairs; they were all dirti and dusti 
enough, as you would expect, but there wa someth strang about them 
all. I couldn't defin it to you, I onli know I felt queer. It wa 
one of the room on the first floor, though, that wa the worst. It 
wa a largish room, and onc on a time the paper must have been 
cheer enough, but when I saw it, paint, paper, and everyth were 
most doleful. but the room wa full of horror; I felt my teeth 
grind as I put my hand on the door, and when I went in, I thought I 
should have fallen faint to the floor. however, I pull myself 
together, and stood against the end wall, wonder what on earth there 
could be about the room to make my limb tremble, and my heart beat as 
if I were at the hour of death. In one corner there wa a pile of 
newspap litter on the floor, and I began look at them; they 
were paper of three or four year ago, some of them half torn, and 
some crumpl as if they had been use for packing. I turn the whole 
pile over, and amongst them I found a curiou drawing; I will show it 
to you presently. but I couldn't stay in the room; I felt it wa 
overpow me. I wa thank to come out, safe and sound, into the 
open air. peopl stare at me as I walk along the street, and one 
man said I wa drunk. I wa stagger about from one side of the 
pavement to the other, and it wa as much as I could do to take the key 
back to the agent and get home. I wa in bed for a week, suffer 
from what my doctor call nervou shock and exhaustion. one of those 
day I wa read the even paper, and happen to notic a 
paragraph headed: 'starv to death.' It wa the usual style of thing; 
a model lodging-hous in marylebone, a door lock for sever days, 
and a dead man in hi chair when they broke in. 'the deceased,' said 
the paragraph, 'wa known as charl herbert, and is believ to have 
been onc a prosper countri gentleman. hi name wa familiar to the 
public three year ago in connect with the mysteri death in paul 
street, tottenham court road, the deceas be the tenant of the 
hous number 20, in the area of which a gentleman of good posit wa 
found dead under circumst not devoid of suspicion.' A tragic 
ending, wasn't it? but after all, if what he told me were true, which 
I am sure it was, the man' life wa all a tragedy, and a tragedi of a 
stranger sort than they put on the boards." 

"and that is the story, is it?" said clark musingly. 

"yes, that is the story." 

"well, really, villiers, I scarc know what to say about it. there 
are, no doubt, circumst in the case which seem peculiar, the 
find of the dead man in the area of herbert' house, for instance, 
and the extraordinari opinion of the physician as to the caus of 
death; but, after all, it is conceiv that the fact may be 
explain in a straightforward manner. As to your own sensations, when 
you went to see the house, I would suggest that they were due to a 
vivid imagination; you must have been brooding, in a semi-consci 
way, over what you had heard. I don't exactli see what more can be 
said or done in the matter; you evid think there is a mysteri of 
some kind, but herbert is dead; where then do you propos to look?" 

"I propos to look for the woman; the woman whom he married. she is 
the mystery." 

the two men sat silent by the fireside; clark secretli congratul 
himself on have success kept up the charact of advoc of the 
commonplace, and villier wrap in hi gloomi fancies. 

"I think I will have a cigarette," he said at last, and put hi hand in 
hi pocket to feel for the cigarette-case. 

"ah!" he said, start slightly, "I forgot I had someth to show 
you. you rememb my say that I had found a rather curiou sketch 
amongst the pile of old newspap at the hous in paul street? here 
it is." 

villier drew out a small thin parcel from hi pocket. It wa cover 
with brown paper, and secur with string, and the knot were 
troublesome. In spite of himself clark felt inquisitive; he bent 
forward on hi chair as villier pain undid the string, and 
unfold the outer covering. insid wa a second wrap of tissue, 
and villier took it off and hand the small piec of paper to clark 
without a word. 

there wa dead silenc in the room for five minut or more; the two 
men sat so still that they could hear the tick of the tall 
old-fashion clock that stood outsid in the hall, and in the mind of 
one of them the slow monotoni of sound woke up a far, far memory. He 
wa look intent at the small pen-and-ink sketch of the woman' 
head; it had evid been drawn with great care, and by a true 
artist, for the woman' soul look out of the eyes, and the lip were 
part with a strang smile. clark gaze still at the face; it 
brought to hi memori one summer evening, long ago; he saw again the 
long love valley, the river wind between the hills, the meadow 
and the cornfields, the dull red sun, and the cold white mist rise 
from the water. He heard a voic speak to him across the wave of 
mani years, and say "clarke, mari will see the god pan!" and then he 
wa stand in the grim room besid the doctor, listen to the heavi 
tick of the clock, wait and watching, watch the figur lie 
on the green chair beneath the lamplight. mari rose up, and he look 
into her eyes, and hi heart grew cold within him. 

"who is thi woman?" he said at last. hi voic wa dri and hoarse. 

"that is the woman who herbert married." 

clark look again at the sketch; it wa not mari after all. there 
certainli wa mary' face, but there wa someth else, someth he 
had not seen on mary' featur when the white-clad girl enter the 
laboratori with the doctor, nor at her terribl awakening, nor when she 
lay grin on the bed. whatev it was, the glanc that came from 
those eyes, the smile on the full lips, or the express of the whole 
face, clark shudder befor it at hi inmost soul, and thought, 
unconsciously, of dr. phillip' words, "the most vivid present of 
evil I have ever seen." He turn the paper over mechan in hi 
hand and glanc at the back. 

"good god! clarke, what is the matter? you are as white as death." 

villier had start wildli from hi chair, as clark fell back with a 
groan, and let the paper drop from hi hands. 

"I don't feel veri well, villiers, I am subject to these attacks. pour 
me out a littl wine; thanks, that will do. I shall feel better in a 
few minutes." 

villier pick up the fallen sketch and turn it over as clark had 
done. 

"you saw that?" he said. "that' how I identifi it as be a 
portrait of herbert' wife, or I should say hi widow. how do you feel 
now?" 

"better, thanks, it wa onli a pass faintness. I don't think I 
quit catch your meaning. what did you say enabl you to identifi the 
picture?" 

"thi word--'helen'--wa written on the back. didn't I tell you her 
name wa helen? yes; helen vaughan." 

clark groaned; there could be no shadow of doubt. 

"now, don't you agre with me," said villiers, "that in the stori I 
have told you to-night, and in the part thi woman play in it, there 
are some veri strang points?" 

"yes, villiers," clark muttered, "it is a strang stori indeed; a 
strang stori indeed. you must give me time to think it over; I may be 
abl to help you or I may not. must you be go now? well, 
good-night, villiers, good-night. come and see me in the cours of a 
week." 



V 

the letter OF advic 

"do you know, austin," said villiers, as the two friend were pace 
sedat along piccadilli one pleasant morn in may, "do you know I 
am convinc that what you told me about paul street and the herbert 
is a mere episod in an extraordinari history? I may as well confess 
to you that when I ask you about herbert a few month ago I had just 
seen him." 

"you had seen him? where?" 

"he beg of me in the street one night. He wa in the most pitiabl 
plight, but I recogn the man, and I got him to tell me hi history, 
or at least the outlin of it. In brief, it amount to this--h had 
been ruin by hi wife." 

"in what manner?" 

"he would not tell me; he would onli say that she had destroy him, 
bodi and soul. the man is dead now." 

"and what ha becom of hi wife?" 

"ah, that' what I should like to know, and I mean to find her sooner 
or later. I know a man name clarke, a dri fellow, in fact a man of 
business, but shrewd enough. you understand my meaning; not shrewd in 
the mere busi sens of the word, but a man who realli know 
someth about men and life. well, I laid the case befor him, and he 
wa evid impressed. He said it need consideration, and ask me 
to come again in the cours of a week. A few day later I receiv 
thi extraordinari letter." 

austin took the envelope, drew out the letter, and read it curiously. 
It ran as follows:-- 

"mi dear villiers,--i have thought over the matter on which you 
consult me the other night, and my advic to you is this. throw the 
portrait into the fire, blot out the stori from your mind. never give 
it anoth thought, villiers, or you will be sorry. you will think, no 
doubt, that I am in possess of some secret information, and to a 
certain extent that is the case. but I onli know a little; I am like a 
travel who ha peer over an abyss, and ha drawn back in terror. 
what I know is strang enough and horribl enough, but beyond my 
knowledg there are depth and horror more fright still, more 
incred than ani tale told of winter night about the fire. I have 
resolved, and noth shall shake that resolve, to explor no whit 
farther, and if you valu your happi you will make the same 
determination. 

"come and see me by all means; but we will talk on more cheer topic 
than this." 

austin fold the letter methodically, and return it to villiers. 

"it is certainli an extraordinari letter," he said, "what doe he mean 
by the portrait?" 

"ah! I forgot to tell you I have been to paul street and have made a 
discovery." 

villier told hi stori as he had told it to clarke, and austin 
listen in silence. He seem puzzled. 

"how veri curiou that you should experi such an unpleas 
sensat in that room!" he said at length. "I hardli gather that it 
wa a mere matter of the imagination; a feel of repulsion, in short." 

"no, it wa more physic than mental. It wa as if I were inhal at 
everi breath some deadli fume, which seem to penetr to everi nerv 
and bone and sinew of my body. I felt rack from head to foot, my 
eye began to grow dim; it wa like the entranc of death." 

"yes, yes, veri strang certainly. you see, your friend confess that 
there is some veri black stori connect with thi woman. did you 
notic ani particular emot in him when you were tell your tale?" 

"yes, I did. He becam veri faint, but he assur me that it wa a 
mere pass attack to which he wa subject." 

"did you believ him?" 

"I did at the time, but I don't now. He heard what I had to say with a 
good deal of indifference, till I show him the portrait. It wa then 
that he wa seiz with the attack of which I spoke. He look 
ghastly, I assur you." 

"then he must have seen the woman before. but there might be anoth 
explanation; it might have been the name, and not the face, which wa 
familiar to him. what do you think?" 

"I couldn't say. To the best of my belief it wa after turn the 
portrait in hi hand that he nearli drop from the chair. the name, 
you know, wa written on the back." 

"quit so. after all, it is imposs to come to ani resolut in a 
case like this. I hate melodrama, and noth strike me as more 
commonplac and tediou than the ordinari ghost stori of commerce; but 
really, villiers, it look as if there were someth veri queer at the 
bottom of all this." 

the two men had, without notic it, turn up ashley street, lead 
northward from piccadilly. It wa a long street, and rather a gloomi 
one, but here and there a brighter tast had illumin the dark 
hous with flowers, and gay curtains, and a cheer paint on the 
doors. villier glanc up as austin stop speaking, and look at 
one of these houses; geraniums, red and white, droop from everi sill, 
and daffodil-colour curtain were drape back from each window. 

"it look cheerful, doesn't it?" he said. 

"yes, and the insid is still more cheery. one of the pleasantest 
hous of the season, so I have heard. I haven't been there myself, 
but i'v met sever men who have, and they tell me it' uncommonli 
jovial." 

"whose hous is it?" 

"A mrs. beaumont's." 

"and who is she?" 

"I couldn't tell you. I have heard she come from south america, but 
after all, who she is is of littl consequence. she is a veri wealthi 
woman, there' no doubt of that, and some of the best peopl have taken 
her up. I hear she ha some wonder claret, realli marvel wine, 
which must have cost a fabul sum. lord argentin wa tell me 
about it; he wa there last sunday evening. He assur me he ha never 
tast such a wine, and argentine, as you know, is an expert. By the 
way, that remind me, she must be an oddish sort of woman, thi mrs. 
beaumont. argentin ask her how old the wine was, and what do you 
think she said? 'about a thousand years, I believe.' lord argentin 
thought she wa chaf him, you know, but when he laugh she said 
she wa speak quit serious and offer to show him the jar. Of 
course, he couldn't say anyth more after that; but it seem rather 
antiqu for a beverage, doesn't it? why, here we are at my rooms. 
come in, won't you?" 

"thanks, I think I will. I haven't seen the curiosity-shop for a 
while." 

It wa a room furnish richly, yet oddly, where everi jar and bookcas 
and table, and everi rug and jar and ornament seem to be a thing 
apart, preserv each it own individuality. 

"anyth fresh lately?" said villier after a while. 

"no; I think not; you saw those queer jugs, didn't you? I thought so. 
I don't think I have come across anyth for the last few weeks." 

austin glanc around the room from cupboard to cupboard, from shelf to 
shelf, in search of some new oddity. hi eye fell at last on an odd 
chest, pleasantli and quaintli carved, which stood in a dark corner of 
the room. 

"ah," he said, "I wa forgetting, I have got someth to show you." 
austin unlock the chest, drew out a thick quarto volume, laid it on 
the table, and resum the cigar he had put down. 

"did you know arthur meyrick the painter, villiers?" 

"A little; I met him two or three time at the hous of a friend of 
mine. what ha becom of him? I haven't heard hi name mention for 
some time." 

"he' dead." 

"you don't say so! quit young, wasn't he?" 

"yes; onli thirti when he died." 

"what did he die of?" 

"I don't know. He wa an intim friend of mine, and a thoroughli 
good fellow. He use to come here and talk to me for hours, and he wa 
one of the best talker I have met. He could even talk about painting, 
and that' more than can be said of most painters. about eighteen 
month ago he wa feel rather overworked, and partli at my 
suggest he went off on a sort of rove expedition, with no veri 
definit end or aim about it. I believ new york wa to be hi first 
port, but I never heard from him. three month ago I got thi book, 
with a veri civil letter from an english doctor practis at bueno 
ayres, state that he had attend the late mr. meyrick dure hi 
illness, and that the deceas had express an earnest wish that the 
enclos packet should be sent to me after hi death. that wa all." 

"and haven't you written for further particulars?" 

"I have been think of do so. you would advis me to write to the 
doctor?" 

"certainly. and what about the book?" 

"it wa seal up when I got it. I don't think the doctor had seen it." 

"it is someth veri rare? meyrick wa a collector, perhaps?" 

"no, I think not, hardli a collector. now, what do you think of these 
ainu jugs?" 

"they are peculiar, but I like them. but aren't you go to show me 
poor meyrick' legacy?" 

"yes, yes, to be sure. the fact is, it' rather a peculiar sort of 
thing, and I haven't shown it to ani one. I wouldn't say anyth 
about it if I were you. there it is." 

villier took the book, and open it at haphazard. 

"it isn't a print volume, then?" he said. 

"no. It is a collect of draw in black and white by my poor 
friend meyrick." 

villier turn to the first page, it wa blank; the second bore a 
brief inscription, which he read: 


silet per diem universus, nec sine horror secretu est; lucet 
nocturni ignibus, choru aegipanum undiqu personatur: audiuntur et 
cantu tibiarum, et tinnitu cymbalorum per oram maritimam. 


On the third page wa a design which made villier start and look up at 
austin; he wa gaze abstractedli out of the window. villier turn 
page after page, absorbed, in spite of himself, in the fright 
walpurgi night of evil, strang monstrou evil, that the dead artist 
had set forth in hard black and white. the figur of faun and satyr 
and aegipan danc befor hi eyes, the dark of the thicket, the 
danc on the mountain-top, the scene by lone shores, in green 
vineyards, by rock and desert places, pass befor him: a world 
befor which the human soul seem to shrink back and shudder. villier 
whirl over the remain pages; he had seen enough, but the pictur 
on the last leaf caught hi eye, as he almost close the book. 

"austin!" 

"well, what is it?" 

"do you know who that is?" 

It wa a woman' face, alon on the white page. 

"know who it is? no, of cours not." 

"I do." 

"who is it?" 

"it is mrs. herbert." 

"are you sure?" 

"I am perfectli sure of it. poor meyrick! He is one more chapter in 
her history." 

"but what do you think of the designs?" 

"they are frightful. lock the book up again, austin. If I were you I 
would burn it; it must be a terribl companion even though it be in a 
chest." 

"yes, they are singular drawings. but I wonder what connect there 
could be between meyrick and mrs. herbert, or what link between her and 
these designs?" 

"ah, who can say? It is possibl that the matter may end here, and we 
shall never know, but in my own opinion thi helen vaughan, or mrs. 
herbert, is onli the beginning. she will come back to london, austin; 
depend on it, she will come back, and we shall hear more about her 
then. I doubt it will be veri pleasant news." 



VI 

the suicid 

lord argentin wa a great favourit in london society. At twenti he 
had been a poor man, deck with the surnam of an illustri family, 
but forc to earn a livelihood as best he could, and the most 
specul of money-lend would not have entrust him with fifti 
pound on the chanc of hi ever chang hi name for a title, and hi 
poverti for a great fortune. hi father had been near enough to the 
fountain of good thing to secur one of the famili livings, but the 
son, even if he had taken orders, would scarc have obtain so much 
as this, and moreov felt no vocat for the ecclesiast estate. 
thu he front the world with no better armour than the bachelor' 
gown and the wit of a younger son' grandson, with which equip he 
contriv in some way to make a veri toler fight of it. At 
twenty-f mr. charl aubernon saw himself still a man of struggl 
and of warfar with the world, but out of the seven who stood befor 
him and the high place of hi famili three onli remained. these 
three, however, were "good lives," but yet not proof against the zulu 
assegai and typhoid fever, and so one morn aubernon woke up and 
found himself lord argentine, a man of thirti who had face the 
difficulti of existence, and had conquered. the situat amus him 
immensely, and he resolv that rich should be as pleasant to him as 
poverti had alway been. argentine, after some littl consideration, 
came to the conclus that dining, regard as a fine art, wa perhap 
the most amus pursuit open to fallen humanity, and thu hi dinner 
becam famou in london, and an invit to hi tabl a thing 
covet desired. after ten year of lordship and dinner argentin 
still declin to be jaded, still persist in enjoy life, and by a 
kind of infect had becom recogn as the caus of joy in others, 
in short, as the best of company. hi sudden and tragic death 
therefor caus a wide and deep sensation. peopl could scarc 
believ it, even though the newspap wa befor their eyes, and the 
cri of "mysteri death of a nobleman" came ring up from the 
street. but there stood the brief paragraph: "lord argentin wa found 
dead thi morn by hi valet under distress circumstances. It is 
state that there can be no doubt that hi lordship commit suicide, 
though no motiv can be assign for the act. the deceas nobleman 
wa wide known in society, and much like for hi genial manner and 
sumptuou hospitality. He is succeed by," etc., etc. 

By slow degre the detail came to light, but the case still remain 
a mystery. the chief wit at the inquest wa the deceased' valet, 
who said that the night befor hi death lord argentin had dine with 
a ladi of good position, whose name wa suppress in the newspap 
reports. At about eleven o'clock lord argentin had returned, and 
inform hi man that he should not requir hi servic till the next 
morning. A littl later the valet had occas to cross the hall and 
wa somewhat astonish to see hi master quietli let himself out 
at the front door. He had taken off hi even clothes, and wa 
dress in a norfolk coat and knickerbockers, and wore a low brown hat. 
the valet had no reason to suppos that lord argentin had seen him, 
and though hi master rare kept late hours, thought littl of the 
occurr till the next morning, when he knock at the bedroom door 
at a quarter to nine as usual. He receiv no answer, and, after 
knock two or three times, enter the room, and saw lord argentine' 
bodi lean forward at an angl from the bottom of the bed. He found 
that hi master had tie a cord secur to one of the short bed-posts, 
and, after make a run noos and slip it round hi neck, the 
unfortun man must have resolut fallen forward, to die by slow 
strangulation. He wa dress in the light suit in which the valet had 
seen him go out, and the doctor who wa summon pronounc that life 
had been extinct for more than four hours. all papers, letters, and so 
forth seem in perfect order, and noth wa discov which point 
in the most remot way to ani scandal either great or small. here the 
evid ended; noth more could be discovered. sever person had 
been present at the dinner-parti at which lord argentin had assisted, 
and to all these he seem in hi usual genial spirits. the valet, 
indeed, said he thought hi master appear a littl excit when he 
came home, but confess that the alter in hi manner wa veri 
slight, hardli noticeable, indeed. It seem hopeless to seek for ani 
clue, and the suggest that lord argentin had been suddenli attack 
by acut suicid mania wa gener accepted. 

It wa otherwise, however, when within three weeks, three more 
gentlemen, one of them a nobleman, and the two other men of good 
posit and ampl means, perish miser in the almost precis 
the same manner. lord swanleigh wa found one morn in hi 
dressing-room, hang from a peg affix to the wall, and mr. 
collier-stuart and mr. herri had chosen to die as lord argentine. 
there wa no explan in either case; a few bald facts; a live man 
in the evening, and a bodi with a black swollen face in the morning. 
the polic had been forc to confess themselv powerless to arrest or 
to explain the sordid murder of whitechapel; but befor the horribl 
suicid of piccadilli and mayfair they were dumbfoundered, for not 
even the mere feroc which did duti as an explan of the crime 
of the east end, could be of servic in the west. each of these men who 
had resolv to die a tortur shame death wa rich, prosperous, and 
to all appear in love with the world, and not the acutest research 
should ferret out ani shadow of a lurk motiv in either case. there 
wa a horror in the air, and men look at one another' face when 
they met, each wonder whether the other wa to be the victim of the 
fifth nameless tragedy. journalist sought in vain for their scrapbook 
for materi whereof to concoct reminisc articles; and the morn 
paper wa unfold in mani a hous with a feel of awe; no man knew 
when or where the next blow would light. 

A short while after the last of these terribl events, austin came to 
see mr. villiers. He wa curiou to know whether villier had 
succeed in discov ani fresh trace of mrs. herbert, either 
through clark or by other sources, and he ask the question soon 
after he had sat down. 

"no," said villiers, "I wrote to clarke, but he remain obdurate, and I 
have tri other channels, but without ani result. I can't find out 
what becam of helen vaughan after she left paul street, but I think 
she must have gone abroad. but to tell the truth, austin, I haven't 
paid much attent to the matter for the last few weeks; I knew poor 
herri intimately, and hi terribl death ha been a great shock to 
me, a great shock." 

"I can well believ it," answer austin gravely, "you know argentin 
wa a friend of mine. If I rememb rightly, we were speak of him 
that day you came to my rooms." 

"yes; it wa in connect with that hous in ashley street, mrs. 
beaumont' house. you said someth about argentine' dine there." 

"quit so. Of cours you know it wa there argentin dine the night 
before--befor hi death." 

"no, I had not heard that." 

"oh, yes; the name wa kept out of the paper to spare mrs. beaumont. 
argentin wa a great favourit of hers, and it is said she wa in a 
terribl state for sometim after." 

A curiou look came over villiers' face; he seem undecid whether to 
speak or not. austin began again. 

"I never experienc such a feel of horror as when I read the 
account of argentine' death. I didn't understand it at the time, and 
I don't now. I knew him well, and it complet pass my 
understand for what possibl caus he--or ani of the other for the 
matter of that--could have resolv in cold blood to die in such an 
aw manner. you know how men babbl away each other' charact in 
london, you may be sure ani buri scandal or hidden skeleton would 
have been brought to light in such a case as this; but noth of the 
sort ha taken place. As for the theori of mania, that is veri well, 
of course, for the coroner' jury, but everybodi know that it' all 
nonsense. suicid mania is not small-pox." 

austin relaps into gloomi silence. villier sat silent, also, 
watch hi friend. the express of indecis still fleet across 
hi face; he seem as if weigh hi thought in the balance, and the 
consider he wa resolv left him still silent. austin tri to 
shake off the remembr of tragedi as hopeless and perplex as the 
labyrinth of daedalus, and began to talk in an indiffer voic of the 
more pleasant incid and adventur of the season. 

"that mrs. beaumont," he said, "of whom we were speaking, is a great 
success; she ha taken london almost by storm. I met her the other 
night at fulham's; she is realli a remark woman." 

"you have met mrs. beaumont?" 

"yes; she had quit a court around her. she would be call veri 
handsome, I suppose, and yet there is someth about her face which I 
didn't like. the featur are exquisite, but the express is 
strange. and all the time I wa look at her, and afterwards, when I 
wa go home, I had a curiou feel that veri express wa in 
some way or anoth familiar to me." 

"you must have seen her in the row." 

"no, I am sure I never set eye on the woman before; it is that which 
make it puzzling. and to the best of my belief I have never seen 
anyon like her; what I felt wa a kind of dim far-off memory, vagu 
but persistent. the onli sensat I can compar it to, is that odd 
feel one sometim ha in a dream, when fantast citi and 
wondrou land and phantom personag appear familiar and accustomed." 

villier nod and glanc aimlessli round the room, possibl in 
search of someth on which to turn the conversation. hi eye fell 
on an old chest somewhat like that in which the artist' strang legaci 
lay hid beneath a gothic scutcheon. 

"have you written to the doctor about poor meyrick?" he asked. 

"yes; I wrote ask for full particular as to hi ill and death. 
I don't expect to have an answer for anoth three week or a month. I 
thought I might as well inquir whether meyrick knew an englishwoman 
name herbert, and if so, whether the doctor could give me ani 
inform about her. but it' veri possibl that meyrick fell in 
with her at new york, or mexico, or san francisco; I have no idea as to 
the extent or direct of hi travels." 

"yes, and it' veri possibl that the woman may have more than one 
name." 

"exactly. I wish I had thought of ask you to lend me the portrait 
of her which you possess. I might have enclos it in my letter to dr. 
matthews." 

"so you might; that never occur to me. We might send it now. hark! 
what are those boy calling?" 

while the two men had been talk togeth a confus nois of 
shout had been gradual grow louder. the nois rose from the 
eastward and swell down piccadilly, draw nearer and nearer, a veri 
torrent of sound; surg up street usual quiet, and make everi 
window a frame for a face, curiou or excited. the cri and voic 
came echo up the silent street where villier lived, grow more 
distinct as they advanced, and, as villier spoke, an answer rang up 
from the pavement: 

"the west end horrors; anoth aw suicide; full details!" 

austin rush down the stair and bought a paper and read out the 
paragraph to villier as the uproar in the street rose and fell. the 
window wa open and the air seem full of nois and terror. 

"anoth gentleman ha fallen a victim to the terribl epidem of 
suicid which for the last month ha prevail in the west end. mr. 
sidney crashaw, of stoke house, fulham, and king' pomeroy, devon, wa 
found, after a prolong search, hang dead from the branch of a tree 
in hi garden at one o'clock today. the deceas gentleman dine last 
night at the carlton club and seem in hi usual health and spirits. 
He left the club at about ten o'clock, and wa seen walk leisur 
up st. james' street a littl later. subsequ to thi hi movement 
cannot be traced. On the discoveri of the bodi medic aid wa at onc 
summoned, but life had evid been long extinct. So far as is 
known, mr. crashaw had no troubl or anxieti of ani kind. thi pain 
suicide, it will be remembered, is the fifth of the kind in the last 
month. the author at scotland yard are unabl to suggest ani 
explan of these terribl occurrences." 

austin put down the paper in mute horror. 

"I shall leav london to-morrow," he said, "it is a citi of nightmares. 
how aw thi is, villiers!" 

mr. villier wa sit by the window quietli look out into the 
street. He had listen to the newspap report attentively, and the 
hint of indecis wa no longer on hi face. 

"wait a moment, austin," he replied, "I have made up my mind to mention 
a littl matter that occur last night. It stated, I think, that 
crashaw wa last seen aliv in st. james' street shortli after ten?" 

"yes, I think so. I will look again. yes, you are quit right." 

"quit so. well, I am in a posit to contradict that statement at 
all events. crashaw wa seen after that; consider later indeed." 

"how do you know?" 

"becaus I happen to see crashaw myself at about two o'clock thi 
morning." 

"you saw crashaw? you, villiers?" 

"yes, I saw him quit distinctly; indeed, there were but a few feet 
between us." 

"where, in heaven' name, did you see him?" 

"not far from here. I saw him in ashley street. He wa just leav a 
house." 

"did you notic what hous it was?" 

"yes. It wa mrs. beaumont's." 

"villiers! think what you are saying; there must be some mistake. how 
could crashaw be in mrs. beaumont' hous at two o'clock in the 
morning? surely, surely, you must have been dreaming, villiers; you 
were alway rather fanciful." 

"no; I wa wide awak enough. even if I had been dream as you say, 
what I saw would have rous me effectually." 

"what you saw? what did you see? wa there anyth strang about 
crashaw? but I can't believ it; it is impossible." 

"well, if you like I will tell you what I saw, or if you please, what I 
think I saw, and you can judg for yourself." 

"veri good, villiers." 

the nois and clamour of the street had die away, though now and then 
the sound of shout still came from the distance, and the dull, 
leaden silenc seem like the quiet after an earthquak or a storm. 
villier turn from the window and began speaking. 

"I wa at a hous near regent' park last night, and when I came away 
the fanci took me to walk home instead of take a hansom. It wa a 
clear pleasant night enough, and after a few minut I had the street 
pretti much to myself. it' a curiou thing, austin, to be alon in 
london at night, the gas-lamp stretch away in perspective, and the 
dead silence, and then perhap the rush and clatter of a hansom on the 
stones, and the fire start up under the horse' hoofs. I walk 
along pretti briskly, for I wa feel a littl tire of be out in 
the night, and as the clock were strike two I turn down ashley 
street, which, you know, is on my way. It wa quieter than ever there, 
and the lamp were fewer; altogether, it look as dark and gloomi as a 
forest in winter. I had done about half the length of the street when I 
heard a door close veri softly, and natur I look up to see who 
wa abroad like myself at such an hour. As it happens, there is a 
street lamp close to the hous in question, and I saw a man stand on 
the step. He had just shut the door and hi face wa toward me, and I 
recogn crashaw directly. I never knew him to speak to, but I had 
often seen him, and I am posit that I wa not mistaken in my man. I 
look into hi face for a moment, and then--i will confess the 
truth--i set off at a good run, and kept it up till I wa within my own 
door." 

"why?" 

"why? becaus it made my blood run cold to see that man' face. I 
could never have suppos that such an infern medley of passion 
could have glare out of ani human eyes; I almost faint as I looked. 
I knew I had look into the eye of a lost soul, austin, the man' 
outward form remained, but all hell wa within it. furiou lust, and 
hate that wa like fire, and the loss of all hope and horror that 
seem to shriek aloud to the night, though hi teeth were shut; and 
the utter black of despair. I am sure that he did not see me; he 
saw noth that you or I can see, but what he saw I hope we never 
shall. I do not know when he died; I suppos in an hour, or perhap 
two, but when I pass down ashley street and heard the close door, 
that man no longer belong to thi world; it wa a devil' face I 
look upon." 

there wa an interv of silenc in the room when villier ceas 
speaking. the light wa failing, and all the tumult of an hour ago wa 
quit hushed. austin had bent hi head at the close of the story, and 
hi hand cover hi eyes. 

"what can it mean?" he said at length. 

"who knows, austin, who knows? it' a black business, but I think we 
had better keep it to ourselves, for the present at ani rate. I will 
see if I cannot learn anyth about that hous through privat 
channel of information, and if I do light upon anyth I will let you 
know." 



vii 

the encount IN soho 

three week later austin receiv a note from villiers, ask him to 
call either that afternoon or the next. He chose the nearer date, and 
found villier sit as usual by the window, appar lost in 
medit on the drowsi traffic of the street. there wa a bamboo 
tabl by hi side, a fantast thing, enrich with gild and queer 
paint scenes, and on it lay a littl pile of paper arrang and 
docket as neatli as anyth in mr. clarke' office. 

"well, villiers, have you made ani discoveri in the last three weeks?" 

"I think so; I have here one or two memoranda which struck me as 
singular, and there is a statement to which I shall call your 
attention." 

"and these document relat to mrs. beaumont? It wa realli crashaw 
whom you saw that night stand on the doorstep of the hous in ashley 
street?" 

"a to that matter my belief remain unchanged, but neither my 
inquiri nor their result have ani special relat to crashaw. but 
my investig have had a strang issue. I have found out who mrs. 
beaumont is!" 

"who is she? In what way do you mean?" 

"I mean that you and I know her better under anoth name." 

"what name is that?" 

"herbert." 

"herbert!" austin repeat the word, daze with astonishment. 

"yes, mrs. herbert of paul street, helen vaughan of earlier adventur 
unknown to me. you had reason to recogn the express of her face; 
when you go home look at the face in meyrick' book of horrors, and you 
will know the sourc of your recollection." 

"and you have proof of this?" 

"yes, the best of proof; I have seen mrs. beaumont, or shall we say 
mrs. herbert?" 

"where did you see her?" 

"hardli in a place where you would expect to see a ladi who live in 
ashley street, piccadilly. I saw her enter a hous in one of the 
meanest and most disreput street in soho. In fact, I had made an 
appointment, though not with her, and she wa precis to both time and 
place." 

"all thi seem veri wonderful, but I cannot call it incredible. you 
must remember, villiers, that I have seen thi woman, in the ordinari 
adventur of london society, talk and laughing, and sip her 
coffe in a commonplac drawing-room with commonplac people. but you 
know what you are saying." 

"I do; I have not allow myself to be led by surmis or fancies. It 
wa with no thought of find helen vaughan that I search for mrs. 
beaumont in the dark water of the life of london, but such ha been 
the issue." 

"you must have been in strang places, villiers." 

"yes, I have been in veri strang places. It would have been useless, 
you know, to go to ashley street, and ask mrs. beaumont to give me a 
short sketch of her previou history. no; assuming, as I had to 
assume, that her record wa not of the cleanest, it would be pretti 
certain that at some previou time she must have move in circl not 
quit so refin as her present ones. If you see mud at the top of a 
stream, you may be sure that it wa onc at the bottom. I went to the 
bottom. I have alway been fond of dive into queer street for my 
amusement, and I found my knowledg of that local and it 
inhabit veri useful. It is, perhaps, needless to say that my 
friend had never heard the name of beaumont, and as I had never seen 
the lady, and wa quit unabl to describ her, I had to set to work in 
an indirect way. the peopl there know me; I have been abl to do some 
of them a servic now and again, so they made no difficulti about 
give their information; they were awar I had no commun direct 
or indirect with scotland yard. I had to cast out a good mani lines, 
though, befor I got what I wanted, and when I land the fish I did 
not for a moment suppos it wa my fish. but I listen to what I wa 
told out of a constitut like for useless information, and I 
found myself in possess of a veri curiou story, though, as I 
imagined, not the stori I wa look for. It wa to thi effect. 
some five or six year ago, a woman name raymond suddenli made her 
appear in the neighbourhood to which I am referring. she wa 
describ to me as be quit young, probabl not more than seventeen 
or eighteen, veri handsome, and look as if she came from the 
country. I should be wrong in say that she found her level in go 
to thi particular quarter, or associ with these people, for from 
what I wa told, I should think the worst den in london far too good 
for her. the person from whom I got my information, as you may 
suppose, no great puritan, shudder and grew sick in tell me of the 
nameless infami which were laid to her charge. after live there for 
a year, or perhap a littl more, she disappear as suddenli as she 
came, and they saw noth of her till about the time of the paul 
street case. At first she came to her old haunt onli occasionally, 
then more frequently, and final took up her abod there as before, 
and remain for six or eight months. it' of no use my go into 
detail as to the life that woman led; if you want particular you can 
look at meyrick' legacy. those design were not drawn from hi 
imagination. she again disappeared, and the peopl of the place saw 
noth of her till a few month ago. My inform told me that she 
had taken some room in a hous which he point out, and these room 
she wa in the habit of visit two or three time a week and alway 
at ten in the morning. I wa led to expect that one of these visit 
would be paid on a certain day about a week ago, and I accordingli 
manag to be on the look-out in compani with my ciceron at a quarter 
to ten, and the hour and the ladi came with equal punctuality. My 
friend and I were stand under an archway, a littl way back from the 
street, but she saw us, and gave me a glanc that I shall be long in 
forgetting. that look wa quit enough for me; I knew miss raymond to 
be mrs. herbert; as for mrs. beaumont she had quit gone out of my 
head. she went into the house, and I watch it till four o'clock, 
when she came out, and then I follow her. It wa a long chase, and I 
had to be veri care to keep a long way in the background, and yet 
not lose sight of the woman. she took me down to the strand, and then 
to westminster, and then up st. james' street, and along piccadilly. 
I felt queerish when I saw her turn up ashley street; the thought that 
mrs. herbert wa mrs. beaumont came into my mind, but it seem too 
imposs to be true. I wait at the corner, keep my eye on her 
all the time, and I took particular care to note the hous at which she 
stopped. It wa the hous with the gay curtains, the home of flowers, 
the hous out of which crashaw came the night he hang himself in hi 
garden. I wa just go away with my discovery, when I saw an empti 
carriag come round and draw up in front of the house, and I came to 
the conclus that mrs. herbert wa go out for a drive, and I wa 
right. there, as it happened, I met a man I know, and we stood talk 
togeth a littl distanc from the carriage-way, to which I had my 
back. We had not been there for ten minut when my friend took off 
hi hat, and I glanc round and saw the ladi I had been follow all 
day. 'who is that?' I said, and hi answer wa 'mrs. beaumont; live in 
ashley street.' Of cours there could be no doubt after that. I don't 
know whether she saw me, but I don't think she did. I went home at 
once, and, on consideration, I thought that I had a suffici good 
case with which to go to clarke." 

"whi to clarke?" 

"becaus I am sure that clark is in possess of fact about thi 
woman, fact of which I know nothing." 

"well, what then?" 

mr. villier lean back in hi chair and look reflect at austin 
for a moment befor he answered: 

"mi idea wa that clark and I should call on mrs. beaumont." 

"you would never go into such a hous as that? no, no, villiers, you 
cannot do it. besides, consider; what result..." 

"I will tell you soon. but I wa go to say that my inform doe 
not end here; it ha been complet in an extraordinari manner. 

"look at thi neat littl packet of manuscript; it is paginated, you 
see, and I have indulg in the civil coquetri of a ribbon of red tape. 
It ha almost a legal air, hasn't it? run your eye over it, austin. It 
is an account of the entertain mrs. beaumont provid for her 
choicer guests. the man who wrote thi escap with hi life, but I do 
not think he will live mani years. the doctor tell him he must have 
sustain some sever shock to the nerves." 

austin took the manuscript, but never read it. open the neat page 
at haphazard hi eye wa caught by a word and a phrase that follow 
it; and, sick at heart, with white lip and a cold sweat pour like 
water from hi temples, he flung the paper down. 

"take it away, villiers, never speak of thi again. are you made of 
stone, man? why, the dread and horror of death itself, the thought of 
the man who stand in the keen morn air on the black platform, 
bound, the bell toll in hi ears, and wait for the harsh rattl of 
the bolt, are as noth compar to this. I will not read it; I 
should never sleep again." 

"veri good. I can fanci what you saw. yes; it is horribl enough; but 
after all, it is an old story, an old mysteri play in our day, and in 
dim london street instead of amidst the vineyard and the oliv 
gardens. We know what happen to those who chanc to meet the great 
god pan, and those who are wise know that all symbol are symbol of 
something, not of nothing. It was, indeed, an exquisit symbol beneath 
which men long ago veil their knowledg of the most awful, most 
secret forc which lie at the heart of all things; forc befor which 
the soul of men must wither and die and blacken, as their bodi 
blacken under the electr current. such forc cannot be named, cannot 
be spoken, cannot be imagin except under a veil and a symbol, a 
symbol to the most of us appear a quaint, poetic fancy, to some a 
foolish tale. but you and I, at all events, have known someth of the 
terror that may dwell in the secret place of life, manifest under 
human flesh; that which is without form take to itself a form. oh, 
austin, how can it be? how is it that the veri sunlight doe not turn 
to black befor thi thing, the hard earth melt and boil beneath 
such a burden?" 

villier wa pace up and down the room, and the bead of sweat stood 
out on hi forehead. austin sat silent for a while, but villier saw 
him make a sign upon hi breast. 

"I say again, villiers, you will sure never enter such a hous as 
that? you would never pass out alive." 

"yes, austin, I shall go out alive--i, and clark with me." 

"what do you mean? you cannot, you would not dare..." 

"wait a moment. the air wa veri pleasant and fresh thi morning; 
there wa a breez blowing, even through thi dull street, and I 
thought I would take a walk. piccadilli stretch befor me a clear, 
bright vista, and the sun flash on the carriag and on the quiver 
leav in the park. It wa a joyou morning, and men and women look 
at the sky and smile as they went about their work or their pleasure, 
and the wind blew as blith as upon the meadow and the scent 
gorse. but somehow or other I got out of the bustl and the gaiety, 
and found myself walk slowli along a quiet, dull street, where there 
seem to be no sunshin and no air, and where the few foot-passeng 
loiter as they walked, and hung indecis about corner and 
archways. I walk along, hardli know where I wa go or what I 
did there, but feel impelled, as one sometim is, to explor still 
further, with a vagu idea of reach some unknown goal. thu I 
forg up the street, note the small traffic of the milk-shop, and 
wonder at the incongru medley of penni pipes, black tobacco, 
sweets, newspapers, and comic song which here and there jostl one 
anoth in the short compass of a singl window. I think it wa a cold 
shudder that suddenli pass through me that first told me that I had 
found what I wanted. I look up from the pavement and stop befor 
a dusti shop, abov which the letter had faded, where the red brick 
of two hundr year ago had grime to black; where the window had 
gather to themselv the dust of winter innumerable. I saw what I 
required; but I think it wa five minut befor I had steadi myself 
and could walk in and ask for it in a cool voic and with a calm face. 
I think there must even then have been a tremor in my words, for the 
old man who came out of the back parlour, and fumbl slowli amongst 
hi goods, look oddli at me as he tie the parcel. I paid what he 
asked, and stood lean by the counter, with a strang reluct to 
take up my good and go. I ask about the business, and learnt that 
trade wa bad and the profit cut down sadly; but then the street wa 
not what it wa befor traffic had been diverted, but that wa done 
forti year ago, 'just befor my father died,' he said. I got away at 
last, and walk along sharply; it wa a dismal street indeed, and I 
wa glad to return to the bustl and the noise. would you like to see 
my purchase?" 

austin said nothing, but nod hi head slightly; he still look 
white and sick. villier pull out a drawer in the bamboo table, and 
show austin a long coil of cord, hard and new; and at one end wa a 
run noose. 

"it is the best hempen cord," said villiers, "just as it use to be 
made for the old trade, the man told me. not an inch of jute from end 
to end." 

austin set hi teeth hard, and stare at villiers, grow whiter as he 
looked. 

"you would not do it," he murmur at last. "you would not have blood 
on your hands. My god!" he exclaimed, with sudden vehemence, "you 
cannot mean this, villiers, that you will make yourself a hangman?" 

"no. I shall offer a choice, and leav helen vaughan alon with thi 
cord in a lock room for fifteen minutes. If when we go in it is not 
done, I shall call the nearest policeman. that is all." 

"I must go now. I cannot stay here ani longer; I cannot bear this. 
good-night." 

"good-night, austin." 

the door shut, but in a moment it wa open again, and austin stood, 
white and ghastly, in the entrance. 

"I wa forgetting," he said, "that I too have someth to tell. I 
have receiv a letter from dr. hard of bueno ayres. He say that 
he attend meyrick for three week befor hi death." 

"and doe he say what carri him off in the prime of life? It wa not 
fever?" 

"no, it wa not fever. accord to the doctor, it wa an utter 
collaps of the whole system, probabl caus by some sever shock. 
but he state that the patient would tell him nothing, and that he wa 
consequ at some disadvantag in treat the case." 

"i there anyth more?" 

"yes. dr. hard end hi letter by saying: 'I think thi is all the 
inform I can give you about your poor friend. He had not been 
long in bueno ayres, and knew scarc ani one, with the except of 
a person who did not bear the best of characters, and ha sinc left--a 
mrs. vaughan.'" 



viii 

the fragment 

[amongst the paper of the well-known physician, dr. robert matheson, 
of ashley street, piccadilly, who die suddenly, of apoplect seizure, 
at the begin of 1892, a leaf of manuscript paper wa found, cover 
with pencil jottings. these note were in latin, much abbreviated, and 
had evid been made in great haste. the ms. wa onli deciph 
with difficulty, and some word have up to the present time evad all 
the effort of the expert employed. the date, "xxv jul. 1888," is 
written on the right-hand corner of the ms. the follow is a 
translat of dr. matheson' manuscript.] 

"whether scienc would benefit by these brief note if they could be 
published, I do not know, but rather doubt. but certainli I shall 
never take the respons of publish or divulg one word of 
what is here written, not onli on account of my oath given freeli to 
those two person who were present, but also becaus the detail are 
too abominable. It is probabl that, upon matur consideration, and 
after weight the good and evil, I shall one day destroy thi paper, 
or at least leav it under seal to my friend d., trust in hi 
discretion, to use it or to burn it, as he may think fit. 

"a wa befitting, I did all that my knowledg suggest to make sure 
that I wa suffer under no delusion. At first astounded, I could 
hardli think, but in a minute' time I wa sure that my puls wa 
steadi and regular, and that I wa in my real and true senses. I then 
fix my eye quietli on what wa befor me. 

"though horror and revolt nausea rose up within me, and an odour of 
corrupt choke my breath, I remain firm. I wa then privileg or 
accursed, I dare not say which, to see that which wa on the bed, lie 
there black like ink, transform befor my eyes. the skin, and the 
flesh, and the muscles, and the bones, and the firm structur of the 
human bodi that I had thought to be unchangeable, and perman as 
adamant, began to melt and dissolve. 

"I know that the bodi may be separ into it element by extern 
agencies, but I should have refus to believ what I saw. for here 
there wa some intern force, of which I knew nothing, that caus 
dissolut and change. 

"here too wa all the work by which man had been made repeat befor 
my eyes. I saw the form waver from sex to sex, divid itself from 
itself, and then again reunited. then I saw the bodi descend to the 
beast whenc it ascended, and that which wa on the height go down to 
the depths, even to the abyss of all being. the principl of life, 
which make organism, alway remained, while the outward form changed. 

"the light within the room had turn to blackness, not the dark of 
night, in which object are seen dimly, for I could see clearli and 
without difficulty. but it wa the negat of light; object were 
present to my eyes, if I may say so, without ani medium, in such a 
manner that if there had been a prism in the room I should have seen no 
colour repres in it. 

"I watched, and at last I saw noth but a substanc as jelly. then 
the ladder wa ascend again... [here the ms. is illegible] ...for one 
instanc I saw a form, shape in dim befor me, which I will not 
farther describe. but the symbol of thi form may be seen in ancient 
sculptures, and in paint which surviv beneath the lava, too foul 
to be spoken of... as a horribl and unspeak shape, neither man nor 
beast, wa chang into human form, there came final death. 

"I who saw all this, not without great horror and loath of soul, 
here write my name, declar all that I have set on thi paper to be 
true. 

"robert matheson, med. dr." 

* * * * * 

...such, raymond, is the stori of what I know and what I have seen. 
the burden of it wa too heavi for me to bear alone, and yet I could 
tell it to none but you. villiers, who wa with me at the last, know 
noth of that aw secret of the wood, of how what we both saw die, 
lay upon the smooth, sweet turf amidst the summer flowers, half in sun 
and half in shadow, and hold the girl rachel' hand, call and 
summon those companions, and shape in solid form, upon the earth we 
tread upon, the horror which we can but hint at, which we can onli name 
under a figure. I would not tell villier of this, nor of that 
resemblance, which struck me as with a blow upon my heart, when I saw 
the portrait, which fill the cup of terror at the end. what thi can 
mean I dare not guess. I know that what I saw perish wa not mary, and 
yet in the last agoni mary' eye look into mine. whether there can 
be ani one who can show the last link in thi chain of aw mystery, I 
do not know, but if there be ani one who can do this, you, raymond, are 
the man. and if you know the secret, it rest with you to tell it or 
not, as you please. 

I am write thi letter to you immedi on my get back to town. 
I have been in the countri for the last few days; perhap you may be 
abl to guess in which part. while the horror and wonder of london wa 
at it height--for "mrs. beaumont," as I have told you, wa well known 
in society--i wrote to my friend dr. phillips, give some brief 
outline, or rather hint, of what happened, and ask him to tell me 
the name of the villag where the event he had relat to me occurred. 
He gave me the name, as he said with the less hesitation, becaus 
rachel' father and mother were dead, and the rest of the famili had 
gone to a rel in the state of washington six month before. the 
parents, he said, had undoubtedli die of grief and horror caus by 
the terribl death of their daughter, and by what had gone befor that 
death. On the even of the day which I receiv phillips' letter I 
wa at caermaen, and stand beneath the moulder roman walls, white 
with the winter of seventeen hundr years, I look over the meadow 
where onc had stood the older templ of the "god of the deeps," and 
saw a hous gleam in the sunlight. It wa the hous where helen had 
lived. I stay at caermaen for sever days. the peopl of the 
place, I found, knew littl and had guess less. those whom I spoke 
to on the matter seem surpris that an antiquarian (a I profess 
myself to be) should troubl about a villag tragedy, of which they 
gave a veri commonplac version, and, as you may imagine, I told 
noth of what I knew. most of my time wa spent in the great wood 
that rise just abov the villag and climb the hillside, and goe 
down to the river in the valley; such anoth long love valley, 
raymond, as that on which we look one summer night, walk to and 
fro befor your house. for mani an hour I stray through the maze of 
the forest, turn now to right and now to left, pace slowli down 
long alley of undergrowth, shadowi and chill, even under the midday 
sun, and halt beneath great oaks; lie on the short turf of a 
clear where the faint sweet scent of wild rose came to me on the 
wind and mix with the heavi perfum of the elder, whose mingl odour 
is like the odour of the room of the dead, a vapour of incens and 
corruption. I stood at the edg of the wood, gaze at all the pomp 
and process of the foxglov tower amidst the bracken and shine 
red in the broad sunshine, and beyond them into deep thicket of close 
undergrowth where spring boil up from the rock and nourish the 
water-weeds, dank and evil. but in all my wander I avoid one 
part of the wood; it wa not till yesterday that I climb to the 
summit of the hill, and stood upon the ancient roman road that thread 
the highest ridg of the wood. here they had walked, helen and rachel, 
along thi quiet causeway, upon the pavement of green turf, shut in on 
either side by high bank of red earth, and tall hedg of shine 
beech, and here I follow in their steps, look out, now and again, 
through part in the boughs, and see on one side the sweep of the 
wood stretch far to right and left, and sink into the broad 
level, and beyond, the yellow sea, and the land over the sea. On the 
other side wa the valley and the river and hill follow hill as wave 
on wave, and wood and meadow, and cornfield, and white hous gleaming, 
and a great wall of mountain, and far blue peak in the north. and so 
at last I came to the place. the track went up a gentl slope, and 
widen out into an open space with a wall of thick undergrowth around 
it, and then, narrow again, pass on into the distanc and the 
faint blue mist of summer heat. and into thi pleasant summer glade 
rachel pass a girl, and left it, who shall say what? I did not stay 
long there. 

In a small town near caermaen there is a museum, contain for the 
most part roman remain which have been found in the neighbourhood at 
variou times. On the day after my arriv in caermaen I walk over 
to the town in question, and took the opportun of inspect the 
museum. after I had seen most of the sculptur stones, the coffins, 
rings, coins, and fragment of tessel pavement which the place 
contains, I wa shown a small squar pillar of white stone, which had 
been recent discov in the wood of which I have been speaking, 
and, as I found on inquiry, in that open space where the roman road 
broaden out. On one side of the pillar wa an inscription, of which I 
took a note. some of the letter have been defaced, but I do not think 
there can be ani doubt as to those which I supply. the inscript is 
as follows: 

devomnodent--i-- 
fla--v--ivssenilispossv--it-- 
propternvp--tias-- 
--qua--sviditsvbvmb--ra-- 

"to the great god noden (the god of the great deep or abyss) flaviu 
senili ha erect thi pillar on account of the marriag which he saw 
beneath the shade." 

the custodian of the museum inform me that local antiquari were 
much puzzled, not by the inscription, or by ani difficulti in 
translat it, but as to the circumst or rite to which allus is 
made. 

* * * * * 

...and now, my dear clarke, as to what you tell me about helen vaughan, 
whom you say you saw die under circumst of the utmost and almost 
incred horror. I wa interest in your account, but a good deal, 
nay all, of what you told me I knew already. I can understand the 
strang like you remark in both the portrait and in the actual 
face; you have seen helen' mother. you rememb that still summer 
night so mani year ago, when I talk to you of the world beyond the 
shadows, and of the god pan. you rememb mary. she wa the mother of 
helen vaughan, who wa born nine month after that night. 

mari never recov her reason. she lay, as you saw her, all the 
while upon her bed, and a few day after the child wa born she died. 
I fanci that just at the last she knew me; I wa stand by the bed, 
and the old look came into her eye for a second, and then she 
shudder and groan and died. It wa an ill work I did that night 
when you were present; I broke open the door of the hous of life, 
without know or care what might pass forth or enter in. I 
recollect your tell me at the time, sharpli enough, and rightli too, 
in one sense, that I had ruin the reason of a human be by a 
foolish experiment, base on an absurd theory. you did well to blame 
me, but my theori wa not all absurdity. what I said mari would see 
she saw, but I forgot that no human eye can look on such a sight with 
impunity. and I forgot, as I have just said, that when the hous of 
life is thu thrown open, there may enter in that for which we have no 
name, and human flesh may becom the veil of a horror one dare not 
express. I play with energi which I did not understand, you have 
seen the end of it. helen vaughan did well to bind the cord about 
her neck and die, though the death wa horrible. the blacken face, 
the hideou form upon the bed, chang and melt befor your eye 
from woman to man, from man to beast, and from beast to wors than 
beast, all the strang horror that you witness, surpris me but 
little. what you say the doctor whom you sent for saw and shudder at 
I notic long ago; I knew what I had done the moment the child wa 
born, and when it wa scarc five year old I surpris it, not onc 
or twice but sever time with a playmate, you may guess of what kind. 
It wa for me a constant, an incarn horror, and after a few year I 
felt I could bear it no more, and I sent helen vaughan away. you know 
now what frighten the boy in the wood. the rest of the strang 
story, and all els that you tell me, as discov by your friend, I 
have contriv to learn from time to time, almost to the last chapter. 
and now helen is with her companions... 









end of the project gutenberg ebook of the great god pan, by arthur machen 

*** end OF thi project gutenberg ebook the great god pan *** 

***** thi file should be name 389.txt or 389.zip ***** 
thi and all associ file of variou format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/3/8/389/ 

produc by brandi weed. html version by Al haines. 

updat edit will replac the previou one--th old edit 
will be renamed. 

creat the work from public domain print edit mean that no 
one own a unit state copyright in these works, so the foundat 
(and you!) can copi and distribut it in the unit state without 
permiss and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the gener term of use part of thi license, appli to 
copi and distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a regist trademark, and may not be use if you 
charg for the ebooks, unless you receiv specif permission. If you 
do not charg anyth for copi of thi ebook, compli with the 
rule is veri easy. you may use thi ebook for nearli ani purpos 
such as creation of deriv works, reports, perform and 
research. they may be modifi and print and given away--y may do 
practic anyth with public domain ebooks. redistribut is 
subject to the trademark license, especi commerci 
redistribution. 



*** start: full licens *** 

the full project gutenberg licens 
pleas read thi befor you distribut OR use thi work 

To protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promot the free 
distribut of electron works, by use or distribut thi work 
(or ani other work associ in ani way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agre to compli with all the term of the full project 
gutenberg-tm licens (avail with thi file or onlin at 
http://gutenberg.net/license). 


section 1. gener term of use and redistribut project gutenberg-tm 
electron work 

1.a. By read or use ani part of thi project gutenberg-tm 
electron work, you indic that you have read, understand, agre to 
and accept all the term of thi licens and intellectu properti 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agre to abid by all 
the term of thi agreement, you must ceas use and return or destroy 
all copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in your possession. 
If you paid a fee for obtain a copi of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work and you do not agre to be bound by the 
term of thi agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entiti to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a regist trademark. It may onli be 
use on or associ in ani way with an electron work by peopl who 
agre to be bound by the term of thi agreement. there are a few 
thing that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electron work 
even without compli with the full term of thi agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of thing you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electron work if you follow the term of thi agreement 
and help preserv free futur access to project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compil copyright in the collect of project 
gutenberg-tm electron works. nearli all the individu work in the 
collect are in the public domain in the unit states. If an 
individu work is in the public domain in the unit state and you are 
locat in the unit states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or creat deriv 
work base on the work as long as all refer to project gutenberg 
are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promot free access to electron work by 
freeli share project gutenberg-tm work in complianc with the term of 
thi agreement for keep the project gutenberg-tm name associ with 
the work. you can easili compli with the term of thi agreement by 
keep thi work in the same format with it attach full project 
gutenberg-tm licens when you share it without charg with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are locat also govern 
what you can do with thi work. copyright law in most countri are in 
a constant state of change. If you are outsid the unit states, check 
the law of your countri in addit to the term of thi agreement 
befor downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribut or 
creat deriv work base on thi work or ani other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundat make no represent concern 
the copyright statu of ani work in ani countri outsid the unit 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remov all refer to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the follow sentence, with activ link to, or other immedi 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm licens must appear promin 
whenev ani copi of a project gutenberg-tm work (ani work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copi or distributed: 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.net 

1.e.2. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is deriv 
from the public domain (doe not contain a notic indic that it is 
post with permiss of the copyright holder), the work can be copi 
and distribut to anyon in the unit state without pay ani fee 
or charges. If you are redistribut or provid access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associ with or appear on the 
work, you must compli either with the requir of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permiss for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is post 
with the permiss of the copyright holder, your use and distribut 
must compli with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and ani addit 
term impos by the copyright holder. addit term will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm licens for all work post with the 
permiss of the copyright holder found at the begin of thi work. 

1.e.4. Do not unlink or detach or remov the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens term from thi work, or ani file contain a part of thi 
work or ani other work associ with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribut or redistribut thi 
electron work, or ani part of thi electron work, without 
promin display the sentenc set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
activ link or immedi access to the full term of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribut thi work in ani binary, 
compressed, mark up, nonproprietari or proprietari form, includ ani 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provid access to or 
distribut copi of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the offici version 
post on the offici project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net), 
you must, at no addit cost, fee or expens to the user, provid a 
copy, a mean of export a copy, or a mean of obtain a copi upon 
request, of the work in it origin "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. ani altern format must includ the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens as specifi in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. Do not charg a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copi or distribut ani project gutenberg-tm work 
unless you compli with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charg a reason fee for copi of or provid 
access to or distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work provid 
that 

- you pay a royalti fee of 20% of the gross profit you deriv from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm work calcul use the method 
you alreadi use to calcul your applic taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
ha agre to donat royalti under thi paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literari archiv foundation. royalti payment 
must be paid within 60 day follow each date on which you 
prepar (or are legal requir to prepare) your period tax 
returns. royalti payment should be clearli mark as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat at the 
address specifi in section 4, "inform about donat to 
the project gutenberg literari archiv foundation." 

- you provid a full refund of ani money paid by a user who notifi 
you in write (or by e-mail) within 30 day of receipt that s/he 
doe not agre to the term of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must requir such a user to return or 
destroy all copi of the work possess in a physic medium 
and discontinu all use of and all access to other copi of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accord with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of ani 
money paid for a work or a replac copy, if a defect in the 
electron work is discov and report to you within 90 day 
of receipt of the work. 

- you compli with all other term of thi agreement for free 
distribut of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. If you wish to charg a fee or distribut a project gutenberg-tm 
electron work or group of work on differ term than are set 
forth in thi agreement, you must obtain permiss in write from 
both the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundat as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunt and employe expend consider 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcrib and proofread 
public domain work in creat the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despit these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electron 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limit to, incomplete, inaccur or 
corrupt data, transcript errors, a copyright or other intellectu 
properti infringement, a defect or damag disk or other medium, a 
comput virus, or comput code that damag or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limit warranty, disclaim OF damag - except for the "right 
of replac or refund" describ in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and ani other parti distribut a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work under thi agreement, disclaim all 
liabil to you for damages, cost and expenses, includ legal 
fees. you agre that you have NO remedi for negligence, strict 
liability, breach OF warranti OR breach OF contract except those 
provid IN paragraph f3. you agre that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and ani distributor under thi agreement will not BE 
liabl TO you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punit OR 
incident damag even IF you give notic OF the possibl OF such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limit right OF replac OR refund - If you discov a 
defect in thi electron work within 90 day of receiv it, you can 
receiv a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explan to the person you receiv the work from. If you 
receiv the work on a physic medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entiti that provid you with 
the defect work may elect to provid a replac copi in lieu of a 
refund. If you receiv the work electronically, the person or entiti 
provid it to you may choos to give you a second opportun to 
receiv the work electron in lieu of a refund. If the second copi 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in write without further 
opportun to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limit right of replac or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, thi work is provid to you 'as-is' with NO other 
warranti OF ani kind, express OR implied, includ but not limit TO 
warranti OF merchant OR fit for ani purpose. 

1.f.5. some state do not allow disclaim of certain impli 
warranti or the exclus or limit of certain type of damages. 
If ani disclaim or limit set forth in thi agreement violat the 
law of the state applic to thi agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaim or limit permit by 
the applic state law. the invalid or unenforc of ani 
provis of thi agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemn - you agre to indemnifi and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, ani agent or employe of the foundation, anyon 
provid copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in accord 
with thi agreement, and ani volunt associ with the production, 
promot and distribut of project gutenberg-tm electron works, 
harmless from all liability, cost and expenses, includ legal fees, 
that aris directli or indirectli from ani of the follow which you do 
or caus to occur: (a) distribut of thi or ani project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addit or delet to ani 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) ani defect you cause. 


section 2. inform about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonym with the free distribut of 
electron work in format readabl by the widest varieti of comput 
includ obsolete, old, middle-ag and new computers. It exist 
becaus of the effort of hundr of volunt and donat from 
peopl in all walk of life. 

volunt and financi support to provid volunt with the 
assist they need, is critic to reach project gutenberg-tm' 
goal and ensur that the project gutenberg-tm collect will 
remain freeli avail for gener to come. In 2001, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundat wa creat to provid a secur 
and perman futur for project gutenberg-tm and futur generations. 
To learn more about the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat 
and how your effort and donat can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundat web page at http://www.pglaf.org. 


section 3. inform about the project gutenberg literari archiv 
foundat 

the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educ corpor organ under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt statu by the intern 
revenu service. the foundation' ein or feder tax identif 
number is 64-6221541. it 501(c)(3) letter is post at 
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contribut to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. feder law and your state' laws. 

the foundation' princip offic is locat at 4557 melan dr. S. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but it volunt and employe are scatter 
throughout numer locations. it busi offic is locat at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact link and up to date contact 
inform can be found at the foundation' web site and offici 
page at http://pglaf.org 

for addit contact information: 
dr. gregori B. newbi 
chief execut and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 


section 4. inform about donat to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot surviv without wide 
spread public support and donat to carri out it mission of 
increas the number of public domain and licens work that can be 
freeli distribut in machin readabl form access by the widest 
array of equip includ outdat equipment. mani small donat 
($1 to $5,000) are particularli import to maintain tax exempt 
statu with the irs. 

the foundat is commit to compli with the law regul 
chariti and charit donat in all 50 state of the unit 
states. complianc requir are not uniform and it take a 
consider effort, much paperwork and mani fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. We do not solicit donat in locat 
where we have not receiv written confirm of compliance. To 
send donat or determin the statu of complianc for ani 
particular state visit http://pglaf.org 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribut from state where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibit 
against accept unsolicit donat from donor in such state who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

intern donat are grate accepted, but we cannot make 
ani statement concern tax treatment of donat receiv from 
outsid the unit states. u.s. law alon swamp our small staff. 

pleas check the project gutenberg web page for current donat 
method and addresses. donat are accept in a number of other 
way includ includ checks, onlin payment and credit card 
donations. To donate, pleas visit: http://pglaf.org/don 


section 5. gener inform about project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. 

professor michael S. hart is the origin of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a librari of electron work that could be freeli share 
with anyone. for thirti years, he produc and distribut project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with onli a loos network of volunt support. 


project gutenberg-tm ebook are often creat from sever print 
editions, all of which are confirm as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notic is included. thus, we do not necessarili 
keep ebook in complianc with ani particular paper edition. 


most peopl start at our web site which ha the main PG search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.net 

thi web site includ inform about project gutenberg-tm, 
includ how to make donat to the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundation, how to help produc our new ebooks, and how to 
subscrib to our email newslett to hear about new ebooks. 
