the project gutenberg ebook of the dunwich horror, by H. P. lovecraft 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher in the unit state and most 
other part of the world at no cost and with almost no restrict 
whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or re-us it under the term of 
the project gutenberg licens includ with thi ebook or onlin at 
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not locat in the unit states, you'll have 
to check the law of the countri where you are locat befor use thi ebook. 

title: the dunwich horror 

author: H. P. lovecraft 

releas date: octob 4, 2015 [ebook #50133] 

language: english 


*** start OF thi project gutenberg ebook the dunwich horror *** 




produc by greg weeks, mari meehan and the onlin 
distribut proofread team at http://www.pgdp.net 









_the_ dunwich horror 

by H. P. lovecraft 


"gorgons, and hydras, and chimeras--dir stori of celæno and 
the harpies--may reproduc themselv in the brain of 
superstition--_but they were there before_. they are transcripts, 
types--th archetyp are in us, and eternal. how els should the 
recit of that which we know in a wake sens to be fals come 
to affect us at all? Is it that we natur conceiv terror from 
such objects, consid in their capac of be abl to 
inflict upon us bodili injury? oh, least of all! _these terror 
are of older standing. they date beyond body_--or without the 
body, they would have been the same.... that the kind of fear here 
treat is pure spiritual--that it is strong in proport as it 
is objectless on earth, that it predomin in the period of our 
sinless infancy--ar difficulti the solut of which might 
afford some probabl insight into our ante-mundan condition, and 
a peep at least into the shadowland of pre-existence."--charl 
lamb: _witch and other night-fears_. 


1 
prefac 
when a travel in north central massachusett take the wrong fork 
at the junction of the aylesburi pike just beyond dean' corner he 
come upon a lone and curiou country. the ground get higher, and 
the brier-bord stone wall press closer and closer against the rut 
of the dusty, curv road. the tree of the frequent forest belt 
seem too large, and the wild weeds, brambles, and grass attain a 
luxuri not often found in settl regions. At the same time the 
plant field appear singularli few and barren; while the spars 
scatter hous wear a surpriz uniform aspect of age, squalor, and 
dilapidation. without know why, one hesit to ask direct 
from the gnarled, solitari figur spi now and then on crumbl 
doorstep or in the sloping, rock-strewn meadows. those figur are 
so silent and furtiv that one feel somehow confront by forbidden 
things, with which it would be better to have noth to do. when a 
rise in the road bring the mountain in view abov the deep woods, 
the feel of strang uneasi is increased. the summit are too 
round and symmetr to give a sens of comfort and naturalness, and 
sometim the sky silhouett with especi clear the queer circl 
of tall stone pillar with which most of them are crowned. 

gorg and ravin of problemat depth intersect the way, and the 
crude wooden bridg alway seem of dubiou safety. when the road 
dip again there are stretch of marshland that one instinct 
dislikes, and inde almost fear at even when unseen whippoorwil 
chatter and the firefli come out in abnorm profus to danc to 
the raucous, creepili insist rhythm of strident pipe bullfrogs. 
the thin, shine line of the miskatonic' upper reach ha an oddli 
serpentlik suggest as it wind close to the feet of the dome hill 
among which it rises. 

As the hill draw nearer, one heed their wood side more than their 
stone-crown tops. those side loom up so darkli and precipit 
that one wish they would keep their distance, but there is no road by 
which to escap them. across a cover bridg one see a small villag 
huddl between the stream and the vertic slope of round mountain, 
and wonder at the cluster of rot gambrel roof bespeak an 
earlier architectur period than that of the neighbor region. It 
is not reassur to see, on a closer glance, that most of the hous 
are desert and fall to ruin, and that the broken-steepl church 
now harbor the one slovenli mercantil establish of the hamlet. 
one dread to trust the tenebr tunnel of the bridge, yet there is no 
way to avoid it. onc across, it is hard to prevent the impress of a 
faint, malign odor about the villag street, as of the mass mold and 
decay of centuries. It is alway a relief to get clear of the place, 
and to follow the narrow road around the base of the hill and across 
the level countri beyond till it rejoin the aylesburi pike. afterward 
one sometim learn that one ha been through dunwich. 

outsid visit dunwich as seldom as possible, and sinc a certain 
season of horror all the signboard point toward it have been taken 
down. the scenery, judg by ani ordinari esthet canon, is more 
than commonli beautiful; yet there is no influx of artist or summer 
tourists. two centuri ago, when talk of witch-blood, satan-worship, 
and strang forest presenc wa not laugh at, it wa the custom to 
give reason for avoid the locality. In our sensibl age--sinc 
the dunwich horror of 1928 wa hush up by those who had the town' 
and the world' welfar at heart--peopl shun it without know 
exactli why. perhap one reason--though it can not appli to uninform 
strangers--i that the nativ are now repel decadent, have 
gone far along that path of retrogress so common in mani new england 
backwaters. they have come to form a race by themselves, with the 
well-defin mental and physic stigmata of degeneraci and inbreeding. 
the averag of their intellig is wofulli low, whilst their annal 
reek of overt vicious and of half-hidden murders, incests, and 
deed of almost unnam violenc and perversity. the old gentry, 
repres the two or three armiger famili which came from 
salem in 1692, have kept somewhat abov the gener level of decay; 
though mani branch are sunk into the sordid populac so deepli that 
onli their name remain as a key to the origin they disgrace. some of 
the whateley and bishop still send their eldest son to harvard and 
miskatonic, though those son seldom return to the molder gambrel 
roof under which they and their ancestor were born. 

No one, even those who have the fact concern the recent horror, 
can say just what is the matter with dunwich; though old legend speak 
of unhallow rite and conclav of the indians, amidst which they 
call forbidden shape of shadow out of the great round hills, and 
made wild orgiast prayer that were answer by loud crack and 
rumbl from the ground below. In 1747 the reverend abijah hoadley, 
newli come to the congreg church at dunwich village, preach a 
memor sermon on the close presenc of satan and hi imps, in which 
he said: 

It must be allow'd that these blasphemi of an infernal train 
of dæmon are matter of too common knowledg to be deny'd; the 
curs voic of _azazel_ and _buzrael_, of _beelzebub_ and 
_belial_, be heard from under ground by abov a score of 
credibl wit now living. I myself did not more than a 
fortnight ago catch a veri plain discours of evil power in the 
hill behind my house; wherein there were a rattl and rolling, 
groaning, screeching, and hissing, such as no thing of thi earth 
cou'd rais up, and which must need have come from those cave 
that onli black magick can discover, and onli the divel unlock. 

mr. hoadley disappear soon after deliv thi sermon; but the 
text, print in springfield, is still extant. nois in the hill 
continu to be report from year to year, and still form a puzzl to 
geologist and physiographers. 

other tradit tell of foul odor near the hill-crown circl of 
stone pillars, and of rush airi presenc to be heard faintli at 
certain hour from state point at the bottom of the great ravines; 
while still other tri to explain the devil' hop yard--a bleak, 
blast hillsid where no tree, shrub, or grass-blad will grow. then, 
too, the nativ are mortal afraid of the numer whippoorwil 
which grow vocal on warm nights. It is vow that the bird are 
psychopomp lie in wait for the soul of the dying, and that they 
time their eeri cri in unison with the sufferer' struggl breath. 
If they can catch the flee soul when it leav the body, they 
instantli flutter away chitter in demoniac laughter; but if they 
fail, they subsid gradual into a disappoint silence. 

these tales, of course, are obsolet and ridiculous; becaus they come 
down from veri old times. dunwich is inde ridicul old--old by 
far than ani of the commun within thirti mile of it. south of the 
villag one may still spi the cellar wall and chimney of the ancient 
bishop house, which wa built befor 1700; whilst the ruin of the mill 
at the falls, built in 1806, form the most modern piec of architectur 
to be seen. industri did not flourish here, and the nineteenth centuri 
factori movement prove short-lived. oldest of all are the great 
ring of rough-hewn stone column on the hilltops, but these are more 
gener attribut to the indian than to the settlers. deposit of 
skull and bones, found within these circl and around the sizabl 
table-lik rock on sentinel hill, sustain the popular belief that such 
spot were onc the burial-plac of the pocumtucks; even though mani 
ethnologists, disregard the absurd improb of such a theory, 
persist in believ the remain caucasian. 


2 

It wa in the township of dunwich, in a larg and partli inhabit 
farmhous set against a hillsid four mile from the villag and a mile 
and a half from ani other dwelling, that wilbur whateley wa born at 5 
a. m. on sunday, the second of february, 1913. thi date wa recal 
becaus it wa candlemas, which peopl in dunwich curious observ 
under anoth name; and becaus the nois in the hill had sounded, 
and all the dog of the countrysid had bark persistently, throughout 
the night before. less worthi of notic wa the fact that the mother 
wa one of the decad whateleys, a somewhat deformed, unattract 
albino woman of 35, live with an age and half-insan father 
about whom the most fright tale of wizardri had been whisper 
in hi youth. lavinia whateley had no known husband, but accord 
to the custom of the region made no attempt to disavow the child; 
concern the other side of whose ancestri the countri folk might--and 
did--specul as wide as they chose. On the contrary, she seem 
strang proud of the dark, goatish-look infant who form such a 
contrast to her own sickli and pink-ey albinism, and wa heard to 
mutter mani curiou propheci about it unusu power and tremend 
future. 

lavinia wa one who would be apt to mutter such things, for she wa a 
lone creatur given to wander amidst thunderstorm in the hill and 
tri to read the great odor book which her father had inherit 
through two centuri of whateleys, and which were fast fall to 
piec with age and worm-holes. she had never been to school, but wa 
fill with disjoint scrap of ancient lore that old whateley had 
taught her. the remot farmhous had alway been fear becaus of old 
whateley' reput for black magic, and the unexplain death by 
violenc of mrs. whateley when lavinia wa twelv year old had not 
help to make the place popular. isol among strang influences, 
lavinia wa fond of wild and grandios daydream and singular 
occupations; nor wa her leisur much taken up by household care in a 
home from which all standard of order and cleanli had long sinc 
disappeared. 

there wa a hideou scream which echo abov even the hill nois 
and the dogs' bark on the night wilbur wa born, but no known doctor 
or midwif presid at hi coming. neighbor knew noth of him till 
a week afterward, when old whateley drove hi sleigh through the snow 
into dunwich villag and discours incoher to the group of 
lounger at osborn' gener store. there seem to be a chang in the 
old man--an ad element of furtiv in the cloud brain which 
subtli transform him from an object to a subject of fear--though he 
wa not one to be perturb by ani common famili event. amidst it all 
he show some trace of the pride later notic in hi daughter, and 
what he said of the child' patern wa rememb by mani of hi 
hearer year afterward. 

"I dun't keer what folk think--ef lavinny' boy look like hi pa, he 
wouldn't look like nothin' ye expeck. Ye needn't think the onli folk 
is the folk hereabouts. lavinny' read some, an' ha seed some thing 
the most o' ye onli tell abaout. I calc'lat her man is as good a 
husban' as ye kin find thi side of aylesbury; an' ef ye know as much 
abaout the hill as I dew, ye wouldn't ast no better church weddin' nor 
her'n. let me tell ye suthin'--_som day yew folks'll hear a child o' 
lavinny' a-callin' it father' name on the top o' sentinel hill!_" 

the onli person who saw wilbur dure the first month of hi life 
were old zechariah whateley, of the undecay whateleys, and earl 
sawyer' common-law wife, mami bishop. mamie' visit wa frankli one 
of curiosity, and her subsequ tale did justic to her observations; 
but zechariah came to lead a pair of alderney cow which old whateley 
had bought of hi son curtis. thi mark the begin of a cours of 
cattle-buy on the part of small wilbur' famili which end onli 
in 1928, when the dunwich horror came and went; yet at no time did 
the ramshackl whateley barn seem over-crowd with livestock. there 
came a period when peopl were curiou enough to steal up and count 
the herd that graze precari on the steep hillsid abov the old 
farmhouse, and they could never find more than ten or twelv anemic, 
bloodless-look specimens. evid some blight or distemper, 
perhap sprung from the unwholesom pasturag or the diseas fungi 
and timber of the filthi barn, caus a heavi mortal amongst the 
whateley animals. odd wound or sores, have someth of the aspect 
of incisions, seem to afflict the visibl cattle; and onc or twice 
dure the earlier month certain caller fanci they could discern 
similar sore about the throat of the gray, unshaven old man and hi 
slatternly, crinkly-hair albino daughter. 

In the spring after wilbur' birth lavinia resum her customari 
rambl in the hills, bear in her misproport arm the swarthi 
child. public interest in the whateley subsid after most of the 
countri folk had seen the baby, and no one bother to comment on the 
swift develop which that newcom seem everi day to exhibit. 
wilbur' growth wa inde phenomenal, for within three month of hi 
birth he had attain a size and muscular power not usual found in 
infant under a full year of age. hi motion and even hi vocal sound 
show a restraint and deliber highli peculiar in an infant, 
and no one wa realli unprepar when, at seven months, he began to 
walk unassisted, with falter which anoth month wa suffici to 
remove. 

It wa somewhat after thi time--on hallowe'en--that a great blaze wa 
seen at midnight on the top of sentinel hill where the old table-lik 
stone stand amidst it tumulu of ancient bones. consider talk 
wa start when sila bishop--of the undecay bishops--ment 
have seen the boy run sturdili up that hill ahead of hi mother 
about an hour befor the blaze wa remarked. sila wa round up a 
stray heifer, but he nearli forgot hi mission when he fleetingli spi 
the two figur in the dim light of hi lantern. they dart almost 
noiselessli through the underbrush, and the astonish watcher seem 
to think they were entir unclothed. afterward he could not be sure 
about the boy, who may have had some kind of a fring belt and a pair 
of dark blue trunk or trouser on. wilbur wa never subsequ seen 
aliv and consciou without complet and tightli button attire, the 
disarrang or threaten disarrang of which alway seem to 
fill him with anger and alarm. hi contrast with hi squalid mother and 
grandfath in thi respect wa thought veri notabl until the horror 
of 1928 suggest the most valid of reasons. 

the next januari gossip were mildli interest in the fact that 
"lavinny' black brat" had commenc to talk, and at the age of onli 
eleven months. hi speech wa somewhat remark both becaus of it 
differ from the ordinari accent of the region, and becaus it 
display a freedom from infantil lisp of which mani children of 
three or four might well be proud. the boy wa not talkative, yet when 
he spoke he seem to reflect some elus element wholli unpossess 
by dunwich and it denizens. the strang did not resid in what he 
said, or even in the simpl idiom he used; but seem vagu link 
with hi inton or with the intern organ that produc the 
spoken sounds. hi facial aspect, too, wa remark for it maturity; 
for though he share hi mother' and grandfather' chinlessness, hi 
firm and precoci shape nose unit with the express on hi 
large, dark, almost latin eye to give him an air of quasi-adulthood 
and well-nigh preternatur intelligence. He was, however, exceedingli 
ugli despit hi appear of brilliancy; there be someth almost 
goatish or animalist about hi thick lips, large-pored, yellowish 
skin, coars crinkli hair, and oddli elong ears. He wa soon 
dislik even more decidedli than hi mother and grandsire, and all 
conjectur about him were spice with refer to the bygon magic 
of old whateley, and how the hill onc shook when he shriek the 
dread name of _yog-sothoth_ in the midst of a circl of stone with 
a great book open in hi arm befor him. dog abhor the boy, and 
he wa alway oblig to take variou defens measur against their 
bark menace. 


3 

meanwhil old whateley continu to buy cattl without measur 
increas the size of hi herd. He also cut timber and began to 
repair the unus part of hi house--a spacious, peaked-roof affair 
whose rear end wa buri entir in the rocki hillside, and whose 
three least-ruin ground-floor room had alway been suffici for 
himself and hi daughter. there must have been prodigi reserv 
of strength in the old man to enabl him to accomplish so much hard 
labor; and though he still babbl dementedli at times, hi carpentri 
seem to show the effect of sound calculation. It had realli begun 
as soon as wilbur wa born, when one of the mani tool-sh had been 
put suddenli in order, clapboarded, and fit with a stout fresh lock. 
now, in restor the abandon upper stori of the house, he wa a no 
less thorough craftsman. hi mania show itself onli in hi tight 
boarding-up of all the window in the reclaim section--though mani 
declar that it wa a crazi thing to bother with the reclam at 
all. less inexplic wa hi fitting-up of anoth downstair room 
for hi new grandson--a room which sever caller saw, though no one 
wa ever admit to the closely-board upper story. thi chamber 
he line with tall, firm shelving; along which he began gradual to 
arrange, in appar care order, all the rot ancient book and 
part of book which dure hi own day had been heap promiscu 
in odd corner of the variou rooms. 

"I made some use of 'em," he would say as he tri to mend a torn 
black-lett page with past prepar on the rusti kitchen stove, "but 
the boy' fitten to make better use of 'em. he'd orter hev 'em as well 
sot as he kin for they'r goin' to be all of hi larnin'." 

when wilbur wa a year and seven month old--in septemb of 1914--hi 
size and accomplish were almost alarming. He had grown as larg as 
a child of four, and wa a fluent and incred intellig talker. 
He ran freeli about the field and hills, and accompani hi mother 
on all her wanderings. At home he would pore dilig over the queer 
pictur and chart in hi grandfather' books, while old whateley 
would instruct and catech him through long, hush afternoons. By 
thi time the restor of the hous wa finished, and those who 
watch it wonder whi one of the upper window had been made into a 
solid plank door. It wa a window in the rear of the east gabl end, 
close against the hill; and no one could imagin whi a cleat wooden 
runway wa built up to it from the ground. about the period of thi 
work' complet peopl notic that the old tool-house, tightli 
lock and windowlessli clapboard sinc wilbur' birth, had been 
abandon again. the door swung listlessli open, and when earl sawyer 
onc step within after a cattle-sel call on old whateley he wa 
quit discompos by the singular odor he encountered--such a stench, 
he averred, as he had never befor smelt in all hi life except near 
the indian circl on the hills, and which could not come from anyth 
sane or of thi earth. but then, the home and shed of dunwich folk 
have never been remark for olfactori immaculateness. 

the follow month were void of visibl events, save that everyon 
swore to a slow but steadi increas in the mysteri hill noises. On 
may eve of 1915 there were tremor which even the aylesburi peopl 
felt, whilst the follow hallowe'en produc an underground rumbl 
queerli synchron with burst of flame--"them witch whateleys' 
doin's"--from the summit of sentinel hill. wilbur wa grow up 
uncannily, so that he look like a boy of ten as he enter hi 
fourth year. He read avidli by himself now; but talk much less than 
formerly. A settl taciturn wa absorb him, and for the first 
time peopl began to speak specif of the dawn look of evil in 
hi goatish face. He would sometim mutter an unfamiliar jargon, and 
chant in bizarr rhythm which chill the listen with a sens of 
unexplain terror. the avers display toward him by dog had now 
becom a matter of wide remark, and he wa oblig to carri a pistol 
in order to travers the countrysid in safety. hi occasion use of 
the weapon did not enhanc hi popular amongst the owner of canin 
guardians. 

the few caller at the hous would often find lavinia alon on the 
ground floor, while odd cri and footstep resound in the boarded-up 
second story. she would never tell what her father and the boy were 
do up there, though onc she turn pale and display an abnorm 
degre of fear when a jocos fish-peddl tri the lock door lead 
to the stairway. that peddler told the store lounger at dunwich 
villag that he thought he heard a hors stamp on that floor above. 
the lounger reflected, think of the door and runway, and of 
the cattl that so swiftli disappeared. then they shudder as they 
recal tale of old whateley' youth, and of the strang thing that 
are call out of the earth when a bullock is sacrif at the proper 
time to certain heathen gods. It had for some time been notic that 
dog had begun to hate and fear the whole whateley place as violent 
as they hate and fear young wilbur personally. 

In 1917 the war came, and squir sawyer whateley, as chairman of the 
local draft board, had hard work find a quota of young dunwich men 
fit even to be sent to a develop camp. the government, alarm at 
such sign of wholesal region decadence, sent sever offic and 
medic expert to investigate; conduct a survey which new england 
newspap reader may still recall. It wa the public attend thi 
investig which set report on the track of the whateleys, and 
caus the _boston globe_ and _arkham advertiser_ to print flamboy 
sunday stori of young wilbur' precociousness, old whateley' black 
magic, the shelv of strang books, the seal second stori of the 
ancient farmhouse, and the weird of the whole region and it hill 
noises. wilbur wa four and a half then, and look like a lad of 
fifteen. hi lip and cheek were fuzzi with a coars dark down, and hi 
voic had begun to break. earl sawyer went out to the whateley place 
with both set of report and camera men, and call their attent 
to the queer stench which now seem to trickl down from the seal 
upper spaces. It was, he said, exactli like a smell he had found in the 
tool-sh abandon when the hous wa final repaired, and like the 
faint odor which he sometim thought he caught near the stone circl 
on the mountains. dunwich folk read the stori when they appeared, and 
grin over the obviou mistakes. they wondered, too, whi the writer 
made so much of the fact that old whateley alway paid for hi cattl 
in gold piec of extrem ancient date. the whateley had receiv 
their visitor with ill-conc distaste, though they did not dare 
court further public by a violent resist or refus to talk. 


4 

for a decad the annal of the whateley sink indistinguish into 
the gener life of a morbid commun use to their queer way and 
harden to their may eve and all-hallow orgies. twice a year they 
would light fire on the top of sentinel hill, at which time the 
mountain rumbl would recur with greater and greater violence; while 
at all season there were strang and portent do at the lone 
farmhouse. In the cours of time caller profess to hear sound 
in the seal upper stori even when all the famili were downstairs, 
and they wonder how swiftli or how lingeringli a cow or bullock 
wa usual sacrificed. there wa talk of a complaint to the societi 
for the prevent of cruelti to animals; but noth ever came of 
it, sinc dunwich folk are never anxiou to call the outsid world' 
attent to themselves. 

about 1923, when wilbur wa a boy of ten whose mind, voice, stature, 
and beard face gave all the impress of maturity, a second great 
sieg of carpentri went on at the old house. It wa all insid the 
seal upper part, and from bit of discard lumber peopl conclud 
that the youth and hi grandfath had knock out all the partit 
and even remov the attic floor, leav onli one vast open void 
between the ground stori and the peak roof. they had torn down the 
great central chimney, too, and fit the rusti rang with a flimsi 
outsid tin stove-pipe. 

In the spring after thi event old whateley notic the grow number 
of whippoorwil that would come out of cold spring glen to chirp under 
hi window at night. He seem to regard the circumst as one of 
great significance, and told the lounger at osborn' that he thought 
hi time had almost come. 

"they whistl jest in tune with my breathin' naow," he said, "an' I 
guess they'r gittin' readi to ketch my soul. they know it' a-goin' 
aout, an' dun't calc'lat to miss it. yew'll know, boys, arter i'm 
gone, whether they git me er not. Ef they dew, they'll keep up 
a-singin' an' laffin' till break o' day. Ef they dun't, they'll kinder 
quiet daown like. I expeck them an' the soul they hunt fer hev some 
pretti tough tussl sometimes." 

On lamma night, 1924, dr. houghton of aylesburi wa hastili summon 
by wilbur whateley, who had lash hi one remain hors through the 
dark and telephon from osborn' in the village. He found old 
whateley in a veri grave state, with a cardiac action and stertor 
breath that told of an end not far off. the shapeless albino 
daughter and oddli beard grandson stood by the bedside, whilst from 
the vacant abyss overhead there came a disquiet suggest of 
rhythmic surg or lapping, as of the wave on some level beach. the 
doctor, though, wa chiefli disturb by the chatter night bird 
outside; a seemingli limitless legion of whippoorwil that cri their 
endless messag in repetit time diabol to the wheez gasp 
of the die man. It wa uncanni and unnatural--too much, thought dr. 
houghton, like the whole of the region he had enter so reluctantli in 
respons to the urgent call. 

toward 1 o'clock old whateley gain consciousness, and interrupt hi 
wheez to choke out a few word to hi grandson. 

"more space, willy, more space soon. yew grows--an' _that_ grow 
faster. it'll be readi to sarv ye soon, boy. open up the gate to 
yog-sothoth with the long chant that ye'll find on page 751 _of the 
complet edition_, an' _then_ put a match to the prison. fire from 
airth can't burn it nohaow!" 

He wa obvious quit mad. after a pause, dure which the flock of 
whippoorwil outsid adjust their cri to the alter tempo while 
some indic of the strang hill nois came from afar off, he 
ad anoth sentenc or two. 

"feed it reg'lar, willy, an' mind the quantity; but dun't let it grow 
too fast fer the place, fer ef it bust quarter or git aout afor ye 
open to yog-sothoth, it' all over an' no use. onli them from beyont 
kin make it multipli an' work.... onli them, the old un as want to 
come back...." 

but speech gave place to gasp again, and lavinia scream at the 
way the whippoorwil follow the change. It wa the same for more 
than an hour, when the final throati rattl came. dr. houghton drew 
shrunken lid over the glaze gray eye as the tumult of bird fade 
impercept to silence. lavinia sobbed, but wilbur onli chuckl 
whilst the hill nois rumbl faintly. 

"they didn't git him," he mutter in hi heavi bass voice. 

wilbur wa by thi time a scholar of realli tremend erudit in 
hi one-sid way, and wa quietli known by correspond to mani 
librarian in distant place where rare and forbidden book of old day 
are kept. He wa more and more hate and dread around dunwich becaus 
of certain youth disappear which suspicion laid vagu at hi 
door; but wa alway abl to silenc inquiri through fear or through 
use of that fund of old-tim gold which still, as in hi grandfather' 
time, went forth regularli and increasingli for cattle-buying. He 
wa now tremend matur of aspect, and hi height, have reach 
the normal adult limit, seem inclin to wax beyond that figure. In 
1925, when a scholarli correspond from miskaton univers call 
upon him one day and depart pale and puzzled, he wa fulli six and 
three-quart feet tall. 

through all the year wilbur had treat hi half-deform albino 
mother with a grow contempt, final forbid her to go to the 
hill with him on may eve and hallowmass; and in 1926 the poor creatur 
complain to mami bishop of be afraid of him. 

"they' more abaout him as I know than I kin tell ye, mamie," she 
said, "an' naowaday they' more nor what I know myself. I vaow afur 
gawd, I dun't know what he want nor what he' a-tryin' to dew." 

that hallowe'en the hill nois sound louder than ever, and fire 
burn on sentinel hill as usual, but peopl paid more attent 
to the rhythmic scream of vast flock of unnatur belat 
whippoorwil which seem to be assembl near the unlight whateley 
farmhouse. after midnight their shrill note burst into a kind of 
pandemoniac cachinn which fill all the countryside, and not 
until dawn did they final quiet down. then they vanished, hurri 
southward where they were fulli a month overdue. what thi meant, no 
one could quit be certain till later. none of the countryfolk seem 
to have died--but poor lavinia whateley, the twist albino, wa never 
seen again. 

In the summer of 1927 wilbur repair two shed in the farmyard and 
began move hi book and effect out to them. soon afterward earl 
sawyer told the lounger at osborn' that more carpentri wa go on 
in the whateley farmhouse. wilbur wa close all the door and window 
on the ground floor, and seem to be take out partit as he and 
hi grandfath had done upstair four year before. He wa live 
in one of the sheds, and sawyer thought he seem unusu worri 
and tremulous. peopl gener suspect him of know someth 
about hi mother' disappearance, and veri few ever approach hi 
neighborhood now. hi height had increas to more than seven feet, and 
show no sign of ceas it development. 


5 

the follow winter brought an event no less strang than wilbur' 
first trip outsid the dunwich region. correspond with the widen 
librari at harvard, the bibliothequ national in paris, the british 
museum, the univers of bueno aires, and the librari of miskaton 
univers at arkham had fail to get him the loan of a book he 
desper wanted; so at length he set out in person, shabby, dirty, 
bearded, and uncouth of dialect, to consult the copi at miskatonic, 
which wa the nearest to him geographically. almost eight feet tall, 
and carri a cheap new valis from osborn' gener store, thi 
dark and goatish gargoyl appear one day in arkham in quest of the 
dread volum kept under lock and key at the colleg library--th 
hideou _necronomicon_ of the mad arab alhazr in olau wormius' latin 
version, as print in spain in the seventeenth century. He had never 
seen a citi before, but had no thought save to find hi way to the 
univers grounds; where, indeed, he pass heedlessli by the great 
white-fang watchdog that bark with unnatur furi and enmity, and 
tug frantic at it stout chain. 

wilbur had with him the priceless but imperfect copi of dr. dee' 
english version which hi grandfath had bequeath him, and upon 
receiv access to the latin copi he at onc began to collat the two 
text with the aim of discov a certain passag which would have 
come on the 751st page of hi own defect volume. thi much he could 
not civilli refrain from tell the librarian--th same erudit henri 
armitag (a. M. miskatonic, ph. D. princeton, litt. D. john hopkins) 
who had onc call at the farm, and who now polit pli him with 
questions. He wa looking, he had to admit, for a kind of formula or 
incant contain the fright name _yog-sothoth_, and it puzzl 
him to find discrepancies, duplications, and ambigu which made 
the matter of determin far from easy. As he copi the formula 
he final chose, dr. armitag look involuntarili over hi shoulder 
at the open pages; the left-hand one of which, in the latin version, 
contain such monstrou threat to the peac and saniti of the world. 

nor is it to be thought [ran the text as armitag mental 
translat it] that man is either the oldest or the last of earth' 
masters, or that the common bulk of life and substanc walk alone. 
the old one were, the old one are, and the old one shall be. not 
in the space we know, but _between_ them. they walk seren and 
primal, undimens and to us unseen. _yog-sothoth_ know the 
gate. _yog-sothoth_ is the gate. _yog-sothoth_ is the key and 
guardian of the gate. past, present, future, all are one in 
_yog-sothoth_. He know where the old one broke through of old, 
and where they shall break through again. He know where they have 
trod earth' fields, and where they still tread them, and whi no 
one can behold them as they tread. By their smell can men sometim 
know them near, but of their semblanc can no man know, _save 
onli in the featur of those they have begotten on mankind_; and 
of those are there mani sorts, differ in like from man' 
truest eidolon to that shape without sight or substanc which is 
_they_. they walk unseen and foul in lone place where the word 
have been spoken and the rite howl through at their seasons. 
the wind gibber with their voices, and the earth mutter with 
their consciousness. they bend the forest and crush the city, yet 
may not forest or citi behold the hand that smites. kadath in the 
cold wast hath known them, and what man know kadath? the ice 
desert of the south and the sunken isl of ocean hold stone 
whereon their seal is engraven, but who hath seen the deep frozen 
citi or the seal tower long garland with seawe and barnacles? 
great cthulhu is their cousin, yet can he spi them onli dimly. _iä 
shub-niggurath!_ As a foul shall ye know them. their hand is at 
your throats, yet ye see them not; and their habit is even one 
with your guard threshold. _yog-sothoth_ is the key to the gate, 
wherebi the sphere meet. man rule now where they rule once; they 
shall soon rule where man rule now. after summer is winter, and 
after winter summer. they wait patient and potent, for here shall 
they reign again. 

dr. armitage, associ what he wa read with what he had heard 
of dunwich and it brood presences, and of wilbur whateley and hi 
dim, hideou aura that stretch from a dubiou birth to a cloud of 
probabl matricide, felt a wave of fright as tangibl as a draft of the 
tomb' cold clamminess. the bent, goatish giant befor him seem like 
the spawn of anoth planet or dimension; like someth onli partli of 
mankind, and link to black gulf of essenc and entiti that stretch 
like titan fantasm beyond all sphere of forc and matter, space and 
time. 

present wilbur rais hi head and began speak in that strange, 
reson fashion which hint at sound-produc organ unlik the run 
of mankind's. 

"mr. armitage," he said, "I calc'lat i'v got to take that book home. 
they' thing in it i'v got to tri under sarten condit that I 
can't git here, an' it 'ud be a mortal sin to let a red-tap rule hold 
me up. let me take it along, sir, an' i'll swar they wun't nobodi know 
the difference. I dun't need to tell ye i'll take good keer of it. It 
wa'n't me that put thi dee copi in the shape it is...." 

He stop as he saw firm denial on the librarian' face, and hi own 
goatish featur grew crafty. armitage, half readi to tell him he might 
make a copi of what part he needed, thought suddenli of the possibl 
consequ and check himself. there wa too much respons 
in give such a be the key to such blasphem outer spheres. 
whateley saw how thing stood, and tri to answer lightly. 

"wal, all right, ef ye feel that way abaout it. mayb harvard wun't be 
so fussi as yew be." and without say more he rose and strode out of 
the building, stoop at each doorway. 

armitag heard the savag yelp of the great watchdog, and studi 
whateley' gorilla-lik lope as he cross the bit of campu visibl 
from the window. He thought of the wild tale he had heard, and 
recal the old sunday stori in the _advertiser_; these things, and 
the lore he had pick up from dunwich rustic and villag dure 
hi one visit there. unseen thing not of earth--or at least not of 
tri-dimension earth--rush fetid and horribl through new england' 
glens, and brood obscen on the mountain tops. Of thi he had 
long felt certain. now he seem to sens the close presenc of some 
terribl part of the intrud horror, and to glimps a hellish advanc 
in the black dominion of the ancient and onc passiv nightmare. He 
lock away the _necronomicon_ with a shudder of disgust, but the room 
still reek with an unholi and unidentifi stench. "a a foul 
shall ye know them," he quoted. yes--th odor wa the same as that 
which had sicken him at the whateley farmhous less than three year 
before. He thought of wilbur, goatish and ominous, onc again, and 
laugh mockingli at the villag rumor of hi parentage. 

"inbreeding?" armitag mutter half aloud to himself. "great god, what 
simpletons! show them arthur machen' _great god pan_ and they'll think 
it a common dunwich scandal! but what thing--what curs shapeless 
influenc on or off thi three-dimens earth--wa wilbur whateley' 
father? born on candlemas--nin month after may eve of 1912, when the 
talk about the queer earth nois reach clear to arkham--what walk 
on the mountain that may night? what roodma horror fasten itself on 
the world in half-human flesh and blood?" 

dure the ensu week dr. armitag set about to collect all possibl 
data on wilbur whateley and the formless presenc around dunwich. He 
got in commun with dr. houghton of aylesbury, who had attend 
old whateley in hi last illness, and found much to ponder over in the 
grandfather' last word as quot by the physician. A visit to dunwich 
villag fail to bring out much that wa new; but a close survey of 
the _necronomicon_, in those part which wilbur had sought so avidly, 
seem to suppli new and terribl clue to the nature, methods, and 
desir of the strang evil so vagu threaten thi planet. talk 
with sever student of archaic lore in boston, and letter to mani 
other elsewhere, gave him a grow amaz which pass slowli 
through vari degre of alarm to a state of realli acut spiritu 
fear. As the summer drew on he felt dimli that someth ought to be 
done about the lurk terror of the upper miskaton valley, and 
about the monstrou be known to the human world as wilbur whateley. 


6 

the dunwich horror itself came between lamma and the equinox in 1928, 
and dr. armitag wa among those who wit it monstrou prologue. 
He had heard, meanwhile, of whateley' grotesqu trip to cambridge, 
and of hi frantic effort to borrow or copi from the _necronomicon_ 
at the widen library. those effort had been in vain, sinc armitag 
had issu warn of the keenest intens to all librarian have 
charg of the dread volume. wilbur had been shockingli nervou at 
cambridge; anxiou for the book, yet almost equal anxiou to get 
home again, as if he fear the result of be away long. 

earli in august the half-expect outcom developed, and in the small 
hour of the third dr. armitag wa awaken suddenli by the wild, 
fierc cri of the savag watchdog on the colleg campus. deep and 
terrible, the snarling, half-mad growl and bark continued; alway 
in mount volume, but with hideous signific pauses. then there 
rang out a scream from a wholli differ throat--such a scream as 
rous half the sleeper of arkham and haunt their dream ever 
afterward--such a scream as could come from no be born of earth, or 
wholli of earth. 

armitag hasten into some cloth and rush across the street and 
lawn to the colleg buildings, saw that other were ahead of him; and 
heard the echo of a burglar-alarm still shrill from the library. 
An open window show black and gape in the moonlight. what had come 
had inde complet it entrance; for the bark and the screaming, 
now fast fade into a mix low growl and moaning, proceed 
unmistak from within. some instinct warn armitag that what wa 
take place wa not a thing for unfortifi eye to see, so he brush 
back the crowd with author as he unlock the vestibul door. among 
the other he saw professor warren rice and dr. franci morgan, men to 
whom he had told some of hi conjectur and misgivings; and these two 
he motion to accompani him inside. the inward sounds, except for a 
watchful, drone whine from the dog, had by thi time quit subsided; 
but armitag now perceiv with a sudden start that a loud choru of 
whippoorwil among the shrubberi had commenc a damnabl rhythmic 
piping, as if in unison with the last breath of a die man. 

the build wa full of a fright stench which dr. armitag knew 
too well, and the three men rush across the hall to the small 
genealog reading-room whenc the low whine came. for a second 
nobodi dare to turn on the light; then armitag summon up hi 
courag and snap the switch. one of the three--it is not certain 
which--shriek aloud at what sprawl befor them among disord 
tabl and overturn chairs. professor rice declar that he wholli 
lost conscious for an instant, though he did not stumbl or fall. 

the thing that lay half-bent on it side in a fetid pool of 
greenish-yellow ichor and tarri sticki wa almost nine feet tall, 
and the dog had torn off all the cloth and some of the skin. It 
wa not quit dead, but twitch silent and spasmod while it 
chest heav in monstrou unison with the mad pipe of the expect 
whippoorwil outside. bit of shoe-leath and fragment of apparel 
were scatter about the room, and just insid the window an empti 
canva sack lay where it had evid been thrown. near the central 
desk a revolv had fallen, a dent but undischarg cartridg later 
explain whi it had not been fired. the thing itself, however, 
crowd out all other imag at the time. It would be trite and not 
wholli accur to say that no human pen could describ it, but one may 
properli say that it could not be vividli visual by anyon whose 
idea of aspect and contour are too close bound up with the common 
life-form of thi planet and of the three known dimensions. It wa 
partli human, beyond a doubt, with veri manlik hand and head, and the 
goatish, chinless face had the stamp of the whateley upon it. but the 
torso and lower part of the bodi were teratolog fabulous, so 
that onli gener cloth could ever have enabl it to walk on earth 
unchalleng or uneradicated. 

abov the waist it wa semi-anthropomorphic; though it chest, where 
the dog' rend paw still rest watchfully, had the leathery, 
reticul hide of a crocodil or alligator. the back wa piebald 
with yellow and black, and dimli suggest the squamou cover of 
certain snakes. below the waist, though, it wa the worst; for here 
all human resembl left off and sheer fantasi began. the skin wa 
thickli cover with coars black fur, and from the abdomen a score of 
long greenish-gray tentacl with red suck mouth protrud limply. 
their arrang wa odd, and seem to follow the symmetri of some 
cosmic geometri unknown to earth or the solar system. On each of the 
hips, deep set in a kind of pinkish, ciliat orbit, wa what seem to 
be a rudimentari eye; whilst in lieu of a tail there depend a kind of 
trunk or feeler with purpl annular markings, and with mani evid 
of be an undevelop mouth or throat. the limbs, save for their 
black fur, roughli resembl the hind leg of prehistor earth' giant 
saurians; and termin in ridgy-vein pad that were neither hoov 
nor claws. when the thing breathed, it tail and tentacl rhythmic 
chang color, as if from some circulatori caus normal to the 
non-human side of it ancestry. In the tentacl thi wa observ as 
a deepen of the greenish tinge, whilst in the tail it wa manifest 
as a yellowish appear which altern with a sickli grayish-whit 
in the space between the purpl rings. Of genuin blood there wa 
none; onli the fetid greenish-yellow ichor which trickl along the 
paint floor beyond the radiu of the stickiness, and left a curiou 
discolor behind it. 

As the presenc of the three men seem to rous the die thing, it 
began to mumbl without turn or rais it head. dr. armitag 
made no written record of it mouthings, but assert confid that 
noth in english wa uttered. At first the syllabl defi all 
correl with ani speech of earth, but toward the last there came 
some disjoint fragment evid taken from the _necronomicon_, 
that monstrou blasphemi in quest of which the thing had perished. 
those fragments, as armitag recal them, ran someth like "_n'gai, 
n'gha'ghaa, bugg-shoggog, y'hah; yog-sothoth, yog-sothoth...._" 
they trail off into nothing as the whippoorwil shriek in 
rhythmic crescendo of unholi anticipation. 

then came a halt in the gasping, and the dog rais hi head in a long, 
lugubri howl. A chang came over the yellow, goatish face of the 
prostrat thing, and the great black eye fell in appallingly. outsid 
the window the shrill of the whippoorwil had suddenli ceased, and 
abov the murmur of the gather crowd there came the sound of a 
panic-struck whir and fluttering. against the moon vast cloud of 
featheri watcher rose and race from sight, frantic at that which they 
had sought for prey. 

all at onc the dog start up abruptly, gave a frighten bark, and 
leap nervous out the window by which it had entered. A cri rose 
from the crowd, and dr. armitag shout to the men outsid that no 
one must be admit till the polic or medic examin came. He wa 
thank that the window were just too high to permit of peer 
in, and drew the dark curtain care down over each one. By thi 
time two policemen had arrived; and dr. morgan, meet them in the 
vestibule, wa urg them for their own sake to postpon entranc to 
the stench-fil reading-room till the examin came and the prostrat 
thing could be cover up. 

meanwhil fright chang were take place on the floor. one need 
not describ the _kind_ and _rate_ of shrinkag and disintegr that 
occur befor the eye of dr. armitag and professor rice; but it is 
permiss to say that, asid from the extern appear of face 
and hands, the realli human element in wilbur whateley must have been 
veri small. when the medic examin came, there wa onli a sticki 
whitish mass on the paint boards, and the monstrou odor had nearli 
disappeared. appar whateley had had no skull or boni skeleton; at 
least, in ani true or stabl sense. He had taken somewhat after hi 
unknown father. 


7 

yet all thi wa onli the prologu of the actual dunwich horror. 
formal were gone through by bewild officials, abnorm detail 
were duli kept from press and public, and men were sent to dunwich 
and aylesburi to look up properti and notifi ani who might be heir 
of the late wilbur whateley. they found the countrysid in great 
agitation, both becaus of the grow rumbl beneath the dome 
hills, and becaus of the unwont stench and the surging, lap 
sound which came increasingli from the great empti shell form by 
whateley' boarded-up farmhouse. earl sawyer, who tend the hors and 
cattl dure wilbur' absence, had develop a wofulli acut case 
of nerves. the offici devis excus not to enter the noisom 
board place; and were glad to confin their survey of the deceased' 
live quarters, the newli mend sheds, to a singl visit. they file 
a ponder report at the court-hous in aylesbury, and litig 
concern heirship are said to be still in progress amongst the 
innumer whateleys, decay and undecayed, of the upper miskaton 
valley. 

An almost intermin manuscript in strang characters, written in a 
huge ledger and adjudg a sort of diari becaus of the space and 
the variat in ink and penmanship, present a baffl puzzl to 
those who found it on the old bureau which serv as it owner' 
desk. after a week of debat it wa sent to miskaton university, 
togeth with the deceased' collect of strang books, for studi 
and possibl translation; but even the best linguist soon saw that it 
wa not like to be unriddl with ease. No trace of the ancient gold 
with which wilbur and old whateley alway paid their debt ha yet been 
discovered. 

It wa in the dark of septemb ninth that the horror broke loose. 
the hill nois had been veri pronounc dure the evening, and dog 
bark frantic all night. earli riser on the tenth notic a 
peculiar stench in the air. about 7 o'clock luther brown, the hire boy 
at georg corey's, between cold spring glen and the village, rush 
frenziedli back from hi morn trip to ten-acr meadow with the cows. 
He wa almost convuls with fright as he stumbl into the kitchen; 
and in the yard outsid the no less frighten herd were paw and 
low pitifully, have follow the boy back in the panic they share 
with him. between gasp luther tri to stammer out hi tale to mrs. 
corey. 

"up thar in the rud beyont the glen, mis' corey--they' suthin' ben 
thar! It smell like thunder, an' all the bush an' littl tree is 
push back from the rud like they'd a haous ben move along of it. 
an' that ain't the wust, nuther. they' _prints_ in the rud, mis' 
corey--great raound print as big as barrel-heads, all sunk daown deep 
like a eleph had ben along, _onli they' a sight more nor four feet 
could make_. I look at one or two afor I run, an' I see everi one 
wa cover with line spreadin' aout from one place, like as if big 
palm-leaf fans--twict or three time as big as ani they is--h of ben 
paound daown into the rud. an' the smell wa awful, like what it is 
araound wizard whateley' ol' haouse...." 

here he faltered, and seem to shiver afresh with the fright that had 
sent him fli home. mrs. corey, unabl to extract more information, 
began telephon the neighbors; thu start on it round the 
overtur of panic that herald the major terrors. when she got salli 
sawyer, housekeep at seth bishop's, the nearest place to whateley's, 
it becam her turn to listen instead of transmit; for sally' boy 
chauncey, who slept poorly, had been up on the hill toward whateley's, 
and had dash back in terror after one look at the place, and at the 
pasturag where mr. bishop' cow had been left out all night. 

"yes, mis' corey," came sally' tremul voic over the parti wire, 
"cha'ncey he just come back a-post-in', and couldn't haff talk fer 
bein' scairt! He say ol' whateley' haous is all blow up, with 
the timber scatter raound like they'd ben dynamit inside; onli 
the bottom floor ain't through, but is all cover with a kind o' 
tarlik stuff that smell aw an' drip daown offen the aidg onto 
the graoun' whar the side timber is blow away. an' they' aw 
kinder mark in the yard, tew--great raound mark bigger raound than a 
hogshead, an' all sticki with stuff like is on the blowed-up haouse. 
cha'ncey he say they lead off into the medders, whar a great swath 
wider'n a barn is mat daown, an' all the stun wall tumbl everi 
which way wherev it goes. 

"an' he says, say he, mis' corey, as haow he sot to look fer seth' 
caows, fright ez he was; an' faound 'em in the upper pastur nigh the 
devil' hop yard in an aw shape. haff on 'em' clean gone, an' nigh 
haff o' them that' left is suck most dri o' blood, with sore on 'em 
like they' ben on whateley' cattl ever senct lavinny' black brat 
wa born. seth he' gone aout naow to look at 'em, though i'll vaow he 
wun't keer ter git veri nigh wizard whateley's! cha'ncey didn't look 
keer ter see whar the big matted-daown swath led arter it leff the 
pasturage, but he say he think it p'int toward the glen rud to the 
village. 

"I tell ye, mis' corey, they' suthin' abroad as hadn't orter be 
abroad, an' I fer one think that black wilbur whateley, as come to 
the bad eend he desarved, is at the bottom of the breedin' of it. He 
wa'n't all human hisself, I allu say to everybody; an' I think he an' 
ol' whateley must a rais suthin' in that there nailed-up haous as 
ain't even so human as he was. they' allu ben unseen thing araound 
dunwich--livin' things--a ain't human an' ain't good fer human folks. 

"the graoun' wa a'talkin' lass night, an' toward mornin' cha'ncey 
he heerd the whippoorwil so laoud in col' spring glen he couldn't 
sleep none. then he thought he heerd anoth faintlik saound over 
toward wizard whateley's--a kinder rippin' or tearin' o' wood, like 
some big box or crate wa bein' open fur off. what with thi an' 
that, he didn't git to sleep at all till sunup, an' no sooner wa he 
up thi mornin', but he' got to go over to whateley' an' see what' 
the matter. He see enough, I tell ye, mis' corey! thi dun't mean no 
good, an' I think as all the men-folk ought to git up a parti an' 
do suthin'. I know suthin' awful' abaout, an' feel my time is nigh, 
though onli gawd know jest what it is. 

"did your luther take accaount o' whar them big track led tew? no? 
wal, mis' corey, ef they wa on the glen rud thi side o' the glen, 
an' ain't got to your haous yet, I calc'lat they must go into the 
glen itself. they would do that. I allu say col' spring glen ain't no 
healthi nor decent place. the whippoorwil an' firefli there never 
did act like they wa creater o' gawd, an' they' them as say ye kin 
hear strang thing a-rushin' an' a-talkin' in the air daown thar ef ye 
stand in the right place, atween the rock fall an' bear' den." 

* * * * * 

By that noon fulli three-quart of the men and boy of dunwich were 
troop over the road and meadow between the new-mad whateley ruin 
and cold spring glen; examin in horror the vast, monstrou prints, 
the maim bishop cattle, the strange, noisom wreck of the farmhouse, 
and the bruised, mat veget of the field and road-sides. 
whatev had burst loos upon the world had assuredli gone down into 
the great sinist ravine; for all the tree on the bank were bent and 
broken, and a great avenu had been goug in the precipice-hang 
underbrush. It wa as though a house, launch by an avalanche, had 
slid down through the tangl growth of the almost vertic slope. 
from below no sound came, but onli a distant, undefin fetor; and 
it is not to be wonder at that the men prefer to stay on the edg 
and argue, rather than descend and beard the unknown cyclopean horror 
in it lair. three dog that were with the parti had bark furious 
at first, but seem cow and reluct when near the glen. someon 
telephon the news to the _aylesburi transcript_; but the editor, 
accustom to wild tale from dunwich, did no more than concoct a 
humor paragraph about it; an item soon afterward reproduc by the 
associ press. 

that night everyon went home, and everi hous and barn wa barricad 
as stoutli as possible. needless to say, no cattl were allow to 
remain in open pasturage. about 2 in the morn a fright stench and 
the savag bark of the dog awaken the household at elmer frye's, 
on the eastern edg of cold spring glen, and all agre that they 
could hear a sort of muffl swish or lap sound from somewher 
outside. mrs. frye propos telephon the neighbors, and elmer wa 
about to agre when the nois of splinter wood burst in upon their 
deliberations. It came, apparently, from the barn; and wa quickli 
follow by a hideou scream and stamp amongst the cattle. the 
dog slaver and crouch close to the feet of the fear-numb family. 
frye lit a lantern through forc of habit, but knew it would be death 
to go out into that black farmyard. the children and the women-folk 
whimpered, kept from scream by some obscure, vestigi instinct 
of defens which told them their live depend on silence. At last 
the nois of the cattl subsid to a piti moaning, and a great 
snapping, crashing, and crackl ensued. the fryes, huddl togeth 
in the sitting-room, did not dare to move until the last echo die 
away far down in cold spring glen. then, amidst the dismal moan from 
the stabl and the demoniac pipe of late whippoorwil in the glen, 
selina frye totter to the telephon and spread what news she could of 
the second phase of the horror. 

the next day all the countrysid wa in a panic; and cowed, 
uncommun group came and went where the fiendish thing had 
occurred. two titan swath of destruct stretch from the glen 
to the frye farmyard, monstrou print cover the bare patch of 
ground, and one side of the old red barn had complet cave in. Of 
the cattle, onli about a quarter could be found and identified. some of 
these were in curiou fragments, and all that surviv had to be shot. 
earl sawyer suggest that help be ask from aylesburi or arkham, but 
other maintain it would be of no use. old zebulon whateley, of a 
branch that hover about half-way between sound and decadence, 
made darkli wild suggest about rite that ought to be practis on 
the hilltops. He came of a line where tradit ran strong, and hi 
memori of chant in the great stone circl were not altogeth 
connect with wilbur and hi grandfather. 

dark fell upon a stricken countrysid too passiv to organ 
for real defense. In a few case close relat famili would band 
togeth and watch in the gloom under one roof; but, in gener there 
wa onli a repetit of the barricad of the night before, and a 
futile, ineffect gestur of load musket and set pitchfork 
handili about. nothing, however, occur except some hill noises; and 
when the day came there were mani who hope that the new horror had 
gone as swiftli as it had come. there were even bold soul who propos 
an offens expedit down in the glen, though they did not ventur 
to set an actual exampl to the still reluct majority. 

when night came again the barricad wa repeated, though there wa 
less huddl togeth of families. In the morn both the frye and 
the seth bishop household report excit among the dog and vagu 
sound and stench from afar, while earli explor note with horror 
a fresh set of the monstrou track in the road skirt sentinel hill. 
As before, the side of the road show a bruis indic of the 
blasphem stupend bulk of the horror; whilst the conform 
of the track seem to argu a passag in two directions, as if the 
move mountain had come from cold spring glen and return to it along 
the same path. At the base of the hill a thirty-foot swath of crush 
shrubberi and sapl led steepli upward, and the seeker gasp when 
they saw that even the most perpendicular place did not deflect the 
inexor trail. whatev the horror was, it could scale a sheer stoni 
cliff of almost complet verticality; and as the investig climb 
around to the hill' summit by safer rout they saw that the trail 
ended--or rather, reversed--there. 

It wa here that the whateley use to build their hellish fire and 
chant their hellish ritual by the table-lik stone on may eve and 
hallowmass. now that veri stone form the center of a vast space 
thrash around by the mountain horror, whilst upon it slightli 
concav surfac wa a thick fetid deposit of the same tarri sticki 
observ on the floor of the ruin whateley farmhous when the horror 
escaped. men look at one anoth and muttered. then they look down 
the hill. appar the horror had descend by a rout much the same 
as that of it ascent. To specul wa futile. reason, logic, and 
normal idea of motiv stood confounded. onli old zebulon, who 
wa not with the group, could have done justic to the situat or 
suggest a plausibl explanation. 

thursday night began much like the others, but it end less happily. 
the whippoorwil in the glen had scream with such unusu 
persist that mani could not sleep, and about 3 a. m. all the parti 
telephon rang tremulously. those who took down their receiv 
heard a fright-mad voic shriek out, "help, oh, my gawd!..." and some 
thought a crash sound follow the break off of the exclamation. 
there wa noth more. No one dare do anything, and no one knew 
till morn whenc the call came. then those who had heard it call 
everyon on the line, and found that onli the frye did not reply. the 
truth appear an hour later, when a hastili assembl group of arm 
men trudg out to the frye place at the head of the glen. It wa 
horrible, yet hardli a surprize. there were more swath and monstrou 
prints, but there wa no longer ani house. It had cave in like an 
egg-shell, and amongst the ruin noth live or dead could be 
discovered--onli a stench and a tarri stickiness. the elmer frye had 
been eras from dunwich. 


8 

In the meantim a quieter yet even more spiritu poignant phase of 
the horror had been blackli unwind itself behind the close door of 
a shelf-lin room in arkham. the curiou manuscript record or diari of 
wilbur whateley, deliv to miskaton univers for translation, 
had caus much worri and bafflement among the expert in languag 
both ancient and modern; it veri alphabet, notwithstand a gener 
resembl to the heavili shade arab use in mesopotamia, be 
absolut unknown to ani avail authority. the final conclus of 
the linguist wa that the text repres an artifici alphabet, 
give the effect of a cipher; though none of the usual method of 
cryptograph solut seem to furnish ani clue, even when appli 
on the basi of everi tongu the writer might conceiv have used. 
the ancient book taken from whateley' quarters, while absorbingli 
interest and in sever case promis to open up new and terribl 
line of research among philosoph and men of science, were of no 
assist whatev in thi matter. one of them, a heavi tome with 
an iron clasp, wa in anoth unknown alphabet--thi one of a veri 
differ cast, and resembl sanskrit more than anyth else. the 
old ledger wa at length given wholli into the charg of dr. armitage, 
both becaus of hi peculiar interest in the whateley matter, and 
becaus of hi wide linguist learn and skill in the mystic 
formulæ of antiqu and the middl ages. 

armitag had an idea that the alphabet might be someth esoter 
use by certain forbidden cult which have come down from old times, 
and which have inherit mani form and tradit from the wizard of 
the saracen world. that question, however, he did not deem vital; 
sinc it would be unnecessari to know the origin of the symbol if, 
as he suspected, they were use as a cipher in a modern language. It 
wa hi belief that, consid the great amount of text involved, the 
writer would scarc have wish the troubl of use anoth speech 
than hi own, save perhap in certain special formulæ and incantations. 
accordingli he attack the manuscript with the preliminari assumpt 
that the bulk of it wa in english. 

dr. armitag knew, from the repeat failur of hi colleagues, that 
the riddl wa a deep and complex one, and that no simpl mode of 
solut could merit even a trial. all through late august he fortifi 
himself with the mass lore of cryptography, draw upon the fullest 
resourc of hi own library, and wade night after night amidst the 
arcana of trithemius' _poligraphia_, giambattista porta' _de furtivi 
literarum notis_, De vigenere' _traité de chiffres_, falconer' 
_cryptomenysi patefacta_, davys' and thicknesse' eighteenth centuri 
treatises, and such fairli modern author as blair, von marten, 
and klüber' _kryptographik_. He interspers hi studi of the book 
with attack on the manuscript itself, and in time becam convinc 
that he had to deal with one of those subtlest and most ingeni of 
cryptograms, in which mani separ list of correspond letter are 
arrang like the multipl table, and the messag built up with 
arbitrari key-word known onli to the initiated. the older author 
seem rather more help than the newer ones, and armitag conclud 
that the code of the manuscript wa one of great antiquity, no doubt 
hand down through a long line of mystic experimenters. sever 
time he seem near daylight, onli to be set back by some unforeseen 
obstacle. then, as septemb approached, the cloud began to clear. 
certain letters, as use in certain part of the manuscript, emerg 
definit and unmistakably; and it becam obviou that the text wa 
inde in english. 

On the even of septemb second the last major barrier gave way, and 
dr. armitag read for the first time a continu passag of wilbur 
whateley' annals. It wa in truth a diary, as all had thought; and 
it wa couch in a style clearli show the mix occult erudit 
and gener illiteraci of the strang be who wrote it. almost the 
first long passag that armitag deciphered, an entri date novemb 
26, 1916, prove highli startl and disquieting. It wa written, he 
remembered, by a child of three and a half who look like a lad of 
twelv or thirteen. 

today learn the aklo for the sabaoth, [it ran] which did not 
like, it be answer from the hill and not from the air. that 
upstair more ahead of me than I had thought it would be, and is 
not like to have much earth brain. shot elam hutchins' colli 
jack when he went to bite me, and elam say he would kill me if he 
dast. I guess he won't. grandfath kept me say the dho formula 
last night, and I think I saw the inner citi at the 2 magnet 
poles. I shall go to those pole when the earth is clear off, if 
I can't break through with the dho-hna formula when I commit it. 
they from the air told me at sabbat that it will be year befor I 
can clear off the earth, and I guess grandfath will be dead then, 
so I shall have to learn all the angl of the plane and all the 
formula between the Yr and the nhhngr. they from outsid will 
help, but they can not take bodi without human blood. that upstair 
look it will have the right cast. I can see it a littl when I 
make the yoorish sign or blow the power of ibn ghazi at it, and it 
is near like them at may eve on the hill. the other face may wear 
off some. I wonder how I shall look when the earth is clear and 
there are no earth be on it. He that came with the aklo sabaoth 
said I may be transfigured, there be much of outsid to work on. 

morn found dr. armitag in a cold sweat of terror and a frenzi of 
wake concentration. He had not left the manuscript all night, but 
sat at hi tabl under the electr light turn page after page 
with shake hand as fast as he could deciph the cryptic text. He 
had nervous telephon hi wife he would not be home, and when she 
brought him a breakfast from the hous he could scarc dispos of a 
mouthful. all that day he read on, now and then halt maddeningli as 
a reapplic of the complex key becam necessary. lunch and dinner 
were brought him, but he ate onli the smallest fraction of either. 
toward the middl of the next night he drows off in hi chair, but 
soon woke out of a tangl of nightmar almost as hideou as the truth 
and menac to man' exist that he had uncovered. 

On the morn of septemb fourth professor rice and dr. morgan 
insist on see him for a while, and depart trembl and 
ashen-gray. that even he went to bed, but slept onli fitfully. 
wednesday--th next day--h wa back at the manuscript, and began to 
take copiou note both from the current section and from those he had 
alreadi deciphered. In the small hour of that night he slept a littl 
in an easy-chair in hi office, but wa at the manuscript again befor 
dawn. some time befor noon hi physician, dr. hartwell, call to see 
him and insist that he ceas work. He refused, intim that it wa 
of the most vital import for him to complet the read of the 
diary, and promis an explan in due cours of time. 

that evening, just as twilight fell, he finish hi terribl perus 
and sank back exhausted. hi wife, bring hi dinner, found him in a 
half-comatos state; but he wa consciou enough to warn her off with 
a sharp cri when he saw her eye wander toward the note he had taken. 
weakli rising, he gather up the scribbl paper and seal them all 
in a great envelope, which he immedi place in hi insid coat 
pocket. He had suffici strength to get home, but wa so clearli in 
need of medic aid that dr. hartwel wa summon at once. As the 
doctor put him to bed he could onli mutter over and over again, "_but 
what, in god' name, can we do?_" 

dr. armitag slept, but wa partli deliri the next day. He made 
no explan to hartwell, but in hi calmer moment spoke of the 
imper need of a long confer with rice and morgan. hi wilder 
wander were veri startl indeed, includ frantic appeal 
that someth in a boarded-up farmhous be destroyed, and fantast 
refer to some plan for the extirp of the entir human race 
and all anim and veget life from the earth by some terribl elder 
race of be from anoth dimension. He would shout that the world 
wa in danger, sinc the elder thing wish to strip it and drag it 
away from the solar system and cosmo of matter into some other plane 
or phase of entiti from which it had onc fallen, vigintillion of eon 
ago. At other time he would call for the dread _necronomicon_ and 
the _dæmonolatreia_ of remigius, in which he seem hope of find 
some formula to check the peril he conjur up. 

"stop them, stop them!" he would shout. "those whateley meant to let 
them in, and the worst of all is left! tell rice and morgan we must do 
something--it' a blind business, but I know how to make the powder.... 
It hasn't been fed sinc the second of august, when wilbur came here to 
hi death, and at that rate...." 

but armitag had a sound physiqu despit hi seventy-thre years, and 
slept off hi disord that night without develop ani real fever. He 
woke late friday, clear of head, though sober, with a gnaw fear and 
tremend sens of responsibility. saturday afternoon he felt abl to 
go over to the librari and summon rice and morgan for a conference, and 
the rest of that day and even the three men tortur their brain 
in the wildest specul and the most desper debate. strang and 
terribl book were drawn volumin from the stack shelv and from 
secur place of storage, and diagram and formulæ were copi with 
feverish hast and in bewild abundance. Of skeptic there wa 
none. all three had seen the bodi of wilbur whateley as it lay on the 
floor in a room of that veri building, and after that not one of them 
could feel even slightli inclin to treat the diari as a madman' 
raving. 

opinion were divid as to notifi the massachusett state police, 
and the neg final won. there were thing involv which simpli 
could not be believ by those who had not seen a sample, as inde wa 
made clear dure certain subsequ investigations. late at night the 
confer disband without have develop a definit plan, but all 
day sunday armitag wa busi compar formulæ and mix chemic 
obtain from the colleg laboratory. the more he reflect on the 
hellish diary, the more he wa inclin to doubt the efficaci of ani 
materi agent in stamp out the entiti which wilbur whateley had 
left behind him--th earth-threaten entiti which, unknown to him, 
wa to burst forth in a few hour and becom the memor dunwich 
horror. 

monday wa a repetit of sunday with dr. armitage, for the task 
in hand requir an infin of research and experiment. further 
consult of the monstrou diari brought about variou chang of 
plan, and he knew that even in the end a larg amount of uncertainti 
must remain. By tuesday he had a definit line of action map out, 
and believ he would tri a trip to dunwich within a week. then, on 
wednesday, the great shock came. tuck obscur away in a corner of 
the _arkham advertiser_ wa a faceti littl item from the associ 
press, tell what a record-break monster the bootleg whiski of 
dunwich had rais up. armitage, half stunned, could onli telephon 
for rice and morgan. far into the night they discussed, and the next 
day wa a whirlwind of prepar on the part of them all. armitag 
knew he would be meddl with terribl powers, yet saw that there wa 
no other way to annul the deeper and more malign meddl which other 
had done befor him. 


9 

friday morn armitage, rice and morgan set out by motor for dunwich, 
arriv at the villag about 1 in the afternoon. the day wa pleasant, 
but even in the brightest sunlight a kind of quiet dread and portent 
seem to hover about the strang dome hill and the deep, shadowi 
ravin of the stricken region. now and then on some mountain top a 
gaunt circl of stone could be glimps against the sky. from the 
air of hush fright at osborn' store they knew someth hideou 
had happened, and soon learn of the annihil of the elmer frye 
hous and family. throughout that afternoon they rode around dunwich, 
question the nativ concern all that had occurred, and see 
for themselv with rise pang of horror the drear frye ruin with 
their linger trace of the tarri stickiness, the blasphem track 
in the frye yard, the wound seth bishop cattle, and the enorm 
swath of disturb veget in variou places. the trail up and down 
sentinel hill seem to armitag of almost cataclysm significance, 
and he look long at the sinist altarlik stone on the summit. 

At length the visitors, appris of a parti of state polic which had 
come from aylesburi that morn in respons to the first telephon 
report of the frye tragedy, decid to seek out the offic and 
compar note as far as practicable. this, however, they found more 
easili plan than performed; sinc no sign of the parti could be 
found in ani direction. there had been five of them in a car, but now 
the car stood empti near the ruin in the frye yard. the natives, all 
of whom had talk with the policemen, seem at first as perplex as 
armitag and hi companions. then old sam hutchin thought of someth 
and turn pale, nudg fred farr and point to the dank, deep 
hollow that yawn close by. 

"gawd," he gasped, "I tell 'em not ter go daown into the glen, an' I 
never thought nobody'd dew it with them track an' that smell an' the 
whippoorwil a-screechin' daown thar in the dark o' noonday...." 

A cold shudder ran through nativ and visitor alike, and everi ear 
seem strain in a kind of instinctive, unconsci listening. 
armitage, now that he had actual come upon the horror and it 
monstrou work, trembl with the respons he felt to be 
his. night would soon fall, and it wa then that the mountain 
blasphemi lumber upon it eldritch course. _negotium perambulan in 
tenebris...._ the old librarian rehears the formulæ he had memorized, 
and clutch the paper contain the altern one he had not 
memorized. He saw that hi electr flashlight wa in work order. 
rice, besid him, took from a valis a metal sprayer of the sort use 
in combat insects; whilst morgan uncas the big-gam rifl on which 
he reli despit hi colleague' warn that no materi weapon 
would be of help. 

armitage, have read the hideou diary, knew pain well what kind 
of a manifest to expect, but he did not add to the fright of the 
dunwich peopl by give ani hint or clues. He hope that it might 
be conquer without ani revel to the world of the monstrou 
thing it had escaped. As the shadow gathered, the nativ commenc 
to dispers homeward, anxiou to bar themselv indoor despit the 
present evid that all human lock and bolt were useless befor a 
forc that could bend tree and crush hous when it chose. they shook 
their head at the visitors' plan to stand guard at the frye ruin near 
the glen; and as they left, had littl expect of ever see the 
watcher again. 

there were rumbl under the hill that night, and the whippoorwil 
pipe threateningly. onc in a while a wind, sweep up out of cold 
spring glen, would bring a touch of ineff fetor to the heavi night 
air; such a fetor as all three of the watcher had smell onc before, 
when they stood abov a die thing that had pass for fifteen year 
and a half as a human being. but the looked-for terror did not appear. 
whatev wa down there in the glen wa bide it time, and armitag 
told hi colleagu it would be suicid to tri to attack it in the 
dark. 

morn came wanly, and the night-sound ceased. It wa a gray, bleak 
day, with now and then a drizzl of rain; and heavier and heavier 
cloud seem to be pile themselv up beyond the hill to the 
northwest. the men from arkham were undecid what to do. seek 
shelter from the increas rainfal beneath one of the few undestroy 
frye outbuildings, they debat the wisdom of waiting, or of take the 
aggress and go down into the glen in quest of their nameless, 
monstrou quarry. the downpour wax in heaviness, and distant peal of 
thunder sound from far horizons. sheet lightn shimmered, and then 
a forki bolt flash near at hand, as if descend into the accurs 
glen itself. the sky grew veri dark, and the watcher hope that the 
storm would prove a short, sharp one follow by clear weather. 

It wa still gruesom dark when, not much over an hour later, a 
confus babel of voic sound down the road. anoth moment brought 
to view a frighten group of more than a dozen men, running, shouting, 
and even whimper hysterically. someon in the lead began sob out 
words, and the arkham men start violent when those word develop 
a coher form. 

"oh, my gawd, my gawd!" the voic choke out; "it' a-goin' agin, _an' 
thi time by day_! it' aout--it' aout an' a-movin' thi veri minute, 
an' onli the lord know when it'll be on us all!" 

the speaker pant into silence, but anoth took up hi message. 

"nigh on a haour ago zeb whateley here heerd the 'phone a-ringin', an' 
it wa mis' corey, george' wife that live daown by the junction. 
she say the hire boy luther wa aout drivin' in the caow from the 
storm arter the big bolt, when he see all the tree a-bendin' at the 
maouth o' the glen--opposit side ter this--an' smelt the same aw 
smell like he smelt when he faound the big track las' monday mornin'. 
an' she say he say they wa a swishin', lappin' saound, more nor 
what the bendin' tree an' bush could make, an' all on a suddent the 
tree along the rud begun ter git push one side, an' they wa a aw 
stompin' an' splashin' in the mud. but mind ye, luther he didn't see 
nothin' at all, onli jest the bendin' tree an' underbrush. 

"then fur ahead where bishop' brook goe under the rud he heerd a 
aw creakin' an' strainin' on the bridge, an' say he could tell the 
saound o' wood a-startin' to crack an' split. an' all the while he 
never see a thing, onli them tree an' bush a-bendin'. an' when the 
swishin' saound got veri fur off--on the rud toward wizard whateley' 
an' sentinel hill--luth he had the gut ter step up whar he'd heerd 
it fust an' look at the graound. It wa all mud an' water, an' the sky 
wa dark, an' the rain wa wipin' aout all track abaout as fast as 
could be; but beginnin' at the glen maouth, whar the tree bed moved, 
they wa still some o' them aw print big as bar'l like he seen 
monday." 

At thi point the first excit speaker interrupted. 

"but _that_ ain't the troubl naow--that wa onli the start. zeb here 
wa callin' folk up an' everybodi wa a-listenin' in when a call from 
seth bishop' cut in. hi haousekeep salli wa carryin' on fit ter 
kill--she'd jest seed the tree a-bendin' besid the rud, an' say 
they wa a kind o' mushi saound, like a eleph puffin' an' treadin', 
a-headin' fer the haouse. then she up an' spoke suddent of a fear 
smell, an' say her boy cha'ncey wa a-screamin' as haow it wa jest 
like what he smelt up to the whateley rewin monday mornin'. an' the 
dog wa all barkin' an' whinin' awful. 

"an' then she let aout a turribl yell, an' say the shed daown the 
rud hed jest cave in like the storm hed blow it over, onli the wind 
wa'n't strong enough to dew that. everybodi wa a-listenin', an' ye 
could hear lot o' folk on the wire a-gaspin'. all to onct salli she 
yell agin, an' say the front yard picket fenc bed jest crumpl up, 
though they wa'n't no sign o' what done it. then everybodi on the line 
could hear cha'ncey an' ol' seth bishop a-yellin', tew, an' salli wa 
shriekin' aout that suthin' heavi hed struck the haouse--not lightnin' 
nor nothin', but suthin' heavi agin' the front, that kep' a-launchin' 
itself agin an' agin, though ye couldn't see nuthin' aout the front 
winders. an' then ... an' then...." 

line of fright deepen on everi face; and armitage, shaken as he was, 
had bare pois enough to prompt the speaker. 

"an' then ... salli she yell aout, 'O help, the haous is a-cavin' 
in' ... an' on the wire we could hoar a turribl crashin', an' a hull 
flock o' screamin' ... jest like when elmer frye' place wa took, onli 
wuss...." 

the man paused, and anoth of the crowd spoke. 

"that' all--not a saound nor squeak over the 'phone arter that. jest 
still-like. We that heerd it got aout ford an' wagon an' raound 
up as mani able-bodi men-folk as we could get, at corey' place, 
an' come up here ter see what yew thought best ter dew. not but what I 
think it' the lord' judgment fer our iniquities, that no mortal kin 
ever set aside." 

armitag saw that the time for posit action had come, and spoke 
decis to the falter group of frighten rustics. 

"we must follow it, boys." He made hi voic as reassur as possible. 
"I believ there' a chanc of put it out of business. you men 
know that those whateley were wizards--well, thi thing is a thing 
of wizardry, and must be put down by the same means. i'v seen wilbur 
whateley' diari and read some of the strang old book he use to 
read, and I think I know the right kind of a spell to recit to make 
the thing fade away. Of course, one can't be sure, but we can alway 
take a chance. it' invisible--i knew it would be--but there' a powder 
in thi long-dist sprayer that might make it show up for a second. 
later on we'll tri it. it' a fright thing to have alive, but it 
isn't as bad as what wilbur would have let in if he'd live longer. 
you'll never know what the world ha escaped. now we'v onli thi one 
thing to fight, and it can't multiply. It can, though, do a lot of 
harm; so we mustn't hesit to rid the commun of it. 

"we must follow it--and the way to begin is to go to the place that ha 
just been wrecked. let somebodi lead the way--i don't know your road 
veri well, but i'v an idea there might be a shorter cut across lots. 
how about it?" 

the men shuffl about a moment, and then earl sawyer spoke softly, 
point with a grimi finger through the steadili lessen rain. 

"I guess ye kin git to seth bishop' quickest by cuttin' acrost the 
lower medder here, wadin' the brook at the low place, an' climbin' 
through carrier' mowin' an' the timber-lot beyont. that come aout on 
the upper rud mighti nigh seth's--a leetl t'other side." 

armitage, with rice and morgan, start to walk in the direct 
indicated; and most of the nativ follow slowly. the sky wa grow 
lighter, and there were sign that the storm had worn itself away. when 
armitag inadvert took a wrong direction, joe osborn warn him 
and walk ahead to show the right one. courag and confid were 
mounting; though the twilight of the almost perpendicular wood hill 
which lay toward the end of their short cut, and among whose fantast 
ancient tree they had to scrambl as if up a ladder, put these 
qualiti to a sever test. 

At length they emerg on a muddi road to find the sun come out. 
they were a littl beyond the seth bishop place, but bent tree and 
hideous unmistak track show what had pass by. onli a few 
moment were consum in survey the ruin just around the bend. It 
wa the frye incid all over again, and noth dead or live wa 
found in either of the collaps shell which had been the bishop hous 
and barn. No one care to remain there amidst the stench and the tarri 
stickiness, but all turn instinct to the line of horribl print 
lead on toward the wreck whateley farmhous and the altar-crown 
slope of sentinel hill. 

As the men pass the site of wilbur whateley' abod they shudder 
visibly, and seem again to mix hesit with their zeal. It wa 
no joke track down someth as big as a hous that one could not 
see, but that had all the viciou malevol of a demon. opposit the 
base of sentinel hill the track left the road, and there wa a fresh 
bend and mat visibl along the broad swath mark the monster' 
former rout to and from the summit. 

armitag produc a pocket telescop of consider power and scan 
the steep green side of the hill. then he hand the instrument to 
morgan, whose sight wa keener. after a moment of gaze morgan cri 
out sharply, pass the glass to earl sawyer and indic a certain 
spot on the slope with hi finger. sawyer, as clumsi as most non-us 
of optic devic are, fumbl a while; but eventu focus the 
lens with armitage' aid. when he did so hi cri wa less restrain 
than morgan' had been. 

"gawd almighty, the grass an' bush is a-movin'! it' a-goin' 
up--slow-like--creepin' up ter the top thi minute, heaven onli know 
what fer!" 

then the germ of panic seem to spread among the seekers. It wa one 
thing to chase the nameless entity, but quit anoth to find it. 
spell might be all right--but suppos they weren't? voic began 
question armitag about what he knew of the thing, and no repli 
seem quit to satisfy. everyon seem to feel himself in close 
proxim to phase of natur and of be utterli forbidden, and 
wholli outsid the sane experi of mankind. 


10 

In the end the three men from arkham--old, white-beard dr. 
armitage, stocky, iron-gray professor rice, and lean, youngish dr. 
morgan--ascend the mountain alone. after much patient instruct 
regard it focus and use, they left the telescop with the 
frighten group that remain in the road; and as they climb they 
were watch close by those among whom the glass wa pass around. 
It wa hard going, and armitag had to be help more than once. high 
abov the toil group the great swath trembl as it hellish maker 
repass with snail-lik deliberateness. then it wa obviou that the 
pursuer were gaining. 

curti whateley--of the undecay branch--wa hold the telescop 
when the arkham parti detour radic from the swath. He told the 
crowd that the men were evid tri to get to a subordin peak 
which overlook the swath at a point consider ahead of where the 
shrubberi wa now bending. this, indeed, prove to be true; and the 
parti were seen to gain the minor elev onli a short time after the 
invis blasphemi had pass it. 

then wesley corey, who had taken the glass, cri out that armitag wa 
adjust the sprayer which rice held, and that someth must be about 
to happen. the crowd stir uneasily, recal that thi sprayer wa 
expect to give the unseen horror a moment of visibility. two or three 
men shut their eyes, but curti whateley snatch back the telescop 
and strain hi vision to the utmost. He saw that rice, from the 
party' point of vantag abov and behind the entity, had an excel 
chanc of spread the potent powder with marvel effect. 

those without the telescop saw onli an instant' flash of gray 
cloud--a cloud about the size of a moder larg building--near the 
top of the mountain. curtis, who had held the instrument, drop it 
with a pierc shriek into the ankle-deep mud of the road. He reeled, 
and would have crumpl to the ground had not two or three other 
seiz and steadi him. all he could do wa moan half-inaudibly: 

"oh, oh, great gawd ... _that ... that_...." 

[illustration: "oh, oh, great gawd ... that ... that."] 

there wa a pandemonium of questioning, and onli henri wheeler thought 
to rescu the fallen telescop and wipe it clean of mud. curti wa 
past all coherence, and even isol repli were almost too much for 
him. 

"bigger 'n a barn ... all made o' squirmin' rope ... hull thing sort 
o' shape like a hen' egg bigger'n anything, with dozen o' leg like 
hogshead that haff shut up when they step ... nothin' solid abaout 
it--al like jelly, an' made o' sep'rit wrigglin' rope push clost 
togeth ... great bulgin' eye all over it ... ten or twenti maouth 
or trunk a-stickin' aout all along the sides, big as stovepipes, an' 
all a-tossin' an' openin' an' shuttin' ... all gray, with kinder blue 
or purpl ring ... _an' gawd in heaven--that haff face on top_!..." 

thi final memory, whatev it was, prove too much for poor curtis, 
and he collaps complet befor he could say more. fred farr and 
will hutchin carri him to the roadsid and laid him on the damp 
grass. henri wheeler, trembling, turn the rescu telescop on the 
mountain to see what he might. through the lens were discern 
three tini figures, appar run toward the summit as fast as the 
steep inclin allowed. onli these--noth more. then everyon notic 
a strang unseason nois in the deep valley behind, and even in 
the underbrush of sentinel hill itself. It wa the pipe of unnumb 
whippoorwills, and in their shrill choru there seem to lurk a note 
of tens and evil expectancy. 

earl sawyer now took the telescop and report the three figur as 
stand on the topmost ridge, virtual level with the altar-ston 
but at a consider distanc from it. one figure, he said, seem 
to be rais it hand abov it head at rhythmic intervals; and 
as sawyer mention the circumst the crowd seem to hear a 
faint, half-mus sound from the distance, as if a loud chant 
were accompani the gestures. the weird silhouett on that 
remot peak must have been a spectacl of infinit grotesqu 
and impressiveness, but no observ wa in a mood for esthet 
appreciation. "I guess he' sayin' the spell," whisper wheeler as 
he snatch back the telescope. the whippoorwil were pipe wildly, 
and in a singularli curiou irregular rhythm quit unlik that of the 
visibl ritual. 

suddenli the sunshin seem to lessen without the intervent of ani 
discern cloud. It wa a veri peculiar phenomenon, and wa plainli 
mark by all. A rumbl sound seem brew beneath the hills, mix 
strang with a concord rumbl which clearli came from the sky. 
lightn flash aloft, and the wonder crowd look in vain for 
the portent of storm. the chant of the men from arkham now becam 
unmistakable, and wheeler saw through the glass that they were all 
rais their arm in the rhythmic incantation. from some farmhous far 
away came the frantic bark of dogs. 

the chang in the qualiti of the daylight increased, and the crowd 
gaze about the horizon in wonder. A purplish darkness, born of 
noth more than a spectral deepen of the sky' blue, press down 
upon the rumbl hills. then the lightn flash again, somewhat 
brighter than before, and the crowd fanci that it had show a 
certain misti around the altar-ston on the distant height. No 
one, however, had been use the telescop at that instant. the 
whippoorwil continu their irregular pulsation, and the men of 
dunwich brace themselv tens against some imponder menac with 
which the atmospher seem surcharged. 

without warn came those deep, cracked, raucou vocal sound which 
will never leav the memori of the stricken group who heard them. not 
from ani human throat were they born, for the organ of man can yield 
no such acoust perversions. rather would one have said they came 
from the pit itself, had not their sourc been so unmistak the 
altar-ston on the peak. It is almost erron to call them _sounds_ 
at all, sinc so much of their ghastly, infra-bass timbr spoke to 
dim seat of conscious and terror far subtler than the ear; yet 
one must do so, sinc their form wa indisput though vagu that 
of half-articul _words_. they were loud--loud as the rumbl and 
the thunder abov which they echoed--yet did they come from no visibl 
being. and becaus imagin might suggest a conjectur sourc in 
the world of non-vis beings, the huddl crowd at the mountain' 
base huddl still closer, and winc as if in expect of a blow. 

"_ygnaiih ... ygnaiih ... thflthkh'ngha ... yog-sothoth...._" rang the 
hideou croak out of space. "_y'bthnk ... h'ehy ... n'grkdl'lh...._" 

the speak impuls seem to falter here, as if some fright 
psychic struggl were go on. henri wheeler strain hi eye at 
the telescope, but saw onli the three grotesqu silhouet human 
figur on the peak, all move their arm furious in strang 
gestur as their incant drew near it culmination. from what 
black well of acheront fear or feeling, from what unplumb gulf of 
extra-cosm conscious or obscure, long-lat heredity, were those 
half-articul thunder-croak drawn? present they began to gather 
renew forc and coher as they grew in stark, utter, ultim 
frenzy. 

"_eh-ya-ya-ya-yahaah ... e'yaya-yayaaaa ... ngh'aaaa ... ngh'aaaa_ ... 
h'yuh ... h'yuh ... help! help! ... _ff--ff--ff_--father! father! 
yog-sothoth!..." 

but that wa all. the pallid group in the road, still reel at 
the _indisput english_ syllabl that had pour thickli and 
thunder down from the frantic vacanc besid that shock 
altar-stone, were never to hear such syllabl again. instead, they 
jump violent at the terrif report which seem to rend the hills; 
the deafening, cataclysm peal whose source, be it inner earth or 
sky, no hearer wa ever abl to place. A singl lightn bolt shot 
from the purpl zenith to the altar-stone, and a great tidal wave of 
viewless forc and indescrib stench swept down from the hill to 
all the countryside. trees, grass, and underbrush were whip into a 
fury; and the frighten crowd at the mountain' base, weaken by the 
lethal fetor that seem about to asphyxi them, were almost hurl 
off their feet. dog howl from the distance, green grass and foliag 
wilt to a curious, sickli yellow-gray, and over field and forest were 
scatter the bodi of dead whippoorwills. 

the stench left quickly, but the veget never came right again. 
To thi day there is someth queer and unholi about the growth on 
and around that fearsom hill. curti whateley wa onli just regain 
conscious when the arkham men came slowli down the mountain in the 
beam of a sunlight onc more brilliant and untainted. they were grave 
and quiet, and seem shaken by memori and reflect even more 
terribl than those which had reduc the group of nativ to a state 
of cow quivering. In repli to a jumbl of question they onli shook 
their head and reaffirm one vital fact. 

"the thing ha gone for ever," armitag said. "it ha been split up 
into what it wa origin made of, and can never exist again. It wa 
an imposs in a normal world. onli the least fraction wa realli 
matter in ani sens we know. It wa like it father--and most of it ha 
gone back to him in some vagu realm or dimens outsid our materi 
universe; some vagu abyss out of which onli the most accurs rite of 
human blasphemi could ever have call him for a moment on the hills." 

there wa a brief silence, and in that paus the scatter sens of 
poor curti whateley began to knit back into a sort of continuity; so 
that he put hi hand to hi head with a moan. memori seem to pick 
itself up where it had left off, and the horror of the sight that had 
prostrat him burst in upon him again. 

"_oh, oh, my gawd, that haff face ... that haff face on top of it ... 
that face with the red eye an' crinkli albino hair, an' no chin, like 
the whateleys.... It wa a octopus, centipede, spider kind o' thing, 
but they wa a haff-shap man' face on top of it, an' it look like 
wizard whateley's, onli it wa yard an' yard acrost...._" 

He paus exhausted, as the whole group of nativ stare in a 
bewilder not quit crystal into fresh terror. onli old zebulon 
whateley, who wanderingli rememb ancient thing but who had been 
silent heretofore, spoke aloud. 

"fifteen year' gone," he rambled, "I heerd ol' whateley say as haow 
some day we'd hear a child o' lavinny' a-callin' it father' name on 
the top o' sentinel hill...." 

but joe osborn interrupt him to question the arkham men anew. 

"_what wa it, anyhaow_, an' haowev did young wizard whateley call it 
aout o' the air it come from?" 

armitag chose hi word carefully. 

"it was--well, it wa mostli a kind of forc that doesn't belong in our 
part of space; a kind of forc that act and grow and shape itself 
by other law than those of our sort of nature. We have no busi 
call in such thing from outside, and onli veri wick peopl 
and veri wick cult ever tri to. there wa some of it in wilbur 
whateley himself--enough to make a devil and a precoci monster of 
him, and to make hi pass out a pretti terribl sight. i'm go 
to burn hi accurs diary, and if you men are wise you'll dynamit 
that altar-ston up there, and pull down all the ring of stand 
stone on the other hills. thing like that brought down the be 
those whateley were so fond of--th be they were go to let in 
tangibl to wipe out the human race and drag the earth off to some 
nameless place for some nameless purpose. 

"but as to thi thing we'v just sent back--th whateley rais it for 
a terribl part in the do that were to come. It grew fast and big 
from the same reason that wilbur grew fast and big--but it beat him 
becaus it had a greater share of the _outsideness_ in it. you needn't 
ask how wilbur call it out of the air. He didn't call it out. _it wa 
hi twin brother, but it look more like the father than he did._" 





end of the project gutenberg ebook of the dunwich horror, by H. P. lovecraft 

*** end OF thi project gutenberg ebook the dunwich horror *** 

***** thi file should be name 50133-8.txt or 50133-8.zip ***** 
thi and all associ file of variou format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/5/0/1/3/50133/ 

produc by greg weeks, mari meehan and the onlin 
distribut proofread team at http://www.pgdp.net 

updat edit will replac the previou one--th old edit will 
be renamed. 

creat the work from print edit not protect by u.s. copyright 
law mean that no one own a unit state copyright in these works, 
so the foundat (and you!) can copi and distribut it in the unit 
state without permiss and without pay copyright 
royalties. special rules, set forth in the gener term of use part 
of thi license, appli to copi and distribut project 
gutenberg-tm electron work to protect the project gutenberg-tm 
concept and trademark. project gutenberg is a regist trademark, 
and may not be use if you charg for the ebooks, unless you receiv 
specif permission. If you do not charg anyth for copi of thi 
ebook, compli with the rule is veri easy. you may use thi ebook 
for nearli ani purpos such as creation of deriv works, reports, 
perform and research. they may be modifi and print and given 
away--y may do practic anyth in the unit state with ebook 
not protect by u.s. copyright law. redistribut is subject to the 
trademark license, especi commerci redistribution. 

start: full licens 

the full project gutenberg licens 
pleas read thi befor you distribut OR use thi work 

To protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promot the free 
distribut of electron works, by use or distribut thi work 
(or ani other work associ in ani way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agre to compli with all the term of the full 
project gutenberg-tm licens avail with thi file or onlin at 
www.gutenberg.org/license. 

section 1. gener term of use and redistribut project 
gutenberg-tm electron work 

1.a. By read or use ani part of thi project gutenberg-tm 
electron work, you indic that you have read, understand, agre to 
and accept all the term of thi licens and intellectu properti 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agre to abid by all 
the term of thi agreement, you must ceas use and return or 
destroy all copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in your 
possession. If you paid a fee for obtain a copi of or access to a 
project gutenberg-tm electron work and you do not agre to be bound 
by the term of thi agreement, you may obtain a refund from the 
person or entiti to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 
1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a regist trademark. It may onli be 
use on or associ in ani way with an electron work by peopl who 
agre to be bound by the term of thi agreement. there are a few 
thing that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electron work 
even without compli with the full term of thi agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of thing you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electron work if you follow the term of thi 
agreement and help preserv free futur access to project gutenberg-tm 
electron works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat ("the 
foundation" or pglaf), own a compil copyright in the collect 
of project gutenberg-tm electron works. nearli all the individu 
work in the collect are in the public domain in the unit 
states. If an individu work is unprotect by copyright law in the 
unit state and you are locat in the unit states, we do not 
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing, 
display or creat deriv work base on the work as long as 
all refer to project gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope 
that you will support the project gutenberg-tm mission of promot 
free access to electron work by freeli share project gutenberg-tm 
work in complianc with the term of thi agreement for keep the 
project gutenberg-tm name associ with the work. you can easili 
compli with the term of thi agreement by keep thi work in the 
same format with it attach full project gutenberg-tm licens when 
you share it without charg with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are locat also govern 
what you can do with thi work. copyright law in most countri are 
in a constant state of change. If you are outsid the unit states, 
check the law of your countri in addit to the term of thi 
agreement befor downloading, copying, displaying, performing, 
distribut or creat deriv work base on thi work or ani 
other project gutenberg-tm work. the foundat make no 
represent concern the copyright statu of ani work in ani 
countri outsid the unit states. 

1.e. unless you have remov all refer to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the follow sentence, with activ link to, or other 
immedi access to, the full project gutenberg-tm licens must appear 
promin whenev ani copi of a project gutenberg-tm work (ani work 
on which the phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, 
performed, viewed, copi or distributed: 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher in the unit state and 
most other part of the world at no cost and with almost no 
restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or re-us it 
under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ with thi 
ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not locat in the 
unit states, you'll have to check the law of the countri where you 
are locat befor use thi ebook. 

1.e.2. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is 
deriv from text not protect by u.s. copyright law (doe not 
contain a notic indic that it is post with permiss of the 
copyright holder), the work can be copi and distribut to anyon in 
the unit state without pay ani fee or charges. If you are 
redistribut or provid access to a work with the phrase "project 
gutenberg" associ with or appear on the work, you must compli 
either with the requir of paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 or 
obtain permiss for the use of the work and the project gutenberg-tm 
trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.3. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is post 
with the permiss of the copyright holder, your use and distribut 
must compli with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and ani 
addit term impos by the copyright holder. addit term 
will be link to the project gutenberg-tm licens for all work 
post with the permiss of the copyright holder found at the 
begin of thi work. 

1.e.4. Do not unlink or detach or remov the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens term from thi work, or ani file contain a part of thi 
work or ani other work associ with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribut or redistribut thi 
electron work, or ani part of thi electron work, without 
promin display the sentenc set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
activ link or immedi access to the full term of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribut thi work in ani binary, 
compressed, mark up, nonproprietari or proprietari form, includ 
ani word process or hypertext form. however, if you provid access 
to or distribut copi of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format 
other than "plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the offici 
version post on the offici project gutenberg-tm web site 
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no addit cost, fee or expens 
to the user, provid a copy, a mean of export a copy, or a mean 
of obtain a copi upon request, of the work in it origin "plain 
vanilla ascii" or other form. ani altern format must includ the 
full project gutenberg-tm licens as specifi in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. Do not charg a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copi or distribut ani project gutenberg-tm work 
unless you compli with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charg a reason fee for copi of or provid 
access to or distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work 
provid that 

* you pay a royalti fee of 20% of the gross profit you deriv from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm work calcul use the method 
you alreadi use to calcul your applic taxes. the fee is owe 
to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he ha 
agre to donat royalti under thi paragraph to the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundation. royalti payment must be paid 
within 60 day follow each date on which you prepar (or are 
legal requir to prepare) your period tax returns. royalti 
payment should be clearli mark as such and sent to the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundat at the address specifi in 
section 4, "inform about donat to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundation." 

* you provid a full refund of ani money paid by a user who notifi 
you in write (or by e-mail) within 30 day of receipt that s/he 
doe not agre to the term of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must requir such a user to return or destroy all 
copi of the work possess in a physic medium and discontinu 
all use of and all access to other copi of project gutenberg-tm 
works. 

* you provide, in accord with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of 
ani money paid for a work or a replac copy, if a defect in the 
electron work is discov and report to you within 90 day of 
receipt of the work. 

* you compli with all other term of thi agreement for free 
distribut of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. If you wish to charg a fee or distribut a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work or group of work on differ term than 
are set forth in thi agreement, you must obtain permiss in write 
from both the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat and the 
project gutenberg trademark llc, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm 
trademark. contact the foundat as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunt and employe expend consider 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcrib and proofread 
work not protect by u.s. copyright law in creat the project 
gutenberg-tm collection. despit these efforts, project gutenberg-tm 
electron works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may 
contain "defects," such as, but not limit to, incomplete, inaccur 
or corrupt data, transcript errors, a copyright or other 
intellectu properti infringement, a defect or damag disk or 
other medium, a comput virus, or comput code that damag or 
cannot be read by your equipment. 

1.f.2. limit warranty, disclaim OF damag - except for the "right 
of replac or refund" describ in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and ani other parti distribut a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work under thi agreement, disclaim all 
liabil to you for damages, cost and expenses, includ legal 
fees. you agre that you have NO remedi for negligence, strict 
liability, breach OF warranti OR breach OF contract except those 
provid IN paragraph 1.f.3. you agre that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and ani distributor under thi agreement will not BE 
liabl TO you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punit OR 
incident damag even IF you give notic OF the possibl OF such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limit right OF replac OR refund - If you discov a 
defect in thi electron work within 90 day of receiv it, you can 
receiv a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explan to the person you receiv the work from. If you 
receiv the work on a physic medium, you must return the medium 
with your written explanation. the person or entiti that provid you 
with the defect work may elect to provid a replac copi in 
lieu of a refund. If you receiv the work electronically, the person 
or entiti provid it to you may choos to give you a second 
opportun to receiv the work electron in lieu of a refund. If 
the second copi is also defective, you may demand a refund in write 
without further opportun to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limit right of replac or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, thi work is provid to you 'as-is', with NO 
other warranti OF ani kind, express OR implied, includ but not 
limit TO warranti OF merchant OR fit for ani purpose. 

1.f.5. some state do not allow disclaim of certain impli 
warranti or the exclus or limit of certain type of 
damages. If ani disclaim or limit set forth in thi agreement 
violat the law of the state applic to thi agreement, the 
agreement shall be interpret to make the maximum disclaim or 
limit permit by the applic state law. the invalid or 
unenforc of ani provis of thi agreement shall not void the 
remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemn - you agre to indemnifi and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, ani agent or employe of the foundation, anyon 
provid copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in 
accord with thi agreement, and ani volunt associ with the 
production, promot and distribut of project gutenberg-tm 
electron works, harmless from all liability, cost and expenses, 
includ legal fees, that aris directli or indirectli from ani of 
the follow which you do or caus to occur: (a) distribut of thi 
or ani project gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or 
addit or delet to ani project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) ani 
defect you cause. 

section 2. inform about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonym with the free distribut of 
electron work in format readabl by the widest varieti of 
comput includ obsolete, old, middle-ag and new computers. It 
exist becaus of the effort of hundr of volunt and donat 
from peopl in all walk of life. 

volunt and financi support to provid volunt with the 
assist they need are critic to reach project gutenberg-tm' 
goal and ensur that the project gutenberg-tm collect will 
remain freeli avail for gener to come. In 2001, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundat wa creat to provid a secur 
and perman futur for project gutenberg-tm and futur 
generations. To learn more about the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundat and how your effort and donat can help, see 
section 3 and 4 and the foundat inform page at 
www.gutenberg.org 



section 3. inform about the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat 

the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educ corpor organ under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt statu by the intern 
revenu service. the foundation' ein or feder tax identif 
number is 64-6221541. contribut to the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundat are tax deduct to the full extent permit by 
u.s. feder law and your state' laws. 

the foundation' princip offic is in fairbanks, alaska, with the 
mail address: PO box 750175, fairbanks, AK 99775, but it 
volunt and employe are scatter throughout numer 
locations. it busi offic is locat at 809 north 1500 west, salt 
lake city, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. email contact link and up to 
date contact inform can be found at the foundation' web site and 
offici page at www.gutenberg.org/contact 

for addit contact information: 

dr. gregori B. newbi 
chief execut and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 

section 4. inform about donat to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot surviv without wide 
spread public support and donat to carri out it mission of 
increas the number of public domain and licens work that can be 
freeli distribut in machin readabl form access by the widest 
array of equip includ outdat equipment. mani small donat 
($1 to $5,000) are particularli import to maintain tax exempt 
statu with the irs. 

the foundat is commit to compli with the law regul 
chariti and charit donat in all 50 state of the unit 
states. complianc requir are not uniform and it take a 
consider effort, much paperwork and mani fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. We do not solicit donat in locat 
where we have not receiv written confirm of compliance. To send 
donat or determin the statu of complianc for ani particular 
state visit www.gutenberg.org/don 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribut from state where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibit 
against accept unsolicit donat from donor in such state who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

intern donat are grate accepted, but we cannot make 
ani statement concern tax treatment of donat receiv from 
outsid the unit states. u.s. law alon swamp our small staff. 

pleas check the project gutenberg web page for current donat 
method and addresses. donat are accept in a number of other 
way includ checks, onlin payment and credit card donations. To 
donate, pleas visit: www.gutenberg.org/don 

section 5. gener inform about project gutenberg-tm electron works. 

professor michael S. hart wa the origin of the project 
gutenberg-tm concept of a librari of electron work that could be 
freeli share with anyone. for forti years, he produc and 
distribut project gutenberg-tm ebook with onli a loos network of 
volunt support. 

project gutenberg-tm ebook are often creat from sever print 
editions, all of which are confirm as not protect by copyright in 
the u.s. unless a copyright notic is included. thus, we do not 
necessarili keep ebook in complianc with ani particular paper 
edition. 

most peopl start at our web site which ha the main PG search 
facility: www.gutenberg.org 

thi web site includ inform about project gutenberg-tm, 
includ how to make donat to the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundation, how to help produc our new ebooks, and how to 
subscrib to our email newslett to hear about new ebooks. 
