 
the project gutenberg ebook the mysteri of udolpho, by ann radcliff 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.org 


title: the mysteri of udolpho 

author: ann radcliff 

releas date: februari 28, 2009 [ebook #3268] 
last updated: march 13, 2019 

language: english 

charact set encoding: utf-8 

*** start OF thi project gutenberg ebook the mysteri OF udolpho *** 




produc by karale coleman, and david widger 



cover 



the mysteri of udolpho 



A romanc 


interspers with some piec of poetri 



By ann radcliff 



content 


volum I 
chapter I 
chapter II 
chapter iii 
chapter IV 
chapter V 
chapter VI 
chapter vii 
chapter viii 
chapter IX 
chapter X 
chapter XI 
chapter xii 
chapter xiii 

volum II 
chapter I 
chapter II 
chapter iii 
chapter IV 
chapter V 
chapter VI 
chapter vii 
chapter viii 
chapter IX 
chapter X 
chapter XI 
chapter xii 

volum iii 
chapter I 
chapter II 
chapter iii 
chapter IV 
chapter V 
chapter VI 
chapter vii 
chapter viii 
chapter IX 
chapter X 
chapter XI 
chapter xii 
chapter xiii 

volum IV 
chapter I 
chapter II 
chapter iii 
chapter IV 
chapter V 
chapter VI 
chapter vii 
chapter viii 
chapter IX 
chapter X 
chapter XI 
chapter xii 
chapter xiii 
chapter xiv 
chapter XV 
chapter xvi 
chapter xvii 
chapter xviii 
chapter xix 



fate sit on these dark battlements, and frowns, 
and, as the portal open to receiv me, 
her voice, in sullen echo through the courts, 
tell of a nameless deed. 




volum 1 



chapter I 
prefac 
home is the resort 
Of love, of joy, of peac and plenty, where, 
support and supported, polish’d friend 
and dear relat mingl into bliss. 
thomson 


On the pleasant bank of the garonne, in the provinc of gascony, 
stood, in the year 1584, the château of monsieur st. aubert. from it 
window were seen the pastor landscap of guienn and gasconi 
stretch along the river, gay with luxuri wood and vine, and 
plantat of olives. To the south, the view wa bound by the 
majest pyrenees, whose summits, veil in clouds, or exhibit aw 
forms, seen, and lost again, as the partial vapour roll along, were 
sometim barren, and gleam through the blue ting of air, and 
sometim frown with forest of gloomi pine, that swept downward to 
their base. these tremend precipic were contrast by the soft 
green of the pastur and wood that hung upon their skirts; among 
whose flocks, and herds, and simpl cottages, the eye, after have 
scale the cliff above, delight to repose. To the north, and to the 
east, the plain of guienn and languedoc were lost in the mist of 
distance; on the west, gasconi wa bound by the water of biscay. 

M. st. aubert love to wander, with hi wife and daughter, on the 
margin of the garonne, and to listen to the music that float on it 
waves. He had known life in other form than those of pastor 
simplicity, have mingl in the gay and in the busi scene of the 
world; but the flatter portrait of mankind, which hi heart had 
delin in earli youth, hi experi had too sorrow 
corrected. yet, amidst the chang vision of life, hi principl 
remain unshaken, hi benevol unchilled; and he retir from the 
multitud “more in _pity_ than in anger,” to scene of simpl nature, 
to the pure delight of literature, and to the exercis of domest 
virtues. 

He wa a descend from the younger branch of an illustri family, 
and it wa designed, that the defici of hi patrimoni wealth 
should be suppli either by a splendid allianc in marriage, or by 
success in the intrigu of public affairs. but st. aubert had too nice 
a sens of honour to fulfil the latter hope, and too small a portion of 
ambit to sacrific what he call happiness, to the attain of 
wealth. after the death of hi father he marri a veri amiabl woman, 
hi equal in birth, and not hi superior in fortune. the late monsieur 
st. aubert’ liberality, or extravagance, had so much involv hi 
affairs, that hi son found it necessari to dispos of a part of the 
famili domain, and, some year after hi marriage, he sold it to 
monsieur quesnel, the brother of hi wife, and retir to a small 
estat in gascony, where conjug felicity, and parent duties, 
divid hi attent with the treasur of knowledg and the 
illumin of genius. 

To thi spot he had been attach from hi infancy. He had often made 
excurs to it when a boy, and the impress of delight given to 
hi mind by the home kind of the grey-head peasant, to whom it 
wa intrusted, and whose fruit and cream never failed, had not been 
obliter by succeed circumstances. the green pastur along which 
he had so often bound in the exult of health, and youth 
freedom—th woods, under whose refresh shade he had first indulg 
that pensiv melancholy, which afterward made a strong featur of hi 
character—th wild walk of the mountains, the river, on whose wave he 
had floated, and the distant plains, which seem boundless as hi 
earli hopes—wer never after rememb by st. aubert but with 
enthusiasm and regret. At length he disengag himself from the world, 
and retir hither, to realis the wish of mani years. 

the building, as it then stood, wa mere a summer cottage, render 
interest to a stranger by it neat simplicity, or the beauti of the 
surround scene; and consider addit were necessari to make it 
a comfort famili residence. st. aubert felt a kind of affect for 
everi part of the fabric, which he rememb in hi youth, and would 
not suffer a stone of it to be removed, so that the new building, 
adapt to the style of the old one, form with it onli a simpl and 
eleg residence. the tast of madam st. aubert wa conspicu in 
it intern finishing, where the same chast simplic wa observ 
in the furniture, and in the few ornament of the apartments, that 
characteris the manner of it inhabitants. 

the librari occupi the west side of the château, and wa enrich by 
a collect of the best book in the ancient and modern languages. 
thi room open upon a grove, which stood on the brow of a gentl 
declivity, that fell toward the river, and the tall tree gave it a 
melancholi and pleas shade; while from the window the eye caught, 
beneath the spread branches, the gay and luxuri landscap 
stretch to the west, and overlook on the left by the bold 
precipic of the pyrenees. adjoin the librari wa a green-house, 
store with scarc and beauti plants; for one of the amus of 
st. aubert wa the studi of botany, and among the neighbour 
mountains, which afford a luxuri feast to the mind of the 
naturalist, he often pass the day in the pursuit of hi favourit 
science. He wa sometim accompani in these littl excurs by 
madam st. aubert, and frequent by hi daughter; when, with a small 
osier basket to receiv plants, and anoth fill with cold 
refreshments, such as the cabin of the shepherd did not afford, they 
wander away among the most romant and magnific scenes, nor 
suffer the charm of nature’ lowli children to abstract them from 
the observ of her stupend works. when weari of saunter among 
cliff that seem scarc access but to the step of the 
enthusiast, and where no track appear on the vegetation, but what the 
foot of the izard had left; they would seek one of those green 
recesses, which so beauti adorn the bosom of these mountains, 
where, under the shade of the lofti larch, or cedar, they enjoy their 
simpl repast, made sweeter by the water of the cool stream, that 
crept along the turf, and by the breath of wild flower and aromat 
plants, that fring the rocks, and inlaid the grass. 

adjoin the eastern side of the green-house, look toward the 
plain of languedoc, wa a room, which emili call hers, and which 
contain her books, her drawings, her music instruments, with some 
favourit bird and plants. here she usual exercis herself in 
eleg arts, cultiv onli becaus they were congeni to her taste, 
and in which nativ genius, assist by the instruct of monsieur 
and madam st. aubert, made her an earli proficient. the window of 
thi room were particularli pleasant; they descend to the floor, and, 
open upon the littl lawn that surround the house, the eye wa led 
between grove of almond, palm-trees, flowering-ash, and myrtle, to the 
distant landscape, where the garonn wandered. 

the peasant of thi gay climat were often seen on an evening, when 
the day’ labour wa done, danc in group on the margin of the 
river. their sprightli melodies, _debonnaire_ steps, the fanci 
figur of their dances, with the tast and caprici manner in 
which the girl adjust their simpl dress, gave a charact to the 
scene entir french. 

the front of the château, which, have a southern aspect, open upon 
the grandeur of the mountains, wa occupi on the ground floor by a 
rustic hall, and two excel sit rooms. the first floor, for the 
cottag had no second story, wa laid out in bed-chambers, except one 
apart that open to a balcony, and which wa gener use for a 
breakfast-room. 

In the surround ground, st. aubert had made veri tast 
improvements; yet, such wa hi attach to object he had rememb 
from hi boyish days, that he had in some instanc sacrif tast to 
sentiment. there were two old larch that shade the building, and 
interrupt the prospect; st. aubert had sometim declar that he 
believ he should have been weak enough to have wept at their fall. In 
addit to these larch he plant a littl grove of beech, pine, and 
mountain-ash. On a lofti terrace, form by the swell bank of the 
river, rose a plantat of orange, lemon, and palm-trees, whose fruit, 
in the cool of evening, breath delici fragrance. with these 
were mingl a few tree of other species. here, under the ampl shade 
of a plane-tree, that spread it majest canopi toward the river, st. 
aubert love to sit in the fine even of summer, with hi wife and 
children, watching, beneath it foliage, the set sun, the mild 
splendour of it light fade from the distant landscape, till the 
shadow of twilight melt it variou featur into one tint of sober 
grey. here, too, he love to read, and to convers with madam st. 
aubert; or to play with hi children, resign himself to the 
influenc of those sweet affections, which are ever attend on 
simplic and nature. He ha often said, while tear of pleasur 
trembl in hi eyes, that these were moment infinit more 
delight than ani pass amid the brilliant and tumultu scene 
that are court by the world. hi heart wa occupied; it had, what can 
be so rare said, no wish for a happi beyond what it experienced. 
the conscious of act right diffus a seren over hi manners, 
which noth els could impart to a man of moral percept like his, 
and which refin hi sens of everi surround blessing. 

the deepest shade of twilight did not send him from hi favourit 
plane-tree. He love the sooth hour, when the last tint of light 
die away; when the stars, one by one, trembl through æther, and are 
reflect on the dark mirror of the waters; that hour, which, of all 
others, inspir the mind with pensiv tenderness, and often elev 
it to sublim contemplation. when the moon shed her soft ray among the 
foliage, he still lingered, and hi pastor supper of cream and fruit 
wa often spread beneath it. then, on the still of night, came the 
song of the nightingale, breath sweetness, and awaken melancholy. 

the first interrupt to the happi he had known sinc hi 
retirement, were occas by the death of hi two sons. He lost them 
at that age when infantin simplic is so fascinating; and though, in 
consider of madam st. aubert’ distress, he restrain the 
express of hi own, and endeavour to bear it, as he meant, with 
philosophy, he had, in truth, no philosophi that could render him calm 
to such losses. one daughter wa now hi onli surviv child; and, 
while he watch the unfold of her infant character, with anxiou 
fondness, he endeavoured, with unremit effort, to counteract those 
trait in her disposition, which might hereaft lead her from 
happiness. she had discov in her earli year uncommon delicaci of 
mind, warm affections, and readi benevolence; but with these wa 
observ a degre of suscept too exquisit to admit of last 
peace. As she advanc in youth, thi sensibl gave a pensiv tone 
to her spirits, and a soft to her manner, which ad grace to 
beauty, and render her a veri interest object to person of a 
congeni disposition. but st. aubert had too much good sens to prefer 
a charm to a virtue; and had penetr enough to see, that thi charm 
wa too danger to it possessor to be allow the charact of a 
blessing. He endeavoured, therefore, to strengthen her mind; to enur 
her to habit of self-command; to teach her to reject the first impuls 
of her feelings, and to look, with cool examination, upon the 
disappoint he sometim threw in her way. while he instruct her 
to resist first impressions, and to acquir that steadi digniti of 
mind, that can alon counterbal the passions, and bear us, as far 
as is compat with our nature, abov the reach of circumstances, he 
taught himself a lesson of fortitude; for he wa often oblig to 
witness, with seem indifference, the tear and struggl which hi 
caution occas her. 

In person, emili resembl her mother; have the same eleg symmetri 
of form, the same delicaci of features, and the same blue eyes, full of 
tender sweetness. but, love as wa her person, it wa the vari 
express of her countenance, as convers awaken the nicer 
emot of her mind, that threw such a captiv grace around her: 

those tend’rer tints, that shun the careless eye, 
and, in the world’ contagi circle, die. 


st. aubert cultiv her understand with the most scrupul care. 
He gave her a gener view of the sciences, and an exact acquaint 
with everi part of eleg literature. He taught her latin and english, 
chiefli that she might understand the sublim of their best poets. 
she discov in her earli year a tast for work of genius; and it 
wa st. aubert’ principle, as well as hi inclination, to promot 
everi innoc mean of happiness. “A well-inform mind,” he would 
say, “i the best secur against the contagion of folli and of vice. 
the vacant mind is ever on the watch for relief, and readi to plung 
into error, to escap from the languor of idleness. store it with 
ideas, teach it the pleasur of thinking; and the temptat of the 
world without, will be counteract by the gratif deriv from 
the world within. thought, and cultivation, are necessari equal to 
the happi of a countri and a citi life; in the first they prevent 
the uneasi sensat of indolence, and afford a sublim pleasur in 
the tast they creat for the beautiful, and the grand; in the latter, 
they make dissip less an object of necessity, and consequ of 
interest.” 

It wa one of emily’ earliest pleasur to rambl among the scene of 
nature; nor wa it in the soft and glow landscap that she most 
delighted; she love more the wild wood-walks, that skirt the 
mountain; and still more the mountain’ stupend recesses, where the 
silenc and grandeur of solitud impress a sacr awe upon her heart, 
and lift her thought to the god OF heaven and earth. In scene like 
these she would often linger along, wrapt in a melancholi charm, till 
the last gleam of day fade from the west; till the lone sound of a 
sheep-bell, or the distant bark of a watch-dog, were all that broke on 
the still of the evening. then, the gloom of the woods; the 
trembl of their leaves, at intervals, in the breeze; the bat, 
flit on the twilight; the cottage-lights, now seen, and now 
lost—wer circumst that awaken her mind into effort, and led to 
enthusiasm and poetry. 

her favourit walk wa to a littl fishing-house, belong to st. 
aubert, in a woodi glen, on the margin of a rivulet that descend from 
the pyrenees, and, after foam among their rocks, wound it silent 
way beneath the shade it reflected. abov the woods, that screen 
thi glen, rose the lofti summit of the pyrenees, which often burst 
boldli on the eye through the glade below. sometim the shatter 
face of a rock onli wa seen, crown with wild shrubs; or a shepherd’ 
cabin seat on a cliff, overshadow by dark cypress, or wave ash. 
emerg from the deep recess of the woods, the glade open to the 
distant landscape, where the rich pastur and vine-cov slope of 
gasconi gradual declin to the plains; and there, on the wind 
shore of the garonne, groves, and hamlets, and villas—their outlin 
soften by distance, melt from the eye into one rich harmoni 
tint. 

this, too, wa the favourit retreat of st. aubert, to which he 
frequent withdrew from the fervour of noon, with hi wife, hi 
daughter, and hi books; or came at the sweet even hour to welcom 
the silent dusk, or to listen for the music of the nightingale. 
sometimes, too, he brought music of hi own, and awaken everi fairi 
echo with the tender accent of hi oboe; and often have the tone of 
emily’ voic drawn sweet from the waves, over which they trembled. 

It wa in one of these excurs to thi spot, that she observ the 
follow line written with a pencil on a part of the wainscot: 

sonnet 

go, pencil! faith to thi master’ sighs! 
go—tel the goddess of the fairi scene, 
when next her light step wind these wood-walk green, 
whenc all hi tears, hi tender sorrows, rise; 
ah! paint her form, her soul-illumin’d eyes, 
the sweet express of her pensiv face, 
the light’n smile, the anim grace— 
the portrait well the lover’ voic supplies; 
speak all hi heart must feel, hi tongu would say: 
yet ah! not all hi heart must sadli feel! 
how oft the flow’ret’ silken leav conceal 
the drug that steal the vital spark away! 
and who that gaze on that angel-smile, 
would fear it charm, or think it could beguile! 


these line were not inscrib to ani person; emili therefor could not 
appli them to herself, though she wa undoubtedli the nymph of these 
shades. have glanc round the littl circl of her acquaint 
without be detain by a suspicion as to whom they could be 
addressed, she wa compel to rest in uncertainty; an uncertainti 
which would have been more pain to an idl mind than it wa to hers. 
she had no leisur to suffer thi circumstance, trifl at first, to 
swell into import by frequent remembrance. the littl vaniti it had 
excit (for the incertitud which forbad her to presum upon have 
inspir the sonnet, forbad her also to disbeliev it) pass away, 
and the incid wa dismiss from her thought amid her books, her 
studies, and the exercis of social charities. 

soon after thi period, her anxieti wa awaken by the indisposit 
of her father, who wa attack with a fever; which, though not thought 
to be of a danger kind, gave a sever shock to hi constitution. 
madam st. aubert and emili attend him with unremit care; but hi 
recoveri wa veri slow, and, as he advanc toward health, madam 
seem to decline. 

the first scene he visited, after he wa well enough to take the air, 
wa hi favourit fishing-house. A basket of provis wa sent 
thither, with books, and emily’ lute; for fishing-tackl he had no 
use, for he never could find amus in tortur or destroying. 

after employ himself, for about an hour, in botanizing, dinner wa 
served. It wa a repast, to which gratitude, for be again permit 
to visit thi spot, gave sweetness; and famili happi onc more 
smile beneath these shades. monsieur st. aubert convers with unusu 
cheerfulness; everi object delight hi senses. the refresh 
pleasur from the first view of nature, after the pain of illness, and 
the confin of a sick-chamber, is abov the conceptions, as well as 
the descriptions, of those in health. the green wood and pastures; the 
floweri turf; the blue concav of the heavens; the balmi air; the 
murmur of the limpid stream; and even the hum of everi littl insect of 
the shade, seem to revivifi the soul, and make mere exist bliss. 

madam st. aubert, reanim by the cheer and recoveri of her 
husband, wa no longer sensibl of the indisposit which had late 
oppress her; and, as she saunter along the wood-walk of thi 
romant glen, and convers with him, and with her daughter, she often 
look at them altern with a degre of tenderness, that fill her 
eye with tears. st. aubert observ thi more than once, and gentli 
reprov her for the emotion; but she could onli smile, clasp hi hand, 
and that of emily, and weep the more. He felt the tender enthusiasm 
steal upon himself in a degre that becam almost painful; hi 
featur assum a seriou air, and he could not forbear secretli 
sighing—“perhap I shall some time look back to these moments, as to 
the summit of my happiness, with hopeless regret. but let me not misus 
them by useless anticipation; let me hope I shall not live to mourn the 
loss of those who are dearer to me than life.” 

To relieve, or perhap to indulge, the pensiv temper of hi mind, he 
bade emili fetch the lute she knew how to touch with such sweet pathos. 
As she drew near the fishing-house, she wa surpris to hear the tone 
of the instrument, which were awaken by the hand of taste, and 
utter a plaintiv air, whose exquisit melodi engag all her 
attention. she listen in profound silence, afraid to move from the 
spot, lest the sound of her step should occas her to lose a note of 
the music, or should disturb the musician. everyth without the 
build wa still, and no person appeared. she continu to listen, 
till timid succeed to surpris and delight; a timidity, increas 
by a remembr of the pencil line she had formerli seen, and she 
hesit whether to proceed, or to return. 

while she paused, the music ceased; and, after a momentari hesitation, 
she recollect courag to advanc to the fishing-house, which she 
enter with falter steps, and found unoccupied! her lute lay on the 
table; everyth seem undisturbed, and she began to believ it wa 
anoth instrument she had heard, till she remembered, that, when she 
follow M. and madam st. aubert from thi spot, her lute wa left on 
a window seat. she felt alarmed, yet knew not wherefore; the melancholi 
gloom of evening, and the profound still of the place, interrupt 
onli by the light trembl of leaves, heighten her fanci 
apprehensions, and she wa desir of quit the building, but 
perceiv herself grow faint, and sat down. As she tri to recov 
herself, the pencil line on the wainscot met her eye; she started, 
as if she had seen a stranger; but, endeavour to conquer the tremor 
of her spirits, rose, and went to the window. To the line befor 
notic she now perceiv that other were added, in which her name 
appeared. 

though no longer suffer to doubt that they were address to herself, 
she wa as ignorant, as before, by whom they could be written. while 
she mused, she thought she heard the sound of a step without the 
building, and again alarmed, she caught up her lute, and hurri away. 
monsieur and madam st. aubert she found in a littl path that wound 
along the side of the glen. 

have reach a green summit, shadow by palm-trees, and overlook 
the valley and plain of gascony, they seat themselv on the turf; 
and while their eye wander over the gloriou scene, and they inhal 
the sweet breath of flower and herb that enrich the grass, emili 
play and sung sever of their favourit airs, with the delicaci of 
express in which she so much excelled. 

music and convers detain them in thi enchant spot, till the 
sun’ last light slept upon the plains; till the white sail that 
glide beneath the mountains, where the garonn wandered, becam dim, 
and the gloom of even stole over the landscape. It wa a melancholi 
but not unpleas gloom. st. aubert and hi famili rose, and left the 
place with regret; alas! madam st. aubert knew not that she left it 
for ever. 

when they reach the fishing-hous she miss her bracelet, and 
recollect that she had taken it from her arm after dinner, and had 
left it on the tabl when she went to walk. after a long search, in 
which emili wa veri active, she wa compel to resign herself to the 
loss of it. what made thi bracelet valuabl to her wa a miniatur of 
her daughter to which it wa attached, esteem a strike resemblance, 
and which had been paint onli a few month before. when emili wa 
convinc that the bracelet wa realli gone, she blushed, and becam 
thoughtful. that some stranger had been in the fishing-house, dure 
her absence, her lute, and the addit line of a pencil, had 
alreadi inform her: from the purport of these line it wa not 
unreason to believe, that the poet, the musician, and the thief 
were the same person. but though the music she had heard, the written 
line she had seen, and the disappear of the picture, form a 
combin of circumst veri remarkable, she wa irresist 
restrain from mention them; secretli determining, however, never 
again to visit the fishing-hous without monsieur or madam st. aubert. 

they return pensiv to the château, emili muse on the incid 
which had just occurred; st. aubert reflecting, with placid gratitude, 
on the bless he possessed; and madam st. aubert somewhat 
disturbed, and perplexed, by the loss of her daughter’ picture. As 
they drew near the house, they observ an unusu bustl about it; the 
sound of voic wa distinctli heard, servant and hors were seen 
pass between the trees, and, at length, the wheel of a carriag 
roll along. have come within view of the front of the château, a 
landau, with smoke horses, appear on the littl lawn befor it. st. 
aubert perceiv the liveri of hi brother-in-law, and in the parlour 
he found monsieur and madam quesnel alreadi entered. they had left 
pari some day before, and were on the way to their estate, onli ten 
leagu distant from La vallée, and which monsieur quesnel had 
purchas sever year befor of st. aubert. thi gentleman wa the 
onli brother of madam st. aubert; but the tie of relationship have 
never been strengthen by congeni of character, the intercours 
between them had not been frequent. M. quesnel had live altogeth in 
the world; hi aim had been consequence; splendour wa the object of 
hi taste; and hi address and knowledg of charact had carri him 
forward to the attain of almost all that he had courted. By a man 
of such a disposition, it is not surpris that the virtu of st. 
aubert should be overlooked; or that hi pure taste, simplicity, and 
moder wishes, were consid as mark of a weak intellect, and of 
confin views. the marriag of hi sister with st. aubert had been 
mortifi to hi ambition, for he had design that the matrimoni 
connect she form should assist him to attain the consequ which 
he so much desired; and some offer were made her by person whose rank 
and fortun flatter hi warmest hope. but hi sister, who wa then 
address also by st. aubert, perceived, or thought she perceived, that 
happi and splendour were not the same, and she did not hesit to 
forego the last for the attain of the former. whether monsieur 
quesnel thought them the same, or not, he would readili have sacrif 
hi sister’ peac to the gratif of hi own ambition; and, on 
her marriag with st. aubert, express in privat hi contempt of her 
spiritless conduct, and of the connect which it permitted. madam 
st. aubert, though she conceal thi insult from her husband, felt, 
perhaps, for the first time, resent light in her heart; and, 
though a regard for her own dignity, unit with consider of 
prudence, restrain her express of thi resentment, there wa ever 
after a mild reserv in her manner toward M. quesnel, which he both 
understood and felt. 

In hi own marriag he did not follow hi sister’ example. hi ladi 
wa an italian, and an heiress by birth; and, by natur and education, 
wa a vain and frivol woman. 

they now determin to pass the night with st. aubert; and as the 
château wa not larg enough to accommod their servants, the latter 
were dismiss to the neighbour village. when the first compliment 
were over, and the arrang for the night made M. quesnel began the 
display of hi intellig and hi connections; while st. aubert, who 
had been long enough in retir to find these topic recommend by 
their novelty, listened, with a degre of patienc and attention, which 
hi guest mistook for the humil of wonder. the latter, indeed, 
describ the few festiv which the turbul of that period 
permit to the court of henri the third, with a minuteness, that 
somewhat recompens for hi ostentation; but, when he came to speak of 
the charact of the duke de joyeuse, of a secret treaty, which he knew 
to be negoti with the porte, and of the light in which henri of 
navarr wa received, M. st. aubert recollect enough of hi former 
experi to be assured, that hi guest could be onli of an inferior 
class of politicians; and that, from the import of the subject 
upon which he commit himself, he could not be of the rank to which 
he pretend to belong. the opinion deliv by M. quesnel, were such 
as st. aubert forebor to repli to, for he knew that hi guest had 
neither human to feel, nor discern to perceive, what is just. 

madam quesnel, meanwhile, wa express to madam st. aubert her 
astonishment, that she could bear to pass her life in thi remot 
corner of the world, as she call it, and describing, from a wish, 
probably, of excit envy, the splendour of the balls, banquets, and 
process which had just been given by the court, in honour of the 
nuptial of the duke de joyeus with margaretta of lorrain, the sister 
of the queen. she describ with equal minut the magnific she 
had seen, and that from which she had been excluded; while emily’ 
vivid fancy, as she listen with the ardent curios of youth, 
heighten the scene she heard of; and madam st. aubert, look on 
her family, felt, as a tear stole to her eye, that though splendour may 
grace happiness, virtu onli can bestow it. 

“it is now twelv years, st. aubert,” said M. quesnel, “sinc I 
purchas your famili estate.”—“somewher thereabout,” repli st. 
aubert, suppress a sigh. “it is near five year sinc I have been 
there,” resum quesnel; “for pari and it neighbourhood is the onli 
place in the world to live in, and I am so immers in politics, and 
have so mani affair of moment on my hands, that I find it difficult to 
steal away even for a month or two.” st. aubert remain silent, M. 
quesnel proceeded: “I have sometim wonder how you, who have live 
in the capital, and have been accustom to company, can exist 
elsewhere;—especi in so remot a countri as this, where you can 
neither hear nor see anything, and can in short be scarc consciou 
of life.” 

“I live for my famili and myself,” said st. aubert; “I am now content 
to know onli happiness;—formerli I knew life.” 

“I mean to expend thirti or forti thousand livr on improvements,” 
said M. quesnel, without seem to notic the word of st. aubert; 
“for I design, next summer, to bring here my friends, the duke de 
durefort and the marqui ramont, to pass a month or two with me.” To 
st. aubert’ enquiry, as to these intend improvements, he replied, 
that he should take down the whole east wing of the château, and rais 
upon the site a set of stables. “then I shall build,” said he, “a 
_sall à manger_, a _salon_, a _sall au commune_, and a number of 
room for servants; for at present there is not accommod for a 
third part of my own people.” 

“it accommod our father’ household,” said st. aubert, griev that 
the old mansion wa to be thu improved, “and that wa not a small 
one.” 

“our notion are somewhat enlarg sinc those days,” said M. 
quesnel;—“what wa then thought a decent style of live would not now 
be endured.” even the calm st. aubert blush at these words, but hi 
anger soon yield to contempt. “the ground about the château is 
encumb with trees; I mean to cut some of them down.” 

“cut down the tree too!” said st. aubert. 

“certainly. whi should I not? they interrupt my prospects. there is a 
chesnut which spread it branch befor the whole south side of the 
château, and which is so ancient that they tell me the hollow of it 
trunk will hold a dozen men. your enthusiasm will scarc contend that 
there can be either use, or beauty, in such a sapless old tree as 
this.” 

“good god!” exclaim st. aubert, “you sure will not destroy that 
nobl chesnut, which ha flourish for centuries, the glori of the 
estate! It wa in it matur when the present mansion wa built. how 
often, in my youth, have I climb among it broad branches, and sat 
embow amidst a world of leaves, while the heavi shower ha patter 
above, and not a rain drop reach me! how often I have sat with a book 
in my hand, sometim reading, and sometim look out between the 
branch upon the wide landscape, and the set sun, till twilight 
came, and brought the bird home to their littl nest among the 
leaves! how often—but pardon me,” ad st. aubert, recollect that 
he wa speak to a man who could neither comprehend, nor allow hi 
feelings, “I am talk of time and feel as old-fashion as the 
tast that would spare that vener tree.” 

“it will certainli come down,” said M. quesnel; “I believ I shall 
plant some lombardi poplar among the clump of chesnut, that I shall 
leav of the avenue; madam quesnel is partial to the poplar, and tell 
me how much it adorn a villa of her uncle, not far from venice.” 

“on the bank of the brenta, indeed,” continu st. aubert, “where it 
spiri form is intermingl with the pine, and the cypress, and where it 
play over light and eleg portico and colonnades, it, 
unquestionably, adorn the scene; but among the giant of the forest, 
and near a heavi gothic mansion—” 

“well, my good sir,” said M. quesnel, “I will not disput with you. you 
must return to pari befor our idea can at all agree. but _à propos_ 
of venice, I have some thought of go thither, next summer; event 
may call me to take possess of that same villa, too, which they tell 
me is the most charm that can be imagined. In that case I shall 
leav the improv I mention to anoth year, and I may, perhaps, 
be tempt to stay some time in italy.” 

emili wa somewhat surpris to hear him talk of be tempt to 
remain abroad, after he had mention hi presenc to be so necessari 
at paris, that it wa with difficulti he could steal away for a month 
or two; but st. aubert understood the self-import of the man too 
well to wonder at thi trait; and the possibility, that these project 
improv might be deferred, gave him a hope, that they might never 
take place. 

befor they separ for the night, M. quesnel desir to speak with 
st. aubert alone, and they retir to anoth room, where they remain 
a consider time. the subject of thi convers wa not known; 
but, whatev it might be, st. aubert, when he return to the 
supper-room, seem much disturbed, and a shade of sorrow sometim 
fell upon hi featur that alarm madam st. aubert. when they were 
alon she wa tempt to enquir the occas of it, but the delicaci 
of mind, which had ever appear in hi conduct, restrain her: she 
consid that, if st. aubert wish her to be acquaint with the 
subject of hi concern, he would not wait on her enquiries. 

On the follow day, befor M. quesnel departed, he had a second 
confer with st. aubert. 

the guests, after dine at the château, set out in the cool of the day 
for epourville, whither they gave him and madam st. aubert a press 
invitation, prompt rather by the vaniti of display their 
splendour, than by a wish to make their friend happy. 

emili returned, with delight, to the liberti which their presenc had 
restrained, to her books, her walks, and the ration convers of 
M. and madam st. aubert, who seem to rejoice, no less, that they 
were deliv from the shackles, which arrog and frivol had 
imposed. 

madam st. aubert excus herself from share their usual even 
walk, complain that she wa not quit well, and st. aubert and emili 
went out together. 

they chose a walk toward the mountains, intend to visit some old 
pension of st. aubert, which, from hi veri moder income, he 
contriv to support, though it is probabl M. quesnel, with hi veri 
larg one, could not have afford this. 

after distribut to hi pension their weekli stipends, listen 
patient to the complaint of some, redress the grievanc of 
others, and soften the discont of all, by the look of sympathy, 
and the smile of benevolence, st. aubert return home through the 
woods, 

where, 
At fall of eve the fairy-peopl throng, 
In variou game and revelri to pass 
the summer night, as villag stori tell. 
thomson 


“the even gloom of wood wa alway delight to me,” said st. 
aubert, whose mind now experienc the sweet calm, which result from 
the conscious of have done a benefic action, and which 
dispos it to receiv pleasur from everi surround object. “I 
rememb that in my youth thi gloom use to call forth to my fanci a 
thousand fairi visions, and romant images; and, I own, I am not yet 
wholli insens of that high enthusiasm, which wake the poet’ 
dream: I can linger, with solemn steps, under the deep shades, send 
forward a transform eye into the distant obscurity, and listen with 
thrill delight to the mystic murmur of the woods.” 

“O my dear father,” said emily, while a sudden tear start to her eye, 
“how exactli you describ what I have felt so often, and which I 
thought nobodi had ever felt but myself! but hark! here come the 
sweep sound over the wood-tops;—now it die away;—how solemn the 
still that succeeds! now the breez swell again. It is like the 
voic of some supernatur being—th voic of the spirit of the woods, 
that watch over them by night. ah! what light is yonder? but it is 
gone. and now it gleam again, near the root of that larg chestnut: 
look, sir!” 

“are you such an admir of nature,” said st. aubert, “and so littl 
acquaint with her appear as not to know that for the glow-worm? 
but come,” ad he gaily, “step a littl further, and we shall see 
fairies, perhaps; they are often companions. the glow-worm lend hi 
light, and they in return charm him with music, and the dance. Do you 
see noth trip yonder?” 

emili laughed. “well, my dear sir,” said she, “sinc you allow of thi 
alliance, I may ventur to own I have anticip you; and almost dare 
ventur to repeat some vers I made one even in these veri woods.” 

“nay,” repli st. aubert, “dismiss the _almost_, and ventur quite; 
let us hear what vagari fanci ha been play in your mind. If she 
ha given you one of her spells, you need not envi those of the 
fairies.” 

“if it is strong enough to enchant your judgment, sir,” said emily, 
“while I disclos her images, I need _not_ envi them. the line go in a 
sort of trip measure, which I thought might suit the subject well 
enough, but I fear they are too irregular.” 

the glow-worm. 

how pleasant is the green-wood’ deep-mat shade 
On a mid-summer’ eve, when the fresh rain is o’er; 
when the yellow beam slope, and sparkl thro’ the glade, 
and swiftli in the thin air the light swallow soar! 

but sweeter, sweeter still, when the sun sink to rest, 
and twilight come on, with the fairi so gay 
trip through the forest-walk, where flow’rs, unprest, 
bow not their tall head beneath their frolic play. 

To music’ softest sound they danc away the hour, 
till moonlight steal down among the trembl leaves, 
and checquer all the ground, and guid them to the bow’r, 
the long haunt bow’r, where the nightingal grieves. 

then no more they dance, till her sad song is done, 
but, silent as the night, to her mourn attend; 
and often as her die note their piti have won, 
they vow all her sacr haunt from mortal to defend. 

when, down among the mountains, sink the ev’n star, 
and the chang moon forsak thi shadowi sphere, 
how cheerless would they be, tho’ they fairi are, 
If I, with my pale light, came not near! 

yet cheerless tho’ they’d be, they’r ungrat to my love! 
for, often when the traveller’ benight on hi way, 
and I glimmer in hi path, and would guid him thro’ the grove, 
they bind me in their magic spell to lead him far astray; 

and in the mire to leav him, till the star are all burnt out, 
while, in strange-look shapes, they frisk about the ground, 
and, afar in the woods, they rais a dismal shout, 
till I shrink into my cell again for terror of the sound! 

but, see where all the tini elv come danc in a ring, 
with the merry, merri pipe, and the tabor, and the horn, 
and the timbrel so clear, and the lute with dulcet string; 
then round about the oak they go till peep of the morn. 

down yonder glade two lover steal, to shun the fairy-queen, 
who frown upon their plight vows, and jealou is of me, 
that yester-ev I light them, along the dewi green, 
To seek the purpl flow’r, whose juic from all her spell can free. 

and now, to punish me, she keep afar her jocund band, 
with the merry, merri pipe, and the tabor, and the lute; 
If I creep near yonder oak she will wave her fairi wand, 
and to me the danc will cease, and the music all be mute. 

O! had I but that purpl flow’r whose leav her charm can foil, 
and knew like fay to draw the juice, and throw it on the wind, 
i’d be her slave no longer, nor the travel beguile, 
and help all faith lovers, nor fear the fairi kind! 

but soon the _vapour of the woods_ will wander afar, 
and the fickl moon will fade, and the star disappear, 
then, cheerless will they be, tho’ they fairi are, 
If I, with my pale light, come not near! 


whatev st. aubert might think of the stanzas, he would not deni hi 
daughter the pleasur of believ that he approv them; and, have 
given hi commendation, he sunk into a reverie, and they walk on in 
silence. 

A faint erron ray, 
glanc’d from th’ imperfect surfac of things, 
flung half an imag on the strain eye; 
while wave woods, and villages, and streams, 
and rocks, and mountain-tops, that long retain 
the ascend gleam, are all one swim scene, 
uncertain if beheld. 
thomson. 


st. aubert continu silent till he reach the château, where hi wife 
had retir to her chamber. the languor and dejection, that had late 
oppress her, and which the exert call forth by the arriv of 
her guest had suspended, now return with increas effect. On the 
follow day, symptom of fever appeared, and st. aubert, have sent 
for medic advice, learned, that her disord wa a fever of the same 
natur as that, from which he had late recovered. she had, indeed, 
taken the infection, dure her attend upon him, and, her 
constitut be too weak to throw out the diseas immediately, it 
had lurk in her veins, and occas the heavi languor of which she 
had complained. st. aubert, whose anxieti for hi wife overcam everi 
other consideration, detain the physician in hi house. He rememb 
the feel and the reflect that had call a momentari gloom upon 
hi mind, on the day when he had last visit the fishing-house, in 
compani with madam st. aubert, and he now admit a presentiment, 
that thi ill would be a fatal one. but he effectu conceal 
thi from her, and from hi daughter, whom he endeavour to reanim 
with hope that her constant assidu would not be unavailing. the 
physician, when ask by st. aubert for hi opinion of the disorder, 
replied, that the event of it depend upon circumst which he 
could not ascertain. madam st. aubert seem to have form a more 
decid one; but her eye onli gave hint of this. she frequent fix 
them upon her anxiou friend with an express of pity, and of 
tenderness, as if she anticip the sorrow that await them, and 
that seem to say, it wa for their sake only, for their sufferings, 
that she regret life. On the seventh day, the disord wa at it 
crisis. the physician assum a graver manner, which she observed, and 
took occasion, when her famili had onc quit the chamber, to tell 
him, that she perceiv her death wa approaching. “do not attempt to 
deceiv me,” said she, “I feel that I cannot long survive. I am 
prepar for the event, I have long, I hope, been prepar for it. 
sinc I have not long to live, do not suffer a mistaken compass to 
induc you to flatter my famili with fals hopes. If you do, their 
afflict will onli be the heavier when it arrives: I will endeavour 
to teach them resign by my example.” 

the physician wa affected; he promis to obey her, and told st. 
aubert, somewhat abruptly, that there wa noth to expect. the latter 
wa not philosoph enough to restrain hi feel when he receiv 
thi information; but a consider of the increas afflict which 
the observ of hi grief would occas hi wife, enabl him, after 
some time, to command himself in her presence. emili wa at first 
overwhelm with the intelligence; then, delud by the strength of her 
wishes, a hope sprung up in her mind that her mother would yet recover, 
and to thi she pertinaci adher almost to the last hour. 

the progress of thi disord wa marked, on the side of madam st. 
aubert, by patient suffering, and subject wishes. the composure, with 
which she await her death, could be deriv onli from the retrospect 
of a life governed, as far as human frailti permits, by a conscious 
of be alway in the presenc of the deity, and by the hope of a 
higher world. but her pieti could not entir subdu the grief of 
part from those whom she so dearli loved. dure these her last 
hours, she convers much with st. aubert and emily, on the prospect of 
futurity, and on other religi topics. the resign she expressed, 
with the firm hope of meet in a futur world the friend she left in 
this, and the effort which sometim appear to conceal her sorrow at 
thi temporari separation, frequent affect st. aubert so much as to 
oblig him to leav the room. have indulg hi tear a while, he 
would dri them and return to the chamber with a counten compos by 
an endeavour which did but increas hi grief. 

never had emili felt the import of the lessons, which had taught 
her to restrain her sensibility, so much as in these moments, and never 
had she practis them with a triumph so complete. but when the last 
wa over, she sunk at onc under the pressur of her sorrow, and then 
perceiv that it wa hope, as well as fortitude, which had hitherto 
support her. st. aubert wa for a time too devoid of comfort himself 
to bestow ani on hi daughter. 



chapter II 

I could a tale unfold, whose lightest word 
would harrow up thi soul. 
shakespear 


madam st. aubert wa inter in the neighbour villag church; her 
husband and daughter attend her to the grave, follow by a long 
train of the peasantry, who were sincer mourner of thi excel 
woman. 

On hi return from the funeral, st. aubert shut himself in hi chamber. 
when he came forth, it wa with a seren countenance, though pale in 
sorrow. He gave order that hi famili should attend him. emili onli 
wa absent; who, overcom with the scene she had just witnessed, had 
retir to her closet to weep alone. st. aubert follow her thither: 
he took her hand in silence, while she continu to weep; and it wa 
some moment befor he could so far command hi voic as to speak. It 
trembl while he said, “mi emily, I am go to prayer with my 
family; you will join us. We must ask support from above. where els 
ought we to seek it—wher els can we find it?” 

emili check her tears, and follow her father to the parlour, where, 
the servant be assembled, st. aubert read, in a low and solemn 
voice, the even service, and ad a prayer for the soul of the 
departed. dure this, hi voic often faltered, hi tear fell upon 
the book, and at length he paused. but the sublim emot of pure 
devot gradual elev hi view abov thi world, and final 
brought comfort to hi heart. 

when the servic wa ended, and the servant were withdrawn, he 
tenderli kiss emily, and said, “I have endeavour to teach you, from 
your earliest youth, the duti of self-command; I have point out to 
you the great import of it through life, not onli as it preserv 
us in the variou and danger temptat that call us from rectitud 
and virtue, but as it limit the indulg which are term virtuous, 
yet which, extend beyond a certain boundary, are vicious, for their 
consequ is evil. all excess is vicious; even that sorrow, which is 
amiabl in it origin, becom a selfish and unjust passion, if 
indulg at the expenc of our duties—bi our duti I mean what we owe 
to ourselves, as well as to others. the indulg of excess grief 
enerv the mind, and almost incapacit it for again partak of 
those variou innoc enjoy which a benevol god design to be 
the sunshin of our lives. My dear emily, recollect and practis the 
precept I have so often given you, and which your own experi ha 
so often shown you to be wise. 

“your sorrow is useless. Do not receiv thi as mere a commonplac 
remark, but let reason _therefore_ restrain sorrow. I would not 
annihil your feelings, my child, I would onli teach you to command 
them; for whatev may be the evil result from a too suscept 
heart, noth can be hope from an insens one; that, on the other 
hand, is all vice—vice, of which the deform is not softened, or the 
effect consol for, by ani semblanc or possibl of good. you know 
my sufferings, and are, therefore, convinc that mine are not the 
light word which, on these occasions, are so often repeat to destroy 
even the sourc of honest emotion, or which mere display the selfish 
ostent of a fals philosophy. I will show my emily, that I can 
practis what I advise. I have said thu much, becaus I cannot bear to 
see you wast in useless sorrow, for want of that resist which is 
due from mind; and I have not said it till now, becaus there is a 
period when all reason must yield to nature; that is past: and 
another, when excess indulgence, have sunk into habit, weigh down 
the elast of the spirit so as to render conquest nearli 
impossible; thi is to come. you, my emily, will show that you are 
will to avoid it.” 

emili smile through her tear upon her father: “dear sir,” said she, 
and her voic trembled; she would have added, “I will show myself 
worthi of be your daughter;” but a mingl emot of gratitude, 
affection, and grief overcam her. st. aubert suffer her to weep 
without interruption, and then began to talk on common topics. 

the first person who came to condol with st. aubert wa a M. barreaux, 
an auster and seemingli unfeel man. A tast for botani had 
introduc them to each other, for they had frequent met in their 
wander among the mountains. M. barreaux had retir from the world, 
and almost from society, to live in a pleasant château, on the skirt 
of the woods, near La vallée. He also had been disappoint in hi 
opinion of mankind; but he did not, like st. aubert, piti and mourn for 
them; he felt more indign at their vices, than compass for 
their weaknesses. 

st. aubert wa somewhat surpris to see him; for, though he had often 
press him to come to the château, he had never till now accept the 
invitation; and now he came without ceremoni or reserve, enter the 
parlour as an old friend. the claim of misfortun appear to have 
soften down all the rugged and prejudic of hi heart. st. 
aubert unhappy, seem to be the sole idea that occupi hi mind. It 
wa in manners, more than in words, that he appear to sympathis with 
hi friends: he spoke littl on the subject of their grief; but the 
minut attent he gave them, and the modul voice, and soften 
look that accompani it, came from hi heart, and spoke to theirs. 

At thi melancholi period st. aubert wa likewis visit by madam 
cheron, hi onli surviv sister, who had been some year a widow, and 
now resid on her own estat near thoulouse. the intercours between 
them had not been veri frequent. In her condolements, word were not 
wanting; she understood not the magic of the look that speak at onc 
to the soul, or the voic that sink like balm to the heart: but she 
assur st. aubert that she sincer sympathis with him, prais the 
virtu of hi late wife, and then offer what she consid to be 
consolation. emili wept unceasingli while she spoke; st. aubert wa 
tranquil, listen to what she said in silence, and then turn the 
discours upon anoth subject. 

At part she press him and her niec to make her an earli visit. 
“chang of place will amus you,” said she, “and it is wrong to give 
way to grief.” st. aubert acknowledg the truth of these word of 
course; but, at the same time, felt more reluct than ever to quit 
the spot which hi past happi had consecrated. the presenc of hi 
wife had sanctifi everi surround scene, and, each day, as it 
gradual soften the acut of hi suffering, assist the tender 
enchant that bound him to home. 

but there were call which must be compli with, and of thi kind wa 
the visit he paid to hi brother-in-law M. quesnel. An affair of an 
interest natur made it necessari that he should delay thi visit no 
longer, and, wish to rous emili from her dejection, he took her 
with him to epourville. 

As the carriag enter upon the forest that adjoin hi patern 
domain, hi eye onc more caught, between the chesnut avenue, the 
turret corner of the château. He sigh to think of what had pass 
sinc he wa last there, and that it wa now the properti of a man who 
neither rever nor valu it. At length he enter the avenue, whose 
lofti tree had so often delight him when a boy, and whose melancholi 
shade wa now so congeni with the tone of hi spirits. everi featur 
of the edifice, distinguish by an air of heavi grandeur, appear 
success between the branch of the trees—th broad turret, the 
arch gateway that led into the courts, the drawbridge, and the dri 
fossé which surround the whole. 

the sound of carriag wheel brought a troop of servant to the great 
gate, where st. aubert alighted, and from which he led emili into the 
gothic hall, now no longer hung with the arm and ancient banner of 
the family. these were displaced, and the oak wainscotting, and beam 
that cross the roof, were paint white. the larg table, too, that 
use to stretch along the upper end of the hall, where the master of 
the mansion love to display hi hospitality, and whenc the peal of 
laughter, and the song of convivi had so often resounded, wa now 
removed; even the bench that had surround the hall were no longer 
there. the heavi wall were hung with frivol ornaments, and 
everyth that appear denot the fals tast and corrupt 
sentiment of the present owner. 

st. aubert follow a gay parisian servant to a parlour, where sat 
mons. and madam quesnel, who receiv him with a state politeness, 
and, after a few formal word of condolement, seem to have forgotten 
that they ever had a sister. 

emili felt tear swell into her eyes, and then resent check them. 
st. aubert, calm and deliberate, preserv hi digniti without assum 
importance, and quesnel wa depress by hi presenc without exactli 
know wherefore. 

after some gener conversation, st. aubert request to speak with him 
alone; and emily, be left with madam quesnel, soon learn that a 
larg parti wa invit to dine at the château, and wa compel to 
hear that noth which wa past and irremedi ought to prevent the 
festiv of the present hour. 

st. aubert, when he wa told that compani were expected, felt a mix 
emot of disgust and indign against the insens of 
quesnel, which prompt him to return home immediately. but he wa 
informed, that madam cheron had been ask to meet him; and, when he 
look at emily, and consid that a time might come when the enmiti 
of her uncl would be prejudici to her, he determin not to incur it 
himself, by conduct which would be resent as indecorous, by the veri 
person who now show so littl sens of decorum. 

among the visitor assembl at dinner were two italian gentlemen, of 
whom one wa name montoni, a distant relat of madam quesnel, a man 
about forty, of an uncommonli handsom person, with featur manli and 
expressive, but whose counten exhibited, upon the whole, more of 
the haughti of command, and the quick of discernment, than of 
ani other character. 

signor cavigni, hi friend, appear to be about thirty—inferior in 
dignity, but equal to him in penetr of countenance, and superior 
in insinu of manner. 

emili wa shock by the salut with which madam cheron met her 
father—“dear brother,” said she, “I am concern to see you look so 
veri ill; do, pray, have advice!” st. aubert answered, with a 
melancholi smile, that he felt himself much as usual; but emily’ fear 
made her now fanci that her father look wors than he realli did. 

emili would have been amus by the new charact she saw, and the 
vari convers that pass dure dinner, which wa serv in a 
style of splendour she had seldom seen before, had her spirit been 
less oppressed. Of the guests, signor montoni wa late come from 
italy, and he spoke of the commot which at that period agit the 
country; talk of parti differ with warmth, and then lament the 
probabl consequ of the tumults. hi friend spoke with equal 
ardour, of the polit of hi country; prais the govern and 
prosper of venice, and boast of it decid superior over all 
the other italian states. He then turn to the ladies, and talk with 
the same eloquence, of parisian fashions, the french opera, and french 
manners; and on the latter subject he did not fail to mingl what is so 
particularli agreeabl to french taste. the flatteri wa not detect 
by those to whom it wa addressed, though it effect, in produc 
submiss attention, did not escap hi observation. when he could 
disengag himself from the assidu of the other ladies, he 
sometim address emily: but she knew noth of parisian fashions, 
or parisian operas; and her modesty, simplicity, and correct manner 
form a decid contrast to those of her femal companions. 

after dinner, st. aubert stole from the room to view onc more the old 
chesnut which quesnel talk of cut down. As he stood under it 
shade, and look up among it branches, still luxuriant, and saw here 
and there the blue sky trembl between them; the pursuit and event 
of hi earli day crowd fast to hi mind, with the figur and 
charact of friends—long sinc gone from the earth; and he now felt 
himself to be almost an insul being, with nobodi but hi emili for 
hi heart to turn to. 

He stood lost amid the scene of year which fanci call up, till the 
success close with the pictur of hi die wife, and he start 
away, to forget it, if possible, at the social board. 

st. aubert order hi carriag at an earli hour, and emili observed, 
that he wa more than usual silent and deject on the way home; but 
she consid thi to be the effect of hi visit to a place which 
spoke so eloqu of former times, nor suspect that he had a caus 
of grief which he conceal from her. 

On enter the château she felt more depress than ever, for she more 
than ever miss the presenc of that dear parent, who, whenev she 
had been from home, use to welcom her return with smile and 
fondness; now, all wa silent and forsaken. 

but what reason and effort may fail to do, time effects. week after 
week pass away, and each, as it passed, stole someth from the 
harsh of her affliction, till it wa mellow to that tender 
which the feel heart cherish as sacred. st. aubert, on the 
contrary, visibl declin in health; though emily, who had been so 
constantli with him, wa almost the last person who observ it. hi 
constitut had never recov from the late attack of the fever, and 
the succeed shock it receiv from madam st. aubert’ death had 
produc it present infirmity. hi physician now order him to 
travel; for it wa percept that sorrow had seiz upon hi nerves, 
weaken as they had been by the preced illness; and varieti of 
scene, it wa probable, would, by amus hi mind, restor them to 
their proper tone. 

for some day emili wa occupi in prepar to attend him; and he, 
by endeavour to diminish hi expenc at home dure the journey—a 
purpos which determin him at length to dismiss hi domestics. emili 
seldom oppos her father’ wish by question or remonstrances, or 
she would now have ask whi he did not take a servant, and have 
repres that hi infirm health made one almost necessary. but when, 
on the eve of their departure, she found that he had dismiss jacques, 
francis, and mary, and detain onli theresa the old housekeeper, she 
wa extrem surprised, and ventur to ask hi reason for have done 
so. “to save expences, my dear,” he replied—“w are go on an 
expens excursion.” 

the physician had prescrib the air of languedoc and provence; and st. 
aubert determined, therefore, to travel leisur along the shore of 
the mediterranean, toward provence. 

they retir earli to their chamber on the night befor their 
departure; but emili had a few book and other thing to collect, and 
the clock had struck twelv befor she had finished, or had rememb 
that some of her draw instruments, which she meant to take with her, 
were in the parlour below. As she went to fetch these, she pass her 
father’ room, and, perceiv the door half open, conclud that he 
wa in hi study—for, sinc the death of madam st. aubert, it had been 
frequent hi custom to rise from hi restless bed, and go thither to 
compos hi mind. when she wa below stair she look into thi room, 
but without find him; and as she return to her chamber, she tap 
at hi door, and receiv no answer, step softli in, to be certain 
whether he wa there. 

the room wa dark, but a light glimmer through some pane of glass 
that were place in the upper part of a closet-door. emili believ her 
father to be in the closet, and, surpris that he wa up at so late an 
hour, apprehend he wa unwell, and wa go to enquire; but, 
consid that her sudden appear at thi hour might alarm him, 
she remov her light to the staircase, and then step softli to the 
closet. On look through the pane of glass, she saw him seat at a 
small table, with paper befor him, some of which he wa read with 
deep attent and interest, dure which he often wept and sob 
aloud. emily, who had come to the door to learn whether her father wa 
ill, wa now detain there by a mixtur of curios and tenderness. 
she could not wit hi sorrow, without be anxiou to know the 
subject of; and she therefor continu to observ him in silence, 
conclud that those paper were letter of her late mother. present 
he knelt down, and with a look so solemn as she had seldom seen him 
assume, and which wa mingl with a certain wild expression, that 
partook more of horror than of ani other character, he pray silent 
for a consider time. 

when he rose, a ghastli pale wa on hi countenance. emili wa 
hastili retiring; but she saw him turn again to the papers, and she 
stopped. He took from among them a small case, and from thenc a 
miniatur picture. the ray of light fell strongli upon it, and she 
perceiv it to be that of a lady, but not of her mother. 

st. aubert gaze earnestli and tenderli upon hi portrait, put it to 
hi lips, and then to hi heart, and sigh with a convuls force. 
emili could scarc believ what she saw to be real. she never knew 
till now that he had a pictur of ani other ladi than her mother, much 
less that he had one which he evid valu so highly; but have 
look repeatedly, to be certain that it wa not the resembl of 
madam st. aubert, she becam entir convinc that it wa design 
for that of some other person. 

At length st. aubert return the pictur to it case; and emily, 
recollect that she wa intrud upon hi privat sorrows, softli 
withdrew from the chamber. 



chapter iii 

O how canst thou renounc the boundless store 
Of charm which natur to her vot’ri yields! 
the warbl woodland, the resound shore, 
the pomp of groves, and garnitur of fields; 
all that the genial ray of morn gilds, 
and all that echo to the song of even; 
all that the mountain’ shelt’r bosom shields, 
and all the dread magnific of heaven; 
O how canst thou renounce, and hope to be forgiven! 
..... 
these charm shall work thi soul’ etern health, 
and love, and gentleness, and joy, impart. 
the minstrel 


st. aubert, instead of take the more direct road, that ran along the 
feet of the pyrene to languedoc, chose one that, wind over the 
heights, afford more extens view and greater varieti of romant 
scenery. He turn a littl out of hi way to take leav of M. 
barreaux, whom he found botan in the wood near hi château, and 
who, when he wa told the purpos of st. aubert’ visit, express a 
degre of concern, such as hi friend had thought it wa scarc 
possibl for him to feel on ani similar occasion. they part with 
mutual regret. 

“if anyth could have tempt me from my retirement,” said M. 
barreaux, “it would have been the pleasur of accompani you on thi 
littl tour. I do not often offer compliments; you may, therefore, 
believ me, when I say, that I shall look for your return with 
impatience.” 

the travel proceed on their journey. As they ascend the 
heights, st. aubert often look back upon the château, in the plain 
below; tender imag crowd to hi mind; hi melancholi imagin 
suggest that he should return no more; and though he check thi 
wander thought, still he continu to look, till the hazi of 
distanc blend hi home with the gener landscape, and st. aubert 
seem to 

drag at each remov a lengthen chain. 


He and emili continu sunk in muse silenc for some leagues, from 
which melancholi reveri emili first awoke, and her young fancy, struck 
with the grandeur of the object around, gradual yield to 
delight impressions. the road now descend into glens, confin by 
stupend wall of rock, grey and barren, except where shrub fring 
their summits, or patch of meagr veget tint their recesses, 
in which the wild goat wa frequent browsing. and now, the way led to 
the lofti cliffs, from whenc the landscap wa seen extend in all 
it magnificence. 

emili could not restrain her transport as she look over the pine 
forest of the mountain upon the vast plains, that, enrich with 
woods, towns, blush vines, and plantat of almonds, palms, and 
olives, stretch along, till their variou colour melt in distanc 
into one harmoni hue, that seem to unit earth with heaven. 
through the whole of thi gloriou scene the majest garonn wandered; 
descend from it sourc among the pyrenees, and wind it blue 
wave toward the bay of biscay. 

the rugged of the unfrequ road often oblig the wander to 
alight from their littl carriage, but they thought themselv ampli 
repaid for thi inconveni by the grandeur of the scenes; and, while 
the mulet led hi anim slowli over the broken ground, the 
travel had leisur to linger amid these solitudes, and to indulg 
the sublim reflections, which soften, while they elevate, the heart, 
and fill it with the certainti of a present god! still the enjoy of 
st. aubert wa touch with that pensiv melancholy, which give to 
everi object a mellow tint, and breath a sacr charm over all 
around. 

they had provid against part of the evil to be encount from a 
want of conveni inns, by carri a stock of provis in the 
carriage, so that they might take refresh on ani pleasant spot, in 
the open air, and pass the night wherev they should happen to meet 
with a comfort cottage. for the mind, also, they had provided, by a 
work on botany, written by M. barreaux, and by sever of the latin and 
italian poets; while emily’ pencil enabl her to preserv some of 
those combin of forms, which charm her at everi step. 

the loneli of the road, where, onli now and then, a peasant wa 
seen drive hi mule, or some mountaineer-children at play among the 
rocks, heighten the effect of the scenery. st. aubert wa so much 
struck with it, that he determined, if he could hear of a road, to 
penetr further among the mountains, and, bend hi way rather more 
to the south, to emerg into rousillon, and coast the mediterranean 
along part of that countri to languedoc. 

soon after mid-day, they reach the summit of one of those cliffs, 
which, bright with the verdur of palm-trees, adorn, like gems, the 
tremend wall of the rocks, and which overlook the greater part of 
gascony, and part of languedoc. here wa shade, and the fresh water of 
a spring, that, glide among the turf, under the trees, thenc 
precipit itself from rock to rock, till it dash murmur were 
lost in the abyss, though it white foam wa long seen amid the 
dark of the pine below. 

thi wa a spot well suit for rest, and the travel alight to 
dine, while the mule were unhar to brows on the savouri herb 
that enrich thi summit. 

It wa some time befor st. aubert or emili could withdraw their 
attent from the surround objects, so as to partak of their 
littl repast. seat in the shade of the palms, st. aubert point out 
to her observ the cours of the rivers, the situat of great 
towns, and the boundari of provinces, which science, rather than the 
eye, enabl him to describe. notwithstand thi occupation, when he 
had talk awhil he suddenli becam silent, thoughtful, and tear 
often swell to hi eyes, which emili observed, and the sympathi of 
her own heart told her their cause. the scene befor them bore some 
resemblance, though it wa on a much grander scale, to a favourit one 
of the late madam st. aubert, within view of the fishing-house. they 
both observ this, and thought how delight she would have been with 
the present landscape, while they knew that her eye must never, never 
more open upon thi world. st. aubert rememb the last time of hi 
visit that spot in compani with her, and also the mourn 
presag thought which had then arisen in hi mind, and were now, 
even thu soon, realised! the recollect subdu him, and he 
abruptli rose from hi seat, and walk away to where no eye could 
observ hi grief. 

when he returned, hi counten had recov it usual serenity; he 
took emily’ hand, press it affectionately, without speaking, and 
soon after call to the muleteer, who sat at a littl distance, 
concern a road among the mountain toward rousillon. michael said, 
there were sever that way, but he did not know how far they extended, 
or even whether they were passable; and st. aubert, who did not intend 
to travel after sunset, ask what villag they could reach about that 
time. the mulet calcul that they could easili reach mateau, 
which wa in their present road; but that, if they took a road that 
slope more to the south, toward rousillon, there wa a hamlet, which 
he thought they could gain befor the even shut in. 

st. aubert, after some hesitation, determin to take the latter 
course, and michael, have finish hi meal, and har hi mules, 
again set forward, but soon stopped; and st. aubert saw him do 
homag to a cross, that stood on a rock impend over their way. 
have conclud hi devotions, he smack hi whip in the air, and, in 
spite of the rough road, and the pain of hi poor mules, which he had 
been late lamenting, rattled, in a full gallop, along the edg of a 
precipice, which it made the eye dizzi to look down. emili wa 
terrifi almost to fainting; and st. aubert, apprehend still 
greater danger from suddenli stop the driver, wa compel to sit 
quietly, and trust hi fate to the strength and discret of the 
mules, who seem to possess a greater portion of the latter qualiti 
than their master; for they carri the travel safe into the 
valley, and there stop upon the brink of the rivulet that water 
it. 

leav the splendour of extens prospects, they now enter thi 
narrow valley screen by 

rock on rock piled, as if by magic spell, 
here scorch’d by lightnings, there with ivi green. 


the scene of barren wa here and there interrupt by the spread 
branch of the larch and cedar, which threw their gloom over the 
cliff, or athwart the torrent that roll in the vale. No live 
creatur appeared, except the lizard, scrambl among the rocks, and 
often hang upon point so dangerous, that fanci shrunk from the view 
of them. thi wa such a scene as _salvator_ would have chosen, had he 
then existed, for hi canvas; st. aubert, impress by the romant 
charact of the place, almost expect to see banditti start from 
behind some project rock, and he kept hi hand upon the arm with 
which he alway travelled. 

As they advanced, the valley opened; it savag featur gradual 
softened, and, toward evening, they were among heathi mountains, 
stretch in far perspective, along which the solitari sheep-bel wa 
heard, and the voic of the shepherd call hi wander flock to 
the nightli fold. hi cabin, partli shadow by the cork-tre and the 
ilex, which st. aubert observ to flourish in higher region of the 
air than ani other trees, except the fir, wa all the human habit 
that yet appeared. along the bottom of thi valley the most vivid 
verdur wa spread; and, in the littl hollow recess of the 
mountains, under the shade of the oak and chestnut, herd of cattl 
were grazing. group of them, too, were often seen repos on the 
bank of the rivulet, or lave their side in the cool stream, and 
sip it wave. 

the sun wa now set upon the valley; it last light gleam upon 
the water, and heighten the rich yellow and purpl tint of the heath 
and broom, that overspread the mountains. st. aubert enquir of 
michael the distanc to the hamlet he had mentioned, but the man could 
not with certainti tell; and emili began to fear that he had mistaken 
the road. here wa no human be to assist, or direct them; they had 
left the shepherd and hi cabin far behind, and the scene becam so 
obscur in twilight, that the eye could not follow the distant 
perspect of the valley in search of a cottage, or a hamlet. A glow 
of the horizon still mark the west, and thi wa of some littl use 
to the travellers. michael seem endeavour to keep up hi courag 
by singing; hi music, however, wa not of a kind to dispers 
melancholy; he sung, in a sort of chant, one of the most dismal ditti 
hi present auditor had ever heard, and st. aubert at length 
discov it to be a vesper-hymn to hi favourit saint. 

they travel on, sunk in that thought melancholy, with which 
twilight and solitud impress the mind. michael had now end hi 
ditty, and noth wa heard but the drowsi murmur of the breez among 
the woods, and it light flutter, as it blew freshli into the carriage. 
they were at length rous by the sound of fire-arms. st. aubert call 
to the mulet to stop, and they listened. the nois wa not repeated; 
but present they heard a rustl among the brakes. st. aubert drew 
forth a pistol, and order michael to proceed as fast as possible; who 
had not long obeyed, befor a horn sounded, that made the mountain 
ring. He look again from the window, and then saw a young man spring 
from the bush into the road, follow by a coupl of dogs. the 
stranger wa in a hunter’ dress. hi gun wa slung across hi 
shoulders, the hunter’ horn hung from hi belt, and in hi hand wa a 
small pike, which, as he held it, ad to the manli grace of hi 
figure, and assist the agil of hi steps. 

after a moment’ hesitation, st. aubert again stop the carriage, and 
wait till he came up, that they might enquir concern the hamlet 
they were in search of. the stranger inform him, that it wa onli 
half a leagu distant, that he wa go thither himself, and would 
readili show the way. st. aubert thank him for the offer, and, 
pleas with hi chevalier-lik air and open countenance, ask him to 
take a seat in the carriage; which the stranger, with an 
acknowledgment, declined, ad that he would keep pace with the 
mules. “but I fear you will be wretchedli accommodated,” said he: “the 
inhabit of these mountain are a simpl people, who are not onli 
without the luxuri of life, but almost destitut of what in other 
place are held to be it necessaries.” 

“I perceiv you are not one of it inhabitants, sir,” said st. aubert. 

“no, sir, I am onli a wander here.” 

the carriag drove on, and the increas dusk made the travel veri 
thank that they had a guide; the frequent glens, too, that now 
open among the mountains, would likewis have ad to their 
perplexity. emily, as she look up one of these, saw someth at a 
great distanc like a bright cloud in the air. “what light is yonder, 
sir?” said she. 

st. aubert looked, and perceiv that it wa the snowi summit of a 
mountain, so much higher than ani around it, that it still reflect 
the sun’ rays, while those below lay in deep shade. 

At length, the villag light were seen to twinkl through the dusk, 
and, soon after, some cottag were discov in the valley, or rather 
were seen by reflect in the stream, on whose margin they stood, and 
which still gleam with the even light. 

the stranger now came up, and st. aubert, on further enquiry, found not 
onli that there wa no inn in the place, but not ani sort of hous of 
public reception. the stranger, however, offer to walk on, and 
enquir for a cottag to accommod them; for which further civil 
st. aubert return hi thanks, and said, that, as the villag wa so 
near, he would alight, and walk with him. emili follow slowli in the 
carriage. 

On the way, st. aubert ask hi companion what success he had had in 
the chase. “not much, sir,” he replied, “nor do I aim at it. I am 
pleas with the country, and mean to saunter away a few week among 
it scenes. My dog I take with me more for companionship than for 
game. thi dress, too, give me an ostens business, and procur me 
that respect from the people, which would, perhaps, be refus to a 
lone stranger, who had no visibl motiv for come among them.” 

“I admir your taste,” said st. aubert, “and, if I wa a younger man, 
should like to pass a few week in your way exceedingly. I, too, am a 
wanderer, but neither my plan nor pursuit are exactli like yours—i go 
in search of health, as much as of amusement.” st. aubert sighed, and 
paused; and then, seem to recollect himself, he resumed: “if I can 
hear of a toler road, that shall afford decent accommodation, it is 
my intent to pass into rousillon, and along the sea-shor to 
languedoc. you, sir, seem to be acquaint with the country, and can, 
perhaps, give me inform on the subject.” 

the stranger said, that what inform he could give wa entir at 
hi service; and then mention a road rather more to the east, which 
led to a town, whenc it would be easi to proceed into rousillon. 

they now arriv at the village, and commenc their search for a 
cottage, that would afford a night’ lodging. In several, which they 
entered, ignorance, poverty, and mirth seem equal to prevail; and 
the owner eye st. aubert with a mixtur of curios and timidity. 
noth like a bed could be found, and he had ceas to enquir for 
one, when emili join him, who observ the languor of her father’ 
countenance, and lamented, that he had taken a road so ill provid 
with the comfort necessari for an invalid. other cottages, which they 
examined, seem somewhat less savag than the former, consist of 
two rooms, if such they could be called; the first of these occupi by 
mule and pigs, the second by the family, which gener consist of 
six or eight children, with their parents, who slept on bed of skin 
and dri beech leaves, spread upon a mud floor. here, light wa 
admitted, and smoke discharged, through an apertur in the roof; and 
here the scent of spirit (for the travel smugglers, who haunt 
the pyrenees, had made thi rude peopl familiar with the use of 
liquors) wa gener percept enough. emili turn from such 
scenes, and look at her father with anxiou tenderness, which the 
young stranger seem to observe; for, draw st. aubert aside, he 
made him an offer of hi own bed. “it is a decent one,” said he, “when 
compar with what we have just seen, yet such as in other 
circumst I should be asham to offer you.” st. aubert 
acknowledg how much he felt himself oblig by thi kindness, but 
refus to accept it, till the young stranger would take no denial. “do 
not give me the pain of knowing, sir,” said he, “that an invalid, like 
you, lie on hard skins, while I sleep in a bed. besides, sir, your 
refus wound my pride; I must believ you think my offer unworthi 
your acceptance. let me show you the way. I have no doubt my landladi 
can accommod thi young ladi also.” 

st. aubert at length consented, that, if thi could be done, he would 
accept hi kindness, though he felt rather surprised, that the stranger 
had prove himself so defici in gallantry, as to administ to the 
repos of an infirm man, rather than to that of a veri love young 
woman, for he had not onc offer the room for emily. but she thought 
not of herself, and the anim smile she gave him, told how much she 
felt herself oblig for the prefer of her father. 

On their way, the stranger, whose name wa valancourt, step on first 
to speak to hi hostess, and she came out to welcom st. aubert into a 
cottage, much superior to ani he had seen. thi good woman seem veri 
will to accommod the strangers, who were soon compel to accept 
the onli two bed in the place. egg and milk were the onli food the 
cottag afforded; but against scarciti of provis st. aubert had 
provided, and he request valancourt to stay, and partak with him of 
less home fare; an invitation, which wa readili accepted, and they 
pass an hour in intellig conversation. st. aubert wa much pleas 
with the manli frankness, simplicity, and keen suscept to the 
grandeur of nature, which hi new acquaint discovered; and, indeed, 
he had often been heard to say, that, without a certain simplic of 
heart, thi tast could not exist in ani strong degree. 

the convers wa interrupt by a violent uproar without, in which 
the voic of the mulet wa heard abov everi other sound. valancourt 
start from hi seat, and went to enquir the occasion; but the 
disput continu so long afterwards, that st. aubert went himself, and 
found michael quarrel with the hostess, becaus she had refus to 
let hi mule lie in a littl room where he and three of her son were 
to pass the night. the place wa wretch enough, but there wa no 
other for these peopl to sleep in; and, with somewhat more of delicaci 
than wa usual among the inhabit of thi wild tract of country, she 
persist in refus to let the anim have the same _bed-chamber_ 
with her children. thi wa a tender point with the muleteer; hi 
honour wa wound when hi mule were treat with disrespect, and he 
would have receiv a blow, perhaps, with more meekness. He declar 
that hi beast were as honest beasts, and as good beasts, as ani in 
the whole province; and that they had a right to be well treat 
wherev they went. “they are as harmless as lambs,” said he, “if 
peopl don’t affront them. I never knew them behav themselv amiss 
abov onc or twice in my life, and then they had good reason for do 
so. once, indeed, they kick at a boy’ leg that lay asleep in the 
stable, and broke it; but I told them they were out there, and by st. 
anthony! I believ they understood me, for they never did so again.” 

He conclud thi eloqu harangu with protesting, that they should 
share with him, go where he would. 

the disput wa at length settl by valancourt, who drew the hostess 
aside, and desir she would let the mulet and hi beast have the 
place in question to themselves, while her son should have the bed of 
skin design for him, for that he would wrap himself in hi cloak, 
and sleep on the bench by the cottag door. but thi she thought it her 
duti to oppose, and she felt it to be her inclin to disappoint the 
muleteer. valancourt, however, wa positive, and the tediou affair wa 
at length settled. 

It wa late when st. aubert and emili retir to their rooms, and 
valancourt to hi station at the door, which, at thi mild season, he 
prefer to a close cabin and a bed of skins. st. aubert wa somewhat 
surpris to find in hi room volum of homer, horace, and petrarch; 
but the name of valancourt, written in them, told him to whom they 
belonged. 



chapter IV 

In truth he wa a strang and wayward wight, 
fond of each gentle, and each dread scene, 
In darkness, and in storm he found delight; 
nor less than when on ocean-wav seren 
the southern sun diffus’d hi dazzl sheen. 
even sad vicissitud amus’d hi soul; 
and if a sigh would sometim intervene, 
and down hi cheek a tear of piti roll, 
A sigh, a tear, so sweet, he wish’d not to control. 
the minstrel 


st. aubert awok at an earli hour, refresh by sleep, and desir to 
set forward. He invit the stranger to breakfast with him; and, 
talk again of the road, valancourt said, that, some month past, he 
had travel as far as beaujeu, which wa a town of some consequ 
on the way to rousillon. He recommend it to st. aubert to take that 
route, and the latter determin to do so. 

“the road from thi hamlet,” said valancourt, “and that to beaujeu, 
part at the distanc of about a leagu and a half from hence; if you 
will give me leave, I will direct your mulet so far. I must wander 
somewhere, and your compani would make thi a pleasant rambl than 
ani other I could take.” 

st. aubert thank accept hi offer, and they set out together, 
the young stranger on foot, for he refus the invit of st. aubert 
to take a seat in hi littl carriage. 

the road wound along the feet of the mountain through a pastor 
valley, bright with verdure, and vari with grove of dwarf oak, beech 
and sycamore, under whose branch herd of cattl reposed. the 
mountain-ash too, and the weep birch, often threw their pendant 
foliag over the steep above, where the scanti soil scarc conceal 
their roots, and where their light branch wave to everi breez that 
flutter from the mountains. 

the travel were frequent met at thi earli hour, for the sun had 
not yet risen upon the valley, by shepherd drive immens flock from 
their fold to feed upon the hills. st. aubert had set out thu early, 
not onli that he might enjoy the first appear of sunrise, but that 
he might inhal the first pure breath of morning, which abov all 
thing is refresh to the spirit of the invalid. In these region it 
wa particularli so, where an abund of wild flower and aromat 
herb breath forth their essenc on the air. 

the dawn, which soften the sceneri with it peculiar grey tint, now 
dispersed, and emili watch the progress of the day, first trembl 
on the top of the highest cliffs, then touch them with splendid 
light, while their side and the vale below were still wrapt in dewi 
mist. meanwhile, the sullen grey of the eastern cloud began to blush, 
then to redden, and then to glow with a thousand colours, till the 
golden light dart over all the air, touch the lower point of the 
mountain’ brow, and glanc in long slope beam upon the valley and 
it stream. all natur seem to have awaken from death into life; 
the spirit of st. aubert wa renovated. hi heart wa full; he wept, 
and hi thought ascend to the great creator. 

emili wish to trip along the turf, so green and bright with dew, and 
to tast the full delight of that liberty, which the izard seem to 
enjoy as he bound along the brow of the cliffs; while valancourt 
often stop to speak with the travellers, and with social feel to 
point out to them the peculiar object of hi admiration. st. aubert 
wa pleas with him: “here is the real ingenu and ardour of 
youth,” said he to himself; “thi young man ha never been at paris.” 

He wa sorri when they came to the spot where the road parted, and hi 
heart took a more affection leav of him than is usual after so 
short an acquaintance. valancourt talk long by the side of the 
carriage; seem more than onc to be going, but still lingered, and 
appear to search anxious for topic of convers to account for 
hi delay. At length he took leave. As he went, st. aubert observ him 
look with an earnest and pensiv eye at emily, who bow to him with a 
counten full of timid sweetness, while the carriag drove on. st. 
aubert, for whatev reason, soon after look from the window, and saw 
valancourt stand upon the bank of the road, rest on hi pike with 
fold arms, and follow the carriag with hi eyes. He wave hi 
hand, and valancourt, seem to awak from hi reverie, return the 
salute, and start away. 

the aspect of the countri now began to change, and the travel soon 
found themselv among mountain cover from their base nearli to 
their summit with forest of gloomi pine, except where a rock of 
granit shot up from the vale, and lost it snowi top in the clouds. 
the rivulet, which had hitherto accompani them, now expand into a 
river; and, flow deepli and silent along, reflected, as in a 
mirror, the black of the impend shades. sometim a cliff wa 
seen lift it bold head abov the wood and the vapours, that 
float mid-way down the mountains; and sometim a face of 
perpendicular marbl rose from the water’ edge, over which the larch 
threw hi gigant arms, here scath with lightning, and there 
float in luxuri foliage. 

they continu to travel over a rough and unfrequ road, see now 
and then at a distanc the solitari shepherd, with hi dog, stalk 
along the valley, and hear onli the dash of torrents, which the 
wood conceal from the eye, the long sullen murmur of the breeze, as 
it swept over the pines, or the note of the eagl and the vulture, 
which were seen tower round the beetl cliff. 

often, as the carriag move slowli over uneven ground, st. aubert 
alighted, and amus himself with examin the curiou plant that 
grew on the bank of the road, and with which these region abound; 
while emily, wrapt in high enthusiasm, wander away under the shades, 
listen in deep silenc to the lone murmur of the woods. 

neither villag nor hamlet wa seen for mani leagues; the goat-herd’ 
or the hunter’ cabin, perch among the cliff of the rocks, were the 
onli human habit that appeared. 

the travel again took their dinner in the open air, on a pleasant 
spot in the valley, under the spread shade of cedars; and then set 
forward toward beaujeu. 

the road now began to descend, and, leav the pine forest behind, 
wound among rocki precipices. the even twilight again fell over the 
scene, and the travel were ignor how far they might yet be from 
beaujeu. st. aubert, however, conjectur that the distanc could not 
be veri great, and comfort himself with the prospect of travel on 
a more frequent road after reach that town, where he design to 
pass the night. mingl woods, and rocks, and heathi mountain were now 
seen obscur through the dusk; but soon even these imperfect imag 
fade in darkness. michael proceed with caution, for he could 
scarc distinguish the road; hi mules, however, seem to have more 
sagacity, and their step were sure. 

On turn the angl of a mountain, a light appear at a distance, 
that illumin the rocks, and the horizon to a great extent. It wa 
evid a larg fire, but whether accidental, or otherwise, there 
were no mean of knowing. st. aubert thought it wa probabl kindl by 
some of the numer banditti, that infest the pyrenees, and he 
becam watch and anxiou to know whether the road pass near thi 
fire. He had arm with him, which, on an emergency, might afford some 
protection, though certainli a veri unequ one, against a band of 
robbers, so desper too as those usual were who haunt these wild 
regions. while mani reflect rose upon hi mind, he heard a voic 
shout from the road behind, and order the mulet to stop. st. 
aubert bade him proceed as fast as possible; but either michael, or hi 
mule were obstinate, for they did not quit the old pace. horses’ feet 
were now heard; a man rode up to the carriage, still order the 
driver to stop; and st. aubert, who could no longer doubt hi purpose, 
wa with difficulti abl to prepar a pistol for hi defence, when hi 
hand wa upon the door of the chaise. the man stagger on hi horse, 
the report of the pistol wa follow by a groan, and st. aubert’ 
horror may be imagined, when in the next instant he thought he heard 
the faint voic of valancourt. He now himself bade the mulet stop; 
and, pronounc the name of valancourt, wa answer in a voice, that 
no longer suffer him to doubt. st. aubert, who instantli alight and 
went to hi assistance, found him still sit on hi horse, but 
bleed profusely, and appear to be in great pain, though he 
endeavour to soften the terror of st. aubert by assur that he 
wa not materi hurt, the wound be onli in hi arm. st. aubert, 
with the muleteer, assist him to dismount, and he sat down on the 
bank of the road, where st. aubert tri to bind up hi arm, but hi 
hand trembl so excess that he could not accomplish it; and, 
michael be now gone in pursuit of the horse, which, on be 
disengag from hi rider, had gallop off, he call emili to hi 
assistance. receiv no answer, he went to the carriage, and found her 
sunk on the seat in a faint fit. between the distress of thi 
circumst and that of leav valancourt bleeding, he scarc knew 
what he did; he endeavoured, however, to rais her, and call to 
michael to fetch water from the rivulet that flow by the road, but 
michael wa gone beyond the reach of hi voice. valancourt, who heard 
these calls, and also the repeat name of emily, instantli understood 
the subject of hi distress; and, almost forget hi own condition, 
he hasten to her relief. she wa reviv when he reach the 
carriage; and then, understand that anxieti for him had occas 
her indisposition, he assur her, in a voic that trembled, but not 
from anguish, that hi wound wa of no consequence. while he said thi 
st. aubert turn round, and perceiv that he wa still bleeding, the 
subject of hi alarm chang again, and he hastili form some 
handkerchief into a bandage. thi stop the effus of the blood; 
but st. aubert, dread the consequ of the wound, enquir 
repeatedli how far they were from beaujeu; when, learn that it wa 
at two leagues’ distance, hi distress increased, sinc he knew not how 
valancourt, in hi present state, would bear the motion of the 
carriage, and perceiv that he wa alreadi faint from loss of blood. 
when he mention the subject of hi anxiety, valancourt entreat that 
he would not suffer himself to be thu alarm on hi account, for that 
he had no doubt he should be abl to support himself veri well; and 
then he talk of the accid as a slight one. the mulet be now 
return with valancourt’ horse, assist him into the chaise; and, as 
emili wa now revived, they move slowli on toward beaujeu. 

st. aubert, when he had recov from the terror occas him by 
thi accident, express surpris on see valancourt, who explain 
hi unexpect appear by saying, “you, sir, renew my tast for 
society; when you had left the hamlet, it did inde appear a solitude. 
I determined, therefore, sinc my object wa mere amusement, to 
chang the scene; and I took thi road, becaus I knew it led through a 
more romant tract of mountain than the spot I have left. besides,” 
ad he, hesit for an instant, “I will own, and whi should I not? 
that I had some hope of overtak you.” 

“and I have made you a veri unexpect return for the compliment,” said 
st. aubert, who lament again the rash which had produc the 
accident, and explain the caus of hi late alarm. but valancourt 
seem anxiou onli to remov from the mind of hi companion everi 
unpleas feel rel to himself; and, for that purpose, still 
struggl against a sens of pain, and tri to convers with gaiety. 
emili meanwhil wa silent, except when valancourt particularli 
address her, and there wa at those time a tremul tone in hi 
voic that spoke much. 

they were now so near the fire, which had long flame at a distanc on 
the black of night, that it gleam upon the road, and they could 
distinguish figur move about the blaze. the way wind still 
nearer, they perceiv in the valley one of those numer band of 
gipsies, which at that period particularli haunt the wild of the 
pyrenees, and live partli by plunder the traveller. emili look 
with some degre of terror on the savag counten of these people, 
shown by the fire, which heighten the romant effect of the 
scenery, as it threw a red duski gleam upon the rock and on the 
foliag of the trees, leav heavi mass of shade and region of 
obscurity, which the eye fear to penetrate. 

they were prepar their supper; a larg pot stood by the fire, over 
which sever figur were busy. the blaze discov a rude kind of 
tent, round which mani children and dog were playing, and the whole 
form a pictur highli grotesque. the travel saw plainli their 
danger. valancourt wa silent, but laid hi hand on one of st. aubert’ 
pistols; st. aubert drew forth another, and michael wa order to 
proceed as fast as possible. they pass the place, however, without 
be attacked; the rover be probabl unprepar for the 
opportunity, and too busi about their supper to feel much interest, at 
the moment, in anyth besides. 

after a leagu and a half more, pass in darkness, the travel 
arriv at beaujeu, and drove up to the onli inn the place afforded; 
which, though superior to ani they had seen sinc they enter the 
mountains, wa bad enough. 

the surgeon of the town wa immedi sent for, if a surgeon he could 
be called, who prescrib for hors as well as for men, and shave 
face at least as dexter as he set bones. after examin 
valancourt’ arm, and perceiv that the bullet had pass through the 
flesh without touch the bone, he dress it, and left him with a 
solemn prescript of quiet, which hi patient wa not inclin to 
obey. the delight of eas had now succeed to pain; for eas may be 
allow to assum a posit qualiti when contrast with anguish; and, 
hi spirit thu reanimated, he wish to partak of the convers 
of st. aubert and emily, who, releas from so mani apprehensions, were 
uncommonli cheerful. late as it was, however, st. aubert wa oblig to 
go out with the landlord to buy meat for supper; and emily, who, dure 
thi interval, had been absent as long as she could, upon excus of 
look to their accommodation, which she found rather better than she 
expected, wa compel to return, and convers with valancourt alone. 
they talk of the charact of the scene they had passed, of the 
natur histori of the country, of poetry, and of st. aubert; a subject 
on which emili alway spoke and listen to with peculiar pleasure. 

the travel pass an agreeabl evening; but st. aubert wa fatigu 
with hi journey; and, as valancourt seem again sensibl of pain, 
they separ soon after supper. 

In the morn st. aubert found that valancourt had pass a restless 
night; that he wa feverish, and hi wound veri painful. the surgeon, 
when he dress it, advis him to remain quietli at beaujeu; advic 
which wa too reason to be rejected. st. aubert, however, had no 
favour opinion of thi practitioner, and wa anxiou to commit 
valancourt into more skil hands; but learning, upon enquiry, that 
there wa no town within sever leagu which seem more like to 
afford better advice, he alter the plan of hi journey, and 
determin to await the recoveri of valancourt, who, with somewhat more 
ceremoni than sincerity, made mani object to thi delay. 

By order of hi surgeon, valancourt did not go out of the hous that 
day; but st. aubert and emili survey with delight the environ of the 
town, situat at the feet of the pyrenean alps, that rose, some in 
abrupt precipices, and other swell with wood of cedar, fir, and 
cypress, which stretch nearli to their highest summits. the cheer 
green of the beech and mountain-ash wa sometim seen, like a gleam of 
light, amidst the dark verdur of the forest; and sometim a torrent 
pour it sparkl flood, high among the woods. 

valancourt’ indisposit detain the travel at beaujeu sever 
days, dure which interv st. aubert had observ hi disposit and 
hi talent with the philosoph inquiri so natur to him. He saw a 
frank and gener nature, full of ardour, highli suscept of 
whatev is grand and beautiful, but impetuous, wild, and somewhat 
romantic. valancourt had known littl of the world. hi percept 
were clear, and hi feel just; hi indign of an unworthy, or 
hi admir of a gener action, were express in term of equal 
vehemence. st. aubert sometim smile at hi warmth, but seldom 
check it, and often repeat to himself, “thi young man ha never 
been at paris.” A sigh sometim follow thi silent ejaculation. He 
determin not to leav valancourt till he should be perfectli 
recovered; and, as he wa now well enough to travel, though not abl to 
manag hi horse, st. aubert invit him to accompani him for a few 
day in the carriage. thi he the more readili did, sinc he had 
discov that valancourt wa of a famili of the same name in gascony, 
with whose respect he wa well acquainted. the latter accept 
the offer with great pleasure, and they again set forward among these 
romant wild about rousillon. 

they travel leisurely; stop wherev a scene uncommonli grand 
appeared; frequent alight to walk to an eminence, whither the 
mule could not go, from which the prospect open in greater 
magnificence; and often saunter over hillock cover with lavender, 
wild thyme, juniper, and tamarisc; and under the shade of woods, 
between those bole they caught the long mountain-vista, sublim beyond 
anyth that emili had ever imagined. 

st. aubert sometim amus himself with botanizing, while valancourt 
and emili stroll on; he point out to her notic the object that 
particularli charm him, and recit beauti passag from such of 
the latin and italian poet as he had heard her admire. In the paus 
of conversation, when he thought himself not observed, he frequent 
fix hi eye pensiv on her countenance, which express with so 
much anim the tast and energi of her mind; and when he spoke 
again, there wa a peculiar tender in the tone of hi voice, that 
defeat ani attempt to conceal hi sentiments. By degre these silent 
paus becam more frequent; till emily, only, betray an anxieti to 
interrupt them; and she; who had been hitherto reserved, would now talk 
again, and again, of the wood and the valley and the mountains, to 
avoid the danger of sympathi and silence. 

from beaujeu the road had constantli ascended, conduct the 
travel into the higher region of the air, where immens glacier 
exhibit their frozen horrors, and etern snow whiten the summit 
of the mountains. they often paus to contempl these stupend 
scenes, and, seat on some wild cliff, where onli the ilex or the 
larch could flourish, look over dark forest of fir, and precipic 
where human foot had never wandered, into the glen—so deep, that the 
thunder of the torrent, which wa seen to foam along the bottom, wa 
scarc heard to murmur. over these crag rose other of stupend 
height, and fantast shape; some shoot into cones; other impend 
far over their base, in huge mass of granite, along whose broken 
ridg wa often lodg a weight of snow, that, trembl even to the 
vibrat of a sound, threaten to bear destruct in it cours to 
the vale. around, on everi side, far as the eye could penetrate, were 
seen onli form of grandeur—th long perspect of mountain-tops, 
ting with ether blue, or white with snow; valley of ice, and 
forest of gloomi fir. the seren and clear of the air in these 
high region were particularli delight to the travellers; it seem 
to inspir them with a finer spirit, and diffus an indescrib 
complac over their minds. they had no word to express the sublim 
emot they felt. A solemn express characteris the feel of 
st. aubert; tear often came to hi eyes, and he frequent walk away 
from hi companions. valancourt now and then spoke, to point to emily’ 
notic some featur of the scene. the thin of the atmosphere, 
through which everi object came so distinctli to the eye, surpris and 
delud her; who could scarc believ that objects, which appear so 
near, were, in reality, so distant. the deep silenc of these solitud 
wa broken onli at interv by the scream of the vultures, seen 
cower round some cliff below, or by the cri of the eagl sail 
high in the air; except when the travel listen to the hollow 
thunder that sometim mutter at their feet. while, above, the deep 
blue of the heaven wa unobscur by the lightest cloud, half way down 
the mountains, long billow of vapour were frequent seen rolling, now 
wholli exclud the countri below, and now opening, and partial 
reveal it features. emili delight to observ the grandeur of 
these cloud as they chang in shape and tints, and to watch their 
variou effect on the lower world, whose features, partli veiled, were 
continu assum new form of sublimity. 

after travers these region for mani leagues, they began to descend 
toward rousillon, and featur of beauti then mingl with the scene. 
yet the travel did not look back without some regret to the sublim 
object they had quitted; though the eye, fatigu with the extens 
of it powers, wa glad to repos on the verdur of wood and pastures, 
that now hung on the margin of the river below; to view again the 
humbl cottag shade by cedars, the play group of 
mountaineer-children, and the floweri nook that appear among the 
hills. 

As they descended, they saw at a distance, on the right, one of the 
grand pass of the pyrene into spain, gleam with it battlement 
and tower to the splendour of the set rays, yellow top of wood 
colour the steep below, while far abov aspir the snowi point of 
the mountains, still reflect a rosi hue. 

st. aubert began to look out for the littl town he had been direct 
to by the peopl of beaujeu, and where he meant to pass the night; but 
no habit yet appeared. Of it distanc valancourt could not assist 
him to judge, for he had never been so far along thi chain of alp 
before. there was, however, a road to guid them; and there could be 
littl doubt that it wa the right one; for, sinc they had left 
beaujeu, there had been no varieti of track to perplex or mislead. 

the sun now gave hi last light, and st. aubert bade the mulet 
proceed with all possibl dispatch. He found, indeed, the lassitud of 
ill return upon him, after a day of uncommon fatigue, both of bodi 
and mind, and he long for repose. hi anxieti wa not sooth by 
observ a numer train, consist of men, horses, and load 
mules, wind down the steep of an opposit mountain, appear and 
disappear at interv among the woods, so that it number could 
not be judg of. someth bright, like arms, glanc in the set 
ray, and the militari dress wa distinguish upon the men who were 
in the van, and on other scatter among the troop that followed. As 
these wound into the vale, the rear of the parti emerg from the 
woods, and exhibit a band of soldiers. st. aubert’ apprehens now 
subsided; he had no doubt that the train befor him consist of 
smugglers, who, in convey prohibit good over the pyrenees, had 
been encountered, and conquer by a parti of troops. 

the travel had linger so long among the sublim scene of these 
mountains, that they found themselv entir mistaken in their 
calcul that they could reach montigni at sunset; but, as they 
wound along the valley, the saw, on a rude alpin bridge, that unit 
two lofti crag of the glen, a group of mountaineer-children, amus 
themselv with drop pebbl into a torrent below, and watch the 
stone plung into the water, that threw up it white spray high in the 
air as it receiv them, and return a sullen sound, which the echo 
of the mountain prolonged. under the bridg wa seen a perspect of 
the valley, with it cataract descend among the rocks, and a cottag 
on a cliff, overshadow with pines. It appeared, that they could not 
be far from some small town. st. aubert bade the mulet stop, and 
then call to the children to enquir if he wa near montigny; but the 
distance, and the roar of the waters, would not suffer hi voic to 
be heard; and the crags, adjoin the bridge, were of such tremend 
height and steepness, that to have climb either would have been 
scarc practic to a person unacquaint with the ascent. st. 
aubert, therefore, did not wast more moment in delay. they continu 
to travel long after twilight had obscur the road, which wa so 
broken, that, now think it safer to walk than to ride, they all 
alighted. the moon wa rising, but her light wa yet too feebl to 
assist them. while they step care on, they heard the 
vesper-bel of a convent. the twilight would not permit them to 
distinguish anyth like a building, but the sound seem to come 
from some woods, that overhung an accliv to the right. valancourt 
propos to go in search of thi convent. “if they will not accommod 
us with a night’ lodging,” said he, “they may certainli inform us how 
far we are from montigny, and direct us toward it.” He wa bound 
forward, without wait st. aubert’ reply, when the latter stop 
him. “I am veri weary,” said st. aubert, “and wish for noth so much 
as for immedi rest. We will all go to the convent; your good look 
would defeat our purpose; but when they see mine and emily’ exhaust 
countenances, they will scarc deni us repose.” 

As he said this, he took emily’ arm within his, and, tell michael 
to wait awhil in the road with the carriage, they began to ascend 
toward the woods, guid by the bell of the convent. hi step were 
feeble, and valancourt offer him hi arm, which he accepted. the moon 
now threw a faint light over their path, and, soon after, enabl them 
to distinguish some tower rise abov the top of the woods. still 
follow the note of the bell, they enter the shade of those woods, 
light onli by the moonbeams, that glide down between the leaves, and 
threw a tremul uncertain gleam upon the steep track they were 
winding. the gloom and the silenc that prevailed, except when the bell 
return upon the air, togeth with the wild of the surround 
scene, struck emili with a degre of fear, which, however, the voic 
and convers of valancourt somewhat repressed. when they had been 
some time ascending, st. aubert complain of weariness, and they 
stop to rest upon a littl green summit, where the tree opened, and 
admit the moonlight. He sat down upon the turf, between emili and 
valancourt. the bell had now ceased, and the deep repos of the scene 
wa undisturb by ani sound, for the low dull murmur of some distant 
torrent might be said to sooth, rather than to interrupt, the silence. 

befor them, extend the valley they had quitted; it rocks, and wood 
to the left, just silver by the rays, form a contrast to the deep 
shadow, that involv the opposit cliffs, whose fring summit onli 
were tip with light; while the distant perspect of the valley wa 
lost in the yellow mist of moonlight. the travel sat for some time 
wrapt in the complac which such scene inspire. 

“these scenes,” said valancourt, at length, “soften the heart, like the 
note of sweet music, and inspir that delici melancholi which no 
person, who had felt it once, would resign for the gayest pleasures. 
they waken our best and purest feelings, dispos us to benevolence, 
pity, and friendship. those whom I love—i alway seem to love more in 
such an hour as this.” hi voic trembled, and he paused. 

st. aubert wa silent; emili perceiv a warm tear fall upon the hand 
he held; she knew the object of hi thoughts; her too had, for some 
time, been occupi by the remembr of her mother. He seem by an 
effort to rous himself. “yes,” said he, with a half-suppress sigh, 
“the memori of those we love—of time for ever past! in such an hour as 
thi steal upon the mind, like a strain of distant music in the 
still of night;—al tender and harmoni as thi landscape, 
sleep in the mellow moonlight.” after the paus of a moment, st. 
aubert added, “I have alway fancied, that I thought with more 
clearness, and precision, at such an hour than at ani other, and that 
heart must be insens in a great degree, that doe not soften to it 
influence. but mani such there are.” 

valancourt sighed. 

“are there, indeed, mani such?” said emily. 

“A few year hence, my emily,” repli st. aubert, “and you may smile 
at the recollect of that question—if you do not weep to it. but 
come, I am somewhat refreshed, let us proceed.” 

have emerg from the woods, they saw, upon a turfi hillock above, 
the convent of which they were in search. A high wall, that surround 
it, led them to an ancient gate, at which they knocked; and the poor 
monk, who open it, conduct them into a small adjoin room, where 
he desir they would wait while he inform the superior of their 
request. In thi interval, sever friar came in separ to look at 
them; and at length the first monk returned, and they follow him to a 
room, where the superior wa sit in an arm-chair, with a larg 
folio volume, print in black letter, open on a desk befor him. He 
receiv them with courtesy, though he did not rise from hi seat; and, 
have ask them a few questions, grant their request. after a short 
conversation, formal and solemn on the part of the superior, they 
withdrew to the apart where they were to sup, and valancourt, whom 
one of the inferior friar civilli desir to accompany, went to seek 
michael and hi mules. they had not descend half way down the cliffs, 
befor they heard the voic of the mulet echo far and wide. 
sometim he call on st. aubert, and sometim on valancourt; who 
having, at length, convinc him that he had noth to fear either for 
himself, or hi master; and have dispos of him, for the night, in a 
cottag on the skirt of the woods, return to sup with hi friends, 
on such sober fare as the monk thought it prudent to set befor them. 
while st. aubert wa too much indispos to share it, emily, in her 
anxieti for her father, forgot herself; and valancourt, silent and 
thoughtful, yet never inattent to them, appear particularli 
solicit to accommod and reliev st. aubert, who often observed, 
while hi daughter wa press him to eat, or adjust the pillow she 
had place in the back of hi arm-chair, that valancourt fix on her a 
look of pensiv tenderness, which he wa not displeas to understand. 

they separ at an earli hour, and retir to their respect 
apartments. emili wa shown to her by a nun of the convent, whom she 
wa glad to dismiss, for her heart wa melancholy, and her attent so 
much abstracted, that convers with a stranger wa painful. she 
thought her father daili declining, and attribut hi present fatigu 
more to the feebl state of hi frame, than to the difficulti of the 
journey. A train of gloomi idea haunt her mind, till she fell 
asleep. 

In about two hour after, she wa awaken by the chime of a bell, 
and then heard quick step pass along the gallery, into which her 
chamber opened. she wa so littl accustom to the manner of a 
convent, as to be alarm by thi circumstance; her fears, ever aliv 
for her father, suggest that he wa veri ill, and she rose in hast 
to go to him. have paused, however, to let the person in the galleri 
pass befor she open her door, her thoughts, in the mean time, 
recov from the confus of sleep, and she understood that the bell 
wa the call of the monk to prayers. It had now ceased, and, all be 
again still, she forbor to go to st. aubert’ room. her mind wa not 
dispos for immedi sleep, and the moonlight, that shone into her 
chamber, invit her to open the casement, and look out upon the 
country. 

It wa a still and beauti night, the sky wa unobscur by ani 
cloud, and scarc a leaf of the wood beneath trembl in the air. As 
she listened, the midnight hymn of the monk rose softli from a chapel, 
that stood on one of the lower cliffs, a holi strain, that seem to 
ascend through the silenc of night to heaven, and her thought 
ascend with it. from the consider of hi works, her mind aros 
to the ador of the deity, in hi good and power; wherev she 
turn her view, whether on the sleep earth, or to the vast region 
of space, glow with world beyond the reach of human thought, the 
sublim of god, and the majesti of hi presenc appeared. her eye 
were fill with tear of aw love and admiration; and she felt that 
pure devotion, superior to all the distinct of human system, which 
lift the soul abov thi world, and seem to expand it into a nobler 
nature; such devot as can, perhaps, onli be experienced, when the 
mind, rescued, for a moment, from the humbl of earthli 
considerations, aspir to contempl hi power in the sublim of 
hi works, and hi good in the infin of hi blessings. 

Is it not now the hour, 
the holi hour, when to the cloudless height 
Of yon star concav climb the full-orb moon, 
and to thi nether world in solemn stillness, 
give sign, that, to the list’n ear of heaven 
religion’ voic should plead? the veri babe 
know this, and, chanc awak’d, hi littl hand 
lift to the gods, and on hi innoc couch 
call down a blessing. 
caractacu 


the midnight chant of the monk soon after drop into silence; but 
emili remain at the casement, watch the set moon, and the 
valley sink into deep shade, and will to prolong her present 
state of mind. At length she retir to her mattress, and sunk into 
tranquil slumber. 



chapter V 

while in the rosi vale 
love breath’d hi infant sighs, from anguish free. 
thomson 


st. aubert, suffici restor by a night’ repos to pursu hi 
journey, set out in the morning, with hi famili and valancourt, for 
rousillon, which he hope to reach befor night-fall. the scenes, 
through which they now passed, were as wild and romantic, as ani they 
had yet observed, with thi difference, that beauty, everi now and 
then, soften the landscap into smiles. littl woodi recess 
appear among the mountains, cover with bright verdur and flowers; 
or a pastor valley open it grassi bosom in the shade of the 
cliffs, with flock and herd loiter along the bank of a rivulet, 
that refresh it with perpetu green. st. aubert could not repent the 
have taken thi fatigu road, though he wa thi day, also, 
frequent oblig to alight, to walk along the rug precipice, and 
to climb the steep and flinti mountain. the wonder sublim and 
varieti of the prospect repaid him for all this, and the enthusiasm, 
with which they were view by hi young companions, heighten hi 
own, and awaken a remembr of all the delight emot of hi 
earli days, when the sublim charm of natur were first unveil to 
him. He found great pleasur in convers with valancourt, and in 
listen to hi ingenu remarks. the fire and simplic of hi 
manner seem to render him a characterist figur in the scene 
around them; and st. aubert discov in hi sentiment the just 
and the digniti of an elev mind, unbias by intercours with the 
world. He perceived, that hi opinion were formed, rather than 
imbibed; were more the result of thought, than of learning. Of the 
world he seem to know nothing; for he believ well of all mankind, 
and thi opinion gave him the reflect imag of hi own heart. 

st. aubert, as he sometim linger to examin the wild plant in hi 
path, often look forward with pleasur to emili and valancourt, as 
they stroll on together; he, with a counten of anim delight, 
point to her attent some grand featur of the scene; and she, 
listen and observ with a look of tender seriousness, that spoke 
the elev of her mind. they appear like two lover who had never 
stray beyond these their nativ mountains; whose situat had 
seclud them from the frivol of common life, whose idea were 
simpl and grand, like the landscap among which they moved, and who 
knew no other happiness, than in the union of pure and affection 
hearts. st. aubert smiled, and sigh at the romant pictur of 
felic hi fanci drew; and sigh again to think, that natur and 
simplic were so littl known to the world, as that their pleasur 
were thought romantic. 

“the world,” said he, pursu thi train of thought, “ridicul a 
passion which it seldom feels; it scenes, and it interests, distract 
the mind, deprav the taste, corrupt the heart, and love cannot exist 
in a heart that ha lost the meek digniti of innocence. virtu and 
tast are nearli the same, for virtu is littl more than activ taste, 
and the most delic affect of each combin in real love. how then 
are we to look for love in great cities, where selfishness, 
dissipation, and insincer suppli the place of tenderness, simplic 
and truth?” 

It wa near noon, when the travellers, have arriv at a piec of 
steep and danger road, alight to walk. the road wound up an 
ascent, that wa cloth with wood, and, instead of follow the 
carriage, they enter the refresh shade. A dewi cool wa 
diffus upon the air, which, with the bright verdur of turf, that 
grew under the trees, the mingl fragranc of flower and of balm, 
thyme, and lavender, that enrich it, and the grandeur of the pines, 
beech, and chestnuts, that overshadow them, render thi a most 
delici retreat. sometimes, the thick foliag exclud all view of 
the country; at others, it admit some partial catch of the distant 
scenery, which gave hint to the imagin to pictur landscap more 
interesting, more impressive, than ani that had been present to the 
eye. the wander often linger to indulg in these reveri of 
fancy. 

the paus of silence, such as had formerli interrupt the 
convers of valancourt and emily, were more frequent today than 
ever. valancourt often drop suddenli from the most anim 
vivac into fit of deep musing, and there was, sometimes, an 
unaffect melancholi in hi smile, which emili could not avoid 
understanding, for her heart wa interest in the sentiment it spoke. 

st. aubert wa refresh by the shades, and they continu to saunter 
under them, following, as nearli as they could guess, the direct of 
the road, till they perceiv that they had total lost it. they had 
continu near the brow of the precipice, allur by the sceneri it 
exhibited, while the road wound far away over the cliff above. 
valancourt call loudli to michael, but heard no voice, except hi 
own, echo among the rocks, and hi variou effort to regain the 
road were equal unsuccessful. while they were thu circumstanced, 
they perceiv a shepherd’ cabin, between the bole of the tree at 
some distance, and valancourt bound on first to ask assistance. when 
he reach it, he saw onli two littl children, at play, on the turf 
befor the door. He look into the hut, but no person wa there, and 
the eldest of the boy told him that their father wa with hi flocks, 
and their mother wa gone down into the vale, but would be back 
presently. As he stood, consid what wa further to be done, on a 
sudden he heard michael’ voic roar forth most man among the 
cliff above, till he made their echo ring. valancourt immedi 
answer the call, and endeavour to make hi way through the thicket 
that cloth the steeps, follow the direct of the sound. after 
much struggl over brambl and precipices, he reach michael, and at 
length prevail with him to be silent, and to listen to him. the road 
wa at a consider distanc from the spot where st. aubert and emili 
were; the carriag could not easili return to the entranc of the wood, 
and, sinc it would be veri fatigu for st. aubert to climb the long 
and steep road to the place where it now stood, valancourt wa anxiou 
to find a more easi ascent, by the way he had himself passed. 

meanwhil st. aubert and emili approach the cottage, and rest 
themselv on a rustic bench, fasten between two pines, which 
overshadow it, till valancourt, whose step they had observed, should 
return. 

the eldest of the children desist from hi play, and stood still to 
observ the strangers, while the younger continu hi littl gambols, 
and teas hi brother to join in them. st. aubert look with pleasur 
upon thi pictur of infantin simplicity, till it brought to hi 
remembr hi own boys, whom he had lost about the age of these, and 
their lament mother; and he sunk into a thoughtfulness, which emili 
observing, she immedi began to sing one of those simpl and live 
air he wa so fond of, and which she knew how to give with the most 
captiv sweetness. st. aubert smile on her through hi tears, took 
her hand and press it affectionately, and then tri to dissip the 
melancholi reflect that linger in hi mind. 

while she sung, valancourt approached, who wa unwil to interrupt 
her, and paus at a littl distanc to listen. when she had concluded, 
he join the party, and told them, that he had found michael, as well 
as a way, by which he thought they could ascend the cliff to the 
carriage. He point to the woodi steep above, which st. aubert 
survey with an anxiou eye. He wa alreadi weari by hi walk, and 
thi ascent wa formid to him. He thought, however, it would be 
less toilsom than the long and broken road, and he determin to 
attempt it; but emily, ever watch of hi ease, propos that he 
should rest, and dine befor they proceed further, valancourt went to 
the carriag for the refresh deposit there. 

On hi return, he propos remov a littl higher up the mountain, to 
where the wood open upon a grand and extens prospect; and thither 
they were prepar to go, when they saw a young woman join the 
children, and caress and weep over them. 

the travellers, interest by her distress, stop to observ her. she 
took the youngest of the children in her arms, and, perceiv the 
strangers, hastili dri her tears, and proceed to the cottage. st. 
aubert, on enquir the occas of her sorrow, learn that her 
husband, who wa a shepherd, and live here in the summer month to 
watch over the flock he led to feed upon these mountains, had lost, on 
the preced night, hi littl all. A gang of gipsies, who had for 
some time infest the neighbourhood, had driven away sever of hi 
master’ sheep. “jacques,” ad the shepherd’ wife, “had save a 
littl money, and had bought a few sheep with it, and now they must go 
to hi master for those that are stolen; and what is wors than all, 
hi master, when he come to know how it is, will trust him no longer 
with the care of hi flocks, for he is a hard man! and then what is to 
becom of our children!” 

the innoc counten of the woman, and the simplic of her manner 
in relat her grievance, inclin st. aubert to believ her story; 
and valancourt, convinc that it wa true, ask eagerli what wa the 
valu of the stolen sheep; on hear which he turn away with a look 
of disappointment. st. aubert put some money into her hand, emili too 
gave someth from her littl purse, and they walk toward the 
cliff; but valancourt linger behind, and spoke to the shepherd’ 
wife, who wa now weep with gratitud and surprise. He enquir how 
much money wa yet want to replac the stolen sheep, and found, that 
it wa a sum veri littl short of all he had about him. He wa 
perplex and distressed. “thi sum then,” said he to himself, “would 
make thi poor famili complet happy—it is in my power to give it—to 
make them complet happy! but what is to becom of me?—how shall I 
contriv to reach home with the littl money that will remain?” for a 
moment he stood, unwil to forego the luxuri of rais a famili 
from ruin to happiness, yet consid the difficulti of pursu 
hi journey with so small a sum as would be left. 

while he wa in thi state of perplexity, the shepherd himself 
appeared: hi children ran to meet him; he took one of them in hi 
arms, and, with the other cling to hi coat, came forward with a 
loiter step. hi forlorn and melancholi look determin valancourt 
at once; he threw down all the money he had, except a veri few louis, 
and bound away after st. aubert and emily, who were proceed slowli 
up the steep. valancourt had seldom felt hi heart so light as at thi 
moment; hi gay spirit danc with pleasure; everi object around him 
appear more interesting, or beautiful, than before. st. aubert 
observ the uncommon vivac of hi countenance: “what ha pleas 
you so much?” said he. “O what a love day,” repli valancourt, “how 
brightli the sun shines, how pure is thi air, what enchant 
scenery!” “it is inde enchanting,” said st. aubert, whom earli 
experi had taught to understand the natur of valancourt’ present 
feelings. “what piti that the wealthy, who can command such sunshine, 
should ever pass their day in gloom—in the cold shade of selfishness! 
for you, my young friend, may the sun alway shine as brightli as at 
thi moment; may your own conduct alway give you the sunshin of 
benevol and reason united!” 

valancourt, highli flatter by thi compliment, could make no repli 
but by a smile of gratitude. 

they continu to wind under the woods, between the grassi knoll of 
the mountain, and, as they reach the shadi summit, which he had 
point out, the whole parti burst into an exclamation. behind the spot 
where they stood, the rock rose perpendicularli in a massi wall to a 
consider height, and then branch out into overhang crags. 
their grey tint were well contrast by the bright hue of the plant 
and wild flowers, that grew in their fractur sides, and were deepen 
by the gloom of the pine and cedars, that wave above. the steep 
below, over which the eye pass abruptli to the valley, were fring 
with thicket of alpin shrubs; and, lower still, appear the tuft 
top of the chesnut woods, that cloth their base, among which peep 
forth the shepherd’ cottage, just left by the travellers, with it 
bluish smoke curl high in the air. On everi side appear the 
majest summit of the pyrenees, some exhibit tremend crag of 
marble, whose appear wa chang everi instant, as the vari 
light fell upon their surface; others, still higher, display onli 
snowi points, while their lower steep were cover almost invari 
with forest of pine, larch, and oak, that stretch down to the vale. 
thi wa one of the narrow valleys, that open from the pyrene into 
the countri of rousillon, and whose green pastures, and cultiv 
beauty, form a decid and wonder contrast to the romant grandeur 
that environ it. through a vista of the mountain appear the 
lowland of rousillon, tint with the blue haze of distance, as they 
unit with the water of the mediterranean; where, on a promontory, 
which mark the boundari of the shore, stood a lone beacon, over 
which were seen circl flight of sea-fowl. beyond, appeared, now and 
then, a steal sail, white with the sunbeam, and whose progress wa 
perceiv by it approach to the light-house. sometimes, too, wa 
seen a sail so distant, that it serv onli to mark the line of 
separ between the sky and the waves. 

On the other side of the valley, immedi opposit to the spot where 
the travel rested, a rocki pass open toward gascony. here no sign 
of cultiv appeared. the rock of granite, that screen the glen, 
rose abruptli from their base, and stretch their barren point to the 
clouds, unvari with woods, and uncheer even by a hunter’ cabin. 
sometimes, indeed, a gigant larch threw it long shade over the 
precipice, and here and there a cliff rear on it brow a monument 
cross, to tell the travel the fate of him who had ventur thither 
before. thi spot seem the veri haunt of banditti; and emily, as she 
look down upon it, almost expect to see them steal out from some 
hollow cave to look for their prey. soon after an object not less 
terrif struck her,—a gibbet stand on a point of rock near the 
entranc of the pass, and immedi over one of the cross she had 
befor observed. these were hieroglyph that told a plain and 
dread story. she forbor to point it out to st. aubert, but it threw 
a gloom over her spirits, and made her anxiou to hasten forward, that 
they might with certainti reach rousillon befor night-fall. It wa 
necessary, however, that st. aubert should take some refreshment, and, 
seat themselv on the short dri turf, they open the basket of 
provisions, while 

by breezi murmur cool’d, 
broad o’er _their_ head the verdant cedar wave, 
and high palmeto lift their grace shade. 
———_they_ draw 
ether soul, there drink reviv gale 
profus breath from the piney groves, 
and vale of fragrance; there at a distanc hear 
the roar floods, and cataracts. 
thomson 


st. aubert wa reviv by rest, and by the seren air of thi summit; 
and valancourt wa so charm with all around, and with the 
convers of hi companions, that he seem to have forgotten he had 
ani further to go. have conclud their simpl repast, they gave a 
long farewel look to the scene, and again began to ascend. st. aubert 
rejoic when he reach the carriage, which emili enter with him; 
but valancourt, will to take a more extens view of the enchant 
country, into which they were about to descend, than he could do from a 
carriage, loosen hi dogs, and onc more bound with them along the 
bank of the road. He often quit it for point that promis a wider 
prospect, and the slow pace, at which the mule travelled, allow him 
to overtak them with ease. whenev a scene of uncommon magnific 
appeared, he hasten to inform st. aubert, who, though he wa too much 
tire to walk himself, sometim made the chais wait, while emili went 
to the neighbour cliff. 

It wa even when they descend the lower alps, that bind rousillon, 
and form a majest barrier round that charm country, leav it 
open onli on the east to the mediterranean. the gay tint of 
cultiv onc more beautifi the landscape; for the lowland were 
colour with the richest hues, which a luxuri climate, and an 
industri peopl can awaken into life. grove of orang and lemon 
perfum the air, their ripe fruit glow among the foliage; while, 
slope to the plains, extens vineyard spread their treasures. 
beyond these, wood and pastures, and mingl town and hamlet 
stretch toward the sea, on whose bright surfac gleam mani a 
distant sail; while, over the whole scene, wa diffus the purpl glow 
of evening. thi landscap with the surround alp did, indeed, 
present a perfect pictur of the love and the sublime, of “beauti 
sleep in the lap of horror.” 

the travellers, have reach the plains, proceeded, between hedg of 
flower myrtl and pomegranate, to the town of arles, where they 
propos to rest for the night. they met with simple, but neat 
accommodation, and would have pass a happi evening, after the toil 
and the delight of thi day, had not the approach separ thrown 
a gloom over their spirit. It wa st. aubert’ plan to proceed, on the 
morrow, to the border of the mediterranean, and travel along it 
shore into languedoc; and valancourt, sinc he wa now nearli 
recovered, and had no longer a pretenc for continu with hi new 
friends, resolv to leav them here. st. aubert, who wa much pleas 
with him, invit him to go further, but did not repeat the invitation, 
and valancourt had resolut enough to forego the temptat of 
accept it, that he might prove himself not unworthi of the favour. 
On the follow morning, therefore, they were to part, st. aubert to 
pursu hi way to languedoc, and valancourt to explor new scene among 
the mountains, on hi return home. dure thi even he wa often 
silent and thoughtful; st. aubert’ manner toward him wa 
affectionate, though grave, and emili wa serious, though she made 
frequent effort to appear cheerful. after one of the most melancholi 
even they had yet pass together, they separ for the night. 



chapter VI 

I care not, fortune! what you me deny; 
you cannot rob me of free nature’ grace; 
you cannot shut the window of the sky, 
through which aurora show her brighten face; 
you cannot bar my constant feet to trace 
the wood and lawns, by live stream, at eve: 
let health my nerv and finer fibr brace, 
and I their toy to the great children leave: 
Of fancy, reason, virtue, nought can me bereave. 
thomson 


In the morning, valancourt breakfast with st. aubert and emily, 
neither of whom seem much refresh by sleep. the languor of ill 
still hung over st. aubert, and to emily’ fear hi disord appear 
to be increas fast upon him. she watch hi look with anxiou 
affection, and their express wa alway faith reflect in her 
own. 

At the commenc of their acquaintance, valancourt had made known 
hi name and family. st. aubert wa not a stranger to either, for the 
famili estates, which were now in the possess of an elder brother of 
valancourt, were littl more than twenti mile distant from La vallée, 
and he had sometim met the elder valancourt on visit in the 
neighbourhood. thi knowledg had made him more willingli receiv hi 
present companion; for, though hi counten and manner would have 
won him the acquaint of st. aubert, who wa veri apt to trust to 
the intellig of hi own eyes, with respect to countenances, he 
would not have accept these, as suffici introduct to that of 
hi daughter. 

the breakfast wa almost as silent as the supper of the preced 
night; but their muse wa at length interrupt by the sound of the 
carriag wheels, which were to bear away st. aubert and emily. 
valancourt start from hi chair, and went to the window; it wa 
inde the carriage, and he return to hi seat without speaking. the 
moment wa now come when they must part. st. aubert told valancourt, 
that he hope he would never pass La vallé without favour him with 
a visit; and valancourt, eagerli thank him, assur him that he 
never would; as he said which he look timidli at emily, who tri to 
smile away the serious of her spirits. they pass a few minut in 
interest conversation, and st. aubert then led the way to the 
carriage, emili and valancourt follow in silence. the latter 
linger at the door sever minut after they were seated, and none 
of the parti seem to have courag enough to say—farewell. At length, 
st. aubert pronounc the melancholi word, which emili pass to 
valancourt, who return it, with a deject smile, and the carriag 
drove on. 

the travel remained, for some time, in a state of tranquil 
pensiveness, which is not unpleasing. st. aubert interrupt it by 
observing, “thi is a veri promis young man; it is mani year sinc 
I have been so much pleas with ani person, on so short an 
acquaintance. He bring back to my memori the day of my youth, when 
everi scene wa new and delightful!” st. aubert sighed, and sunk again 
into a reverie; and, as emili look back upon the road they had 
passed, valancourt wa seen, at the door of the littl inn, follow 
them with hi eyes. her perceiv her, and wave hi hand; and she 
return the adieu, till the wind road shut her from hi sight. 

“I rememb when I wa about hi age,” resum st. aubert, “and I 
thought, and felt exactli as he does. the world wa open upon me 
then, now—it is closing.” 

“mi dear sir, do not think so gloomily,” said emili in a trembl 
voice, “I hope you have many, mani year to live—for your own sake—for 
_my_ sake.” 

“ah, my emily!” repli st. aubert, “for thi sake! well—i hope it is 
so.” He wipe away a tear, that wa steal down hi cheek, threw a 
smile upon hi countenance, and said in a cheer voice, “there is 
someth in the ardour and ingenu of youth, which is 
particularli pleas to the contempl of an old man, if hi 
feel have not been entir corrod by the world. It is cheer 
and reviving, like the view of spring to a sick person; hi mind 
catch somewhat of the spirit of the season, and hi eye are light 
up with a transient sunshine. valancourt is thi spring to me.” 

emily, who press her father’ hand affectionately, had never befor 
listen with so much pleasur to the prais he bestowed; no, not even 
when he had bestow them on herself. 

they travel on, among vineyards, woods, and pastures, delight with 
the romant beauti of the landscape, which wa bounded, on one side, 
by the grandeur of the pyrenees, and, on the other, by the ocean; and, 
soon after noon, they reach the town of colioure, situat on the 
mediterranean. here they dined, and rest till toward the cool of 
day, when they pursu their way along the shores—thos enchant 
shores!—which extend to languedoc. emili gaze with enthusiasm on the 
vast of the sea, it surfac varying, as the light and shadow 
fell, and on it woodi banks, mellow with autumn tints. 

st. aubert wa impati to reach perpignan, where he expect letter 
from M. quesnel; and it wa the expect of these letters, that had 
induc him to leav colioure, for hi feebl frame had requir 
immedi rest. after travel a few miles, he fell asleep; and 
emily, who had put two or three book into the carriage, on leav La 
vallée, had now the leisur for look into them. she sought for one, 
in which valancourt had been read the day before, and hope for the 
pleasur of retrac a page, over which the eye of a belov friend 
had late passed, of dwell on the passages, which he had admired, 
and of permit them to speak to her in the languag of hi own mind, 
and to bring himself to her presence. On search for the book, she 
could find it nowhere, but in it stead perceiv a volum of 
petrarch’ poems, that had belong to valancourt, whose name wa 
written in it, and from which he had frequent read passag to her, 
with all the pathet expression, that characteris the feel of 
the author. she hesit in believing, what would have been 
suffici appar to almost ani other person, that he had purpos 
left thi book, instead of the one she had lost, and that love had 
prompt the exchange; but, have open it with impati pleasure, 
and observ the line of hi pencil drawn along the variou passag 
he had read aloud, and under other more descript of delic 
tender than he had dare to trust hi voic with, the convict 
came, at length, to her mind. for some moment she wa consciou onli 
of be beloved; then, a recollect of all the variat of tone 
and countenance, with which he had recit these sonnets, and of the 
soul, which spoke in their expression, press to her memory, and she 
wept over the memori of hi affection. 

they arriv at perpignan soon after sunset, where st. aubert found, as 
he had expected, letter from M. quesnel, the content of which so 
evid and grievous affect him, that emili wa alarmed, and 
press him, as far as her delicaci would permit, to disclos the 
occas of hi concern; but he answer her onli by tears, and 
immedi began to talk on other topics. emily, though she forbor to 
press the one most interest to her, wa greatli affect by her 
father’ manner, and pass a night of sleepless solicitude. 

In the morn they pursu their journey along the coast toward 
leucate, anoth town on the mediterranean, situat on the border of 
languedoc and rousillon. On the way, emili renew the subject of the 
preced night, and appear so deepli affect by st. aubert’ 
silenc and dejection, that he relax from hi reserve. “I wa 
unwilling, my dear emily,” said he, “to throw a cloud over the pleasur 
you receiv from these scenes, and meant, therefore, to conceal, for 
the present, some circumstances, with which, however, you must at 
length have been made acquainted. but your anxieti ha defeat my 
purpose; you suffer as much from this, perhaps, as you will do from a 
knowledg of the fact I have to relate. M. quesnel’ visit prove an 
unhappi one to me; he came to tell me part of the news he ha now 
confirmed. you may have heard me mention a M. motteville, of paris, but 
you did not know that the chief of my person properti wa invest in 
hi hands. I had great confid in him, and I am yet will to 
believe, that he is not wholli unworthi of my esteem. A varieti of 
circumst have concur to ruin him, and—i am ruin with him.” 

st. aubert paus to conceal hi emotion. 

“the letter I have just receiv from M. quesnel,” resum he, 
struggl to speak with firmness, “enclos other from motteville, 
which confirm all I dreaded.” 

“must we then quit La vallée?” said emily, after a long paus of 
silence. “that is yet uncertain,” repli st. aubert, “it will depend 
upon the compromis mottevil is abl to make with hi creditors. My 
income, you know, wa never large, and now it will be reduc to littl 
indeed! It is for you, emily, for you, my child, that I am most 
afflicted.” hi last word faltered; emili smile tenderli upon him 
through her tears, and then, endeavour to overcom her emotion, “mi 
dear father,” said she, “do not griev for me, or for yourself; we may 
yet be happy;—if La vallé remain for us, we must be happy. We will 
retain onli one servant, and you shall scarc perceiv the chang in 
your income. Be comforted, my dear sir; we shall not feel the want of 
those luxuries, which other valu so highly, sinc we never had a 
tast for them; and poverti cannot depriv us of mani consolations. It 
cannot rob us of the affect we have for each other, or degrad us in 
our own opinion, or in that of ani person, whose opinion we ought to 
value.” 

st. aubert conceal hi face with hi handkerchief, and wa unabl to 
speak; but emili continu to urg to her father the truths, which 
himself had impress upon her mind. 

“besides, my dear sir, poverti cannot depriv us of intellectu 
delights. It cannot depriv you of the comfort of afford me exampl 
of fortitud and benevolence; nor me of the delight of consol a 
belov parent. It cannot deaden our tast for the grand, and the 
beautiful, or deni us the mean of indulg it; for the scene of 
nature—thos sublim spectacles, so infinit superior to all 
artifici luxuries! are open for the enjoy of the poor, as well as 
of the rich. Of what, then, have we to complain, so long as we are not 
in want of necessaries? pleasures, such as wealth cannot buy, will 
still be ours. We retain, then, the sublim luxuri of nature, and 
lose onli the frivol one of art.” 

st. aubert could not reply: he caught emili to hi bosom, their tear 
flow together, but—they were not tear of sorrow. after thi languag 
of the heart, all other would have been feeble, and they remain 
silent for some time. then, st. aubert convers as before; for, if hi 
mind had not recov it natur tranquillity, it at least assum 
the appear of it. 

they reach the romant town of leucat earli in the day, but st. 
aubert wa weary, and they determin to pass the night there. In the 
evening, he exert himself so far as to walk with hi daughter to view 
the environ that overlook the lake of leucate, the mediterranean, part 
of rousillon, with the pyrenees, and a wide extent of the luxuri 
provinc of languedoc, now blush with the ripen vintage, which the 
peasant were begin to gather. st. aubert and emili saw the busi 
groups, caught the joyou song, that wa waft on the breeze, and 
anticipated, with appar pleasure, their next day’ journey over thi 
gay region. He designed, however, still to wind along the sea-shore. To 
return home immedi wa partli hi wish, but from thi he wa 
withheld by a desir to lengthen the pleasure, which the journey gave 
hi daughter, and to tri the effect of the sea air on hi own disorder. 

On the follow day, therefore, they recommenc their journey through 
languedoc, wind the shore of the mediterranean; the pyrene still 
form the magnific back-ground of their prospects, while on their 
right wa the ocean, and, on their left, wide extend plain melt 
into the blue horizon. st. aubert wa pleased, and convers much with 
emily, yet hi cheer wa sometim artificial, and sometim a 
shade of melancholi would steal upon hi countenance, and betray him. 
thi wa soon chase away by emily’ smile; who smiled, however, with 
an ach heart, for she saw that hi misfortun prey upon hi mind, 
and upon hi enfeebl frame. 

It wa even when they reach a small villag of upper languedoc, 
where they meant to pass the night, but the place could not afford them 
beds; for here, too, it wa the time of the vintage, and they were 
oblig to proceed to the next post. the languor of ill and of 
fatigue, which return upon st. aubert, requir immedi repose, and 
the even wa now far advanced; but from necess there wa no 
appeal, and he order michael to proceed. 

the rich plain of languedoc, which exhibit all the glori of the 
vintage, with the gaieti of a french festival, no longer awaken st. 
aubert to pleasure, whose condit form a mourn contrast to the 
hilar and youth beauti which surround him. As hi languid eye 
move over the scene, he considered, that they would soon, perhaps, be 
close for ever on thi world. “those distant and sublim mountains,” 
said he secretly, as he gaze on a chain of the pyrene that stretch 
toward the west, “these luxuri plains, thi blue vault, the 
cheer light of day, will be shut from my eyes! the song of the 
peasant, the cheer voic of man—wil no longer sound for me!” 

the intellig eye of emili seem to read what pass in the mind of 
her father, and she fix them on hi face, with an express of such 
tender pity, as recal hi thought from everi desultori object of 
regret, and he rememb only, that he must leav hi daughter without 
protection. thi reflect chang regret to agony; he sigh deeply, 
and remain silent, while she seem to understand that sigh, for she 
press hi hand affectionately, and then turn to the window to 
conceal her tears. the sun now threw a last yellow gleam on the wave 
of the mediterranean, and the gloom of twilight spread fast over the 
scene, till onli a melancholi ray appear on the western horizon, 
mark the point where the sun had set amid the vapour of an autumn 
evening. A cool breez now came from the shore, and emili let down the 
glass; but the air, which wa refresh to health, wa as chill to 
sickness, and st. aubert desired, that the window might be drawn up. 
increas ill made him now more anxiou than ever to finish the 
day’ journey, and he stop the mulet to enquir how far they had 
yet to go to the next post. He replied, “nine miles.” “I feel I am 
unabl to proceed much further,” said st. aubert; “enquire, as you go, 
if there is ani hous on the road that would accommod us for the 
night.” He sunk back in the carriage, and michael, crack hi whip in 
the air, set off, and continu on the full gallop, till st. aubert, 
almost fainting, call to him to stop. emili look anxious from the 
window, and saw a peasant walk at some littl distanc on the road, 
for whom they waited, till he came up, when he wa asked, if there wa 
ani hous in the neighbourhood that accommod travellers. He 
replied, that he knew of none. “there is a château, indeed, among those 
wood on the right,” ad he, “but I believ it receiv nobody, and I 
cannot show you the way, for I am almost a stranger here.” st. aubert 
wa go to ask him some further question concern the château, but 
the man abruptli pass on. after some consideration, he order 
michael to proceed slowli to the woods. everi moment now deepen the 
twilight, and increas the difficulti of find the road. anoth 
peasant soon after passed. “which is the way to the château in the 
woods?” cri michael. 

“the château in the woods!” exclaim the peasant—“do you mean that 
with the turret, yonder?” 

“I don’t know as for the turret, as you call it,” said michael, “I mean 
that white piec of a building, that we see at a distanc there, among 
the trees.” 

“yes, that is the turret; why, who are you, that you are go 
thither?” said the man with surprise. 

st. aubert, on hear thi odd question, and observ the peculiar 
tone in which it wa delivered, look out from the carriage. “we are 
travellers,” said he, “who are in search of a hous of accommod 
for the night; is there ani hereabout?” 

“none, monsieur, unless you have a mind to tri your luck yonder,” 
repli the peasant, point to the woods, “but I would not advis you 
to go there.” 

“to whom doe the château belong?” 

“I scarc know myself, monsieur.” 

“it is uninhabited, then?”—“no, not uninhabited; the steward and 
housekeep are there, I believe.” 

On hear this, st. aubert determin to proceed to the château, and 
risk the refus of be accommod for the night; he therefor 
desir the countryman would show michael the way, and bade him expect 
reward for hi trouble. the man wa for a moment silent, and then said, 
that he wa go on other business, but that the road could not be 
missed, if they went up an avenu to the right, to which he pointed. 
st. aubert wa go to speak, but the peasant wish him good night, 
and walk on. 

the carriag now move toward the avenue, which wa guard by a gate, 
and michael have dismount to open it, they enter between row of 
ancient oak and chesnut, whose intermingl branch form a lofti 
arch above. there wa someth so gloomi and desol in the 
appear of thi avenue, and it lone silence, that emili almost 
shudder as she pass along; and, recollect the manner in which 
the peasant had mention the château, she gave a mysteri mean to 
hi words, such as she had not suspect when he utter them. these 
apprehensions, however, she tri to check, consid that they were 
probabl the effect of a melancholi imagination, which her father’ 
situation, and a consider of her own circumstances, had made 
sensibl to everi impression. 

they pass slowli on, for they were now almost in darkness, which, 
togeth with the uneven of the ground, and the frequent root of 
old trees, that shot up abov the soil, made it necessari to proceed 
with caution. On a sudden michael stop the carriage; and, as st. 
aubert look from the window to enquir the cause, he perceiv a 
figur at some distanc move up the avenue. the dusk would not permit 
him to distinguish what it was, but he bade michael go on. 

“thi seem a wild place,” said michael; “there is no hous hereabout, 
don’t your honour think we had better turn back?” 

“go a littl farther, and if we see no hous then, we will return to 
the road,” repli st. aubert. 

michael proceed with reluctance, and the extrem slow of hi pace 
made st. aubert look again from the window to hasten him, when again he 
saw the same figure. He wa somewhat startled: probabl the gloomi 
of the spot made him more liabl to alarm than usual; howev thi 
might be, he now stop michael, and bade him call to the person in 
the avenue. 

“pleas your honour, he may be a robber,” said michael. “it doe not 
pleas me,” repli st. aubert, who could not forbear smile at the 
simplic of hi phrase, “and we will, therefore, return to the road, 
for I see no probabl of meet here with what we seek.” 

michael turn about immediately, and wa retrac hi way with 
alacrity, when a voic wa heard from among the tree on the left. It 
wa not the voic of command, or distress, but a deep hollow tone, 
which seem to be scarc human. the man whip hi mule till they 
went as fast as possible, regardless of the darkness, the broken 
ground, and the neck of the whole party, nor onc stop till he 
reach the gate, which open from the avenu into the high-road, 
where he went into a more moder pace. 

“I am veri ill,” said st. aubert, take hi daughter’ hand. “you are 
worse, then, sir!” said emily, extrem alarm by hi manner, “you 
are worse, and here is no assistance. good god! what is to be done!” He 
lean hi head on her shoulder, while she endeavour to support him 
with her arm, and michael wa again order to stop. when the rattl 
of the wheel had ceased, music wa heard on their air; it wa to emili 
the voic of hope. “oh! we are near some human habitation!” said she, 
“help may soon be had.” 

she listen anxiously; the sound were distant, and seem to come 
from a remot part of the wood that border the road; and, as she 
look toward the spot whenc they issued, she perceiv in the faint 
moonlight someth like a château. It wa difficult, however, to reach 
this; st. aubert wa now too ill to bear the motion of the carriage; 
michael could not quit hi mules; and emily, who still support her 
father, fear to leav him, and also fear to ventur alon to such a 
distance, she knew not whither, or to whom. something, however, it wa 
necessari to determin upon immediately; st. aubert, therefore, told 
michael to proceed slowly; but they had not gone far, when he fainted, 
and the carriag wa again stopped. He lay quit senseless.—“mi dear, 
dear father!” cri emili in great agony, who began to fear that he wa 
dying, “speak, if it is onli one word to let me hear the sound of your 
voice!” but no voic spoke in reply. In the agoni of terror she bade 
michael bring water from the rivulet, that flow along the road; and, 
have receiv some in the man’ hat, with trembl hand she 
sprinkl it over her father’ face, which, as the moon’ ray now fell 
upon it, seem to bear the impress of death. everi emot of 
selfish fear now gave way to a stronger influence, and, commit st. 
aubert to the care of michael, who refus to go far from hi mules, 
she step from the carriag in search of the château she had seen at 
a distance. It wa a still moonlight night, and the music, which yet 
sound on the air, direct her step from the high road, up a shadowi 
lane, that led to the woods. her mind wa for some time so entir 
occupi by anxieti and terror for her father, that she felt none for 
herself, till the deepen gloom of the overhang foliage, which now 
wholli exclud the moonlight, and the wild of the place, recal 
her to a sens of her adventur situation. the music had ceased, and 
she had no guid but chance. for a moment she paus in terrifi 
perplexity, till a sens of her father’ condit again overcom 
everi consider for herself, she proceeded. the lane termin in 
the woods, but she look round in vain for a house, or a human being, 
and as vainli listen for a sound to guid her. she hurri on, 
however, not know whither, avoid the recess of the woods, and 
endeavour to keep along their margin, till a rude kind of avenue, 
which open upon a moonlight spot, arrest her attention. the 
wild of thi avenu brought to her recollect the one lead to 
the turret château, and she wa inclin to believe, that thi wa a 
part of the same domain, and probabl led to the same point. while she 
hesitated, whether to follow it or not, a sound of mani voic in loud 
merriment burst upon her ear. It seem not the laugh of cheerfulness, 
but of riot, and she stood appalled. while she paused, she heard a 
distant voice, call from the way she had come, and not doubt but 
it wa that of michael, her first impuls wa to hasten back; but a 
second thought chang her purpose; she believ that noth less than 
the last extrem could have prevail with michael to quit hi mules, 
and fear that her father wa now dying, she rush forward, with a 
feebl hope of obtain assist from the peopl in the woods. her 
heart beat with fear expectation, as she drew near the spot whenc 
the voic issued, and she often startl when her step disturb the 
fallen leaves. the sound led her toward the moonlight glade she had 
befor noticed; at a littl distanc from which she stopped, and saw, 
between the bole of the trees, a small circular level of green turf, 
surround by the woods, on which appear a group of figures. On 
draw nearer, she distinguish these, by their dress, to be 
peasants, and perceiv sever cottag scatter round the edg of 
the woods, which wave loftili over thi spot. while she gazed, and 
endeavour to overcom the apprehens that withheld her steps, 
sever peasant girl came out of a cottage; music instantli struck up, 
and the danc began. It wa the joyou music of the vintage—th same 
she had befor heard upon the air. her heart, occupi with terror for 
her father, could not feel the contrast, which thi gay scene offer 
to her own distress; she step hastili forward toward a group of 
elder peasants, who were seat at the door of a cottage, and, have 
explain her situation, entreat their assistance. sever of them 
rose with alacrity, and, offer ani servic in their power, follow 
emily, who seem to move on the wind, as fast as they could toward 
the road. 

when she reach the carriag she found st. aubert restor to 
animation. On the recoveri of hi senses, have heard from michael 
whither hi daughter wa gone, anxieti for her overcam everi regard 
for himself, and he had sent him in search of her. He was, however, 
still languid, and, perceiv himself unabl to travel much farther, 
he renew hi enquiri for an inn, and concern the château in the 
woods. “the château cannot accommod you, sir,” said a vener 
peasant who had follow emili from the woods, “it is scarc 
inhabited; but, if you will do me the honour to visit my cottage, you 
shall be welcom to the best bed it affords.” 

st. aubert wa himself a frenchman; he therefor wa not surpris at 
french courtesy; but, ill as he was, he felt the valu of the offer 
enhanc by the manner which accompani it. He had too much delicaci 
to apologise, or to appear to hesit about avail himself of the 
peasant’ hospitality, but immedi accept it with the same 
frank with which it wa offered. 

the carriag again move slowli on; michael follow the peasant up 
the lane, which emili had just quitted, till they came to the moonlight 
glade. st. aubert’ spirit were so far restor by the courtesi of hi 
host, and the near prospect of repose, that he look with a sweet 
complac upon the moonlight scene, surround by the shadowi woods, 
through which, here and there, an open admit the stream 
splendour, discov a cottage, or a sparkl rivulet. He listened, 
with no pain emotion, to the merri note of the guitar and 
tamborine; and, though tear came to hi eyes, when he saw the 
_debonnaire_ danc of the peasants, they were not mere tear of 
mourn regret. with emili it wa otherwise; immedi terror for her 
father had now subsid into a gentl melancholy, which everi note of 
joy, by awaken comparison, serv to heighten. 

the danc ceas on the approach of the carriage, which wa a 
phenomenon in these sequest woods, and the peasantri flock round 
it with eager curiosity. On learn that it brought a sick stranger, 
sever girl ran across the turf, and return with wine and basket 
of grapes, which they present to the travellers, each with kind 
content press for a preference. At length, the carriag stop 
at a neat cottage, and hi vener conductor, have assist st. 
aubert to alight, led him and emili to a small inner room, illumin 
onli by moonbeams, which the open casement admitted. st. aubert, 
rejoic in rest, seat himself in an arm-chair, and hi sens were 
refresh by the cool and balmi air, that lightli wave the embow 
honeysuckles, and waft their sweet breath into the apartment. hi 
host, who wa call La voisin, quit the room, but soon return 
with fruits, cream, and all the pastor luxuri hi cottag afforded; 
have set down which, with a smile of unfeign welcome, he retir 
behind the chair of hi guest. st. aubert insist on hi take a seat 
at the table, and, when the fruit had allay the fever of hi palate, 
and he found himself somewhat revived, he began to convers with hi 
host, who commun sever particular concern himself and hi 
family, which were interesting, becaus they were spoken from the 
heart, and delin a pictur of the sweet courtesi of famili 
kindness. emili sat by her father, hold hi hand, and, while she 
listen to the old man, her heart swell with the affection 
sympathi he described, and her tear fell to the mourn 
consideration, that death would probabl soon depriv her of the 
dearest bless she then possessed. the soft moonlight of an autumn 
evening, and the distant music, which now sound a plaintiv strain, 
aid the melancholi of her mind. the old man continu to talk of hi 
family, and st. aubert remain silent. “I have onli one daughter 
living,” said La voisin, “but she is happili married, and is everyth 
to me. when I lost my wife,” he ad with a sigh, “I came to live with 
agnes, and her family; she ha sever children, who are all danc on 
the green yonder, as merri as grasshoppers—and long may they be so! I 
hope to die among them, monsieur. I am old now, and cannot expect to 
live long, but there is some comfort in die surround by one’ 
children.” 

“mi good friend,” said st. aubert, while hi voic trembled, “I hope 
you will long live surround by them.” 

“ah, sir! at my age I must not expect that!” repli the old man, and 
he paused: “I can scarc wish it,” he resumed, “for I trust that 
whenev I die I shall go to heaven, where my poor wife is gone befor 
me. I can sometim almost fanci I see her of a still moonlight night, 
walk among these shade she love so well. Do you believe, monsieur, 
that we shall be permit to revisit the earth, after we have quit 
the body?” 

emili could no longer stifl the anguish of her heart; her tear fell 
fast upon her father’ hand, which she yet held. He made an effort to 
speak, and at length said in a low voice, “I hope we shall be permit 
to look down on those we have left on the earth, but I can onli hope 
it. futur is much veil from our eyes, and faith and hope are our 
onli guid concern it. We are not enjoin to believe, that 
disembodi spirit watch over the friend they have loved, but we may 
innoc hope it. It is a hope which I will never resign,” continu 
he, while he wipe the tear from hi daughter’ eyes, “it will sweeten 
the bitter moment of death!” tear fell slowli on hi cheeks; La 
voisin wept too, and there wa a paus of silence. then, La voisin, 
renew the subject, said, “but you believe, sir, that we shall meet 
in anoth world the relat we have love in this; I must believ 
this.” “then do believ it,” repli st. aubert, “severe, indeed, would 
be the pang of separation, if we believ it to be eternal. look up, 
my dear emily, we shall meet again!” He lift hi eye toward heaven, 
and a gleam of moonlight, which fell upon hi countenance, discov 
peac and resignation, steal on the line of sorrow. 

La voisin felt that he had pursu the subject too far, and he drop 
it, saying, “we are in darkness, I forgot to bring a light.” 

“no,” said st. aubert, “thi is a light I love. sit down, my good 
friend. emily, my love, I find myself better than I have been all day; 
thi air refresh me. I can enjoy thi tranquil hour, and that music, 
which float so sweetli at a distance. let me see you smile. who 
touch that guitar so tastefully? are there two instruments, or is it 
an echo I hear?” 

“it is an echo, monsieur, I fancy. that guitar is often heard at night, 
when all is still, but nobodi know who touch it, and it is sometim 
accompani by a voic so sweet, and so sad, one would almost think the 
wood were haunted.” “they certainli are haunted,” said st. aubert with 
a smile, “but I believ it is by mortals.” “I have sometim heard it 
at midnight, when I could not sleep,” rejoin La voisin, not seem 
to notic thi remark, “almost under my window, and I never heard ani 
music like it. It ha often made me think of my poor wife till I cried. 
I have sometim got up to the window to look if I could see anybody, 
but as soon as I open the casement all wa hushed, and nobodi to be 
seen; and I have listened, and listen till I have been so timorous, 
that even the trembl of the leav in the breez ha made me start. 
they say it often come to warn peopl of their death, but I have heard 
it these mani years, and outliv the warning.” 

emily, though she smile at the mention of thi ridicul 
superstition, could not, in the present tone of her spirits, wholli 
resist it contagion. 

“well, but, my good friend,” said st. aubert, “ha nobodi had courag 
to follow the sounds? If they had, they would probabl have discov 
who is the musician.” “yes, sir, they have follow them some way into 
the woods, but the music ha still retreated, and seem as distant as 
ever, and the peopl have at last been afraid of be led into harm, 
and would go no further. It is veri seldom that I have heard these 
sound so earli in the evening. they usual come about midnight, when 
that bright planet, which is rise abov the turret yonder, set below 
the wood on the left.” 

“what turret?” ask st. aubert with quickness, “I see none.” 

“your pardon, monsieur, you do see one indeed, for the moon shine full 
upon it;—up the avenu yonder, a long way off; the château it belong 
to is hid among the trees.” 

“yes, my dear sir,” said emily, pointing, “don’t you see someth 
glitter abov the dark woods? It is a fane, I fancy, which the ray 
fall upon.” 

“O yes, I see what you mean; and who doe the château belong to?” 

“the marqui de villeroi wa it owner,” repli La voisin, 
emphatically. 

“ah!” said st. aubert, with a deep sigh, “are we then so near 
le-blanc!” He appear much agitated. 

“it use to be the marquis’ favourit residence,” resum La voisin, 
“but he took a dislik to the place, and ha not been there for mani 
years. We have heard late that he is dead, and that it is fallen into 
other hands.” st. aubert, who had sat in deep musing, wa rous by the 
last words. “dead!” he exclaimed, “good god! when did he die?” 

“he is report to have die about five week since,” repli La 
voisin. “did you know the marquis, sir?” 

“thi is veri extraordinary!” said st. aubert without attend to the 
question. “whi is it so, my dear sir?” said emily, in a voic of timid 
curiosity. He made no reply, but sunk again into a reverie; and in a 
few moments, when he seem to have recov himself, ask who had 
succeed to the estates. “I have forgot hi title, monsieur,” said La 
voisin; “but my lord resid at pari chiefly; I hear no talk of hi 
come hither.” 

“the château is shut up then, still?” 

“why, littl better, sir; the old housekeeper, and her husband the 
steward, have the care of it, but they live gener in a cottag hard 
by.” 

“the château is spacious, I suppose,” said emily, “and must be desol 
for the resid of onli two persons.” 

“desol enough, mademoiselle,” repli La voisin, “I would not pass 
one night in the château, for the valu of the whole domain.” 

“what is that?” said st. aubert, rous again from thoughtfulness. As 
hi host repeat hi last sentence, a groan escap from st. aubert, 
and then, as if anxiou to prevent it from be noticed, he hastili 
ask La voisin how long he had live in thi neighbourhood. “almost 
from my childhood, sir,” repli hi host. 

“you rememb the late marchioness, then?” said st. aubert in an 
alter voice. 

“ah, monsieur!—that I do well. there are mani besid me who rememb 
her.” 

“yes—” said st. aubert, “and I am one of those.” 

“alas, sir! you remember, then, a most beauti and excel lady. 
she deserv a better fate.” 

tear stood in st. aubert’ eyes; “enough,” said he, in a voic almost 
stifl by the violenc of hi emotions,—“it is enough, my friend.” 

emily, though extrem surpris by her father’ manner, forbor to 
express her feel by ani question. La voisin began to apologise, but 
st. aubert interrupt him; “apolog is quit unnecessary,” said he, 
“let us chang the topic. you were speak of the music we just now 
heard.” 

“I was, monsieur—but hark!—it come again; listen to that voice!” they 
were all silent; 

At last a soft and solemn-breath sound 
rose, like a stream of rich distil perfumes, 
and stole upon the air, that even silenc 
wa took ere she wa ’ware, and wish she might 
deni her nature, and be never more 
still, to be so displaced. 
milton. 


In a few moment the voic die into air, and the instrument, which had 
been heard before, sound in low symphony. st. aubert now observed, 
that it produc a tone much more full and melodi than that of a 
guitar, and still more melancholi and soft than the lute. they 
continu to listen, but the sound return no more. “thi is 
strange!” said st. aubert, at length interrupt the silence. “veri 
strange!” said emily. “it is so,” rejoin La voisin, and they were 
again silent. 

after a long pause, “it is now about eighteen year sinc I first heard 
that music,” said La voisin; “I rememb it wa on a fine summer’ 
night, much like this, but later, that I wa walk in the woods, and 
alone. I remember, too, that my spirit were veri low, for one of my 
boy wa ill, and we fear we should lose him. I had been watch at 
hi bedsid all the even while hi mother slept; for she had sat up 
with him the night before. I had been watching, and went out for a 
littl fresh air, the day had been veri sultry. As I walk under the 
shade and mused, I heard music at a distance, and thought it wa 
claud play upon hi flute, as he often did of a fine evening, at 
the cottag door. but, when I came to a place where the tree opened, 
(I shall never forget it!) and stood look up at the north-lights, 
which shot up the heaven to a great height, I heard all of a sudden 
such sounds!—they came so as I cannot describe. It wa like the music 
of angels, and I look up again almost expect to see them in the 
sky. when I came home, I told what I had heard, but they laugh at me, 
and said it must be some of the shepherd play on their pipes, and I 
could not persuad them to the contrary. A few night after, however, 
my wife herself heard the same sounds, and wa as much surpris as I 
was, and father deni frighten her sadli by saying, that it wa music 
come to warn her of her child’ death, and that music often came to 
hous where there wa a die person.” 

emily, on hear this, shrunk with a superstiti dread entir new 
to her, and could scarc conceal her agit from st. aubert. 

“but the boy lived, monsieur, in spite of father denis.” 

“father denis!” said st. aubert, who had listen to ‘narr old 
age’ with patient attention, “are we near a convent, then?” 

“yes, sir; the convent of st. clair stand at no great distance, on the 
sea shore yonder.” 

“ah!” said st. aubert, as if struck with some sudden remembrance, “the 
convent of st. clair!” emili observ the cloud of grief, mingl with 
a faint express of horror, gather on hi brow; hi counten 
becam fixed, and, touch as it now wa by the silver white of the 
moonlight, he resembl one of those marbl statu of a monument, 
which seem to bend, in hopeless sorrow, over the ash of the dead, 
shown 

by the blunt light 
that the dim moon through paint casement lends. 
the emigrants. 


“but, my dear sir,” said emily, anxiou to dissip hi thoughts, “you 
forget that repos is necessari to you. If our kind host will give me 
leave, I will prepar your bed, for I know how you like it to be made.” 
st. aubert, recollect himself, and smile affectionately, desir 
she would not add to her fatigu by that attention; and La voisin, 
whose consider for hi guest had been suspend by the interest 
which hi own narr had recalled, now start from hi seat, and, 
apologis for not have call agn from the green, hurri out of 
the room. 

In a few moment he return with hi daughter, a young woman of 
pleas countenance, and emili learn from her, what she had not 
befor suspected, that, for their accommodation, it wa necessari part 
of La voisin’ famili should leav their beds; she lament thi 
circumstance, but agnes, by her reply, fulli prove that she inherited, 
at least, a share of her father’ courteou hospitality. It wa 
settled, that some of her children and michael should sleep in the 
neighbour cottage. 

“if I am better, tomorrow, my dear,” said st. aubert when emili 
return to him, “I mean to set out at an earli hour, that we may rest, 
dure the heat of the day, and will travel toward home. In the 
present state of my health and spirit I cannot look on a longer 
journey with pleasure, and I am also veri anxiou to reach La vallée.” 
emily, though she also desir to return, wa griev at her father’ 
sudden wish to do so, which she thought indic a greater degre of 
indisposit than he would acknowledge. st. aubert now retir to 
rest, and emili to her littl chamber, but not to immedi repose. her 
thought return to the late conversation, concern the state of 
depart spirits; a subject, at thi time, particularli affect to 
her, when she had everi reason to believ that her dear father would 
ere long be number with them. she lean pensiv on the littl open 
casement, and in deep thought fix her eye on the heaven, whose blue 
uncloud concav wa stud thick with stars, the worlds, perhaps, of 
spirits, unspher of mortal mould. As her eye wander along the 
boundless æther, her thought rose, as before, toward the sublim of 
the deity, and to the contempl of futurity. No busi note of thi 
world interrupt the cours of her mind; the merri danc had ceased, 
and everi cottag had retir to hi home. the still air seem 
scarc to breath upon the woods, and, now and then, the distant 
sound of a solitari sheep-bell, or of a close casement, wa all that 
broke on silence. At length, even thi hint of human be wa heard no 
more. elev and enwrapt, while her eye were often wet with tear of 
sublim devot and solemn awe, she continu at the casement, till 
the gloom of midnight hung over the earth, and the planet, which La 
voisin had point out, sunk below the woods. she then recollect what 
he had said concern thi planet, and the mysteri music; and, as 
she linger at the window, half hope and half fear that it would 
return, her mind wa led to the remembr of the extrem emot her 
father had shown on mention of the marqui La villeroi’ death, and of 
the fate of the marchioness, and she felt strongli interest 
concern the remot caus of thi emotion. her surpris and curios 
were inde the greater, becaus she did not recollect ever to have 
heard him mention the name of villeroi. 

No music, however, stole on the silenc of the night, and emily, 
perceiv the late of the hour, return to a scene of fatigue, 
rememb that she wa to rise earli in the morning, and withdrew from 
the window to repose. 



chapter vii 

let those deplor their doom, 
whose hope still grovel in thi dark sojourn. 
but lofti soul can look beyond the tomb, 
can smile at fate, and wonder how they mourn. 
shall spring to these sad scene no more return? 
Is yonder wave the sun’ etern bed?— 
soon shall the orient with new lustr burn, 
and spring shall soon her vital influenc shed, 
again attun the grove, again adorn the mead! 
beatti 


emily, called, as she had requested, at an earli hour, awoke, littl 
refresh by sleep, for uneasi dream had pursu her, and mar the 
kindest bless of the unhappy. but, when she open her casement, 
look out upon the woods, bright with the morn sun, and inspir 
the pure air, her mind wa soothed. the scene wa fill with that 
cheer freshness, which seem to breath the veri spirit of health, 
and she heard onli sweet and _picturesque_ sounds, if such an 
express may be allowed—th matin-bel of a distant convent, the 
faint murmur of the sea-waves, the song of birds, and the far-off low 
of cattle, which she saw come slowli on between the trunk of trees. 
struck with the circumst of imageri around her, she indulg the 
pensiv tranquil which they inspired; and while she lean on her 
window, wait till st. aubert should descend to breakfast, her idea 
arrang themselv in the follow lines: 

the first hour OF morn 

how sweet to wind the forest’ tangl shade, 
when earli twilight, from the eastern bound, 
dawn on the sleep landscap in the glade, 
and fade as morn spread her blush around! 

when ev’ri infant flower, that wept in night, 
lift it chill head soft glow with a tear, 
expand it tender blossom to the light, 
and give it incens to the genial air. 

how fresh the breez that waft the rich perfume, 
and swell the melodi of wake birds; 
the hum of bees, beneath the verdant gloom, 
and woodman’ song, and low of distant herds! 

then, doubt gleam the mountain’ hoari head, 
seen through the part foliag from afar; 
and, farther still, the ocean’ misti bed, 
with flit sails, that partial sunbeam share. 

but, vain the sylvan shade—th breath of may, 
the voic of music float on the gale, 
and forms, that beam through morning’ dewi veil, 
If health no longer bid the heart be gay! 

O balmi hour! ’ti thine her wealth to give, 
here spread her blush, and bid the parent live! 


emili now heard person move below in the cottage, and present the 
voic of michael, who wa talk to hi mules, as he led them forth 
from a hut adjoining. As she left her room, st. aubert, who wa now 
risen, met her at the door, appar as littl restor by sleep as 
herself. she led him down stair to the littl parlour, in which they 
had sup on the preced night, where they found a neat breakfast 
set out, while the host and hi daughter wait to bid them 
good-morrow. 

“I envi you thi cottage, my good friends,” said st. aubert, as he met 
them, “it is so pleasant, so quiet, and so neat; and thi air, that one 
breathes—if anyth could restor lost health, it would sure be thi 
air.” 

La voisin bow gratefully, and replied, with the gallantri of a 
frenchman, “our cottag may be envied, sir, sinc you and mademoisel 
have honour it with your presence.” st. aubert gave him a friendli 
smile for hi compliment, and sat down to a table, spread with cream, 
fruit, new cheese, butter, and coffee. emily, who had observ her 
father with attent and thought he look veri ill, endeavour to 
persuad him to defer travel till the afternoon; but he seem veri 
anxiou to be at home, and hi anxieti he express repeatedly, and 
with an earnest that wa unusu with him. He now said, he found 
himself as well as he had been of late, and that he could bear 
travel better in the cool hour of the morning, than at ani other 
time. but, while he wa talk with hi vener host, and thank 
him for hi kind attentions, emili observ hi counten change, 
and, befor she could reach him, he fell back in hi chair. In a few 
moment he recov from the sudden faint that had come over him, 
but felt so ill, that he perceiv himself unabl to set out, and, 
have remain a littl while, struggl against the pressur of 
indisposition, he beg he might be help up stair to bed. thi 
request renew all the terror which emili had suffer on the 
preced evening; but, though scarc abl to support herself, under 
the sudden shock it gave her, she tri to conceal her apprehens 
from st. aubert, and gave her trembl arm to assist him to the door 
of hi chamber. 

when he wa onc more in bed, he desir that emily, who wa then 
weep in her own room, might be called; and, as she came, he wave 
hi hand for everi other person to quit the apartment. when they were 
alone, he held out hi hand to her, and fix hi eye upon her 
countenance, with an express so full of tender and grief, that 
all her fortitud forsook her, and she burst into an agoni of tears. 
st. aubert seem struggl to acquir firmness, but wa still unabl 
to speak; he could onli press her hand, and check the tear that stood 
trembl in hi eyes. At length he command hi voice, “mi dear 
child,” said he, tri to smile through hi anguish, “mi dear 
emily!”—and paus again. He rais hi eye to heaven, as if in 
prayer, and then, in a firmer tone, and with a look, in which the 
tender of the father wa dignifi by the piou solemn of the 
saint, he said, “mi dear child, I would soften the pain truth I have 
to tell you, but I find myself quit unequ to the art. alas! I would, 
at thi moment, conceal it from you, but that it would be most cruel to 
deceiv you. It cannot be long befor we must part; let us talk of it, 
that our thought and our prayer may prepar us to bear it.” hi voic 
faltered, while emily, still weeping, press hi hand close to her 
heart, which swell with a convuls sigh, but she could not look up. 

“let me not wast these moments,” said st. aubert, recov himself, 
“I have much to say. there is a circumst of solemn consequence, 
which I have to mention, and a solemn promis to obtain from you; when 
thi is done I shall be easier. you have observed, my dear, how anxiou 
I am to reach home, but know not all my reason for this. listen to 
what I am go to say.—yet stay—befor I say more give me thi 
promise, a promis made to your die father!”—st. aubert wa 
interrupted; emily, struck by hi last words, as if for the first time, 
with a convict of hi immedi danger, rais her head; her tear 
stopped, and, gaze at him for a moment with an express of 
unutter anguish, a slight convuls seiz her, and she sunk 
senseless in her chair. st. aubert’ cri brought La voisin and hi 
daughter to the room, and they administ everi mean in their power 
to restor her, but, for a consider time, without effect. when she 
recovered, st. aubert wa so exhaust by the scene he had witnessed, 
that it wa mani minut befor he had strength to speak; he was, 
however, somewhat reviv by a cordial, which emili gave him; and, 
be again alon with her, he exert himself to tranquil her 
spirits, and to offer her all the comfort of which her situat 
admitted. she threw herself into hi arms, wept on hi neck, and grief 
made her so insens to all he said, that he ceas to offer the 
alleviations, which he himself could not, at thi moment, feel, and 
mingl hi silent tear with hers. recalled, at length, to a sens of 
duty, she tri to spare her father from a farther view of her 
suffering; and, quit hi embrace, dri her tears, and said 
something, which she meant for consolation. “mi dear emily,” repli 
st. aubert, “mi dear child, we must look up with humbl confid to 
that being, who ha protect and comfort us in everi danger, and in 
everi afflict we have known; to whose eye everi moment of our live 
ha been exposed; he will not, he doe not, forsak us now; I feel hi 
consol in my heart. I shall leav you, my child, still in hi 
care; and, though I depart from thi world, I shall be still in hi 
presence. nay, weep not again, my emily. In death there is noth new, 
or surprising, sinc we all know, that we are born to die; and noth 
terribl to those, who can confid in an all-pow god. had my life 
been spare now, after a veri few years, in the cours of nature, I 
must have resign it; old age, with all it train of infirmity, it 
privat and it sorrows, would have been mine; and then, at last, 
death would have come, and call forth the tear you now shed. rather, 
my child, rejoice, that I am save from such suffering, and that I am 
permit to die with a mind unimpaired, and sensibl of the comfort 
of faith and resignation.” st. aubert paused, fatigu with speaking. 
emili again endeavour to assum an air of composure; and, in repli 
to what he had said, tri to sooth him with a belief, that he had not 
spoken in vain. 

when he had repos a while, he resum the conversation. “let me 
return,” said he, “to a subject, which is veri near my heart. I said I 
had a solemn promis to receiv from you; let me receiv it now, befor 
I explain the chief circumst which it concerns; there are others, 
of which your peac requir that you should rest in ignorance. 
promise, then, that you will perform exactli what I shall enjoin.” 

emily, awe by the earnest solemn of hi manner, dri her tears, 
that had begun again to flow, in spite of her effort to suppress them; 
and, look eloqu at st. aubert, bound herself to do whatev he 
should requir by a vow, at which she shuddered, yet knew not why. 

He proceeded: “I know you too well, my emily, to believe, that you 
would break ani promise, much less one thu solemnli given; your 
assur give me peace, and the observ of it is of the utmost 
import to your tranquillity. hear, then, what I am go to tell 
you. the closet, which adjoin my chamber at La vallée, ha a slide 
board in the floor. you will know it by a remark knot in the wood, 
and by it be the next board, except one, to the wainscot, which 
front the door. At the distanc of about a yard from that end, nearer 
the window, you will perceiv a line across it, as if the plank had 
been joined;—th way to open it is this:—press your foot upon the line; 
the end of the board will then sink, and you may slide it with eas 
beneath the other. below, you will see a hollow place.” st. aubert 
paus for breath, and emili sat fix in deep attention. “do you 
understand these directions, my dear?” said he. emily, though scarc 
abl to speak, assur him that she did. 

“when you return home, then,” he ad with a deep sigh— 

At the mention of her return home, all the melancholi circumstances, 
that must attend thi return, rush upon her fancy; she burst into 
convuls grief, and st. aubert himself, affect beyond the 
resist of the fortitud which he had, at first, summoned, wept with 
her. after some moments, he compos himself. “mi dear child,” said he, 
“be comforted. when I am gone, you will not be forsaken—i leav you 
onli in the more immedi care of that providence, which ha never yet 
forsaken me. Do not afflict me with thi excess of grief; rather teach 
me by your exampl to bear my own.” He stop again, and emily, the 
more she endeavour to restrain her emotion, found it the less 
possibl to do so. 

st. aubert, who now spoke with pain, resum the subject. “that closet, 
my dear,—when you return home, go to it; and, beneath the board I have 
described, you will find a packet of written papers. attend to me now, 
for the promis you have given particularli relat to what I shall 
direct. these paper you must burn—and, solemnli I command you, 
_without examin them_.” 

emily’ surprise, for a moment, overcam her grief, and she ventur to 
ask, whi thi must be? st. aubert replied, that, if it had been right 
for him to explain hi reasons, her late promis would have been 
unnecessarili exacted. “it is suffici for you, my love, to have a 
deep sens of the import of observ me in thi instance.” st. 
aubert proceeded. “under that board you will also find about two 
hundr loui d’ors, wrap in a silk purse; indeed, it wa to secur 
whatev money might be in the château, that thi secret place wa 
contrived, at a time when the provinc wa over-run by troop of men, 
who took advantag of the tumults, and becam plunderers. 

“but I have yet anoth promis to receiv from you, which is—that you 
will never, whatev may be your futur circumstances, _sell_ the 
château.” st. aubert even enjoin her, whenev she might marry, to 
make it an articl in the contract, that the château should alway be 
hers. He then gave her a more minut account of hi present 
circumst than he had yet done, adding, “the two hundr louis, 
with what money you will now find in my purse, is all the readi money I 
have to leav you. I have told you how I am circumstanc with M. 
motteville, at paris. ah, my child! I leav you poor—but not 
destitute,” he added, after a long pause. emili could make no repli to 
anyth he now said, but knelt at the bedside, with her face upon the 
quilt, weep over the hand she held there. 

after thi conversation, the mind of st. aubert appear to be much 
more at ease; but, exhaust by the effort of speaking, he sunk into a 
kind of doze, and emili continu to watch and weep besid him, till a 
gentl tap at the chamber-door rous her. It wa La voisin, come to 
say, that a confessor from the neighbour convent wa below, readi to 
attend st. aubert. emili would not suffer her father to be disturbed, 
but desired, that the priest might not leav the cottage. when st. 
aubert awok from thi doze, hi sens were confused, and it wa some 
moment befor he recov them suffici to know, that it wa 
emili who sat besid him. He then move hi lips, and stretch forth 
hi hand to her; as she receiv which, she sunk back in her chair, 
overcom by the impress of death on hi countenance. In a few 
minut he recov hi voice, and emili then asked, if he wish to 
see the confessor; he replied, that he did; and, when the holi father 
appeared, she withdrew. they remain alon togeth abov half an 
hour; when emili wa call in, she found st. aubert more agit than 
when she had left him, and she gazed, with a slight degre of 
resentment, at the friar, as the caus of this; who, however, look 
mildli and mourn at her, and turn away. st. aubert, in a 
tremul voice, said, he wish her to join in prayer with him, and 
ask if La voisin would do so too. the old man and hi daughter came; 
they both wept, and knelt with emili round the bed, while the holi 
father read in a solemn voic the servic for the dying. st. aubert lay 
with a seren countenance, and seem to join fervent in the 
devotion, while tear often stole from beneath hi close eyelids, and 
emily’ sob more than onc interrupt the service. 

when it wa concluded, and extrem unction had been administered, the 
friar withdrew. st. aubert then made a sign for La voisin to come 
nearer. He gave him hi hand, and was, for a moment, silent. At length, 
he said, in a trembl voice, “mi good friend, our acquaint ha 
been short, but long enough to give you an opportun of show me 
much kind attention. I cannot doubt, that you will extend thi kind 
to my daughter, when I am gone; she will have need of it. I entrust her 
to your care dure the few day she will remain here. I need say no 
more—y know the feel of a father, for you have children; mine 
would be, indeed, sever if I had less confid in you.” He paused. 
La voisin assur him, and hi tear bore testimoni to hi sincerity, 
that he would do all he could to soften her affliction, and that, if 
st. aubert wish it, he would even attend her into gascony; an offer 
so pleas to st. aubert, that he had scarc word to acknowledg 
hi sens of the old man’ kindness, or to tell him, that he accept 
it. the scene, that follow between st. aubert and emily, affect La 
voisin so much, that he quit the chamber, and she wa again left 
alon with her father, whose spirit seem faint fast, but neither 
hi senses, nor hi voice, yet fail him; and, at intervals, he 
employ much of these last aw moment in advis hi daughter, as 
to her futur conduct. perhaps, he never had thought more justly, or 
express himself more clearly, than he did now. 

“abov all, my dear emily,” said he, “do not indulg in the pride of 
fine feeling, the romant error of amiabl minds. those, who realli 
possess sensibility, ought earli to be taught, that it is a danger 
quality, which is continu extract the excess of misery, or 
delight, from everi surround circumstance. and, since, in our 
passag through thi world, pain circumst occur more frequent 
than pleas ones, and sinc our sens of evil is, I fear, more acut 
than our sens of good, we becom the victim of our feelings, unless 
we can in some degre command them. I know you will say, (for you are 
young, my emily) I know you will say, that you are content sometim 
to suffer, rather than to give up your refin sens of happiness, at 
others; but, when your mind ha been long harass by vicissitude, you 
will be content to rest, and you will then recov from your delusion. 
you will perceive, that the phantom of happi is exchang for the 
substance; for happi aris in a state of peace, not of tumult. It 
is of a temper and uniform nature, and can no more exist in a heart, 
that is continu aliv to minut circumstances, than in one that is 
dead to feeling. you see, my dear, that, though I would guard you 
against the danger of sensibility, I am not an advoc for apathy. At 
your age I should have said _that_ is a vice more hate than all the 
error of sensibility, and I say so still. I call it a _vice_, becaus 
it lead to posit evil; in this, however, it doe no more than an 
ill-govern sensibility, which, by such a rule, might also be call a 
vice; but the evil of the former is of more gener consequence. I have 
exhaust myself,” said st. aubert, feebly, “and have weari you, my 
emily; but, on a subject so import to your futur comfort, I am 
anxiou to be perfectli understood.” 

emili assur him, that hi advic wa most preciou to her, and that 
she would never forget it, or ceas from endeavour to profit by it. 
st. aubert smile affection and sorrow upon her. “I repeat 
it,” said he, “I would not teach you to becom insensible, if I could; 
I would onli warn you of the evil of susceptibility, and point out how 
you may avoid them. beware, my love, I conjur you, of that 
self-delusion, which ha been fatal to the peac of so mani persons; 
bewar of pride yourself on the grace of sensibility; if you 
yield to thi vanity, your happi is lost for ever. alway rememb 
how much more valuabl is the strength of fortitude, than the grace of 
sensibility. Do not, however, confound fortitud with apathy; apathi 
cannot know the virtue. remember, too, that one act of beneficence, one 
act of real usefulness, is worth all the abstract sentiment in the 
world. sentiment is a disgrace, instead of an ornament, unless it lead 
us to good actions. the miser, who think himself respectable, mere 
becaus he possess wealth, and thu mistak the mean of do good, 
for the actual accomplish of it, is not more blameabl than the man 
of sentiment, without activ virtue. you may have observ persons, who 
delight so much in thi sort of sensibl to sentiment, which 
exclud that to the call of ani practic virtue, that they turn from 
the distressed, and, becaus their suffer are pain to be 
contemplated, do not endeavour to reliev them. how despic is that 
humanity, which can be content to pity, where it might assuage!” 

st. aubert, some time after, spoke of madam cheron, hi sister. “let 
me inform you of a circumstance, that nearli affect your welfare,” he 
added. “we have, you know, had littl intercours for some years, but, 
as she is now your onli femal relation, I have thought it proper to 
consign you to her care, as you will see in my will, till you are of 
age, and to recommend you to her protect afterwards. she is not 
exactli the person, to whom I would have commit my emily, but I had 
no alternative, and I believ her to be upon the whole—a good kind of 
woman. I need not recommend it to your prudence, my love, to endeavour 
to concili her kindness; you will do thi for hi sake, who ha 
often wish to do so for yours.” 

emili assur him, that, whatev he request she would religi 
perform to the utmost of her ability. “alas!” ad she, in a voic 
interrupt by sighs, “that will soon be all which remain for me; it 
will be almost my onli consol to fulfil your wishes.” 

st. aubert look up silent in her face, as if would have spoken, but 
hi spirit sunk a while, and hi eye becam heavi and dull. she felt 
that look at her heart. “mi dear father!” she exclaimed; and then, 
check herself, press hi hand closer, and hid her face with her 
handkerchief. her tear were concealed, but st. aubert heard her 
convuls sobs. hi spirit returned. “O my child!” said he, faintly, 
“let my consol be yours. I die in peace; for I know, that I am 
about to return to the bosom of my father, who will still be your 
father, when I am gone. alway trust in him, my love, and he will 
support you in these moments, as he support me.” 

emili could onli listen, and weep; but the extrem composur of hi 
manner, and the faith and hope he expressed, somewhat sooth her 
anguish. yet, whenev she look upon hi emaci countenance, and 
saw the line of death begin to prevail over it—saw hi sunk eyes, 
still bent on her, and their heavi lid press to a close, there wa 
a pang in her heart, such as defi expression, though it requir 
filial virtue, like hers, to forbear the attempt. 

He desir onc more to bless her; “where are you, my dear?” said he, 
as he stretch forth hi hands. emili had turn to the window, that 
he might not perceiv her anguish; she now understood, that hi sight 
had fail him. when he had given her hi blessing, and it seem to be 
the last effort of expir life, he sunk back on hi pillow. she 
kiss hi forehead; the damp of death had settl there, and, 
forget her fortitud for a moment, her tear mingl with them. st. 
aubert lift up hi eyes; the spirit of a father return to them, but 
it quickli vanished, and he spoke no more. 

st. aubert linger till about three o’clock in the afternoon, and, 
thu gradual sink into death, he expir without a struggle, or a 
sigh. 

emili wa led from the chamber by La voisin and hi daughter, who did 
what they could to comfort her. the old man sat and wept with her. 
agn wa more erron officious. 



chapter viii 

o’er him, whose doom thi virtu grieve, 
aerial form shall sit at eve, 
and bend the pensiv head. 
collin 


the monk, who had befor appeared, return in the even to offer 
consol to emily, and brought a kind messag from the ladi abbess, 
invit her to the convent. emily, though she did not accept the 
offer, return an answer express of her gratitude. the holi 
convers of the friar, whose mild benevol of manner bore some 
resembl to those of st. aubert, sooth the violenc of her grief, 
and lift her heart to the being, who, extend through all place and 
all eternity, look on the event of thi littl world as on the 
shadow of a moment, and behold equally, and in the same instant, the 
soul that ha pass the gate of death, and that, which still linger 
in the body. “in the sight of god,” said emily, “mi dear father now 
exists, as truli as he yesterday exist to me; it is to me onli that 
he is dead; to god and to himself he yet lives!” 

the good monk left her more tranquil than she had been sinc st. aubert 
died; and, befor she retir to her littl cabin for the night, she 
trust herself so far as to visit the corpse. silent, and without 
weeping, she stood by it side. the features, placid and serene, told 
the natur of the last sensations, that had linger in the now 
desert frame. for a moment she turn away, in horror of the 
still in which death had fix that countenance, never till now 
seen otherwis than animated; then gaze on it with a mixtur of doubt 
and aw astonishment. her reason could scarc overcom an 
involuntari and unaccount expect of see that belov 
counten still susceptible. she continu to gaze wildly; took up 
the cold hand; spoke; still gazed, and then burst into a transport of 
grief. La voisin, hear her sobs, came into the room to lead her 
away, but she heard nothing, and onli beg that he would leav her. 

again alone, she indulg her tears, and, when the gloom of even 
obscur the chamber, and almost veil from her eye the object of her 
distress, she still hung over the body; till her spirits, at length, 
were exhausted, and she becam tranquil. La voisin again knock at the 
door, and entreat that she would come to the common apartment. befor 
she went, she kiss the lip of st. aubert, as she wa wont to do when 
she bade him good night. again she kiss them; her heart felt as if it 
would break, a few tear of agoni start to her eyes, she look up to 
heaven, then at st. aubert, and left the room. 

retir to her lone cabin, her melancholi thought still hover 
round the bodi of her deceas parent; and, when she sunk into a kind 
of slumber, the imag of her wake mind still haunt her fancy. she 
thought she saw her father approach her with a benign countenance; 
then, smile mourn and point upwards, hi lip moved, but, 
instead of words, she heard sweet music born on the distant air, and 
present saw hi featur glow with the mild raptur of a superior 
being. the strain seem to swell louder, and she awoke. the vision wa 
gone, but music yet came to her ear in strain such as angel might 
breathe. she doubted, listened, rais herself in the bed, and again 
listened. It wa music, and not an illus of her imagination. after a 
solemn steadi harmony, it paused; then rose again, in mourn 
sweetness, and then died, in a cadence, that seem to bear away the 
listen soul to heaven. she instantli rememb the music of the 
preced night, with the strang circumstances, relat by La voisin, 
and the affect convers it had led to, concern the state of 
depart spirits. all that st. aubert had said, on that subject, now 
press upon her heart, and overwhelm it. what a chang in a few 
hours! he, who then could onli conjecture, wa now made acquaint with 
truth; wa himself becom one of the departed! As she listened, she wa 
chill with superstiti awe, her tear stopped; and she rose, and 
went to the window. all without wa obscur in shade; but emily, 
turn her eye from the massi dark of the woods, whose wave 
outlin appear on the horizon, saw, on the left, that effulg 
planet, which the old man had point out, set over the woods. she 
rememb what he had said concern it, and, the music now come at 
interv on the air, she unclos the casement to listen to the 
strains, that soon gradual sunk to a greater distance, and tri to 
discov whenc they came. the obscur prevent her from 
distinguish ani object on the green platform below; and the sound 
becam fainter and fainter, till they soften into silence. she 
listened, but they return no more. soon after, she observ the 
planet trembl between the fring top of the woods, and, in the 
next moment, sink behind them. chill with a melancholi awe, she 
retir onc more to her bed, and, at length, forgot for a while her 
sorrow in sleep. 

On the follow morning, she wa visit by a sister of the convent, 
who came, with kind offic and a second invit from the ladi 
abbess; and emily, though she could not forsak the cottage, while the 
remain of her father were in it, consented, howev pain such a 
visit must be, in the present state of her spirits, to pay her respect 
to the abbess, in the evening. 

about an hour befor sunset, La voisin show her the way through the 
wood to the convent, which stood in a small bay of the mediterranean, 
crown by a woodi amphitheatre; and emily, had she been less unhappy, 
would have admir the extens sea view, that appear from the green 
slope, in front of the edifice, and the rich shores, hung with wood 
and pastures, that extend on either hand. but her thought were now 
occupi by one sad idea, and the featur of natur were to her 
colourless and without form. the bell for vesper struck, as she pass 
the ancient gate of the convent, and seem the funer note for st. 
aubert. littl incid affect a mind, enerv by sorrow; emili 
struggl against the sicken faintness, that came over her, and wa 
led into the presenc of the abbess, who receiv her with an air of 
matern tenderness; an air of such gentl solicitud and 
consideration, as touch her with an instantan gratitude; her eye 
were fill with tears, and the word she would have spoken falter on 
her lips. the abbess led her to a seat, and sat down besid her, still 
hold her hand and regard her in silence, as emili dri her tear 
and attempt to speak. “be composed, my daughter,” said the abbess in 
a sooth voice, “do not speak yet; I know all you would say. your 
spirit must be soothed. We are go to prayers;—wil you attend our 
even service? It is comfortable, my child, to look up in our 
afflict to a father, who see and piti us, and who chasten in 
hi mercy.” 

emily’ tear flow again, but a thousand sweet emot mingl with 
them. the abbess suffer her to weep without interruption, and watch 
over her with a look of benignity, that might have characteris the 
counten of a guardian angel. emily, when she becam tranquil, wa 
encourag to speak without reserve, and to mention the motive, that 
made her unwil to quit the cottage, which the abbess did not oppos 
even by a hint; but prais the filial pieti of her conduct, and ad 
a hope, that she would pass a few day at the convent, befor she 
return to La vallée. “you must allow yourself a littl time to 
recov from your first shock, my daughter, befor you encount a 
second; I will not affect to conceal from you how much I know your 
heart must suffer, on return to the scene of your former happiness. 
here, you will have all, that quiet and sympathi and religion can give, 
to restor your spirits. but come,” ad she, observ the tear 
swell in emily’ eyes, “we will go to the chapel.” 

emili follow to the parlour, where the nun were assembled, to whom 
the abbess commit her, saying, “thi is a daughter, for whom I have 
much esteem; be sister to her.” 

they pass on in a train to the chapel, where the solemn devotion, 
with which the servic wa performed, elev her mind, and brought to 
it the comfort of faith and resignation. 

twilight came on, befor the abbess’ kind would suffer emili to 
depart, when she left the convent, with a heart much lighter than she 
had enter it, and wa reconduct by La voisin through the woods, the 
pensiv gloom of which wa in unison with the temper of her mind; and 
she pursu the littl wild path, in muse silence, till her guid 
suddenli stopped, look round, and then struck out of the path into 
the high grass, say he had mistaken the road. He now walk on 
quickly, and emily, proceed with difficulti over the obscur and 
uneven ground, wa left at some distance, till her voic arrest him, 
who seem unwil to stop, and still hurri on. “if you are in 
doubt about the way,” said emily, “had we not better enquir it at the 
château yonder, between the trees?” 

“no,” repli La voisin, “there is no occasion. when we reach that 
brook, ma’amselle, (you see the light upon the water there, beyond the 
woods) when we reach that brook, we shall be at home presently. I don’t 
know how I happen to mistak the path; I seldom come thi way after 
sunset.” 

“it is solitari enough,” said emily, “but you have no banditti here.” 

“no, ma’amselle—no banditti.” 

“what are you afraid of then, my good friend? you are not 
superstitious?” “no, not superstitious; but, to tell you the truth, 
lady, nobodi like to go near that château, after dusk.” “bi whom is it 
inhabited,” said emily, “that it is so formidable?” “why, ma’amselle, 
it is scarc inhabited, for our lord the marquis, and the lord of all 
these find woods, too, is dead. He had not onc been in it, for these 
mani years, and hi people, who have the care of it, live in a cottag 
close by.” emili now understood thi to be the château, which La voisin 
had formerli point out, as have belong to the marqui villeroi, 
on the mention of which her father had appear so much affected. 

“ah! it is a desol place now,” continu La voisin, “and such a 
grand, fine place, as I rememb it!” emili enquir what had 
occas thi lament change; but the old man wa silent, and 
emily, whose interest wa awaken by the fear he had expressed, and 
abov all by a recollect of her father’ agitation, repeat the 
question, and added, “if you are neither afraid of the inhabitants, my 
good friend, nor are superstitious, how happen it, that you dread to 
pass near that château in the dark?” 

“perhaps, then, I am a littl superstitious, ma’amselle; and, if you 
knew what I do, you might be so too. strang thing have happen 
there. monsieur, your good father, appear to have known the late 
marchioness.” “pray inform me what did happen?” said emily, with much 
emotion. 

“alas! ma’amselle,” answer La voisin, “enquir no further; it is not 
for me to lay open the domest secret of my lord.”—emily, surpris 
by the old man’ words, and hi manner of deliv them, forbor to 
repeat her question; a nearer interest, the remembr of st. aubert, 
occupi her thoughts, and she wa led to recollect the music she heard 
on the preced night, which she mention to La voisin. “you were not 
alone, ma’amselle, in this,” he replied, “I heard it too; but I have so 
often heard it, at the same hour, that I wa scarc surprised.” 

“you doubtless believ thi music to have some connect with the 
château,” said emili suddenly, “and are, therefore, superstitious.” “it 
may be so, ma’amselle, but there are other circumstances, belong to 
that château, which I remember, and sadli too.” A heavi sigh followed: 
but emily’ delicaci restrain the curios these word revived, and 
she enquir no further. 

On reach the cottage, all the violenc of her grief returned; it 
seem as if she had escap it heavi pressur onli while she wa 
remov from the object of it. she pass immedi to the chamber, 
where the remain of her father were laid, and yield to all the 
anguish of hopeless grief. La voisin, at length, persuad her to leav 
the room, and she return to her own, where, exhaust by the 
suffer of the day, she soon fell into deep sleep, and awok 
consider refreshed. 

when the dread hour arrived, in which the remain of st. aubert were 
to be taken from her for ever, she went alon to the chamber to look 
upon hi counten yet onc again, and La voisin, who had wait 
patient below stairs, till her despair should subside, with the 
respect due to grief, forbor to interrupt the indulg of it, till 
surprise, at the length of her stay, and then apprehens overcam hi 
delicacy, and he went to lead her from the chamber. have tap 
gentli at the door, without receiv an answer, he listen 
attentively, but all wa still; no sigh, no sob of anguish wa heard. 
yet more alarm by thi silence, he open the door, and found emili 
lie senseless across the foot of the bed, near which stood the 
coffin. hi call procur assistance, and she wa carri to her room, 
where proper applications, at length, restor her. 

dure her state of insensibility, La voisin had given direct for 
the coffin to be closed, and he succeed in persuad emili to 
forbear revisit the chamber. she, indeed, felt herself unequ to 
this, and also perceiv the necess of spare her spirits, and 
recollect fortitud suffici to bear her through the approach 
scene. st. aubert had given a particular injunction, that hi remain 
should be inter in the church of the convent of st. clair, and, in 
mention the north chancel, near the ancient tomb of the villerois, 
had point out the exact spot, where he wish to be laid. the 
superior had grant thi place for the interment, and thither, 
therefore, the sad process now moved, which wa met, at the gates, 
by the vener priest, follow by a train of friars. everi person, 
who heard the solemn chant of the anthem, and the peal of the organ, 
that struck up, when the bodi enter the church, and saw also the 
feebl steps, and the assum tranquil of emily, gave her 
involuntari tears. she shed none, but walked, her face partli shade by 
a thin black veil, between two persons, who support her, preced by 
the abbess, and follow by nuns, whose plaintiv voic mellow the 
swell harmoni of the dirge. when the process came to the grave 
the music ceased. emili drew the veil entir over her face, and, in a 
momentari pause, between the anthem and the rest of the service, her 
sob were distinctli audible. the holi father began the service, and 
emili again command her feelings, till the coffin wa let down, and 
she heard the earth rattl on it lid. then, as she shuddered, a groan 
burst from her heart, and she lean for support on the person who 
stood next to her. In a few moment she recovered; and, when she heard 
those affect and sublim words: “hi bodi is buri in peace, and 
hi soul return to him that gave it,” her anguish soften into tears. 

the abbess led her from the church into her own parlour, and there 
administ all the consolations, that religion and gentl sympathi 
can give. emili struggl against the pressur of grief; but the 
abbess, observ her attentively, order a bed to be prepared, and 
recommend her to retir to repose. she also kindli claim her 
promis to remain a few day at the convent; and emily, who had no wish 
to return to the cottage, the scene of all her sufferings, had leisure, 
now that no immedi care press upon her attention, to feel the 
indisposition, which disabl her from immedi travelling. 

meanwhile, the matern kind of the abbess, and the gentl 
attent of the nun did all, that wa possible, toward sooth her 
spirit and restor her health. but the latter wa too deepli 
wounded, through the medium of her mind, to be quickli revived. she 
linger for some week at the convent, under the influenc of a slow 
fever, wish to return home, yet unabl to go thither; often even 
reluct to leav the spot where her father’ relic were deposited, 
and sometim sooth herself with the consideration, that, if she 
die here, her remain would repos besid those of st. aubert. In the 
meanwhile, she sent letter to madam cheron and to the old 
housekeeper, inform them of the sad event, that had taken place, and 
of her own situation. from her aunt she receiv an answer, abound 
more in common-plac condolement, than in trait of real sorrow, which 
assur her, that a servant should be sent to conduct her to La vallée, 
for that her own time wa so much occupi by company, that she had no 
leisur to undertak so long a journey. howev emili might prefer La 
vallé to thoulouse, she could not be insens to the indecor and 
unkind conduct of her aunt, in suffer her to return thither, where 
she had no longer a relat to consol and protect her; a conduct, 
which wa the more culpable, sinc st. aubert had appoint madam 
cheron the guardian of hi orphan daughter. 

madam cheron’ servant made the attend of the good La voisin 
unnecessary; and emily, who felt sensibl her oblig to him, for 
all hi kind attent to her late father, as well as to herself, wa 
glad to spare him a long, and what, at hi time of life, must have been 
a troublesom journey. 

dure her stay at the convent, the peac and sanctiti that reign 
within, the tranquil beauti of the sceneri without, and the delic 
attent of the abbess and the nuns, were circumst so sooth 
to her mind, that they almost tempt her to leav a world, where she 
had lost her dearest friends, and devot herself to the cloister, in a 
spot, render sacr to her by contain the tomb of st. aubert. the 
pensiv enthusiasm, too, so natur to her temper, had spread a 
beauti illus over the sanctifi retir of a nun, that almost 
hid from her view the selfish of it security. but the touches, 
which a melancholi fancy, slightli tinctur with superstition, gave to 
the monast scene, began to fade, as her spirit revived, and brought 
onc more to her heart an image, which had onli transient been 
banish thence. By thi she wa silent awaken to hope and comfort 
and sweet affections; vision of happi gleam faintli at a 
distance, and, though she knew them to be illusions, she could not 
resolv to shut them out for ever. It wa the remembr of 
valancourt, of hi taste, hi genius, and of the counten which 
glow with both, that, perhaps, alon determin her to return to the 
world. the grandeur and sublim of the scenes, amidst which they had 
first met, had fascin her fancy, and had impercept contribut 
to render valancourt more interest by seem to commun to him 
somewhat of their own character. the esteem, too, which st. aubert had 
repeatedli express for him, sanction thi kindness; but, though hi 
counten and manner had continu express hi admir of her, 
he had not otherwis declar it; and even the hope of see him again 
wa so distant, that she wa scarc consciou of it, still less that 
it influenc her conduct on thi occasion. 

It wa sever day after the arriv of madam cheron’ servant befor 
emili wa suffici recov to undertak the journey to La vallée. 
On the even preced her departure, she went to the cottag to take 
leav of La voisin and hi family, and to make them a return for their 
kindness. the old man she found sit on a bench at hi door, between 
hi daughter, and hi son-in-law, who wa just return from hi daili 
labour, and who wa play upon a pipe, that, in tone, resembl an 
oboe. A flask of wine stood besid the old man, and, befor him, a 
small tabl with fruit and bread, round which stood sever of hi 
grandsons, fine rosi children, who were take their supper, as their 
mother distribut it. On the edg of the littl green, that spread 
befor the cottage, were cattl and a few sheep repos under the 
trees. the landscap wa touch with the mellow light of the even 
sun, whose long slant beam play through a vista of the woods, and 
light up the distant turret of the château. she paus a moment, 
befor she emerg from the shade, to gaze upon the happi group befor 
her—on the complac and eas of healthi age, depictur on the 
counten of La voisin; the matern tender of agnes, as she 
look upon her children, and the innoc of infantin pleasures, 
reflect in their smiles. emili look again at the vener old man, 
and at the cottage; the memori of her father rose with full forc upon 
her mind, and she hastili step forward, afraid to trust herself with 
a longer pause. she took an affection and affect leav of La 
voisin and hi family; he seem to love her as hi daughter, and shed 
tears; emili shed many. she avoid go into the cottage, sinc she 
knew it would reviv emotions, such as she could not now endure. 

one pain scene yet await her, for she determin to visit again 
her father’ grave; and that she might not be interrupted, or observ 
in the indulg of her melancholi tenderness, she defer her visit, 
till everi inhabit of the convent, except the nun who promis to 
bring her the key of the church, should be retir to rest. emili 
remain in her chamber, till she heard the convent bell strike twelve, 
when the nun came, as she had appointed, with the key of a privat 
door, that open into the church, and they descend togeth the 
narrow wind staircase, that led thither. the nun offer to 
accompani emili to the grave, adding, “it is melancholi to go alon at 
thi hour;” but the former, thank her for the consideration, could 
not consent to have ani wit of her sorrow; and the sister, have 
unlock the door, gave her the lamp. “you will remember, sister,” said 
she, “that in the east aisle, which you must pass, is a newli open 
grave; hold the light to the ground, that you may not stumbl over the 
loos earth.” emily, thank her again, took the lamp, and, step 
into the church, sister mariett departed. but emili paus a moment at 
the door; a sudden fear came over her, and she return to the foot of 
the staircase, where, as she heard the step of the nun ascending, and, 
while she held up the lamp, saw her black veil wave over the spiral 
balusters, she wa tempt to call her back. while she hesitated, the 
veil disappeared, and, in the next moment, asham of her fears, she 
return to the church. the cold air of the aisl chill her, and 
their deep silenc and extent, feebli shone upon by the moonlight, that 
stream through a distant gothic window, would at ani other time have 
awe her into superstition; now, grief occupi all her attention. she 
scarc heard the whisper echo of her own steps, or thought of 
the open grave, till she found herself almost on it brink. A friar of 
the convent had been buri there on the preced evening, and, as she 
had sat alon in her chamber at twilight, she heard, at distance, the 
monk chant the requiem for hi soul. thi brought freshli to her 
memori the circumst of her father’ death; and, as the voices, 
mingl with a low querul peal of the organ, swell faintly, 
gloomi and affect vision had arisen upon her mind. now she 
rememb them, and, turn asid to avoid the broken ground, these 
recollect made her pass on with quicker step to the grave of st. 
aubert, when in the moonlight, that fell athwart a remot part of the 
aisle, she thought she saw a shadow glide between the pillars. she 
stop to listen, and, not hear ani footstep, believ that her 
fanci had deceiv her, and, no longer apprehens of be observed, 
proceeded. st. aubert wa buri beneath a plain marble, bear littl 
more than hi name and the date of hi birth and death, near the foot 
of the state monument of the villerois. emili remain at hi grave, 
till a chime, that call the monk to earli prayers, warn her to 
retire; then, she wept over it a last farewell, and forc herself from 
the spot. after thi hour of melancholi indulgence, she wa refresh 
by a deeper sleep, than she had experienc for a long time, and, on 
awakening, her mind wa more tranquil and resigned, than it had been 
sinc st. aubert’ death. 

but, when the moment of her departur from the convent arrived, all her 
grief returned; the memori of the dead, and the kind of the live 
attach her to the place; and for the sacr spot, where her father’ 
remain were interred, she seem to feel all those tender affect 
which we conceiv for home. the abbess repeat mani kind assur of 
regard at their parting, and press her to return, if ever she should 
find her condit elsewher unpleasant; mani of the nun also 
express unaffect regret at her departure, and emili left the 
convent with mani tears, and follow by sincer wish for her 
happiness. 

she had travel sever leagues, befor the scene of the country, 
through which she passed, had power to rous her for a moment from the 
deep melancholy, into which she wa sunk, and, when they did, it wa 
onli to remind her, that, on her last view of them, st. aubert wa at 
her side, and to call up to her remembr the remark he had 
deliv on similar scenery. thus, without ani particular occurrence, 
pass the day in languor and dejection. she slept that night in a town 
on the skirt of languedoc, and, on the follow morning, enter 
gascony. 

toward the close of thi day, emili came within view of the plain in 
the neighbourhood of La vallée, and the well-known object of former 
time began to press upon her notice, and with them recollections, that 
awaken all her tender and grief. often, while she look through 
her tear upon the wild grandeur of the pyrenees, now vari with the 
rich light and shadow of evening, she remembered, that, when last she 
saw them, her father partook with her of the pleasur they inspired. 
suddenli some scene, which he had particularli point out to her, 
would present itself, and the sick languor of despair would steal upon 
her heart. “there!” she would exclaim, “there are the veri cliffs, 
there the wood of pines, which he look at with such delight, as we 
pass thi road togeth for the last time. there, too, under the crag 
of that mountain, is the cottage, peep from among the cedars, which 
he bade me remember, and copi with my pencil. O my father, shall I 
never see you more!” 

As she drew near the château, these melancholi memori of past time 
multiplied. At length, the château itself appeared, amid the glow 
beauti of st. aubert’ favourit landscape. thi wa an object, which 
call for fortitude, not for tears; emili dri hers, and prepar to 
meet with calm the tri moment of her return to that home, where 
there wa no longer a parent to welcom her. “yes,” said she, “let me 
not forget the lesson he ha taught me! how often he ha point out 
the necess of resist even virtuou sorrow; how often we have 
admir togeth the great of a mind, that can at onc suffer and 
reason! O my father! if you are permit to look down upon your child, 
it will pleas you to see, that she remembers, and endeavour to 
practise, the precept you have given her.” 

A turn on the road now allow a nearer view of the château, the 
chimneys, tip with light, rise from behind st. aubert’ favourit 
oaks, whose foliag partli conceal the lower part of the building. 
emili could not suppress a heavi sigh. “this, too, wa hi favourit 
hour,” said she, as she gaze upon the long even shadows, stretch 
athwart the landscape. “how deep the repose, how love the scene! 
love and tranquil as in former days!” 

again she resist the pressur of sorrow, till her ear caught the gay 
melodi of the dance, which she had so often listen to, as she walk 
with st. aubert, on the margin of the garonne, when all her fortitud 
forsook her, and she continu to weep, till the carriag stop at 
the littl gate, that open upon what wa now her own territory. she 
rais her eye on the sudden stop of the carriage, and saw her 
father’ old housekeep come to open the gate. manchon also came 
running, and bark befor her; and when hi young mistress alighted, 
fawned, and play round her, gasp with joy. 

“dear ma’amselle!” said theresa, and paused, and look as if she would 
have offer someth of condol to emily, whose tear now 
prevent reply. the dog still fawn and ran round her, and then flew 
toward the carriage, with a short quick bark. “ah, ma’amselle!—mi poor 
master!” said theresa, whose feel were more awaken than her 
delicacy, “manchon’ gone to look for him.” emili sob aloud; and, on 
look toward the carriage, which still stood with the door open, saw 
the anim spring into it, and instantli leap out, and then with hi 
nose on the ground run round the horses. 

“don’t cri so, ma’amselle,” said theresa, “it break my heart to see 
you.” the dog now came run to emily, then return to the carriage, 
and then back again to her, whine and discontented. “poor rogue!” 
said theresa, “thou hast lost thi master, thou mayst well cry! but 
come, my dear young lady, be comforted. what shall I get to refresh 
you?” emili gave her hand to the old servant, and tri to restrain her 
grief, while she made some kind enquiri concern her health. but 
she still linger in the walk which led to the château, for within wa 
no person to meet her with the kiss of affection; her own heart no 
longer palpit with impati joy to meet again the well-known 
smile, and she dread to see objects, which would recal the full 
remembr of her former happiness. she move slowli toward the door, 
paused, went on, and paus again. how silent, how forsaken, how 
forlorn did the château appear! trembl to enter it, yet blame 
herself for delay what she could not avoid, she, at length, pass 
into the hall; cross it with a hurri step, as if afraid to look 
round, and open the door of that room, which she wa wont to call her 
own. the gloom of even gave solemn to it silent and desert 
air. the chairs, the tables, everi articl of furniture, so familiar to 
her in happier times, spoke eloqu to her heart. she seat 
herself, without immedi observ it, in a window, which open 
upon the garden, and where st. aubert had often sat with her, watch 
the sun retir from the rich and extens prospect, that appear 
beyond the groves. 

have indulg her tear for some time, she becam more composed; and, 
when theresa, after see the baggag deposit in her lady’ room, 
again appeared, she had so far recov her spirits, as to be abl to 
convers with her. 

“I have made up the green bed for you, ma’amselle,” said theresa, as 
she set the coffe upon the table. “I thought you would like it better 
than your own now; but I littl thought thi day month, that you would 
come back alone. a-well-a-day! the news almost broke my heart, when it 
did come. who would have believed, that my poor master, when he went 
from home, would never return again!” emili hid her face with her 
handkerchief, and wave her hand. 

“do tast the coffee,” said theresa. “mi dear young lady, be 
comforted—w must all die. My dear master is a saint above.” emili took 
the handkerchief from her face, and rais her eye full of tear 
toward heaven; soon after she dri them, and, in a calm, but 
tremul voice, began to enquir concern some of her late father’ 
pensioners. 

“alas-a-day!” said theresa, as she pour out the coffee, and hand it 
to her mistress, “all that could come, have been here everi day to 
enquir after you and my master.” she then proceed to tell, that some 
were dead whom they had left well; and others, who were ill, had 
recovered. “and see, ma’amselle,” ad theresa, “there is old mari 
come up the garden now; she ha look everi day these three year as 
if she would die, yet she is aliv still. she ha seen the chais at 
the door, and know you are come home.” 

the sight of thi poor old woman would have been too much for emily, 
and she beg theresa would go and tell her, that she wa too ill to 
see ani person that night. “tomorrow I shall be better, perhaps; but 
give her thi token of my remembrance.” 

emili sat for some time, given up to sorrow. not an object, on which 
her eye glanced, but awaken some remembrance, that led immedi to 
the subject of her grief. her favourit plants, which st. aubert had 
taught her to nurse; the littl drawings, that adorn the room, which 
hi tast had instruct her to execute; the books, that he had 
select for her use, and which they had read together; her music 
instruments, whose sound he love so well, and which he sometim 
awaken himself—everi object gave new forc to sorrow. At length, she 
rous herself from thi melancholi indulgence, and, summon all her 
resolution, step forward to go into those forlorn rooms, which, 
though she dread to enter, she knew would yet more power affect 
her, if she delay to visit them. 

have pass through the green-house, her courag for a moment forsook 
her, when she open the door of the library; and, perhaps, the shade, 
which even and the foliag of the tree near the window threw 
across the room, heighten the solemn of her feel on enter 
that apartment, where everyth spoke of her father. there wa an arm 
chair, in which he use to sit; she shrunk when she observ it, for 
she had so often seen him seat there, and the idea of him rose so 
distinctli to her mind, that she almost fanci she saw him befor her. 
but she check the illus of a distemp imagination, though she 
could not subdu a certain degre of awe, which now mingl with her 
emotions. she walk slowli to the chair, and seat herself in it; 
there wa a reading-desk befor it, on which lay a book open, as it had 
been left by her father. It wa some moment befor she recov 
courag enough to examin it; and, when she look at the open page, 
she immedi recollected, that st. aubert, on the even befor hi 
departur from the château, had read to her some passag from thi hi 
favourit author. the circumst now affect her extremely; she 
look at the page, wept, and look again. To her the book appear 
sacr and invaluable, and she would not have move it, or close the 
page, which he had left open, for the treasur of the indies. still 
she sat befor the desk, and could not resolv to quit it, though the 
increas gloom, and the profound silenc of the apartment, reviv a 
degre of pain awe. her thought dwelt on the probabl state of 
depart spirits, and she rememb the affect conversation, which 
had pass between st. aubert and La voisin, on the night preced hi 
death. 

As she muse she saw the door slowli open, and a rustl sound in a 
remot part of the room startl her. through the dusk she thought she 
perceiv someth move. the subject she had been considering, and the 
present tone of her spirits, which made her imagin respond to 
everi impress of her senses, gave her a sudden terror of someth 
supernatural. she sat for a moment motionless, and then, her dissip 
reason returning, “what should I fear?” said she. “if the spirit of 
those we love ever return to us, it is in kindness.” 

the silence, which again reigned, made her asham of her late fears, 
and she believed, that her imagin had delud her, or that she had 
heard one of those unaccount noises, which sometim occur in old 
houses. the same sound, however, returned; and, distinguish 
someth move toward her, and in the next instant press besid her 
into the chair, she shrieked; but her fleet sens were instantli 
recalled, on perceiv that it wa manchon who sat by her, and who now 
lick her hand affectionately. 

perceiv her spirit unequ to the task she had assign herself of 
visit the desert room of the château thi night, when she left 
the library, she walk into the garden, and down to the terrace, that 
overhung the river. the sun wa now set; but, under the dark branch 
of the almond trees, wa seen the saffron glow of the west, spread 
beyond the twilight of middl air. the bat flit silent by; and, 
now and then, the mourn note of the nightingal wa heard. the 
circumst of the hour brought to her recollect some lines, which 
she had onc heard st. aubert recit on thi veri spot, and she had now 
a melancholi pleasur in repeat them. 

sonnet 

now the bat circl on the breez of eve, 
that creeps, in shudd’r fits, along the wave, 
and trembl ’mid the woods, and through the cave 
whose lone sigh the wander deceive; 

for oft, when melancholi charm hi mind, 
He think the spirit of the rock he hears, 
nor listens, but with sweetly-thril fears, 
To the low, mystic murmur of the wind! 

now the bat circles, and the twilight-dew 
fall silent round, and, o’er the mountain-cliff, 
the gleam wave, and far-discover’d skiff, 
spread the grey veil of soft, harmoni hue. 

So fall o’er grief the dew of pity’ tear 
dim her lone vision of despair. 


emily, wander on, came to st. aubert’ favourit plane-tree, where 
so often, at thi hour, they had sat beneath the shade together, and 
with her dear mother so often had convers on the subject of a futur 
state. how often, too, had her father express the comfort he deriv 
from believing, that they should meet in anoth world! emily, overcom 
by these recollections, left the plane-tree, and, as she lean 
pensiv on the wall of the terrace, she observ a group of peasant 
danc gaili on the bank of the garonne, which spread in broad 
expans below, and reflect the even light. what a contrast they 
form to the desolate, unhappi emily! they were gay and _debonnaire_, 
as they were wont to be when she, too, wa gay—when st. aubert use to 
listen to their merri music, with a counten beam pleasur and 
benevolence. emily, have look for a moment on thi sprightli band, 
turn away, unabl to bear the remembr it excited; but where, 
alas! could she turn, and not meet new object to give acut to 
grief? 

As she walk slowli toward the house, she wa met by theresa. “dear 
ma’amselle,” said she, “I have been seek you up and down thi half 
hour, and wa afraid some accid had happen to you. how can you 
like to wander about so in thi night air! Do come into the house. 
think what my poor master would have said, if he could see you. I am 
sure, when my dear ladi died, no gentleman could take it more to heart 
than he did, yet you know he seldom shed a tear.” 

“pray, theresa, cease,” said emily, wish to interrupt thi 
ill-judged, but well-mean harangue; theresa’ loquacity, however, 
wa not to be silenc so easily. “and when you use to griev so,” she 
added, “he often told you how wrong it was—for that my mistress wa 
happy. and, if she wa happy, I am sure he is so too; for the prayer 
of the poor, they say, reach heaven.” dure thi speech, emili had 
walk silent into the château, and theresa light her across the 
hall into the common sit parlour, where she had laid the cloth, 
with one solitari knife and fork, for supper. emili wa in the room 
befor she perceiv that it wa not her own apartment, but she check 
the emot which inclin her to leav it, and seat herself quietli 
by the littl supper table. her father’ hat hung upon the opposit 
wall; while she gaze at it, a faint came over her. theresa look 
at her, and then at the object, on which her eye were settled, and 
went to remov it; but emili wave her hand—“no,” said she, “let it 
remain. I am go to my chamber.” “nay, ma’amselle, supper is ready.” 
“I cannot take it,” repli emily, “I will go to my room, and tri to 
sleep. tomorrow I shall be better.” 

“thi is poor doings!” said theresa. “dear lady! do take some food! I 
have dress a pheasant, and a fine one it is. old monsieur barreaux 
sent it thi morning, for I saw him yesterday, and told him you were 
coming. and I know nobodi that seem more concerned, when he heard the 
sad news, then he.” 

“did he?” said emily, in a tender voice, while she felt her poor heart 
warm for a moment by a ray of sympathy. 

At length, her spirit were entir overcome, and she retir to her 
room. 



chapter IX 

can music’ voice, can beauty’ eye, 
can painting’ glow hand suppli 
A charm so suit to my mind, 
As blow thi hollow gust of wind? 
As drop thi littl weep rill, 
soft tinkl down the moss-grown hill; 
while, through the west, where sink the crimson day, 
meek twilight slowli sails, and wave her banner grey? 
mason 


emily, some time after her return to La vallée, receiv letter from 
her aunt, madam cheron, in which, after some common-plac condol 
and advice, she invit her to thoulouse, and added, that, as her late 
brother had entrust emily’ _education_ to her, she should consid 
herself bound to overlook her conduct. emily, at thi time, wish onli 
to remain at La vallée, in the scene of her earli happiness, now 
render infinit dear to her, as the late resid of those, whom 
she had lost for ever, where she could weep unobserved, retrac their 
steps, and rememb each minut particular of their manners. but she 
wa equal anxiou to avoid the displeasur of madam cheron. 

though her affect would not suffer her to question, even a moment, 
the proprieti of st. aubert’ conduct in appoint madam cheron for 
her guardian, she wa sensible, that thi step had made her happi 
depend, in a great degree, on the humour of her aunt. In her reply, she 
beg permiss to remain, at present, at La vallée, mention the 
extrem deject of her spirits, and the necess she felt for quiet 
and retir to restor them. these she knew were not to be found at 
madam cheron’s, whose inclin led her into a life of dissipation, 
which her ampl fortun encouraged; and, have given her answer, she 
felt somewhat more at ease. 

In the first day of her affliction, she wa visit by monsieur 
barreaux, a sincer mourner for st. aubert. “I may well lament my 
friend,” said he, “for I shall never meet with hi resemblance. If I 
could have found such a man in what is call society, I should not 
have left it.” 

M. barreaux’ admir of her father endear him extrem to emily, 
whose heart found almost it first relief in convers of her parents, 
with a man, whom she so much revered, and who, though with such an 
ungraci appearance, possess to much good of heart and delicaci 
of mind. 

sever week pass away in quiet retirement, and emily’ afflict 
began to soften into melancholy. she could bear to read the book she 
had befor read with her father; to sit in hi chair in the library—to 
watch the flower hi hand had planted—to awaken the tone of that 
instrument hi finger had pressed, and sometim even to play hi 
favourit air. 

when her mind had recov from the first shock of affliction, 
perceiv the danger of yield to indolence, and that activ alon 
could restor it tone, she scrupul endeavour to pass all her 
hour in employment. and it wa now that she understood the full valu 
of the educ she had receiv from st. aubert, for in cultiv 
her understand he had secur her an asylum from indolence, without 
recours to dissipation, and rich and vari amus and information, 
independ of the society, from which her situat seclud her. nor 
were the good effect of thi educ confin to selfish advantages, 
since, st. aubert have nourish everi amiabl qualiti of her heart, 
it now expand in benevol to all around her, and taught her, when 
she could not remov the misfortun of others, at least to soften them 
by sympathi and tenderness;—a benevol that taught her to feel for 
all, that could suffer. 

madam cheron return no answer to emily’ letter, who began to hope, 
that she should be permit to remain some time longer in her 
retirement, and her mind had now so far recov it strength, that 
she ventur to view the scenes, which most power recal the 
imag of past times. among these wa the fishing-house; and, to 
indulg still more the affection melancholi of the visit, she took 
thither her lute, that she might again hear there the tones, to which 
st. aubert and her mother had so often delight to listen. she went 
alone, and at that still hour of the even which is so sooth to 
fanci and to grief. the last time she had been here she wa in compani 
with monsieur and madam st. aubert, a few day preced that, on 
which the latter wa seiz with a fatal illness. now, when emili again 
enter the woods, that surround the building, they awaken so 
forcibl the memori of former times, that her resolut yield for a 
moment to excess of grief. she stopped, lean for support against a 
tree, and wept for some minutes, befor she had recov herself 
suffici to proceed. the littl path, that led to the building, wa 
overgrown with grass and the flower which st. aubert had scatter 
carelessli along the border were almost choke with weeds—th tall 
thistle—th fox-glove, and the nettle. she often paus to look on the 
desol spot, now so silent and forsaken, and when, with a trembl 
hand, she open the door of the fishing-house, “ah!” said she, 
“everything—everyth remain as when I left it last—left it with 
those who never must return!” she went to a window, that overhung the 
rivulet, and, lean over it, with her eye fix on the current, wa 
soon lost in melancholi reverie. the lute she had brought lay forgotten 
besid her; the mourn sigh of the breeze, as it wave the high 
pine above, and it softer whisper among the osiers, that bow upon 
the bank below, wa a kind of music more in unison with her feelings. 
It did not vibrat on the chord of unhappi memory, but wa sooth to 
the heart as the voic of pity. she continu to muse, unconsci of 
the gloom of evening, and that the sun’ last light trembl on the 
height above, and would probabl have remain so much longer, if a 
sudden footstep, without the building, had not alarm her attention, 
and first made her recollect that she wa unprotected. In the next 
moment, a door opened, and a stranger appeared, who stop on 
perceiv emily, and then began to apologis for hi intrusion. but 
emily, at the sound of hi voice, lost her fear in a stronger emotion: 
it tone were familiar to her ear, and, though she could not readili 
distinguish through the dusk the featur of the person who spoke, she 
felt a remembr too strong to be distrusted. 

He repeat hi apology, and emili then said someth in reply, when 
the stranger eagerli advancing, exclaimed, “good god! can it be—sur 
I am not mistaken—ma’amsel st. aubert?—i it not?” 

“it is indeed,” said emily, who wa confirm in her first conjecture, 
for she now distinguish the counten of valancourt, light up 
with still more than it usual animation. A thousand pain 
recollect crowd to her mind, and the effort, which she made to 
support herself, onli serv to increas her agitation. valancourt, 
meanwhile, have enquir anxious after her health, and express 
hi hopes, that M. st. aubert had found benefit from travelling, 
learn from the flood of tears, which she could no longer repress, the 
fatal truth. He led her to a seat, and sat down by her, while emili 
continu to weep, and valancourt to hold the hand, which she wa 
unconsci he had taken, till it wa wet with the tears, which grief 
for st. aubert and sympathi for herself had call forth. 

“I feel,” said he at length, “I feel how insuffici all attempt at 
consol must be on thi subject. I can onli mourn with you, for I 
cannot doubt the sourc of your tears. would to god I were mistaken!” 

emili could still answer onli by tears, till she rose, and beg they 
might leav the melancholi spot, when valancourt, though he saw her 
feebleness, could not offer to detain her, but took her arm within his, 
and led her from the fishing-house. they walk silent through the 
woods, valancourt anxiou to know, yet fear to ask ani particular 
concern st. aubert; and emili too much distress to converse. after 
some time, however, she acquir fortitud enough to speak of her 
father, and to give a brief account of the manner of hi death; dure 
which recit valancourt’ counten betray strong emotion, and, 
when he heard that st. aubert had die on the road, and that emili had 
been left among strangers, he press her hand between his, and 
involuntarili exclaimed, “whi wa I not there!” but in the next moment 
recollect himself, for he immedi return to the mention of her 
father; till, perceiv that her spirit were exhausted, he gradual 
chang the subject, and spoke of himself. emili thu learn that, 
after they had parted, he had wandered, for some time, along the shore 
of the mediterranean, and had then return through languedoc into 
gascony, which wa hi nativ province, and where he usual resided. 

when he had conclud hi littl narrative, he sunk into a silence, 
which emili wa not dispos to interrupt, and it continued, till they 
reach the gate of the château, when he stopped, as if he had known 
thi to be the limit of hi walk. here, saying, that it wa hi 
intent to return to estuvièr on the follow day, he ask her if 
she would permit him to take leav of her in the morning; and emily, 
perceiv that she could not reject an ordinari civility, without 
express by her refus an expect of someth more, wa 
compel to answer, that she should be at home. 

she pass a melancholi evening, dure which the retrospect of all 
that had happened, sinc she had seen valancourt, would rise to her 
imagination; and the scene of her father’ death appear in tint as 
fresh, as if it had pass on the preced day. she rememb 
particularli the earnest and solemn manner, in which he had requir 
her to destroy the manuscript papers, and, awaken from the lethargy, 
in which sorrow had held her, she wa shock to think she had not yet 
obey him, and determined, that anoth day should not reproach her 
with the neglect. 



chapter X 

can such thing be, 
and overcom us like a summer’ cloud, 
without our special wonder? 
macbeth 


On the next morning, emili order a fire to be light in the stove of 
the chamber, where st. aubert use to sleep; and, as soon as she had 
breakfasted, went thither to burn the papers. have fasten the door 
to prevent interruption, she open the closet where they were 
concealed, as she enter which, she felt an emot of unusu awe, 
and stood for some moment survey it, trembling, and almost afraid 
to remov the board. there wa a great chair in one corner of the 
closet, and, opposit to it, stood the table, at which she had seen her 
father sit, on the even that preced hi departure, look over, 
with so much emotion, what she believ to be these veri papers. 

the solitari life, which emili had led of late, and the melancholi 
subjects, on which she had suffer her thought to dwell, had render 
her at time sensibl to the ‘thick-com fancies’ of a mind greatli 
enervated. It wa lamentable, that her excel understand should 
have yielded, even for a moment, to the reveri of superstition, or 
rather to those start of imagination, which deceiv the sens into 
what can be call noth less than momentari madness. instanc of 
thi temporari failur of mind had more than onc occur sinc her 
return home; particularli when, wander through thi lone mansion 
in the even twilight, she had been alarm by appearances, which 
would have been unseen in her more cheer days. To thi infirm state 
of her nerv may be attribut what she imagined, when, her eye 
glanc a second time on the arm-chair, which stood in an obscur part 
of the closet, the counten of her dead father appear there. emili 
stood fix for a moment to the floor, after which she left the closet. 
her spirits, however, soon returned; she reproach herself with the 
weak of thu suffer interrupt in an act of seriou 
importance, and again open the door. By the direct which st. 
aubert had given her, she readili found the board he had describ in 
an opposit corner of the closet, near the window; she distinguish 
also the line he had mentioned, and, press it as he had bade her, it 
slid down, and disclos the bundl of papers, togeth with some 
scatter ones, and the purs of louis. with a trembl hand she 
remov them, replac the board, paus a moment, and wa rise from 
the floor, when, on look up, there appear to her alarm fanci the 
same counten in the chair. the illusion, anoth instanc of the 
unhappi effect which solitud and grief had gradual produc upon her 
mind, subdu her spirits; she rush forward into the chamber, and 
sunk almost senseless into a chair. return reason soon overcam the 
dreadful, but pitiabl attack of imagination, and she turn to the 
papers, though still with so littl recollection, that her eye 
involuntarili settl on the write of some loos sheets, which lay 
open; and she wa unconscious, that she wa transgress her father’ 
strict injunction, till a sentenc of dread import awaken her 
attent and her memori together. she hastili put the paper from her; 
but the words, which had rous equal her curios and terror, she 
could not dismiss from her thoughts. So power had they affect 
her, that she even could not resolv to destroy the paper immediately; 
and the more she dwelt on the circumstance, the more it inflam her 
imagination. urg by the most forcible, and appar the most 
necessary, curios to enquir farther, concern the terribl and 
mysteri subject, to which she had seen an allusion, she began to 
lament her promis to destroy the papers. for a moment, she even 
doubted, whether it could justli be obeyed, in contradict to such 
reason as there appear to be for further information. but the 
delus wa momentary. 

“I have given a solemn promise,” said she, “to observ a solemn 
injunction, and it is not my busi to argue, but to obey. let me 
hasten to remov the temptation, that would destroy my innocence, and 
embitt my life with the conscious of irremedi guilt, while I 
have strength to reject it.” 

thu reanim with a sens of her duty, she complet the triumph of 
her integr over temptation, more forcibl than ani she had ever 
known, and consign the paper to the flames. her eye watch them as 
they slowli consumed, she shudder at the recollect of the sentenc 
she had just seen, and at the certainty, that the onli opportun of 
explain it wa then pass away for ever. 

It wa long after this, that she recollect the purse; and as she wa 
deposit it, unopened, in a cabinet, perceiv that it contain 
someth of a size larger than coin, she examin it. “hi hand 
deposit them here,” said she, as she kiss some piec of the coin, 
and wet them with her tears, “hi hand—which is now dust!” At the 
bottom of the purs wa a small packet, have taken out which, and 
unfold paper after paper, she found to be an ivori case, contain 
the miniatur of a—lady! she started—“th same,” said she, “mi father 
wept over!” On examin the counten she could recollect no person 
that it resembled. It wa of uncommon beauty, and wa characteris by 
an express of sweetness, shade with sorrow, and temper by 
resignation. 

st. aubert had given no direct concern thi picture, nor had 
even name it; she, therefore, thought herself justifi in preserv 
it. more than onc rememb hi manner, when he had spoken of the 
marchio of villeroi, she felt inclin to believ that thi wa her 
resemblance; yet there appear no reason whi he should have preserv 
a pictur of that lady, or, have preserv it, whi he should lament 
over it in a manner so strike and affect as she had wit on 
the night preced hi departure. 

emili still gaze on the countenance, examin it features, but she 
knew not where to detect the charm that captiv her attention, and 
inspir sentiment of such love and pity. dark brown hair play 
carelessli along the open forehead; the nose wa rather inclin to 
aquiline; the lip spoke in a smile, but it wa a melancholi one; the 
eye were blue, and were direct upward with an express of 
peculiar meekness, while the soft cloud of the brow spoke of the fine 
sensibl of the temper. 

emili wa rous from the muse mood into which the pictur had thrown 
her, by the close of the garden gate; and, on turn her eye to the 
window, she saw valancourt come toward the château. her spirit 
agit by the subject that had late occupi her mind, she felt 
unprepar to see him, and remain a few moment in the chamber to 
recov herself. 

when she met him in the parlour, she wa struck with the chang that 
appear in hi air and counten sinc they had part in rousillon, 
which twilight and the distress she suffer on the preced even 
had prevent her from observing. but deject and languor 
disappeared, for a moment, in the smile that now enlighten hi 
countenance, on perceiv her. “you see,” said he, “I have avail 
myself of the permiss with which you honour me—of bid _you_ 
farewell, whom I had the happi of meet onli yesterday.” 

emili smile faintly, and, anxiou to say something, ask if he had 
been long in gascony. “A few day only,” repli valancourt, while a 
blush pass over hi cheek. “I engag in a long rambl after I had 
the misfortun of part with the friend who had made my wander 
among the pyrene so delightful.” 

A tear came to emily’ eye, as valancourt said this, which he observed; 
and, anxiou to draw off her attent from the remembr that had 
occas it, as well as shock at hi own thoughtlessness, he began 
to speak on other subjects, express hi admir of the château, 
and it prospects. emily, who felt somewhat embarrass how to support 
a conversation, wa glad of such an opportun to continu it on 
indiffer topics. they walk down to the terrace, where valancourt 
wa charm with the river scenery, and the view over the opposit 
shore of guienne. 

As he lean on the wall of the terrace, watch the rapid current of 
the garonne, “I wa a few week ago,” said he, “at the sourc of thi 
nobl river; I had not then the happi of know you, or I should 
have regret your absence—it wa a scene so exactli suit to your 
taste. It rise in a part of the pyrenees, still wilder and more 
sublime, I think, than ani we pass in the way to rousillon.” He then 
describ it fall among the precipic of the mountains, where it 
waters, augment by the stream that descend from the snowi summit 
around, rush into the vallé d’aran, between whose romant height it 
foam along, pursu it way to the north west till it emerg upon 
the plain of languedoc. then, wash the wall of thoulouse, and 
turn again to the north west, it assum a milder character, as it 
fertil the pastur of gasconi and guienne, in it progress to the 
bay of biscay. 

emili and valancourt talk of the scene they had pass among the 
pyrenean alps; as he spoke of which there wa often a tremul 
tender in hi voice, and sometim he expati on them with all 
the fire of genius, sometim would appear scarc consciou of the 
topic, though he continu to speak. thi subject recal forcibl to 
emili the idea of her father, whose imag appear in everi landscape, 
which valancourt particularized, whose remark dwelt upon her memory, 
and whose enthusiasm still glow in her heart. her silence, at length, 
remind valancourt how nearli hi convers approach to the 
occas of her grief, and he chang the subject, though for one 
scarc less affect to emily. when he admir the grandeur of the 
plane-tree, that spread it wide branch over the terrace, and under 
whose shade they now sat, she rememb how often she had sat thu 
with st. aubert, and heard him express the same admiration. 

“thi wa a favourit tree with my dear father,” said she; “he use to 
love to sit under it foliag with hi famili about him, in the fine 
even of summer.” 

valancourt understood her feelings, and wa silent; had she rais her 
eye from the ground she would have seen tear in his. He rose, and 
lean on the wall of the terrace, from which, in a few moments, he 
return to hi seat, then rose again, and appear to be greatli 
agitated; while emili found her spirit so much depressed, that sever 
of her attempt to renew the convers were ineffectual. valancourt 
again sat down, but wa still silent, and trembled. At length he said, 
with a hesit voice, “thi love scene!—i am go to leave—to 
leav you—perhap for ever! these moment may never return; I cannot 
resolv to neglect, though I scarc dare to avail myself of them. let 
me, however, without offend the delicaci of your sorrow, ventur to 
declar the admir I must alway feel of your goodness—o! that at 
some futur period I might be permit to call it love!” 

emily’ emot would not suffer her to reply; and valancourt, who now 
ventur to look up, observ her counten change, expect to see 
her faint, and made an involuntari effort to support her, which 
recal emili to a sens of her situation, and to an exert of her 
spirits. valancourt did not appear to notic her indisposition, but, 
when he spoke again, hi voic told the tenderest love. “I will not 
presume,” he added, “to intrud thi subject longer upon your attent 
at thi time, but I may, perhaps, be permit to mention, that these 
part moment would lose much of their bitter if I might be 
allow to hope the declar I have made would not exclud me from 
your presenc in future.” 

emili made anoth effort to overcom the confus of her thoughts, 
and to speak. she fear to trust the prefer her heart acknowledg 
toward valancourt, and to give him ani encourag for hope, on so 
short an acquaintance. for though in thi narrow period she had 
observ much that wa admir in hi tast and disposition, and 
though these observ had been sanction by the opinion of her 
father, they were not suffici testimoni of hi gener worth to 
determin her upon a subject so infinit import to her futur 
happi as that, which now solicit her attention. yet, though the 
thought of dismiss valancourt wa so veri pain to her, that she 
could scarc endur to paus upon it, the conscious of thi made 
her fear the partial of her judgment, and hesit still more to 
encourag that suit, for which her own heart too tenderli pleaded. the 
famili of valancourt, if not hi circumstances, had been known to her 
father, and known to be unexceptionable. Of hi circumstances, 
valancourt himself hint as far as delicaci would permit, when he said 
he had at present littl els to offer but a heart, that ador her. He 
had solicit onli for a distant hope, and she could not resolv to 
forbid, though she scarc dare to permit it; at length, she acquir 
courag to say, that she must think herself honour by the good 
opinion of ani person, whom her father had esteemed. 

“and wa I, then, thought worthi of hi esteem?” said valancourt, in a 
voic trembl with anxiety; then check himself, he added, “but 
pardon the question; I scarc know what I say. If I might dare to 
hope, that you think me not unworthi such honour, and might be 
permit sometim to enquir after your health, I should now leav 
you with compar tranquillity.” 

emily, after a moment’ silence, said, “I will be ingenu with you, 
for I know you will understand, and allow for my situation; you will 
consid it as a proof of my—mi esteem that I am so. though I live here 
in what wa my father’ house, I live here alone. I have, alas! no 
longer a parent—a parent, whose presenc might sanction your visits. It 
is unnecessari for me to point out the improprieti of my receiv 
them.” 

“nor will I affect to be insens of this,” repli valancourt, 
ad mournfully—“but what is to consol me for my candour? I distress 
you, and would now leav the subject, if I might carri with me a hope 
of be some time permit to renew it, of be allow to make 
myself known to your family.” 

emili wa again confused, and again hesit what to reply; she felt 
most acut the difficulty—th forlorn of her situation, which did 
not allow her a singl relative, or friend, to whom she could turn for 
even a look, that might support and guid her in the present 
embarrass circumstances. madam cheron, who wa her onli relative, 
and ought to have been thi friend, wa either occupi by her own 
amusements, or so resent of the reluct her niec had shown to 
quit La vallée, that she seem total to have abandon her. 

“ah! I see,” said valancourt, after a long pause, dure which emili 
had begun, and left unfinish two or three sentences, “I see that I 
have noth to hope; my fear were too just, you think me unworthi of 
your esteem. that fatal journey! which I consid as the happiest 
period of my life—thos delight day were to embitt all my futur 
ones. how often I have look back to them with hope and fear—yet never 
till thi moment could I prevail with myself to regret their enchant 
influence.” 

hi voic faltered, and he abruptli quit hi seat and walk on the 
terrace. there wa an express of despair on hi countenance, that 
affect emily. the plead of her heart overcame, in some degree, 
her extrem timidity, and, when he resum hi seat, she said, in an 
accent that betray her tenderness, “you do both yourself and me 
injustic when you say I think you unworthi of my esteem; I will 
acknowledg that you have long possess it, and—and—” 

valancourt wait impati for the conclus of the sentence, but 
the word die on her lips. her eyes, however, reflect all the 
emot of her heart. valancourt passed, in an instant, from the 
impati of despair, to that of joy and tenderness. “O emily!” he 
exclaimed, “mi own emily—teach me to sustain thi moment! let me seal 
it as the most sacr of my life!” 

He press her hand to hi lips, it wa cold and trembling; and, 
rais her eyes, he saw the pale of her countenance. tear came to 
her relief, and valancourt watch in anxiou silenc over her. In a 
few moments, she recov herself, and smile faintli through her 
tears, said, “can you excus thi weakness? My spirit have not yet, I 
believe, recov from the shock they late received.” 

“I cannot excus myself,” said valancourt, “but I will forbear to renew 
the subject, which may have contribut to agit them, now that I can 
leav you with the sweet certainti of possess your esteem.” 

then, forget hi resolution, he again spoke of himself. “you know 
not,” said he, “the mani anxiou hour I have pass near you lately, 
when you believ me, if inde you honour me with a thought, far 
away. I have wandered, near the château, in the still hour of the 
night, when no eye could observ me. It wa delight to know I wa so 
near you, and there wa someth particularli sooth in the thought, 
that I watch round your habitation, while you slept. these ground 
are not entir new to me. onc I ventur within the fence, and spent 
one of the happiest, and yet most melancholi hour of my life in 
walk under what I believ to be your window.” 

emili enquir how long valancourt had been in the neighbourhood. 
“sever days,” he replied. “it wa my design to avail myself of the 
permiss M. st. aubert had given me. I scarc know how to account 
for it; but, though I anxious wish to do this, my resolut alway 
failed, when the moment approached, and I constantli defer my visit. 
I lodg in a villag at some distance, and wander with my dogs, 
among the scene of thi charm country, wish continu to meet 
you, yet not dare to visit you.” 

have thu continu to converse, without perceiv the flight of 
time, valancourt, at length, seem to recollect himself. “I must go,” 
said he mournfully, “but it is with the hope of see you again, of 
be permit to pay my respect to your family; let me hear thi 
hope confirm by your voice.” “mi famili will be happi to see ani 
friend of my dear father,” said emily. valancourt kiss her hand, and 
still lingered, unabl to depart, while emili sat silently, with her 
eye bent on the ground; and valancourt, as he gaze on her, consid 
that it would soon be imposs for him to recall, even to hi memory, 
the exact resembl of the beauti counten he then beheld; at 
thi moment a hasti footstep approach from behind the plane-tree, 
and, turn her eyes, emili saw madam cheron. she felt a blush steal 
upon her cheek, and her frame trembl with the emot of her mind; 
but she instantli rose to meet her visitor. “so, niece!” said madam 
cheron, cast a look of surpris and enquiri on valancourt, “so 
niece, how do you do? but I need not ask, your look tell me you have 
alreadi recov your loss.” 

“mi look do me injustic then, madame, my loss I know can never be 
recovered.” 

“well—well! I will not argu with you; I see you have exactli your 
father’ disposition; and let me tell you it would have been much 
happier for him, poor man! if it had been a differ one.” 

A look of dignifi displeasure, with which emili regard madam 
cheron, while she spoke, would have touch almost ani other heart; she 
made no other reply, but introduc valancourt, who could scarc 
stifl the resent he felt, and whose bow madam cheron return 
with a slight curtsy, and a look of supercili examination. after a 
few moment he took leav of emily, in a manner, that hastili express 
hi pain both at hi own departure, and at leav her to the societi 
of madam cheron. 

“who is that young man?” said her aunt, in an accent which equal 
impli inquisit and censure. “some idl admir of your I 
suppose; but I believ niec you had a greater sens of propriety, 
than to have receiv the visit of ani young man in your present 
unfriend situation. let me tell you the world will observ those 
things, and it will talk, aye and veri freeli too.” 

emily, extrem shock at thi coars speech, attempt to interrupt 
it; but madam cheron would proceed, with all the self-import of a 
person, to whom power is new. 

“it is veri necessari you should be under the eye of some person more 
abl to guid you than yourself. I, indeed, have not much leisur for 
such a task; however, sinc your poor father made it hi last request, 
that I should overlook your conduct—i must even take you under my care. 
but thi let me tell you niece, that, unless you will determin to be 
veri conform to my direction, I shall not troubl myself longer 
about you.” 

emili made no attempt to interrupt madam cheron a second time, grief 
and the pride of consciou innoc kept her silent, till her aunt 
said, “I am now come to take you with me to thoulouse; I am sorri to 
find, that your poor father died, after all, in such indiffer 
circumstances; however, I shall take you home with me. ah! poor man, he 
wa alway more gener than provident, or he would not have left hi 
daughter depend on hi relations.” 

“nor ha he done so, I hope, madam,” said emili calmly, “nor did hi 
pecuniari misfortun aris from that nobl generosity, which alway 
distinguish him. the affair of M. de mottevil may, I trust, yet be 
settl without deepli injur hi creditors, and in the meantim I 
should be veri happi to remain at La vallée.” 

“no doubt you would,” repli madam cheron, with a smile of irony, 
“and I shall no doubt consent to this, sinc I see how necessari 
tranquil and retir are to restor your spirits. I did not 
think you capabl of so much duplicity, niece; when you plead thi 
excus for remain here, I foolishli believ it to be a just one, 
nor expect to have found with you so agreeabl a companion as thi M. 
La val—, I forget hi name.” 

emili could no longer endur these cruel indignities. “it wa a just 
one, madam,” said she; “and now, indeed, I feel more than ever the 
valu of the retir I then solicited; and, if the purport of your 
visit is onli to add insult to the sorrow of your brother’ child, she 
could well have spare it.” 

“I see that I have undertaken a veri troublesom task,” said madam 
cheron, colour highly. “I am sure, madam,” said emili mildly, and 
endeavour to restrain her tears, “I am sure my father did not mean 
it should be such. I have the happi to reflect, that my conduct 
under hi eye wa such as he often delight to approve. It would be 
veri pain to me to disobey the sister of such a parent, and, if you 
believ the task will realli be so troublesome, I must lament, that it 
is yours.” 

“well! niece, fine speak signifi little. I am willing, in 
consider of my poor brother, to overlook the improprieti of your 
late conduct, and to tri what your futur will be.” 

emili interrupt her, to beg she would explain what wa the 
improprieti she allud to. 

“what impropriety! whi that of receiv the visit of a lover unknown 
to your family,” repli madam cheron, not consid the improprieti 
of which she had herself been guilty, in expos her niec to the 
possibl of conduct so erroneous. 

A faint blush pass over emily’ countenance; pride and anxieti 
struggl in her breast; and, till she recollected, that appear 
did, in some degree, justifi her aunt’ suspicions, she could not 
resolv to humbl herself so far as to enter into the defenc of a 
conduct, which had been so innoc and undesign on her part. she 
mention the manner of valancourt’ introduct to her father; the 
circumst of hi receiv the pistol-shot, and of their afterward 
travel together; with the accident way, in which she had met him, 
on the preced evening. she own he had declar a partial for 
her, and that he had ask permiss to address her family. 

“and who is thi young adventurer, pray?” said madam cheron, “and what 
are hi pretensions?” “these he must himself explain, madam,” repli 
emily. “of hi famili my father wa not ignorant, and I believ it is 
unexceptionable.” she then proceed to mention what she knew 
concern it. 

“oh, then, thi it seem is a younger brother,” exclaim her aunt, 
“and of cours a beggar. A veri fine tale indeed! and so my brother 
took a fanci to thi young man after onli a few day acquaintance!—but 
that wa so like him! In hi youth he wa alway take these like and 
dislikes, when no other person saw ani reason for them at all; nay, 
indeed, I have often thought the peopl he disapprov were much more 
agreeabl than those he admired;—but there is no account for tastes. 
He wa alway so much influenc by people’ countenances; now I, for 
my part, have no notion of this, it is all ridicul enthusiasm. what 
ha a man’ face to do with hi character? can a man of good charact 
help have a disagre face?”—which last sentenc madam cheron 
deliv with the decis air of a person who congratul herself 
on have made a grand discovery, and believ the question to be 
unanswer settled. 

emily, desir of conclud the conversation, enquir if her aunt 
would accept some refreshment, and madam cheron accompani her to the 
château, but without desist from a topic, which she discuss with 
so much complac to herself, and sever to her niece. 

“I am sorri to perceive, niece,” said she, in allus to somewhat that 
emili had said, concern physiognomy, “that you have a great mani of 
your father’ prejudices, and among them those sudden predilect for 
peopl from their looks. I can perceive, that you imagin yourself to 
be violent in love with thi young adventurer, after an acquaint 
of onli a few days. there wa something, too, so charmingli romant in 
the manner of your meeting!” 

emili check the tears, that trembl in her eyes, while she said, 
“when my conduct shall deserv thi severity, madam, you will do well 
to exercis it; till then justice, if not tenderness, should sure 
restrain it. I have never willingli offend you; now I have lost my 
parents, you are the onli person to whom I can look for kindness. let 
me not lament more than ever the loss of such parents.” the last word 
were almost stifl by her emotions, and she burst into tears. 
rememb the delicaci and the tender of st. aubert, the happy, 
happi day she had pass in these scenes, and contrast them with 
the coars and unfeel behaviour of madam cheron, and from the 
futur hour of mortif she must submit to in her presence—a 
degre of grief seiz her, that almost reach despair. madam cheron, 
more offend by the reproof which emily’ word conveyed, than touch 
by the sorrow they expressed, said nothing, that might soften her 
grief; but, notwithstand an appar reluct to receiv her 
niece, she desir her company. the love of sway wa her rule 
passion, and she knew it would be highli gratifi by take into her 
hous a young orphan, who had no appeal from her decisions, and on whom 
she could exercis without control the caprici humour of the moment. 

On enter the château, madam cheron express a desire, that she 
would put up what she thought necessari to take to thoulouse, as she 
meant to set off immediately. emili now tri to persuad her to defer 
the journey, at least till the next day, and, at length, with much 
difficulty, prevailed. 

the day pass in the exercis of petti tyranni on the part of madam 
cheron, and in mourn regret and melancholi anticip on that of 
emily, who, when her aunt retir to her apart for the night, went 
to take leav of everi other room in thi her dear nativ home, which 
she wa now quit for she knew not how long, and for a world, to 
which she wa wholli a stranger. she could not conquer a presentiment, 
which frequent occur to her, thi night—that she should never more 
return to La vallée. have pass a consider time in what had been 
her father’ study, have select some of hi favourit authors, to 
put up with her clothes, and shed mani tears, as she wipe the dust 
from their covers, she seat herself in hi chair befor the read 
desk, and sat lost in melancholi reflection, till theresa open the 
door to examine, as wa her custom befor she went to bed, it wa all 
safe. she started, on observ her young lady, who bade her come in, 
and then gave her some direct for keep the château in readi 
for her recept at all times. 

“alas-a-day! that you should leav it!” said theresa, “I think you 
would be happier here than where you are going, if one may judge.” 
emili made no repli to thi remark; the sorrow theresa proceed to 
express at her departur affect her, but she found some comfort in 
the simpl affect of thi poor old servant, to whom she gave such 
direct as might best conduc to her comfort dure her own absence. 

have dismiss theresa to bed, emili wander through everi lone 
apart of the château, linger long in what had been her father’ 
bedroom, indulg melancholy, yet not unpleasing, emotions, and, 
have often return within the door to take anoth look at it, she 
withdrew to her own chamber. from her window she gaze upon the garden 
below, shown faintli by the moon, rise over the top of the 
palm-trees, and, at length, the calm beauti of the night increas a 
desir of indulg the mourn sweet of bid farewel to the 
belov shade of her childhood, till she wa tempt to descend. 
throw over her the light veil, in which she usual walked, she 
silent pass into the garden, and, hasten toward the distant 
groves, wa glad to breath onc more the air of liberty, and to sigh 
unobserved. the deep repos of the scene, the rich scents, that float 
on the breeze, the grandeur of the wide horizon and of the clear blue 
arch, sooth and gradual elev her mind to that sublim 
complacency, which render the vexat of thi world so insignific 
and mean in our eyes, that we wonder they have had power for a moment 
to disturb us. emili forgot madam cheron and all the circumst of 
her conduct, while her thought ascend to the contempl of those 
unnumb worlds, that lie scatter in the depth of æther, thousand 
of them hid from human eyes, and almost beyond the flight of human 
fancy. As her imagin soar through the region of space, and 
aspir to that great first cause, which pervad and govern all 
being, the idea of her father scarc ever left her; but it wa a 
pleas idea, sinc she resign him to god in the full confid of 
a pure and holi faith. she pursu her way through the grove to the 
terrace, often paus as memori awaken the pang of affection, and as 
reason anticip the exile, into which she wa going. 

and now the moon wa high over the woods, touch their summit with 
yellow light, and dart between the foliag long level beams; while 
on the rapid garonn below the trembl radianc wa faintli obscur 
by the lightest vapour. emili long watch the play lustre, listen 
to the sooth murmur of the current, and the yet lighter sound of 
the air, as it stirred, at intervals, the lofti palm-trees. “how 
delight is the sweet breath of these groves,” said she. “thi love 
scene!—how often shall I rememb and regret it, when I am far away. 
alas! what event may occur befor I see it again! O, peaceful, happi 
shades!—scen of my infant delights, of parent tender now lost 
for ever!—whi must I leav ye!—in your retreat I should still find 
safeti and repose. sweet hour of my childhood—i am now to leav even 
your last memorials! No objects, that would reviv your impressions, 
will remain for me!” 

then dri her tear and look up, her thought rose again to the 
sublim subject she had contemplated; the same divin complac stole 
over her heart, and, hush it throbs, inspir hope and confid 
and resign to the will of the deity, whose work fill her mind 
with adoration. 

emili gaze long on the plane-tree, and then seat herself, for the 
last time, on the bench under it shade, where she had so often sat 
with her parents, and where, onli a few hour before, she had convers 
with valancourt, at the remembr of whom, thu revived, a mingl 
sensat of esteem, tender and anxieti rose in her breast. with 
thi remembr occur a recollect of hi late confession—that he 
had often wander near her habit in the night, have even pass 
the boundari of the garden, and it immedi occur to her, that he 
might be at thi moment in the grounds. the fear of meet him, 
particularli after the declar he had made, and of incur a 
censure, which her aunt might so reason bestow, if it wa known, 
that she wa met by her lover, at thi hour, made her instantli leav 
her belov plane-tree, and walk toward the château. she cast an 
anxiou eye around, and often stop for a moment to examin the 
shadowi scene befor she ventur to proceed, but she pass on without 
perceiv ani person, till, have reach a clump of almond trees, 
not far from the house, she rest to take a retrospect of the garden, 
and to sigh forth anoth adieu. As her eye wander over the 
landscap she thought she perceiv a person emerg from the groves, 
and pass slowli along a moonlight alley that led between them; but the 
distance, and the imperfect light would not suffer her to judg with 
ani degre of certainti whether thi wa fanci or reality. she 
continu to gaze for some time on the spot, till on the dead still 
of the air she heard a sudden sound, and in the next instant fanci 
she distinguish footstep near her. wast not anoth moment in 
conjecture, she hurri to the château, and, have reach it, retir 
to her chamber, where, as she close her window she look upon the 
garden, and then again thought she distinguish a figure, glide 
between the almond tree she had just left. she immedi withdrew 
from the casement, and, though much agitated, sought in sleep the 
refresh of a short oblivion. 



chapter XI 

I leav that floweri path for eye 
Of childhood, where I sport mani a day, 
warbl and saunter carelessli along; 
where everi face wa innoc and gay, 
each vale romantic, tune everi tongue— 
sweet, wild, and artless, all. 
the minstrel 


At an earli hour, the carriage, which wa to take emili and madam 
cheron to thoulouse, appear at the door of the château, and madam 
wa alreadi in the breakfast-room, when her niec enter it. the 
repast wa silent and melancholi on the part of emily; and madam 
cheron, whose vaniti wa piqu on observ her dejection, reprov 
her in a manner that did not contribut to remov it. It wa with much 
reluctance, that emily’ request to take with her the dog, which had 
been a favourit of her father, wa granted. her aunt, impati to be 
gone, order the carriag to draw up; and, while she pass to the 
hall door, emili gave anoth look into the library, and anoth 
farewel glanc over the garden, and then followed. old theresa stood 
at the door to take leav of her young lady. “god for ever keep you, 
ma’amselle!” said she, while emili gave her hand in silence, and could 
answer onli with a pressur of her hand, and a forc smile. 

At the gate, which led out of the grounds, sever of her father’ 
pension were assembl to bid her farewell, to whom she would have 
spoken, if her aunt would have suffer the driver to stop; and, have 
distribut to them almost all the money she had about her, she sunk 
back in the carriage, yield to the melancholi of her heart. soon 
after, she caught, between the steep bank of the road, anoth view of 
the château, peep from among the high trees, and surround by green 
slope and tuft groves, the garonn wind it way beneath their 
shades, sometim lost among the vineyards, and then rise in greater 
majesti in the distant pastures. the tower precipic of the 
pyrenees, that rose to the south, gave emili a thousand interest 
recollect of her late journey; and these object of her former 
enthusiast admiration, now excit onli sorrow and regret. have 
gaze on the château and it love scenery, till the bank again 
close upon them, her mind becam too much occupi by mourn 
reflections, to permit her to attend to the conversation, which madam 
cheron had begun on some trivial topic, so that they soon travel in 
profound silence. 

valancourt, meanwhile, wa return to estuvière, hi heart occupi 
with the imag of emily; sometim indulg in reveri of futur 
happiness, but more frequent shrink with dread of the opposit 
he might encount from her family. He wa the younger son of an 
ancient famili of gascony; and, have lost hi parent at an earli 
period of hi life, the care of hi educ and of hi small portion 
had devolv to hi brother, the count de duvarney, hi senior by 
nearli twenti years. valancourt had been educ in all the 
accomplish of hi age, and had an ardour of spirit, and a certain 
grandeur of mind, that gave him particular excel in the exercis 
then thought heroic. hi littl fortun had been diminish by the 
necessari expenc of hi education; but M. La valancourt, the elder, 
seem to think that hi geniu and accomplish would ampli suppli 
the defici of hi inheritance. they offer flatter hope of 
promot in the militari profession, in those time almost the onli 
one in which a gentleman could engag without incur a stain on hi 
name; and La valancourt wa of cours enrol in the army. the gener 
geniu of hi mind wa but littl understood by hi brother. that 
ardour for whatev is great and good in the moral world, as well as in 
the natur one, display itself in hi infant years; and the strong 
indignation, which he felt and express at a criminal, or a mean 
action, sometim drew upon him the displeasur of hi tutor; who 
reprob it under the gener term of violenc of temper; and who, 
when harangu on the virtu of mild and moderation, seem to 
forget the gentl and compassion, which alway appear in hi 
pupil toward object of misfortune. 

He had now obtain leav of absenc from hi regiment when he made the 
excurs into the pyrenees, which wa the mean of introduc him to 
st. aubert; and, as thi permiss wa nearli expired, he wa the more 
anxiou to declar himself to emily’ family, from whom he reason 
apprehend opposition, sinc hi fortune, though, with a moder 
addit from hers, it would be suffici to support them, would not 
satisfi the views, either of vanity, or ambition. valancourt wa not 
without the latter, but he saw golden vision of promot in the army; 
and believed, that with emili he could, in the mean time, be delight 
to live within the limit of hi humbl income. hi thought were now 
occupi in consid the mean of make himself known to her 
family, to whom, however, he had yet no address, for he wa entir 
ignor of emily’ precipit departur from La vallée, of whom he 
hope to obtain it. 

meanwhile, the travel pursu their journey; emili make frequent 
effort to appear cheerful, and too often relaps into silenc and 
dejection. madam cheron, attribut her melancholi sole to the 
circumst of her be remov to a distanc from her lover, and 
believing, that the sorrow, which her niec still express for the 
loss of st. aubert, proceed partli from an affect of 
sensibility, endeavour to make it appear ridicul to her, that such 
deep regret should continu to be felt so long after the period usual 
allow for grief. 

At length, these unpleas lectur were interrupt by the arriv of 
the travel at thoulouse; and emily, who had not been there for mani 
years, and had onli a veri faint recollect of it, wa surpris at 
the ostentati style exhibit in her aunt’ hous and furniture; the 
more so, perhaps, becaus it wa so total differ from the modest 
elegance, to which she had been accustomed. she follow madam cheron 
through a larg hall, where sever servant in rich liveri appeared, 
to a kind of saloon, fit up with more show than taste; and her aunt, 
complain of fatigue, order supper immediately. “I am glad to find 
myself in my own hous again,” said she, throw herself on a larg 
settee, “and to have my own peopl about me. I detest travelling; 
though, indeed, I ought to like it, for what I see abroad alway make 
me delight to return to my own château. what make you so silent, 
child?—what is it that disturb you now?” 

emili suppress a start tear, and tri to smile away the 
express of an oppress heart; she wa think of _her_ home, and 
felt too sensibl the arrog and ostentati vaniti of madam 
cheron’ conversation. “can thi be my father’ sister!” said she to 
herself; and then the convict that she wa so, warm her heart 
with someth like kind toward her, she felt anxiou to soften 
the harsh impress her mind had receiv of her aunt’ character, and 
to show a willing to oblig her. the effort did not entir fail; 
she listen with appar cheerfulness, while madam cheron expati 
on the splendour of her house, told of the numer parti she 
entertained, and what she should expect of emily, whose diffid 
assum the air of a reserve, which her aunt, believ it to be that 
of pride and ignor united, now took occas to reprehend. she knew 
noth of the conduct of a mind, that fear to trust it own powers; 
which, possess a nice judgment, and inclin to believe, that everi 
other person perceiv still more critically, fear to commit itself to 
censure, and seek shelter in the obscur of silence. emili had 
frequent blush at the fearless manners, which she had seen admired, 
and the brilliant nothings, which she had heard applauded; yet thi 
applause, so far from encourag her to imit the conduct that had 
won it, rather made her shrink into the reserve, that would protect her 
from such absurdity. 

madam cheron look on her niece’ diffid with a feel veri near 
to contempt, and endeavour to overcom it by reproof, rather than to 
encourag it by gentleness. 

the entranc of supper somewhat interrupt the complac discours of 
madam cheron and the pain considerations, which it had forc upon 
emily. when the repast, which wa render ostentati by the 
attend of a great number of servants, and by a profus of plate, 
wa over, madam cheron retir to her chamber, and a femal servant 
came to show emili to hers. have pass up a larg staircase, and 
through sever galleries, they came to a flight of back stairs, which 
led into a short passag in a remot part of the château, and there the 
servant open the door of a small chamber, which she said wa 
ma’amsel emily’s, who, onc more alone, indulg the tear she had 
long tri to restrain. 

those, who know, from experience, how much the heart becom attach 
even to inanim objects, to which it ha been long accustomed, how 
unwillingli it resign them; how with the sensat of an old friend 
it meet them, after temporari absence, will understand the forlorn 
of emily’ feelings, of emili shut out from the onli home she had known 
from her infancy, and thrown upon a scene, and among persons, 
disagre for more qualiti than their novelty. her father’ 
favourit dog, now in the chamber, thu seem to acquir the charact 
and import of a friend; and, as the anim fawn over her when she 
wept, and lick her hands, “ah, poor manchon!” said she, “I have 
nobodi now to love me—but you!” and she wept the more. after some time, 
her thought return to her father’ injunctions, she rememb how 
often he had blame her for indulg useless sorrow; how often he had 
point out to her the necess of fortitud and patience, assur 
her, that the faculti of the mind strengthen by exertion, till they 
final unnerv affliction, and triumph over it. these recollect 
dri her tears, gradual sooth her spirits, and inspir her with 
the sweet emul of practis precepts, which her father had so 
frequent inculcated. 



chapter xii 

some pow’r impart the spear and shield, 
At which the wizard passion fly, 
By which the giant folli die! 
collin 


madam cheron’ hous stood at a littl distanc from the citi of 
thoulouse, and wa surround by extens gardens, in which emily, who 
had risen early, amus herself with wander befor breakfast. from a 
terrace, that extend along the highest part of them, wa a wide view 
over languedoc. On the distant horizon to the south, she discov the 
wild summit of the pyrenees, and her fanci immedi paint the 
green pastur of gasconi at their feet. her heart point to her 
peac home—to the neighbourhood where valancourt was—wher st. 
aubert had been; and her imagination, pierc the veil of distance, 
brought that home to her eye in all it interest and romant 
beauty. she experienc an inexpress pleasur in believing, that 
she beheld the countri around it, though no featur could be 
distinguished, except the retir chain of the pyrenees; and, 
inattent to the scene immedi befor her, and to the flight of 
time, she continu to lean on the window of a pavilion, that 
termin the terrace, with her eye fix on gascony, and her mind 
occupi with the interest idea which the view of it awakened, till 
a servant came to tell her breakfast wa ready. her thought thu 
recal to the surround objects, the straight walks, squar 
parterres, and artifici fountain of the garden, could not fail, as 
she pass through it, to appear the worse, oppos to the neglig 
graces, and natur beauti of the ground of La vallée, upon which 
her recollect had been so intens employed. 

“whither have you been rambl so early?” said madam cheron, as her 
niec enter the breakfast-room. “I don’t approv of these solitari 
walks.” and emili wa surprised, when, have inform her aunt, that 
she had been no further than the gardens, she understood these to be 
includ in the reproof. “I desir you will not walk there again at so 
earli an hour unattended,” said madam cheron; “mi garden are veri 
extensive; and a young woman, who can make assign by moonlight at 
La vallée, is not to be trust to her own inclin elsewhere.” 

emily, extrem surpris and shocked, had scarc power to beg an 
explan of these words, and, when she did, her aunt absolut 
refus to give it, though, by her sever looks, and half sentences, 
she appear anxiou to impress emili with a belief, that she wa well 
inform of some degrad circumst of her conduct. consciou 
innoc could not prevent a blush from steal over emily’ cheek; 
she trembled, and look confusedli under the bold eye of madam 
cheron, who blush also; but her wa the blush of triumph, such as 
sometim stain the counten of a person, congratul himself on 
the penetr which had taught him to suspect another, and who lose 
both piti for the suppos criminal, and indign of hi guilt, in 
the gratif of hi own vanity. 

emily, not doubt that her aunt’ mistak aros from the have 
observ her rambl in the garden on the night preced her departur 
from La vallée, now mention the motiv of it, at which madam cheron 
smile contemptuously, refus either to accept thi explanation, or 
to give her reason for refus it; and, soon after, she conclud the 
subject by saying, “I never trust people’ assertions, I alway judg 
of them by their actions; but I am will to tri what will be your 
behaviour in future.” 

emily, less surpris by her aunt’ moder and mysteri silence, 
than by the accus she had received, deepli consid the latter, 
and scarc doubted, that it wa valancourt whom she had seen at night 
in the garden of La vallée, and that he had been observ there by 
madam cheron; who now pass from one pain topic onli to reviv 
anoth almost equal so, spoke of the situat of her niece’ 
property, in the hand of M. motteville. while she thu talk with 
ostentati piti of emily’ misfortunes, she fail not to inculc 
the duti of humil and gratitude, or to render emili fulli sensibl 
of everi cruel mortification, who soon perceived, that she wa to be 
consid as a dependant, not onli by her aunt, but by her aunt’ 
servants. 

she wa now informed, that a larg parti were expect to dinner, on 
which account madam cheron repeat the lesson of the preced night, 
concern her conduct in company, and emili wish that she might have 
courag enough to practis it. her aunt then proceed to examin the 
simplic of her dress, adding, that she expect to see her attir 
with gaieti and taste; after which she condescend to show emili the 
splendour of her château, and to point out the particular beauty, or 
elegance, which she thought distinguish each of her numer suit 
of apartments. she then withdrew to her toilet, the throne of her 
homage, and emili to her chamber, to unpack her books, and to tri to 
charm her mind by reading, till the hour of dressing. 

when the compani arrived, emili enter the saloon with an air of 
timidity, which all her effort could not overcome, and which wa 
increas by the conscious of madam cheron’ sever observation. 
her mourn dress, the mild deject of her beauti countenance, 
and the retir diffid of her manner, render her a veri 
interest object to mani of the company; among whom she distinguish 
signor montoni, and hi friend cavigni, the late visitor at M. 
quesnel’s, who now seem to convers with madam cheron with the 
familiar of old acquaintance, and she to attend to them with 
particular pleasure. 

thi signor montoni had an air of consciou superiority, anim by 
spirit, and strengthen by talents, to which everi person seem 
involuntarili to yield. the quick of hi percept wa strikingli 
express on hi countenance, yet that counten could submit 
implicitli to occasion; and, more than onc in thi day, the triumph of 
art over natur might have been discern in it. hi visag wa long, 
and rather narrow, yet he wa call handsome; and it was, perhaps, the 
spirit and vigour of hi soul, sparkl through hi features, that 
triumph for him. emili felt admiration, but not the admir that 
lead to esteem; for it wa mix with a degre of fear she knew not 
exactli wherefore. 

cavigni wa gay and insinu as formerly; and, though he paid almost 
incess attent to madam cheron, he found some opportun of 
convers with emily, to whom he directed, at first, the salli of 
hi wit, but now and then assum an air of tenderness, which she 
observed, and shrunk from. though she repli but little, the 
gentl and sweet of her manner encourag him to talk, and she 
felt reliev when a young ladi of the party, who spoke incessantly, 
obtrud herself on hi notice. thi lady, who possess all the 
sprightli of a frenchwoman, with all her coquetry, affect to 
understand everi subject, or rather there wa no affect in the 
case; for, never look beyond the limit of her own ignorance, she 
believ she had noth to learn. she attract notic from all; 
amus some, disgust other for a moment, and wa then forgotten. 

thi day pass without ani materi occurrence; and emily, though 
amus by the charact she had seen, wa glad when she could retir 
to the recollections, which had acquir with her the charact of 
duties. 

A fortnight pass in a round of dissip and company, and emily, 
who attend madam cheron in all her visits, wa sometim 
entertained, but often wearied. she wa struck by the appar 
talent and knowledg display in the variou convers she 
listen to, and it wa long befor she discovered, that the talent 
were for the most part those of imposture, and the knowledg noth 
more than wa necessari to assist them. but what deceiv her most, wa 
the air of constant gaieti and good spirits, display by everi 
visitor, and which she suppos to aris from content as constant, and 
from benevol as ready. At length, from the over-act of some, 
less accomplish than the others, she could perceive, that, though 
content and benevol are the onli sure sourc of cheerfulness, 
the immoder and feverish animation, usual exhibit in larg 
parties, result partli from an insens to the cares, which 
benevol must sometim deriv from the suffer of others, and 
partli from a desir to display the appear of that prosperity, 
which they know will command submiss and attent to themselves. 

emily’ pleasantest hour were pass in the pavilion of the terrace, 
to which she retired, when she could steal from observation, with a 
book to overcome, or a lute to indulge, her melancholy. there, as she 
sat with her eye fix on the far-dist pyrenees, and her thought 
on valancourt and the belov scene of gascony, she would play the 
sweet and melancholi song of her nativ province—th popular song she 
had listen to from her childhood. 

one evening, have excus herself from accompani her aunt abroad, 
she thu withdrew to the pavilion, with book and her lute. It wa the 
mild and beauti even of a sultri day, and the windows, which 
front the west, open upon all the glori of a set sun. it ray 
illuminated, with strong splendour, the cliff of the pyrenees, and 
touch their snowi top with a roseat hue, that remained, long after 
the sun had sunk below the horizon, and the shade of twilight had 
stolen over the landscape. emili touch her lute with that fine 
melancholi expression, which came from her heart. the pensiv hour and 
the scene, the even light on the garonne, that flow at no great 
distance, and whose waves, as they pass toward La vallée, she often 
view with a sigh—thes unit circumst dispos her mind to 
tenderness, and her thought were with valancourt, of whom she had 
heard noth sinc her arriv at thoulouse, and now that she wa 
remov from him, and in uncertainty, she perceiv all the interest he 
held in her heart. befor she saw valancourt she had never met a mind 
and tast so accord with her own, and, though madam cheron told her 
much of the art of dissimulation, and that the eleg and proprieti 
of thought, which she so much admir in her lover, were assum for 
the purpos of pleas her, she could scarc doubt their truth. thi 
possibility, however, faint as it was, wa suffici to harass her 
mind with anxiety, and she found, that few condit are more pain 
than that of uncertainty, as to the merit of a belov object; an 
uncertainty, which she would not have suffered, had her confid in 
her own opinion been greater. 

she wa awaken from her muse by the sound of horses’ feet along a 
road, that wound under the window of the pavilion, and a gentleman 
pass on horseback, whose resembl to valancourt, in air and 
figure, for the twilight did not permit a view of hi features, 
immedi struck her. she retir hastili from the lattice, fear 
to be seen, yet wish to observ further, while the stranger pass 
on without look up, and, when she return to the lattice, she saw 
him faintli through the twilight, wind under the high trees, that 
led to thoulouse. thi littl incid so much disturb her spirits, 
that the templ and it sceneri were no longer interest to her, and, 
after walk a while on the terrace, she return to the château. 

madam cheron, whether she had seen a rival admired, had lost at play, 
or had wit an entertain more splendid than her own, wa 
return from her visit with a temper more than usual discomposed; 
and emili wa glad, when the hour arrived, in which she could retir to 
the solitud of her own apartment. 

On the follow morning, she wa summon to madam cheron, whose 
counten wa inflam with resentment, and, as emili advanced, she 
held out a letter to her. 

“do you know thi hand?” said she, in a sever tone, and with a look 
that wa intend to search her heart, while emili examin the letter 
attentively, and assur her, that she did not. 

“do not provok me,” said her aunt; “you do know it, confess the truth 
immediately. I insist upon your confess the truth instantly.” 

emili wa silent, and turn to leav the room, but madam call her 
back. “O you are guilty, then,” said she, “you do know the hand.” “if 
you were befor in doubt of this, madam,” repli emili calmly, “whi 
did you accus me of have told a falsehood.” madam cheron did not 
blush; but her niec did, a moment after, when she heard the name of 
valancourt. It wa not, however, with the conscious of deserv 
reproof, for, if she ever had seen hi hand-writing, the present 
charact did not bring it to her recollection. 

“it is useless to deni it,” said madam cheron, “I see in your 
countenance, that you are no stranger to thi letter; and, I dare say, 
you have receiv mani such from thi impertin young man, without my 
knowledge, in my own house.” 

emily, shock at the indelicaci of thi accusation, still more than by 
the vulgar of the former, instantli forgot the pride, that had 
impos silence, and endeavour to vindic herself from the 
aspersion, but madam cheron wa not to be convinced. 

“I cannot suppose,” she resumed, “that thi young man would have taken 
the liberti of write to me, if you had not encourag him to do so, 
and I must now” 

“you will allow me to remind you, madam,” said emili timidly, “of some 
particular of a convers we had at La vallée. I then told you 
truly, that I had onli not forbad monsieur valancourt from address 
my family.” 

“I will not be interrupted,” said madam cheron, interrupt her 
niece, “I wa go to say—i—i—hav forgot what I wa go to say. but 
how happen it that you did not forbid him?” emili wa silent. “how 
happen it that you encourag him to troubl me with thi letter?—a 
young man that nobodi knows;—an utter stranger in the place,—a young 
adventurer, no doubt, who is look out for a good fortune. however, 
on that point he ha mistaken hi aim.” 

“hi famili wa known to my father,” said emili modestly, and without 
appear to be sensibl of the last sentence. 

“o! that is no recommend at all,” repli her aunt, with her usual 
readi upon thi topic; “he took such strang fanci to people! He 
wa alway judg person by their countenances, and wa continu 
deceived.” 

“yet it wa but now, madam, that you judg me guilti by my 
countenance,” said emily, with a design of reprov madam cheron, to 
which she wa induc by thi disrespect mention of her father. 

“I call you here,” resum her aunt, colouring, “to tell you, that I 
will not be disturb in my own hous by ani letters, or visit from 
young men, who may take a fanci to flatter you. thi M. de valantine—i 
think you call him, ha the impertin to beg I will permit him to 
pay hi respect to me! I shall send him a proper answer. and for you, 
emily, I repeat it onc for all—if you are not content to conform to 
my directions, and to my way of live, I shall give up the task of 
overlook your conduct—i shall no longer troubl myself with your 
education, but shall send you to board in a convent.” 

“dear madam,” said emily, burst into tears, and overcom by the rude 
suspicion her aunt had expressed, “how have I deserv these 
reproofs?” she could say no more; and so veri fear wa she of act 
with ani degre of improprieti in the affair itself, that, at the 
present moment, madam cheron might perhap have prevail with her to 
bind herself by a promis to renounc valancourt for ever. her mind, 
weaken by her terrors, would no longer suffer her to view him as she 
had formerli done; she fear the error of her own judgment, not that 
of madam cheron, and fear also, that, in her former convers 
with him, at La vallée, she had not conduct herself with suffici 
reserve. she knew, that she did not deserv the coars suspicions, 
which her aunt had thrown out, but a thousand scrupl rose to torment 
her, such as would never have disturb the peac of madam cheron. 
thu render anxiou to avoid everi opportun of erring, and will 
to submit to ani restrictions, that her aunt should think proper, she 
express an obedience, to which madam cheron did not give much 
confidence, and which she seem to consid as the consequ of 
either fear, or artifice. 

“well, then,” said she, “promis me that you will neither see thi 
young man, nor write to him without my consent.” “dear madam,” repli 
emily, “can you suppos I would do either, unknown to you!” “I don’t 
know what to suppose; there is no know how young women will act. It 
is difficult to place ani confid in them, for they have seldom 
sens enough to wish for the respect of the world.” 

“alas, madam!” said emily, “I am anxiou for my own respect; my father 
taught me the valu of that; he said if I deserv my own esteem, that 
the world would follow of course.” 

“mi brother wa a good kind of a man,” repli madam cheron, “but he 
did not know the world. I am sure I have alway felt a proper respect 
for myself, yet—” she stopped, but she might have added, that the world 
had not alway shown respect to her, and thi without impeach it 
judgment. 

“well!” resum madam cheron, “you have not given me the promise, 
though, that I demand.” 

emili readili gave it, and, be then suffer to withdraw, she walk 
in the garden; tri to compos her spirits, and, at length, arriv at 
her favourit pavilion at the end of the terrace, where, seat 
herself at one of the embow windows, that open upon a balcony, 
the still and seclus of the scene allow her to recollect her 
thoughts, and to arrang them so as to form a clearer judgment of her 
former conduct. she endeavour to review with exact all the 
particular of her convers with valancourt at La vallée, had the 
satisfact to observ nothing, that could alarm her delic pride, 
and thu to be confirm in the self-esteem, which wa so necessari to 
her peace. her mind then becam tranquil, and she saw valancourt 
amiabl and intelligent, as he had formerli appeared, and madam cheron 
neither the one, nor the other. the remembr of her lover, however, 
brought with it mani veri pain emotions, for it by no mean 
reconcil her to the thought of resign him; and, madam cheron 
have alreadi shown how highli she disapprov of the attachment, she 
foresaw much suffer from the opposit of interests; yet with all 
thi wa mingl a degre of delight, which, in spite of reason, 
partook of hope. she determined, however, that no consider should 
induc her to permit a clandestin correspondence, and to observ in 
her convers with valancourt, should they ever meet again, the same 
niceti of reserve, which had hitherto mark her conduct. As she 
repeat the words—“should we ever meet again!” she shrunk as if thi 
wa a circumstance, which had never befor occur to her, and tear 
came to her eyes, which she hastili dried, for she heard footstep 
approaching, and then the door of the pavilion open, and, on turning, 
she saw—valancourt. 

An emot of mingl pleasure, surpris and apprehens press so 
suddenli upon her heart as almost to overcom her spirits; the colour 
left her cheeks, then return brighter than before, and she wa for a 
moment unabl to speak, or to rise from her chair. hi counten wa 
the mirror, in which she saw her own emot reflected, and it rous 
her to self-command. the joy, which had anim hi features, when he 
enter the pavilion, wa suddenli repressed, as, approaching, he 
perceiv her agitation, and, in a tremul voice, enquir after her 
health. recov from her first surprise, she answer him with a 
temper smile; but a varieti of opposit emot still assail her 
heart, and struggl to subdu the mild digniti of her manner. It wa 
difficult to tell which predominated—th joy of see valancourt, or 
the terror of her aunt’ displeasure, when she should hear of thi 
meeting. after some short and embarrass conversation, she led him 
into the gardens, and enquir if he had seen madam cheron. “no,” said 
he, “I have not yet seen her, for they told me she wa engaged, and as 
soon as I learn that you were in the gardens, I came hither.” He 
paus a moment, in great agitation, and then added, “may I ventur to 
tell you the purport of my visit, without incur your displeasure, 
and to hope, that you will not accus me of precipit in now 
avail myself of the permiss you onc gave me of address your 
family?” emily, who knew not what to reply, wa spare from further 
perplexity, and wa sensibl onli of fear, when on rais her eyes, 
she saw madam cheron turn into the avenue. As the conscious of 
innoc returned, thi fear wa so far dissip as to permit her to 
appear tranquil, and, instead of avoid her aunt, she advanc with 
valancourt to meet her. the look of haughti and impati displeasure, 
with which madam cheron regard them, made emili shrink, who 
understood from a singl glance, that thi meet wa believ to have 
been more than accidental: have mention valancourt’ name, she 
becam again too much agit to remain with them, and return into 
the château; where she await long, in a state of trembl anxiety, 
the conclus of the conference. she knew not how to account for 
valancourt’ visit to her aunt, befor he had receiv the permiss 
he solicited, sinc she wa ignor of a circumstance, which would 
have render the request useless, even if madam cheron had been 
inclin to grant it. valancourt, in the agit of hi spirits, had 
forgotten to date hi letter, so that it wa imposs for madam 
cheron to return an answer; and, when he recollect thi circumstance, 
he was, perhaps, not so sorri for the omiss as glad of the excus it 
allow him for wait on her befor she could send a refusal. 

madam cheron had a long convers with valancourt, and, when she 
return to the château, her counten express ill-humour, but not 
the degre of severity, which emili had apprehended. “I have dismiss 
thi young man, at last,” said she, “and I hope my hous will never 
again be disturb with similar visits. He assur me, that your 
interview wa not preconcerted.” 

“dear madam!” said emili in extrem emotion, “you sure did not ask 
him the question!” “most certainli I did; you could not suppos I 
should be so imprud as to neglect it.” 

“good god!” exclaim emily, “what an opinion must he form of me, sinc 
you, madam, could express a suspicion of such ill conduct!” 

“it is of veri littl consequ what opinion he may form of you,” 
repli her aunt, “for I have put an end to the affair; but I believ 
he will not form a wors opinion of me for my prudent conduct. I let 
him see, that I wa not to be trifl with, and that I had more 
delicacy, than to permit ani clandestin correspond to be carri 
on in my house.” 

emili had frequent heard madam cheron use the word delicacy, but she 
wa now more than usual perplex to understand how she meant to 
appli it in thi instance, in which her whole conduct appear to merit 
the veri revers of the term. 

“it wa veri inconsider of my brother,” resum madam cheron, “to 
leav the troubl of overlook your conduct to me; I wish you were 
well settl in life. but if I find, that I am to be further troubl 
with such visitor as thi M. valancourt, I shall place you in a 
convent at once;—so rememb the alternative. thi young man ha the 
impertin to own to me,—h own it! that hi fortun is veri small, 
and that he is chiefli depend on an elder brother and on the 
profess he ha chosen! He should have conceal these circumstances, 
at least, if he expect to succeed with me. had he the presumpt to 
suppos I would marri my niec to a person such as he describ 
himself!” 

emili dri her tear when she heard of the candid confess of 
valancourt; and, though the circumst it discov were afflict 
to her hopes, hi artless conduct gave her a degre of pleasure, that 
overcam everi other emotion. but she wa compelled, even thu earli in 
life, to observe, that good sens and nobl integr are not alway 
suffici to cope with folli and narrow cunning; and her heart wa 
pure enough to allow her, even at thi tri moment, to look with more 
pride on the defeat of the former, than with mortif on the 
conquest of the latter. 

madam cheron pursu her triumph. “he ha also thought proper to tell 
me, that he will receiv hi dismiss from no person but yourself; 
thi favour, however, I have absolut refus him. He shall learn, 
that it is quit sufficient, that I disapprov him. and I take thi 
opportun of repeating,—that if you concert ani mean of interview 
unknown to me, you shall leav my hous immediately.” 

“how littl do you know me, madam, that you should think such an 
injunct necessary!” said emily, tri to suppress her emotion, “how 
littl of the dear parents, who educ me!” 

madam cheron now went to dress for an engagement, which she had made 
for the evening; and emily, who would gladli have been excus from 
attend her aunt, did not ask to remain at home lest her request 
should be attribut to an improp motive. when she retir to her own 
room, the littl fortitude, which had support her in the presenc of 
her relation, forsook her; she rememb onli that valancourt, whose 
charact appear more amiabl from everi circumstance, that unfold 
it, wa banish from her presence, perhaps, for ever, and she pass 
the time in weeping, which, accord to her aunt’ direction, she 
ought to have employ in dressing. thi import duti was, however, 
quickli dispatched; though, when she join madam cheron at table, her 
eye betrayed, that she had been in tears, and drew upon her a sever 
reproof. 

her effort to appear cheer did not entir fail when she join 
the compani at the hous of madam clairval, an elderli widow lady, who 
had late come to resid at thoulouse, on an estat of her late 
husband. she had live mani year at pari in a splendid style; had 
natur a gay temper, and, sinc her resid at thoulouse, had 
given some of the most magnific entertainments, that had been seen 
in that neighbourhood. 

these excit not onli the envy, but the trifl ambit of madam 
cheron, who, sinc she could not rival the splendour of her 
festivities, wa desir of be rank in the number of her most 
intim friends. for thi purpos she paid her the most obsequi 
attention, and made a point of be disengaged, whenev she receiv 
an invit from madam clairval, of whom she talked, wherev she 
went, and deriv much self-consequ from impress a belief on her 
gener acquaintance, that they were on the most familiar footing. 

the entertain of thi even consist of a ball and supper; it 
wa a fanci ball, and the compani danc in group in the gardens, 
which were veri extensive. the high and luxuri trees, under which 
the group assembled, were illumin with a profus of lamps, 
dispos with tast and fancy. the gay and variou dress of the 
company, some of whom were seat on the turf, convers at their 
ease, observ the _cotillons_, take refreshments, and sometim 
touch sportiv a guitar; the gallant manner of the gentlemen, the 
exquisit caprici air of the ladies; the light fantast step of 
their dances; the musicians, with the lute, the hautboy, and the tabor, 
seat at the foot of an elm, and the sylvan sceneri of wood around 
were circumstances, that unitedli form a characterist and strike 
pictur of french festivity. emili survey the gaieti of the scene 
with a melancholi kind of pleasure, and her emot may be imagin 
when, as she stood with her aunt, look at one of the groups, she 
perceiv valancourt; saw him danc with a young and beauti lady, 
saw him convers with her with a mixtur of attent and 
familiarity, such as she had seldom observ in hi manner. she turn 
hastili from the scene, and attempt to draw away madam cheron, who 
wa convers with signor cavigni, and neither perceiv valancourt, 
nor wa will to be interrupted. A faint suddenli came over 
emily, and, unabl to support herself, she sat down on a turf bank 
beneath the trees, where sever other person were seated. one of 
these, observ the extrem pale of her countenance, enquir if 
she wa ill, and beg she would allow him to fetch her a glass of 
water, for which polit she thank him, but did not accept it. her 
apprehens lest valancourt should observ her emot made her 
anxiou to overcom it, and she succeed so far as to recompos her 
countenance. madam cheron wa still convers with cavigni; and the 
count bauvillers, who had address emily, made some observ upon 
the scene, to which she answer almost unconsciously, for her mind wa 
still occupi with the idea of valancourt, to whom it wa with extrem 
uneasi that she remain so near. some remarks, however, which the 
count made upon the danc oblig her to turn her eye toward it, and, 
at that moment, valancourt’ met hers. her colour fade again, she 
felt, that she wa relaps into faintness, and instantli avert her 
looks, but not befor she had observ the alter counten of 
valancourt, on perceiv her. she would have left the spot 
immediately, had she not been conscious, that thi conduct would have 
shown him more obvious the interest he held in her heart; and, have 
tri to attend to the count’ conversation, and to join in it, she, at 
length, recov her spirits. but, when he made some observ on 
valancourt’ partner, the fear of show that she wa interest in 
the remark, would have betray it to him, had not the count, while he 
spoke, look toward the person of whom he wa speaking. “the lady,” 
said he, “danc with that young chevalier, who appear to be 
accomplish in everything, but in dancing, is rank among the 
beauti of thoulouse. she is handsome, and her fortun will be veri 
large. I hope she will make a better choic in a partner for life than 
she ha done in a partner for the dance, for I observ he ha just put 
the set into great confusion; he doe noth but commit blunders. I am 
surprised, that, with hi air and figure, he ha not taken more care to 
accomplish himself in dancing.” 

emily, whose heart trembl at everi word, that wa now uttered, 
endeavour to turn the convers from valancourt, by enquir the 
name of the lady, with whom he danced; but, befor the count could 
reply, the danc concluded, and emily, perceiv that valancourt wa 
come toward her, rose and join madam cheron. 

“here is the chevali valancourt, madam,” said she in a whisper, “pray 
let us go.” her aunt immedi move on, but not befor valancourt 
had reach them, who bow lowli to madam cheron, and with an earnest 
and deject look to emily, with whom, notwithstand all her effort, 
an air of more than common reserv prevailed. the presenc of madam 
cheron prevent valancourt from remaining, and he pass on with a 
countenance, whose melancholi reproach her for have increas it. 
emili wa call from the muse fit, into which she had fallen, by the 
count bauvillers, who wa known to her aunt. 

“I have your pardon to beg, ma’amselle,” said he, “for a rudeness, 
which you will readili believ wa quit unintentional. I did not know, 
that the chevali wa your acquaintance, when I so freeli criticis 
hi dancing.” emili blush and smiled, and madam cheron spare her 
the difficulti of replying. “if you mean the person, who ha just 
pass us,” said she, “I can assur you he is no acquaint of either 
mine, or ma’amsel st. aubert’s: I know noth of him.” 

“o! that is the chevali valancourt,” said cavigni carelessly, and 
look back. “you know him then?” said madam cheron. “I am not 
acquaint with him,” repli cavigni. “you don’t know, then, the 
reason I have to call him impertinent;—h ha had the presumpt to 
admir my niece!” 

“if everi man deserv the titl of impertinent, who admir ma’amsel 
st. aubert,” repli cavigni, “I fear there are a great mani 
impertinents, and I am will to acknowledg myself one of the 
number.” 

“O signor!” said madam cheron, with an affect smile, “I perceiv you 
have learnt the art of complimenting, sinc you came into france. but 
it is cruel to compliment children, sinc they mistak flatteri for 
truth.” 

cavigni turn away hi face for a moment, and then said with a studi 
air, “whom then are we to compliment, madam? for it would be absurd to 
compliment a woman of refin understanding; _she_ is abov all 
praise.” As he finish the sentenc he gave emili a sli look, and the 
smile, that had lurk in hi eye, stole forth. she perfectli 
understood it, and blush for madam cheron, who replied, “you are 
perfectli right, signor, no woman of understand can endur 
compliment.” 

“I have heard signor montoni say,” rejoin cavigni, “that he never 
knew but one woman who deserv it.” 

“well!” exclaim madam cheron, with a short laugh, and a smile of 
unutter complacency, “and who could she be?” 

“o!” repli cavigni, “it is imposs to mistak her, for certainli 
there is not more than one woman in the world, who ha both the merit 
to deserv compliment and the wit to refus it. most women revers the 
case entirely.” He look again at emily, who blush deeper than 
befor for her aunt, and turn from him with displeasure. 

“well, signor!” said madam cheron, “I protest you are a frenchman; I 
never heard a foreign say anyth half so gallant as that!” 

“true, madam,” said the count, who had been some time silent, and with 
a low bow, “but the gallantri of the compliment had been utterli lost, 
but for the ingenu that discov the application.” 

madam cheron did not perceiv the mean of thi too satir 
sentence, and she, therefore, escap the pain, which emili felt on her 
account. “o! here come signor montoni himself,” said her aunt, “I 
protest I will tell him all the fine thing you have been say to 
me.” the signor, however, pass at thi moment into anoth walk. 
“pray, who is it, that ha so much engag your friend thi evening?” 
ask madam cheron, with an air of chagrin, “I have not seen him 
once.” 

“he had a veri particular engag with the marqui La rivière,” 
repli cavigni, “which ha detain him, I perceive, till thi moment, 
or he would have done himself the honour of pay hi respect to you, 
madam, sooner, as he commiss me to say. but, I know not how it 
is—your convers is so fascinating—that it can charm even memory, I 
think, or I should certainli have deliv my friend’ apolog 
before.” 

“the apology, sir, would have been more satisfactori from himself,” 
said madam cheron, whose vaniti wa more mortifi by montoni’ 
neglect, than flatter by cavigni’ compliment. her manner, at thi 
moment, and cavigni’ late conversation, now awaken a suspicion in 
emily’ mind, which, notwithstand that some recollect serv to 
confirm it, appear preposterous. she thought she perceived, that 
montoni wa pay seriou address to her aunt, and that she not onli 
accept them, but wa jealous watch of ani appear of neglect 
on hi part.—that madam cheron at her year should elect a second 
husband wa ridiculous, though her vaniti made it not impossible; but 
that montoni, with hi discernment, hi figure, and pretensions, should 
make a choic of madam cheron—appear most wonderful. her thoughts, 
however, did not dwell long on the subject; nearer interest press 
upon them; valancourt, reject of her aunt, and valancourt danc 
with a gay and beauti partner, altern torment her mind. As 
she pass along the garden she look timidli forward, half fear 
and half hope that he might appear in the crowd; and the 
disappoint she felt on not see him, told her, that she had hope 
more than she had feared. 

montoni soon after join the party. He mutter over some short speech 
about regret for have been so long detain elsewhere, when he knew 
he should have the pleasur of see madam cheron here; and she, 
receiv the apolog with the air of a pettish girl, address herself 
entir to cavigni, who look archli at montoni, as if he would have 
said, “I will not triumph over you too much; I will have the good 
to bear my honour meekly; but look sharp, signor, or I shall certainli 
run away with your prize.” 

the supper wa serv in differ pavilion in the gardens, as well as 
in one larg saloon of the château, and with more of taste, than either 
of splendour, or even of plenty. madam cheron and her parti sup 
with madam clairval in the saloon, and emily, with difficulty, 
disguis her emotion, when she saw valancourt place at the same tabl 
with herself. there, madam cheron have survey him with high 
displeasure, said to some person who sat next to her, “pray, who _is_ 
that young man?” “it is the chevali valancourt,” wa the answer. 
“yes, I am not ignor of hi name, but who is thi chevali 
valancourt that thu intrud himself at thi table?” the attent of 
the person, to whom she spoke, wa call off befor she receiv a 
second reply. the table, at which they sat, wa veri long, and, 
valancourt be seated, with hi partner, near the bottom, and emili 
near the top, the distanc between them may account for hi not 
immedi perceiv her. she avoid look to that end of the 
table, but whenev her eye happen to glanc toward it, she 
observ him convers with hi beauti companion, and the 
observ did not contribut to restor her peace, ani more than the 
account she heard of the fortun and accomplish of thi same 
lady. 

madam cheron, to whom these remark were sometim addressed, becaus 
they support topic for trivial conversation, seem indefatig in 
her attempt to depreci valancourt, toward whom she felt all the 
petti resent of a narrow pride. “I admir the lady,” said she, “but 
I must condemn her choic of a partner.” “oh, the chevali valancourt 
is one of the most accomplish young men we have,” repli the lady, 
to whom thi remark wa addressed: “it is whispered, that mademoisel 
d’emery, and her larg fortune, are to be his.” 

“impossible!” exclaim madam cheron, redden with vexation, “it is 
imposs that she can be so destitut of taste; he ha so littl the 
air of a person of condition, that, if I did not see him at the tabl 
of madam clairval, I should never have suspect him to be one. I have 
besid particular reason for believ the report to be erroneous.” 

“I cannot doubt the truth of it,” repli the ladi gravely, disgust 
by the abrupt contradict she had received, concern her opinion of 
valancourt’ merit. “you will, perhaps, doubt it,” said madam cheron, 
“when I assur you, that it wa onli thi morn that I reject hi 
suit.” 

thi wa said without ani intent of impos the mean it 
conveyed, but simpli from a habit of consid herself to be the most 
import person in everi affair that concern her niece, and becaus 
liter _she_ had reject valancourt. “your reason are inde such 
as cannot be doubted,” repli the lady, with an iron smile. “ani 
more than the discern of the chevali valancourt,” ad cavigni, 
who stood by the chair of madam cheron, and had heard her arrog to 
herself, as he thought, a distinct which had been paid to her niece. 
“hi discern _may_ be justli questioned, signor,” said madam 
cheron, who wa not flatter by what she understood to be an encomium 
on emily. 

“alas!” exclaim cavigni, survey madam cheron with affect 
ecstasy, “how vain is that assertion, while that face—that shape—that 
air—combin to refut it! unhappi valancourt! hi discern ha been 
hi destruction.” 

emili look surpris and embarrassed; the lady, who had late 
spoken, astonished, and madam cheron, who, though she did not 
perfectli understand thi speech, wa veri readi to believ herself 
compliment by it, said smilingly, “O signor! you are veri gallant; 
but those, who hear you vindic the chevalier’ discernment, will 
suppos that I am the object of it.” 

“they cannot doubt it,” repli cavigni, bow low. 

“and would not that be veri mortifying, signor?” 

“unquestion it would,” said cavigni. 

“I cannot endur the thought,” said madam cheron. 

“it is not to be endured,” repli cavigni. 

“what can be done to prevent so humili a mistake?” rejoin madam 
cheron. 

“alas! I cannot assist you,” repli cavigni, with a deliber air. 
“your onli chanc of refut the calumny, and of make peopl 
understand what you wish them to believe, is to persist in your first 
assertion; for, when they are told of the chevalier’ want of 
discernment, it is possibl they may suppos he never presum to 
distress you with hi admiration.—but then again—that diffidence, which 
render you so insens to your own perfections—they will consid 
this, and valancourt’ tast will not be doubted, though you arraign 
it. In short, they will, in spite of your endeavours, continu to 
believe, what might veri natur have occur to them without ani 
hint of mine—that the chevali ha tast enough to admir a beauti 
woman.” 

“all thi is veri distressing!” said madam cheron, with a profound 
sigh. 

“may I be allow to ask what is so distressing?” said madam clairval, 
who wa struck with the rueful counten and dole accent, with 
which thi wa delivered. 

“it is a delic subject,” repli madam cheron, “a veri mortifi 
one to me.” “I am concern to hear it,” said madam clairval, “I hope 
noth ha occurred, thi evening, particularli to distress you?” 
“alas, yes! within thi half hour; and I know not where the report may 
end;—mi pride wa never so shock before, but I assur you the report 
is total void of foundation.” “good god!” exclaim madam clairval, 
“what can be done? can you point out ani way, by which I can assist, or 
consol you?” 

“the onli way, by which you can do either,” repli madam cheron, “i 
to contradict the report wherev you go.” 

“well! but pray inform me what I am to contradict.” 

“it is so veri humiliating, that I know not how to mention it,” 
continu madam cheron, “but you shall judge. Do you observ that 
young man seat near the bottom of the table, who is convers with 
mademoisel d’emery?” “yes, I perceiv whom you mean.” “you observ 
how littl he ha the air of a person of condition; I wa say just 
now, that I should not have thought him a gentleman, if I had not seen 
him at thi table.” “well! but the report,” said madam clairval, “let 
me understand the subject of your distress.” “ah! the subject of my 
distress,” repli madam cheron; “thi person, whom nobodi knows—(i 
beg pardon, madam, I did not consid what I said)—thi impertin 
young man, have had the presumpt to address my niece, has, I fear, 
given rise to a report, that he had declar himself my admirer. now 
onli consid how veri mortifi such a report must be! you, I know, 
will feel for my situation. A woman of my condition!—think how 
degrad even the rumour of such an allianc must be.” 

“degrad indeed, my poor friend!” said madam clairval. “you may reli 
upon it I will contradict the report wherev I go;” as she said which, 
she turn her attent upon anoth part of the company; and cavigni, 
who had hitherto appear a grave spectat of the scene, now fear 
he should be unabl to smother the laugh, that convuls him, walk 
abruptli away. 

“I perceiv you do not know,” said the ladi who sat near madam cheron, 
“that the gentleman you have been speak of is madam clairval’ 
nephew!” “impossible!” exclaim madam cheron, who now began to 
perceive, that she had been total mistaken in her judgment of 
valancourt, and to prais him aloud with as much servility, as she had 
befor censur him with frivol malignity. 

emily, who, dure the greater part of thi conversation, had been so 
absorb in thought as to be spare the pain of hear it, wa now 
extrem surpris by her aunt’ prais of valancourt, with whose 
relationship to madam clairval she wa unacquainted; but she wa not 
sorri when madam cheron, who, though she now tri to appear 
unconcerned, wa realli much embarrassed, prepar to withdraw 
immedi after supper. montoni then came to hand madam cheron to 
her carriage, and cavigni, with an arch solemn of countenance, 
follow with emily, who, as she wish them good night, and drew up 
the glass, saw valancourt among the crowd at the gates. befor the 
carriag drove off, he disappeared. madam cheron forbor to mention 
him to emily, and, as soon as they reach the château, they separ 
for the night. 

On the follow morning, as emili sat at breakfast with her aunt, a 
letter wa brought to her, of which she knew the handwrit upon the 
cover; and, as she receiv it with a trembl hand, madam cheron 
hastili enquir from whom it came. emily, with her leave, broke the 
seal, and, observ the signatur of valancourt, gave it unread to her 
aunt, who receiv it with impatience; and, as she look it over, 
emili endeavour to read on her counten it contents. have 
return the letter to her niece, whose eye ask if she might examin 
it, “yes, read it, child,” said madam cheron, in a manner less sever 
than she had expected, and emili had, perhaps, never befor so 
willingli obey her aunt. In thi letter valancourt said littl of the 
interview of the preced day, but conclud with declaring, that he 
would accept hi dismiss from emili only, and with entreating, that 
she would allow him to wait upon her, on the approach evening. when 
she read this, she wa astonish at the moder of madam cheron, 
and look at her with timid expectation, as she said sorrowfully—“what 
am I to say, madam?” 

“why—w must see the young man, I believe,” repli her aunt, “and hear 
what he ha further to say for himself. you may tell him he may come.” 
emili dare scarc credit what she heard. “yet, stay,” ad madam 
cheron, “I will tell him so myself.” she call for pen and ink; emili 
still not dare to trust the emot she felt, and almost sink 
beneath them. her surpris would have been less had she overheard, on 
the preced evening, what madam cheron had not forgotten—that 
valancourt wa the nephew of madam clairval. 

what were the particular of her aunt’ note emili did not learn, but 
the result wa a visit from valancourt in the evening, whom madam 
cheron receiv alone, and they had a long convers befor emili 
wa call down. when she enter the room, her aunt wa convers 
with complacency, and she saw the eye of valancourt, as he impati 
rose, anim with hope. 

“we have been talk over thi affair,” said madam cheron, “the 
chevali ha been tell me, that the late monsieur clairval wa the 
brother of the countess de duvarney, hi mother. I onli wish he had 
mention hi relationship to madam clairval before; I certainli 
should have consid that circumst as a suffici introduct 
to my house.” valancourt bowed, and wa go to address emily, but her 
aunt prevent him. “I have, therefore, consent that you shall 
receiv hi visits; and, though I will not bind myself by ani promise, 
or say, that I shall consid him as my nephew, yet I shall permit the 
intercourse, and shall look forward to ani further connect as an 
event, which may possibl take place in a cours of years, provid the 
chevali rise in hi profession, or ani circumst occurs, which 
may make it prudent for him to take a wife. but mons. valancourt will 
observe, and you too, emily, that, till that happens, I posit 
forbid ani thought of marrying.” 

emily’ countenance, dure thi coars speech, vari everi instant, 
and, toward it conclusion, her distress had so much increased, that 
she wa on the point of leav the room. valancourt, meanwhile, 
scarc less embarrassed, did not dare to look at her, for whom he wa 
thu distressed; but, when madam cheron wa silent, he said, 
“flattering, madam, as your approb is to me—highli as I am 
honour by it—i have yet so much to fear, that I scarc dare to 
hope.” “pray, sir, explain yourself,” said madam cheron; an unexpect 
requisition, which embarrass valancourt again, and almost overcam 
him with confusion, at circumstances, on which, had he been onli a 
spectat of the scene, he would have smiled. 

“till I receiv mademoisel st. aubert’ permiss to accept your 
indulgence,” said he, falteringly—“til she allow me to hope—” 

“o! is that all?” interrupt madam cheron. “well, I will take upon me 
to answer for her. but at the same time, sir, give me leav to observ 
to you, that I am her guardian, and that I expect, in everi instance, 
that my will is hers.” 

As she said this, she rose and quit the room, leav emili and 
valancourt in a state of mutual embarrassment; and, when valancourt’ 
hope enabl him to overcom hi fears, and to address her with the 
zeal and sincer so natur to him, it wa a consider time befor 
she wa suffici recov to hear with distinct hi 
solicit and inquiries. 

the conduct of madam cheron in thi affair had been entir govern 
by selfish vanity. valancourt, in hi first interview, had with great 
candour laid open to her the true state of hi present circumstances, 
and hi futur expectancies, and she, with more prudenc than humanity, 
had absolut and abruptli reject hi suit. she wish her niec to 
marri ambitiously, not becaus she desir to see her in possess of 
the happiness, which rank and wealth are usual believ to bestow, 
but becaus she desir to partak the importance, which such an 
allianc would give. when, therefore, she discov that valancourt 
wa the nephew of a person of so much consequ as madam clairval, 
she becam anxiou for the connection, sinc the prospect it afford 
of futur fortun and distinct for emily, promis the exalt 
she covet for herself. her calcul concern fortun in thi 
allianc were guid rather by her wishes, than by ani hint of 
valancourt, or strong appear of probability; and, when she rest 
her expect on the wealth of madam clairval, she seem total to 
have forgotten, that the latter had a daughter. valancourt, however, 
had not forgotten thi circumstance, and the consider of it had 
made him so modest in hi expect from madam clairval, that he 
had not even name the relationship in hi first convers with 
madam cheron. but, whatev might be the futur fortun of emily, the 
present distinction, which the connect would afford for herself, wa 
certain, sinc the splendour of madam clairval’ establish wa 
such as to excit the gener envi and partial imit of the 
neighbourhood. thu had she consent to involv her niec in an 
engagement, to which she saw onli a distant and uncertain conclusion, 
with as littl consider of her happiness, as when she had so 
precipit forbad it: for though she herself possess the mean of 
render thi union not onli certain, but prudent, yet to do so wa no 
part of her present intention. 

from thi period valancourt made frequent visit to madam cheron, and 
emili pass in hi societi the happiest hour she had known sinc the 
death of her father. they were both too much engag by the present 
moment to give seriou consider to the future. they love and 
were beloved, and saw not, that the veri attachment, which form the 
delight of their present days, might possibl occas the suffer 
of years. meanwhile, madam cheron’ intercours with madam clairval 
becam more frequent than before, and her vaniti wa alreadi gratifi 
by the opportun of proclaiming, wherev she went, the attach 
that subsist between their nephew and niece. 

montoni wa now also becom a daili guest at the château, and emili wa 
compel to observe, that he realli wa a suitor, and a favour 
suitor, to her aunt. 

thu pass the winter months, not onli in peace, but in happiness, to 
valancourt and emily; the station of hi regiment be so near 
thoulouse, as to allow thi frequent intercourse. the pavilion on the 
terrac wa the favourit scene of their interviews, and there emily, 
with madam cheron, would work, while valancourt read aloud work of 
geniu and taste, listen to her enthusiasm, express hi own, and 
caught new opportun of observing, that their mind were form to 
constitut the happi of each other, the same taste, the same nobl 
and benevol sentiment anim each. 



chapter xiii 

As when a shepherd of the hebrid-isles, 
place far amid the melancholi main, 
(whether it be lone fanci him beguiles, 
Or that aerial be sometim deign 
To stand embodi to our sens plain) 
see on the nake hill, or valley low, 
the whilst in ocean phœbu dip hi wain, 
A vast assembl move to and fro, 
then all at onc in air dissolv the wondrou show. 
castl OF indol 


madam cheron’ avaric at length yield to her vanity. some veri 
splendid entertainments, which madam clairval had given, and the 
gener adulation, which wa paid her, made the former more anxiou 
than befor to secur an alliance, that would so much exalt her in her 
own opinion and in that of the world. she propos term for the 
immedi marriag of her niece, and offer to give emili a dower, 
provid madam clairval observ equal terms, on the part of her 
nephew. madam clairval listen to the proposal, and, consid that 
emili wa the appar heiress of her aunt’ wealth, accept it. 
meanwhile, emili knew noth of the transaction, till madam cheron 
inform her, that she must make prepar for the nuptials, which 
would be celebr without further delay; then, astonish and wholli 
unabl to account for thi sudden conclusion, which valancourt had not 
solicit (for he wa ignor of what had pass between the elder 
ladies, and had not dare to hope such good fortune), she decis 
object to it. madam cheron, however, quit as jealou of 
contradict now, as she had been formerly, contend for a speedi 
marriag with as much vehem as she had formerli oppos whatev 
had the most remot possibl of lead to it; and emily’ scrupl 
disappeared, when she again saw valancourt, who wa now inform of the 
happiness, design for him, and came to claim a promis of it from 
herself. 

while prepar were make for these nuptials, montoni becam the 
acknowledg lover of madam cheron; and, though madam clairval wa 
much displeased, when she heard of the approach connection, and wa 
will to prevent that of valancourt with emily, her conscienc told 
her, that she had no right thu to trifl with their peace, and madam 
clairval, though a woman of fashion, wa far less advanc than her 
friend in the art of deriv satisfact from distinct and 
admiration, rather than from conscience. 

emili observ with concern the ascendancy, which montoni had acquir 
over madam cheron, as well as the increas frequenc of hi visits; 
and her own opinion of thi italian wa confirm by that of 
valancourt, who had alway express a dislik of him. As she was, one 
morning, sit at work in the pavilion, enjoy the pleasant 
fresh of spring, whose colour were now spread upon the landscape, 
and listen to valancourt, who wa reading, but who often laid asid 
the book to converse, she receiv a summon to attend madam cheron 
immediately, and had scarc enter the dressing-room, when she 
observ with surpris the deject of her aunt’ countenance, and the 
contrast gaieti of her dress. “so, niece!”—said madame, and she 
stop under some degre of embarrassment.—“i sent for you—i—i wish 
to see you; I have news to tell you. from thi hour you must consid 
the signor montoni as your uncle—w were marri thi morning.” 

astonished—not so much at the marriage, as at the secreci with which it 
had been concluded, and the agit with which it wa announced, 
emily, at length, attribut the privaci to the wish of montoni, rather 
than of her aunt. hi wife, however, intended, that the contrari should 
be believed, and therefor added, “you see I wish to avoid a bustle; 
but now the ceremoni is over I shall do so no longer; and I wish to 
announc to my servant that they must receiv the signor montoni for 
their master.” emili made a feebl attempt to congratul her on these 
appar imprud nuptials. “I shall now celebr my marriag with 
some splendour,” continu madam montoni, “and to save time I shall 
avail myself of the prepar that ha been made for yours, which 
will, of course, be delay a littl while. such of your wed 
cloth as are readi I shall expect you will appear in, to do honour to 
thi festival. I also wish you to inform monsieur valancourt, that I 
have chang my name, and he will acquaint madam clairval. In a few 
day I shall give a grand entertainment, at which I shall request their 
presence.” 

emili wa so lost in surpris and variou thought, that she made madam 
montoni scarc ani reply, but, at her desire, she return to inform 
valancourt of what had passed. surpris wa not hi predomin emot 
on hear of these hasti nuptials; and, when he learned, that they 
were to be the mean of delay hi own, and that the veri ornament 
of the château, which had been prepar to grace the nuptial day of hi 
emily, were to be degrad to the celebr of madam montoni’s, 
grief and indign agit him alternately. He could conceal 
neither from the observ of emily, whose effort to abstract him 
from these seriou emotions, and to laugh at the apprehens 
considerations, that assail him, were ineffectual; and, when, at 
length, he took leave, there wa an earnest tender in hi manner, 
that extrem affect her; she even shed tears, when he disappear 
at the end of the terrace, yet knew not exactli whi she should do so. 

montoni now took possess of the château, and the command of it 
inhabitants, with the eas of a man, who had long consid it to be 
hi own. hi friend cavigni, who had been extrem serviceable, in 
have paid madam cheron the attent and flattery, which she 
required, but from which montoni too often revolted, had apart 
assign to him, and receiv from the domest an equal degre of 
obedi with the master of the mansion. 

within a few days, madam montoni, as she had promised, gave a 
magnific entertain to a veri numer company, among whom wa 
valancourt; but at which madam clairval excus herself from 
attending. there wa a concert, ball and supper. valancourt was, of 
course, emily’ partner, and though, when he gave a look to the 
decor of the apartments, he could not but remember, that they 
were design for other festivities, than those they now contribut to 
celebrate, he endeavour to check hi concern by considering, that a 
littl while onli would elaps befor they would be given to their 
origin destination. dure thi evening, madam montoni danced, 
laugh and talk incessantly; while montoni, silent, reserv and 
somewhat haughty, seem weari of the parade, and of the frivol 
compani it had drawn together. 

thi wa the first and the last entertainment, given in celebr of 
their nuptials. montoni, though the sever of hi temper and the 
gloomi of hi pride prevent him from enjoy such festivities, 
wa extrem will to promot them. It wa seldom, that he could 
meet in ani compani a man of more address, and still seldom one of 
more understanding, than himself; the balanc of advantag in such 
parties, or in the connections, which might aris from them, must, 
therefore, be on hi side; and, knowing, as he did, the selfish 
purposes, for which they are gener frequented, he had no object 
to measur hi talent of dissimul with those of ani other 
competitor for distinct and plunder. but hi wife, who, when her own 
interest wa immedi concerned, had sometim more discern than 
vanity, acquir a conscious of her inferior to other women, in 
person attractions, which, unit with the jealousi natur to the 
discovery, counteract hi readi for mingl with all the parti 
thoulous could afford. till she had, as she supposed, the affect 
of a husband to lose, she had no motiv for discov the unwelcom 
truth, and it had never obtrud itself upon her; but, now that it 
influenc her policy, she oppos her husband’ inclin for 
company, with the more eagerness, becaus she believ him to be realli 
as well receiv in the femal societi of the place, as, dure hi 
address to her, he had affect to be. 

A few week onli had elapsed, sinc the marriage, when madam montoni 
inform emily, that the signor intend to return to italy, as soon as 
the necessari prepar could be made for so long a journey. “we 
shall go to venice,” said she, “where the signor ha a fine mansion, 
and from thenc to hi estat in tuscany. whi do you look so grave, 
child?—you, who are so fond of a romant countri and fine views, will 
doubtless be delight with thi journey.” 

“am I then to be of the party, madam?” said emily, with extrem 
surpris and emotion. “most certainly,” repli her aunt, “how could 
you imagin we should leav you behind? but I see you are think of 
the chevalier; he is not yet, I believe, inform of the journey, but 
he veri soon will be so. signor montoni is gone to acquaint madam 
clairval of our journey, and to say, that the propos connect 
between the famili must from thi time be thought of no more.” 

the unfeel manner, in which madam montoni thu inform her niece, 
that she must be separated, perhap for ever, from the man, with whom 
she wa on the point of be unit for life, ad to the dismay, 
which she must otherwis have suffer at such intelligence. when she 
could speak, she ask the caus of the sudden chang in madame’ 
sentiment toward valancourt, but the onli repli she could obtain was, 
that the signor had forbad the connection, consid it to be 
greatli inferior to what emili might reason expect. 

“I now leav the affair entir to the signor,” ad madam montoni, 
“but I must say, that M. valancourt never wa a favourit with me, and 
I wa overpersuaded, or I should not have given my consent to the 
connection. I wa weak enough—i am so foolish sometimes!—to suffer 
other people’ uneasi to affect me, and so my better judgment 
yield to your affliction. but the signor ha veri properli point 
out the folli of this, and he shall not have to reprov me a second 
time. I am determined, that you shall submit to those, who know how to 
guid you better than yourself—i am determined, that you shall be 
conformable.” 

emili would have been astonish at the assert of thi eloqu 
speech, had not her mind been so overwhelm by the sudden shock it had 
received, that she scarc heard a word of what wa latterli address 
to her. whatev were the weak of madam montoni, she might have 
avoid to accus herself with those of compass and tender to 
the feel of others, and especi to those of emily. It wa the 
same ambition, that late prevail upon her to solicit an allianc 
with madam clairval’ family, which induc her to withdraw from it, 
now that her marriag with montoni had exalt her self-consequence, 
and, with it, her view for her niece. 

emili was, at thi time, too much affect to employ either 
remonstrance, or entreati on thi topic; and when, at length, she 
attempt the latter, her emot overcam her speech, and she retir 
to her apartment, to think, if in the present state of her mind to 
think wa possible, upon thi sudden and overwhelm subject. It wa 
veri long, befor her spirit were suffici compos to permit the 
reflection, which, when it came, wa dark and even terrible. she saw, 
that montoni sought to aggrandis himself in hi dispos of her, and 
it occurred, that hi friend cavigni wa the person, for whom he wa 
interested. the prospect of go to itali wa still render darker, 
when she consid the tumultu situat of that country, then torn 
by civil commotion, where everi petti state wa at war with it 
neighbour, and even everi castl liabl to the attack of an invader. 
she consid the person, to whose immedi guidanc she would be 
committed, and the vast distance, that wa to separ her from 
valancourt, and, at the recollect of him, everi other imag vanish 
from her mind, and everi thought wa again obscur by grief. 

In thi perturb state she pass some hours, and, when she wa 
summon to dinner, she entreat permiss to remain in her own 
apartment; but madam montoni wa alone, and the request wa refused. 
emili and her aunt said littl dure the repast; the one occupi by 
her griefs, the other engross by the disappointment, which the 
unexpect absenc of montoni occasioned; for not onli wa her vaniti 
piqu by the neglect, but her jealousi alarm by what she consid 
as a mysteri engagement. when the cloth wa drawn and they were 
alone, emili renew the mention of valancourt; but her aunt, neither 
soften to pity, nor awaken to remorse, becam enraged, that her 
will should be opposed, and the author of montoni questioned, though 
thi wa done by emili with her usual gentleness, who, after a long, 
and tortur conversation, retir in tears. 

As she cross the hall, a person enter it by the great door, whom, 
as her eye hastili glanc that way, she imagin to be montoni, and 
she wa pass on with quicker steps, when she heard the well-known 
voic of valancourt. 

“emily, O! my emily!” cri he in a tone falter with impatience, 
while she turned, and, as he advanced, wa alarm at the express of 
hi counten and the eager desper of hi air. “in tears, emily! 
I would speak with you,” said he, “I have much to say; conduct me to 
where we may converse. but you tremble—y are ill! let me lead you to 
a seat.” 

He observ the open door of an apartment, and hastili took her hand to 
lead her thither; but she attempt to withdraw it, and said, with a 
languid smile, “I am better already; if you wish to see my aunt she is 
in the dining-parlour.” “I must speak with _you_, my emily,” repli 
valancourt, “good god! is it alreadi come to this? are you inde so 
will to resign me? but thi is an improp place—i am overheard. let 
me entreat your attention, if onli for a few minutes.”—“when you have 
seen my aunt,” said emily. “I wa wretch enough when I came hither,” 
exclaim valancourt, “do not increas my miseri by thi coldness—thi 
cruel refusal.” 

the despondency, with which he spoke this, affect her almost to 
tears, but she persist in refus to hear him, till he had convers 
with madam montoni. “where is her husband, where, then, is montoni?” 
said valancourt, in an alter tone: “it is he, to whom I must speak.” 

emily, terrifi for the consequ of the indignation, that flash 
in hi eyes, tremblingli assur him, that montoni wa not at home, and 
entreat he would endeavour to moder hi resentment. At the 
tremul accent of her voice, hi eye soften instantli from 
wild into tenderness. “you are ill, emily,” said he, “they will 
destroy us both! forgiv me, that I dare to doubt your affection.” 

emili no longer oppos him, as he led her into an adjoin parlour; 
the manner, in which he had name montoni, had so much alarm her for 
hi own safety, that she wa now onli anxiou to prevent the 
consequ of hi just resentment. He listen to her entreaties, 
with attention, but repli to them onli with look of despond and 
tenderness, concealing, as much as possible, the sentiment he felt 
toward montoni, that he might sooth the apprehensions, which 
distress her. but she saw the veil he had spread over hi resentment, 
and, hi assum tranquil onli alarm her more, she urged, at 
length, the impolici of forc an interview with montoni, and of 
take ani measure, which might render their separ irremediable. 
valancourt yield to these remonstrances, and her affect entreati 
drew from him a promise, that, howev montoni might persist in hi 
design of disunit them, he would not seek to redress hi wrong by 
violence. “for my sake,” said emily, “let the consider of what I 
should suffer deter you from such a mode of revenge!” “for your sake, 
emily,” repli valancourt, hi eye fill with tear of tender 
and grief, while he gaze upon her. “yes—yes—i shall subdu myself. 
but, though I have given you my solemn promis to do this, do not 
expect, that I can tame submit to the author of montoni; if I 
could, I should be unworthi of you. yet, O emily! how long may he 
condemn me to live without you,—how long may it be befor you return to 
france!” 

emili endeavour to sooth him with assur of her unalter 
affection, and by representing, that, in littl more than a year, she 
should be her own mistress, as far as relat to her aunt, from whose 
guardianship her age would then releas her; assurances, which gave 
littl consol to valancourt, who considered, that she would then 
be in itali and in the power of those, whose dominion over her would 
not ceas with their rights; but he affect to be consol by them. 
emily, comfort by the promis she had obtained, and by hi appar 
composure, wa about to leav him, when her aunt enter the room. she 
threw a glanc of sharp reproof upon her niece, who immedi 
withdrew, and of haughti displeasur upon valancourt. 

“thi is not the conduct I should have expect from you, sir;” said 
she, “I did not expect to see you in my house, after you had been 
informed, that your visit were no longer agreeable, much less, that 
you would seek a clandestin interview with my niece, and that she 
would grant one.” 

valancourt, perceiv it necessari to vindic emili from such a 
design, explained, that the purpos of hi own visit had been to 
request an interview with montoni, and he then enter upon the subject 
of it, with the temper spirit which the sex, rather than the 
respectability, of madam montoni, demanded. 

hi expostul were answer with sever rebuke; she lament 
again, that her prudenc had ever yield to what she term 
compassion, and added, that she wa so sensibl of the folli of her 
former consent, that, to prevent the possibl of a repetition, she 
had commit the affair entir to the conduct of signor montoni. 

the feel eloqu of valancourt, however, at length, made her 
sensibl in some measur of her unworthi conduct, and she becam 
suscept to shame, but not remorse: she hate valancourt, who 
awaken her to thi pain sensation, and, in proport as she grew 
dissatisfi with herself, her abhorr of him increased. thi wa 
also the more inveterate, becaus hi temper word and manner were 
such as, without accus her, compel her to accus herself, and 
neither left her a hope, that the odiou portrait wa the caricatur of 
hi prejudice, or afford her an excus for express the violent 
resentment, with which she contempl it. At length, her anger rose 
to such a height, that valancourt wa compel to leav the hous 
abruptly, lest he should forfeit hi own esteem by an intemper 
reply. He wa then convinced, that from madam montoni he had noth 
to hope, for what of either pity, or justic could be expect from a 
person, who could feel the pain of guilt, without the humil of 
repentance? 

To montoni he look with equal despondency, sinc it wa nearli 
evident, that thi plan of separ origin with him, and it wa 
not probable, that he would relinquish hi own view to entreaties, or 
remonstrances, which he must have foreseen and have been prepar to 
resist. yet, rememb hi promis to emily, and more solicitous, 
concern hi love, than jealou of hi consequence, valancourt wa 
care to do noth that might unnecessarili irrit montoni, he 
wrote to him, therefore, not to demand an interview, but to solicit 
one, and, have done this, he endeavour to wait with calm hi 
reply. 

madam clairval wa passiv in the affair. when she gave her 
approb to valancourt’ marriage, it wa in the belief, that emili 
would be the heiress of madam montoni’ fortune; and, though, upon the 
nuptial of the latter, when she perceiv the fallaci of thi 
expectation, her conscienc had withheld her from adopt ani measur 
to prevent the union, her benevol wa not suffici activ to 
impel her toward ani step, that might now promot it. she was, on the 
contrary, secretli pleased, that valancourt wa releas from an 
engagement, which she consid to be as inferior, in point of 
fortune, to hi merit, as hi allianc wa thought by montoni to be 
humili to the beauti of emily; and, though her pride wa wound 
by thi reject of a member of her family, she disdain to show 
resent otherwise, than by silence. 

montoni, in hi repli to valancourt, said, that as an interview could 
neither remov the object of the one, nor overcom the wish of 
the other, it would serv onli to produc useless alterc between 
them. he, therefore, thought proper to refus it. 

In consider of the policy, suggest by emily, and of hi promis 
to her, valancourt restrain the impulse, that urg him to the hous 
of montoni, to demand what had been deni to hi entreaties. He onli 
repeat hi solicit to see him; second them with all the 
argument hi situat could suggest. thu sever day passed, in 
remonstrance, on one side, and inflex denial, on the other; for, 
whether it wa fear, or shame, or the hatred, which result from both, 
that made montoni shun the man he had injured, he wa peremptori in hi 
refusal, and wa neither soften to piti by the agony, which 
valancourt’ letter portrayed, nor awaken to a repent of hi own 
injustic by the strong remonstr he employed. At length, 
valancourt’ letter were return unopened, and then, in the first 
moment of passion despair, he forgot everi promis to emily, except 
the solemn one, which bound him to avoid violence, and hasten to 
montoni’ château, determin to see him by whatev other mean might 
be necessary. montoni wa denied, and valancourt, when he afterward 
enquir for madame, and ma’amsel st. aubert, wa absolut refus 
admitt by the servants. not choos to submit himself to a contest 
with these, he, at length, departed, and, return home in a state of 
mind approach to frenzy, wrote to emili of what had passed, 
express without restraint all the agoni of hi heart, and entreated, 
that, sinc he must not otherwis hope to see her immediately, she 
would allow him an interview unknown to montoni. soon after he had 
dispatch this, hi passion becom more temperate, he wa sensibl 
of the error he had commit in have given emili a new subject of 
distress in the strong mention of hi own suffering, and would have 
given half the world, had it been his, to recov the letter. emily, 
however, wa spare the pain she must have receiv from it by the 
suspici polici of madam montoni, who had ordered, that all letters, 
address to her niece, should be deliv to herself, and who, after 
have perus thi and indulg the express of resentment, which 
valancourt’ mention of montoni provoked, had consign it to the 
flames. 

montoni, meanwhile, everi day more impati to leav france, gave 
repeat order for dispatch to the servant employ in prepar 
for the journey, and to the persons, with whom he wa transact some 
particular business. He preserv a steadi silenc to the letter in 
which valancourt, despair of greater good, and have subdu the 
passion, that had transgress against hi policy, solicit onli the 
indulg of be allow to bid emili farewell. but when valancourt 
learn that she wa realli to set out in a veri few days, and that it 
wa design he should see her no more, forget everi consider 
of prudence, he dared, in a second letter to emily, to propos a 
clandestin marriage. thi also wa transmit to madam montoni, and 
the last day of emily’ stay at thoulous arrived, without afford 
valancourt even a line to sooth hi sufferings, or a hope, that he 
should be allow a part interview. 

dure thi period of tortur suspens to valancourt, emili wa sunk 
into that kind of stupor, with which sudden and irremedi misfortun 
sometim overwhelm the mind. love him with the tenderest affection, 
and have long been accustom to consid him as the friend and 
companion of all her futur days, she had no idea of happiness, that 
were not connect with him. what, then, must have been her suffering, 
when thu suddenli they were to be separated, perhaps, for ever, 
certainli to be thrown into distant part of the world, where they 
could scarc hear of each other’ existence; and all thi in 
obedi to the will of a stranger, for such as montoni, and of a 
person, who had but late been anxiou to hasten their nuptials! It 
wa in vain, that she endeavour to subdu her grief, and resign 
herself to an event, which she could not avoid. the silenc of 
valancourt afflict more than it surpris her, sinc she attribut 
it to it just occasion; but, when the day, preced that, on which 
she wa to quit thoulouse, arrived, and she had heard no mention of hi 
be permit to take leav of her, grief overcam everi 
consideration, that had made her reluct to speak of him, and she 
enquir of madam montoni, whether thi consol had been refused. 
her aunt inform her that it had, adding, that, after the provoc 
she had herself receiv from valancourt, in their last interview, and 
the persecution, which the signor had suffer from hi letters, no 
entreati should avail to procur it. 

“if the chevali expect thi favour from us,” said she, “he should 
have conduct himself in a veri differ manner; he should have 
wait patiently, till he knew whether we were dispos to grant it, 
and not have come and reprov me, becaus I did not think proper to 
bestow my niec upon him, and then have persist in troubl the 
signor, becaus he did not think proper to enter into ani disput about 
so childish an affair. hi behaviour throughout ha been extrem 
presumptu and impertinent, and I desire, that I may never hear hi 
name repeated, and that you will get the better of those foolish 
sorrow and whims, and look like other people, and not appear with that 
dismal countenance, as if you were readi to cry. for, though you say 
nothing, you cannot conceal your grief from my penetration. I can see 
you are readi to cri at thi moment, though I am reprov you for it; 
aye, even now, in spite of my commands.” 

emily, have turn away to hide her tears, quit the room to 
indulg them, and the day wa pass in an intens of anguish, such 
as she had, perhaps, never known before. when she withdrew to her 
chamber for the night, she remain in the chair where she had place 
herself, on enter the room, absorb in her grief, till long after 
everi member of the family, except herself, wa retir to rest. she 
could not divest herself of a belief, that she had part with 
valancourt to meet no more; a belief, which did not aris mere from 
foreseen circumstances, for, though the length of the journey she wa 
about to commence, the uncertainti as to the period of her return, 
togeth with the prohibit she had received, seem to justifi it, 
she yield also to an impression, which she mistook for a 
presentiment, that she wa go from valancourt for ever. how dread 
to her imagination, too, wa the distanc that would separ them—th 
alps, those tremend barriers! would rise, and whole countri extend 
between the region where each must exist! To live in adjoin 
provinces, to live even in the same country, though without see him, 
wa compar happi to the convict of thi dread length of 
distance. 

her mind was, at length, so much agit by the consider of her 
state, and the belief, that she had seen valancourt for the last time, 
that she suddenli becam veri faint, and, look round the chamber for 
something, that might reviv her, she observ the casements, and had 
just strength to throw one open, near which she seat herself. the air 
recal her spirits, and the still moonlight, that fell upon the elm 
of a long avenue, front the window, somewhat sooth them, and 
determin her to tri whether exercis and the open air would not 
reliev the intens pain that bound her temples. In the château all wa 
still; and, pass down the great staircas into the hall, from whenc 
a passag led immedi to the garden, she softli and unheard, as she 
thought, unlock the door, and enter the avenue. emili pass on 
with step now hurried, and now faltering, as, deceiv by the shadow 
among the trees, she fanci she saw some person move in the distant 
perspective, and feared, that it wa a spi of madam montoni. her 
desire, however, to revisit the pavilion, where she had pass so mani 
happi hour with valancourt, and had admir with him the extens 
prospect over languedoc and her nativ gascony, overcam her 
apprehens of be observed, and she move on toward the terrace, 
which, run along the upper garden, command the whole of the lower 
one, and commun with it by a flight of marbl steps, that 
termin the avenue. 

have reach these steps, she paus a moment to look round, for her 
distanc from the château now increas the fear, which the still 
and obscur of the hour had awakened. but, perceiv noth that 
could justifi it, she ascend to the terrace, where the moonlight 
show the long broad walk, with the pavilion at it extremity, while 
the ray silver the foliag of the high tree and shrubs, that 
border it on the right, and the tuft summit of those, that rose to 
a level with the balustrad on the left, from the garden below. her 
distanc from the château again alarm her, she paus to listen; the 
night wa so calm, that no sound could have escap her, but she heard 
onli the plaintiv sweet of the nightingale, with the light shiver 
of the leaves, and she pursu her way toward the pavilion, have 
reach which, it obscur did not prevent the emotion, that a fuller 
view of it well-known scene would have excited. the lattic were 
thrown back, and show beyond their embow arch the moonlight 
landscape, shadowi and soft; it groves, and plain extend gradual 
and indistinctli to the eye, it distant mountain catch a stronger 
gleam, and the nearer river reflect the moon, and trembl to her 
rays. 

emily, as she approach the lattice, wa sensibl of the featur of 
thi scene onli as they serv to bring valancourt more immedi to 
her fancy. “ah!” said she, with a heavi sigh, as she threw herself into 
a chair by the window, “how often have we sat togeth in thi 
spot—often have look upon that landscape! never, never more shall we 
view it together—never—nev more, perhaps, shall we look upon each 
other!” 

her tear were suddenli stop by terror—a voic spoke near her in the 
pavilion; she shrieked—it spoke again, and she distinguish the 
well-known tone of valancourt. It wa inde valancourt who support 
her in hi arms! for some moment their emot would not suffer either 
to speak. “emily,” said valancourt at length, as he press her hand in 
his. “emily!” and he wa again silent, but the accent, in which he had 
pronounc her name, express all hi tender and sorrow. 

“O my emily!” he resumed, after a long pause, “I do then see you onc 
again, and hear again the sound of that voice! I have haunt thi 
place—thes gardens, for many—mani nights, with a faint, veri faint 
hope of see you. thi wa the onli chanc that remain to me, and 
thank heaven! it ha at length succeeded—i am not condemn to absolut 
despair!” 

emili said something, she scarc knew what, express of her 
unalter affection, and endeavour to calm the agit of hi 
mind; but valancourt could for some time onli utter incoher 
express of hi emotions; and, when he wa somewhat more composed, 
he said, “I came hither, soon after sunset, and have been watch in 
the gardens, and in thi pavilion ever since; for, though I had now 
given up all hope of see you, I could not resolv to tear myself 
from a place so near to you, and should probabl have linger about 
the château till morn dawned. O how heavili the moment have passed, 
yet with what variou emot have they been marked, as I sometim 
thought I heard footsteps, and fanci you were approaching, and then 
again—perceiv onli a dead and dreari silence! but, when you open 
the door of the pavilion, and the dark prevent my distinguish 
with certainty, whether it wa my love—mi heart beat so strongli with 
hope and fears, that I could not speak. the instant I heard the 
plaintiv accent of your voice, my doubt vanished, but not my fears, 
till you spoke of me; then, lose the apprehens of alarm you in 
the excess of my emotion, I could no longer be silent. O emily! these 
are moments, in which joy and grief struggl so power for 
pre-eminence, that the heart can scarc support the contest!” 

emily’ heart acknowledg the truth of thi assertion, but the joy she 
felt on thu meet valancourt, at the veri moment when she wa 
lamenting, that they must probabl meet no more, soon melt into 
grief, as reflect stole over her thoughts, and imagin prompt 
vision of the future. she struggl to recov the calm digniti of 
mind, which wa necessari to support her through thi last interview, 
and which valancourt found it utterli imposs to attain, for the 
transport of hi joy chang abruptli into those of suffering, and he 
express in the most impass languag hi horror of thi 
separation, and hi despair of their ever meet again. emili wept 
silent as she listen to him, and then, tri to command her own 
distress, and to sooth his, she suggest everi circumst that could 
lead to hope. but the energi of hi fear led him instantli to detect 
the friendli fallacies, which she endeavour to impos on herself and 
him, and also to conjur up illus too power for hi reason. 

“you are go from me,” said he, “to a distant country, O how 
distant!—to new society, new friends, new admirers, with peopl too, 
who will tri to make you forget me, and to promot new connections! how 
can I know this, and not know, that you will never return for me—nev 
can be mine.” hi voic wa stifl by sighs. 

“you believe, then,” said emily, “that the pang I suffer proceed from 
a trivial and temporari interest; you believe—” 

“suffer!” interrupt valancourt, “suffer for me! O emily—how sweet—how 
bitter are those words; what comfort, what anguish do they give! I 
ought not to doubt the steadi of your affection, yet such is the 
inconsist of real love, that it is alway awak to suspicion, 
howev unreasonable; alway requir new assur from the object 
of it interest, and thu it is, that I alway feel revived, as by a 
new conviction, when your word tell me I am dear to you; and, want 
these, I relaps into doubt, and too often into despondency.” then 
seem to recollect himself, he exclaimed, “but what a wretch am I, 
thu to tortur you, and in these moments, too! I, who ought to support 
and comfort you!” 

thi reflect overcam valancourt with tenderness, but, relaps 
into despondency, he again felt onli for himself, and lament again 
thi cruel separation, in a voic and word so impassioned, that emili 
could no longer struggl to repress her own grief, or to sooth his. 
valancourt, between these emot of love and pity, lost the power, 
and almost the wish, of repress hi agitation; and, in the interv 
of convuls sobs, he, at one moment, kiss away her tears, then told 
her cruelly, that possibl she might never again weep for him, and then 
tri to speak more calmly, but onli exclaimed, “O emily—mi heart will 
break!—i cannot—cannot leav you! now—i gaze upon that countenance, now 
I hold you in my arms! a littl while, and all thi will appear a 
dream. I shall look, and cannot see you; shall tri to recollect your 
features—and the impress will be fled from my imagination;—to hear 
the tone of your voice, and even memori will be silent!—i cannot, 
cannot leav you! whi should we confid the happi of our whole 
live to the will of people, who have no right to interrupt, and, 
except in give you to me, have no power to promot it? O emily! 
ventur to trust your own heart, ventur to be mine for ever!” hi 
voic trembled, and he wa silent; emili continu to weep, and wa 
silent also, when valancourt proceed to propos an immedi 
marriage, and that at an earli hour on the follow morning, she 
should quit madam montoni’ house, and be conduct by him to the 
church of the augustines, where a friar should await to unit them. 

the silence, with which she listen to a proposal, dictat by love 
and despair, and enforc at a moment, when it seem scarc possibl 
for her to oppos it;—when her heart wa soften by the sorrow of a 
separation, that might be eternal, and her reason obscur by the 
illus of love and terror, encourag him to hope, that it would not 
be rejected. “speak, my emily!” said valancourt eagerly, “let me hear 
your voice, let me hear you confirm my fate.” she spoke not; her cheek 
wa cold, and her sens seem to fail her, but she did not faint. To 
valancourt’ terrifi imagin she appear to be dying; he call 
upon her name, rose to go to the château for assistance, and then, 
recollect her situation, fear to go, or to leav her for a moment. 

after a few minutes, she drew a deep sigh, and began to revive. the 
conflict she had suffered, between love and the duti she at present 
owe to her father’ sister; her repugn to a clandestin marriage, 
her fear of emerg on the world with embarrassments, such as might 
ultim involv the object of her affect in miseri and 
repentance;—al thi variou interest wa too power for a mind, 
alreadi enerv by sorrow, and her reason had suffer a transient 
suspension. but duty, and good sense, howev hard the conflict, at 
length, triumph over affect and mourn presentiment; abov all, 
she dread to involv valancourt in obscur and vain regret, which 
she saw, or thought she saw, must be the too certain consequ of a 
marriag in their present circumstances; and she acted, perhaps, with 
somewhat more than femal fortitude, when she resolv to endur a 
present, rather than provok a distant misfortune. 

with a candour, that prove how truli she esteem and love him, and 
which endear her to him, if possible, more than ever, she told 
valancourt all her reason for reject hi proposals. those, which 
influenc her concern hi futur welfare, he instantli refuted, or 
rather contradicted; but they awaken tender consider for her, 
which the frenzi of passion and despair had conceal before, and love, 
which had but late prompt him to propos a clandestin and 
immedi marriage, now induc him to renounc it. the triumph wa 
almost too much for hi heart; for emily’ sake, he endeavour to 
stifl hi grief, but the swell anguish would not be restrained. “O 
emily!” said he, “I must leav you—i _must_ leav you, and I know it is 
for ever!” 

convuls sob again interrupt hi words, and they wept togeth in 
silence, till emily, recollect the danger of be discovered, and 
the improprieti of prolong an interview, which might subject her to 
censure, summon all her fortitud to utter a last farewell. 

“stay!” said valancourt, “I conjur you stay, for I have much to tell 
you. the agit of my mind ha hitherto suffer me to speak onli on 
the subject that occupi it;—i have forborn to mention a doubt of 
much importance, partly, lest it should appear as if I told it with an 
ungener view of alarm you into a complianc with my late 
proposal.” 

emily, much agitated, did not leav valancourt, but she led him from 
the pavilion, and, as they walk upon the terrace, he proceed as 
follows: 

“thi montoni: I have heard some strang hint concern him. are you 
certain he is of madam quesnel’ family, and that hi fortun is what 
it appear to be?” 

“I have no reason to doubt either,” repli emily, in a voic of alarm. 
“of the first, indeed, I cannot doubt, but I have no certain mean of 
judg of the latter, and I entreat you will tell me all you have 
heard.” 

“that I certainli will, but it is veri imperfect, and unsatisfactori 
information. I gather it by accid from an italian, who wa 
speak to anoth person of thi montoni. they were talk of hi 
marriage; the italian said, that if he wa the person he meant, he wa 
not like to make madam cheron happy. He proceed to speak of him in 
gener term of dislike, and then gave some particular hints, 
concern hi character, that excit my curiosity, and I ventur to 
ask him a few questions. He wa reserv in hi replies, but, after 
hesit for some time, he owned, that he had understood abroad, that 
montoni wa a man of desper fortun and character. He said someth 
of a castl of montoni’s, situat among the apennines, and of some 
strang circumstances, that might be mentioned, as to hi former mode 
of life. I press him to inform me further, but I believ the strong 
interest I felt wa visibl in my manner, and alarm him; for no 
entreati could prevail with him to give ani explan of the 
circumst he had allud to, or to mention anyth further 
concern montoni. I observ to him, that, if montoni wa possess 
of a castl in the apennines, it appear from such a circumstance, 
that he wa of some family, and also seem to contradict the report, 
that he wa a man of entir broken fortunes. He shook hi head, and 
look as if he could have said a great deal, but made no reply. 

“A hope of learn someth more satisfactory, or more positive, 
detain me in hi compani a consider time, and I renew the 
subject repeatedly, but the italian wrap himself up in reserve, 
said—that what he had mention he had caught onli from a float 
report, and that report frequent aros from person malice, and 
were veri littl to be depend upon. I forbor to press the subject 
farther, sinc it wa obviou that he wa alarm for the consequ 
of what he had alreadi said, and I wa compel to remain in 
uncertainti on a point where suspens is almost intolerable. think, 
emily, what I must suffer to see you depart for a foreign country, 
commit to the power of a man of such doubt charact as is thi 
montoni! but I will not alarm you unnecessarily;—it is possible, as the 
italian said, at first, that thi is not the montoni he allud to. 
yet, emily, consid well befor you resolv to commit yourself to him. 
O! I must not trust myself to speak—or I shall renounc all the 
motives, which so late influenc me to resign the hope of your 
becom mine immediately.” 

valancourt walk upon the terrac with hurri steps, while emili 
remain lean on the balustrad in deep thought. the inform she 
had just receiv excited, perhaps, more alarm than it could justify, 
and rais onc more the conflict of contrast interests. she had 
never like montoni. the fire and keen of hi eye, it proud 
exultation, it bold fierceness, it sullen watchfulness, as occasion, 
and even slight occasion, had call forth the latent soul, she had 
often observ with emotion; while from the usual express of hi 
counten she had alway shrunk. from such observ she wa the 
more inclin to believe, that it wa thi montoni, of whom the italian 
had utter hi suspici hints. the thought of be sole in hi 
power, in a foreign land, wa terrifi to her, but it wa not by 
terror alon that she wa urg to an immedi marriag with 
valancourt. the tenderest love had alreadi plead hi cause, but had 
been unabl to overcom her opinion, as to her duty, her disinterest 
consider for valancourt, and the delicacy, which made her revolt 
from a clandestin union. It wa not to be expected, that a vagu 
terror would be more powerful, than the unit influenc of love and 
grief. but it recal all their energy, and render a second conquest 
necessary. 

with valancourt, whose imagin wa now awak to the suggest of 
everi passion; whose apprehens for emili had acquir strength by 
the mere mention of them, and becam everi instant more powerful, as 
hi mind brood over them—with valancourt no second conquest wa 
attainable. He thought he saw in the clearest light, and love assist 
the fear, that thi journey to itali would involv emili in misery; he 
determined, therefore, to persever in oppos it, and in conjur 
her to bestow upon him the titl of her law protector. 

“emily!” said he, with solemn earnestness, “thi is no time for 
scrupul distinctions, for weigh the dubiou and compar 
trifl circumstances, that may affect our futur comfort. I now see, 
much more clearli than before, the train of seriou danger you are 
go to encount with a man of montoni’ character. those dark hint 
of the italian spoke much, but not more than the idea I have of 
montoni’ disposition, as exhibit even in hi countenance. I think I 
see at thi moment all that could have been hinted, written there. He 
is the italian, whom I fear, and I conjur you for your own sake, as 
well as for mine, to prevent the evil I shudder to foresee. O emily! 
let my tenderness, my arm withhold you from them—giv me the right to 
defend you!” 

emili onli sighed, while valancourt proceed to remonstr and to 
entreat with all the energi that love and apprehens could inspire. 
but, as hi imagin magnifi to her the possibl evil she wa 
go to meet, the mist of her own fanci began to dissipate, and 
allow her to distinguish the exagger images, which impos on hi 
reason. she considered, that there wa no proof of montoni be the 
person, whom the stranger had meant; that, even if he wa so, the 
italian had notic hi charact and broken fortun mere from 
report; and that, though the counten of montoni seem to give 
probabl to a part of the rumour, it wa not by such circumst 
that an implicit belief of it could be justified. these consider 
would probabl not have arisen so distinctli to her mind, at thi time, 
had not the terror of valancourt present to her such obviou 
exagger of her danger, as incit her to distrust the fallaci 
of passion. but, while she endeavour in the gentlest manner to 
convinc him of hi error, she plung him into a new one. hi voic 
and counten chang to an express of dark despair. “emily!” said 
he, “this, thi moment is the bitterest that is yet come to me. you do 
not—cannot love me!—it would be imposs for you to reason thu 
coolly, thu deliberately, if you did. I, _i_ am torn with anguish at 
the prospect of our separation, and of the evil that may await you in 
consequ of it; I would encount ani hazard to prevent it—to save 
you. no! emily, no!—you cannot love me.” 

“we have now littl time to wast in exclamation, or assertion,” said 
emily, endeavour to conceal her emotion: “if you are yet to learn 
how dear you are, and ever must be, to my heart, no assur of mine 
can give you conviction.” 

the last word falter on her lips, and her tear flow fast. these 
word and tear brought, onc more, and with instantan force, 
convict of her love to valancourt. He could onli exclaim, “emily! 
emily!” and weep over the hand he press to hi lips; but she, after 
some moments, again rous herself from the indulg of sorrow, and 
said, “I must leav you; it is late, and my absenc from the château 
may be discovered. think of me—lov me—when I am far away; the belief 
of thi will be my comfort!” 

“think of you!—lov you!” exclaim valancourt. 

“tri to moder these transports,” said emily, “for my sake, try.” 

“for your sake!” 

“yes, for my sake,” repli emily, in a tremul voice, “I cannot 
leav you thus!” 

“then do not leav me!” said valancourt, with quickness. “whi should we 
part, or part for longer than till tomorrow?” 

“I am, inde I am, unequ to these moments,” repli emily, “you tear 
my heart, but I never can consent to thi hasty, imprud proposal!” 

“if we could command our time, my emily, it should not be thu hasty; 
we must submit to circumstances.” 

“we must indeed! I have alreadi told you all my heart—mi spirit are 
gone. you allow the forc of my objections, till your tender 
call up vagu terrors, which have given us both unnecessari anguish. 
spare me! do not oblig me to repeat the reason I have alreadi urged.” 

“spare you!” cri valancourt, “I am a wretch—a veri wretch, that have 
felt onli for myself!—i! who ought to have shown the fortitud of a 
man, who ought to have support you, I have increas your suffer 
by the conduct of a child! forgiv me, emily! think of the distract 
of my mind now that I am about to part with all that is dear to me—and 
forgiv me! when you are gone, I shall recollect with bitter remors 
what I have made you suffer, and shall wish in vain that I could see 
you, if onli for a moment, that I might sooth your grief.” 

tear again interrupt hi voice, and emili wept with him. “I will 
show myself more worthi of your love,” said valancourt, at length; “I 
will not prolong these moments. My emily—mi own emily! never forget me! 
god know when we shall meet again! I resign you to hi care.—o god!—o 
god!—protect and bless her!” 

He press her hand to hi heart. emili sunk almost lifeless on hi 
bosom, and neither wept, nor spoke. valancourt, now command hi own 
distress, tri to comfort and reassur her, but she appear total 
unaffect by what he said, and a sigh, which she uttered, now and 
then, wa all that prove she had not fainted. 

He support her slowli toward the château, weep and speak to 
her; but she answer onli in sighs, till, have reach the gate, 
that termin the avenue, she seem to have recov her 
consciousness, and, look round, perceiv how near they were to the 
château. “we must part here,” said she, stopping, “whi prolong these 
moments? teach me the fortitud I have forgot.” 

valancourt struggl to assum a compos air. “farewell, my love!” 
said he, in a voic of solemn tenderness—“trust me we shall meet 
again—meet for each other—meet to part no more!” hi voic faltered, 
but, recov it, he proceed in a firmer tone. “you know not what I 
shall suffer, till I hear from you; I shall omit no opportun of 
convey to you my letters, yet I trembl to think how few may occur. 
and trust me, love, for your dear sake, I will tri to bear thi absenc 
with fortitude. O how littl I have shown tonight!” 

“farewell!” said emili faintly. “when you are gone, I shall think of 
mani thing I would have said to you.” “and I of many—many!” said 
valancourt; “I never left you yet, that I did not immedi rememb 
some question, or some entreaty, or some circumstance, concern my 
love, that I earnestli wish to mention, and feel wretch becaus I 
could not. O emily! thi countenance, on which I now gaze—will, in a 
moment, be gone from my eyes, and not all the effort of fanci will be 
abl to recal it with exactness. O! what an infinit differ 
between thi moment and the next!—_now_, I am in your presence, can 
behold you! _then_, all will be a dreari blank—and I shall be a 
wanderer, exil from my onli home!” 

valancourt again press her to hi heart, and held her there in 
silence, weeping. tear onc again calm her oppress mind. they 
again bade each other farewell, linger a moment, and then parted. 
valancourt seem to forc himself from the spot; he pass hastili up 
the avenue, and emily, as she move slowli toward the château, heard 
hi distant steps. she listen to the sounds, as they sunk fainter and 
fainter, till the melancholi still of night alon remained; and 
then hurri to her chamber, to seek repose, which, alas! wa fled from 
her wretchedness. 



volum 2 



chapter I 

where’ I roam, whatev realm I see, 
My heart untravell’d still shall turn to thee. 
goldsmith 


the carriag were at the gate at an earli hour; the bustl of the 
domestics, pass to and fro in the galleries, awaken emili from 
harass slumbers: her unquiet mind had, dure the night, present 
her with terrif imag and obscur circumstances, concern her 
affect and her futur life. she now endeavour to chase away the 
impress they had left on her fancy; but from imaginari evil she 
awok to the conscious of real ones. recollect that she had 
part with valancourt, perhap for ever, her heart sicken as memori 
revived. but she tri to dismiss the dismal forebod that crowd 
on her mind, and to restrain the sorrow which she could not subdue; 
effort which diffus over the settl melancholi of her counten 
an express of temper resignation, as a thin veil, thrown over the 
featur of beauty, render them more interest by a partial 
concealment. but madam montoni observ noth in thi counten 
except it usual paleness, which attract her censure. she told her 
niece, that she had been indulg in fanci sorrows, and beg she 
would have more regard for decorum, than to let the world see that she 
could not renounc an improp attachment; at which emily’ pale cheek 
becam flush with crimson, but it wa the blush of pride, and she 
made no answer. soon after, montoni enter the breakfast room, spoke 
little, and seem impati to be gone. 

the window of thi room open upon the garden. As emili pass them, 
she saw the spot where she had part with valancourt on the preced 
night: the remembr press heavili on her heart, and she turn 
hastili away from the object that had awaken it. 

the baggag be at length adjusted, the travel enter their 
carriages, and emili would have left the château without one sigh of 
regret, had it not been situat in the neighbourhood of valancourt’ 
residence. 

from a littl emin she look back upon thoulouse, and the far-seen 
plain of gascony, beyond which the broken summit of the pyrene 
appear on the distant horizon, light up by a morn sun. “dear 
pleasant mountains!” said she to herself, “how long may it be ere I see 
ye again, and how much may happen to make me miser in the interval! 
oh, could I now be certain, that I should ever return to ye, and find 
that valancourt still live for me, I should go in peace! He will still 
gaze on ye, gaze when I am far away!” 

the trees, that impend over the high bank of the road and form a 
line of perspect with the distant country, now threaten to exclud 
the view of them; but the bluish mountain still appear beyond the 
dark foliage, and emili continu to lean from the coach window, till 
at length the close branch shut them from her sight. 

anoth object soon caught her attention. she had scarc look at a 
person who walk along the bank, with hi hat, in which wa the 
militari feather, drawn over hi eyes, before, at the sound of wheels, 
he suddenli turned, and she perceiv that it wa valancourt himself, 
who wave hi hand, sprung into the road, and through the window of the 
carriag put a letter into her hand. He endeavour to smile through 
the despair that overspread hi counten as she pass on. the 
remembr of that smile seem impress on emily’ mind for ever. 
she lean from the window, and saw him on a knoll of the broken bank, 
lean against the high tree that wave over him, and pursu the 
carriag with hi eyes. He wave hi hand, and she continu to gaze 
till distanc confus hi figure, and at length anoth turn of the 
road entir separ him from her sight. 

have stop to take up signor cavigni at a château on the road, the 
travellers, of whom emili wa disrespect seat with madam 
montoni’ woman in a second carriage, pursu their way over the plain 
of languedoc. the presenc of thi servant restrain emili from 
read valancourt’ letter, for she did not choos to expos the 
emot it might occas to the observ of ani person. yet such 
wa her wish to read thi hi last communication, that her trembl 
hand wa everi moment on the point of break the seal. 

At length they reach the village, where they staid onli to chang 
horses, without alighting, and it wa not till they stop to dine, 
that emili had an opportun of read the letter. though she had 
never doubt the sincer of valancourt’ affection, the fresh 
assur she now receiv of it reviv her spirits; she wept over 
hi letter in tenderness, laid it by to be refer to when they should 
be particularli depressed, and then thought of him with much less 
anguish than she had done sinc they parted. among some other requests, 
which were interest to her, becaus express of hi tenderness, 
and becaus a complianc with them seem to annihil for a while the 
pain of absence, he entreat she would alway think of him at sunset. 
“you will then meet me in thought,” said he; “I shall constantli watch 
the sunset, and I shall be happi in the belief, that your eye are 
fix upon the same object with mine, and that our mind are 
conversing. you know not, emily, the comfort I promis myself from 
these moments; but I trust you will experi it.” 

It is unnecessari to say with what emot emily, on thi evening, 
watch the declin sun, over a long extent of plains, on which she 
saw it set without interruption, and sink toward the provinc which 
valancourt inhabited. after thi hour her mind becam far more tranquil 
and resigned, than it had been sinc the marriag of montoni and her 
aunt. 

dure sever day the travel journey over the plain of 
languedoc; and then enter dauphiny, and wind for some time among 
the mountain of that romant province, they quit their carriag 
and began to ascend the alps. and here such scene of sublim open 
upon them as no colour of languag must dare to paint! emily’ mind 
wa even so much engag with new and wonder images, that they 
sometim banish the idea of valancourt, though they more frequent 
reviv it. these brought to her recollect the prospect among the 
pyrenees, which they had admir together, and had believ noth 
could excel in grandeur. how often did she wish to express to him the 
new emot which thi astonish sceneri awakened, and that he could 
partak of them! sometim too she endeavour to anticip hi 
remarks, and almost imagin him present. she seem to have arisen 
into anoth world, and to have left everi trifl thought, everi 
trifl sentiment, in that below; those onli of grandeur and sublim 
now dilat her mind, and elev the affect of her heart. 

with what emot of sublimity, soften by tenderness, did she meet 
valancourt in thought, at the customari hour of sunset, when, wander 
among the alps, she watch the gloriou orb sink amid their summits, 
hi last tint die away on their snowi points, and a solemn obscur 
steal over the scene! and when the last gleam had faded, she turn her 
eye from the west with somewhat of the melancholi regret that is 
experienc after the departur of a belov friend; while these lone 
feel were heighten by the spread gloom, and by the low sounds, 
heard onli when dark confin attention, which make the gener 
still more impressive—leav shook by the air, the last sigh of the 
breez that linger after sunset, or the murmur of distant streams. 

dure the first day of thi journey among the alps, the sceneri 
exhibit a wonder mixtur of solitud and inhabitation, of 
cultiv and barrenness. On the edg of tremend precipices, and 
within the hollow of the cliffs, below which the cloud often floated, 
were seen villages, spires, and convent towers; while green pastur 
and vineyard spread their hue at the feet of perpendicular rock of 
marble, or of granite, whose points, tuft with alpin shrubs, or 
exhibit onli massi crags, rose abov each other, till they 
termin in the snowtop mountain, whenc the torrent fell, that 
thunder along the valley. 

the snow wa not yet melt on the summit of mount cenis, over which 
the travel passed; but emily, as she look upon it clear lake and 
extend plain, surround by broken cliffs, saw, in imagination, the 
verdant beauti it would exhibit when the snow should be gone, and the 
shepherds, lead up the midsumm flock from piedmont, to pastur on 
it floweri summit, should add arcadian figur to arcadian landscape. 

As she descend on the italian side, the precipic becam still more 
tremendous, and the prospect still more wild and majestic, over which 
the shift light threw all the pomp of colouring. emili delight to 
observ the snowi top of the mountain under the pass influenc of 
the day, blush with morning, glow with the bright of noon, or 
just tint with the purpl evening. the haunt of man could now onli be 
discov by the simpl hut of the shepherd and the hunter, or by the 
rough pine bridg thrown across the torrent, to assist the latter in 
hi chase of the chamoi over crag where, but for thi vestig of man, 
it would have been believ onli the chamoi or the wolf dare to 
venture. As emili gaze upon one of these peril bridges, with the 
cataract foam beneath it, some imag came to her mind, which she 
afterward combin in the follow 

stori sonnet 

the weari traveller, who all night long 
ha climb’d among the alps’ tremend steeps, 
skirt the pathless precipice, where throng 
wild form of danger; as he onward creep 
if, chance, hi anxiou eye at distanc see 
the mountain-shepherd’ solitari home, 
peep from forth the moon-illumin’d trees, 
what sudden transport to hi bosom come! 
but, if between some hideou chasm yawn, 
where the cleft pine a doubt bridg displays, 
In dread silence, on the brink, forlorn 
He stands, and view in the faint ray 
far, far below, the torrent’ rise surge, 
and listen to the wild impetu roar; 
still eye the depth, still shudder on the verge, 
fear to return, nor dare to ventur o’er. 
desperate, at length the totter plank he tries, 
hi weak step slide, he shrieks, he sinks—h dies! 


emily, often as she travel among the clouds, watch in silent awe 
their billowi surg roll below; sometimes, wholli close upon the 
scene, they appear like a world of chaos, and, at others, spread 
thinly, they open and admit partial catch of the landscape—th 
torrent, whose astound roar had never failed, tumbl down the 
rocki chasm, huge cliff white with snow, or the dark summit of the 
pine forests, that stretch mid-way down the mountains. but who may 
describ her rapture, when, have pass through a sea of vapour, she 
caught a first view of italy; when, from the ridg of one of those 
tremend precipic that hang upon mount ceni and guard the entranc 
of that enchant country, she look down through the lower clouds, 
and, as they float away, saw the grassi vale of piedmont at her 
feet, and, beyond, the plain of lombardi extend to the farthest 
distance, at which appeared, on the faint horizon, the doubt tower 
of turin? 

the solitari grandeur of the object that immedi surround her, 
the mountain-region tower above, the deep precipic that fell 
beneath, the wave black of the forest of pine and oak, which 
skirt their feet, or hung within their recesses, the headlong 
torrent that, dash among their cliffs, sometim appear like a 
cloud of mist, at other like a sheet of ice—thes were featur which 
receiv a higher charact of sublim from the repos beauti of 
the italian landscap below, stretch to the wide horizon, where the 
same melt blue tint seem to unit earth and sky. 

madam montoni onli shudder as she look down precipic near whose 
edg the chairmen trot lightli and swiftly, almost, as the chamoi 
bounded, and from which emili too recoiled; but with her fear were 
mingl such variou emot of delight, such admiration, 
astonishment, and awe, as she had never experienc before. 

meanwhil the carriers, have come to a landing-place, stop to 
rest, and the travel be seat on the point of a cliff, montoni 
and cavigni renew a disput concern hannibal’ passag over the 
alps, montoni contend that he enter itali by way of mount cenis, 
and cavigni, that he pass over mount st. bernard. the subject brought 
to emily’ imagin the disast he had suffer in thi bold and 
peril adventure. she saw hi vast armi wind among the defiles, 
and over the tremend cliff of the mountains, which at night were 
light up by hi fires, or by the torch which he caus to be 
carri when he pursu hi indefatig march. In the eye of fancy, 
she perceiv the gleam of arm through the duski of night, the 
glitter of spear and helmets, and the banner float dimli on the 
twilight; while now and then the blast of a distant trumpet echo 
along the defile, and the signal wa answer by a momentari clash of 
arms. she look with horror upon the mountaineers, perch on the 
higher cliffs, assail the troop below with broken fragment of the 
mountain; on soldier and eleph tumbl headlong down the lower 
precipices; and, as she listen to the rebound rocks, that follow 
their fall, the terror of fanci yield to those of reality, and she 
shudder to behold herself on the dizzi height, whenc she had 
pictur the descent of others. 

madam montoni, meantime, as she look upon italy, wa contempl 
in imagin the splendour of palac and the grandeur of castles, 
such as she believ she wa go to be mistress of at venic and in 
the apennine, and she became, in idea, littl less than a princess. 
be no longer under the alarm which had deter her from give 
entertain to the beauti of thoulouse, whom montoni had mention 
with more _eclât_ to hi own vaniti than credit to their discretion, or 
regard to truth, she determin to give concerts, though she had 
neither ear nor tast for music; _conversazione_, though she had no 
talent for conversation; and to outvie, if possible, in the gaieti 
of her parti and the magnific of her liveries, all the nobless 
of venice. thi bliss reveri wa somewhat obscured, when she 
recollect the signor, her husband, who, though he wa not avers to 
the profit which sometim result from such parties, had alway shown 
a contempt of the frivol parad that sometim attend them; till 
she consid that hi pride might be gratifi by displaying, among 
hi own friends, in hi nativ city, the wealth which he had neglect 
in france; and she court again the splendid illus that had 
charm her before. 

the travellers, as they descended, gradually, exchang the region of 
winter for the genial warmth and beauti of spring. the sky began to 
assum that seren and beauti tint peculiar to the climat of italy; 
patch of young verdure, fragrant shrub and flower look gaili 
among the rocks, often fring their rug brows, or hang in tuft 
from their broken sides; and the bud of the oak and mountain ash were 
expand into foliage. descend lower, the orang and the myrtle, 
everi now and then, appear in some sunni nook, with their yellow 
blossom peep from among the dark green of their leaves, and 
mingl with the scarlet flower of the pomegran and the paler one 
of the arbutus, that ran mantl to the crag above; while, lower 
still, spread the pastur of piedmont, where earli flock were 
crop the luxuri herbag of spring. 

the river doria, which, rise on the summit of mount cenis, had dash 
for mani leagu over the precipic that border the road, now began 
to assum a less impetuous, though scarc less romant character, as 
it approach the green valley of piedmont, into which the travel 
descend with the even sun; and emili found herself onc more amid 
the tranquil beauti of pastor scenery; among flock and herds, and 
slope tuft with wood of live verdur and with beauti shrubs, 
such as she had often seen wave luxuriantli over the alp above. the 
verdur of the pasturage, now vari with the hue of earli flowers, 
among which were yellow ranunculus and pansey violet of delici 
fragrance, she had never seen excelled.—emili almost wish to becom a 
peasant of piedmont, to inhabit one of the pleasant embow cottag 
which she saw peep beneath the cliffs, and to pass her careless 
hour among these romant landscapes. To the hours, the months, she 
wa to pass under the dominion of montoni, she look with 
apprehension; while those which were depart she rememb with 
regret and sorrow. 

In the present scene her fanci often gave her the figur of 
valancourt, whom she saw on a point of the cliffs, gaze with awe and 
admir on the imageri around him; or wander pensiv along the 
vale below, frequent paus to look back upon the scenery, and then, 
hi counten glow with the poet’ fire, pursu hi way to some 
overhang heights. when she again consid the time and the 
distanc that were to separ them, that everi step she now took 
lengthen thi distance, her heart sunk, and the surround landscap 
charm her no more. 

the travellers, pass novalesa, reached, after the even had 
closed, the small and ancient town of susa, which had formerli guard 
thi pass of the alp into piedmont. the height which command it had, 
sinc the invent of artillery, render it fortif useless; 
but these romant heights, seen by moonlight, with the town below, 
surround by it wall and watchtowers, and partial illumined, 
exhibit an interest pictur to emily. here they rest for the 
night at an inn, which had littl accommod to boast of; but the 
travel brought with them the hunger that give delici flavour to 
the coarsest viands, and the weari that ensur repose; and here 
emili first caught a strain of italian music, on italian ground. As she 
sat after supper at a littl window, that open upon the country, 
observ an effect of the moonlight on the broken surfac of the 
mountains, and rememb that on such a night as thi she onc had 
sat with her father and valancourt, rest upon a cliff of the 
pyrenees, she heard from below the long-drawn note of a violin, of 
such tone and delicaci of expression, as harmonis exactli with the 
tender emot she wa indulging, and both charm and surpris her. 
cavigni, who approach the window, smile at her surprise. “thi is 
noth extraordinary,” said he, “you will hear the same, perhaps, at 
everi inn on our way. It is one of our landlord’ famili who plays, I 
doubt not,” emily, as she listened, thought he could be scarc less 
than a professor of music whom she heard; and the sweet and plaintiv 
strain soon lull her into a reverie, from which she wa veri 
unwillingli rous by the railleri of cavigni, and by the voic of 
montoni, who gave order to a servant to have the carriag readi at an 
earli hour on the follow morning; and added, that he meant to dine 
at turin. 

madam montoni wa exceedingli rejoic to be onc more on level 
ground; and, after give a long detail of the variou terror she had 
suffered, which she forgot that she wa describ to the companion of 
her dangers, she ad a hope, that she should soon be beyond the view 
of these horrid mountains, “which all the world,” said she, “should not 
tempt me to cross again.” complain of fatigu she soon retir to 
rest, and emili withdrew to her own room, when she understood from 
annette, her aunt’ woman, that cavigni wa nearli right in hi 
conjectur concern the musician, who had awaken the violin with so 
much taste, for that he wa the son of a peasant inhabit the 
neighbour valley. “he is go to the carniv at venice,” ad 
annette, “for they say he ha a fine hand at playing, and will get a 
world of money; and the carniv is just go to begin: but for my 
part, I should like to live among these pleasant wood and hills, 
better than in a town; and they say ma’amselle, we shall see no woods, 
or hills, or fields, at venice, for that it is built in the veri middl 
of the sea.” 

emili agre with the talk annette, that thi young man wa make 
a chang for the worse, and could not forbear silent lamenting, that 
he should be drawn from the innoc and beauti of these scenes, to 
the corrupt one of that voluptu city. 

when she wa alone, unabl to sleep, the landscap of her nativ home, 
with valancourt, and the circumst of her departure, haunt her 
fancy; she drew pictur of social happi amidst the grand 
simplic of nature, such as she fear she had bade farewel to for 
ever; and then, the idea of thi young piedmontese, thu ignorantli 
sport with hi happiness, return to her thoughts, and, glad to 
escap a while from the pressur of nearer interests, she indulg her 
fanci in compos the follow lines. 

the piedmontes 

ah, merri swain, who laugh’d along the vales, 
and with your gay pipe made the mountain ring, 
whi leav your cot, your woods, and thymi gales, 
and friend belov’d, for aught that wealth can bring? 
He goe to wake o’er moonlight sea the string, 
venetian gold hi untaught fanci hails! 
yet oft of home hi simpl carol sing, 
and hi step pause, as the last alp he scales. 
onc more he turn to view hi nativ scene— 
far, far below, as roll the cloud away, 
He spi hi cabin ’mid the pine-top green, 
the well-known woods, clear brook, and pastur gay; 
and think of friend and parent left behind, 
Of sylvan revels, dance, and festiv song; 
and hear the faint reed swell in the wind; 
and hi sad sigh the distant note prolong! 
thu went the swain, till mountain-shadow fell, 
and dimm’d the landscap to hi ach sight; 
and must he leav the vale he love so well! 
can foreign wealth, and shows, hi heart delight? 
no, happi vales! your wild rock still shall hear 
hi pipe, light sound on the morn breeze; 
still shall he lead the flock to streamlet clear, 
and watch at eve beneath the western trees. 
away, venetian gold—your charm is o’er! 
and now hi swift step seek the lowland bow’rs, 
where, through the leaves, hi cottag light _onc more_ 
guid him to happi friends, and jocund hours. 
ah, merri swain! that laugh along the vales, 
and with your gay pipe make the mountain ring, 
your cot, your woods, your thymy-sc gales— 
and friend belov’d, more joy than wealth can bring! 




chapter II 

_titania_. If you will patient danc in our round, 
and see our moonlight revels, go with us. 
midsumm night’ dream 


earli on the follow morning, the travel set out for turin. the 
luxuri plain, that extend from the feet of the alp to that 
magnific city, wa not then, as now, shade by an avenu of tree 
nine mile in length; but plantat of olives, mulberri and palms, 
festoon with vines, mingl with the pastor scenery, through with 
the rapid po, after it descent from the mountains, wander to meet 
the humbl doria at turin. As they advanc toward thi city, the 
alps, seen at some distance, began to appear in all their aw 
sublimity; chain rise over chain in long succession, their higher 
point darken by the hover clouds, sometim hid, and at other 
seen shoot up far abov them; while their lower steeps, broken into 
fantast forms, were touch with blue and purplish tints, which, as 
they chang in light and shade, seem to open new scene to the eye. 
To the east stretch the plain of lombardy, with the tower of turin 
rise at a distance; and beyond, the apennines, bound the horizon. 

the gener magnific of that city, with it vista of church and 
palaces, branch from the grand square, each open to a landscap 
of the distant alp or apennines, wa not onli such as emili had never 
seen in france, but such as she had never imagined. 

montoni, who had been often at turin, and care littl about view of 
ani kind, did not compli with hi wife’ request, that they might 
survey some of the palaces; but stay onli till the necessari 
refresh could be obtained, they set forward for venic with all 
possibl rapidity. montoni’ manner, dure thi journey, wa grave, 
and even haughty; and toward madam montoni he wa more especi 
reserved; but it wa not the reserv of respect so much as of pride and 
discontent. Of emili he took littl notice. with cavigni hi 
convers were commonli on polit or militari topics, such as 
the convuls state of their countri render at thi time particularli 
interesting, emili observed, that, at the mention of ani dare 
exploit, montoni’ eye lost their sullenness, and seem 
instantan to gleam with fire; yet they still retain somewhat of 
a lurk cunning, and she sometim thought that their fire partook 
more of the glare of malic than the bright of valour, though the 
latter would well have harmonis with the high chivalr air of hi 
figure, in which cavigni, with all hi gay and gallant manners, wa hi 
inferior. 

On enter the milanese, the gentlemen exchang their french hat for 
the italian cap of scarlet cloth, embroidered; and emili wa somewhat 
surpris to observe, that montoni ad to hi the militari plume, 
while cavigni retain onli the feather: which wa usual worn with 
such caps: but she at length concluded, that montoni assum thi 
ensign of a soldier for convenience, as a mean of pass with more 
safeti through a countri over-run with parti of the military. 

over the beauti plain of thi countri the devast of war were 
frequent visible. where the land had not been suffer to lie 
uncultivated, they were often track with the step of the spoiler; 
the vine were torn down from the branch that had support them, the 
oliv trampl upon the ground, and even the grove of mulberri tree 
had been hewn by the enemi to light fire that destroy the hamlet 
and villag of their owners. emili turn her eye with a sigh from 
these pain vestig of contention, to the alp of the grison, that 
overlook them to the north, whose aw solitud seem to offer to 
persecut man a secur asylum. 

the travel frequent distinguish troop of soldier move at a 
distance; and they experienced, at the littl inn on the road, the 
scarciti of provis and other inconveniences, which are a part of the 
consequ of intestin war; but they had never reason to be much 
alarm for their immedi safety, and they pass on to milan with 
littl interrupt of ani kind, where they staid not to survey the 
grandeur of the city, or even to view it vast cathedral, which wa 
then building. 

beyond milan, the countri wore the aspect of a ruder devastation; and 
though everyth seem now quiet, the repos wa like that of death, 
spread over features, which retain the impress of the last 
convulsions. 

It wa not till they had pass the eastern limit of the milanese, 
that the travel saw ani troop sinc they had left milan, when, as 
the even wa draw to a close, they descri what appear to be 
an armi wind onward along the distant plains, whose spear and other 
arm caught the last ray of the sun. As the column advanc through a 
part of the road, contract between two hillocks, some of the 
commanders, on horseback, were distinguish on a small eminence, 
point and make signal for the march; while sever of the 
offic were ride along the line direct it progress, accord 
to the sign commun by those above; and others, separ from 
the vanguard, which had emerg from the pass, were ride carelessli 
along the plain at some distanc to the right of the army. 

As they drew nearer, montoni, distinguish the feather that wave in 
their caps, and the banner and liveri of the band that follow 
them, thought he knew thi to be the small armi command by the famou 
captain utaldo, with whom, as well as with some of the other chiefs, he 
wa person acquainted. he, therefore, gave order that the 
carriag should draw up by the side of the road, to await their 
arrival, and give them the pass. A faint strain of martial music now 
stole by, and, gradual strengthen as the troop approached, emili 
distinguish the drum and trumpets, with the clash of cymbal and of 
arms, that were struck by a small party, in time to the march. 

montoni be now certain that these were the band of the victori 
utaldo, lean from the carriag window, and hail their gener by 
wave hi cap in the air; which compliment the chief return by 
rais hi spear, and then let it down again suddenly, while some 
of hi officers, who were ride at a distanc from the troops, came up 
to the carriage, and salut montoni as an old acquaintance. the 
captain himself soon after arriving, hi band halt while he 
convers with montoni, whom he appear much rejoic to see; and from 
what he said, emili understood that thi wa a victori army, 
return into their own principality; while the numer waggons, that 
accompani them, contain the rich spoil of the enemy, their own 
wound soldiers, and the prison they had taken in battle, who were 
to be ransom when the peace, then negoci between the 
neighbour states, should be ratified. the chief on the follow 
day were to separate, and each, take hi share of the spoil, wa to 
return with hi own band to hi castle. thi wa therefor to be an 
even of uncommon and gener festivity, in commemor of the 
victori they had accomplish together, and of the farewel which the 
command were about to take of each other. 

emily, as these offic convers with montoni, observ with 
admiration, tinctur with awe, their high martial air, mingl with 
the haughti of the nobless of those days, and heighten by the 
gallantri of their dress, by the plume tower on their caps, the 
armori coat, persian sash, and ancient spanish cloak. utaldo, tell 
montoni that hi armi were go to encamp for the night near a villag 
at onli a few mile distance, invit him to turn back and partak of 
their festivity, assur the ladi also, that they should be 
pleasantli accommodated; but montoni excus himself, adding, that it 
wa hi design to reach verona that evening; and, after some 
convers concern the state of the countri toward that city, 
they parted. 

the travel proceed without ani interruption; but it wa some 
hour after sunset befor they arriv at verona, whose beauti 
environ were therefor not seen by emili till the follow morning; 
when, leav that pleasant town at an earli hour, they set off for 
padua, where they embark on the brenta for venice. here the scene wa 
entir changed; no vestig of war, such as had deform the plain 
of the milanese, appeared; on the contrary, all wa peac and elegance. 
the verdant bank of the brenta exhibit a continu landscap of 
beauty, gaiety, and splendour. emili gaze with admir on the 
villa of the venetian noblesse, with their cool portico and 
colonnades, overhung with poplar and cypress of majest height and 
live verdure; on their rich orangeries, whose blossom perfum the 
air, and on the luxuri willows, that dip their light leav in 
the wave, and shelter from the sun the gay parti whose music came 
at interv on the breeze. the carniv did, indeed, appear to extend 
from venic along the whole line of these enchant shores; the river 
wa gay with boat pass to that city, exhibit the fantast 
divers of a masquerad in the dress of the peopl within them; 
and, toward evening, group of dancer frequent were seen beneath 
the trees. 

cavigni, meanwhile, inform her of the name of the noblemen to whom 
the sever villa they pass belonged, ad light sketch of their 
characters, such as serv to amus rather than to inform, exhibit 
hi own wit instead of the delin of truth. emili wa sometim 
divert by hi conversation; but hi gaieti did not entertain madam 
montoni, as it had formerli done; she wa frequent grave, and montoni 
retain hi usual reserve. 

noth could exceed emily’ admir on her first view of venice, 
with it islets, palaces, and tower rise out of the sea, whose clear 
surfac reflect the tremul pictur in all it colours. the sun, 
sink in the west, tint the wave and the lofti mountain of 
friuli, which skirt the northern shore of the adriatic, with a saffron 
glow, while on the marbl portico and colonnad of st. mark were 
thrown the rich light and shade of evening. As they glide on, the 
grander featur of thi citi appear more distinctly: it terraces, 
crown with airi yet majest fabrics, touched, as they now were, with 
the splendour of the set sun, appear as if they had been call 
up from the ocean by the wand of an enchanter, rather than rear by 
mortal hands. 

the sun, soon after, sink to the lower world, the shadow of the 
earth stole gradual over the waves, and then up the tower side of 
the mountain of friuli, till it extinguish even the last upward 
beam that had linger on their summits, and the melancholi purpl of 
even drew over them, like a thin veil. how deep, how beauti wa 
the tranquil that wrap the scene! all natur seem to repose; 
the finest emot of the soul were alon awake. emily’ eye fill 
with tear of admir and sublim devotion, as she rais them over 
the sleep world to the vast heavens, and heard the note of solemn 
music, that stole over the water from a distance. she listen in 
still rapture, and no person of the parti broke the charm by an 
enquiry. the sound seem to grow on the air; for so smoothli did the 
barg glide along, that it motion wa not perceivable, and the fairi 
citi appear approach to welcom the strangers. they now 
distinguish a femal voice, accompani by a few instruments, sing 
a soft and mourn air; and it fine expression, as sometim it 
seem plead with the impass tender of love, and then 
languish into the cadenc of hopeless grief, declared, that it 
flow from no feign sensibility. ah! thought emily, as she sigh 
and rememb valancourt, those strain come from the heart! 

she look round, with anxiou enquiry; the deep twilight, that had 
fallen over the scene, admit onli imperfect imag to the eye, but, 
at some distanc on the sea, she thought she perceiv a gondola: a 
choru of voic and instrument now swell on the air—so sweet, so 
solemn! it seem like the hymn of angel descend through the 
silenc of night! now it die away, and fanci almost beheld the holi 
choir reascend toward heaven; then again it swell with the 
breeze, trembl awhile, and again die into silence. It brought to 
emily’ recollect some line of her late father, and she repeat in 
a low voice, 

oft I hear, 
upon the silenc of the midnight air, 
celesti voic swell in holi choru 
that bear the soul to heaven! 


the deep stillness, that succeeded, wa as express as the strain 
that had just ceased. It wa uninterrupt for sever minutes, till a 
gener sigh seem to releas the compani from their enchantment. 
emily, however, long indulg the pleas sadness, that had stolen 
upon her spirits; but the gay and busi scene that appeared, as the 
barg approach st. mark’ place, at length rous her attention. the 
rise moon, which threw a shadowi light upon the terraces, and 
illumin the portico and magnific arcad that crown them, 
discov the variou company, whose light steps, soft guitars, and 
softer voices, echo through the colonnades. 

the music they heard befor now pass montoni’ barge, in one of the 
gondolas, of which sever were seen skim along the moonlight sea, 
full of gay parties, catch the cool breeze. most of these had music, 
made sweeter by the wave over which it floated, and by the measur 
sound of oars, as they dash the sparkl tide. emili gazed, and 
listened, and thought herself in a fairi scene; even madam montoni wa 
pleased; montoni congratul himself on hi return to venice, which 
he call the first citi in the world, and cavigni wa more gay and 
anim than ever. 

the barg pass on to the grand canal, where montoni’ mansion wa 
situated. and here, other form of beauti and of grandeur, such as her 
imagin had never painted, were unfold to emili in the palac of 
sansovino and palladio, as she glide along the waves. the air bore no 
sounds, but those of sweetness, echo along each margin of the canal, 
and from gondola on it surface, while group of mask were seen 
danc on the moonlight terraces, and seem almost to realis the 
romanc of fairyland. 

the barg stop befor the portico of a larg house, from whenc a 
servant of montoni cross the terrace, and immedi the parti 
disembarked. from the portico they pass a nobl hall to a staircas 
of marble, which led to a saloon, fit up in a style of magnific 
that surpris emily. the wall and ceil were adorn with 
histor and allegor paintings, in _fresco_; silver tripods, 
depend from chain of the same metal, illumin the apartment, the 
floor of which wa cover with indian mat paint in a varieti of 
colour and devices; the couch and draperi of the lattic were of 
pale green silk, embroid and fring with green and gold. balconi 
lattic open upon the grand canal, whenc rose a confus of voic 
and of music instruments, and the breez that gave fresh to the 
apartment. emily, consid the gloomi temper of montoni, look upon 
the splendid furnitur of thi hous with surprise, and rememb the 
report of hi be a man of broken fortune, with astonishment. “ah!” 
said she to herself, “if valancourt could but see thi mansion, what 
peac would it give him! He would then be convinc that the report wa 
groundless.” 

madam montoni seem to assum the air of a princess; but montoni wa 
restless and discontented, and did not even observ the civil of 
bid her welcom to her home. 

soon after hi arrival, he order hi gondola, and, with cavigni, went 
out to mingl in the scene of the evening. madam then becam seriou 
and thoughtful. emily, who wa charm with everyth she saw, 
endeavour to enliven her; but reflect had not, with madam 
montoni, subdu capric and ill-humour, and her answer discov so 
much of both, that emili gave up the attempt of divert her, and 
withdrew to a lattice, to amus herself with the scene without, so new 
and so enchanting. 

the first object that attract her notic wa a group of dancer on 
the terrac below, led by a guitar and some other instruments. the 
girl, who struck the guitar, and another, who flourish a tambourine, 
pass on in a danc step, and with a light grace and gaieti of 
heart, that would have subdu the goddess of spleen in her worst 
humour. after these came a group of fantast figures, some dress as 
gondolieri, other as minstrels, while other seem to defi all 
description. they sung in parts, their voic accompani by a few soft 
instruments. At a littl distanc from the portico they stopped, and 
emili distinguish the vers of ariosto. they sung of the war of the 
moor against charlemagne, and then of the woe of orlando: afterward 
the measur changed, and the melancholi sweet of petrarch 
succeeded. the magic of hi grief wa assist by all that italian 
music and italian expression, heighten by the enchant of 
venetian moonlight, could give. 

emily, as she listened, caught the pensiv enthusiasm; her tear flow 
silently, while her fanci bore her far away to franc and to 
valancourt. each succeed sonnet, more full of charm sad than 
the last, seem to bind the spell of melancholy: with extrem regret 
she saw the musician move on, and her attent follow the strain 
till the last faint warbl die in air. she then remain sunk in that 
pensiv tranquil which soft music leav on the mind—a state like 
that produc by the view of a beauti landscap by moonlight, or by 
the recollect of scene mark with the tender of friend lost 
for ever, and with sorrows, which time ha mellow into mild regret. 
such scene are indeed, to the mind, like “those faint trace which the 
memori bear of music that is past.” 

other sound soon awaken her attention: it wa the solemn harmoni of 
horns, that swell from a distance; and, observ the gondola 
arrang themselv along the margin of the terraces, she threw on her 
veil, and, step into the balcony, discerned, in the distant 
perspect of the canal, someth like a procession, float on the 
light surfac of the water: as it approached, the horn and other 
instrument mingl sweetly, and soon after the fabl deiti of the 
citi seem to have arisen from the ocean; for neptune, with venic 
personifi as hi queen, came on the undul waves, surround by 
triton and sea-nymphs. the fantast splendour of thi spectacle, 
togeth with the grandeur of the surround palaces, appear like 
the vision of a poet suddenli embodied, and the fanci images, which 
it awaken in emily’ mind, linger there long after the process 
had pass away. she indulg herself in imagin what might be the 
manner and delight of a sea-nymph, till she almost wish to throw 
off the habit of mortality, and plung into the green wave to 
particip them. 

“how delightful,” said she, “to live amidst the coral bower and 
crystal cavern of the ocean, with my sister nymphs, and listen to the 
sound water above, and to the soft shell of the tritons! and then, 
after sunset, to skim on the surfac of the wave round wild rock and 
along sequest shores, where, perhaps, some pensiv wander come 
to weep! then would I sooth hi sorrow with my sweet music, and offer 
him from a shell some of the delici fruit that hang round neptune’ 
palace.” 

she wa recal from her reveri to a mere mortal supper, and could 
not forbear smile at the fanci she had been indulging, and at her 
convict of the seriou displeasure, which madam montoni would have 
expressed, could she have been made acquaint with them. 

after supper, her aunt sat late, but montoni did not return, and she at 
length retir to rest. If emili had admir the magnific of the 
saloon, she wa not less surprised, on observ the half-furnish and 
forlorn appear of the apart she pass in the way to her 
chamber, whither she went through long suit of nobl rooms, that 
seemed, from their desol aspect, to have been unoccupi for mani 
years. On the wall of some were the fade remain of tapestry; from 
others, paint in fresco, the damp had almost withdrawn both colour 
and design. At length she reach her own chamber, spacious, desolate, 
and lofty, like the rest, with high lattic that open toward the 
adriatic. It brought gloomi imag to her mind, but the view of the 
adriat soon gave her other more airy, among which wa that of the 
sea-nymph, whose delight she had befor amus herself with picturing; 
and, anxiou to escap from seriou reflections, she now endeavour to 
throw her fanci idea into a train, and conclud the hour with 
compos the follow lines: 

the sea-nymph 

down, down a thousand fathom deep, 
among the sound sea I go; 
play round the foot of ev’ri steep 
whose cliff abov the ocean grow. 

there, within their secret cares, 
I hear the mighti river roar; 
and guid their stream through neptune’ wave 
To bless the green earth’ inmost shore: 

and bid the freshen’d water glide, 
for fern-crown’d nymph of lake, or brook, 
through wind wood and pastur wide, 
and mani a wild, romant nook. 

for thi the nymphs, at fall of eave, 
oft danc upon the flow’ri banks, 
and sing my name, and garland weav 
To bear beneath the wave their thanks. 

In coral bow’r I love to lie, 
and hear the surg roll above, 
and through the water view on high 
the proud ship sail, and gay cloud move. 

and oft at midnight’ stillest hour, 
when summer sea the vessel lave, 
I love to prove my charm pow’r 
while float on the moonlight wave. 

and when deep sleep the crew ha bound, 
and the sad lover muse lean 
o’er the ship’ side, I breath around 
such strain as speak no mortal means! 

o’er the dim wave hi search eye 
see but the vessel’ lengthen’d shade; 
above—th moon and azur sky; 
entranc’d he hears, and half afraid! 

sometimes, a singl note I swell, 
that, softli sweet, at distanc dies; 
then wake the magic of my shell, 
and choral voic round me rise! 

the trembl youth, charm’d by my strain, 
call up the crew, who, silent, bend 
o’er the high deck, but list in vain; 
My song is hush’d, my wonder end! 

within the mountain’ woodi bay, 
where the tall bark at anchor rides, 
At twilight hour, with triton gay, 
I danc upon the laps tides: 

and with my sister-nymph I sport, 
till the broad sun look o’er the floods; 
then, swift we seek our crystal court, 
deep in the wave, ’mid neptune’ woods. 

In cool arcad and glassi hall 
We pass the sultri hour of noon, 
beyond wherev sunbeam falls, 
weav sea-flow in gay festoon. 

the while we chant our ditti sweet 
To some soft shell that warbl near; 
join’d by the murmur currents, fleet, 
that glide along our hall so clear. 

there, the pale pearl and sapphir blue, 
and rubi red, and em’rald green, 
dart from the dome a chang hue, 
and sparri column deck the scene. 

when the dark storm scowl o’er the deep, 
and long, long peal of thunder sound, 
On some high cliff my watch I keep 
o’er all the restless sea around: 

till on the ridgi wave afar 
come the lone vessel, labour slow, 
spread the white foam in the air, 
with sail and top-mast bend low. 

then, plung I ’mid the ocean’ roar, 
My way by quiv’r lightn shown, 
To guid the bark to peac shore, 
and hush the sailor’ fear groan. 

and if too late I reach it side 
To save it from the ’whelm surge, 
I call my dolphin o’er the tide, 
To bear the crew where isl emerge. 

their mourn spirit soon I cheer, 
while round the desert coast I go, 
with warbl song they faintli hear, 
oft as the stormi gust sink low. 

My music lead to lofti groves, 
that wild upon the sea-bank wave; 
where sweet fruit bloom, and fresh spring roves, 
and close bough the tempest brave. 

then, from the air spirit obey 
My potent voic they love so well, 
and, on the clouds, paint vision gay, 
while strain more sweet at distanc swell. 

and thu the lone hour I cheat, 
sooth the ship-wreck’d sailor’ heart, 
till from the wave the storm retreat, 
and o’er the east the day-beam dart. 

neptun for thi oft bind me fast 
To rock below, with coral chain, 
till all the tempest’ over-past, 
and drown seamen cri in vain. 

whoe’er ye are that love my lay, 
come, when red sunset tint the wave, 
To the still sands, where fairi play; 
there, in cool seas, I love to lave. 




chapter iii 

He is a great observer, and he look 
quit through the deed of men: he love no plays, 
....................he hear no music; 
seldom he smiles; and smile in such a sort, 
As if he mock’d himself, and scorn’d hi spirit 
that could be mov’d to smile at anything. 
such men as he be never at heart’ ease, 
while they behold a greater than themselves. 
juliu cæsar 


montoni and hi companion did not return home, till mani hour after 
the dawn had blush upon the adriatic. the airi groups, which had 
danc all night along the colonnad of st. mark, dispers befor the 
morning, like so mani spirits. montoni had been otherwis engaged; hi 
soul wa littl suscept of light pleasures. He delight in the 
energi of the passions; the difficulti and tempest of life, which 
wreck the happi of others, rous and strengthen all the power 
of hi mind, and afford him the highest enjoyments, of which hi 
natur wa capable. without some object of strong interest, life wa to 
him littl more than a sleep; and, when pursuit of real interest 
failed, he substitut artifici ones, till habit chang their 
nature, and they ceas to be unreal. Of thi kind wa the habit of 
gaming, which he had adopted, first, for the purpos of reliev him 
from the languor of inaction, but had sinc pursu with the ardour of 
passion. In thi occup he had pass the night with cavigni and a 
parti of young men, who had more money than rank, and more vice than 
either. montoni despis the greater part of these for the inferior 
of their talents, rather than for their viciou inclinations, and 
associ with them onli to make them the instrument of hi purposes. 
among these, however, were some of superior abilities, and a few whom 
montoni admit to hi intimacy, but even toward these he still 
preserv a decis and haughti air, which, while it impos 
submiss on weak and timid minds, rous the fierc hatr of strong 
ones. He had, of course, mani and bitter enemies; but the rancour of 
their hatr prove the degre of hi power; and, as power wa hi 
chief aim, he glori more in such hatred, than it wa possibl he 
could in be esteemed. A feel so temper as that of esteem, he 
despised, and would have despis himself also had he thought himself 
capabl of be flatter by it. 

among the few whom he distinguished, were the signor bertolini, 
orsino, and verezzi. the first wa a man of gay temper, strong 
passions, dissipated, and of unbound extravagance, but generous, 
brave, and unsuspicious. orsino wa reserved, and haughty; love power 
more than ostentation; of a cruel and suspici temper; quick to feel 
an injury, and relentless in aveng it; cun and unsearch in 
contrivance, patient and indefatig in the execut of hi schemes. 
He had a perfect command of featur and of hi passions, of which he 
had scarc any, but pride, reveng and avarice; and, in the 
gratif of these, few consider had power to restrain him, 
few obstacl to withstand the depth of hi stratagems. thi man wa 
the chief favourit of montoni. verezzi wa a man of some talent, of 
fieri imagination, and the slave of altern passions. He wa gay, 
voluptuous, and daring; yet had neither persever nor true courage, 
and wa meanli selfish in all hi aims. quick to form schemes, and 
sanguin in hi hope of success, he wa the first to undertake, and to 
abandon, not onli hi own plans, but those adopt from other persons. 
proud and impetuous, he revolt against all subordination; yet those 
who were acquaint with hi character, and watch the turn of hi 
passions, could lead him like a child. 

such were the friend whom montoni introduc to hi famili and hi 
table, on the day after hi arriv at venice. there were also of the 
parti a venetian nobleman, count morano, and a signora livona, whom 
montoni had introduc to hi wife, as a ladi of distinguish merit, 
and who, have call in the morn to welcom her to venice, had 
been request to be of the dinner party. 

madam montoni receiv with a veri ill grace, the compliment of the 
signors. she dislik them, becaus they were the friend of her 
husband; hate them, becaus she believ they had contribut to 
detain him abroad till so late an hour of the preced morning; and 
envi them, since, consciou of her own want of influence, she wa 
convinced, that he prefer their societi to her own. the rank of 
count morano procur him that distinct which she refus to the 
rest of the company. the haughti sullen of her counten and 
manner, and the ostentati extravag of her dress, for she had not 
yet adopt the venetian habit, were strikingli contrast by the 
beauty, modesty, sweet and simplic of emily, who observed, with 
more attent than pleasure, the parti around her. the beauti and 
fascin manner of signora livona, however, won her involuntari 
regard; while the sweet of her accent and her air of gentl 
kind awaken with emili those pleas affections, which so long 
had slumbered. 

In the cool of the even the parti embark in montoni’ gondola, and 
row out upon the sea. the red glow of sunset still touch the waves, 
and linger in the west, where the melancholi gleam seem slowli 
expiring, while the dark blue of the upper æther began to twinkl with 
stars. emili sat, given up to pensiv and sweet emotions. the 
smooth of the water, over which she glided, it reflect images—a 
new heaven and trembl star below the waves, with shadowi outlin 
of tower and porticos, conspir with the still of the hour, 
interrupt onli by the pass wave, or the note of distant music, to 
rais those emot to enthusiasm. As she listen to the measur 
sound of the oars, and to the remot warbl that came in the breeze, 
her soften mind return to the memori of st. aubert and to 
valancourt, and tear stole to her eyes. the ray of the moon, 
strengthen as the shadow deepened, soon after threw a silveri gleam 
upon her countenance, which wa partli shade by a thin black veil, and 
touch it with inimit softness. her wa the _contour_ of a 
madona, with the sensibl of a magdalen; and the pensiv uplift 
eye, with the tear that glitter on her cheek, confirm the 
express of the character. 

the last strain of distant music now die in air, for the gondola wa 
far upon the waves, and the parti determin to have music of their 
own. the count morano, who sat next to emily, and who had been 
observ her for some time in silence, snatch up a lute, and struck 
the chord with the finger of harmoni herself, while hi voice, a fine 
tenor, accompani them in a rondeau full of tender sadness. To him, 
indeed, might have been appli that beauti exhort of an 
english poet, had it then existed: 

strike up, my master, 
but touch the string with a religi softness! 
teach sound to languish through the night’ dull ear 
till melancholi start from off her couch, 
and careless grow concert to attention! 


with such power of express the count sung the follow 

rondeau 

soft as yon silver ray, that sleep 
upon the ocean’ trembl tide; 
soft as the air, that lightli sweep 
yon sad, that swell in state pride: 

soft as the surge’ steal note, 
that die along the distant shores, 
Or warbl strain, that sink remote— 
So soft the sigh my bosom pours! 

true as the wave to cynthia’ ray, 
true as the vessel to the breeze, 
true as the soul to music’ sway, 
Or music to venetian seas: 

soft as yon silver beams, that sleep 
upon the ocean’ trembl breast; 
So soft, so true, fond love shall weep, 
So soft, so true, with _thee_ shall rest. 


the cadenc with which he return from the last stanza to a repetit 
of the first; the fine modul in which hi voic stole upon the 
first line, and the pathet energi with which it pronounc the last, 
were such as onli exquisit tast could give. when he had concluded, he 
gave the lute with a sigh to emily, who, to avoid ani appear of 
affectation, immedi began to play. she sung a melancholi littl 
air, one of the popular song of her nativ province, with a simplic 
and patho that made it enchanting. but it well-known melodi brought 
so forcibl to her fanci the scene and the persons, among which she 
had often heard it, that her spirit were overcome, her voic trembl 
and ceased—and the string of the lute were struck with a disord 
hand; till, asham of the emot she had betrayed, she suddenli 
pass on to a song so gay and airy, that the step of the danc seem 
almost to echo to the notes. _bravissimo!_ burst instantli from the 
lip of her delight auditors, and she wa compel to repeat the 
air. among the compliment that followed, those of the count were not 
the least audible, and they had not concluded, when emili gave the 
instrument to signora livona, whose voic accompani it with true 
italian taste. 

afterwards, the count, emily, cavigni, and the signora, sung 
_canzonettes_, accompani by a coupl of lute and a few other 
instruments. sometim the instrument suddenli ceased, and the voic 
drop from the full swell of harmoni into a low chant; then, after a 
deep pause, they rose by degrees, the instrument one by one strike 
up, till the loud and full choru soar again to heaven! 

meanwhile, montoni, who wa weari of thi harmony, wa consid how 
he might disengag himself from hi party, or withdraw with such of it 
as would be will to play, to a casino. In a paus of the music, he 
propos return to shore, a propos which orsino eagerli seconded, 
but which the count and the other gentlemen as warmli opposed. 

montoni still medit how he might excus himself from longer 
attend upon the count, for to him onli he thought excus necessary, 
and how he might get to land, till the gondolieri of an empti boat, 
return to venice, hail hi people. without troubl himself 
longer about an excuse, he seiz thi opportun of go thither, 
and, commit the ladi to the care of hi friends, depart with 
orsino, while emily, for the first time, saw him go with regret; for 
she consid hi presenc a protection, though she knew not what she 
should fear. He land at st. mark’s, and, hurri to a casino, wa 
soon lost amidst a crowd of gamesters. 

meanwhile, the count have secretli dispatch a servant in montoni’ 
boat, for hi own gondola and musicians, emili heard, without know 
hi project, the gay song of gondolieri approaching, as they sat on the 
stern of the boat, and saw the tremul gleam of the moonlight wave, 
which their oar disturbed. present she heard the sound of 
instruments, and then a full symphoni swell on the air, and, the 
boat meeting, the gondolieri hail each other. the count then 
explain himself, the parti remov into hi gondola, which wa 
embellish with all that tast could bestow. 

while they partook of a collat of fruit and ice, the whole band, 
follow at a distanc in the other boat, play the most sweet and 
enchant strains, and the count, who had again seat himself by 
emily, paid her unremit attention, and sometimes, in a low but 
impass voice, utter compliment which she could not 
misunderstand. To avoid them she convers with signora livona, and her 
manner to the count assum a mild reserve, which, though dignified, 
wa too gentl to repress hi assiduities: he could see, hear, speak to 
no person, but emili while cavigni observ him now and then, with a 
look of displeasure, and emily, with one of uneasiness. she now wish 
for noth so much as to return to venice, but it wa near midnight 
befor the gondola approach st. mark’ place, where the voic of 
gaieti and song wa loud. the busi hum of mingl sound wa heard at 
a consider distanc on the water, and, had not a bright moonlight 
discov the city, with it terrac and towers, a stranger would 
almost have credit the fabl wonder of neptune’ court, and 
believed, that the tumult aros from beneath the waves. 

they land at st. mark’s, where the gaieti of the colonnad and the 
beauti of the night, made madam montoni willingli submit to the 
count’ solicit to join the promenade, and afterward to take a 
supper with the rest of the party, at hi casino. If anyth could 
have dissip emily’ uneasiness, it would have been the grandeur, 
gaiety, and novelti of the surround scene, adorn with palladio’ 
palaces, and busi with parti of masqueraders. 

At length they withdrew to the casino, which wa fit up with 
infinit taste, and where a splendid banquet wa prepared; but here 
emily’ reserv made the count perceive, that it wa necessari for hi 
interest to win the favour of madam montoni, which, from the 
condescens she had alreadi shown to him, appear to be an 
achiev of no great difficulty. He transferred, therefore, part of 
hi attent from emili to her aunt, who felt too much flatter by 
the distinct even to disguis her emotion; and befor the parti 
broke up, he had entir engag the esteem of madam montoni. 
whenev he address her, her ungraci counten relax into 
smiles, and to whatev he propos she assented. He invit her, with 
the rest of the party, to take coffee, in hi box at the opera, on the 
follow evening, and emili heard the invit accepted, with strong 
anxiety, concern the mean of excus herself from attend madam 
montoni thither. 

It wa veri late befor their gondola wa ordered, and emily’ surpris 
wa extreme, when, on quit the casino, she beheld the broad sun 
rise out of the adriatic, while st. mark’ place wa yet crowd with 
company. sleep had long weigh heavili on her eyes, but now the fresh 
sea-breez reviv her, and she would have quit the scene with 
regret, had not the count been present, perform the duty, which he 
had impos upon himself, of escort them home. there they heard that 
montoni wa not yet returned; and hi wife, retir in displeasur to 
her apartment, at length releas emili from the fatigu of further 
attendance. 

montoni came home late in the morning, in a veri ill humour, have 
lost consider at play, and, befor he withdrew to rest, had a 
privat confer with cavigni, whose manner, on the follow day, 
seem to tell, that the subject of it had not been pleas to him. 

In the evening, madam montoni, who, dure the day, had observ a 
sullen silenc toward her husband, receiv visit from some venetian 
ladies, with whose sweet manner emili wa particularli charmed. they 
had an air of eas and kind toward the strangers, as if they had 
been their familiar friend for years; and their convers wa by 
turn tender, sentiment and gay. madame, though she had no tast for 
such conversation, and whose coars and selfish sometim 
exhibit a ludicr contrast to their excess refinement, could not 
remain wholli insens to the captiv of their manner. 

In a paus of conversation, a ladi who wa call signora herminia took 
up a lute, and began to play and sing, with as much easi gaiety, as if 
she had been alone. her voic wa uncommonli rich in tone, and variou 
in expression; yet she appear to be entir unconsci of it 
powers, and meant noth less than to display them. she sung from the 
gaieti of her heart, as she sat with her veil half thrown back, hold 
grace the lute, under the spread foliag and flower of some 
plants, that rose from baskets, and interlac one of the lattic of 
the saloon. emily, retir a littl from the company, sketch her 
figure, with the miniatur sceneri around her, and drew a veri 
interest picture, which, though it would not, perhaps, have born 
criticism, had spirit and tast enough to awaken both the fanci and the 
heart. when she had finish it, she present it to the beauti 
original, who wa delight with the offering, as well as the sentiment 
it conveyed, and assur emily, with a smile of captiv sweetness, 
that she should preserv it as a pledg of her friendship. 

In the even cavigni join the ladies, but montoni had other 
engagements; and they embark in the gondola for st. mark’s, where the 
same gay compani seem to flutter as on the preced night. the cool 
breeze, the glassi sea, the gentl sound of it waves, and the sweeter 
murmur of distant music; the lofti portico and arcades, and the happi 
group that saunter beneath them; these, with everi featur and 
circumst of the scene, unit to charm emily, no longer teas by 
the offici attent of count morano. but, as she look upon the 
moonlight sea, undul along the wall of st. mark, and, linger 
for a moment over those walls, caught the sweet and melancholi song of 
some gondoli as he sat in hi boat below, wait for hi master, her 
soften mind return to the memori of her home, of her friends, and 
of all that wa dear in her nativ country. 

after walk some time, they sat down at the door of a casino, and, 
while cavigni wa accommod them with coffe and ice, were join 
by count morano. He sought emili with a look of impati delight, who, 
rememb all the attent he had shown her on the preced 
evening, wa compelled, as before, to shrink from hi assidu into 
a timid reserve, except when she convers with signora herminia and 
the other ladi of her party. 

It wa near midnight befor they withdrew to the opera, where emili wa 
not so charm but that, when she rememb the scene she had just 
quitted, she felt how infinit inferior all the splendour of art is 
to the sublim of nature. her heart wa not now affected, tear of 
admir did not start to her eyes, as when she view the vast 
expans of ocean, the grandeur of the heavens, and listen to the 
roll waters, and to the faint music that, at intervals, mingl with 
their roar. rememb these, the scene befor her fade into 
insignificance. 

Of the evening, which pass on without ani particular incident, she 
wish the conclusion, that she might escap from the attent of the 
count; and, as opposit qualiti frequent attract each other in our 
thoughts, thu emily, when she look on count morano, rememb 
valancourt, and a sigh sometim follow the recollection. 

sever week pass in the cours of customari visits, dure which 
noth remark occurred. emili wa amus by the manner and scene 
that surround her, so differ from those of france, but where count 
morano, too frequent for her comfort, contriv to introduc himself. 
hi manner, figur and accomplishments, which were gener admired, 
emili would, perhaps, have admir also, had her heart been disengag 
from valancourt, and had the count forborn to persecut her with 
offici attentions, dure which she observ some trait in hi 
character, that prejud her against whatev might otherwis be good 
in it. 

soon after hi arriv at venice, montoni receiv a packet from M. 
quesnel, in which the latter mention the death of hi wife’ uncle, 
at hi villa on the brenta; and that, in consequ of thi event, he 
should hasten to take possess of that estat and of other effect 
bequeath to him. thi uncl wa the brother of madam quesnel’ late 
mother; montoni wa relat to her by the father’ side, and though he 
could have had neither claim nor expect concern these 
possessions, he could scarc conceal the envi which M. quesnel’ 
letter excited. 

emili had observ with concern, that, sinc they left france, montoni 
had not even affect kind toward her aunt, and that, after 
treat her, at first, with neglect, he now met her with uniform 
ill-humour and reserve. she had never supposed, that her aunt’ foibl 
could have escap the discern of montoni, or that her mind or 
figur were of a kind to deserv hi attention. her surprise, 
therefore, at thi match, had been extreme; but sinc he had made the 
choice, she did not suspect that he would so openli have discov hi 
contempt of it. but montoni, who had been allur by the seem wealth 
of madam cheron, wa now sever disappoint by her compar 
poverty, and highli exasper by the deceit she had employ to 
conceal it, till conceal wa no longer necessary. He had been 
deceiv in an affair, wherein he meant to be the deceiver; out-wit 
by the superior cun of a woman, whose understand he despised, 
and to whom he had sacrif hi pride and hi liberty, without save 
himself from the ruin, which had impend over hi head. madam montoni 
had contriv to have the greatest part of what she realli did possess, 
settl upon herself: what remained, though it wa total inadequ 
both to her husband’ expectations, and to hi necessities, he had 
convert into money, and brought with him to venice, that he might a 
littl longer delud society, and make a last effort to regain the 
fortun he had lost. 

the hint which had been thrown out to valancourt, concern montoni’ 
charact and condition, were too true; but it wa now left to time and 
occasion, to unfold the circumstances, both of what had, and of what 
had not been hinted, and to time and occas we commit them. 

madam montoni wa not of a natur to bear injuri with meekness, or 
to resent them with dignity: her exasper pride display itself in 
all the violenc and acrimoni of a little, or at least of an 
ill-regul mind. she would not acknowledge, even to herself, that 
she had in ani degre provok contempt by her duplicity, but weakli 
persist in believing, that she alon wa to be pitied, and montoni 
alon to be censured; for, as her mind had natur littl percept 
of moral obligation, she seldom understood it forc but when it 
happen to be violat toward herself: her vaniti had alreadi been 
sever shock by a discoveri of montoni’ contempt; it remain to 
be farther reprov by a discoveri of hi circumstances. hi mansion at 
venice, though it furnitur discov a part of the truth to 
unprejud persons, told noth to those who were blind by a 
resolut to believ whatev they wished. madam montoni still 
thought herself littl less than a princess, possess a palac at 
venice, and a castl among the apennines. To the castl di udolpho, 
indeed, montoni sometim talk of go for a few week to examin 
into it condition, and to receiv some rents; for it appear that he 
had not been there for two years, and that, dure thi period, it had 
been inhabit onli by an old servant, whom he call hi steward. 

emili listen to the mention of thi journey with pleasure, for she 
not onli expect from it new ideas, but a releas from the persev 
assidu of count morano. In the country, too, she would have 
leisur to think of valancourt, and to indulg the melancholy, which 
hi image, and a recollect of the scene of La vallée, alway 
bless with the memori of her parents, awakened. the ideal scene were 
dearer, and more sooth to her heart, than all the splendour of gay 
assemblies; they were a kind of talisman that expel the poison of 
temporari evils, and support her hope of happi days: they appear 
like a beauti landscape, light up by a gleam of sunshine, and seen 
through a perspect of dark and rug rocks. 

but count morano did not long confin himself to silent assiduities; he 
declar hi passion to emily, and made propos to montoni, who 
encouraged, though emili rejected, him: with montoni for hi friend, 
and an abund of vaniti to delud him, he did not despair of 
success. emili wa astonish and highli disgust at hi perseverance, 
after she had explain her sentiment with a frank that would not 
allow him to misunderstand them. 

He now pass the greater part of hi time at montoni’s, dine there 
almost daily, and attend madam and emili wherev they went; and 
all this, notwithstand the uniform reserv of emily, whose aunt 
seem as anxiou as montoni to promot thi marriage; and would never 
dispens with her attend at ani assembl where the count propos 
to be present. 

montoni now said noth of hi intend journey, of which emili wait 
impati to hear; and he wa seldom at home but when the count, or 
signor orsino, wa there, for between himself and cavigni a cool 
seem to subsist, though the latter remain in hi house. with 
orsino, montoni wa frequent closet for hour together, and, 
whatev might be the business, upon which they consulted, it appear 
to be of consequence, sinc montoni often sacrif to it hi 
favourit passion for play, and remain at home the whole night. there 
wa somewhat of privacy, too, in the manner of orsino’ visits, which 
had never befor occurred, and which excit not onli surprise, but 
some degre of alarm in emily’ mind, who had unwillingli discov 
much of hi charact when he had most endeavour to disguis it. 
after these visits, montoni wa often more thought than usual; 
sometim the deep work of hi mind entir abstract him from 
surround objects, and threw a gloom over hi visag that render it 
terrible; at others, hi eye seem almost to flash fire, and all the 
energi of hi soul appear to be rous for some great enterprise. 
emili observ these written charact of hi thought with deep 
interest, and not without some degre of awe, when she consid that 
she wa entir in hi power; but forbor even to hint her fears, or 
her observations, to madam montoni, who discern noth in her 
husband, at these times, but hi usual sternness. 

A second letter from M. quesnel announc the arriv of himself and 
hi ladi at the villa miarenti; state sever circumst of hi 
good fortune, respect the affair that had brought him into italy; 
and conclud with an earnest request to see montoni, hi wife and 
niece, at hi new estate. 

emili received, about the same period, a much more interest letter, 
and which sooth for a while everi anxieti of her heart. valancourt, 
hope she might be still at venice, had trust a letter to the 
ordinari post, that told her of hi health, and of hi unceas and 
anxiou affection. He had linger at thoulous for some time after her 
departure, that he might indulg the melancholi pleasur of wander 
through the scene where he had been accustom to behold her, and had 
thenc gone to hi brother’ château, which wa in the neighbourhood of 
La vallée. have mention this, he added, “if the duti of attend 
my regiment did not requir my departure, I know not when I should have 
resolut enough to quit the neighbourhood of a place which is 
endear by the remembr of you. the vicin to La vallé ha alon 
detain me thu long at estuvière: I frequent ride thither earli in 
the morning, that I may wander, at leisure, through the day, among 
scenes, which were onc your home, where I have been accustom to see 
you, and to hear you converse. I have renew my acquaint with the 
good old theresa, who rejoic to see me, that she might talk of you: I 
need not say how much thi circumst attach me to her, or how 
eagerli I listen to her upon her favourit subject. you will guess 
the motiv that first induc me to make myself known to theresa: it 
was, indeed, no other than that of gain admitt into the château 
and gardens, which my emili had so late inhabited: here, then, I 
wander, and meet your imag under everi shade: but chiefli I love to 
sit beneath the spread branch of your favourit plane, where once, 
emily, we sat together; where I first ventur to tell you, that I 
loved. O emily! the remembr of those moment overcom me—i sit 
lost in reverie—i endeavour to see you dimli through my tears, in all 
the heaven of peac and innocence, such as you then appear to me; to 
hear again the accent of that voice, which then thrill my heart with 
tender and hope. I lean on the wall of the terrace, where we 
togeth watch the rapid current of the garonn below, while I 
describ the wild sceneri about it source, but thought onli of you. O 
emily! are these moment pass for ever—wil they never more return?” 

In anoth part of hi letter he wrote thus. “you see my letter is 
date on mani differ days, and, if you look back to the first, you 
will perceive, that I began to write soon after your departur from 
france. To write was, indeed, the onli employ that withdrew me from 
my own melancholy, and render your absenc supportable, or rather, it 
seem to destroy absence; for, when I wa convers with you on 
paper, and tell you everi sentiment and affect of my heart, you 
almost appear to be present. thi employ ha been from time to 
time my chief consolation, and I have defer send off my packet, 
mere for the comfort of prolong it, though it wa certain, that 
what I had written, wa written to no purpos till you receiv it. 
whenev my mind ha been more than usual depress I have come to 
pour forth it sorrow to you, and have alway found consolation; and, 
when ani littl occurr ha interest my heart, and given a gleam 
of joy to my spirits, I have hasten to commun it to you, and 
have receiv reflect satisfaction. thus, my letter is a kind of 
pictur of my life and of my thought for the last month, and thus, 
though it ha been deepli interest to me, while I wrote it, and I 
dare hope will, for the same reason, be not indiffer to you, yet to 
other reader it would seem to abound onli in frivolities. thu it is 
always, when we attempt to describ the finer movement of the heart, 
for they are too fine to be discerned, they can onli be experienced, 
and are therefor pass over by the indiffer observer, while the 
interest one feels, that all descript is imperfect and 
unnecessary, except as it may prove the sincer of the writer, and 
sooth hi own sufferings. you will pardon all thi egotism—for I am a 
lover.” 

“I have just heard of a circumstance, which entir destroy all my 
fairi paradis of ideal delight, and which will reconcil me to the 
necess of return to my regiment, for I must no longer wander 
beneath the belov shades, where I have been accustom to meet you in 
thought.—la vallé is let! I have reason to believ thi is without 
your knowledge, from what theresa told me thi morning, and, therefore, 
I mention the circumstance. she shed tears, while she related, that she 
wa go to leav the servic of her dear mistress, and the château 
where she had live so mani happi years; and all this, ad she, 
without even a letter from mademoisel to soften the news; but it is 
all mons. quesnel’ doings, and I dare say she doe not even know what 
is go forward.” 

“theresa added, that she had receiv a letter from him, inform her 
the château wa let, and that, as her servic would no longer be 
required, she must quit the place, on that day week, when the new 
tenant would arrive.” 

“theresa had been surpris by a visit from M. quesnel, some time 
befor the receipt of thi letter, who wa accompani by a stranger 
that view the premis with much curiosity.” 

toward the conclus of hi letter, which is date a week after thi 
sentence, valancourt adds, “I have receiv a summon from my regiment, 
and I join it without regret, sinc I am shut out from the scene that 
are so interest to my heart. I rode to La vallé thi morning, and 
heard that the new tenant wa arrived, and that theresa wa gone. I 
should not treat the subject thu familiarli if I did not believ you 
to be uninform of thi dispos of your house; for your satisfact 
I have endeavour to learn someth of the charact and fortun of 
your tenant, but without success. He is a gentleman, they say, and thi 
is all I can hear. the place, as I wander round the boundaries, 
appear more melancholi to my imagination, than I had ever seen it. I 
wish earnestli to have got admittance, that I might have taken 
anoth leav of your favourit plane-tree, and thought of you onc 
more beneath it shade: but I forbor to tempt the curios of 
strangers: the fishing-hous in the woods, however, wa still open to 
me; thither I went, and pass an hour, which I cannot even look back 
upon without emotion. O emily! sure we are not separ for 
ever—sur we shall live for each other!” 

thi letter brought mani tear to emily’ eyes; tear of tender and 
satisfact on learn that valancourt wa well, and that time and 
absenc had in no degre effac her imag from hi heart. there were 
passag in thi letter which particularli affect her, such as those 
describ hi visit to La vallée, and the sentiment of delic 
affect that it scene had awakened. It wa a consider time 
befor her mind wa suffici abstract from valancourt to feel the 
forc of hi intellig concern La vallée. that mons. quesnel 
should let it, without even consult her on the measure, both 
surpris and shock her, particularli as it prove the absolut 
author he thought himself entitl to exercis in her affairs. It is 
true, he had proposed, befor she left france, that the château should 
be let, dure her absence, and to the econom prudenc of thi she 
had noth to object; but the commit what had been her father’ 
villa to the power and capric of strangers, and the depriv herself 
of a sure home, should ani unhappi circumst make her look back to 
her home as an asylum, were consider that made her, even then, 
strongli oppos the measure. her father, too, in hi last hour, had 
receiv from her a solemn promis never to dispos of La vallée; and 
thi she consid as in some degre violat if she suffer the 
place to be let. but it wa now evid with how littl respect M. 
quesnel had regard these objections, and how insignific he 
consid everi obstacl to pecuniari advantage. It appeared, also, 
that he had not even condescend to inform montoni of the step he had 
taken, sinc no motiv wa evid for montoni’ conceal the 
circumst from her, if it had been made known to him: thi both 
displeas and surpris her; but the chief subject of her uneasi 
were—th temporari dispos of La vallée, and the dismiss of her 
father’ old and faith servant.—“poor theresa,” said emily, “thou 
hadst not save much in thi servitude, for thou wast alway tender 
toward the poor, and believd’st thou shouldst die in the family, where 
thi best year had been spent. poor theresa!—now thou art turn out in 
thi old age to seek thi bread!” 

emili wept bitterli as these thought pass over her mind, and she 
determin to consid what could be done for theresa, and to talk veri 
explicitli to M. quesnel on the subject; but she much fear that hi 
cold heart could feel onli for itself. she determin also to enquir 
whether he had made ani mention of her affairs, in hi letter to 
montoni, who soon gave her the opportun she sought, by desir that 
she would attend him in hi study. she had littl doubt, that the 
interview wa intend for the purpos of commun to her a part 
of M. quesnel’ letter concern the transact at La vallée, and 
she obey him immediately. montoni wa alone. 

“I have just been write to mons. quesnel,” said he when emili 
appeared, “in repli to the letter I receiv from him a few day ago, 
and I wish to talk to you upon a subject that occupi part of it.” 

“I also wish to speak with you on thi topic, sir,” said emily. 

“it is a subject of some interest to you, undoubtedly,” rejoin 
montoni, “and I think you must see it in the light that I do; inde it 
will not bear ani other. I trust you will agre with me, that ani 
object found on sentiment, as they call it, ought to yield to 
circumst of solid advantage.” 

“grant this, sir,” repli emily, modestly, “those of human ought 
sure to be attend to. but I fear it is now too late to deliber 
upon thi plan, and I must regret, that it is no longer in my power to 
reject it.” 

“it is too late,” said montoni; “but sinc it is so, I am pleas to 
observe, that you submit to reason and necess without indulg 
useless complaint. I applaud thi conduct exceedingly, the more, 
perhaps, sinc it discov a strength of mind seldom observ in 
your sex. when you are older you will look back with gratitud to the 
friend who assist in rescu you from the romant illus of 
sentiment, and will perceive, that they are onli the snare of 
childhood, and should be vanquish the moment you escap from the 
nursery. I have not close my letter, and you may add a few line to 
inform your uncl of your acquiescence. you will soon see him, for it 
is my intent to take you, with madam montoni, in a few day to 
miarenti, and you can then talk over the affair.” 

emili wrote on the opposit page of the paper as follows: 

“it is now useless, sir, for me to remonstr upon the circumst 
of which signor montoni inform me that he ha written. I could have 
wished, at least, that the affair had been conclud with less 
precipitation, that I might have taught myself to subdu some 
prejudices, as the signor call them, which still linger in my heart. 
As it is, I submit. In point of prudenc noth certainli can be 
objected; but, though I submit, I have yet much to say on some other 
point of the subject, when I shall have the honour of see you. In 
the meantim I entreat you will take care of theresa, for the sake of, 
“sir, 
“your affection niece, 
“emili st. aubert.” 


montoni smile satir at what emili had written, but did not 
object to it, and she withdrew to her own apartment, where she sat down 
to begin a letter to valancourt, in which she relat the particular 
of her journey, and her arriv at venice, describ some of the most 
strike scene in the passag over the alps; her emot on her first 
view of italy; the manner and charact of the peopl around her, and 
some few circumst of montoni’ conduct. but she avoid even 
name count morano, much more the declar he had made, sinc she 
well knew how tremblingli aliv to fear is real love, how jealous 
watch of everi circumst that may affect it interest; and she 
scrupul avoid to give valancourt even the slightest reason for 
believ he had a rival. 

On the follow day count morano dine again at montoni’s. He wa in 
an uncommon flow of spirits, and emili thought there wa somewhat of 
exult in hi manner of address her, which she had never 
observ before. she endeavour to repress thi by more than her usual 
reserve, but the cold civil of her air now seem rather to 
encourag than to depress him. He appear watch of an opportun 
of speak with her alone, and more than onc solicit this; but 
emili alway replied, that she could hear noth from him which he 
would be unwil to repeat befor the whole company. 

In the evening, madam montoni and her parti went out upon the sea, and 
as the count led emili to hi _zendaletto_, he carri her hand to hi 
lips, and thank her for the condescens she had shown him. emily, 
in extrem surpris and displeasure, hastili withdrew her hand, and 
conclud that he had spoken ironically; but, on reach the step of 
the terrace, and observ by the livery, that it wa the count’ 
_zendaletto_ which wait below, while the rest of the party, have 
arrang themselv in the gondolas, were move on, she determin not 
to permit a separ conversation, and, wish him a good evening, 
return to the portico. the count follow to expostul and entreat, 
and montoni, who then came out, render solicit unnecessary, for, 
without condescend to speak, he took her hand, and led her to the 
_zendaletto_. emili wa not silent; she entreat montoni, in a low 
voice, to consid the improprieti of these circumstances, and that he 
would spare her the mortif of submit to them; he, however, 
wa inflexible. 

“thi capric is intolerable,” said he, “and shall not be indulged: 
there is no improprieti in the case.” 

At thi moment, emily’ dislik of count morano rose to abhorrence. 
that he should, with undaunt assurance, thu pursu her, 
notwithstand all she had express on the subject of hi addresses, 
and think, as it wa evid he did, that her opinion of him wa of no 
consequence, so long as hi pretens were sanction by montoni, 
ad indign to the disgust which she had felt toward him. she 
wa somewhat reliev by observ that montoni wa to be of the party, 
who seat himself on one side of her, while morano place himself on 
the other. there wa a paus for some moment as the gondolieri 
prepar their oars, and emili trembl from apprehens of the 
discours that might follow thi silence. At length she collect 
courag to break it herself, in the hope of prevent fine speech 
from morano, and reproof from montoni. To some trivial remark which she 
made, the latter return a short and disoblig reply; but morano 
immedi follow with a gener observation, which he contriv to 
end with a particular compliment, and, though emili pass it without 
even the notic of a smile, he wa not discouraged. 

“I have been impatient,” said he, address emily, “to express my 
gratitude; to thank you for your goodness; but I must also thank signor 
montoni, who ha allow me thi opportun of do so.” 

emili regard the count with a look of mingl astonish and 
displeasure. 

“why,” continu he, “should you wish to diminish the delight of thi 
moment by that air of cruel reserve?—whi seek to throw me again into 
the perplex of doubt, by teach your eye to contradict the 
kind of your late declaration? you cannot doubt the sincerity, the 
ardour of my passion; it is therefor unnecessary, charm emily! 
sure unnecessary, ani longer to attempt a disguis of your 
sentiments.” 

“if I ever had disguis them, sir,” said emily, with recollect 
spirit, “it would certainli be unnecessari ani longer to do so. I had 
hoped, sir, that you would have spare me ani farther necess of 
allud to them; but, sinc you do not grant this, hear me declare, 
and for the last time, that your persever ha depriv you even of 
the esteem, which I wa inclin to believ you merited.” 

“astonishing!” exclaim montoni: “thi is beyond even my expectation, 
though I have hitherto done justic to the capric of the sex! but you 
will observe, mademoisel emily, that I am no lover, though count 
morano is, and that I will not be made the amus of your caprici 
moments. here is the offer of an alliance, which would do honour to ani 
family; yours, you will recollect, is not noble; you long resist my 
remonstrances, but my honour is now engaged, and it shall not be 
trifl with.—you shall adher to the declaration, which you have made 
me an agent to convey to the count.” 

“I must certainli mistak you, sir,” said emily; “mi answer on the 
subject have been uniform; it is unworthi of you to accus me of 
caprice. If you have condescend to be my agent, it is an honour I did 
not solicit. I myself have constantli assur count morano, and you 
also, sir, that I never can accept the honour he offer me, and I now 
repeat the declaration.” 

the count look with an air of surpris and enquiri at montoni, whose 
counten also wa mark with surprise, but it wa surpris mingl 
with indignation. 

“here is confidence, as well as caprice!” said the latter. “will you 
deni your own words, madam?” 

“such a question is unworthi of an answer, sir;” said emili blushing; 
“you will recollect yourself, and be sorri that you have ask it.” 

“speak to the point,” rejoin montoni, in a voic of increas 
vehemence. “will you deni your own words; will you deny, that you 
acknowledged, onli a few hour ago, that it wa too late to reced from 
your engagements, and that you accept the count’ hand?” 

“I will deni all this, for no word of mine ever import it.” 

“astonishing! will you deni what you wrote to mons. quesnel, your 
uncle? If you do, your own hand will bear testimoni against you. what 
have you now to say?” continu montoni, observ the silenc and 
confus of emily. 

“I now perceive, sir, that you are under a veri great error, and that I 
have been equal mistaken.” 

“no more duplicity, I entreat; be open and candid, if it be possible.” 

“I have alway been so, sir; and can claim no merit in such conduct, 
for I have had noth to conceal.” 

“how is this, signor?” cri morano, with trembl emotion. 

“suspend your judgment, count,” repli montoni, “the wile of a femal 
heart are unsearchable. now, madame, your _explanation_.” 

“excus me, sir, if I withhold my explan till you appear will 
to give me your confidence; assert as present can onli subject me to 
insult.” 

“your explanation, I entreat you!” said morano. 

“well, well,” rejoin montoni, “I give you my confidence; let us hear 
thi explanation.” 

“let me lead to it then, by ask a question.” 

“a mani as you please,” said montoni, contemptuously. 

“what, then, wa the subject of your letter to mons. quesnel?” 

“the same that wa the subject of your note to him, certainly. you did 
well to stipul for my confid befor you demand that question.” 

“I must beg you will be more explicit, sir; what wa that subject?” 

“what could it be, but the nobl offer of count morano,” said montoni. 

“then, sir, we entir misunderstood each other,” repli emily. 

“we entir misunderstood each other too, I suppose,” rejoin 
montoni, “in the convers which preced the write of that note? 
I must do you the justic to own, that you are veri ingeni at thi 
same art of misunderstanding.” 

emili tri to restrain the tear that came to her eyes, and to answer 
with becom firmness. “allow me, sir, to explain myself fully, or to 
be wholli silent.” 

“the explan may now be dispens with; it is anticipated. If count 
morano still think one necessary, I will give him an honest one: you 
have chang your intent sinc our last conversation; and, if he can 
have patienc and humil enough to wait till tomorrow, he will 
probabl find it chang again: but as I have neither the patienc nor 
the humility, which you expect from a lover, I warn you of the effect 
of my displeasure!” 

“montoni, you are too precipitate,” said the count, who had listen to 
thi convers in extrem agit and impatience;—“signora, I 
entreat your own explan of thi affair!” 

“signor montoni ha said justly,” repli emily, “that all explan 
may now be dispens with; after what ha pass I cannot suffer myself 
to give one. It is suffici for me, and for you, sir, that I repeat 
my late declaration; let me hope thi is the last time it will be 
necessari for me to repeat it—i never can accept the honour of your 
alliance.” 

“charm emily!” exclaim the count in an impass tone, “let not 
resent make you unjust; let me not suffer for the offenc of 
montoni!—revoke—” 

“offence!” interrupt montoni—“count, thi languag is ridiculous, 
thi submiss is childish!—speak as becom a man, not as the slave 
of a pretti tyrant.” 

“you distract me, signor; suffer me to plead my own cause; you have 
alreadi prove insuffici to it.” 

“all convers on thi subject, sir,” said emily, “i wors than 
useless, sinc it can bring onli pain to each of us: if you would 
oblig me, pursu it no farther.” 

“it is impossible, madam, that I can thu easili resign the object of a 
passion, which is the delight and torment of my life.—i must still 
love—stil pursu you with unremit ardour;—when you shall be 
convinc of the strength and constanc of my passion, your heart must 
soften into piti and repentance.” 

“i thi generous, sir? is thi manly? can it either deserv or obtain 
the esteem you solicit, thu to continu a persecut from which I 
have no present mean of escaping?” 

A gleam of moonlight that fell upon morano’ countenance, reveal the 
strong emot of hi soul; and, glanc on montoni discov the 
dark resentment, which contrast hi features. 

“bi heaven thi is too much!” suddenli exclaim the count; “signor 
montoni, you treat me ill; it is from you that I shall look for 
explanation.” 

“from me, sir! you shall have it;” mutter montoni, “if your 
discern is inde so far obscur by passion, as to make 
explan necessary. and for you, madam, you should learn, that a man 
of honour is not to be trifl with, though you may, perhaps, with 
impunity, treat a _boy_ like a puppet.” 

thi sarcasm rous the pride of morano, and the resent which he 
had felt at the indiffer of emily, be lost in indign of the 
insol of montoni, he determin to mortifi him, by defend her. 

“thi also,” said he, repli to montoni’ last words, “thi also, 
shall not pass unnoticed. I bid you learn, sir, that you have a 
stronger enemi than a woman to contend with: I will protect signora st. 
aubert from your threaten resentment. you have misl me, and would 
reveng your disappoint view upon the innocent.” 

“misl you!” retort montoni with quickness, “i my conduct—mi 
word”—then pausing, while he seem endeavour to restrain the 
resentment, that flash in hi eyes, in the next moment he added, in a 
subdu voice, “count morano, thi is a language, a sort of conduct to 
which I am not accustomed: it is the conduct of a passion boy—a 
such, I pass it over in contempt.” 

“in contempt, signor?” 

“the respect I owe myself,” rejoin montoni, “requires, that I should 
convers more larg with you upon some point of the subject in 
dispute. return with me to venice, and I will condescend to convinc 
you of your error.” 

“condescend, sir! but I will not condescend to be so convers with.” 

montoni smile contemptuously; and emily, now terrifi for the 
consequ of what she saw and heard, could no longer be silent. she 
explain the whole subject upon which she had mistaken montoni in the 
morning, declaring, that she understood him to have consult her 
sole concern the dispos of La vallée, and conclud with 
entreating, that he would write immedi to M. quesnel, and rectifi 
the mistake. 

but montoni either was, or affect to be, still incredulous; and count 
morano wa still entangl in perplexity. while she wa speaking, 
however, the attent of her auditor had been divert from the 
immedi occas of their resentment, and their passion consequ 
becam less. montoni desir the count would order hi servant to row 
back to venice, that he might have some privat convers with him; 
and morano, somewhat sooth by hi soften voic and manner, and 
eager to examin into the full extent of hi difficulties, complied. 

emily, comfort by thi prospect of release, employ the present 
moment in endeavouring, with concili care, to prevent ani fatal 
mischief between the person who so late had persecut and insult 
her. 

her spirit revived, when she heard onc more the voic of song and 
laughter, resound from the grand canal, and at length enter again 
between it state piazzas. the _zendaletto_ stop at montoni’ 
mansion, and the count hastili led her into the hall, where montoni 
took hi arm, and said someth in a low voice, on which morano kiss 
the hand he held, notwithstand emily’ effort to disengag it, and, 
wish her a good evening, with an accent and look she could not 
misunderstand, return to hi _zendaletto_ with montoni. 

emily, in her own apartment, consid with intens anxieti all the 
unjust and tyrann conduct of montoni, the dauntless persever of 
morano, and her own desol situation, remov from her friend and 
country. she look in vain to valancourt, confin by hi profess 
to a distant kingdom, as her protector; but it gave her comfort to 
know, that there was, at least, one person in the world, who would 
sympathis in her afflictions, and whose wish would fli eagerli to 
releas her. yet she determin not to give him unavail pain by 
relat the reason she had to regret the have reject hi better 
judgment concern montoni; reasons, however, which could not induc 
her to lament the delicaci and disinterest affect that had made 
her reject hi propos for a clandestin marriage. the approach 
interview with her uncl she regard with some degre of hope, for she 
determin to repres to him the distress of her situation, and to 
entreat that he would allow her to return to franc with him and madam 
quesnel. then, suddenli rememb that her belov La vallée, her 
onli home, wa no longer at her command, her tear flow anew, and she 
fear that she had littl piti to expect from a man who, like M. 
quesnel, could dispos of it without deign to consult with her, and 
could dismiss an age and faith servant, destitut of either support 
or asylum. but, though it wa certain, that she had herself no longer a 
home in france, and few, veri few friend there, she determin to 
return, if possible, that she might be releas from the power of 
montoni, whose particularli oppress conduct toward herself, and 
gener charact as to others, were justli terribl to her 
imagination. she had no wish to resid with her uncle, M. quesnel, 
sinc hi behaviour to her late father and to herself, had been 
uniformli such as to convinc her, that in fli to him she could onli 
obtain an exchang of oppressors; neither had she the slightest 
intent of consent to the propos of valancourt for an immedi 
marriage, though thi would give her a law and a gener protector, 
for the chief reasons, which had formerli influenc her conduct, still 
exist against it, while others, which seem to justifi the step, 
would not be done away; and hi interest, hi fame were at all time 
too dear to her, to suffer her to consent to a union, which, at thi 
earli period of their lives, would probabl defeat both. one sure, and 
proper asylum, however, would still be open to her in france. she knew 
that she could board in the convent, where she had formerli experienc 
so much kindness, and which had an affect and solemn claim upon her 
heart, sinc it contain the remain of her late father. here she 
could remain in safeti and tranquillity, till the term, for which La 
vallé might be let, should expire; or, till the arrang of M. 
motteville’ affair enabl her so far to estim the remain of her 
fortune, as to judg whether it would be prudent for her to resid 
there. 

concern montoni’ conduct with respect to hi letter to M. quesnel, 
she had mani doubts; howev he might be at first mistaken on the 
subject, she much suspect that he wil persev in hi error, 
as a mean of intimid her into a complianc with hi wish of 
unit her to count morano. whether thi wa or wa not the fact, she 
wa extrem anxiou to explain the affair to M. quesnel, and look 
forward with a mixtur of impatience, hope and fear, to her approach 
visit. 

On the follow day, madam montoni, be alon with emily, 
introduc the mention of count morano, by express her surprise, 
that she had not join the parti on the water the preced evening, 
and at her abrupt departur to venice. emili then relat what had 
passed, express her concern for the mutual mistak that had occur 
between montoni and herself, and solicit her aunt’ kind offic in 
urg him to give a decis denial to the count’ further addresses; 
but she soon perceived, that madam montoni had not been ignor of 
the late conversation, when she introduc the present. 

“you have no encourag to expect from me,” said her aunt, “in these 
notions. I have alreadi given my opinion on the subject, and think 
signor montoni right in enforcing, by ani means, your consent. If young 
person will be blind to their interest, and obstin oppos it, 
why, the greatest bless they can have are friends, who will oppos 
their folly. pray what pretens of ani kind do you think you have to 
such a match as is now offer you?” 

“not ani whatever, madam,” repli emily, “and, therefore, at least, 
suffer me to be happi in my humility.” 

“nay, niece, it cannot be denied, that you have pride enough; my poor 
brother, your father, had hi share of pride too; though, let me add, 
hi fortun did not justifi it.” 

emily, somewhat embarrass by the indignation, which thi malevol 
allus to her father excited, and by the difficulti of render her 
answer as temper as it should be reprehensive, hesit for some 
moments, in a confusion, which highli gratifi her aunt. At length she 
said, “mi father’ pride, madam, had a nobl object—th happi which 
he knew could be deriv onli from goodness, knowledg and charity. As 
it never consist in hi superiority, in point of fortune, to some 
persons, it wa not humbl by hi inferiority, in that respect, to 
others. He never disdain those, who were wretch by poverti and 
misfortune; he did sometim despis persons, who, with mani 
opportun of happiness, render themselv miser by vanity, 
ignor and cruelty. I shall think it my highest glori to emul 
such pride.” 

“I do not pretend to understand anyth of these high-flown 
sentiments, niece; you have all that glori to yourself: I would teach 
you a littl plain sense, and not have you so wise as to despis 
happiness.” 

“that would inde not be wisdom, but folly,” said emily, “for wisdom 
can boast no higher attain than happiness; but you will allow, 
madam, that our idea of happi may differ. I cannot doubt, that you 
wish me to be happy, but I must fear you are mistaken in the mean of 
make me so.” 

“I cannot boast of a learn education, niece, such as your father 
thought proper to give you, and, therefore, do not pretend to 
understand all these fine speech about happiness. I must be content 
to understand onli common sense, and happi would it have been for you 
and your father, if that had been includ in hi education.” 

emili wa too much shock by these reflect on her father’ memory, 
to despis thi speech as it deserved. 

madam montoni wa about to speak, but emili quit the room, and 
retir to her own, where the littl spirit she had late exert 
yield to grief and vexation, and left her onli to her tears. from 
everi review of her situat she could derive, indeed, onli new 
sorrow. To the discovery, which had just been forc upon her, of 
montoni’ unworthiness, she had now to add, that of the cruel vanity, 
for the gratif of which her aunt wa about to sacrific her; of 
the effronteri and cunning, with which, at the time that she medit 
the sacrifice, she boast of her tenderness, or insult her victim; 
and of the venom envy, which, as it did not scrupl to attack her 
father’ character, could scarc be expect to withhold from her 
own. 

dure the few day that interven between thi convers and the 
departur for miarenti, montoni did not onc address himself to emily. 
hi look suffici declar hi resentment; but that he should 
forbear to renew a mention of the subject of it, exceedingli surpris 
her, who wa no less astonished, that, dure three days, count morano 
neither visit montoni, nor wa name by him. sever conjectur 
aros in her mind. sometim she fear that the disput between them 
had been revived, and had end fatal to the count. sometim she wa 
inclin to hope, that weariness, or disgust at her firm reject of 
hi suit had induc him to relinquish it; and, at others, she 
suspect that he had now recours to stratagem, and forbor hi 
visits, and prevail with montoni to forbear the repetit of hi 
name, in the expect that gratitud and generos would prevail 
with her to give him the consent, which he could not hope from love. 

thu pass the time in vain conjecture, and altern hope and fears, 
till the day arriv when montoni wa to set out for the villa of 
miarenti, which, like the preced ones, neither brought the count, 
nor the mention of him. 

montoni have determin not to leav venice, till toward evening, 
that he might avoid the heats, and catch the cool breez of night, 
embark about an hour befor sunset, with hi family, in a barge, for 
the brenta. emili sat alon near the stern of the vessel, and, as it 
float slowli on, watch the gay and lofti citi lessen from her 
view, till it palac seem to sink in the distant waves, while it 
loftier tower and domes, illumin by the declin sun, appear on 
the horizon, like those far-seen cloud which, in more northern climes, 
often linger on the western verge, and catch the last light of a 
summer’ evening. soon after, even these grew dim, and fade in 
distanc from her sight; but she still sat gaze on the vast scene of 
cloudless sky, and mighti waters, and listen in pleas awe to the 
deep-sound waves, while, as her eye glanc over the adriatic, 
toward the opposit shores, which were, however, far beyond the reach 
of sight, she thought of greece, and, a thousand classic remembr 
steal to her mind, she experienc that pensiv luxuri which is felt 
on view the scene of ancient story, and on compar their present 
state of silenc and solitud with that of their former grandeur and 
animation. the scene of the illiad illaps in glow colour to her 
fancy—scenes, onc the haunt of heroes—now lonely, and in ruins; but 
which still shone, in the poet’ strain, in all their youth 
splendour. 

As her imagin paint with melancholi touches, the desert plain 
of troy, such as they appear in thi after-day, she reanim the 
landscap with the follow littl story. 

stanza 

o’er ilion’ plains, where onc the warrior bled, 
and onc the poet rais’d hi deathless strain, 
o’er ilion’ plain a weari driver led 
hi state camels: for the ruin’d fane 

wide round the lone scene hi glanc he threw, 
for now the red cloud fade in the west, 
and twilight o’er the silent landscap drew 
her deep’n veil; eastward hi cours he prest: 

there, on the grey horizon’ glimm’r bound, 
rose the proud column of desert troy, 
and wander shepherd now a shelter found 
within those walls, where princ wont to joy. 

beneath a lofti porch the driver pass’d, 
then, from hi camel heav’d the heavi load; 
partook with them the simple, cool repast, 
and in short vesper gave himself to god. 

from distant land with merchandis he came, 
hi all of wealth hi patient servant bore; 
oft deep-drawn sigh hi anxiou wish proclaim 
To reach, again, hi happi cottag door; 

for there, hi wife, hi littl children, dwell; 
their smile shall pay the toil of mani an hour: 
ev’n now warm tear to expect swell, 
As fanci o’er hi mind extend her pow’r. 

A death-lik still reign’d, where onc the song, 
the song of heroes, wak’d the midnight air, 
save, when a solemn murmur roll’d along, 
that seem’d to say—“for futur world prepare.” 

for time’ imperi voic wa frequent heard 
shake the marbl templ to it fall, 
(bi hand he long had conquer’d, vainli rear’d), 
and distant ruin answer’d to hi call. 

while hamet slept, hi camel round him lay, 
beneath him, all hi store of wealth wa piled; 
and here, hi cruse and empti wallet lay, 
and there, the flute that chear’d him in the wild. 

the robber tartar on hi slumber stole, 
for o’er the waste, at eve, he watch’d hi train; 
ah! who hi thirst of plunder shall control? 
who call on him for mercy—cal in vain! 

A poison’d poignard in hi belt he wore, 
A crescent sword depend at hi side, 
the death quiver at hi back he bore, 
and infants—at hi veri look had died! 

the moon’ cold beam athwart the templ fell, 
and to hi sleep prey the tartar led; 
but soft!—a startl camel shook hi bell, 
then stretch’d hi limbs, and rear’d hi drowsi head. 

hamet awoke! the poignard glitter’d high! 
swift from hi couch he sprung, and ’scap’d the blow; 
when from an unknown hand the arrow fly, 
that lay the ruffian, in hi vengeance, low. 

He groan’d, he died! from forth a column’d gate 
A fear shepherd, pale and silent, crept, 
who, as he watch’d hi fold flock star-late, 
had mark’d the robber steal where hamet slept. 

He fear’d hi own, and sav’d a stranger’ life! 
poor hamet clasp’d him to hi grate heart; 
then, rous’d hi camel for the dusti strife, 
and, with the shepherd, hasten’d to depart. 

and now, aurora breath her fresh’n gale, 
and faintli trembl on the eastern cloud; 
and now, the sun, from under twilight’ veil, 
look gaili forth, and melt her airi shroud. 

wide o’er the level plains, hi slant beam 
dart their long line on ilion’ tower’d site; 
the distant hellespont with morn gleams, 
and old scamand wind hi wave in light. 

all merri sound the camel bells, so gay, 
and merri beat fond hamet’ heart, for he, 
e’er the dim even steal upon the day, 
hi children, wife and happi home shall see. 


As emili approach the shore of itali she began to discrimin the 
rich featur and vari colour of the landscape—th purpl hills, 
grove of orang pine and cypress, shade magnific villas, and 
town rise among vineyard and plantations. the nobl brenta, pour 
it broad wave into the sea, now appeared, and, when she reach it 
mouth, the barg stopped, that the hors might be fasten which were 
now to tow it up the stream. thi done, emili gave a last look to the 
adriatic, and to the dim sail, 

that from the sky-mix’d wave 
dawn on the sight, 


and the barg slowli glide between the green and luxuri slope of 
the river. the grandeur of the palladian villas, that adorn these 
shores, wa consider heighten by the set rays, which threw 
strong contrast of light and shade upon the portico and long arcades, 
and beam a mellow lustr upon the orangeri and the tall grove of 
pine and cypress, that overhung the buildings. the scent of oranges, of 
flower myrtles, and other odorifer plant wa diffus upon the 
air, and often, from these embow retreats, a strain of music stole 
on the calm, and “soften into silence.” 

the sun now sunk below the horizon, twilight fell over the landscape, 
and emily, wrapt in muse silence, continu to watch it featur 
gradual vanish into obscurity. she rememb her mani happi 
evenings, when with st. aubert she had observ the shade of twilight 
steal over a scene as beauti as this, from the garden of La vallée, 
and a tear fell to the memori of her father. her spirit were soften 
into melancholi by the influenc of the hour, by the low murmur of the 
wave pass under the vessel, and the still of the air, that 
trembl onli at interv with distant music:—whi els should she, at 
these moments, have look on her attach to valancourt with 
presag so veri afflicting, sinc she had but late receiv letter 
from him, that had sooth for a while all her anxieties? It now seem 
to her oppress mind, that she had taken leav of him for ever, and 
that the countries, which separ them, would never more be retrac 
by her. she look upon count morano with horror, as in some degre the 
caus of this; but apart from him, a conviction, if such that may be 
called, which aris from no proof, and which she knew not how to 
account for, seiz her mind—that she should never see valancourt 
again. though she knew, that neither morano’ solicitations, nor 
montoni’ command had law power to enforc her obedience, she 
regard both with a superstiti dread, that they would final 
prevail. 

lost in thi melancholi reverie, and shed frequent tears, emili wa 
at length rous by montoni, and she follow him to the cabin, where 
refresh were spread, and her aunt wa seat alone. the 
counten of madam montoni wa inflam with resentment, that 
appear to be the consequ of some convers she had held with 
her husband, who regard her with a kind of sullen disdain, and both 
preserved, for some time, a haughti silence. montoni then spoke to 
emili of mons. quesnel: “you will not, I hope, persist in disclaim 
your knowledg of the subject of my letter to him?” 

“I had hoped, sir, that it wa no longer necessari for me to disclaim 
it,” said emily, “I had hoped, from your silence, that you were 
convinc of your error.” 

“you have hope imposs then,” repli montoni; “I might as 
reason have expect to find sincer and uniform of conduct in 
one of your sex, as you to convict me of error in thi affair.” 

emili blushed, and wa silent; she now perceiv too clearly, that she 
had hope an impossibility, for, where no mistak had been commit no 
convict could follow; and it wa evident, that montoni’ conduct had 
not been the consequ of mistake, but of design. 

anxiou to escap from conversation, which wa both afflict and 
humili to her, she soon return to the deck, and resum her 
station near the stern, without apprehens of cold, for no vapour 
rose from the water, and the air wa dri and tranquil; here, at least, 
the benevol of natur allow her the quiet which montoni had 
deni her elsewhere. It wa now past midnight. the star shed a kind 
of twilight, that serv to show the dark outlin of the shore on 
either hand, and the grey surfac of the river; till the moon rose from 
behind a high palm grove, and shed her mellow lustr over the scene. 
the vessel glide smoothli on: amid the still of the hour emili 
heard, now and then, the solitari voic of the barge-men on the bank, 
as they spoke to their horses; while, from a remot part of the vessel, 
with melancholi song, 

the sailor sooth’d, 
beneath the trembl moon, the midnight wave. 


emily, meanwhile, anticip her recept by mons, and madam 
quesnel; consid what she should say on the subject of La vallée; 
and then, to withhold her mind from more anxiou topics, tri to amus 
herself by discrimin the faint-drawn featur of the landscape, 
repos in the moonlight. while her fanci thu wandered, she saw, at a 
distance, a build peep between the moonlight trees, and, as the 
barg approached, heard voic speaking, and soon distinguish the 
lofti portico of a villa, overshadow by grove of pine and sycamore, 
which she recollect to be the same, that had formerli been point 
out to her, as belong to madam quesnel’ relative. 

the barg stop at a flight of marbl steps, which led up the bank to 
a lawn. light appear between some pillar beyond the portico. 
montoni sent forward hi servant, and then disembark with hi family. 
they found mons. and madam quesnel, with a few friends, seat on 
sofa in the portico, enjoy the cool breez of the night, and eat 
fruit and ices, while some of their servant at a littl distance, on 
the river’ bank, were perform a simpl serenade. emili wa now 
accustom to the way of live in thi warm country, and wa not 
surpris to find mons. and madam quesnel in their portico, two hour 
after midnight. 

the usual salut be over, the compani seat themselv in the 
portico, and refresh were brought them from the adjoin hall, 
where a banquet wa spread, and servant attended. when the bustl of 
thi meet had subsided, and emili had recov from the littl 
flutter into which it had thrown her spirits, she wa struck with the 
singular beauti of the hall, so perfectli accommod to the luxuri 
of the season. It wa of white marble, and the roof, rise into an 
open cupola, wa support by column of the same material. two 
opposit side of the apartment, termin in open porticos, admit 
to the hall a full view of the gardens, and of the river scenery; in 
the centr a fountain continu refresh the air, and seem to 
heighten the fragrance, that breath from the surround orangeries, 
while it dash water gave an agreeabl and sooth sound. etruscan 
lamps, suspend from the pillars, diffus a brilliant light over the 
interior part of the hall, leav the remot portico to the softer 
lustr of the moon. 

mons. quesnel talk apart to montoni of hi own affairs, in hi usual 
strain of self-importance; boast of hi new acquisitions, and then 
affect to piti some disappointments, which montoni had late 
sustained. meanwhile, the latter, whose pride at least enabl him to 
despis such vaniti as this, and whose discern at onc detect 
under thi assum pity, the frivol malign of quesnel’ mind, 
listen to him in contemptu silence, till he name hi niece, and 
then they left the portico, and walk away into the gardens. 

emily, however, still attend to madam quesnel, who spoke of franc 
(for even the name of her nativ countri wa dear to her) and she found 
some pleasur in look at a person, who had late been in it. that 
country, too, wa inhabit by valancourt, and she listen to the 
mention of it, with a faint hope, that he also would be named. madam 
quesnel, who, when she wa in france, had talk with raptur of italy, 
now, that she wa in italy, talk with equal prais of france, and 
endeavour to excit the wonder and the envi of her auditor by 
account of places, which they had not been happi enough to see. In 
these descript she not onli impos upon them, but upon herself, 
for she never thought a present pleasur equal to one, that wa passed; 
and thu the delici climate, the fragrant orangeri and all the 
luxuries, which surround her, slept unnoticed, while her fanci 
wander over the distant scene of a northern country. 

emili listen in vain for the name of valancourt. madam montoni spoke 
in her turn of the delight of venice, and of the pleasur she expect 
from visit the fine castl of montoni, on the apennine; which latter 
mention, at least, wa mere a retali boast, for emili well knew, 
that her aunt had no tast for solitari grandeur, and, particularly, 
for such as the castl of udolpho promised. thu the parti continu to 
converse, and, as far as civil would permit, to tortur each other 
by mutual boasts, while they reclin on sofa in the portico, and were 
environ with delight both from natur and art, by which ani honest 
mind would have been temper to benevolence, and happi imagin 
would have been sooth into enchantment. 

the dawn, soon after, trembl in the eastern horizon, and the light 
tint of morning, gradual expanding, show the beauti declin 
form of the italian mountain and the gleam landscapes, stretch 
at their feet. then the sunbeams, shoot up from behind the hills, 
spread over the scene that fine saffron tinge, which seem to impart 
repos to all it touches. the landscap no longer gleamed; all it 
glow colour were revealed, except that it remot featur were 
still soften and unit in the mist of distance, whose sweet effect 
wa heighten to emili by the dark verdur of the pine and cypresses, 
that over-arch the foreground of the river. 

the market people, pass with their boat to venice, now form a 
move pictur on the brenta. most of these had littl paint awnings, 
to shelter their owner from the sunbeams, which, togeth with the 
pile of fruit and flowers, display beneath, and the tast 
simplic of the peasant girls, who watch the rural treasures, 
render them gay and strike objects. the swift movement of the boat 
down the current, the quick glanc of oar in the water, and now and 
then the pass choru of peasants, who reclin under the sail of 
their littl bark, or the tone of some rustic instrument, play by a 
girl, as she sat near her sylvan cargo, heighten the anim and 
festiv of the scene. 

when montoni and M. quesnel had join the ladies, the parti left the 
portico for the gardens, where the charm sceneri soon withdrew 
emily’ thought from pain subjects. the majest form and rich 
verdur of cypress she had never seen so perfect before: grove of 
cedar, lemon, and orange, the spiri cluster of the pine and poplar, 
the luxuri chesnut and orient plane, threw all their pomp of shade 
over these gardens; while bower of flower myrtl and other spici 
shrub mingl their fragranc with that of flowers, whose vivid and 
variou colour glow with increas effect beneath the contrast 
umbrag of the groves. the air also wa continu refresh by 
rivulets, which, with more tast than fashion, had been suffer to 
wander among the green recesses. 

emili often linger behind the party, to contempl the distant 
landscape, that close a vista, or that gleam beneath the dark 
foliag of the foreground;—th spiral summit of the mountains, touch 
with a purpl tint, broken and steep above, but shelv gradual to 
their base; the open valley, mark by no formal line of art; and the 
tall grove of cypress, pine and poplar, sometim embellish by a 
ruin villa, whose broken column appear between the branch of a 
pine, that seem to droop over their fall. 

from other part of the gardens, the charact of the view wa entir 
changed, and the fine solitari beauti of the landscap shift for the 
crowd featur and vari colour of inhabitation. 

the sun wa now gain fast upon the sky, and the parti quit the 
gardens, and retir to repose. 



chapter IV 

and poor misfortun feel the lash of vice. 
thomson 


emili seiz the first opportun of convers alon with mons. 
quesnel, concern La vallée. hi answer to her enquiri were 
concise, and deliv with the air of a man, who is consciou of 
possess absolut power and impati of hear it questioned. He 
declared, that the dispos of the place wa a necessari measure; and 
that she might consid herself indebt to hi prudenc for even the 
small incom that remain for her. “but, however,” ad he, “when 
thi venetian count (I have forgot hi name) marri you, your present 
disagre state of depend will cease. As a relat to you I 
rejoic in the circumstance, which is so fortun for you, and, I may 
add, so unexpect by your friends.” for some moment emili wa chill 
into silenc by thi speech; and, when she attempt to undec him, 
concern the purport of the note she had inclos in montoni’ 
letter, he appear to have some privat reason for disbeliev her 
assertion, and, for a consider time, persev in accus her of 
caprici conduct. being, at length, however, convinc that she 
realli dislik morano and had posit reject hi suit, hi 
resent wa extravagant, and he express it in term equal 
point and inhuman; for, secretli flatter by the prospect of a 
connect with a nobleman, whose titl he had affect to forget, he 
wa incap of feel piti for whatev suffer of hi niec 
might stand in the way of hi ambition. 

emili saw at onc in hi manner all the difficulties, that await her, 
and, though no oppress could have power to make her renounc 
valancourt for morano, her fortitud now trembl at an encount with 
the violent passion of her uncle. 

she oppos hi turbul and indign onli by the mild digniti of 
a superior mind; but the gentl firm of her conduct serv to 
exasper still more hi resentment, sinc it compel him to feel 
hi own inferiority, and, when he left her, he declared, that, if she 
persist in her folly, both himself and montoni would abandon her to 
the contempt of the world. 

the calm she had assum in hi presenc fail emily, when alone, 
and she wept bitterly, and call frequent upon the name of her 
depart father, whose advic to her from hi death-b she then 
remembered. “alas!” said she, “I do inde perceiv how much more 
valuabl is the strength of fortitud than the grace of sensibility, 
and I will also endeavour to fulfil the promis I then made; I will not 
indulg in unavail lamentation, but will tri to endure, with 
firmness, the oppress I cannot elude.” 

somewhat sooth by the conscious of perform a part of st. 
aubert’ last request, and of endeavour to pursu the conduct which 
he would have approved, she overcam her tears, and, when the compani 
met at dinner, had recov her usual seren of countenance. 

In the cool of the evening, the ladi took the _fresco_ along the bank 
of the brenta in madam quesnel’ carriage. the state of emily’ mind 
wa in melancholi contrast with the gay group assembl beneath the 
shade that overhung thi enchant stream. some were danc under 
the trees, and other reclin on the grass, take ice and coffe 
and calmli enjoy the effect of a beauti evening, on a luxuri 
landscape. emily, when she look at the snow-cap apennines, 
ascend in the distance, thought of montoni’ castle, and suffer 
some terror, lest he should convey her thither, for the purpos of 
enforc her obedience; but the thought vanished, when she considered, 
that she wa as much in hi power at venic as she could be elsewhere. 

It wa moonlight befor the parti return to the villa, where supper 
wa spread in the airi hall, which had so much enchant emily’ fancy, 
on the preced night. the ladi seat themselv in the portico, 
till mons. quesnel, montoni, and other gentlemen should join them at 
table, and emili endeavour to resign herself to the tranquil of 
the hour. presently, a barg stop at the step that led into the 
gardens, and, soon after, she distinguish the voic of montoni and 
quesnel, and then that of morano, who, in the next moment, appeared. 
hi compliment she receiv in silence, and her cold air seem at 
first to discompos him; but he soon recov hi usual gaieti of 
manner, though the offici kind of M. and madam quesnel emili 
perceiv disgust him. such a degre of attent she had scarc 
believ could be shown by M. quesnel, for she had never befor seen 
him otherwis than in the presenc of hi inferior or equals. 

when she could retir to her own apartment, her mind almost 
involuntarili dwelt on the most probabl mean of prevail with the 
count to withdraw hi suit, and to her liber mind none appear more 
probable, than that of acknowledg to him a prior attach and 
throw herself upon hi generos for a release. when, however, on 
the follow day, he renew hi addresses, she shrunk from the 
adopt of the plan she had formed. there wa someth so repugn 
to her just pride, in lay open the secret of her heart to such a man 
as morano, and in su to him for compassion, that she impati 
reject thi design and wondered, that she could have paus upon it 
for a moment. the reject of hi suit she repeat in the most 
decis term she could select, mingl with it a sever censur of 
hi conduct; but, though the count appear mortifi by this, he 
persev in the most ardent profess of admiration, till he wa 
interrupt and emili releas by the presenc of madam quesnel. 

dure her stay at thi pleasant villa, emili wa thu render 
miser by the assidu of morano, togeth with the cruelli 
exert author of M. quesnel and montoni, who, with her aunt, seem 
now more resolut determin upon thi marriag than they had even 
appear to be at venice. M. quesnel, finding, that both argument and 
menac were ineffectu in enforc an immedi conclus to it, at 
length relinquish hi endeavours, and trust to the power of montoni 
and to the cours of event at venice. emily, indeed, look to venic 
with hope, for there she would be reliev in some measur from the 
persecut of morano, who would no longer be an inhabit of the same 
hous with herself, and from that of montoni, whose engag would 
not permit him to be continu at home. but amidst the pressur of 
her own misfortunes, she did not forget those of poor theresa, for whom 
she plead with courag tender to quesnel, who promised, in 
slight and gener terms, that she should not be forgotten. 

montoni, in a long convers with M. quesnel, arrang the plan to 
be pursu respect emily, and M. quesnel propos to be at venice, 
as soon as he should be informed, that the nuptial were concluded. 

It wa new to emili to part with ani person, with whom she wa 
connected, without feel of regret; the moment, however, in which she 
took leav of M. and madam quesnel, was, perhaps, the onli 
satisfactori one she had known in their presence. 

morano return in montoni’ barge, and emily, as she watch her 
gradual approach to that magic city, saw at her side the onli person, 
who occas her to view it with less than perfect delight. they 
arriv there about midnight, when emili wa releas from the presenc 
of the count, who, with montoni, went to a casino, and she wa suffer 
to retir to her own apartment. 

On the follow day, montoni, in a short conversation, which he held 
with emily, inform her, that he would no longer be _trifled_ with, 
and that, sinc her marriag with the count would be so highli 
advantag to her, that folli onli could object to it, and folli of 
such extent as wa incap of conviction, it should be celebr 
without further delay, and, if that wa necessary, without her consent. 

emily, who had hitherto tri remonstrance, had now recours to 
supplication, for distress prevent her from foreseeing, that, with a 
man of montoni’ disposition, supplic would be equal useless. 
she afterward enquir by what right he exert thi unlimit 
author over her, a question, which her better judgment would have 
withheld her, in a calmer moment, from making, sinc it could avail her 
nothing, and would afford montoni anoth opportun of triumph 
over her defenceless condition. 

“bi what right!” cri montoni, with a malici smile, “bi the right 
of my will; if you can elud that, I will not inquir by what right you 
do so. I now remind you, for the last time, that you are a stranger, in 
a foreign country, and that it is your interest to make me your friend; 
you know the means; if you compel me to becom your enemy—i will 
ventur to tell you, that the punish shall exceed your expectation. 
you may know _i_ am not to be trifl with.” 

emili continued, for some time after montoni had left her, in a state 
of despair, or rather stupefaction; a conscious of miseri wa all 
that remain in her mind. In thi situat madam montoni found her, 
at the sound of whose voic emili look up, and her aunt, somewhat 
soften by the express of despair, that fix her countenance, 
spoke in a manner more kind than she had ever yet done. emily’ heart 
wa touched; she shed tears, and, after weep for some time, 
recov suffici composur to speak on the subject of her distress, 
and to endeavour to interest madam montoni in her behalf. but, though 
the compass of her aunt had been surprised, her ambit wa not to 
be overcome, and her present object wa to be the aunt of a countess. 
emily’ efforts, therefore, were as unsuccess as they had been with 
montoni, and she withdrew to her apart to think and weep alone. how 
often did she rememb the part scene with valancourt, and wish, 
that the italian had mention montoni’ charact with less reserve! 
when her mind, however, had recov from the first shock of thi 
behaviour, she considered, that it would be imposs for him to 
compel her allianc with morano, if she persist in refus to repeat 
ani part of the marriag ceremony; and she persev in her resolut 
to await montoni’ threaten vengeanc rather than give herself for 
life to a man, whom she must have despis for hi present conduct, had 
she never even love valancourt; yet she trembl at the reveng she 
thu resolv to brave. 

An affair, however, soon after occurred, which somewhat call off 
montoni’ attent from emily. the mysteri visit of orsino were 
renew with more frequenc sinc the return of the former to venice. 
there were others, also, besid orsino, admit to these midnight 
councils, and among them cavigni and verezzi. montoni becam more 
reserv and auster in hi manner than ever; and emily, if her own 
interest had not made her regardless of his, might have perceived, 
that someth extraordinari wa work in hi mind. 

one night, on which a council wa not held, orsino came in great 
agit of spirits, and dispatch hi confidenti servant to 
montoni, who wa at a casino, desir that he would return home 
immediately; but charg the servant not to mention hi name. montoni 
obey the summons, and, on meet orsino, wa inform of the 
circumstances, that occas hi visit and hi visibl alarm, with a 
part of which he wa alreadi acquainted. 

A venetian nobleman, who had, on some late occasion, provok the 
hatr of orsino, had been way-laid and poniard by hire assassins: 
and, as the murder person wa of the first connections, the senat 
had taken up the affair. one of the assassin wa now apprehended, who 
had confessed, that orsino wa hi employ in the atroci deed; and 
the latter, inform of hi danger, had now come to montoni to consult 
on the measur necessari to favour hi escape. He knew, that, at thi 
time, the offic of the polic were upon the watch for him, all over 
the city; to leav it, at present, therefore, wa impracticable, and 
montoni consent to secret him for a few day till the vigil of 
justic should relax, and then to assist him in quit venice. He 
knew the danger he himself incur by permit orsino to remain in 
hi house, but such wa the natur of hi oblig to thi man, that 
he did not think it prudent to refus him an asylum. 

such wa the person whom montoni had admit to hi confidence, and 
for whom he felt as much friendship as wa compat with hi 
character. 

while orsino remain conceal in hi house, montoni wa unwil to 
attract public observ by the nuptial of count morano; but thi 
obstacl was, in a few days, overcom by the departur of hi crimin 
visitor, and he then inform emily, that her marriag wa to be 
celebr on the follow morning. To her repeat assurances, that 
it should not take place, he repli onli by a malign smile; and, 
tell her that the count and a priest would be at hi house, earli in 
the morning, he advis her no further to dare hi resentment, by 
opposit to hi will and to her own interest. “I am now go out for 
the evening,” said he, “remember, that I shall give your hand to count 
morano in the morning.” emily, having, ever sinc hi late threats, 
expected, that her trial would at length arriv to thi crisis, wa 
less shock by the declaration, that she otherwis would have been, 
and she endeavour to support herself by the belief, that the marriag 
could not be valid, so long as she refus befor the priest to repeat 
ani part of the ceremony. yet, as the moment of trial approached, her 
long-harass spirit shrunk almost equal from the encount of hi 
vengeance, and from the hand of count morano. she wa not even 
perfectli certain of the consequ of her steadi refus at the 
altar, and she trembled, more than ever, at the power of montoni, which 
seem unlimit as hi will, for she saw, that he would not scrupl to 
transgress ani law, if, by so doing, he could accomplish hi project. 

while her mind wa thu suffer and in a state littl short of 
distraction, she wa inform that morano ask permiss to see her, 
and the servant had scarc depart with an excuse, befor she 
repent that she had sent one. In the next moment, revert to her 
former design, and determin to try, whether expostul and 
entreati would not succeed, where a refus and a just disdain had 
failed, she recal the servant, and, send a differ message, 
prepar to go down to the count. 

the digniti and assum composur with which she met him, and the kind 
of pensiv resignation, that soften her countenance, were 
circumst not like to induc him to relinquish her, serving, as 
they did, to heighten a passion, which had alreadi intox hi 
judgment. He listen to all she said with an appear of complac 
and of a wish to oblig her; but hi resolut remain invari the 
same, and he endeavour to win her admir by everi insinu art 
he so well knew how to practise. being, at length, assured, that she 
had noth to hope from hi justice, she repeated, in a solemn and 
impress manner, her absolut reject of hi suit, and quit him 
with an assurance, that her refus would be effectu maintain 
against everi circumstance, that could be imagin for subdu it. A 
just pride had restrain her tear in hi presence, but now they 
flow from the ful of her heart. she often call upon the name of 
her late father, and often dwelt with unutter anguish on the idea 
of valancourt. 

she did not go down to supper, but remain alon in her apartment, 
sometim yield to the influenc of grief and terror, and, at 
others, endeavour to fortifi her mind against them, and to prepar 
herself to meet, with compos courage, the scene of the follow 
morning, when all the stratagem of morano and the violenc of montoni 
would be unit against her. 

the even wa far advanced, when madam montoni came to her chamber 
with some bridal ornaments, which the count had sent to emily. she had, 
thi day, purpos avoid her niece; perhaps, becaus her usual 
insens fail her, and she fear to trust herself with a view 
of emily’ distress; or possibly, though her conscienc wa seldom 
audible, it now reproach her with her conduct to her brother’ orphan 
child, whose happi had been entrust to her care by a die 
father. 

emili could not look at these presents, and made a last, though almost 
hopeless, effort to interest the compass of madam montoni, who, if 
she did feel ani degre of pity, or remorse, success conceal it, 
and reproach her niec with folli in be miserable, concern a 
marriage, which ought onli to make her happy. “I am sure,” said she, 
“if I wa unmarried, and the count had propos to me, I should have 
been flatter by the distinction: and if I should have been so, I am 
sure, niece, you, who have no fortune, ought to feel yourself highli 
honoured, and show a proper gratitud and humil toward the count, 
for hi condescension. I am often surprised, I must own, to observ how 
humbl he deport himself to you, notwithstand the haughti air you 
give yourself; I wonder he ha patienc to humour you so: if I wa he, 
I know, I should often be readi to reprehend you, and make you know 
yourself a littl better. I would not have flatter you, I can tell 
you, for it is thi absurd flatteri that make you fanci yourself of so 
much consequence, that you think nobodi can deserv you, and I often 
tell the count so, for I have no patienc to hear him pay you such 
extravag compliments, which you believ everi word of!” 

“your patience, madam, cannot suffer more cruelli on such occasions, 
than my own,” said emily. 

“o! that is all mere affectation,” rejoin her aunt. “I know that hi 
flatteri delight you, and make you so vain, that you think you may 
have the whole world at your feet. but you are veri much mistaken; I 
can assur you, niece, you will not meet with mani such suitor as the 
count: everi other person would have turn upon hi heel, and left you 
to repent at your leisure, long ago.” 

“O that the count had resembl everi other person, then!” said emily, 
with a heavi sigh. 

“it is happi for you, that he doe not,” rejoin madam montoni; “and 
what I am now say is from pure kindness. I am endeavour to 
convinc you of your good fortune, and to persuad you to submit to 
necess with a good grace. It is noth to me, you know, whether you 
like thi marriag or not, for it must be; what I say, therefore, is 
from pure kindness. I wish to see you happy, and it is your own fault 
if you are not so. I would ask you, now, serious and calmly, what 
kind of a match you can expect, sinc a count cannot content your 
ambition?” 

“I have no ambit whatever, madam,” repli emily, “mi onli wish is 
to remain in my present station.” 

“o! that is speak quit from the purpose,” said her aunt, “I see you 
are still think of mons. valancourt. pray get rid of all those 
fantast notion about love, and thi ridicul pride, and be 
someth like a reason creature. but, however, thi is noth to 
the purpose—for your marriag with the count take place tomorrow, you 
know, whether you approv it or not. the count will be trifl with no 
longer.” 

emili made no attempt to repli to thi curiou speech; she felt it 
would be mean, and she knew it would be useless. madam montoni laid 
the count’ present upon the table, on which emili wa leaning, and 
then, desir she would be readi earli in the morning, bade her 
good-night. “good-night, madam,” said emily, with a deep sigh, as the 
door close upon her aunt, and she wa left onc more to her own sad 
reflections. for some time she sat so lost in thought, as to be wholli 
unconsci where she was; at length, rais her head, and look 
round the room, it gloom and profound still awe her. she fix 
her eye on the door, through which her aunt had disappeared, and 
listen anxious for some sound, that might reliev the deep 
deject of her spirits; but it wa past midnight, and all the famili 
except the servant, who sat up for montoni, had retir to bed. her 
mind, long harass by distress, now yield to imaginari terrors; she 
trembl to look into the obscur of her spaciou chamber, and fear 
she knew not what; a state of mind, which continu so long, that she 
would have call up annette, her aunt’ woman, had her fear permit 
her to rise from her chair, and to cross the apartment. 

these melancholi illus at length began to disperse, and she retir 
to her bed, not to sleep, for that wa scarc possible, but to try, 
at least, to quiet her disturb fancy, and to collect strength of 
spirit suffici to bear her through the scene of the approach 
morning. 



chapter V 

dark power! with shudd’ring, meek submit thought 
Be mine to read the vision old 
which thi awak’n bard have told, 
and, lest they meet my blast view, 
hold each strang tale devoutli true. 
collins’ ode TO fear 


emili wa recal from a kind of slumber, into which she had, at 
length, sunk, by a quick knock at her chamber door. she start up 
in terror, for montoni and count morano instantli came to her mind; 
but, have listen in silenc for some time, and recognis the 
voic of annette, she rose and open the door. “what bring you hither 
so early?” said emily, trembl excessively. she wa unabl to support 
herself, and sat down on the bed. 

“dear ma’amselle!” said annette, “do not look so pale. I am quit 
frighten to see you. here is a fine bustl below stairs, all the 
servant run to and fro, and none of them fast enough! here is a 
bustle, indeed, all of a sudden, and nobodi know for what!” 

“who is below besid them?” said emily, “annette, do not trifl with 
me!” 

“not for the world, ma’amselle, I would not trifl for the world; but 
one cannot help make one’ remarks, and there is the signor in such a 
bustle, as I never saw him before; and he ha sent me to tell you, 
ma’am, to get readi immediately.” 

“good god support me!” cri emily, almost fainting, “count morano is 
below, then!” 

“no, ma’amselle, he is not below that I know of,” repli annette, 
“onli hi _excellenza_ sent me to desir you would get readi directli 
to leav venice, for that the gondola would be at the step of the 
canal in a few minutes: but I must hurri back to my lady, who is just 
at her wits’ end, and know not which way to turn for haste.” 

“explain, annette, explain the mean of all thi befor you go,” said 
emily, so overcom with surpris and timid hope, that she had scarc 
breath to speak. 

“nay, ma’amselle, that is more than I can do. I onli know that the 
signor is just come home in a veri ill humour, that he ha had us all 
call out of our beds, and tell us we are all to leav venic 
immediately.” 

“i count morano to go with the signor?” said emily, “and whither are 
we going?” 

“I know neither, ma’am, for certain; but I heard ludovico say someth 
about going, after we get to _terra-firma_, to the signor’ castl 
among some mountains, that he talk of.” 

“the apennines!” said emily, eagerly, “o! then I have littl to hope!” 

“that is the veri place, ma’am. but cheer up, and do not take it so 
much to heart, and think what a littl time you have to get readi in, 
and how impati the signor is. holi st. mark! I hear the oar on the 
canal; and now they come nearer, and now they are dash at the step 
below; it is the gondola, sure enough.” 

annett hasten from the room; and emili prepar for thi unexpect 
flight, as fast as her trembl hand would permit, not perceiving, 
that ani chang in her situat could possibl be for the worse. she 
had scarc thrown her book and cloth into her travel trunk, 
when, receiv a second summons, she went down to her aunt’ 
dressing-room, where she found montoni impati reprov hi wife 
for delay. He went out, soon after, to give some further order to hi 
people, and emili then enquir the occas of thi hasti journey; but 
her aunt appear to be as ignor as herself, and to undertak the 
journey with more reluctance. 

the famili at length embarked, but neither count morano, nor cavigni, 
wa of the party. somewhat reviv by observ this, emily, when the 
gondolieri dash their oar in the water, and put off from the step 
of the portico, felt like a criminal, who receiv a short reprieve. 
her heart beat yet lighter, when they emerg from the canal into the 
ocean, and lighter still, when they skim past the wall of st. mark, 
without have stop to take up count morano. 

the dawn now began to tint the horizon, and to break upon the shore of 
the adriatic. emili did not ventur to ask ani question of montoni, 
who sat, for some time, in gloomi silence, and then roll himself up 
in hi cloak, as if to sleep, while madam montoni did the same; but 
emily, who could not sleep, undrew one of the littl curtain of the 
gondola, and look out upon the sea. the rise dawn now enlighten 
the mountain-top of friuli, but their lower sides, and the distant 
waves, that roll at their feet, were still in deep shadow. emily, 
sunk in tranquil melancholy, watch the strengthen light spread 
upon the ocean, show success venic and her islets, and the 
shore of italy, along which boats, with their point latin sails, 
began to move. 

the gondolieri were frequent hailed, at thi earli hour, by the 
market-people, as they glide by toward venice, and the lagun soon 
display a gay scene of innumer littl barks, pass from 
_terra-firma_ with provisions. emili gave a last look to that splendid 
city, but her mind wa then occupi by consid the probabl 
events, that await her, in the scenes, to which she wa removing, and 
with conjectures, concern the motiv of thi sudden journey. It 
appeared, upon calmer consideration, that montoni wa remov her to 
hi seclud castle, becaus he could there, with more probabl of 
success, attempt to terrifi her into obedience; or, that, should it 
gloomi and sequest scene fail of thi effect, her forc marriag 
with the count could there be solemn with the secrecy, which wa 
necessari to the honour of montoni. the littl spirit, which thi 
repriev had recalled, now began to fail, and, when emili reach the 
shore, her mind had sunk into all it former depression. 

montoni did not embark on the brenta, but pursu hi way in carriag 
across the country, toward the apennine; dure which journey, hi 
manner to emili wa so particularli severe, that thi alon would have 
confirm her late conjecture, had ani such confirm been 
necessary. her sens were now dead to the beauti country, through 
which she travelled. sometim she wa compel to smile at the 
_naïveté_ of annette, in her remark on what she saw, and sometim to 
sigh, as a scene of peculiar beauti recal valancourt to her 
thoughts, who wa inde seldom absent from them, and of whom she could 
never hope to hear in the solitude, to which she wa hastening. 

At length, the travel began to ascend among the apennines. the 
immens pine-forests, which, at that period, overhung these mountains, 
and between which the road wound, exclud all view but of the cliff 
aspir above, except, that, now and then, an open through the dark 
wood allow the eye a momentari glimps of the countri below. the 
gloom of these shades, their solitari silence, except when the breez 
swept over their summits, the tremend precipic of the mountains, 
that came partial to the eye, each assist to rais the solemn of 
emily’ feel into awe; she saw onli imag of gloomi grandeur, or 
of dread sublimity, around her; other images, equal gloomi and 
equal terrible, gleam on her imagination. she wa go she 
scarc knew whither, under the dominion of a person, from whose 
arbitrari disposit she had alreadi suffer so much, to marry, 
perhaps, a man who possess neither her affection, nor esteem; or to 
endure, beyond the hope of succour, whatev punish revenge, and 
that italian revenge, might dictate.—th more she consid what might 
be the motiv of the journey, the more she becam convinced, that it 
wa for the purpos of conclud her nuptial with count morano, with 
that secrecy, which her resolut resist had made necessari to the 
honour, if not to the safety, of montoni. from the deep solitudes, into 
which she wa emerging, and from the gloomi castle, of which she had 
heard some mysteri hints, her sick heart recoil in despair, and 
she experienced, that, though her mind wa alreadi occupi by peculiar 
distress, it wa still aliv to the influenc of new and local 
circumstance; whi els did she shudder at the idea of thi desol 
castle? 

As the travel still ascend among the pine forests, steep rose 
over steep, the mountain seem to multiply, as they went, and what 
wa the summit of one emin prove to be onli the base of another. 
At length, they reach a littl plain, where the driver stop to 
rest the mules, whenc a scene of such extent and magnific open 
below, as drew even from madam montoni a note of admiration. emili 
lost, for a moment, her sorrows, in the immens of nature. beyond the 
amphitheatr of mountains, that stretch below, whose top appear as 
numer almost, as the wave of the sea, and whose feet were conceal 
by the forests—extend the _campagna_ of italy, where citi and 
rivers, and wood and all the glow of cultiv were mingl in gay 
confusion. the adriat bound the horizon, into which the Po and the 
brenta, after wind through the whole extent of the landscape, pour 
their fruit waves. emili gaze long on the splendour of the world 
she wa quitting, of which the whole magnific seem thu given to 
her sight onli to increas her regret on leav it; for her, 
valancourt alon wa in that world; to him alon her heart turned, and 
for him alon fell her bitter tears. 

from thi sublim scene the travel continu to ascend among the 
pines, till they enter a narrow pass of the mountains, which shut out 
everi featur of the distant country, and, in it stead, exhibit onli 
tremend crags, impend over the road, where no vestig of 
humanity, or even of vegetation, appeared, except here and there the 
trunk and scath branch of an oak, that hung nearli headlong from 
the rock, into which it strong root had fastened. thi pass, which 
led into the heart of the apennine, at length open to day, and a 
scene of mountain stretch in long perspective, as wild as ani the 
travel had yet passed. still vast pine-forest hung upon their 
base, and crown the ridgi precipice, that rose perpendicularli from 
the vale, while, above, the roll mist caught the sunbeams, and 
touch their cliff with all the magic colour of light and shade. 
the scene seem perpetu changing, and it featur to assum new 
forms, as the wind road brought them to the eye in differ 
attitudes; while the shift vapours, now partial conceal their 
minut beauti and now illumin them with splendid tints, 
assist the illus of the sight. 

though the deep valley between these mountain were, for the most 
part, cloth with pines, sometim an abrupt open present a 
perspect of onli barren rocks, with a cataract flash from their 
summit among broken cliffs, till it waters, reach the bottom, 
foam along with unceas fury; and sometim pastor scene 
exhibit their “green delights” in the narrow vales, smile amid 
surround horror. there herd and flock of goat and sheep, brows 
under the shade of hang woods, and the shepherd’ littl cabin, 
rear on the margin of a clear stream, present a sweet pictur of 
repose. 

wild and romant as were these scenes, their charact had far less of 
the sublime, that had those of the alps, which guard the entranc of 
italy. emili wa often elevated, but seldom felt those emot of 
indescrib awe which she had so continu experienced, in her 
passag over the alps. 

toward the close of day, the road wound into a deep valley. mountains, 
whose shaggi steep appear to be inaccessible, almost surround it. 
To the east, a vista opened, that exhibit the apennin in their 
darkest horrors; and the long perspect of retir summits, rise 
over each other, their ridg cloth with pines, exhibit a stronger 
imag of grandeur, than ani that emili had yet seen. the sun had just 
sunk below the top of the mountain she wa descending, whose long 
shadow stretch athwart the valley, but hi slope rays, shoot 
through an open of the cliffs, touch with a yellow gleam the 
summit of the forest, that hung upon the opposit steeps, and stream 
in full splendour upon the tower and battlement of a castle, that 
spread it extens rampart along the brow of a precipic above. the 
splendour of these illumin object wa heighten by the contrast 
shade, which involv the valley below. 

“there,” said montoni, speak for the first time in sever hours, 
“i udolpho.” 

emili gaze with melancholi awe upon the castle, which she understood 
to be montoni’s; for, though it wa now light up by the set sun, 
the gothic great of it features, and it moulder wall of dark 
grey stone, render it a gloomi and sublim object. As she gazed, the 
light die away on it walls, leav a melancholi purpl tint, which 
spread deeper and deeper, as the thin vapour crept up the mountain, 
while the battlement abov were still tip with splendour. from 
those, too, the ray soon faded, and the whole edific wa invest 
with the solemn duski of evening. silent, lonely, and sublime, it 
seem to stand the sovereign of the scene, and to frown defianc on 
all, who dare to invad it solitari reign. As the twilight deepened, 
it featur becam more aw in obscurity, and emili continu to 
gaze, till it cluster tower were alon seen, rise over the top 
of the woods, beneath whose thick shade the carriag soon after began 
to ascend. 

the extent and dark of these tall wood awaken terrif imag in 
her mind, and she almost expect to see banditti start up from under 
the trees. At length, the carriag emerg upon a heathi rock, and, 
soon after, reach the castl gates, where the deep tone of the portal 
bell, which wa struck upon to give notic of their arrival, increas 
the fear emotions, that had assail emily. while they wait till 
the servant within should come to open the gates, she anxious 
survey the edifice: but the gloom, that overspread it, allow her to 
distinguish littl more than a part of it outline, with the massi 
wall of the ramparts, and to know, that it wa vast, ancient and 
dreary. from the part she saw, she judg of the heavi strength and 
extent of the whole. the gateway befor her, lead into the courts, 
wa of gigant size, and wa defend by two round towers, crown by 
overhang turrets, embattled, where, instead of banners, now wave 
long grass and wild plants, that had taken root among the moulder 
stones, and which seem to sigh, as the breez roll past, over the 
desol around them. the tower were unit by a curtain, pierc 
and embattl also, below which appear the point arch of a huge 
portcullis, surmount the gates: from these, the wall of the 
rampart extend to other towers, overlook the precipice, whose 
shatter outline, appear on a gleam, that linger in the west, 
told of the ravag of war.—beyond these all wa lost in the obscur 
of evening. 

while emili gaze with awe upon the scene, footstep were heard within 
the gates, and the undraw of bolts; after which an ancient servant 
of the castl appeared, forc back the huge fold of the portal, to 
admit hi lord. As the carriage-wheel roll heavili under the 
portcullis, emily’ heart sunk, and she seemed, as if she wa go 
into her prison; the gloomi court, into which she passed, serv to 
confirm the idea, and her imagination, ever awak to circumstance, 
suggest even more terrors, than her reason could justify. 

anoth gate deliv them into the second court, grass-grown, and 
more wild than the first, where, as she survey through the twilight 
it desolation—it lofti walls, overtop with briony, moss and 
nightshade, and the embattl tower that rose above,—long-suff 
and murder came to her thoughts. one of those instantan and 
unaccount convictions, which sometim conquer even strong minds, 
impress her with it horror. the sentiment wa not diminished, when 
she enter an extens gothic hall, obscur by the gloom of evening, 
which a light, glimmer at a distanc through a long perspect of 
arches, onli render more striking. As a servant brought the lamp 
nearer partial gleam fell upon the pillar and the point arches, 
form a strong contrast with their shadows, that stretch along the 
pavement and the walls. 

the sudden journey of montoni had prevent hi peopl from make ani 
other prepar for hi reception, than could be had in the short 
interval, sinc the arriv of the servant, who had been sent forward 
from venice; and this, in some measure, may account for the air of 
extrem desolation, that everywher appeared. 

the servant, who came to light montoni, bow in silence, and the 
muscl of hi counten relax with no symptom of joy.—montoni 
notic the salut by a slight motion of hi hand, and pass on, 
while hi lady, following, and look round with a degre of surpris 
and discontent, which she seem fear of expressing, and emily, 
survey the extent and grandeur of the hall in timid wonder, 
approach a marbl staircase. the arch here open to a lofti vault, 
from the centr of which hung a tripod lamp, which a servant wa 
hastili lighting; and the rich fret-work of the roof, a corridor, 
lead into sever upper apartments, and a paint window, stretch 
nearli from the pavement to the ceil of the hall, becam gradual 
visible. 

have cross the foot of the staircase, and pass through an 
ante-room, they enter a spaciou apartment, whose walls, wainscot 
with black larch-wood, the growth of the neighbour mountains, were 
scarc distinguish from dark itself. “bring more light,” said 
montoni, as he entered. the servant, set down hi lamp, wa 
withdraw to obey him, when madam montoni observing, that the 
even air of thi mountain region wa cold, and that she should 
like a fire, montoni order that wood might be brought. 

while he pace the room with thought steps, and madam montoni sat 
silent on a couch, at the upper end of it, wait till the servant 
returned, emili wa observ the singular solemn and desol of 
the apartment, viewed, as it now was, by the glimmer of the singl 
lamp, place near a larg venetian mirror, that duskili reflect the 
scene, with the tall figur of montoni pass slowli along, hi arm 
folded, and hi counten shade by the plume, that wave in hi hat. 

from the contempl of thi scene, emily’ mind proceed to the 
apprehens of what she might suffer in it, till the remembr of 
valancourt, far, far distant! came to her heart, and soften it into 
sorrow. A heavi sigh escap her: but, tri to conceal her tears, she 
walk away to one of the high windows, that open upon the ramparts, 
below which, spread the wood she had pass in her approach to the 
castle. but the night-shad sat deepli on the mountain beyond, and 
their indent outlin alon could be faintli trace on the horizon, 
where a red streak yet glimmer in the west. the valley between wa 
sunk in darkness. 

the scene within, upon which emili turn on the open of the door, 
wa scarc less gloomy. the old servant, who had receiv them at the 
gates, now entered, bend under a load of pine-branches, while two of 
montoni’ venetian servant follow with lights. 

“your _excellenza_ is welcom to the castle,” said the old man, as he 
rais himself from the hearth, where he had laid the wood: “it ha 
been a lone place a long while; but you will excus it, signor, 
know we had but short notice. It is near two years, come next feast 
of st. mark, sinc your _excellenza_ wa within these walls.” 

“you have a good memory, old carlo,” said montoni: “it is thereabout; 
and how hast thou contriv to live so long?” 

“a-well-a-day, sir, with much ado; the cold winds, that blow through 
the castl in winter, are almost too much for me; and I thought 
sometim of ask your _excellenza_ to let me leav the mountains, 
and go down into the lowlands. but I don’t know how it is—i am loth to 
quit these old wall I have live in so long.” 

“well, how have you gone on in the castle, sinc I left it?” said 
montoni. 

“whi much as usual, signor, onli it want a good deal of repairing. 
there is the north tower—som of the battlement have tumbl down, and 
had like one day to have knock my poor wife (god rest her soul!) on 
the head. your _excellenza_ must know—” 

“well, but the repairs,” interrupt montoni. 

“aye, the repairs,” said carlo: “a part of the roof of the great hall 
ha fallen in, and all the wind from the mountain rush through it 
last winter, and whistl through the whole castl so, that there wa 
no keep one’ self warm, be where one would. there, my wife and I 
use to sit shiver over a great fire in one corner of the littl 
hall, readi to die with cold, and—” 

“but there are no more repair wanted,” said montoni, impatiently. 

“O lord! your _excellenza_, yes—th wall of the rampart ha tumbl 
down in three places; then, the stairs, that lead to the west gallery, 
have been a long time so bad, that it is danger to go up them; and 
the passag lead to the great oak chamber, that overhang the north 
rampart—on night last winter I ventur to go there by myself, and 
your _excellenza_—” 

“well, well, enough of this,” said montoni, with quickness: “I will 
talk more with thee tomorrow.” 

the fire wa now lighted; carlo swept the hearth, place chairs, wipe 
the dust from a larg marbl tabl that stood near it, and then left 
the room. 

montoni and hi famili drew round the fire. madam montoni made sever 
attempt at conversation, but hi sullen answer repuls her, while 
emili sat endeavour to acquir courag enough to speak to him. At 
length, in a tremul voice, she said, “may I ask, sir, the motiv of 
thi sudden journey?”—aft a long pause, she recov suffici 
courag to repeat the question. 

“it doe not suit me to answer enquiries,” said montoni, “nor doe it 
becom you to make them; time may unfold them all: but I desir I may 
be no further harassed, and I recommend it to you to retir to your 
chamber, and to endeavour to adopt a more ration conduct, than that 
of yield to fancies, and to a sensibility, which, to call it by the 
gentlest name, is onli a weakness.” 

emili rose to withdraw. “good night, madam,” said she to her aunt, with 
an assum composure, that could not disguis her emotion. 

“good night, my dear,” said madam montoni, in a tone of kindness, 
which her niec had never befor heard from her; and the unexpect 
endear brought tear to emily’ eyes. she curtsi to montoni, and 
wa retiring; “but you do not know the way to your chamber,” said her 
aunt. montoni call the servant, who wait in the ante-room, and bade 
him send madam montoni’ woman, with whom, in a few minutes, emili 
withdrew. 

“do you know which is my room?” said she to annette, as they cross 
the hall. 

“yes, I believ I do, ma’amselle; but thi is such a strang rambl 
place! I have been lost in it already: they call it the doubl chamber, 
over the south rampart, and I went up thi great staircas to it. My 
lady’ room is at the other end of the castle.” 

emili ascend the marbl staircase, and came to the corridor, as they 
pass through which, annett resum her chat—“what a wild lone 
place thi is, ma’am! I shall be quit frighten to live in it. how 
often, and often have I wish myself in franc again! I littl 
thought, when I came with my ladi to see the world, that I should ever 
be shut up in such a place as this, or I would never have left my own 
country! thi way, ma’amselle, down thi turning. I can almost believ 
in giant again, and such like, for thi is just like one of their 
castles; and, some night or other, I suppos I shall see fairi too, 
hop about in that great old hall, that look more like a church, 
with it huge pillars, than anyth else.” 

“yes,” said emily, smiling, and glad to escap from more seriou 
thought, “if we come to the corridor, about midnight, and look down 
into the hall, we shall certainli see it illumin with a thousand 
lamps, and the fairi trip in gay circl to the sound of 
delici music; for it is in such place as this, you know, that they 
come to hold their revels. but I am afraid, annette, you will not be 
abl to pay the necessari penanc for such a sight: and, if onc they 
hear your voice, the whole scene will vanish in an instant.” 

“o! if you will bear me company, ma’amselle, I will come to the 
corridor, thi veri night, and I promis you I will hold my tongue; it 
shall not be my fault if the show vanishes.—but do you think they will 
come?” 

“I cannot promis that with certainty, but I will ventur to say, it 
will not be your fault if the enchant should vanish.” 

“well, ma’amselle, that is say more than I expect of you: but I am 
not so much afraid of fairies, as of ghosts, and they say there are a 
plenti mani of them about the castle: now I should be frighten to 
death, if I should chanc to see ani of them. but hush! ma’amselle, 
walk softly! I have thought, sever times, someth pass by me.” 

“ridiculous!” said emily, “you must not indulg such fancies.” 

“O ma’am! they are not fancies, for aught I know; benedetto say these 
dismal galleri and hall are fit for noth but ghost to live in; 
and I verili believe, if I _live_ long in them I shall turn to one 
myself!” 

“I hope,” said emily, “you will not suffer signor montoni to hear of 
these weak fears; they would highli displeas him.” 

“what, you know then, ma’amselle, all about it!” rejoin annette. “no, 
no, I do know better than to do so; though, if the signor can sleep 
sound, nobodi els in the castl ha ani right to lie awake, I am 
sure.” emili did not appear to notic thi remark. 

“down thi passage, ma’amselle; thi lead to a back staircase. O! if I 
see anything, I shall be frighten out of my wits!” 

“that will scarc be possible,” said emili smiling, as she follow 
the wind of the passage, which open into anoth gallery: and then 
annette, perceiv that she had miss her way, while she had been so 
eloqu harangu on ghost and fairies, wander about through 
other passag and galleries, till, at length, frighten by their 
intricaci and desolation, she call aloud for assistance: but they 
were beyond the hear of the servants, who were on the other side of 
the castle, and emili now open the door of a chamber on the left. 

“o! do not go in there, ma’amselle,” said annette, “you will onli lose 
yourself further.” 

“bring the light forward,” said emily, “we may possibl find our way 
through these rooms.” 

annett stood at the door, in an attitud of hesitation, with the light 
held up to show the chamber, but the feebl ray spread through not 
half of it. “whi do you hesitate?” said emily, “let me see whither thi 
room leads.” 

annett advanc reluctantly. It open into a suit of spaciou and 
ancient apartments, some of which were hung with tapestry, and other 
wainscot with cedar and black larch-wood. what furnitur there was, 
seem to be almost as old as the rooms, and retain an appear of 
grandeur, though cover with dust, and drop to piec with the 
damps, and with age. 

“how cold these room are, ma’amselle!” said annette: “nobodi ha live 
in them for many, mani years, they say. Do let us go.” 

“they may open upon the great staircase, perhaps,” said emily, pass 
on till she came to a chamber, hung with pictures, and took the light 
to examin that of a soldier on horseback in a field of battle.—h wa 
dart hi spear upon a man, who lay under the feet of the horse, and 
who held up one hand in a supplic attitude. the soldier, whose 
beaver wa up, regard him with a look of vengeance, and the 
countenance, with that expression, struck emili as resembl montoni. 
she shuddered, and turn from it. pass the light hastili over 
sever other pictures, she came to one conceal by a veil of black 
silk. the singular of the circumst struck her, and she stop 
befor it, wish to remov the veil, and examin what could thu 
care be concealed, but somewhat want courage. “holi virgin! 
what can thi mean?” exclaim annette. “thi is sure the pictur 
they told me of at venice.” 

“what picture?” said emily. “whi a picture—a picture,” repli annette, 
hesitatingly—“but I never could make out exactli what it wa about, 
either.” 

“remov the veil, annette.” 

“what! I, ma’amselle!—i! not for the world!” emily, turn round, saw 
annette’ counten grow pale. “and pray, what have you heard of thi 
picture, to terrifi you so, my good girl?” said she. “nothing, 
ma’amselle: I have heard nothing, onli let us find our way out.” 

“certainly: but I wish first to examin the picture; take the light, 
annette, while I lift the veil.” annett took the light, and 
immedi walk away with it, disregard emily’ call to stay, 
who, not choos to be left alon in the dark chamber, at length 
follow her. “what is the reason of this, annette?” said emily, when 
she overtook her, “what have you heard concern that picture, which 
make you so unwil to stay when I bid you?” 

“I don’t know what is the reason, ma’amselle,” repli annette, “nor 
anyth about the picture, onli I have heard there is someth veri 
dread belong to it—and that it ha been cover up in black _ever 
since_—and that nobodi ha look at it for a great mani years—and it 
somehow ha to do with the owner of thi castl befor signor montoni 
came to the possess of it—and—” 

“well, annette,” said emily, smiling, “I perceiv it is as you say—that 
you know noth about the picture.” 

“no, nothing, indeed, ma’amselle, for they made me promis never to 
tell:—but—” 

“well,” rejoin emily, who observ that she wa struggl between 
her inclin to reveal a secret, and her apprehens for the 
consequence, “I will enquir no further—” 

“no, pray, ma’am, do not.” 

“lest you should tell all,” interrupt emily. 

annett blushed, and emili smiled, and they pass on to the extrem 
of thi suit of apartments, and found themselves, after some further 
perplexity, onc more at the top of the marbl staircase, where annett 
left emily, while she went to call one of the servant of the castl to 
show them to the chamber, for which they had been seeking. 

while she wa absent, emily’ thought return to the picture; an 
unwilling to tamper with the integr of a servant, had check 
her enquiri on thi subject, as well as concern some alarm 
hints, which annett had drop respect montoni; though her 
curios wa entir awakened, and she had perceived, that her 
question might easili be answered. she wa now, however, inclin to 
go back to the apart and examin the picture; but the loneli of 
the hour and of the place, with the melancholi silenc that reign 
around her, conspir with a certain degre of awe, excit by the 
mysteri attend thi picture, to prevent her. she determined, 
however, when daylight should have reanim her spirits, to go 
thither and remov the veil. As she lean from the corridor, over the 
staircase, and her eye wander round, she again observed, with 
wonder, the vast strength of the walls, now somewhat decayed, and the 
pillar of solid marble, that rose from the hall, and support the 
roof. 

A servant now appear with annette, and conduct emili to her 
chamber, which wa in a remot part of the castle, and at the veri end 
of the corridor, from whenc the suit of apart opened, through 
which they had been wandering. the lone aspect of her room made emili 
unwil that annett should leav her immediately, and the damp 
of it chill her with more than fear. she beg caterina, the servant 
of the castle, to bring some wood and light a fire. 

“aye, lady, it’ mani a year sinc a fire wa light here,” said 
caterina. 

“you need not tell us that, good woman,” said annette; “everi room in 
the castl feel like a well. I wonder how you contriv to live here; 
for my part, I wish myself at venic again.” emili wave her hand for 
caterina to fetch the wood. 

“I wonder, ma’am, whi they call thi the doubl chamber?” said annette, 
while emili survey it in silenc and saw that it wa lofti and 
spacious, like the other she had seen, and, like mani of them, too, 
had it wall line with dark larch-wood. the bed and other furnitur 
wa veri ancient, and had an air of gloomi grandeur, like all that she 
had seen in the castle. one of the high casements, which she opened, 
overlook a rampart, but the view beyond wa hid in darkness. 

In the presenc of annette, emili tri to support her spirits, and to 
restrain the tears, which, everi now and then, came to her eyes. she 
wish much to enquir when count morano wa expect at the castle, 
but an unwilling to ask unnecessari questions, and to mention 
famili concern to a servant, withheld her. meanwhile, annette’ 
thought were engag upon anoth subject: she dearli love the 
marvellous, and had heard of a circumstance, connect with the castle, 
that highli gratifi thi taste. have been enjoin not to mention 
it, her inclin to tell it wa so strong, that she wa everi 
instant on the point of speak what she had heard. such a strang 
circumstance, too, and to be oblig to conceal it, wa a sever 
punishment; but she knew, that montoni might impos one much severer, 
and she fear to incur it by offend him. 

caterina now brought the wood, and it bright blaze dispelled, for a 
while, the gloom of the chamber. she told annette, that her ladi had 
enquir for her, and emili wa onc again left to her own sad 
reflections. her heart wa not yet harden against the stern manner 
of montoni, and she wa nearli as much shock now, as she had been 
when she first wit them. the tender and affection, to which 
she had been accustomed, till she lost her parents, had made her 
particularli sensibl to ani degre of unkindness, and such a revers 
as thi no apprehens had prepar her to support. 

To call off her attent from subjects, that press heavili on her 
spirits, she rose and again examin her room and it furniture. As she 
walk round it, she pass a door, that wa not quit shut, and, 
perceiving, that it wa not the one, through which she entered, she 
brought the light forward to discov whither it led. she open it, 
and, go forward, had nearli fallen down a steep, narrow staircas 
that wound from it, between two stone walls. she wish to know to what 
it led, and wa the more anxious, sinc it commun so immedi 
with her apartment; but, in the present state of her spirits, she 
want courag to ventur into the dark alone. close the door, 
therefore, she endeavour to fasten it, but, upon further examination, 
perceived, that it had no bolt on the chamber side, though it had two 
on the other. By place a heavi chair against it, she in some measur 
remedi the defect; yet she wa still alarm at the thought of 
sleep in thi remot room alone, with a door open she knew not 
whither, and which could not be perfectli fasten on the inside. 
sometim she wish to entreat of madam montoni, that annett might 
have leav to remain with her all night, but wa deter by an 
apprehens of betray what would be thought childish fears, and by 
an unwilling to increas the apt terror of annette. 

her gloomi reflect were, soon after, interrupt by a footstep in 
the corridor, and she wa glad to see annett enter with some supper, 
sent by madam montoni. have a tabl near the fire, she made the good 
girl sit down and sup with her; and, when their littl repast wa over, 
annette, encourag by her kind and stir the wood into a blaze, 
drew her chair upon the hearth, nearer to emily, and said—“did you ever 
hear, ma’amselle, of the strang accident, that made the signor lord of 
thi castle?” 

“what wonder stori have you now to tell?” said emily, conceal the 
curiosity, occas by the mysteri hint she had formerli heard on 
that subject. 

“I have heard all about it, ma’amselle,” said annette, look round 
the chamber and draw closer to emily; “benedetto told it me as we 
travel together: say he, ‘annette, you don’t know about thi castl 
here, that we are go to?’ ‘no,’ say I, ‘mr. benedetto, pray what do 
you know?’ but, ma’amselle, you can keep a secret, or I would not tell 
it you for the world; for I promis never to tell, and they say, that 
the signor doe not like to have it talk of.” 

“if you promis to keep thi secret,” said emily, “you do right not to 
mention it.” 

annett paus a moment, and then said, “o, but to you, ma’amselle, to 
you I may tell it safely, I know.” 

emili smiled, “I certainli shall keep it as faith as yourself, 
annette.” 

annett repli veri gravely, that would do, and proceeded—“thi 
castle, you must know, ma’amselle, is veri old, and veri strong, and 
ha stood out mani sieg as they say. now it wa not signor montoni’ 
always, nor hi father’s; no; but, by some law or other, it wa to come 
to the signor, if the ladi die unmarried.” 

“what lady?” said emily. 

“I am not come to that yet,” repli annette, “it is the ladi I am 
go to tell you about, ma’amselle: but, as I wa saying, thi ladi 
live in the castle, and had everyth veri grand about her, as you 
may suppose, ma’amselle. the signor use often to come to see her, and 
wa in love with her, and offer to marri her; for, though he wa 
somehow related, that did not signify. but she wa in love with 
somebodi else, and would not have him, which made him veri angry, as 
they say, and you know, ma’amselle, what an ill-look gentleman he 
is, when he is angry. perhap she saw him in a passion, and therefor 
would not have him. but, as I wa saying, she wa veri melancholi and 
unhappy, and all that, for a long while, and—holi virgin! what nois is 
that? did not you hear a sound, ma’amselle?” 

“it wa onli the wind,” said emily, “but do come to the end of your 
story.” 

“a I wa saying—o, where wa i?—a I wa saying—sh wa veri 
melancholi and unhappi a long while, and use to walk about upon the 
terrace, there, under the windows, by herself, and cri so! it would 
have done your heart good to hear her. that is—i don’t mean good, but 
it would have made you cri too, as they tell me.” 

“well, but, annette, do tell me the substanc of your tale.” 

“all in good time, ma’am; all thi I heard befor at venice, but what 
is to come I never heard till today. thi happen a great mani year 
ago, when signor montoni wa quit a young man. the lady—they call 
her signora laurentini, wa veri handsome, but she use to be in great 
passions, too, sometimes, as well as the signor. find he could not 
make her listen to him—what doe he do, but leav the castle, and never 
come near it for a long time! but it wa all one to her; she wa just 
as unhappi whether he wa here or not, till one evening, holi st. 
peter! ma’amselle,” cri annette, “look at that lamp, see how blue it 
burns!” she look fear round the chamber. “ridicul girl!” said 
emily, “whi will you indulg those fancies? pray let me hear the end of 
your story, I am weary.” 

annett still kept her eye on the lamp, and proceed in a lower 
voice. “it wa one evening, they say, at the latter end of the year, it 
might be about the middl of september, I suppose, or the begin of 
october; nay, for that matter, it might be november, for that, too, is 
the latter end of the year, but that I cannot say for certain, becaus 
they did not tell me for certain themselves. however, it wa at the 
latter end of the year, thi grand ladi walk out of the castl into 
the wood below, as she had often done before, all alone, onli her maid 
wa with her. the wind blew cold, and strew the leav about, and 
whistl dismal among those great old chesnut trees, that we passed, 
ma’amselle, as we came to the castle—for benedetto show me the tree 
as he wa talking—th wind blew cold, and her woman would have 
persuad her to return: but all would not do, for she wa fond of 
walk in the woods, at even time, and, if the leav were fall 
about her, so much the better. 

“well, they saw her go down among the woods, but night came, and she 
did not return: ten o’clock, eleven o’clock, twelv o’clock came, and 
no lady! well, the servant thought to be sure, some accid had 
befallen her, and they went out to seek her. they search all night 
long, but could not find her, or ani trace of her; and, from that day 
to this, ma’amselle, she ha never been heard of.” 

“i thi true, annette?” said emily, in much surprise. 

“true, ma’am!” said annette, with a look of horror, “yes, it is true, 
indeed. but they do say,” she added, lower her voice, “they do say, 
that the signora ha been seen, sever time since, walk in the 
wood and about the castl in the night: sever of the old servants, 
who remain here some time after, declar they saw her; and, sinc 
then, she ha been seen by some of the vassals, who have happen to be 
in the castle, at night. carlo, the old steward, could tell such 
things, they say, if he would.” 

“how contradictori is this, annette!” said emily, “you say noth ha 
been sinc known of her, and yet she ha been seen!” 

“but all thi wa told me for a great secret,” rejoin annette, 
without notic the remark, “and I am sure, ma’am, you would not hurt 
either me or benedetto, so much as to go and tell it again.” emili 
remain silent, and annett repeat her last sentence. 

“you have noth to fear from my indiscretion,” repli emily, “and 
let me advis you, my good annette, be discreet yourself, and never 
mention what you have just told me to ani other person. signor montoni, 
as you say, may be angri if he hear of it. but what inquiri were 
made concern the lady?” 

“o! a great deal, indeed, ma’amselle, for the signor laid claim to the 
castl directly, as be the next heir, and they said, that is, the 
judges, or the senators, or somebodi of that sort, said, he could not 
take possess of it till so mani year were gone by, and then, if, 
after all, the ladi could not be found, whi she would be as good as 
dead, and the castl would be hi own; and so it is hi own. but the 
stori went round, and mani strang report were spread, so veri 
strange, ma’amselle, that I shall not tell them.” 

“that is stranger still, annette,” said emily, smiling, and rous 
herself from her reverie. “but, when signora laurentini wa afterward 
seen in the castle, did nobodi speak to her?” 

“speak—speak to her!” cri annette, with a look of terror; “no, to be 
sure.” 

“and whi not?” rejoin emily, will to hear further. 

“holi mother! speak to a spirit!” 

“but what reason had they to conclud it wa a spirit, unless they had 
approached, and spoken to it?” 

“O ma’amselle, I cannot tell. how can you ask such shock questions? 
but nobodi ever saw it come in, or go out of the castle; and it wa in 
one place now, and then the next minut in quit anoth part of the 
castle; and then it never spoke, and, if it wa alive, what should it 
do in the castl if it never spoke? sever part of the castl have 
never been gone into since, they say, for that veri reason.” 

“what, becaus it never spoke?” said emily, tri to laugh away the 
fear that began to steal upon her. 

“no, ma’amselle, no;” repli annette, rather angrili “but becaus 
someth ha been seen there. they say, too, there is an old chapel 
adjoin the west side of the castle, where, ani time at midnight, you 
may hear such groans!—it make one shudder to think of them!—and 
strang sight have been seen there—” 

“pr’ythee, annette, no more of these silli tales,” said emily. 

“silli tales, ma’amselle! O, but I will tell you one stori about this, 
if you please, that caterina told me. It wa one cold winter’ night 
that caterina (she often came to the castl then, she says, to keep old 
carlo and hi wife company, and so he recommend her afterward to the 
signor, and she ha live here ever since) caterina wa sit with 
them in the littl hall, say carlo, ‘I wish we had some of those fig 
to roast, that lie in the store-closet, but it is a long way off, and I 
am loath to fetch them; do, caterina,’ say he, ‘for you are young and 
nimble, do bring us some, the fire is in nice trim for roast them; 
they lie,’ say he, ‘in such a corner of the store-room, at the end of 
the north-gallery; here, take the lamp,’ say he, ‘and mind, as you go 
up the great staircase, that the wind, through the roof, doe not blow 
it out.’ so, with that, caterina took the lamp—hush! ma’amselle, I 
sure heard a noise!” 

emily, whom annett had now infect with her own terrors, listen 
attentively; but everyth wa still, and annett proceeded: 

“caterina went to the north-gallery, that is the wide galleri we 
passed, ma’am, befor we came to the corridor, here. As she went with 
the lamp in her hand, think of noth at all—there, again!” cri 
annett suddenly—“i heard it again!—it wa not fancy, ma’amselle!” 

“hush!” said emily, trembling. they listened, and, continu to sit 
quit still, emili heard a low knock against the wall. It came 
repeatedly. annett then scream loudly, and the chamber door slowli 
opened.—it wa caterina, come to tell annette, that her ladi want 
her. emily, though she now perceiv who it was, could not immedi 
overcom her terror; while annette, half laughing, half crying, scold 
caterina heartili for thu alarm them; and wa also terrifi lest 
what she had told had been overheard.—emily, whose mind wa deepli 
impress by the chief circumst of annette’ relation, wa 
unwil to be left alone, in the present state of her spirits; but, 
to avoid offend madam montoni, and betray her own weakness, she 
struggl to overcom the illus of fear, and dismiss annett for 
the night. 

when she wa alone, her thought recur to the strang histori of 
signora laurentini and then to her own strang situation, in the wild 
and solitari mountain of a foreign country, in the castle, and the 
power of a man, to whom, onli a few preced months, she wa an entir 
stranger; who had alreadi exercis a usurp author over her, and 
whose charact she now regarded, with a degre of terror, appar 
justifi by the fear of others. she knew, that he had invent equal 
to the concept and talent to the execut of ani project, and she 
greatli fear he had a heart too void of feel to oppos the 
perpetr of whatev hi interest might suggest. she had long 
observ the unhappi of madam montoni, and had often been wit 
to the stern and contemptu behaviour she receiv from her husband. 
To these circumstances, which conspir to give her just caus for 
alarm, were now ad those thousand nameless terrors, which exist onli 
in activ imaginations, and which set reason and examin equal at 
defiance. 

emili rememb all that valancourt had told her, on the eve of her 
departur from languedoc, respect montoni, and all that he had said 
to dissuad her from ventur on the journey. hi fear had often 
sinc appear to her prophetic—now they seem confirmed. her heart, 
as it gave her back the imag of valancourt, mourn in vain regret, 
but reason soon came with a consol which, though feebl at first, 
acquir vigour from reflection. she considered, that, whatev might 
be her sufferings, she had withheld from involv him in misfortune, 
and that, whatev her futur sorrow could be, she was, at least, free 
from self-reproach. 

her melancholi wa assist by the hollow sigh of the wind along 
the corridor and round the castle. the cheer blaze of the wood had 
long been extinguished, and she sat with her eye fix on the die 
embers, till a loud gust, that swept through the corridor, and shook 
the door and casements, alarm her, for it violenc had move the 
chair she had place as a fastening, and the door, lead to the 
privat staircas stood half open. her curios and her fear were 
again awakened. she took the lamp to the top of the steps, and stood 
hesit whether to go down; but again the profound still and the 
gloom of the place awe her, and, determin to enquir further, when 
daylight might assist the search, she close the door, and place 
against it a stronger guard. 

she now retir to her bed, leav the lamp burn on the table; but 
it gloomi light, instead of dispel her fear, assist it; for, by 
it uncertain rays, she almost fanci she saw shape flit past her 
curtain and glide into the remot obscur of her chamber.—th castl 
clock struck one befor she close her eye to sleep. 



chapter VI 

I think it is the weak of mine eyes, 
that shape thi monstrou apparition. 
It come upon me! 
juliu cæsar 


daylight dispel from emily’ mind the gloom of superstition, but 
not those of apprehension. the count morano wa the first imag that 
occur to her wake thoughts, and then came a train of anticip 
evils, which she could neither conquer, nor avoid. she rose, and, to 
reliev her mind from the busi ideas, that torment it, compel 
herself to notic extern objects. from her casement she look out 
upon the wild grandeur of the scene, close nearli on all side by 
alpin steeps, whose tops, peep over each other, fade from the eye 
in misti hues, while the promontori below were dark with woods, that 
swept down to their base, and stretch along the narrow valleys. the 
rich pomp of these wood wa particularli delight to emily; and she 
view with astonish the fortif of the castl spread 
along a vast extent of rock, and now partli in decay, the grandeur of 
the rampart below, and the tower and battlement and variou featur 
of the fabric above. from these her sight wander over the cliff and 
wood into the valley, along which foam a broad and rapid stream, 
seen fall among the crag of an opposit mountain, now flash in 
the sunbeams, and now shadow by over-arch pines, till it wa 
entir conceal by their thick foliage. again it burst from beneath 
thi dark in one broad sheet of foam, and fell thunder into the 
vale. nearer, toward the west, open the mountain-vista, which emili 
had view with such sublim emotion, on her approach to the castle: a 
thin duski vapour, that rose from the valley, overspread it featur 
with a sweet obscurity. As thi ascend and caught the sunbeams, it 
kindl into a crimson tint, and touch with exquisit beauti the 
wood and cliffs, over which it pass to the summit of the mountains; 
then, as the veil drew up, it wa delight to watch the gleam 
objects, that progress disclos themselv in the valley—th 
green turf—dark woods—littl rocki recesses—a few peasants’ huts—th 
foam stream—a herd of cattle, and variou imag of pastor beauty. 
then, the pine-forest brightened, and then the broad breast of the 
mountains, till, at length, the mist settl round their summit, 
touch them with a ruddi glow. the featur of the vista now appear 
distinctly, and the broad deep shadows, that fell from the lower 
cliffs, gave strong effect to the stream splendour above; while the 
mountains, gradual sink in the perspective, appear to shelv 
into the adriat sea, for such emili imagin to be the gleam of 
bluish light that termin the view. 

thu she endeavour to amus her fancy, and wa not unsuccessful. the 
breezi fresh of the morning, too, reviv her. she rais her 
thought in prayer, which she felt alway most dispos to do, when 
view the sublim of nature, and her mind recov it strength. 

when she turn from the casement, her eye glanc upon the door she 
had so care guarded, on the preced night, and she now 
determin to examin whither it led; but, on advanc to remov the 
chairs, she perceived, that they were alreadi move a littl way. her 
surpris cannot be easili imagined, when, in the next minute, she 
perceiv that the door wa fastened.—sh felt, as if she had seen an 
apparition. the door of the corridor wa lock as she had left it, but 
thi door, which could be secur onli on the outside, must have been 
bolted, dure the night. she becam serious uneasi at the thought of 
sleep again in a chamber, thu liabl to intrusion, so remote, too, 
as it wa from the family, and she determin to mention the 
circumst to madam montoni, and to request a change. 

after some perplex she found her way into the great hall, and to the 
room, which she had left, on the preced night, where breakfast wa 
spread, and her aunt wa alone, for montoni had been walk over the 
environ of the castle, examin the condit of it fortifications, 
and talk for some time with carlo. emili observ that her aunt had 
been weeping, and her heart soften toward her, with an affection, 
that show itself in her manner, rather than in words, while she 
care avoid the appear of have noticed, that she wa 
unhappy. she seiz the opportun of montoni’ absenc to mention the 
circumst of the door, to request that she might be allow anoth 
apartment, and to enquir again, concern the occas of their 
sudden journey. On the first subject her aunt refer her to montoni, 
posit refus to interfer in the affair; on the last, she 
profess utter ignorance. 

emily, then, with a wish of make her aunt more reconcil to her 
situation, prais the grandeur of the castl and the surround 
scenery, and endeavour to soften everi unpleas circumst 
attend it. but, though misfortun had somewhat conquer the 
asper of madam montoni’ temper, and, by increas her care for 
herself, had taught her to feel in some degre for others, the 
caprici love of rule, which natur had plant and habit had 
nourish in her heart, wa not subdued. she could not now deni herself 
the gratif of tyrannis over the innoc and helpless emily, 
by attempt to ridicul the tast she could not feel. 

her satir discours was, however, interrupt by the entranc of 
montoni, and her counten immedi assum a mingl express 
of fear and resentment, while he seat himself at the breakfast-table, 
as if unconsci of there be ani person but himself in the room. 

emily, as she observ him in silence, saw, that hi counten wa 
darker and sterner than usual. “O could I know,” said she to herself, 
“what pass in that mind; could I know the thoughts, that are known 
there, I should no longer be condemn to thi tortur suspense!” 
their breakfast pass in silence, till emili ventur to request, that 
anoth apart might be allot to her, and relat the 
circumst which made her wish it. 

“I have no time to attend to these idl whims,” said montoni, “that 
chamber wa prepar for you, and you must rest content with it. It 
is not probable, that ani person would take the troubl of go to 
that remot staircase, for the purpos of fasten a door. If it wa 
not fastened, when you enter the chamber, the wind, perhaps, shook 
the door and made the bolt slide. but I know not whi I should 
undertak to account for so trifl an occurrence.” 

thi explan wa by no mean satisfactori to emily, who had 
observed, that the bolt were rusted, and consequ could not be 
thu easili moved; but she forbor to say so, and repeat her request. 

“if you will not releas yourself from the slaveri of these fears,” 
said montoni, sternly, “at least forbear to torment other by the 
mention of them. conquer such whims, and endeavour to strengthen your 
mind. No exist is more contempt than that, which is embitt 
by fear.” As he said this, hi eye glanc upon madam montoni, who 
colour highly, but wa still silent. emily, wound and disappointed, 
thought her fear were, in thi instance, too reason to deserv 
ridicule; but, perceiving, that, howev they might oppress her, she 
must endur them, she tri to withdraw her attent from the subject. 

carlo soon after enter with some fruit: 

“your _excellenza_ is tire after your long ramble,” said he, as he set 
the fruit upon the table; “but you have more to see after breakfast. 
there is a place in the vault passag lead to—” 

montoni frown upon him, and wave hi hand for him to leav the room. 
carlo stopped, look down, and then added, as he advanc to the 
breakfast-table, and took up the basket of fruit, “I made bold, your 
_excellenza_, to bring some cherries, here, for my honour ladi and my 
young mistress. will your ladyship tast them, madam?” said carlo, 
present the basket, “they are veri fine ones, though I gather them 
myself, and from an old tree, that catch all the south sun; they are 
as big as plums, your ladyship.” 

“veri well, old carlo,” said madam montoni; “I am oblig to you.” 

“and the young signora, too, she may like some of them,” rejoin 
carlo, turn with the basket to emily, “it will do me good to see her 
eat some.” 

“thank you, carlo,” said emily, take some cherries, and smile 
kindly. 

“come, come,” said montoni, impatiently, “enough of this. leav the 
room, but be in waiting. I shall want you presently.” 

carlo obeyed, and montoni, soon after, went out to examin further into 
the state of the castle; while emili remain with her aunt, patient 
endur her ill humour, and endeavouring, with much sweetness, to 
sooth her affliction, instead of resent it effect. 

when madam montoni retir to her dressing-room, emili endeavour to 
amus herself by a view of the castle. through a fold door she 
pass from the great hall to the ramparts, which extend along the 
brow of the precipice, round three side of the edifice; the fourth wa 
guard by the high wall of the courts, and by the gateway, through 
which she had passed, on the preced evening. the grandeur of the 
broad ramparts, and the chang sceneri they overlooked, excit her 
high admiration; for the extent of the terrac allow the featur of 
the countri to be seen in such variou point of view, that they 
appear to form new landscapes. she often paus to examin the gothic 
magnific of udolpho, it proud irregularity, it lofti tower and 
battlements, it high-arch casements, and it slender watch-towers, 
perch upon the corner of turrets. then she would lean on the wall of 
the terrace, and, shuddering, measur with her eye the precipic below, 
till the dark summit of the wood arrest it. wherev she turned, 
appear mountain-tops, forest of pine and narrow glens, open among 
the apennin and retir from the sight into inaccess regions. 

while she thu leaned, montoni, follow by two men, appeared, 
ascend a wind path, cut in the rock below. He stop upon a 
cliff, and, point to the ramparts, turn to hi followers, and 
talk with much eager of gesticulation.—emili perceived, that one 
of these men wa carlo; the other wa in the dress of a peasant, and he 
alon seem to be receiv the direct of montoni. 

she withdrew from the walls, and pursu her walk, till she heard at a 
distanc the sound of carriag wheels, and then the loud bell of the 
portal, when it instantli occur to her, that count morano wa 
arrived. As she hastili pass the fold door from the terrace, 
toward her own apartment, sever person enter the hall by an 
opposit door. she saw them at the extrem of the arcades, and 
immedi retreated; but the agit of her spirits, and the extent 
and duski of the hall, had prevent her from distinguish the 
person of the strangers. her fears, however, had but one object, and 
they had call up that object to her fancy:—sh believ that she had 
seen count morano. 

when she thought that they had pass the hall, she ventur again to 
the door, and proceeded, unobserved, to her room, where she remained, 
agit with apprehensions, and listen to everi distant sound. At 
length, hear voic on the rampart, she hasten to her window, and 
observ montoni, with signor cavigni, walk below, convers 
earnestly, and often stop and turn toward each other, at which 
time their discours seem to be uncommonli interesting. 

Of the sever person who had appear in the hall, here wa cavigni 
alone: but emily’ alarm wa soon after heighten by the step of some 
one in the corridor, who, she apprehended, brought a messag from the 
count. In the next moment, annett appeared. 

“ah! ma’amselle,” said she, “here is the signor cavigni arrived! I am 
sure I rejoic to see a christian person in thi place; and then he is 
so good natur too, he alway take so much notic of me!—and here is 
also signor verezzi, and who do you think besides, ma’amselle?” 

“I cannot guess, annette; tell me quickly.” 

“nay, ma’am, do guess once.” 

“well, then,” said emily, with assum composure, “it is—count morano, 
I suppose.” 

“holi virgin!” cri annette, “are you ill, ma’amselle? you are go 
to faint! let me get some water.” 

emili sunk into a chair. “stay, annette,” said she, feebly, “do not 
leav me—i shall soon be better; open the casement.—th count, you 
say—h is come, then?” 

“who, i!—th count! no, ma’amselle, I did not say so.” 

“he is _not_ come then?” said emili eagerly. 

“no, ma’amselle.” 

“you are sure of it?” 

“lord bless me!” said annette, “you recov veri suddenly, ma’am! why, 
I thought you were dying, just now.” 

“but the count—you are sure, is not come?” 

“O yes, quit sure of that, ma’amselle. why, I wa look out through 
the grate in the north turret, when the carriag drove into the 
courtyard, and I never expect to see such a goodli sight in thi 
dismal old castle! but here are master and servants, too, enough to 
make the place ring again. O! I wa readi to leap through the rusti old 
bar for joy!—o! who would ever have thought of see a christian face 
in thi huge dreari house? I could have kiss the veri hors that 
brought them.” 

“well, annette, well, I am better now.” 

“yes, ma’amselle, I see you are. O! all the servant will lead merri 
live here, now; we shall have sing and danc in the littl hall, 
for the signor cannot hear us there—and droll stories—ludovico’ come, 
ma’am; yes, there is ludovico come with them! you rememb ludovico, 
ma’am—a tall, handsom young man—signor cavigni’ lacquey—who alway 
wear hi cloak with such a grace, thrown round hi left arm, and hi 
hat set on so smartly, all on one side, and—” 

“no,” said emily, who wa weari by her loquacity. 

“what, ma’amselle, don’t you rememb ludovico—who row the 
cavaliero’ gondola, at the last regatta, and won the prize? and who 
use to sing such sweet vers about orlando and about the 
black-a-moors, too; and charly—charly—magne, yes, that wa the name, 
all under my lattice, in the west portico, on the moonlight night at 
venice? O! I have listen to him!—” 

“I fear, to thi peril, my good annette,” said emily; “for it seem hi 
vers have stolen thi heart. but let me advis you; if it is so, keep 
the secret; never let him know it.” 

“ah—ma’amselle!—how can one keep such a secret as that?” 

“well, annette, I am now so much better, that you may leav me.” 

“o, but, ma’amselle, I forgot to ask—how did you sleep in thi dreari 
old chamber last night?”—“a well as usual.”—“did you hear no 
noises?”—“none.”—“nor see anything?”—“nothing.”—“well, that is 
surprising!”—“not in the least: and now tell me, whi you ask these 
questions.” 

“o, ma’amselle! I would not tell you for the world, nor all I have 
heard about thi chamber, either; it would frighten you so.” 

“if that is all, you have frighten me already, and may therefor tell 
me what you know, without hurt your conscience.” 

“O lord! they say the room is haunted, and ha been so these mani 
years.” 

“it is by a ghost, then, who can draw bolts,” said emily, endeavour 
to laugh away her apprehensions; “for I left the door open, last night, 
and found it fasten thi morning.” 

annett turn pale, and said not a word. 

“do you know whether ani of the servant fasten thi door in the 
morning, befor I rose?” 

“no, ma’am, that I will be bound they did not; but I don’t know: shall 
I go and ask, ma’amselle?” said annette, move hastili toward the 
corridor. 

“stay, annette, I have anoth question to ask; tell me what you have 
heard concern thi room, and whither that staircas leads.” 

“I will go and ask it all directly, ma’am; besides, I am sure my ladi 
want me. I cannot stay now, indeed, ma’am.” 

she hurri from the room, without wait emily’ reply, whose heart, 
lighten by the certainty, that morano wa not arrived, allow her to 
smile at the superstiti terror, which had seiz on annette; for, 
though she sometim felt it influenc herself, she could smile at it, 
when appar in other persons. 

montoni have refus emili anoth chamber, she determin to bear 
with patienc the evil she could not remove, and, in order to make the 
room as comfort as possible, unpack her books, her sweet delight 
in happier days, and her sooth resourc in the hour of moder 
sorrow: but there were hour when even these fail of their effect; 
when the genius, the taste, the enthusiasm of the sublimest writer 
were felt no longer. 

her littl librari be arrang on a high chest, part of the 
furnitur of the room, she took out her draw utensils, and wa 
tranquil enough to be pleas with the thought of sketch the sublim 
scenes, beheld from her windows; but she suddenli check thi 
pleasure, rememb how often she had sooth herself by the 
intent of obtain amus of thi kind, and had been prevent 
by some new circumst of misfortune. 

“how can I suffer myself to be delud by hope,” said she, “and, 
becaus count morano is not yet arrived, feel a momentari happiness? 
alas! what is it to me, whether he is here today, or tomorrow, if he 
come at all?—and that he will come—it were weak to doubt.” 

To withdraw her thoughts, however, from the subject of her misfortunes, 
she attempt to read, but her attent wander from the page, and, 
at length, she threw asid the book, and determin to explor the 
adjoin chamber of the castle. her imagin wa pleas with the 
view of ancient grandeur, and an emot of melancholi awe awaken all 
it powers, as she walk through rooms, obscur and desolate, where no 
footstep had pass probabl for mani years, and rememb the 
strang histori of the former possessor of the edifice. thi brought to 
her recollect the veil picture, which had attract her curiosity, 
on the preced night, and she resolv to examin it. As she pass 
through the chambers, that led to this, she found herself somewhat 
agitated; it connect with the late ladi of the castle, and the 
convers of annette, togeth with the circumst of the veil, 
throw a mysteri over the subject, that excit a faint degre of 
terror. but a terror of thi nature, as it occupi and expand the 
mind, and elev it to high expectation, is pure sublime, and lead 
us, by a kind of fascination, to seek even the object, from which we 
appear to shrink. 

emili pass on with falter steps, and have paus a moment at the 
door, befor she attempt to open it, she then hastili enter the 
chamber, and went toward the picture, which appear to be enclos in 
a frame of uncommon size, that hung in a dark part of the room. she 
paus again, and then, with a timid hand, lift the veil; but 
instantli let it fall—perceiv that what it had conceal wa no 
picture, and, befor she could leav the chamber, she drop senseless 
on the floor. 

when she recov her recollection, the remembr of what she had 
seen had nearli depriv her of it a second time. she had scarc 
strength to remov from the room, and regain her own; and, when arriv 
there, want courag to remain alone. horror occupi her mind, and 
excluded, for a time, all sens of past, and dread of futur 
misfortune: she seat herself near the casement, becaus from thenc 
she heard voices, though distant, on the terrace, and might see peopl 
pass, and these, trifl as they were, were reviv circumstances. 
when her spirit had recov their tone, she considered, whether she 
should mention what she had seen to madam montoni, and variou and 
import motiv urg her to do so, among which the least wa the 
hope of the relief, which an overburden mind find in speak of the 
subject of it interest. but she wa awar of the terribl 
consequences, which such a commun might lead to; and, dread 
the indiscret of her aunt, at length, endeavour to arm herself 
with resolut to observ a profound silenc on the subject. montoni 
and verezzi soon after pass under the casement, speak cheerfully, 
and their voic reviv her. present the signor bertolini and 
cavigni join the parti on the terrace, and emily, suppos that 
madam montoni wa then alone, went to seek her; for the solitud of 
her chamber, and it proxim to that where she had receiv so sever 
a shock, again affect her spirit. 

she found her aunt in her dressing-room, prepar for dinner. emily’ 
pale and affright counten alarm even madam montoni; but she 
had suffici strength of mind to be silent on the subject, that still 
made her shudder, and which wa readi to burst from her lips. In her 
aunt’ apart she remain till they both descend to dinner. there 
she met the gentlemen late arrived, who had a kind of busi 
serious in their looks, which wa somewhat unusu with them, while 
their thought seem too much occupi by some deep interest, to 
suffer them to bestow much attent either on emili or madam montoni. 
they spoke little, and montoni less. emily, as she now look on him, 
shuddered. the horror of the chamber rush on her mind. sever time 
the colour fade from her cheeks, and she feared, that ill would 
betray her emotions, and compel her to leav the room; but the strength 
of her resolut remedi the weak of her frame; she oblig 
herself to converse, and even tri to look cheerful. 

montoni evid labour under some vexation, such as would probabl 
have agit a weaker mind or a more suscept heart, but which 
appeared, from the stern of hi countenance, onli to bend up hi 
faculti to energi and fortitude. 

It wa a comfortless and silent meal. the gloom of the castl seem to 
have spread it contagion even over the gay counten of cavigni, and 
with thi gloom wa mingl a fierc such as she had seldom seen 
him indicate. count morano wa not named, and what convers there 
was, turn chiefli upon the war which at that time agit the 
italian states, the strength of the venetian armies, and the charact 
of their generals. 

after dinner, when the servant had withdrawn, emili learned, that the 
cavalier, who had drawn upon himself the vengeanc of orsino, had sinc 
die of hi wounds, and that strict search wa still make for hi 
murderer. the intellig seem to disturb montoni, who mused, and 
then enquired, where orsino had conceal himself. hi guests, who all, 
except cavigni, were ignorant, that montoni had himself assist him to 
escap from venice, replied, that he had fled in the night with such 
precipit and secrecy, that hi most intim companion knew not 
whither. montoni blame himself for have ask the question, for a 
second thought convinc him, that a man of orsino’ suspici temper 
wa not like to trust ani of the person present with the knowledg 
of hi asylum. He consid himself, however, as entitl to hi 
utmost confidence, and did not doubt, that he should soon hear of him. 

emili retir with madam montoni, soon after the cloth wa withdrawn, 
and left the cavali to their secret councils, but not befor the 
signific frown of montoni had warn hi wife to depart, who pass 
from the hall to the ramparts, and walked, for some time, in silence, 
which emili did not interrupt, for her mind wa also occupi by 
interest of it own. It requir all her resolution, to forbear 
commun to madam montoni the terribl subject, which still 
thrill her everi nerv with horror; and sometim she wa on the 
point of do so, mere to obtain the relief of a moment; but she 
knew how wholli she wa in the power of montoni, and, considering, that 
the indiscret of her aunt might prove fatal to them both, she 
compel herself to endur a present and an inferior evil, rather than 
to tempt a futur and a heavier one. A strang kind of presenti 
frequently, on thi day, occur to her;—it seem as if her fate 
rest here, and wa by some invis mean connect with thi 
castle. 

“let me not acceler it,” said she to herself: “for whatev I may be 
reserved, let me, at least, avoid self-reproach.” 

As she look on the massi wall of the edifice, her melancholi spirit 
repres it to be her prison; and she start as at a new 
suggestion, when she consid how far distant she wa from her nativ 
country, from her littl peac home, and from her onli friend—how 
remot wa her hope of happiness, how feebl the expect of again 
see him! yet the idea of valancourt, and her confid in hi 
faith love, had hitherto been her onli solace, and she struggl 
hard to retain them. A few tear of agoni start to her eyes, which 
she turn asid to conceal. 

while she afterward lean on the wall of the rampart, some peasants, 
at a littl distance, were seen examin a breach, befor which lay a 
heap of stones, as if to repair it, and a rusti old cannon, that 
appear to have fallen from it station above. madam montoni stop 
to speak to the men, and enquir what they were go to do. “to 
repair the fortifications, your ladyship,” said one of them; a labour 
which she wa somewhat surprised, that montoni should think necessary, 
particularli sinc he had never spoken of the castle, as of a place, at 
which he meant to resid for ani consider time; but she pass on 
toward a lofti arch, that led from the south to the east rampart, and 
which adjoin the castle, on one side, while, on the other, it 
support a small watch-tower, that entir command the deep valley 
below. As she approach thi arch, she saw, beyond it, wind along 
the woodi descent of a distant mountain, a long troop of hors and 
foot, whom she knew to be soldiers, onli by the glitter of their pike 
and other arms, for the distanc did not allow her to discov the 
colour of their liveries. As she gazed, the vanguard issu from the 
wood into the valley, but the train still continu to pour over the 
remot summit of the mountain, in endless succession; while, in the 
front, the militari uniform becam distinguishable, and the commanders, 
ride first, and seeming, by their gestures, to direct the march of 
those that followed, at length, approach veri near to the castle. 

such a spectacle, in these solitari regions, both surpris and alarm 
madam montoni, and she hasten toward some peasants, who were 
employ in rais bastion befor the south rampart, where the rock 
wa less abrupt than elsewhere. these men could give no satisfactori 
answer to her enquiries, but, be rous by them, gaze in stupid 
astonish upon the long cavalcade. madam montoni, then think it 
necessari to commun further the object of her alarm, sent emili to 
say, that she wish to speak to montoni; an errand her niec did not 
approve, for she dread hi frowns, which she knew thi messag would 
provoke; but she obey in silence. 

As she drew near the apartment, in which he sat with hi guests, she 
heard them in earnest and loud dispute, and she paus a moment, 
trembl at the displeasure, which her sudden interrupt would 
occasion. In the next, their voic sunk all together; she then 
ventur to open the door, and, while montoni turn hastili and look 
at her, without speaking, she deliv her message. 

“tell madam montoni I am engaged,” said he. 

emili then thought it proper to mention the subject of her alarm. 
montoni and hi companion rose instantli and went to the windows, but, 
these not afford them a view of the troops, they at length proceed 
to the ramparts, where cavigni conjectur it to be a legion of 
_condottieri_, on their march toward modena. 

one part of the cavalcad now extend along the valley, and anoth 
wound among the mountain toward the north, while some troop still 
linger on the woodi precipices, where the first had appeared, so that 
the great length of the process seem to includ a whole army. 
while montoni and hi famili watch it progress, they heard the sound 
of trumpet and the clash of cymbal in the vale, and then others, 
answer from the heights. emili listen with emot to the shrill 
blast, that woke the echo of the mountains, and montoni explain the 
signals, with which he appear to be well acquainted, and which meant 
noth hostile. the uniform of the troops, and the kind of arm they 
bore, confirm to him the conjectur of cavigni, and he had the 
satisfact to see them pass by, without even stop to gaze upon 
hi castle. He did not, however, leav the rampart, till the base of 
the mountain had shut them from hi view, and the last murmur of the 
trumpet float away on the wind. cavigni and verezzi were inspirit 
by thi spectacle, which seem to have rous all the fire of their 
temper; montoni turn into the castl in thought silence. 

emily’ mind had not yet suffici recov from it late shock, to 
endur the loneli of her chamber, and she remain upon the 
ramparts; for madam montoni had not invit her to her dressing-room, 
whither she had gone evid in low spirits, and emily, from her late 
experience, had lost all wish to explor the gloomi and mysteri 
recess of the castle. the ramparts, therefore, were almost her onli 
retreat, and here she lingered, till the grey haze of even wa again 
spread over the scene. 

the cavali sup by themselves, and madam montoni remain in her 
apartment, whither emili went, befor she retir to her own. she found 
her aunt weeping, and in much agitation. the tender of emili wa 
natur so soothing, that it seldom fail to give comfort to the 
droop heart: but madam montoni’ wa torn, and the softest accent 
of emily’ voic were lost upon it. with her usual delicacy, she did 
not appear to observ her aunt’ distress, but it gave an involuntari 
gentl to her manners, and an air of solicitud to her countenance, 
which madam montoni wa vex to perceive, who seem to feel the piti 
of her niec to be an insult to her pride, and dismiss her as soon as 
she properli could. emili did not ventur to mention again the 
reluct she felt to her gloomi chamber, but she request that 
annett might be permit to remain with her till she retir to rest; 
and the request wa somewhat reluctantli granted. annette, however, wa 
now with the servants, and emili withdrew alone. 

with light and hasti step she pass through the long galleries, while 
the feebl glimmer of the lamp she carri onli show the gloom around 
her, and the pass air threaten to extinguish it. the lone 
silence, that reign in thi part of the castle, awe her; now and 
then, indeed, she heard a faint peal of laughter rise from a remot 
part of the edifice, where the servant were assembled, but it wa soon 
lost, and a kind of breathless still remained. As she pass the 
suit of room which she had visit in the morning, her eye glanc 
fear on the door, and she almost fanci she heard murmur 
sound within, but she paus not a moment to enquire. 

have reach her own apartment, where no blaze wood on the hearth 
dissip the gloom, she sat down with a book, to enliven her 
attention, till annett should come, and a fire could be kindled. she 
continu to read till her light wa nearli expired, but annett did 
not appear, and the solitud and obscur of her chamber again 
affect her spirits, the more, becaus of it near to the scene of 
horror, that she had wit in the morning. gloomi and fantast 
imag came to her mind. she look fear toward the door of the 
staircase, and then, examin whether it wa still fastened, found 
that it wa so. unabl to conquer the uneasi she felt at the 
prospect of sleep again in thi remot and insecur apartment, which 
some person seem to have enter dure the preced night, her 
impati to see annette, whom she had bidden to enquir concern 
thi circumstance, becam extrem painful. she wish also to 
question her, as to the object, which had excit so much horror in her 
own mind, and which annett on the preced even had appear to be 
in part acquaint with, though her word were veri remot from the 
truth, and it appear plainli to emily, that the girl had been 
purpos misl by a fals report: abov all she wa surprised, that 
the door of the chamber, which contain it, should be left unguarded. 
such an instanc of neglig almost surpass belief. but her light 
wa now expiring; the faint flash it threw upon the wall call up 
all the terror of fancy, and she rose to find her way to the habit 
part of the castle, befor it wa quit extinguished. As she open the 
chamber door, she heard remot voices, and, soon after, saw a light 
issu upon the further end of the corridor, which annett and anoth 
servant approached. “I am glad you are come,” said emily: “what ha 
detain you so long? pray light me a fire immediately.” 

“mi ladi want me, ma’amselle,” repli annett in some confusion; “I 
will go and get the wood.” 

“no,” said caterina, “that is my business,” and left the room 
instantly, while annett would have followed; but, be call back, 
she began to talk veri loud, and laugh, and seem afraid to trust a 
paus of silence. 

caterina soon return with the wood, and then, when the cheer blaze 
onc more anim the room, and thi servant had withdrawn, emili 
ask annette, whether she had made the enquiri she bade her. “yes, 
ma’amselle,” said annette, “but not a soul know anyth about the 
matter: and old carlo—i watch him well, for they say he know strang 
things—old carlo look so as I don’t know how to tell, and he ask me 
again and again, if I wa sure the door wa ever unfastened. lord, say 
i—am I sure I am alive? and as for me, ma’am, I am all astounded, as 
one may say, and would no more sleep in thi chamber, than I would on 
the great cannon at the end of the east rampart.” 

“and what object have you to that cannon, more than to ani of the 
rest?” said emili smiling: “the best would be rather a hard bed.” 

“yes, ma’amselle, ani of them would be hard enough for that matter; but 
they do say, that someth ha been seen in the dead of night, 
stand besid the great cannon, as if to guard it.” 

“well! my good annette, the peopl who tell such stories, are happi in 
have you for an auditor, for I perceiv you believ them all.” 

“dear ma’amselle! I will show you the veri cannon; you can see it from 
these windows!” 

“well,” said emily, “but that doe not prove, that an apparit guard 
it.” 

“what! not if I show you the veri cannon! dear ma’am, you will believ 
nothing.” 

“noth probabl upon thi subject, but what I see,” said 
emily.—“well, ma’am, but you shall see it, if you will onli step thi 
way to the casement.”—emili could not forbear laughing, and annett 
look surprised. perceiv her extrem aptitud to credit the 
marvellous, emili forbor to mention the subject she had intended, lest 
it should overcom her with idl terrors, and she began to speak on a 
live topic—th regatta of venice. 

“aye, ma’amselle, those row matches,” said annette, “and the fine 
moonlight nights, are all, that are worth see in venice. To be sure 
the moon is brighter than ani I ever saw; and then to hear such sweet 
music, too, as ludovico ha often and often sung under the lattic by 
the west portico! ma’amselle, it wa ludovico, that told me about that 
picture, which you want so to look at last night, and—” 

“what picture?” said emily, wish annett to explain herself. 

“o! that terribl pictur with the black veil over it.” 

“you never saw it, then?” said emily. 

“who, i!—no, ma’amselle, I never did. but thi morning,” continu 
annette, lower her voice, and look round the room, “thi morning, 
as it wa broad daylight, do you know, ma’am, I took a strang fanci to 
see it, as I had heard such odd hint about it, and I got as far as the 
door, and should have open it, if it had not been locked!” 

emily, endeavour to conceal the emot thi circumst 
occasioned, enquir at what hour she went to the chamber, and found, 
that it wa soon after herself had been there. she also ask further 
questions, and the answer convinc her, that annette, and probabl 
her informer, were ignor of the terribl truth, though in annette’ 
account someth veri like the truth, now and then, mingl with the 
falsehood. emili now began to fear, that her visit to the chamber had 
been observed, sinc the door had been closed, so immedi after her 
departure; and dread lest thi should draw upon her the vengeanc of 
montoni. her anxiety, also, wa excit to know whence, and for what 
purpose, the delus report, which had been impos upon annette, had 
originated, sinc montoni could onli have wish for silenc and 
secrecy; but she felt, that the subject wa too terribl for thi 
lone hour, and she compel herself to leav it, to convers with 
annette, whose chat, simpl as it was, she prefer to the still 
of total solitude. 

thu they sat, till near midnight, but not without mani hint from 
annette, that she wish to go. the ember were now nearli burnt out; 
and emili heard, at a distance, the thunder sound of the hall doors, 
as they were shut for the night. she, therefore, prepar for rest, but 
wa still unwil that annett should leav her. At thi instant, the 
great bell of the portal sounded. they listen in fear expectation, 
when, after a long paus of silence, it sound again. soon after, they 
heard the nois of carriag wheel in the courtyard. emili sunk almost 
lifeless in her chair; “it is the count,” said she. 

“what, at thi time of night, ma’am!” said annette: “no, my dear lady. 
but, for that matter, it is a strang time of night for anybodi to 
come!” 

“nay, pr’ythee, good annette, stay not talking,” said emili in a voic 
of agony—“go, pr’ythee, go, and see who it is.” 

annett left the room, and carri with her the light, leav emili in 
darkness, which a few moment befor would have terrifi her in thi 
room, but wa now scarc observ by her. she listen and waited, in 
breathless expectation, and heard distant noises, but annett did not 
return. her patience, at length, exhausted, she tri to find her way 
to the corridor, but it wa long befor she could touch the door of the 
chamber, and, when she had open it, the total dark without made 
her fear to proceed. voic were now heard, and emili even thought she 
distinguish those of count morano and montoni. soon after she heard 
step approaching, and then a ray of light stream through the 
darkness, and annett appeared, whom emili went to meet. 

“yes, ma’amselle,” said she, “you were right, it is the count sure 
enough.” 

“it is he!” exclaim emily, lift her eye toward heaven and 
support herself by annette’ arm. 

“good lord! my dear lady, don’t be in such a _fluster_, and look so 
pale, we shall soon hear more.” 

“we shall, indeed!” said emily, move as fast as she wa abl toward 
her apartment. “I am not well; give me air.” annett open a casement, 
and brought water. the faint soon left emily, but she desir 
annett would not go till she heard from montoni. 

“dear ma’amselle! he sure will not disturb you at thi time of night; 
whi he must think you are asleep.” 

“stay with me till I am so, then,” said emily, who felt temporari 
relief from thi suggestion, which appear probabl enough, though her 
fear had prevent it occur to her. annette, with secret 
reluctance, consent to stay, and emili wa now compos enough to ask 
her some questions; among others, whether she had seen the count. 

“yes, ma’am, I saw him alight, for I went from henc to the grate in 
the north turret, that overlook the inner courtyard, you know. there I 
saw the count’ carriage, and the count in it, wait at the great 
door,—for the porter wa just gone to bed—with sever men on horseback 
all by the light of the torch they carried.” 

emili wa compel to smile. “when the door wa opened, the count said 
something, that I could not make out, and then got out, and anoth 
gentleman with him. I thought, to be sure, the signor wa gone to bed, 
and I hasten away to my lady’ dressing-room, to see what I could 
hear. but in the way I met ludovico, and he told me that the signor wa 
up, counsel with hi master and the other signors, in the room at 
the end of the north gallery; and ludovico held up hi finger, and laid 
it on hi lips, as much as to say—ther is more go on, than you 
think of, annette, but you must hold your tongue. and so I did hold my 
tongue, ma’amselle, and came away to tell you directly.” 

emili enquir who the cavali was, that accompani the count, and 
how montoni receiv them; but annett could not inform her. 

“ludovico,” she added, “had just been to call signor montoni’ valet, 
that he might tell him they were arrived, when I met him.” 

emili sat musing, for some time, and then her anxieti wa so much 
increased, that she desir annett would go to the servants’ hall, 
where it wa possibl she might hear someth of the count’ 
intention, respect hi stay at the castle. 

“yes, ma’am,” said annett with readiness; “but how am I to find the 
way, if I leav the lamp with you?” 

emili said she would light her, and they immedi quit the 
chamber. when they had reach the top of the great staircase, emili 
recollected, that she might be seen by the count, and, to avoid the 
great hall, annett conduct her through some privat passag to a 
back staircase, which led directli to that of the servants. 

As she return toward her chamber, emili began to fear, that she 
might again lose herself in the intricaci of the castle, and again be 
shock by some mysteri spectacle; and, though she wa alreadi 
perplex by the numer turnings, she fear to open one of the mani 
door that offered. while she step thought along, she fancied, 
that she heard a low moan at no great distance, and, have paus a 
moment, she heard it again and distinctly. sever door appear on 
the right hand of the passage. she advanced, and listened. when she 
came to the second, she heard a voice, appar in complaint, within, 
to which she continu to listen, afraid to open the door, and 
unwil to leav it. convuls sob followed, and then the pierc 
accent of an agon spirit burst forth. emili stood appalled, and 
look through the gloom, that surround her, in fear expectation. 
the lament continued. piti now began to subdu terror; it wa 
possibl she might administ comfort to the sufferer, at least, by 
express sympathy, and she laid her hand on the door. while she 
hesit she thought she knew thi voice, disguis as it wa by tone 
of grief. having, therefore, set down the lamp in the passage, she 
gentli open the door, within which all wa dark, except that from an 
inner apart a partial light appeared; and she step softli on. 
befor she reach it, the appear of madam montoni, lean on her 
dressing-table, weeping, and with a handkerchief held to her eyes, 
struck her, and she paused. 

some person wa seat in a chair by the fire, but who it wa she could 
not distinguish. He spoke, now and then, in a low voice, that did not 
allow emili to hear what wa uttered, but she thought, that madam 
montoni, at those times, wept the more, who wa too much occupi by 
her own distress, to observ emily, while the latter, though anxiou to 
know what occas this, and who wa the person admit at so late 
an hour to her aunt’ dressing-room, forbor to add to her suffer 
by surpris her, or to take advantag of her situation, by listen 
to a privat discourse. she, therefore, step softli back, and, after 
some further difficulty, found the way to her own chamber, where nearer 
interests, at length, exclud the surpris and concern she had felt, 
respect madam montoni. 

annette, however, return without satisfactori intelligence, for the 
servants, among whom she had been, were either entir ignorant, or 
affect to be so, concern the count’ intend stay at the castle. 
they could talk onli of the steep and broken road they had just passed, 
and of the numer danger they had escap and express wonder how 
their lord could choos to encount all these, in the dark of 
night; for they scarc allowed, that the torch had serv for ani 
other purpos but that of show the dreari of the mountains. 
annette, find she could gain no information, left them, make noisi 
petitions, for more wood on the fire and more supper on the table. 

“and now, ma’amselle,” ad she, “I am so sleepy!—i am sure, if you 
were so sleepy, you would not desir me to sit up with you.” 

emily, indeed, began to think it wa cruel to wish it; she had also 
wait so long, without receiv a summon from montoni, that it 
appear he did not mean to disturb her, at thi late hour, and she 
determin to dismiss annette. but, when she again look round her 
gloomi chamber, and recollect certain circumstances, fear seiz her 
spirits, and she hesitated. 

“and yet it were cruel of me to ask you to stay, till I am asleep, 
annette,” said she, “for I fear it will be veri long befor I forget 
myself in sleep.” 

“I dare say it will be veri long, ma’amselle,” said annette. 

“but, befor you go,” rejoin emily, “let me ask you—had signor 
montoni left count morano, when you quit the hall?” 

“O no, ma’am, they were alon together.” 

“have you been in my aunt’ dressing-room, sinc you left me?” 

“no, ma’amselle, I call at the door as I passed, but it wa fastened; 
so I thought my ladi wa gone to bed.” 

“who, then, wa with your ladi just now?” said emily, forgetting, in 
surprise, her usual prudence. 

“nobody, I believe, ma’am,” repli annette, “nobodi ha been with her, 
I believe, sinc I left you.” 

emili took no further notic of the subject, and, after some struggl 
with imaginari fears, her good natur prevail over them so far, that 
she dismiss annett for the night. she then sat, muse upon her own 
circumst and those of madam montoni, till her eye rest on the 
miniatur picture, which she had found, after her father’ death, among 
the paper he had enjoin her to destroy. It wa open upon the table, 
befor her, among some loos drawings, having, with them, been taken 
out of a littl box by emily, some hour before. the sight of it call 
up mani interest reflections, but the melancholi sweet of the 
counten sooth the emotions, which these had occasioned. It wa 
the same style of counten as that of her late father, and, while 
she gaze on it with fond on thi account, she even fanci a 
resembl in the features. but thi tranquil wa suddenli 
interrupted, when she recollect the word in the manuscript, that had 
been found with thi picture, and which had formerli occas her so 
much doubt and horror. At length, she rous herself from the deep 
reverie, into which thi remembr had thrown her; but, when she rose 
to undress, the silenc and solitude, to which she wa left, at thi 
midnight hour, for not even a distant sound wa now heard, conspir 
with the impress the subject she had been consid had given to 
her mind, to appal her. annette’ hints, too, concern thi chamber, 
simpl as they were, had not fail to affect her, sinc they follow 
a circumst of peculiar horror, which she herself had witnessed, and 
sinc the scene of thi wa a chamber nearli adjoin her own. 

the door of the staircas was, perhaps, a subject of more reason 
alarm, and she now began to apprehend, such wa the aptitud of her 
fears, that thi staircas had some privat commun with the 
apartment, which she shudder even to remember. determin not to 
undress, she lay down to sleep in her clothes, with her late father’ 
dog, the faith _manchon_, at the foot of the bed, whom she 
consid as a kind of guard. 

thu circumstanced, she tri to banish reflection, but her busi fanci 
would still hover over the subject of her interest, and she heard the 
clock of the castl strike two, befor she close her eyes. 

from the disturb slumber, into which she then sunk, she wa soon 
awaken by a noise, which seem to aris within her chamber; but the 
silence, that prevailed, as she fear listened, inclin her to 
believe, that she had been alarm by such sound as sometim occur in 
dreams, and she laid her head again upon the pillow. 

A return of the nois again disturb her; it seem to come from that 
part of the room, which commun with the privat staircase, and 
she instantli rememb the odd circumst of the door have been 
fastened, dure the preced night, by some unknown hand. her late 
alarm suspicion, concern it communication, also occur to her. 
her heart becam faint with terror. half rais herself from the bed, 
and gentli draw asid the curtain, she look toward the door of 
the staircase, but the lamp, that burnt on the hearth, spread so feebl 
a light through the apartment, that the remot part of it were lost in 
shadow. the noise, however, which, she wa convinced, came from the 
door, continued. It seem like that made by the undraw of rusti 
bolts, and often ceased, and wa then renew more gently, as if the 
hand, that occas it, wa restrain by a fear of discovery. 

while emili kept her eye fix on the spot, she saw the door move, and 
then slowli open, and perceiv someth enter the room, but the 
extrem duski prevent her distinguish what it was. almost 
faint with terror, she had yet suffici command over herself, to 
check the shriek, that wa escap from her lips, and, let the 
curtain drop from her hand, continu to observ in silenc the motion 
of the mysteri form she saw. It seem to glide along the remot 
obscur of the apartment, then paused, and, as it approach the 
hearth, she perceived, in the stronger light, what appear to be a 
human figure. certain remembr now struck upon her heart, and 
almost subdu the feebl remain of her spirits; she continued, 
however, to watch the figure, which remain for some time motionless, 
but then, advanc slowli toward the bed, stood silent at the feet, 
where the curtains, be a littl open, allow her still to see it; 
terror, however, had now depriv her of the power of discrimination, 
as well as of that of utterance. 

have continu there a moment, the form retreat toward the hearth, 
when it took the lamp, held it up, survey the chamber, for a few 
moments, and then again advanc toward the bed. the light at that 
instant awaken the dog, that had slept at emily’ feet, he bark 
loudly, and, jump to the floor, flew at the stranger, who struck the 
anim smartli with a sheath sword, and, spring toward the bed, 
emili discovered—count morano! 

she gaze at him for a moment in speechless affright, while he, 
throw himself on hi knee at the bedside, besought her to fear 
nothing, and, have thrown down hi sword, would have taken her hand, 
when the faculties, that terror had suspended, suddenli returned, and 
she sprung from the bed, in the dress, which sure a kind of prophet 
apprehens had prevent her, on thi night, from throw aside. 

morano rose, follow her to the door, through which he had entered, 
and caught her hand, as she reach the top of the staircase, but not 
befor she had discovered, by the gleam of a lamp, anoth man half-way 
down the steps. she now scream in despair, and, believ herself 
given up by montoni, saw, indeed, no possibl of escape. 

the count, who still held her hand, led her back into the chamber. 

“whi all thi terror?” said he, in a tremul voice. “hear me, emily: 
I come not to alarm you; no, by heaven! I love you too well—too well 
for my own peace.” 

emili look at him for a moment, in fear doubt. 

“then leav me, sir,” said she, “leav me instantly.” 

“hear me, emily,” resum morano, “hear me! I love, and am in 
despair—yes—in despair. how can I gaze upon you, and know, that it is, 
perhaps, for the last time, without suffer all the frenzi of 
despair? but it shall not be so; you shall be mine, in spite of montoni 
and all hi villany.” 

“in spite of montoni!” cri emili eagerly: “what is it I hear?” 

“you hear, that montoni is a villain,” exclaim morano with 
vehemence,—“a villain who would have sold you to my love!—who—” 

“and is he less, who would have bought me?” said emily, fix on the 
count an eye of calm contempt. “leav the room, sir, instantly,” she 
continu in a voice, trembl between joy and fear, “or I will alarm 
the family, and you may receiv that from signor montoni’ vengeance, 
which I have vainli supplic from hi pity.” but emili knew, that 
she wa beyond the hear of those, who might protect her. 

“you can never hope anyth from hi pity,” said morano, “he ha use 
me infamously, and my vengeanc shall pursu him. and for you, emily, 
for you, he ha new plan more profit than the last, no doubt.” the 
gleam of hope, which the count’ former speech had revived, wa now 
nearli extinguish by the latter; and, while emily’ counten 
betray the emot of her mind, he endeavour to take advantag of 
the discovery. 

“I lose time,” said he: “I came not to exclaim against montoni; I came 
to solicit, to plead—to emily; to tell her all I suffer, to entreat her 
to save me from despair, and herself from destruction. emily! the 
scheme of montoni are insearchable, but, I warn you, they are 
terrible; he ha no principle, when interest, or ambit leads. can I 
love you, and abandon you to hi power? fly, then, fli from thi gloomi 
prison, with a lover, who ador you! I have bribe a servant of the 
castl to open the gates, and, befor tomorrow’ dawn, you shall be far 
on the way to venice.” 

emily, overcom by the sudden shock she had received, at the moment, 
too, when she had begun to hope for better days, now thought she saw 
destruct surround her on everi side. unabl to reply, and almost to 
think, she threw herself into a chair, pale and breathless. that 
montoni had formerli sold her to morano, wa veri probable; that he had 
now withdrawn hi consent to the marriage, wa evid from the count’ 
present conduct; and it wa nearli certain, that a scheme of stronger 
interest onli could have induc the selfish montoni to forego a plan, 
which he had hitherto so strenuous pursued. these reflect made 
her trembl at the hints, which morano had just given, which she no 
longer hesit to believe; and, while she shrunk from the new scene 
of miseri and oppression, that might await her in the castl of 
udolpho, she wa compel to observe, that almost her onli mean of 
escap them wa by submit herself to the protect of thi man, 
with whom evil more certain and not less terribl appeared,—evils, 
upon which she could not endur to paus for an instant. 

her silence, though it wa that of agony, encourag the hope of 
morano, who watch her counten with impatience, took again the 
resist hand she had withdrawn, and, as he press it to hi heart, 
again conjur her to determin immediately. “everi moment we lose, 
will make our departur more dangerous,” said he: “these few moment 
lost may enabl montoni to overtak us.” 

“I beseech you, sir, be silent,” said emili faintly: “I am inde veri 
wretched, and wretch I must remain. leav me—i command you, leav me 
to my fate.” 

“never!” cri the count vehemently: “let me perish first! but forgiv 
my violence! the thought of lose you is madness. you cannot be 
ignor of montoni’ character, you may be ignor of hi 
schemes—nay, you must be so, or you would not hesit between my love 
and hi power.” 

“nor do I hesitate,” said emily. 

“let us go, then,” said morano, eagerli kiss her hand, and rising, 
“mi carriag waits, below the castl walls.” 

“you mistak me, sir,” said emily. “allow me to thank you for the 
interest you express in my welfare, and to decid by my own choice. I 
shall remain under the protect of signor montoni.” 

“under hi protection!” exclaim morano, proudly, “hi _protection!_ 
emily, whi will you suffer yourself to be thu deluded? I have alreadi 
told you what you have to expect from hi _protection_.” 

“and pardon me, sir, if, in thi instance, I doubt mere assertion, and, 
to be convinced, requir someth approach to proof.” 

“I have now neither the time, nor the mean of adduc proof,” repli 
the count. 

“nor have I, sir, the inclin to listen to it, if you had.” 

“but you trifl with my patienc and my distress,” continu morano. 
“i a marriag with a man, who ador you, so veri terribl in your 
eyes, that you would prefer to it all the misery, to which montoni may 
condemn you in thi remot prison? some wretch must have stolen those 
affections, which ought to be mine, or you would not thu obstin 
persist in refus an offer, that would place you beyond the reach of 
oppression.” morano walk about the room, with quick steps, and a 
disturb air. 

“thi discourse, count morano, suffici proves, that my affect 
ought not to be yours,” said emily, mildly, “and thi conduct, that I 
should not be place beyond the reach of oppression, so long as I 
remain in your power. If you wish me to believ otherwise, ceas to 
oppress me ani longer by your presence. If you refus this, you will 
compel me to expos you to the resent of signor montoni.” 

“yes, let him come,” cri morano furiously, “and brave _my_ 
resentment! let him dare to face onc more the man he ha so 
courag injured; danger shall teach him morality, and vengeanc 
justice—let him come, and receiv my sword in hi heart!” 

the vehemence, with which thi wa uttered, gave emili new caus of 
alarm, who aros from her chair, but her trembl frame refus to 
support her, and she resum her seat;—th word die on her lips, and, 
when she look wist toward the door of the corridor, which wa 
locked, she consid it wa imposs for her to leav the 
apartment, befor morano would be appris of, and abl to counteract, 
her intention. 

without observ her agitation, he continu to pace the room in the 
utmost perturb of spirits. hi darken counten express all 
the rage of jealousi and revenge; and a person, who had seen hi 
featur under the smile of ineff tenderness, which he so late 
assumed, would now scarc have believ them to be the same. 

“count morano,” said emily, at length recov her voice, “calm, I 
entreat you, these transports, and listen to reason, if you will not to 
pity. you have equal misplac your love, and your hatred.—i never 
could have return the affection, with which you honour me, and 
certainli have never encourag it; neither ha signor montoni injur 
you, for you must have known, that he had no right to dispos of my 
hand, had he even possess the power to do so. leave, then, leav the 
castle, while you may with safety. spare yourself the dread 
consequ of an unjust revenge, and the remors of have prolong 
to me these moment of suffering.” 

“i it for mine, or for montoni’ safety, that you are thu alarmed?” 
said morano, coldly, and turn toward her with a look of acrimony. 

“for both,” repli emily, in a trembl voice. 

“unjust revenge!” cri the count, resum the abrupt tone of 
passion. “who, that look upon that face, can imagin a punish 
adequ to the injuri he would have done me? yes, I will leav the 
castle; but it shall not be alone. I have trifl too long. sinc my 
prayer and my suffer cannot prevail, forc shall. I have peopl in 
waiting, who shall convey you to my carriage. your voic will bring no 
succour; it cannot be heard from thi remot part of the castle; 
submit, therefore, in silence, to go with me.” 

thi wa an unnecessari injunction, at present; for emili wa too 
certain, that her call would avail her nothing; and terror had so 
entir disord her thoughts, that she knew not how to plead to 
morano, but sat, mute and trembling, in her chair, till he advanc to 
lift her from it, when she suddenli rais herself, and, with a 
repuls gesture, and a counten of forc serenity, said, “count 
morano! I am now in your power; but you will observe, that thi is not 
the conduct which can win the esteem you appear so solicit to 
obtain, and that you are prepar for yourself a load of remorse, in 
the miseri of a friendless orphan, which can never leav you. Do you 
believ your heart to be, indeed, so hardened, that you can look 
without emot on the suffering, to which you would condemn me?—” 

emili wa interrupt by the growl of the dog, who now came again 
from the bed, and morano look toward the door of the staircase, 
where no person appearing, he call aloud, “cesario!” 

“emily,” said the count, “whi will you reduc me to adopt thi conduct? 
how much more willingli would I persuade, than compel you to becom my 
wife! but, by heaven! I will not leav you to be sold by montoni. yet a 
thought glanc across my mind, that bring mad with it. I know not 
how to name it. It is preposterous—it cannot be.—yet you tremble—y 
grow pale! It is! it is so;—you—you—lov montoni!” cri morano, 
grasp emily’ wrist, and stamp hi foot on the floor. 

An involuntari air of surpris appear on her countenance. “if you 
have inde believ so,” said she, “believ so still.” 

“that look, those word confirm it,” exclaim morano, furiously. “no, 
no, no, montoni had a richer prize in view, than gold. but he shall not 
live to triumph over me!—thi veri instant—” 

He wa interrupt by the loud bark of the dog. 

“stay, count morano,” said emily, terrifi by hi words, and by the 
furi express in hi eyes, “I will save you from thi error.—of all 
men, signor montoni is not your rival; though, if I find all other 
mean of save myself vain, I will tri whether my voic may not arous 
hi servant to my succour.” 

“assertion,” repli morano, “at such a moment, is not to be depend 
upon. how could I suffer myself to doubt, even for an instant, that he 
could see you, and not love?—but my first care shall be to convey you 
from the castle. cesario! ho,—cesario!” 

A man now appear at the door of the staircase, and other step were 
heard ascending. emili utter a loud shriek, as morano hurri her 
across the chamber, and, at the same moment, she heard a nois at the 
door, that open upon the corridor. the count paus an instant, as if 
hi mind wa suspend between love and the desir of vengeance; and, 
in that instant, the door gave way, and montoni, follow by the old 
steward and sever other persons, burst into the room. 

“draw!” cri montoni to the count, who did not paus for a second 
bidding, but, give emili into the hand of the people, that appear 
from the staircase, turn fierc round. “thi in thine heart, 
villain!” said he, as he made a thrust at montoni with hi sword, who 
parri the blow, and aim another, while some of the persons, who had 
follow him into the room, endeavour to part the combatants, and 
other rescu emili from the hand of morano’ servants. 

“wa it for this, count morano,” said montoni, in a cool sarcast tone 
of voice, “that I receiv you under my roof, and permit you, though 
my declar enemy, to remain under it for the night? wa it, that you 
might repay my hospit with the treacheri of a fiend, and rob me of 
my niece?” 

“who talk of treachery?” said morano, in a tone of unrestrain 
vehemence. “let him that does, show an unblush face of innocence. 
montoni, you are a villain! If there is treacheri in thi affair, look 
to yourself as the author of it. _if_—do I say? _i_—whom you have 
wrong with unexampl baseness, whom you have injur almost beyond 
redress! but whi do I use words?—com on, coward, and receiv justic 
at my hands!” 

“coward!” cri montoni, burst from the peopl who held him, and 
rush on the count, when they both retreat into the corridor, where 
the fight continu so desperately, that none of the spectat dare 
approach them, montoni swearing, that the first who interfered, should 
fall by hi sword. 

jealousi and reveng lent all their furi to morano, while the superior 
skill and the temper of montoni enabl him to wound hi adversary, 
whom hi servant now attempt to seize, but he would not be 
restrained, and, regardless of hi wound, continu to fight. He seem 
to be insens both of pain and loss of blood, and aliv onli to the 
energi of hi passions. montoni, on the contrary, persev in the 
combat, with a fierce, yet wary, valour; he receiv the point of 
morano’ sword on hi arm, but, almost in the same instant, sever 
wound and disarm him. the count then fell back into the arm of hi 
servant, while montoni held hi sword over him, and bade him ask hi 
life. morano, sink under the anguish of hi wound, had scarc 
repli by a gesture, and by a few words, feebli articulated, that he 
would not—when he fainted; and montoni wa then go to have plung 
the sword into hi breast, as he lay senseless, but hi arm wa 
arrest by cavigni. To the interrupt he yield without much 
difficulty, but hi complexion chang almost to blackness, as he 
look upon hi fallen adversary, and ordered, that he should be 
carri instantli from the castle. 

In the mean time, emily, who had been withheld from leav the chamber 
dure the affray, now came forward into the corridor, and plead a 
caus of common humanity, with the feel of the warmest benevolence, 
when she entreat montoni to allow morano the assist in the 
castle, which hi situat required. but montoni, who had seldom 
listen to pity, now seem rapaci of vengeance, and, with a 
monster’ cruelty, again order hi defeat enemi to be taken from 
the castle, in hi present state, though there were onli the woods, or 
a solitari neighbour cottage, to shelter him from the night. 

the count’ servant have declared, that they would not move him till 
he revived, montoni’ stood inactive, cavigni remonstrating, and emily, 
superior to montoni’ menaces, give water to morano, and direct 
the attend to bind up hi wound. At length, montoni had leisur to 
feel pain from hi own hurt, and he withdrew to examin it. 

the count, meanwhile, have slowli recovered, the first object he saw, 
on rais hi eyes, wa emily, bend over him with a counten 
strongli express of solicitude. He survey her with a look of 
anguish. 

“I have deserv this,” said he, “but not from montoni. It is from you, 
emily, that I have deserv punishment, yet I receiv onli pity!” He 
paused, for he had spoken with difficulty. after a moment, he 
proceeded. “I must resign you, but not to montoni. forgiv me the 
suffer I have alreadi occas you! but for _that_ villain—hi 
infami shall not go unpunished. carri me from thi place,” said he to 
hi servants. “I am in no condit to travel: you must, therefore, 
take me to the nearest cottage, for I will not pass the night under hi 
roof, although I may expir on the way from it.” 

cesario propos to go out, and enquir for a cottage, that might 
receiv hi master, befor he attempt to remov him: but morano wa 
impati to be gone; the anguish of hi mind seem to be even greater 
than that of hi wound, and he rejected, with disdain, the offer of 
cavigni to entreat montoni, that he might be suffer to pass the night 
in the castle. cesario wa now go to call up the carriag to the 
great gate, but the count forbad him. “I cannot bear the motion of a 
carriage,” said he: “call some other of my people, that they may 
assist in bear me in their arms.” 

At length, however, morano submit to reason, and consented, that 
cesario should first prepar some cottag to receiv him. emily, now 
that he had recov hi senses, wa about to withdraw from the 
corridor, when a messag from montoni command her to do so, and also 
that the count, if he wa not alreadi gone, should quit the castl 
immediately. indign flash from morano’ eyes, and flush hi 
cheeks. 

“tell montoni,” said he, “that I shall go when it suit my own 
convenience; that I quit the castle, he dare to call his, as I would 
the nest of a serpent, and that thi is not the last he shall hear from 
me. tell him, I will not leav _another_ murder on hi conscience, if I 
can help it.” 

“count morano! do you know what you say?” said cavigni. 

“yes, signor, I know well what I say, and he will understand well what 
I mean. hi conscienc will assist hi understanding, on thi 
occasion.” 

“count morano,” said verezzi, who had hitherto silent observ him, 
“dare again to insult my friend, and I will plung thi sword in your 
body.” 

“it would be an action worthi the friend of a villain!” said morano, as 
the strong impuls of hi indign enabl him to rais himself from 
the arm of hi servants; but the energi wa momentary, and he sunk 
back, exhaust by the effort. montoni’ people, meanwhile, held 
verezzi, who seem inclined, even in thi instant, to execut hi 
threat; and cavigni, who wa not so deprav as to abet the cowardli 
malign of verezzi, endeavour to withdraw him from the corridor; 
and emily, whom a compassion interest had thu long detained, wa 
now quit it in new terror, when the supplic voic of morano 
arrest her, and, by a feebl gesture, he beckon her to draw nearer. 
she advanc with timid steps, but the faint languor of hi 
counten again awaken her pity, and overcam her terror. 

“I am go from henc for ever,” said he: “perhaps, I shall never see 
you again. I would carri with me your forgiveness, emily; nay more—i 
would also carri your good wishes.” 

“you have my forgiveness, then,” said emily, “and my sincer wish for 
your recovery.” 

“and onli for my recovery?” said morano, with a sigh. “for your gener 
welfare,” ad emily. 

“perhap I ought to be content with this,” he resumed; “I certainli 
have not deserv more; but I would ask you, emily, sometim to think 
of me, and, forget my offence, to rememb onli the passion which 
occas it. I would ask, alas! impossibilities: I would ask you to 
love me! At thi moment, when I am about to part with you, and that, 
perhaps, for ever, I am scarc myself. emily—may you never know the 
tortur of a passion like mine! what do I say? O, that, for me, you 
might be sensibl of such a passion!” 

emili look impati to be gone. “I entreat you, count, to consult 
your own safety,” said she, “and linger here no longer. I trembl for 
the consequ of signor verezzi’ passion, and of montoni’ 
resentment, should he learn that you are still here.” 

morano’ face wa overspread with a momentari crimson, hi eye 
sparkled, but he seem endeavour to conquer hi emotion, and 
repli in a calm voice, “sinc you are interest for my safety, I 
will regard it, and be gone. but, befor I go, let me again hear you 
say, that you wish me well,” said he, fix on her an earnest and 
mourn look. 

emili repeat her assurances. He took her hand, which she scarc 
attempt to withdraw, and put it to hi lips. “farewell, count 
morano!” said emily; and she turn to go, when a second messag 
arriv from montoni, and she again conjur morano, as he valu hi 
life, to quit the castl immediately. He regard her in silence, with 
a look of fix despair. but she had no time to enforc her 
compassion entreaties, and, not dare to disobey the second command 
of montoni, she left the corridor, to attend him. 

He wa in the cedar parlour, that adjoin the great hall, laid upon a 
couch, and suffer a degre of anguish from hi wound, which few 
person could have disguised, as he did. hi countenance, which wa 
stern, but calm, express the dark passion of revenge, but no symptom 
of pain; bodili pain, indeed, he had alway despised, and had yield 
onli to the strong and terribl energi of the soul. He wa attend 
by old carlo and by signor bertolini, but madam montoni wa not with 
him. 

emili trembled, as she approach and receiv hi sever rebuke, for 
not have obey hi first summons; and perceived, also, that he 
attribut her stay in the corridor to a motive, that had not even 
occur to her artless mind. 

“thi is an instanc of femal caprice,” said he, “which I ought to 
have foreseen. count morano, whose suit you obstin rejected, so 
long as it wa countenanc by me, you favour, it seems, sinc you find 
I have dismiss him.” 

emili look astonished. “I do not comprehend you, sir,” said she, “you 
certainli do not mean to imply, that the design of the count to visit 
the double-chamber, wa found upon ani approb of mine.” 

“to that I repli nothing,” said montoni; “but it must certainli be a 
more than common interest, that made you plead so warmli in hi cause, 
and that could detain you thu long in hi presence, contrari to my 
express order—in the presenc of a man, whom you have hitherto, on all 
occasions, most scrupul shunned!” 

“I fear, sir, it wa a more than common interest, that detain me,” 
said emili calmly; “for of late I have been inclin to think, that of 
compass is an uncommon one. but how could I, could _you_, sir, 
wit count morano’ deplor condition, and not wish to reliev 
it?” 

“you add hypocrisi to caprice,” said montoni, frowning, “and an attempt 
at satire, to both; but, befor you undertak to regul the moral of 
other persons, you should learn and practis the virtues, which are 
indispens to a woman—sincerity, uniform of conduct and 
obedience.” 

emily, who had alway endeavour to regul her conduct by the nicest 
laws, and whose mind wa fine sensible, not onli of what is just in 
morals, but of whatev is beauti in the femal character, wa 
shock by these words; yet, in the next moment, her heart swell with 
the conscious of have deserv praise, instead of censure, and 
she wa proudli silent. montoni, acquaint with the delicaci of her 
mind, knew how keenli she would feel hi rebuke; but he wa a stranger 
to the luxuri of consciou worth, and, therefore, did not forese the 
energi of that sentiment, which now repel hi satire. turn to a 
servant who had late enter the room, he ask whether morano had 
quit the castle. the man answered, that hi servant were then 
remov him, on a couch, to a neighbour cottage. montoni seem 
somewhat appeased, on hear this; and, when ludovico appeared, a few 
moment after, and said, that morano wa gone, he told emili she might 
retir to her apartment. 

she withdrew willingli from hi presence; but the thought of pass 
the remaind of the night in a chamber, which the door from the 
staircas made liabl to the intrus of ani person, now alarm her 
more than ever, and she determin to call at madam montoni’ room, 
and request, that annett might be permit to be with her. 

On reach the great gallery, she heard voic seemingli in dispute, 
and, her spirit now apt to take alarm, she paused, but soon 
distinguish some word of cavigni and verezzi, and went toward them, 
in the hope of concili their difference. they were alone. 
verezzi’ face wa still flush with rage; and, as the first object of 
it wa now remov from him, he appear will to transfer hi 
resent to cavigni, who seem to be expostulating, rather than 
disputing, with him. 

verezzi wa protesting, that he would instantli inform montoni of the 
insult, which morano had thrown out against him, and abov all, that, 
wherein he had accus him of murder. 

“there is no answering,” said cavigni, “for the word of a man in a 
passion; littl seriou regard ought to be paid to them. If you persist 
in your resolution, the consequ may be fatal to both. We have now 
more seriou interest to pursue, than those of a petti revenge.” 

emili join her entreati to cavigni’ arguments, and they, at 
length, prevail so far, as that verezzi consent to retire, without 
see montoni. 

On call at her aunt’ apartment, she found it fastened. In a few 
minutes, however, it wa open by madam montoni herself. 

It may be remembered, that it wa by a door lead into the bedroom 
from a back passage, that emili had secretli enter a few hour 
preceding. she now conjectured, by the calm of madam montoni’ 
air, that she wa not appris of the accident, which had befallen her 
husband, and wa begin to inform her of it, in the tenderest manner 
she could, when her aunt interrupt her, by saying, she wa acquaint 
with the whole affair. 

emili knew indeed, that she had littl reason to love montoni, but 
could scarc have believ her capabl of such perfect apathy, as she 
now discov toward him; have obtain permission, however, for 
annett to sleep in her chamber, she went thither immediately. 

A track of blood appear along the corridor, lead to it; and on the 
spot, where the count and montoni had fought, the whole floor wa 
stained. emili shuddered, and lean on annette, as she passed. when 
she reach her apartment, she instantli determined, sinc the door of 
the staircas had been left open, and that annett wa now with her, to 
explor whither it led,—a circumst now materi connect with 
her own safety. annett accordingly, half curiou and half afraid, 
propos to descend the stairs; but, on approach the door, they 
perceived, that it wa alreadi fasten without, and their care wa 
then direct to the secur it on the insid also, by place against 
it as much of the heavi furnitur of the room, as they could lift. 
emili then retir to bed, and annett continu on a chair by the 
hearth, where some feebl ember remained. 



chapter vii 

Of aeri tongues, that syllabl men’ name 
On sand and shore and desert wildernesses. 
milton 


It is now necessari to mention some circumstances, which could not be 
relat amidst the event of emily’ hasti departur from venice, or 
togeth with those, which so rapidli succeed to her arriv in the 
castle. 

On the morn of her journey, count morano had gone at the appoint 
hour to the mansion of montoni, to demand hi bride. when he reach 
it, he wa somewhat surpris by the silenc and solitari air of the 
portico, where montoni’ lacquey usual loitered; but surpris wa 
soon chang to astonishment, and astonish to the rage of 
disappointment, when the door wa open by an old woman, who told hi 
servants, that her master and hi famili had left venice, earli in the 
morning, for _terra-firma_. scarc believ what hi servant told, 
he left hi gondola, and rush into the hall to enquir further. the 
old woman, who wa the onli person left in care of the mansion, 
persist in her story, which the silent and desert apart soon 
convinc him wa no fiction. He then seiz her with a menac air, 
as if he meant to wreak all hi vengeanc upon her, at the same time 
ask her twenti question in a breath, and all these with a 
gesticul so furious, that she wa depriv of the power of 
answer them; then suddenli let her go, he stamp about the 
hall, like a madman, curs montoni and hi own folly. 

when the good woman wa at liberty, and had somewhat recov from her 
fright, she told him all she knew of the affair, which was, indeed, 
veri little, but enough to enabl morano to discover, that montoni wa 
gone to hi castl on the apennine. thither he followed, as soon as hi 
servant could complet the necessari prepar for the journey, 
accompani by a friend, and attend by a number of hi people, 
determin to obtain emily, or a full reveng on montoni. when hi mind 
had recov from the first effervesc of rage, and hi thought 
becam less obscured, hi conscienc hint to him certain 
circumstances, which, in some measure, explain the conduct of 
montoni: but how the latter could have been led to suspect an 
intention, which, he had believed, wa known onli to himself, he could 
not even guess. On thi occasion, however, he had been partli betray 
by that sympathet intelligence, which may be said to exist between 
bad minds, and which teach one man to judg what anoth will do in 
the same circumstances. thu it wa with montoni, who had now receiv 
indisput proof of a truth, which he had some time suspected—that 
morano’ circumstances, instead of be affluent, as he had been 
bidden to believe, were greatli involved. montoni had been interest 
in hi suit, by motiv entir selfish, those of avaric and pride; 
the last of which would have been gratifi by an allianc with a 
venetian nobleman, the former by emily’ estat in gascony, which he 
had stipulated, as the price of hi favour, should be deliv up to 
him from the day of her marriage. In the meantime, he had been led to 
suspect the consequ of the count’ boundless extravagance; but it 
wa not till the evening, preced the intend nuptials, that he 
obtain certain inform of hi distress circumstances. He did 
not hesit then to infer, that morano design to defraud him of 
emily’ estate; and in thi supposit he wa confirmed, and with 
appar reason, by the subsequ conduct of the count, who, after 
have appoint to meet him on that night, for the purpos of sign 
the instrument, which wa to secur to him hi reward, fail in hi 
engagement. such a circumstance, indeed, in a man of morano’ gay and 
thoughtless character, and at a time when hi mind wa engag by the 
bustl of prepar for hi nuptials, might have been attribut to a 
caus less decisive, than design; but montoni did not hesit an 
instant to interpret it hi own way, and, after vainli wait the 
count’ arrival, for sever hours, he gave order for hi peopl to be 
in readi to set off at a moment’ notice. By hasten to udolpho 
he intend to remov emili from the reach of morano, as well as to 
break off the affair, without submit himself to useless 
altercation: and, if the count meant what he call honourably, he 
would doubtless follow emily, and sign the write in question. If 
thi wa done, so littl consider had montoni for her welfare, 
that he would not have scrupl to sacrific her to a man of ruin 
fortune, sinc by that mean he could enrich himself; and he forbor to 
mention to her the motiv of hi sudden journey, lest the hope it might 
reviv should render her more intractable, when submiss would be 
required. 

with these considerations, he had left venice; and, with other total 
different, morano had, soon after, pursu hi step across the rug 
apennines. when hi arriv wa announc at the castle, montoni did 
not believe, that he would have presum to show himself, unless he had 
meant to fulfil hi engagement, and he, therefore, readili admit 
him; but the enrag counten and express of morano, as he 
enter the apartment, instantli undeceiv him; and, when montoni had 
explained, in part, the motiv of hi abrupt departur from venice, 
the count still persist in demand emily, and reproach montoni, 
without even name the former stipulation. 

montoni, at length, weari of the dispute, defer the settl of it 
till the morrow, and morano retir with some hope, suggest by 
montoni’ appar indecision. when, however, in the silenc of hi own 
apartment, he began to consid the past conversation, the charact of 
montoni, and some former instanc of hi duplicity, the hope, which he 
had admitted, vanished, and he determin not to neglect the present 
possibl of obtain emili by other means. To hi confidenti 
valet he told hi design of carri away emily, and sent him back to 
montoni’ servant to find out one among them, who might enabl him to 
execut it. the choic of thi person he entrust to the fellow’ own 
discernment, and not imprudently; for he discov a man, whom montoni 
had, on some former occasion, treat harshly, and who wa now readi to 
betray him. thi man conduct cesario round the castle, through a 
privat passage, to the staircase, that led to emily’ chamber; then 
show him a short way out of the building, and afterward procur him 
the keys, that would secur hi retreat. the man wa well reward for 
hi trouble; how the count wa reward for hi treachery, had alreadi 
appeared. 

meanwhile, old carlo had overheard two of morano’ servants, who had 
been order to be in wait with the carriage, beyond the castl 
walls, express their surpris at their master’ sudden, and secret 
departure, for the valet had entrust them with no more of morano’ 
designs, than it wa necessari for them to execute. they, however, 
indulg themselv in surmises, and in express them to each other; 
and from these carlo had drawn a just conclusion. but, befor he 
ventur to disclos hi apprehens to montoni, he endeavour to 
obtain further confirm of them, and, for thi purpose, place 
himself, with one of hi fellow-servants, at the door of emily’ 
apartment, that open upon the corridor. He did not watch long in 
vain, though the growl of the dog had onc nearli betray him. when 
he wa convinced, that morano wa in the room, and had listen long 
enough to hi conversation, to understand hi scheme, he immedi 
alarm montoni, and thu rescu emili from the design of the count. 

montoni, on the follow morning, appear as usual, except that he 
wore hi wound arm in a sling; he went out upon the ramparts; 
overlook the men employ in repair them; gave order for 
addit workmen, and then came into the castl to give audienc to 
sever persons, who were just arrived, and who were shown into a 
privat apartment, where he commun with them, for near an hour. 
carlo wa then summoned, and order to conduct the stranger to a part 
of the castle, which, in former times, had been occupi by the upper 
servant of the family, and to provid them with everi necessari 
refreshment.—when he had done this, he wa bidden to return to hi 
master. 

meanwhile, the count remain in a cottag in the skirt of the wood 
below, suffer under bodili and mental pain, and medit deep 
reveng against montoni. hi servant, whom he had dispatch for a 
surgeon to the nearest town, which was, however, at a consider 
distance, did not return till the follow day, when, hi wound be 
examin and dressed, the practition refus to deliv ani posit 
opinion, concern the degre of danger attend them; but give hi 
patient a compos draught and order him to be quiet, remain at 
the cottag to watch the event. 

emily, for the remaind of the late event night, had been suffer 
to sleep, undisturbed; and, when her mind recov from the confus 
of slumber, and she remembered, that she wa now releas from the 
address of count morano, her spirit were suddenli reliev from a 
part of the terribl anxiety, that had long oppress them; that which 
remained, aros chiefli from a recollect of morano’ assertions, 
concern the scheme of montoni. He had said, that plan of the 
latter, concern emily, were insearchable, yet that he knew them to 
be terrible. At the time he utter this, she almost believ it to be 
design for the purpos of prevail with her to throw herself into 
hi protection, and she still thought it might be chiefli so account 
for; but hi assert had left an impress on her mind, which a 
consider of the charact and former conduct of montoni did not 
contribut to efface. she, however, check her propens to 
anticip evil; and, determin to enjoy thi respit from actual 
misfortune, tri to dismiss thought, took her instrument for drawing, 
and place herself at a window, to select into a landscap some 
featur of the sceneri without. 

As she wa thu employed, she saw, walk on the rampart below, the 
men, who had so late arriv at the castle. the sight of stranger 
surpris her, but still more, of stranger such as these. there wa a 
singular in their dress, and a certain fierc in their air, that 
fix all her attention. she withdrew from the casement, while they 
passed, but soon return to observ them further. their figur seem 
so well suit to the wild of the surround objects, that, as 
they stood survey the castle, she sketch them for banditti, amid 
the mountain-view of her picture, when she had finish which, she wa 
surpris to observ the spirit of her group. but she had copi from 
nature. 

carlo, when he had place refresh befor these men in the apart 
assign to them, returned, as he wa ordered, to montoni, who wa 
anxiou to discov by what servant the key of the castl had been 
deliv to morano, on the preced night. but thi man, though he 
wa too faith to hi master quietli to see him injured, would not 
betray a fellow-serv even to justice; he, therefore, pretend to be 
ignor who it was, that had conspir with count morano, and related, 
as before, that he had onli overheard some of the stranger describ 
the plot. 

montoni’ suspicion natur fell upon the porter, whom he order 
now to attend. carlo hesitated, and then with slow step went to seek 
him. 

barnardine, the porter, deni the accus with a counten so 
steadi and undaunted, that montoni could scarc believ him guilty, 
though he knew not how to think him innocent. At length, the man wa 
dismiss from hi presence, and, though the real offender, escap 
detection. 

montoni then went to hi wife’ apartment, whither emili follow soon 
after, but, find them in high dispute, wa instantli leav the 
room, when her aunt call her back, and desir her to stay.—“you 
shall be a witness,” said she, “of my opposition. now, sir, repeat the 
command, I have so often refus to obey.” 

montoni turned, with a stern countenance, to emily, and bade her quit 
the apartment, while hi wife persist in desiring, that she would 
stay. emili wa eager to escap from thi scene of contention, and 
anxious, also, to serv her aunt; but she despair of concili 
montoni, in whose eye the rise tempest of hi soul flash terribly. 

“leav the room,” said he, in a voic of thunder. emili obeyed, and, 
walk down to the rampart, which the stranger had now left, 
continu to medit on the unhappi marriag of her father’ sister, 
and on her own desol situation, occas by the ridicul 
imprud of her, whom she had alway wish to respect and love. 
madam montoni’ conduct had, indeed, render it imposs for emili 
to do either; but her gentl heart wa touch by her distress, and, in 
the piti thu awakened, she forgot the injuri treatment she had 
receiv from her. 

As she saunter on the rampart, annett appear at the hall door, 
look cautious round, and then advanc to meet her. 

“dear ma’amselle, I have been look for you all over the castle,” 
said she. “if you will step thi way, I will show you a picture.” 

“A picture!” exclaim emily, and shuddered. 

“yes, ma’am, a pictur of the late ladi of thi place. old carlo just 
now told me it wa her, and I thought you would be curiou to see it. 
As to my lady, you know, ma’amselle, one cannot talk about such thing 
to her.” 

“and so,” said emili smilingly, “a you must talk of them to somebody—” 

“why, yes, ma’amselle; what can one do in such a place as this, if one 
must not talk? If I wa in a dungeon, if they would let me talk—it 
would be some comfort; nay, I would talk, if it wa onli to the walls. 
but come, ma’amselle, we lose time—let me show you the picture.” 

“i it veiled?” said emily, pausing. 

“dear ma’amselle!” said annette, fix her eye on emily’ face, “what 
make you look so pale?—ar you ill?” 

“no, annette, I am well enough, but I have no desir to see thi 
picture; return into the hall.” 

“what! ma’am, not to see the ladi of thi castle?” said the girl; “the 
lady, who disappear to strangely? well! now, I would have run to the 
furthest mountain we can see, yonder, to have got a sight of such a 
picture; and, to speak my mind, that strang stori is all, that make 
me care about thi old castle, though it make me thrill all over, as 
it were, whenev I think of it.” 

“yes, annette, you love the wonderful; but do you know, that, unless 
you guard against thi inclination, it will lead you into all the 
miseri of superstition?” 

annett might have smile in her turn, at thi sage observ of 
emily, who could trembl with ideal terrors, as much as herself, and 
listen almost as eagerli to the recit of a mysteri story. annett 
urg her request. 

“are you sure it is a picture?” said emily, “have you seen it?—i it 
veiled?” 

“holi maria! ma’amselle, yes, no, yes. I am sure it is a picture—i have 
seen it, and it is not veiled!” 

the tone and look of surprise, with which thi wa uttered, recal 
emily’ prudence; who conceal her emot under a smile, and bade 
annett lead her to the picture. It wa in an obscur chamber, 
adjoin that part of the castle, allot to the servants. sever 
other portrait hung on the walls, covered, like this, with dust and 
cobweb. 

“that is it, ma’amselle,” said annette, in a low voice, and pointing. 
emili advanced, and survey the picture. It repres a ladi in the 
flower of youth and beauty; her featur were handsom and noble, full 
of strong expression, but had littl of the captiv sweetness, that 
emili had look for, and still less of the pensiv mild she loved. 
It wa a countenance, which spoke the languag of passion, rather than 
that of sentiment; a haughti impati of misfortune—not the placid 
melancholi of a spirit injured, yet resigned. 

“how mani year have passed, sinc thi ladi disappeared, annette?” 
said emily. 

“twenti years, ma’amselle, or thereabout, as they tell me; I know it is 
a long while ago.” emili continu to gaze upon the portrait. 

“I think,” resum annette, “the signor would do well to hang it in a 
better place, than thi old chamber. now, in my mind, he ought to place 
the pictur of a lady, who gave him all these riches, in the handsomest 
room in the castle. but he may have good reason for what he does: and 
some peopl do say that he ha lost hi riches, as well as hi 
gratitude. but hush, ma’am, not a word!” ad annette, lay her 
finger on her lips. emili wa too much absorb in thought, to hear 
what she said. 

“’ti a handsom lady, I am sure,” continu annette: “the signor need 
not be asham to put her in the great apartment, where the veil 
pictur hangs.” emili turn round. “but for that matter, she would be 
as littl seen there, as here, for the door is alway locked, I find.” 

“let us leav thi chamber,” said emily: “and let me caution you again, 
annette; be guard in your conversation, and never tell, that you know 
anyth of that picture.” 

“holi mother!” exclaim annette, “it is no secret; whi all the 
servant have seen it already!” 

emili started. “how is this?” said she—“hav seen it! when?—how?” 

“dear, ma’amselle, there is noth surpris in that; we had all a 
littl more _curiousness_ than you had.” 

“I thought you told me, the door wa kept locked?” said emily. 

“if that wa the case, ma’amselle,” repli annette, look about her, 
“how could we get here?” 

“oh, you mean _this_ picture,” said emily, with return calmness. 
“well, annette, here is noth more to engag my attention; we will 
go.” 

emily, as she pass to her own apartment, saw montoni go down to the 
hall, and she turn into her aunt’ dressing-room, whom she found 
weep and alone, grief and resent struggl on her countenance. 
pride had hitherto restrain complaint. judg of emily’ disposit 
from her own, and from a conscious of what her treatment of her 
deserved, she had believed, that her grief would be caus of triumph 
to her niece, rather than of sympathy; that she would despise, not piti 
her. but she knew not the tender and benevol of emily’ heart, 
that had alway taught her to forget her own injuri in the 
misfortun of her enemy. the suffer of others, whoever they might 
be, call forth her readi compassion, which dissip at onc everi 
obscur cloud to goodness, that passion or prejudic might have 
rais in her mind. 

madam montoni’ sufferings, at length, rose abov her pride, and, when 
emili had befor enter the room, she would have told them all, had 
not her husband prevent her; now that she wa no longer restrain by 
hi presence, she pour forth all her complaint to her niece. 

“O emily!” she exclaimed, “I am the most wretch of women—i am inde 
cruelli treated! who, with my prospect of happiness, could have 
foreseen such a wretch fate as this?—who could have thought, when I 
marri such a man as the signor, I should ever have to bewail my lot? 
but there is no judg what is for the best—ther is no know what 
is for our good! the most flatter prospect often change—th best 
judgment may be deceived—who could have foreseen, when I marri the 
signor, that I should ever repent my _generosity?_” 

emili thought she might have foreseen it, but thi wa not a thought of 
triumph. she place herself in a chair near her aunt, took her hand, 
and, with one of those look of soft compassion, which might 
characteris the counten of a guardian angel, spoke to her in the 
tenderest accents. but these did not sooth madam montoni, whom 
impati to talk made unwil to listen. she want to complain, 
not to be consoled; and it wa by exclam of complaint only, that 
emili learn the particular circumst of her affliction. 

“ungrat man!” said madam montoni, “he ha deceiv me in everi 
respect; and now he ha taken me from my countri and friends, to shut 
me up in thi old castle; and, here he think he can compel me to do 
whatev he designs! but he shall find himself mistaken, he shall find 
that no threat can alter—but who would have believed! who would have 
supposed, that a man of hi famili and appar wealth had absolut 
no fortune?—no, scarc a sequin of hi own! I did all for the best; I 
thought he wa a man of consequence, of great property, or I am sure I 
would never have marri him,—ungrateful, art man!” she paus to 
take breath. 

“dear madam, be composed,” said emily: “the signor may not be so rich 
as you had reason to expect, but sure he cannot be veri poor, sinc 
thi castl and the mansion at venic are his. may I ask what are the 
circumstances, that particularli affect you?” 

“what are the circumstances!” exclaim madam montoni with resentment: 
“whi is it not sufficient, that he had long ago ruin hi own fortun 
by play, and that he ha sinc lost what I brought him—and that now he 
would compel me to sign away my settlement (it wa well I had the chief 
of my properti settl on myself!) that he may lose thi also, or throw 
it away in wild schemes, which nobodi can understand but himself? and, 
and—i not all thi sufficient?” 

“it is, indeed,” said emily, “but you must recollect, dear madam, that 
I knew noth of all this.” 

“well, and is it not sufficient,” rejoin her aunt, “that he is also 
absolut ruined, that he is sunk deepli in debt, and that neither 
thi castle, nor the mansion at venice, is hi own, if all hi debts, 
honour and dishonourable, were paid!” 

“I am shock by what you tell me, madam,” said emily. 

“and is it not enough,” interrupt madam montoni, “that he ha 
treat me with neglect, with cruelty, becaus I refus to relinquish 
my settlements, and, instead of be frighten by hi menaces, 
resolut defi him, and upbraid him with hi shame conduct? but 
I bore all meekly,—y know, niece, I never utter a word of 
complaint, till now; no! that such a disposit as mine should be so 
impos upon! that I, whose onli fault are too much kindness, too much 
generosity, should be chain for life to such a vile, deceitful, cruel 
monster!” 

want of breath compel madam montoni to stop. If anyth could have 
made emili smile in these moments, it would have been thi speech of 
her aunt, deliv in a voic veri littl below a scream, and with a 
vehem of gesticul and of countenance, that turn the whole 
into burlesque. emili saw, that her misfortun did not admit of real 
consolation, and, contemn the commonplac term of superfici 
comfort, she wa silent; while madam montoni, jealou of her own 
consequence, mistook thi for the silenc of indifference, or of 
contempt, and reproach her with want of duti and feeling. 

“o! I suspect what all thi boast sensibl would prove to be!” 
rejoin she; “I thought it would not teach you to feel either duty, or 
affection, for your relations, who have treat you like their own 
daughter!” 

“pardon me, madam,” said emily, mildly, “it is not natur to me to 
boast, and if it was, I am sure I would not boast of sensibility—a 
quality, perhaps, more to be feared, than desired.” 

“well, well, niece, I will not disput with you. but, as I said, 
montoni threaten me with violence, if I ani longer refus to sign away 
my settlements, and thi wa the subject of our contest, when you came 
into the room before. now, I am determin no power on earth shall make 
me do this. neither will I bear all thi tamely. He shall hear hi true 
charact from me; I will tell him all he deserves, in spite of hi 
threat and cruel treatment.” 

emili seiz a paus of madam montoni’ voice, to speak. “dear madam,” 
said she, “but will not thi serv to irrit the signor 
unnecessarily? will it not provok the harsh treatment you dread?” 

“I do not care,” repli madam montoni, “it doe not signify: I will 
not submit to such usage. you would have me give up my settlements, 
too, I suppose!” 

“no, madam, I do not exactli mean that.” 

“what is it you do mean then?” 

“you spoke of reproach the signor,”—said emily, with hesitation. 
“why, doe he not deserv reproaches?” said her aunt. 

“certainli he does; but will it be prudent in you, madam, to make 
them?” 

“prudent!” exclaim madam montoni. “i thi a time to talk of 
prudence, when one is threaten with all sort of violence?” 

“it is to avoid that violence, that prudenc is necessary.” said emily. 

“of prudence!” continu madam montoni, without attend to her, “of 
prudenc toward a man, who doe not scrupl to break all the common 
tie of human in hi conduct to me! and is it for me to consid 
prudenc in my behaviour toward him! I am not so mean.” 

“it is for your own sake, not for the signor’s, madam,” said emili 
modestly, “that you should consult prudence. your reproaches, howev 
just, cannot punish him, but they may provok him to further violenc 
against you.” 

“what! would you have me submit, then, to whatev he commands—would 
you have me kneel down at hi feet, and thank him for hi cruelties? 
would you have me give up my settlements?” 

“how much you mistak me, madam!” said emily, “I am unequ to advis 
you on a point so import as the last: but you will pardon me for 
saying, that, if you consult your own peace, you will tri to concili 
signor montoni, rather than to irrit him by reproaches.” 

“concili indeed! I tell you, niece, it is utterli impossible; I 
disdain to attempt it.” 

emili wa shock to observ the pervert understand and obstin 
temper of madam montoni; but, not less griev for her sufferings, she 
look round for some allevi circumst to offer her. “your 
situat is, perhaps, not so desperate, dear madam,” said emily, “a 
you may imagine. the signor may repres hi affair to be wors than 
they are, for the purpos of plead a stronger necess for hi 
possess of your settlement. besides, so long as you keep this, you 
may look forward to it as a resource, at least, that will afford you a 
competence, should the signor’ futur conduct compel you to sue for 
separation.” 

madam montoni impati interrupt her. “unfeeling, cruel girl!” 
said she, “and so you would persuad me, that I have no reason to 
complain; that the signor is in veri flourish circumstances, that my 
futur prospect promis noth but comfort, and that my grief are as 
fanci and romant as your own! Is it the way to consol me, to 
endeavour to persuad me out of my sens and my feelings, becaus you 
happen to have no feel yourself? I thought I wa open my heart 
to a person, who could sympathis in my distress, but I find, that your 
peopl of sensibl can feel for nobodi but themselves! you may 
retir to your chamber.” 

emily, without replying, immedi left the room, with a mingl 
emot of piti and contempt, and hasten to her own, where she 
yield to the mourn reflections, which a knowledg of her aunt’ 
situat had occasioned. the convers of the italian with 
valancourt, in france, again occur to her. hi hints, respect the 
broken fortun of montoni, were now complet justified; those, also, 
concern hi character, appear not less so, though the particular 
circumstances, connect with hi fame, to which the stranger had 
alluded, yet remain to be explained. notwithstanding, that her own 
observ and the word of count morano had convinc her, that 
montoni’ situat wa not what it formerli appear to be, the 
intellig she had just receiv from her aunt on thi point, struck 
her with all the forc of astonishment, which wa not weakened, when 
she consid the present style of montoni’ living, the number of 
servant he maintained, and the new expenc he wa incurring, by 
repair and fortifi hi castle. her anxieti for her aunt and for 
herself increas with reflection. sever assert of morano, which, 
on the preced night, she had believ were prompt either by 
interest, or by resentment, now return to her mind with the strength 
of truth. she could not doubt, that montoni had formerli agre to give 
her to the count, for a pecuniari reward;—hi character, and hi 
distress circumst justifi the belief; these, also, seem to 
confirm morano’ assertion, that he now design to dispos of her, 
more advantag for himself, to a richer suitor. 

amidst the reproaches, which morano had thrown out against montoni, he 
had said—h would not quit the castl _he dare to call his_, nor 
willingli leav _another_ murder on hi conscience—hints, which might 
have no other origin than the passion of the moment: but emili wa now 
inclin to account for them more seriously, and she shudder to 
think, that she wa in the hand of a man, to whom it wa even possibl 
they could apply. At length, considering, that reflect could neither 
releas her from her melancholi situation, nor enabl her to bear it 
with greater fortitude, she tri to divert her anxiety, and took down 
from her littl librari a volum of her favourit ariosto; but hi wild 
imageri and rich invent could not long enchant her attention; hi 
spell did not reach her heart, and over her sleep fanci they 
played, without awaken it. 

she now put asid the book, and took her lute, for it wa seldom that 
her suffer refus to yield to the magic of sweet sounds; when they 
did so, she wa oppress by sorrow, that came from excess of 
tender and regret; and there were times, when music had increas 
such sorrow to a degree, that wa scarc endurable; when, if it had 
not suddenli ceased, she might have lost her reason. such wa the time, 
when she mourn for her father, and heard the midnight strains, that 
float by her window near the convent in languedoc, on the night that 
follow hi death. 

she continu to play, till annett brought dinner into her chamber, at 
which emili wa surprised, and enquir whose order she obeyed. “mi 
lady’s, ma’amselle,” repli annette: “the signor order her dinner to 
be carri to her own apartment, and so she ha sent you yours. there 
have been sad do between them, wors than ever, I think.” 

emily, not appear to notic what she said, sat down to the littl 
table, that wa spread for her. but annett wa not to be silenc thu 
easily. while she waited, she told of the arriv of the men, whom 
emili had observ on the ramparts, and express much surpris at 
their strang appearance, as well as at the manner, in which they had 
been attend by montoni’ order. “do they dine with the signor, then?” 
said emily. 

“no, ma’amselle, they dine long ago, in an apart at the north end 
of the castle, but I know not when they are to go, for the signor told 
old carlo to see them provid with everyth necessary. they have 
been walk all about the castle, and ask question of the workmen 
on the ramparts. I never saw such strange-look men in my life; I am 
frighten whenev I see them.” 

emili enquired, if she had heard of count morano, and whether he wa 
like to recover: but annett onli knew, that he wa lodg in a 
cottag in the wood below, and that everybodi said he must die. emily’ 
counten discov her emotion. 

“dear ma’amselle,” said annette, “to see how young ladi will disguis 
themselves, when they are in love! I thought you hate the count, or I 
am sure I would not have told you; and I am sure you have caus enough 
to hate him.” 

“I hope I hate nobody,” repli emily, tri to smile; “but certainli 
I do not love count morano. I should be shock to hear of ani person 
die by violent means.” 

“yes, ma’amselle, but it is hi own fault.” 

emili look displeased; and annette, mistak the caus of her 
displeasure, immedi began to excus the count, in her way. “to be 
sure, it wa veri ungenteel behaviour,” said she, “to break into a 
lady’ room, and then, when he found hi discours wa not agreeabl 
to her, to refus to go; and then, when the gentleman of the castl 
come to desir him to walk about hi business—to turn round, and draw 
hi sword, and swear he’ll run him through the body! To be sure it wa 
veri ungenteel behaviour, but then he wa disguis in love, and so did 
not know what he wa about.” 

“enough of this,” said emily, who now smile without an effort; and 
annett return to a mention of the disagr between montoni, and 
her lady. “it is noth new,” said she: “we saw and heard enough of 
thi at venice, though I never told you of it, ma’amselle.” 

“well, annette, it wa veri prudent of you not to mention it then: be 
as prudent now; the subject is an unpleas one.” 

“ah dear, ma’amselle!—to see now how consider you can be about some 
folks, who care so littl about you! I cannot bear to see you so 
deceived, and I must tell you. but it is all for your own good, and not 
to spite my lady, though, to speak truth, I have littl reason to love 
her; but—” 

“you are not speak thu of my aunt, I hope, annette?” said emily, 
gravely. 

“yes, ma’amselle, but I am, though; and if you knew as much as I do, 
you would not look so angry. I have often, and often, heard the signor 
and her talk over your marriag with the count, and she alway 
advis him never to give up to your foolish whims, as she wa pleas 
to call them, but to be resolute, and compel you to be obedient, 
whether you would, or no. and I am sure, my heart ha ach a thousand 
times, and I have thought, when she wa so unhappi herself, she might 
have felt a littl for other people, and—” 

“I thank you for your pity, annette,” said emily, interrupt her: 
“but my aunt wa unhappi then, and that disturb her temper perhaps, 
or I think—i am sure—y may take away, annette, I have done.” 

“dear ma’amselle, you have eat noth at all! Do try, and take a 
littl bit more. disturb her temper truly! why, her temper is alway 
disturbed, I think. and at thoulous I have heard my ladi talk of 
you and mons. valancourt to madam merveil and madam vaison, often 
and often, in a veri ill-natur way, as I thought, tell them what a 
deal of troubl she had to keep you in order, and what a fatigu and 
distress it wa to her, and that she believ you would run away with 
mons. valancourt, if she wa not to watch you closely; and that you 
conniv at hi come about the hous at night, and—” 

“good god!” exclaim emily, blush deeply, “it is sure imposs 
my aunt could thu have repres me!” 

“indeed, ma’am, I say noth more than the truth, and not all of that. 
but I thought, myself, she might have found someth better to 
discours about, than the fault of her own niece, even if you had been 
in fault, ma’amselle; but I did not believ a word of what she said. 
but my ladi doe not care what she say against anybody, for that 
matter.” 

“howev that may be, annette,” interrupt emily, recov her 
composure, “it doe not becom you to speak of the fault of my aunt to 
me. I know you have meant well, but—say no more.—i have quit dined.” 

annett blushed, look down, and then began slowli to clear the table. 

“i this, then, the reward of my ingenuousness?” said emily, when she 
wa alone; “the treatment I am to receiv from a relation—an aunt—who 
ought to have been the guardian, not the slander of my 
reputation,—who, as a woman, ought to have respect the delicaci of 
femal honour, and, as a relation, should have protect mine! but, to 
utter falsehood on so nice a subject—to repay the openness, and, I may 
say with honest pride, the proprieti of my conduct, with 
slanders—requir a deprav of heart, such as I could scarc have 
believ existed, such as I weep to find in a relation. O! what a 
contrast doe her charact present to that of my belov father; while 
envi and low cun form the chief trait of hers, hi wa 
distinguish by benevol and philosoph wisdom! but now, let me 
onli remember, if possible, that she is unfortunate.” 

emili threw her veil over her, and went down to walk upon the ramparts, 
the onli walk, indeed, which wa open to her, though she often wished, 
that she might be permit to rambl among the wood below, and still 
more, that she might sometim explor the sublim scene of the 
surround country. but, as montoni would not suffer her to pass the 
gate of the castle, she tri to be content with the romant view 
she beheld from the walls. the peasants, who had been employ on the 
fortifications, had left their work, and the rampart were silent and 
solitary. their lone appearance, togeth with the gloom of a 
lower sky, assist the muse of her mind, and threw over it a 
kind of melancholi tranquillity, such as she often love to indulge. 
she turn to observ a fine effect of the sun, as hi rays, suddenli 
stream from behind a heavi cloud, light up the west tower of the 
castle, while the rest of the edific wa in deep shade, except, that, 
through a lofti gothic arch, adjoin the tower, which led to anoth 
terrace, the beam dart in full splendour, and show the three 
stranger she had observ in the morning. perceiv them, she 
started, and a momentari fear came over her, as she look up the long 
rampart, and saw no other persons. while she hesitated, they 
approached. the gate at the end of the terrace, whither they were 
advancing, she knew, wa alway locked, and she could not depart by the 
opposit extremity, without meet them; but, befor she pass them, 
she hastili drew a thin veil over her face, which did, indeed, but ill 
conceal her beauty. they look earnestli at her, and spoke to each 
other in bad italian, of which she caught onli a few words; but the 
fierc of their countenances, now that she wa near enough to 
discrimin them, struck her yet more than the wild singular of 
their air and dress had formerli done. It wa the counten and 
figur of him, who walk between the other two, that chiefli seiz 
her attention, which express a sullen haughti and a kind of dark 
watch villany, that gave a thrill of horror to her heart. all thi 
wa so legibl written on hi features, as to be seen by a singl 
glance, for she pass the group swiftly, and her timid eye scarc 
rest on them a moment. have reach the terrace, she stopped, and 
perceiv the stranger stand in the shadow of one of the turrets, 
gaze after her, and seemingly, by their action, in earnest 
conversation. she immedi left the rampart, and retir to her 
apartment. 

In the evening, montoni sat late, carous with hi guest in the 
cedar chamber. hi recent triumph over count morano, or, perhaps, some 
other circumstance, contribut to elev hi spirit to an unusu 
height. He fill the goblet often, and gave a loos to merriment and 
talk. the gaieti of cavigni, on the contrary, wa somewhat cloud by 
anxiety. He kept a watch eye upon verezzi, whom, with the utmost 
difficulty, he had hitherto restrain from exasper montoni 
further against morano, by a mention of hi late taunt words. 

one of the compani exultingli recur to the event of the preced 
evening. verezzi’ eye sparkled. the mention of morano led to that of 
emily, of whom they were all profus in the praise, except montoni, who 
sat silent, and then interrupt the subject. 

when the servant had withdrawn, montoni and hi friend enter into 
close conversation, which wa sometim check by the irasc temper 
of verezzi, but in which montoni display hi consciou superiority, 
by that decis look and manner, which alway accompani the vigour 
of hi thought, and to which most of hi companion submitted, as to a 
power, that they had no right to question, though of each other’ 
self-import they were jealous scrupulous. amidst thi 
conversation, one of them imprud introduc again the name of 
morano; and verezzi, now more heat by wine, disregard the 
express look of cavigni, and gave some dark hint of what had 
pass on the preced night. these, however, montoni did not appear 
to understand, for he continu silent in hi chair, without 
discov ani emotion, while, the choler of verezzi increas with 
the appar insens of montoni, he at length told the suggest 
of morano, that thi castl did not law belong to him, and that he 
would not willingli leav anoth murder on hi conscience. 

“am I to be insult at my own table, and by my own friends?” said 
montoni, with a counten pale in anger. “whi are the word of that 
madman repeat to me?” verezzi, who had expect to hear montoni’ 
indign pour forth against morano, and answer by thank to 
himself, look with astonish at cavigni, who enjoy hi 
confusion. “can you be weak enough to credit the assert of a 
madman?” rejoin montoni, “or, what is the same thing, a man possess 
by the spirit of vengeance? but he ha succeed too well; you believ 
what he said.” 

“signor,” said verezzi, “we believ onli what we know.”—“how!” 
interrupt montoni, sternly: “produc your proof.” 

“we believ onli what we know,” repeat verezzi, “and we know noth 
of what morano asserts.” montoni seem to recov himself. “I am 
hasty, my friends,” said he, “with respect to my honour; no man shall 
question it with impunity—y did not mean to question it. these 
foolish word are not worth your remembrance, or my resentment. 
verezzi, here is to your first exploit.” 

“success to your first exploit,” re-echo the whole company. 

“nobl signor,” repli verezzi, glad to find he had escap montoni’ 
resentment, “with my good will, you shall build your rampart of gold.” 

“pass the goblet,” cri montoni. “we will drink to signora st. 
aubert,” said cavigni. “bi your leav we will first drink to the ladi 
of the castle.” said bertolini.—montoni wa silent. “to the ladi of the 
castle,” said hi guests. He bow hi head. 

“it much surpris me, signor,” said bertolini, “that you have so long 
neglect thi castle; it is a nobl edifice.” 

“it suit our purpose,” repli montoni, “and _is_ a nobl edifice. you 
know not, it seems, by what mischanc it came to me.” 

“it wa a lucki mischance, be it what it may, signor,” repli 
bertolini, smiling. “I would, that one so lucki had befallen me.” 

montoni look grave at him. “if you will attend to what I say,” he 
resumed, “you shall hear the story.” 

the counten of bertolini and verezzi express someth more than 
curiosity; cavigni, who seem to feel none, had probabl heard the 
relat before. 

“it is now near twenti years,” said montoni, “sinc thi castl came 
into my possession. I inherit it by the femal line. the lady, my 
predecessor, wa onli distantli relat to me; I am the last of her 
family. she wa beauti and rich; I woo her; but her heart wa 
fix upon another, and she reject me. It is probable, however, that 
she wa herself reject of the person, whoever he might be, on whom 
she bestow her favour, for a deep and settl melancholi took 
possess of her; and I have reason to believ she put a period to her 
own life. I wa not at the castl at the time; but, as there are some 
singular and mysteri circumst attend that event, I shall 
repeat them.” 

“repeat them!” said a voice. 

montoni wa silent; the guest look at each other, to know who spoke; 
but they perceived, that each wa make the same enquiry. montoni, at 
length, recov himself. “we are overheard,” said he: “we will finish 
thi subject anoth time. pass the goblet.” 

the cavali look round the wide chamber. 

“here is no person, but ourselves,” said verezzi: “pray, signor, 
proceed.” 

“did you hear anything?” said montoni. 

“we did,” said bertolini. 

“it could be onli fancy,” said verezzi, look round again. “we see no 
person besid ourselves; and the sound I thought I heard seem within 
the room. pray, signor, go on.” 

montoni paus a moment, and then proceed in a lower voice, while 
the cavali drew nearer to attend. 

“ye are to know, signors, that the ladi laurentini had for some month 
shown symptom of a deject mind, nay, of a disturb imagination. her 
mood wa veri unequal; sometim she wa sunk in calm melancholy, and, 
at others, as I have been told, she betray all the symptom of 
frantic madness. It wa one night in the month of october, after she 
had recov from one of those fit of excess, and had sunk again into 
her usual melancholy, that she retir alon to her chamber, and 
forbad all interruption. It wa the chamber at the end of the 
corridor, signors, where we had the affray, last night. from that hour, 
she wa seen no more.” 

“how! seen no more!” said bertolini, “wa not her bodi found in the 
chamber?” 

“were her remain never found?” cri the rest of the compani all 
together. 

“never!” repli montoni. 

“what reason were there to suppos she destroy herself, then?” said 
bertolini.—“aye, what reasons?” said verezzi.—“how happen it, that 
her remain were never found? although she kill herself, she could 
not buri herself.” montoni look indignantli at verezzi, who began to 
apologise. 

“your pardon, signor,” said he: “I did not consider, that the ladi wa 
your relative, when I spoke of her so lightly.” 

montoni accept the apology. 

“but the signor will oblig us with the reasons, which urg him to 
believe, that the ladi commit suicide.” 

“those I will explain hereafter,” said montoni: “at present let me 
relat a most extraordinari circumstance. thi convers goe no 
further, signors. listen, then, to what I am go to say.” 

“listen!” said a voice. 

they were all again silent, and the counten of montoni changed. 
“thi is no illus of the fancy,” said cavigni, at length break 
the profound silence.—“no,” said bertolini; “I heard it myself, now. 
yet here is no person in the room but ourselves!” 

“thi is veri extraordinary,” said montoni, suddenli rising. “thi is 
not to be borne; here is some deception, some trick. I will know what 
it means.” 

all the compani rose from their chair in confusion. 

“it is veri odd!” said bertolini. “here is realli no stranger in the 
room. If it is a trick, signor, you will do well to punish the author 
of it severely.” 

“A trick! what els can it be?” said cavigni, affect a laugh. 

the servant were now summoned, and the chamber wa searched, but no 
person wa found. the surpris and constern of the compani 
increased. montoni wa discomposed. “we will leav thi room,” said he, 
“and the subject of our convers also; it is too solemn.” hi 
guest were equal readi to quit the apartment; but the subject had 
rous their curiosity, and they entreat montoni to withdraw to 
anoth chamber, and finish it; no entreati could, however, prevail 
with him. notwithstand hi effort to appear at ease, he wa visibl 
and greatli disordered. 

“why, signor, you are not superstitious,” cri verezzi, jeeringly; 
“you, who have so often laugh at the credul of others!” 

“I am not superstitious,” repli montoni, regard him with stern 
displeasure, “though I know how to despis the common-plac sentences, 
which are frequent utter against superstition. I will enquir 
further into thi affair.” He then left the room; and hi guests, 
separ for the night, retir to their respect apartments. 



chapter viii 

He wear the rose of youth upon hi cheek. 
shakespear 


We now return to valancourt, who, it may be remembered, remain at 
thoulouse, some time after the departur of emily, restless and 
miserable. each morrow that approached, he design should carri him 
from thence; yet tomorrow and tomorrow came, and still saw him 
linger in the scene of hi former happiness. He could not 
immedi tear himself from the spot, where he had been accustom to 
convers with emily, or from the object they had view together, 
which appear to him memori of her affection, as well as a kind of 
sureti for it faithfulness; and, next to the pain of bid her 
adieu, wa that of leav the scene which so power awaken her 
image. sometim he had bribe a servant, who had been left in the care 
of madam montoni’ château, to permit him to visit the gardens, and 
there he would wander, for hour together, rapt in a melancholy, not 
unpleasing. the terrace, and the pavilion at the end of it, where he 
had taken leav of emily, on the eve of her departur from thoulouse, 
were hi most favourit haunts. there, as he walked, or lean from the 
window of the building, he would endeavour to recollect all she had 
said, on that night; to catch the tone of her voice, as they faintli 
vibrat on hi memory, and to rememb the exact express of her 
countenance, which sometim came suddenli to hi fancy, like a vision; 
that beauti countenance, which awakened, as by instantan magic, 
all the tender of hi heart, and seem to tell with irresist 
eloquence—that he had lost her for ever! At these moments, hi hurri 
step would have discov to a spectat the despair of hi heart. 
the charact of montoni, such as he had receiv from hints, and such 
as hi fear repres it, would rise to hi view, togeth with all 
the danger it seem to threaten to emili and to hi love. He blame 
himself, that he had not urg these more forcibl to her, while it 
might have been in hi power to detain her, and that he had suffer an 
absurd and crimin delicacy, as he term it, to conquer so soon the 
reason argument he had oppos to thi journey. ani evil, that 
might have attend their marriage, seem so inferior to those, which 
now threaten their love, or even to the sufferings, that absenc 
occasioned, that he wonder how he could have ceas to urg hi suit, 
till he had convinc her of it propriety; and he would certainli now 
have follow her to italy, if he could have been spare from hi 
regiment for so long a journey. hi regiment, indeed, soon remind 
him, that he had other duti to attend, than those of love. 

A short time after hi arriv at hi brother’ house, he wa summon 
to join hi brother officers, and he accompani a battalion to paris; 
where a scene of novelti and gaieti open upon him, such as, till 
then, he had onli a faint idea of. but gaieti disgusted, and compani 
fatigued, hi sick mind; and he becam an object of unceas railleri 
to hi companions, from whom, whenev he could steal an opportunity, 
he escaped, to think of emily. the scene around him, however, and the 
compani with whom he wa oblig to mingle, engag hi attention, 
though they fail to amus hi fancy, and thu gradual weaken the 
habit of yield to lamentation, till it appear less a duti to hi 
love to indulg it. among hi brother-offic were many, who ad to 
the ordinari charact of a french soldier’ gaieti some of those 
fascin qualities, which too frequent throw a veil over folly, 
and sometim even soften the featur of vice into smiles. To these 
men the reserv and thought manner of valancourt were a kind of 
tacit censur on their own, for which they ralli him when present, 
and plot against him when absent; they glori in the thought of 
reduc him to their own level, and, consid it to be a spirit 
frolic, determin to accomplish it. 

valancourt wa a stranger to the gradual progress of scheme and 
intrigue, against which he could not be on hi guard. He had not been 
accustom to receiv ridicule, and he could ill endur it sting; he 
resent it, and thi onli drew upon him a louder laugh. To escap from 
such scenes, he fled into solitude, and there the imag of emili met 
him, and reviv the pang of love and despair. He then sought to renew 
those tast studies, which had been the delight of hi earli years; 
but hi mind had lost the tranquillity, which is necessari for their 
enjoyment. To forget himself and the grief and anxiety, which the idea 
of her recalled, he would quit hi solitude, and again mingl in the 
crowd—glad of a temporari relief, and rejoic to snatch amus for 
the moment. 

thu pass week after weeks, time gradual soften hi sorrow, and 
habit strengthen hi desir of amusement, till the scene around him 
seem to awaken into a new character, and valancourt, to have fallen 
among them from the clouds. 

hi figur and address made him a welcom visitor, wherev he had been 
introduced, and he soon frequent the most gay and fashion circl 
of paris. among these, wa the assembl of the countess lacleur, a 
woman of emin beauti and captiv manners. she had pass the 
spring of youth, but her wit prolong the triumph of it reign, and 
they mutual assist the fame of each other; for those, who were 
charm by her loveliness, spoke with enthusiasm of her talents; and 
others, who admir her play imagination, declared, that her 
person grace were unrivalled. but her imagin wa mere 
playful, and her wit, if such it could be called, wa brilliant, rather 
than just; it dazzled, and it fallaci escap the detect of the 
moment; for the accents, in which she pronounc it, and the smile, 
that accompani them, were a spell upon the judgment of the auditors. 
her _petit soupers_ were the most tast of ani in paris, and were 
frequent by mani of the second class of literati. she wa fond of 
music, wa herself a scientif performer, and had frequent concert 
at her house. valancourt, who passion love music, and who 
sometim assist at these concerts, admir her execution, but 
rememb with a sigh the eloqu simplic of emily’ song and the 
natur express of her manner, which wait not to be approv by 
the judgment, but found their way at onc to the heart. 

madam _la comtesse_ had often deep play at her house, which she 
affect to restrain, but secretli encouraged; and it wa well known 
among her friends, that the splendour of her establish wa chiefli 
suppli from the profit of her tables. but her _petit soupers_ were 
the most charm imaginable! here were all the delicaci of the four 
quarter of the world, all the wit and the lighter effort of genius, 
all the grace of conversation—th smile of beauty, and the charm of 
music; and valancourt pass hi pleasantest, as well as most danger 
hour in these parties. 

hi brother, who remain with hi famili in gascony, had content 
himself with give him letter of introduct to such of hi 
relations, resid at paris, as the latter wa not alreadi known to. 
all these were person of some distinction; and, as neither the person, 
mind, nor manner of valancourt the younger threaten to disgrac 
their alliance, they receiv him with as much kind as their 
nature, harden by uninterrupt prosperity, would admit of; but their 
attent did not extend to act of real friendship; for they were too 
much occupi by their own pursuits, to feel ani interest in his; and 
thu he wa set down in the midst of paris, in the pride of youth, with 
an open, unsuspici temper and ardent affections, without one friend, 
to warn him of the dangers, to which he wa exposed. emily, who, had 
she been present, would have save him from these evil by awaken 
hi heart, and engag him in worthi pursuits, now onli increas hi 
danger;—it wa to lose the grief, which the remembr of her 
occasioned, that he first sought amusement; and for thi end he pursu 
it, till habit made it an object of abstract interest. 

there wa also a marchio champfort, a young widow, at whose 
assembl he pass much of hi time. she wa handsome, still more 
artful, gay and fond of intrigue. the society, which she drew round 
her, wa less eleg and more vicious, than that of the countess 
lacleur: but, as she had address enough to throw a veil, though but a 
slight one, over the worst part of her character, she wa still visit 
by mani person of what is call distinction. valancourt wa 
introduc to her parti by two of hi brother officers, whose late 
ridicul he had now forgiven so far, that he could sometim join in 
the laugh, which a mention of hi former manner would renew. 

the gaieti of the most splendid court in europe, the magnific of 
the palaces, entertainments, and equipages, that surround him—al 
conspir to dazzl hi imagination, and reanim hi spirits, and the 
exampl and maxim of hi militari associ to delud hi mind. 
emily’ image, indeed, still live there; but it wa no longer the 
friend, the monitor, that save him from himself, and to which he 
retir to weep the sweet, yet melancholy, tear of tenderness. when he 
had recours to it, it assum a counten of mild reproach, that 
wrung hi soul, and call forth tear of unmix misery; hi onli 
escap from which wa to forget the object of it, and he endeavoured, 
therefore, to think of emili as seldom as he could. 

thu danger circumstanc wa valancourt, at the time, when emili 
wa suffer at venice, from the persecut address of count 
morano, and the unjust author of montoni; at which period we leav 
him. 



chapter IX 

the imag of a wicked, heinou fault 
live in hi eye; that close aspect of hi 
doe show the mood of a much-troubl breast. 
king john 


leav the gay scene of paris, we return to those of the gloomi 
apennine, where emily’ thought were still faith to valancourt. 
look to him as to her onli hope, she recollected, with jealou 
exactness, everi assur and everi proof she had wit of hi 
affection; read again and again the letter she had receiv from him; 
weighed, with intens anxiety, the forc of everi word, that spoke of 
hi attachment; and dri her tears, as she trust in hi truth. 

montoni, meanwhile, had made strict enquiri concern the strang 
circumst of hi alarm, without obtain information; and was, at 
length, oblig to account for it by the reason supposition, that 
it wa a mischiev trick play off by one of hi domestics. hi 
disagr with madam montoni, on the subject of her settlements, 
were now more frequent than ever; he even confin her entir to her 
own apartment, and did not scrupl to threaten her with much greater 
severity, should she persever in a refusal. 

reason, had she consult it, would now have perplex her in the 
choic of a conduct to be adopted. It would have point out the danger 
of irrit by further opposit a man, such as montoni had prove 
himself to be, and to whose power she had so entir commit 
herself; and it would also have told her, of what extrem import to 
her futur comfort it was, to reserv for herself those possessions, 
which would enabl her to live independ of montoni, should she 
ever escap from hi immedi control. but she wa direct by a more 
decis guid than reason—th spirit of revenge, which urg her to 
oppos violenc to violence, and obstinaci to obstinacy. 

wholli confin to the solitud of her apartment, she wa now reduc 
to solicit the societi she had late rejected; for emili wa the onli 
person, except annette, with whom she wa permit to converse. 

gener anxiou for her peace, emily, therefore, tri to persuade, 
when she could not convince, and sought by everi gentl mean to induc 
her to forbear that asper of reply, which so greatli irrit 
montoni. the pride of her aunt did sometim soften to the sooth 
voic of emily, and there even were moments, when she regard her 
affection attent with goodwill. 

the scene of terribl contention, to which emili wa frequent 
compel to be witness, exhaust her spirit more than ani 
circumstances, that had occur sinc her departur from thoulouse. 
the gentl and good of her parents, togeth with the scene of 
her earli happiness, often stole on her mind, like the vision of a 
higher world; while the charact and circumstances, now pass 
beneath her eye, excit both terror and surprise. she could scarc 
have imagined, that passion so fierc and so various, as those which 
montoni exhibited, could have been concentr in one individual; yet 
what more surpris her, was, that, on great occasions, he could bend 
these passions, wild as they were, to the caus of hi interest, and 
gener could disguis in hi counten their oper on hi 
mind; but she had seen him too often, when he had thought it 
unnecessari to conceal hi nature, to be deceiv on such occasions. 

her present life appear like the dream of a distemp imagination, 
or like one of those fright fictions, in which the wild geniu of 
the poet sometim delighted. reflect brought onli regret, and 
anticip terror. how often did she wish to “steal the lark’ wing, 
and mount the swiftest gale,” that languedoc and repos might onc more 
be hers! 

Of count morano’ health she made frequent enquiry; but annett heard 
onli vagu report of hi danger, and that hi surgeon had said he 
would never leav the cottag alive; while emili could not but be 
shock to think, that she, howev innocently, might be the mean of 
hi death; and annette, who did not fail to observ her emotion, 
interpret it in her own way. 

but a circumst soon occurred, which entir withdrew annette’ 
attent from thi subject, and awaken the surpris and curios so 
natur to her. come one day to emily’ apartment, with a counten 
full of importance, “what can all thi mean, ma’amselle?” said she. 
“would I wa onc safe in languedoc again, they should never catch me 
go on my travel ani more! I must think it a fine thing, truly, to 
come abroad, and see foreign parts! I littl thought I wa come to be 
catch up in an old castle, among such dreari mountains, with the 
chanc of be murdered, or, what is as good, have my throat cut!” 

“what can all thi mean, indeed, annette?” said emily, in astonishment. 

“aye, ma’amselle, you may look surprised; but you won’t believ it, 
perhaps, till they have murder you, too. you would not believ about 
the ghost I told you of, though I show you the veri place, where it 
use to appear!—y will believ nothing, ma’amselle.” 

“not till you speak more reasonably, annette; for heaven’ sake, 
explain your meaning. you spoke of murder!” 

“aye, ma’amselle, they are come to murder us all, perhaps; but what 
signifi explaining?—y will not believe.” 

emili again desir her to relat what she had seen, or heard. 

“o, I have seen enough, ma’am, and heard too much, as ludovico can 
prove. poor soul! they will murder him, too! I littl thought, when he 
sung those sweet vers under my lattice, at venice!”—emili look 
impati and displeased. “well, ma’amselle, as I wa saying, these 
prepar about the castle, and these strange-look people, that 
are call here everi day, and the signor’ cruel usag of my lady, 
and hi odd goings-on—al these, as I told ludovico, can bode no good. 
and he bid me hold my tongue. so, say I, the signor’ strang 
altered, ludovico, in thi gloomi castle, to what he wa in france; 
there, all so gay! nobodi so gallant to my lady, then; and he could 
smile, too, upon a poor servant, sometimes, and jeer her, too, 
good-naturedli enough. I rememb once, when he said to me, as I wa 
go out of my lady’ dressing-room—annette, say he—” 

“never mind what the signor said,” interrupt emily; “but tell me, at 
once, the circumstance, which ha thu alarm you.” 

“aye, ma’amselle,” rejoin annette, “that is just what ludovico said: 
say he, never mind what the signor say to you. So I told him what I 
thought about the signor. He is so strang altered, said I: for now 
he is so haughty, and so commanding, and so sharp with my lady; and, if 
he meet one, he’ll scarc look at one, unless it be to frown. So 
much the better, say ludovico, so much the better. and to tell you the 
truth, ma’amselle, I thought thi wa a veri ill-natur speech of 
ludovico: but I went on. and then, say I, he is alway knit hi 
brows; and if one speak to him, he doe not hear; and then he sit up 
counsel so, of a night, with the other signors—ther they are, till 
long past midnight, discours together! aye, but say ludovico, you 
don’t know what they are counsel about. no, said I, but I can 
guess—it is about my young lady. upon that, ludovico burst out 
a-laughing, quit loud; so he put me in a huff, for I did not like that 
either I or you, ma’amselle, should be laugh at; and I turn away 
quick, but he stop me. ‘don’t be affronted, annette,’ said he, ‘but 
I cannot help laughing;’ and with that he laugh again. ‘what!’ say 
he, ‘do you think the signor sit up, night after night, onli to 
counsel about thi young lady! no, no, there is someth more in the 
wind than that. and these repair about the castle, and these 
prepar about the ramparts—they are not make about young 
ladies.’ why, surely, said I, the signor, my master, is not go to 
make war? ‘make war!’ said ludovico, ‘what, upon the mountain and the 
woods? for here is no live soul to make war upon that I see.’ 

‘what are these prepar for, then?’ said I; whi sure nobodi is 
come to take away my master’ castle! ‘then there are so mani 
ill-look fellow come to the castl everi day,’ say ludovico, 
without answer my question, ‘and the signor see them all, and talk 
with them all, and they all stay in the neighbourhood! By holi st. 
marco! some of them are the most cut-throat-look dog I ever set my 
eye upon.’ 

“I ask ludovico again, if he thought they were come to take away my 
master’ castle; and he said, no, he did not think they were, but he 
did not know for certain. ‘then yesterday,’ said he, but you must not 
tell this, ma’amselle, ‘yesterday, a parti of these men came, and left 
all their hors in the castl stables, where, it seems, they are to 
stay, for the signor order them all to be entertain with the best 
provend in the manger; but the men are, most of them, in the 
neighbour cottages.’ 

“so, ma’amselle, I came to tell you all this, for I never heard 
anyth so strang in my life. but what can these ill-look men be 
come about, if it is not to murder us? and the signor know this, or 
whi should he be so civil to them? and whi should he fortifi the 
castle, and counsel so much with the other signors, and be so 
thoughtful?” 

“i thi all you have to tell, annette?” said emily. “have you heard 
noth else, that alarm you?” 

“noth else, ma’amselle!” said annette; “why, is not thi enough?” 
“quit enough for my patience, annette, but not quit enough to 
convinc me we are all to be murdered, though I acknowledg here is 
suffici food for curiosity.” she forbor to speak her apprehensions, 
becaus she would not encourag annette’ wild terrors; but the present 
circumst of the castl both surprised, and alarm her. annette, 
have told her tale, left the chamber, on the wing for new wonders. 

In the evening, emili had pass some melancholi hour with madam 
montoni, and wa retir to rest, when she wa alarm by a strang 
and loud knock at her chamber door, and then a heavi weight fell 
against it, that almost burst it open. she call to know who wa 
there, and receiv no answer, repeat the call; but a chill 
silenc followed. It occur to her—for, at thi moment, she could not 
reason on the probabl of circumstances—that some one of the 
strangers, late arriv at the castle, had discov her apartment, 
and wa come with such intent, as their look render too possible—to 
rob, perhap to murder, her. the moment she admit thi possibility, 
terror suppli the place of conviction, and a kind of instinct 
remembr of her remot situat from the famili heighten it to a 
degree, that almost overcam her senses. she look at the door, which 
led to the staircase, expect to see it open, and listening, in 
fear silence, for a return of the noise, till she began to think it 
had proceed from thi door, and a wish of escap through the 
opposit one rush upon her mind. she went to the galleri door, and 
then, fear to open it, lest some person might be silent lurk 
for her without, she stopped, but with her eye fix in expect 
upon the opposit door of the staircase. As thu she stood, she heard a 
faint breath near her, and becam convinced, that some person wa on 
the other side of the door, which wa alreadi locked. she sought for 
other fastening, but there wa none. 

while she yet listened, the breath wa distinctli heard, and her 
terror wa not soothed, when, look round her wide and lone 
chamber, she again consid her remot situation. As she stood 
hesit whether to call for assistance, the continu of the 
still surpris her; and her spirit would have revived, had she 
not continu to hear the faint breathing, that convinc her, the 
person, whoever it was, had not quit the door. 

At length, worn out with anxiety, she determin to call loudli for 
assist from her casement, and wa advanc to it, when, whether 
the terror of her mind gave her ideal sounds, or that real one did 
come, she thought footstep were ascend the privat staircase; and, 
expect to see it door unclose, she forgot all other caus of alarm, 
and retreat toward the corridor. here she endeavour to make her 
escape, but, on open the door, wa veri near fall over a person, 
who lay on the floor without. she screamed, and would have passed, but 
her trembl frame refus to support her; and the moment, in which 
she lean against the wall of the gallery, allow her leisur to 
observ the figur befor her, and to recognis the featur of 
annette. fear instantli yield to surprise. she spoke in vain to the 
poor girl, who remain senseless on the floor, and then, lose all 
conscious of her own weakness, hurri to her assistance. 

when annett recovered, she wa help by emili into the chamber, but 
wa still unabl to speak, and look round her, as if her eye 
follow some person in the room. emili tri to sooth her disturb 
spirits, and forbore, at present, to ask her ani questions; but the 
faculti of speech wa never long withheld from annette, and she 
explained, in broken sentences, and in her tediou way, the occas of 
her disorder. she affirmed, and with a solemn of conviction, that 
almost stagger the incredul of emily, that she had seen an 
apparition, as she wa pass to her bedroom, through the corridor. 

“I had heard strang stori of that chamber before,” said annette: 
“but as it wa so near yours, ma’amselle, I would not tell them to you, 
becaus they would frighten you. the servant had told me, often and 
often, that it wa haunted, and that wa the reason whi it wa shut up: 
nay, for that matter, whi the whole string of these rooms, here, are 
shut up. I quak whenev I went by, and I must say, I did sometim 
think I heard odd nois within it. but, as I said, as I wa pass 
along the corridor, and not think a word about the matter, or even 
of the strang voic that the signor heard the other night, all of a 
sudden come a great light, and, look behind me, there wa a tall 
figure, (I saw it as plainly, ma’amselle, as I see you at thi moment), 
a tall figur glide along (oh! I cannot describ how!) into the room, 
that is alway shut up, and nobodi ha the key of it but the signor, 
and the door shut directly.” 

“then it doubtless wa the signor,” said emily. 

“O no, ma’amselle, it could not be him, for I left him busi 
a-quarrel in my lady’ dressing-room!” 

“you bring me strang tales, annette,” said emily: “it wa but thi 
morning, that you would have terrifi me with the apprehens of 
murder; and now you would persuad me, you have seen a ghost! these 
wonder stori come too quickly.” 

“nay, ma’amselle, I will say no more, only, if I had not been 
frightened, I should not have faint dead away so. I ran as fast as I 
could, to get to your door; but, what wa worst of all, I could not 
call out; then I thought someth must be strang the matter with 
me, and directli I dropt down.” 

“wa it the chamber where the black veil hangs?” said emily. “o! no, 
ma’amselle, it wa one nearer to this. what shall I do, to get to my 
room? I would not go out into the corridor again, for the whole world!” 
emily, whose spirit had been sever shocked, and who, therefore, did 
not like the thought of pass the night alone, told her she might 
sleep where she was. “o, no, ma’amselle,” repli annette, “I would not 
sleep in the room now for a thousand sequins!” 

weari and disappointed, emili first ridiculed, though she shared, her 
fears, and then tri to sooth them; but neither attempt succeeded, and 
the girl persist in believ and affirming, that what she had seen 
wa noth human. It wa not till some time after emili had recov 
her composure, that she recollect the step she had heard on the 
staircase—a remembrance, however, which made her insist that annett 
should pass the night with her, and, with much difficulty, she, at 
length, prevailed, assist by that part of the girl’ fear, which 
concern the corridor. 

earli on the follow morning, as emili cross the hall to the 
ramparts, she heard a noisi bustl in the courtyard, and the clatter of 
horses’ hoofs. such unusu sound excit her curiosity; and, instead 
of go to the ramparts, she went to an upper casement, from whenc 
she saw, in the court below, a larg parti of horsemen, dress in a 
singular, but uniform, habit, and completely, though variously, armed. 
they wore a kind of short jacket, compos of black and scarlet, and 
sever of them had a cloak, of plain black, which, cover the person 
entirely, hung down to the stirrups. As one of these cloak glanc 
aside, she saw, beneath, daggers, appar of differ sizes, tuck 
into the horseman’ belt. she further observed, that these were 
carried, in the same manner, by mani of the horsemen without cloaks, 
most of whom bore also pikes, or javelins. On their heads, were the 
small italian caps, some of which were distinguish by black feathers. 
whether these cap gave a fierc air to the countenance, or that the 
counten they surmount had natur such an appearance, emili 
thought she had never, till then, seen an assemblag of face so savag 
and terrific. while she gazed, she almost fanci herself surround by 
banditti; and a vagu thought glanc athwart her fancy—that montoni 
wa the captain of the group befor her, and that thi castl wa to be 
the place of rendezvous. the strang and horribl supposit wa but 
momentary, though her reason could suppli none more probable, and 
though she discovered, among the band, the stranger she had formerli 
notic with so much alarm, who were now distinguish by the black 
plume. 

while she continu gazing, cavigni, verezzi, and bertolini came forth 
from the hall, habit like the rest, except that they wore hats, with 
a mix plume of black and scarlet, and that their arm differ from 
those of the rest of the party. As they mount their horses, emili wa 
struck with the exult joy, express on the visag of verezzi, while 
cavigni wa gay, yet with a shade of thought on hi countenance; and, 
as he manag hi hors with dexterity, hi grace and command 
figure, which exhibit the majesti of a hero, had never appear to 
more advantage. emily, as she observ him, thought he somewhat 
resembl valancourt, in the spirit and digniti of hi person; but she 
look in vain for the noble, benevol countenance—th soul’ 
intelligence, which overspread the featur of the latter. 

As she wa hoping, she scarc knew why, that montoni would accompani 
the party, he appear at the hall door, but un-accoutred. have 
care observ the horsemen, convers awhil with the cavaliers, 
and bidden them farewell, the band wheel round the court, and, led by 
verezzi, issu forth under the portcullis; montoni follow to the 
portal, and gaze after them for some time. emili then retir from 
the casement, and, now certain of be unmolested, went to walk on the 
ramparts, from whenc she soon after saw the parti wind among the 
mountain to the west, appear and disappear between the woods, 
till distanc confus their figures, consolid their numbers, and 
onli a dingi mass appear move along the heights. 

emili observed, that no workmen were on the ramparts, and that the 
repair of the fortif seem to be completed. while she 
saunter thought on, she heard distant footsteps, and, rais 
her eyes, saw sever men lurk under the castl walls, who were 
evid not workmen, but look as if they would have accord well 
with the parti which wa gone. wonder where annett had hid herself 
so long, who might have explain some of the late circumstances, and 
then consid that madam montoni wa probabl risen, she went to 
her dressing-room, where she mention what had occurred; but madam 
montoni either would not, or could not, give ani explan of the 
event. the signor’ reserv to hi wife, on thi subject, wa probabl 
noth more than usual; yet, to emily, it gave an air of mysteri to 
the whole affair, that seem to hint there wa danger, if not villany, 
in hi schemes. 

annett present came, and, as usual, wa full of alarm; to her lady’ 
eager enquiri of what she had heard among the servants, she replied: 

“ah, madam! nobodi know what it is all about, but old carlo; he know 
well enough, I dare say, but he is as close as hi master. some say the 
signor is go out to frighten the enemy, as they call it: but where 
is the enemy? then other say, he is go to take away somebody’ 
castle: but I am sure he ha room enough in hi own, without take 
other people’s; and I am sure I should like it a great deal better, if 
there were more peopl to fill it.” 

“ah! you will soon have your wish, I fear,” repli madam montoni. 

“no, madam, but such ill-look fellow are not worth having. I mean 
such gallant, smart, merri fellow as ludovico, who is alway tell 
droll stories, to make one laugh. It wa but yesterday, he told me such 
a _humoursome_ tale! I can’t help laugh at it now.—say he—” 

“well, we can dispens with the story,” said her lady. 

“ah!” continu annette, “he see a great way further than other 
people! now he see into all the signor’ meaning, without know a 
word about the matter!” 

“how is that?” said madam montoni. 

“whi he says—but he made me promis not to tell, and I would not 
disoblig him for the world.” 

“what is it he made you promis not to tell?” said her lady, sternly. 
“I insist upon know immediately—what is it he made you promise?” 

“O madam,” cri annette, “I would not tell for the universe!” 

“I insist upon your tell thi instant,” said madam montoni. 

“O dear madam! I would not tell for a hundr sequins! you would not 
have me forswear myself madam!” exclaim annette. 

“I will not wait anoth moment,” said madam montoni. annett wa 
silent. 

“the signor shall be inform of thi directly,” rejoin her mistress; 
“he will make you discov all.” 

“it is ludovico, who ha discovered,” said annette: “but for mercy’ 
sake, madam, don’t tell the signor, and you shall know all directly.” 
madam montoni said, that she would not. 

“well then, madam, ludovico says, that the signor, my master, 
is—is—that is, he onli think so, and anybody, you know, madam, is free 
to think—that the signor, my master, is—is—” 

“i what?” said her lady, impatiently. 

“that the signor, my master, is go to be—a great robber—that is—h 
is go to rob on hi own account;—to be, (but I am sure I don’t 
understand what he means) to be a—captain of—robbers.” 

“art thou in thi senses, annette?” said madam montoni; “or is thi a 
trick to deceiv me? tell me, thi instant, what ludovico _did_ say to 
thee;—no equivocation;—thi instant.” 

“nay, madam,” cri annette, “if thi is all I am to get for have 
told the secret—” her mistress thu continu to insist, and annett to 
protest, till montoni, himself, appeared, who bade the latter leav the 
room, and she withdrew, trembl for the fate of her story. emili also 
wa retiring, but her aunt desir she would stay; and montoni had so 
often made her a wit of their contention, that he no longer had 
scrupl on that account. 

“I insist upon know thi instant, signor, what all thi means:” said 
hi wife—“what are all these arm men, whom they tell me of, gone out 
about?” montoni answer her onli with a look of scorn; and emili 
whisper someth to her. “it doe not signify,” said her aunt: “I 
will know; and I will know, too, what the castl ha been fortifi 
for.” 

“come, come,” said montoni, “other busi brought me here. I must be 
trifl with no longer. I have immedi occas for what I 
demand—thos estat must be given up, without further contention; or I 
may find a way—” 

“they never shall be given up,” interrupt madam montoni: “they never 
shall enabl you to carri on your wild schemes;—but what are these? I 
will know. Do you expect the castl to be attacked? Do you expect 
enemies? Am I to be shut up here, to be kill in a siege?” 

“sign the writings,” said montoni, “and you shall know more.” 

“what enemi can be coming?” continu hi wife. “have you enter into 
the servic of the state? Am I to be block up here to die?” 

“that may possibl happen,” said montoni, “unless you yield to my 
demand: for, come what may, you shall not quit the castl till then.” 
madam montoni burst into loud lamentation, which she as suddenli 
checked, considering, that her husband’ assert might be onli 
artifices, employ to extort her consent. she hint thi suspicion, 
and, in the next moment, told him also, that hi design were not so 
honour as to serv the state, and that she believ he had onli 
commenc a captain of banditti, to join the enemi of venice, in 
plunder and lay wast the surround country. 

montoni look at her for a moment with a steadi and stern countenance; 
while emili trembled, and hi wife, for once, thought she had said too 
much. “you shall be removed, thi night,” said he, “to the east turret: 
there, perhaps, you may understand the danger of offend a man, who 
ha an unlimit power over you.” 

emili now fell at hi feet, and, with tear of terror, supplic for 
her aunt, who sat, trembl with fear, and indignation; now readi to 
pour forth execrations, and now to join the intercess of emily. 
montoni, however, soon interrupt these entreati with a horribl 
oath; and, as he burst from emily, leav hi cloak, in her hand, she 
fell to the floor, with a force, that occas her a sever blow on 
the forehead. but he quit the room, without attempt to rais her, 
whose attent wa call from herself, by a deep groan from madam 
montoni, who continu otherwis unmov in her chair, and had not 
fainted. emily, hasten to her assistance, saw her eye rolling, and 
her featur convulsed. 

have spoken to her, without receiv an answer, she brought water, 
and support her head, while she held it to her lips; but the 
increas convuls soon compel emili to call for assistance. On 
her way through the hall, in search of annette, she met montoni, whom 
she told what had happened, and conjur to return and comfort her 
aunt; but he turn silent away, with a look of indifference, and 
went out upon the ramparts. At length she found old carlo and annette, 
and they hasten to the dressing-room, where madam montoni had fallen 
on the floor, and wa lie in strong convulsions. have lift her 
into the adjoin room, and laid her on the bed, the forc of her 
disord still made all their strength necessari to hold her, while 
annett trembl and sobbed, and old carlo look silent and 
piteous on, as hi feebl hand grasp those of hi mistress, till, 
turn hi eye upon emily, he exclaimed, “good god! signora, what is 
the matter?” 

emili look calmli at him, and saw hi enquir eye fix on her: 
and annette, look up, scream loudly; for emily’ face wa stain 
with blood, which continu to fall slowli from her forehead: but her 
attent had been so entir occupi by the scene befor her, that 
she had felt no pain from the wound. she now held a handkerchief to her 
face, and, notwithstand her faintness, continu to watch madam 
montoni, the violenc of whose convuls wa abating, till at length 
they ceased, and left her in a kind of stupor. 

“mi aunt must remain quiet,” said emily. “go, good carlo; if we should 
want your assistance, I will send for you. In the mean time, if you 
have an opportunity, speak kindli of your mistress to your master.” 

“alas!” said carlo, “I have seen too much! I have littl influenc with 
the signor. but do, dear young lady, take some care of yourself; that 
is an ugli wound, and you look sadly.” 

“thank you, my friend, for your consideration,” said emily, smile 
kindly: “the wound is trifling, it came by a fall.” 

carlo shook hi head, and left the room; and emily, with annette, 
continu to watch by her aunt. “did my ladi tell the signor what 
ludovico said, ma’amselle?” ask annett in a whisper; but emili 
quiet her fear on the subject. 

“I thought what thi quarrel would come to,” continu annette: “I 
suppos the signor ha been beat my lady.” 

“no, no, annette, you are total mistaken, noth extraordinari ha 
happened.” 

“why, extraordinari thing happen here so often, ma’amselle, that there 
is noth in them. here is anoth legion of those ill-look 
fellows, come to the castle, thi morning.” 

“hush! annette, you will disturb my aunt; we will talk of that by and 
bye.” 

they continu watch silently, till madam montoni utter a low 
sigh, when emili took her hand, and spoke soothingli to her; but the 
former gaze with unconsci eyes, and it wa long befor she knew her 
niece. her first word then enquir for montoni; to which emili 
repli by an entreaty, that she would compos her spirits, and consent 
to be kept quiet, adding, that, if she wish ani messag to be 
convey to him, she would herself deliv it. “no,” said her aunt 
faintly, “no—i have noth new to tell him. doe he persist in say 
I shall be remov from my chamber?” 

emili repli that he had not spoken on the subject sinc madam 
montoni heard him; and then she tri to divert her attent to some 
other topic; but her aunt seem to be inattent to what she said, 
and lost in secret thoughts. emily, have brought her some 
refreshment, now left her to the care of annette, and went in search of 
montoni, whom she found on a remot part of the rampart, convers 
among a group of the men describ by annette. they stood round him 
with fierce, yet subjugated, looks, while he, speak earnestly, and 
point to the walls, did not perceiv emily, who remain at some 
distance, wait till he should be at leisure, and observ 
involuntarili the appear of one man, more savag than hi fellows, 
who stood rest on hi pike, and looking, over the shoulder of a 
comrade, at montoni, to whom he listen with uncommon earnestness. 
thi man wa appar of low condition; yet hi look appear not to 
acknowledg the superior of montoni, as did those of hi companions; 
and sometim they even assum an air of authority, which the decis 
manner of the signor could not repress. some few word of montoni then 
pass in the wind; and, as the men were separating, she heard him say, 
“thi evening, then, begin the watch at sunset.” 

“at sunset, signor,” repli one or two of them, and walk away; while 
emili approach montoni, who appear desir of avoid her: but, 
though she observ this, she had courag to proceed. she endeavour 
to interced onc more for her aunt, repres to him her sufferings, 
and urg the danger of expos her to a cold apart in her present 
state. “she suffer by her own folly,” said montoni, “and is not to be 
pitied;—sh know how she may avoid these suffer in future—if she 
is remov to the turret, it will be her own fault. let her be 
obedient, and sign the write you heard of, and I will think no more 
of it.” 

when emili ventur still to plead, he sternli silenc and rebuk her 
for interf in hi domest affairs, but, at length, dismiss her 
with thi concession—that he would not remov madam montoni, on the 
ensu night, but allow her till the next to consider, whether she 
would resign her settlements, or be imprison in the east turret of 
the castle, “where she shall find,” he added, “a punish she may not 
expect.” 

emili then hasten to inform her aunt of thi short respit and of the 
alternative, that await her, to which the latter made no reply, but 
appear thoughtful, while emily, in consider of her extrem 
languor, wish to sooth her mind by lead it to less interest 
topics: and, though these effort were unsuccessful, and madam montoni 
becam peevish, her resolution, on the contend point, seem somewhat 
to relax, and emili recommended, as her onli mean of safety, that she 
should submit to montoni’ demand. “you know not what you advise,” said 
her aunt. “do you understand, that these estat will descend to you at 
my death, if I persist in a refusal?” 

“I wa ignor of that circumstance, madam,” repli emily, “but the 
knowledg of it cannot withhold me from advis you to adopt the 
conduct, which not onli your peace, but, I fear, your safeti requires, 
and I entreat, that you will not suffer a consider compar 
so trifling, to make you hesit a moment in resign them.” 

“are you sincere, niece?” “i it possibl you can doubt it, madam?” her 
aunt appear to be affected. “you are not unworthi of these estates, 
niece,” said she: “I would wish to keep them for your sake—y show a 
virtu I did not expect.” 

“how have I deserv thi reproof, madam?” said emili sorrowfully. 

“reproof!” repli madam montoni: “I meant to prais your virtue.” 

“alas! here is no exert of virtue,” rejoin emily, “for here is no 
temptat to be overcome.” 

“yet monsieur valancourt—” said her aunt. “o, madam!” interrupt 
emily, anticip what she would have said, “do not let me glanc on 
that subject: do not let my mind be stain with a wish so shockingli 
self-interested.” she immedi chang the topic, and continu with 
madam montoni, till she withdrew to her apart for the night. 

At that hour, the castl wa perfectli still, and everi inhabit of 
it, except herself, seem to have retir to rest. As she pass along 
the wide and lone galleries, duski and silent, she felt forlorn and 
apprehens of—sh scarc knew what; but when, enter the 
corridor, she recollect the incid of the preced night, a dread 
seiz her, lest a subject of alarm, similar to that, which had 
befallen annette, should occur to her, and which, whether real, or 
ideal, would, she felt, have an almost equal effect upon her weaken 
spirits. the chamber, to which annett had alluded, she did not exactli 
know, but understood it to be one of those she must pass in the way to 
her own; and, send a fear look forward into the gloom, she 
step lightli and cautious along, till, come to a door, from 
whenc issu a low sound, she hesit and paused; and, dure the 
delay of that moment, her fear so much increased, that she had no 
power to move from the spot. believing, that she heard a human voic 
within, she wa somewhat revived; but, in the next moment, the door wa 
opened, and a person, whom she conceiv to be montoni, appeared, who 
instantli start back, and close it, though not befor she had seen, 
by the light that burn in the chamber, anoth person, sit in a 
melancholi attitud by the fire. her terror vanished, but her 
astonish onli began, which wa now rous by the mysteri secreci 
of montoni’ manner, and by the discoveri of a person, whom he thu 
visit at midnight, in an apartment, which had long been shut up, and 
of which such extraordinari report were circulated. 

while she thu continu hesitating, strongli prompt to watch 
montoni’ motions, yet fear to irrit him by appear to notic 
them, the door wa again open cautiously, and as instantli close as 
before. she then step softli to her chamber, which wa the next but 
one to this, but, have put down her lamp, return to an obscur 
corner of the corridor, to observ the proceed of thi half-seen 
person, and to ascertain, whether it wa inde montoni. 

have wait in silent expect for a few minutes, with her eye 
fix on the door, it wa again opened, and the same person appeared, 
whom she now knew to be montoni. He look cautious round, without 
perceiv her, then, step forward, close the door, and left the 
corridor. soon after, emili heard the door fasten on the inside, and 
she withdrew to her chamber, wonder at what she had witnessed. 

It wa now twelv o’clock. As she close her casement, she heard 
footstep on the terrac below, and saw imperfectly, through the gloom, 
sever person advancing, who pass under the casement. she then 
heard the clink of arms, and, in the next moment, the watch-word; when, 
recollect the command she had overheard from montoni, and the hour 
of the night, she understood, that these men were, for the first time, 
reliev guard in the castle. have listen till all wa again 
still, she retir to sleep. 



chapter X 

and shall no lay of death 
with pleas murmur sooth 
her part soul? 
shall no tear wet her grave? 
sayer 


On the follow morning, emili went earli to the apart of madam 
montoni, who had slept well, and wa much recovered. her spirit had 
also return with her health, and her resolut to oppos montoni’ 
demand revived, though it yet struggl with her fears, which emily, 
who trembl for the consequ of further opposition, endeavour to 
confirm. 

her aunt, as ha been alreadi shown, had a disposition, which delight 
in contradiction, and which taught her, when unpleas circumst 
were offer to her understanding, not to enquir into their truth, but 
to seek for arguments, by which she might make them appear false. long 
habit had so entir confirm thi natur propensity, that she wa 
not consciou of possess it. emily’ remonstr and 
representations, therefore, rous her pride, instead of alarming, or 
convinc her judgment, and she still reli upon the discoveri of 
some means, by which she might yet avoid submit to the demand of 
her husband. considering, that, if she could onc escap from hi 
castle, she might defi hi power, and, obtain a decis separation, 
live in comfort on the estates, that yet remain for her, she 
mention thi to her niece, who accord with her in the wish, but 
differ from her, as to the probabl of it completion. she 
repres the imposs of pass the gates, secur and guard 
as they were, and the extrem danger of commit her design to the 
discret of a servant, who might either purpos betray, or 
accident disclos it.—montoni’ vengeanc would also disdain 
restraint, if her intent wa detected: and, though emili wished, as 
fervent as she could do, to regain her freedom, and return to france, 
she consult onli madam montoni’ safety, and persev in advis 
her to relinquish her settlement, without brave further outrage. 

the struggl of contrari emotions, however, continu to rage in her 
aunt’ bosom, and she still brood over the chanc of effect an 
escape. while she thu sat, montoni enter the room, and, without 
notic hi wife’ indisposition, said, that he came to remind her of 
the impolici of trifl with him, and that he gave her onli till the 
even to determine, whether she would consent to hi demand, or 
compel him, by a refusal, to remov her to the east turret. He added, 
that a parti of cavali would dine with him, that day, and that he 
expect that she would sit at the head of the table, where emily, 
also, must be present. madam montoni wa now on the point of utter 
an absolut refusal, but, suddenli considering, that her liberty, 
dure thi entertainment, though circumscribed, might favour her 
further plans, she acquiesced, with seem reluctance, and montoni, 
soon after, left the apartment. hi command struck emili with surpris 
and apprehension, who shrank from the thought of be expos to the 
gaze of strangers, such as her fanci repres these to be, and the 
word of count morano, now again recollected, did not sooth her fears. 

when she withdrew to prepar for dinner, she dress herself with even 
more simplic than usual, that she might escap observation—a policy, 
which did not avail her, for, as she repass to her aunt’ apartment, 
she wa met by montoni, who censur what he call her prudish 
appearance, and insisted, that she should wear the most splendid dress 
she had, even that, which had been prepar for her intend nuptial 
with count morano, and which, it now appeared, her aunt had care 
brought with her from venice. thi wa made, not in the venetian, but, 
in the neapolitan fashion, so as to set off the shape and figure, to 
the utmost advantage. In it, her beauti chestnut tress were 
neglig bound up in pearls, and suffer to fall back again on her 
neck. the simplic of a better taste, than madam montoni’s, wa 
conspicu in thi dress, splendid as it was, and emily’ unaffect 
beauti never had appear more captivatingly. she had now onli to hope, 
that montoni’ order wa prompted, not by ani extraordinari design, but 
by an ostent of display hi family, richli attired, to the eye 
of strangers; yet noth less than hi absolut command could have 
prevail with her to wear a dress, that had been design for such an 
offens purpose, much less to have worn it on thi occasion. As she 
descend to dinner, the emot of her mind threw a faint blush over 
her countenance, and heighten it interest expression; for 
timid had made her linger in her apartment, till the utmost moment, 
and, when she enter the hall, in which a kind of state dinner wa 
spread, montoni and hi guest were alreadi seat at the table. she 
wa then go to place herself by her aunt; but montoni wave hi 
hand, and two of the cavali rose, and seat her between them. 

the eldest of these wa a tall man, with strong italian features, an 
aquilin nose, and dark penetr eyes, that flash with fire, when 
hi mind wa agitated, and, even in it state of rest, retain 
somewhat of the wild of the passions. hi visag wa long and 
narrow, and hi complexion of a sickli yellow. 

the other, who appear to be about forty, had featur of a differ 
cast, yet italian, and hi look wa slow, subtl and penetrating; hi 
eyes, of a dark grey, were small, and hollow; hi complexion wa a 
sun-burnt brown, and the contour of hi face, though inclin to oval, 
wa irregular and ill-formed. 

eight other guest sat round the table, who were all dress in a 
uniform, and had all an expression, more or less, of wild fierceness, 
of subtl design, or of licenti passions. As emili timidli survey 
them, she rememb the scene of the preced morning, and again 
almost fanci herself surround by banditti; then, look back to 
the tranquil of her earli life, she felt scarc less 
astonishment, than grief, at her present situation. the scene, in which 
they sat, assist the illusion; it wa an ancient hall, gloomi from 
the style of it architecture, from it great extent, and becaus 
almost the onli light it receiv wa from one larg gothic window, and 
from a pair of fold doors, which, be open, admit likewis a 
view of the west rampart, with the wild mountain of the apennin 
beyond. 

the middl compart of thi hall rose into a vault roof, enrich 
with fretwork, and supported, on three sides, by pillar of marble; 
beyond these, long colonnad retir in gloomi grandeur, till their 
extent wa lost in twilight. the lightest footstep of the servants, as 
they advanc through these, were return in whisper echoes, and 
their figures, seen at a distanc imperfectli through the dusk, 
frequent awaken emily’ imagination. she look altern at 
montoni, at hi guest and on the surround scene; and then, 
rememb her dear nativ province, her pleasant home and the 
simplic and good of the friends, whom she had lost, grief and 
surpris again occupi her mind. 

when her thought could return from these considerations, she fanci 
she observ an air of author toward hi guests, such as she had 
never befor seen him assume, though he had alway been distinguish 
by a haughti carriage; there wa someth also in the manner of the 
strangers, that seem perfectly, though not servilely, to acknowledg 
hi superiority. 

dure dinner, the convers wa chiefli on war and politics. they 
talk with energi of the state of venice, it dangers, the charact 
of the reign doge and of the chief senators; and then spoke of the 
state of rome. when the repast wa over, they rose, and, each fill 
hi goblet with wine from the gild ewer, that stood besid him, drank 
“success to our exploits!” montoni wa lift hi goblet to hi lip 
to drink thi toast, when suddenli the wine hissed, rose to the brim, 
and, as he held the glass from him, it burst into a thousand pieces. 

To him, who constantli use that sort of venic glass, which had the 
qualiti of breaking, upon receiv poison liquor, a suspicion, that 
some of hi guest had endeavour to betray him, instantli occurred, 
and he order all the gate to be closed, drew hi sword, and, look 
round on them, who stood in silent amazement, exclaimed, “here is a 
traitor among us; let those, that are innocent, assist in discov 
the guilty.” 

indign flash from the eye of the cavaliers, who all drew their 
swords; and madam montoni, terrifi at what might ensue, wa 
hasten from the hall, when her husband command her to stay; but 
hi further word could not now be distinguished, for the voic of 
everi person rose together. hi order, that all the servant should 
appear, wa at length obeyed, and they declar their ignor of ani 
deceit—a protest which could not be believed; for it wa evident, 
that, as montoni’ liquor, and hi only, had been poisoned, a 
deliber design had been form against hi life, which could not 
have been carri so far toward it accomplishment, without the 
conniv of the servant, who had the care of the wine ewers. 

thi man, with another, whose face betray either the conscious of 
guilt, or the fear of punishment, montoni order to be chain 
instantly, and confin in a strong room, which had formerli been use 
as a prison. thither, likewise, he would have sent all hi guests, had 
he not foreseen the consequ of so bold and unjustifi a 
proceeding. As to those, therefore, he content himself with swearing, 
that no man should pass the gates, till thi extraordinari affair had 
been investigated, and then sternli bade hi wife retir to her 
apartment, whither he suffer emili to attend her. 

In about half an hour, he follow to the dressing-room; and emili 
observed, with horror, hi dark counten and quiver lip, and 
heard him denounc vengeanc on her aunt. 

“it will avail you nothing,” said he to hi wife, “to deni the fact; I 
have proof of your guilt. your onli chanc of merci rest on a full 
confession;—ther is noth to hope from sullenness, or falsehood; 
your accomplic ha confess all.” 

emily’ faint spirit were rous by astonishment, as she heard her 
aunt accus of a crime so atrocious, and she could not, for a moment, 
admit the possibl of her guilt. meanwhil madam montoni’ 
agit did not permit her to reply; altern her complexion 
vari from livid pale to a crimson flush; and she trembled,—but, 
whether with fear, or with indignation, it were difficult to decide. 

“spare your words,” said montoni, see her about to speak, “your 
counten make full confess of your crime.—y shall be instantli 
remov to the east turret.” 

“thi accusation,” said madam montoni, speak with difficulty, “i 
use onli as an excus for your cruelty; I disdain to repli to it. you 
do not believ me guilty.” 

“signor!” said emili solemnly, “thi dread charge, I would answer 
with my life, is false. nay, signor,” she added, observ the sever 
of hi countenance, “thi is no moment for restraint, on my part; I do 
not scrupl to tell you, that you are deceived—most wickedli deceived, 
by the suggest of some person, who aim at the ruin of my aunt:—it 
is impossible, that you could yourself have imagin a crime so 
hideous.” 

montoni, hi lip trembl more than before, repli only, “if you 
valu your own safety,” address emily, “you will be silent. I shall 
know how to interpret your remonstrances, should you persever in 
them.” 

emili rais her eye calmli to heaven. “here is, indeed, then, noth 
to hope!” said she. 

“peace!” cri montoni, “or you shall find there is someth to fear.” 

He turn to hi wife, who had now recov her spirits, and who 
vehement and wildli remonstr upon thi mysteri suspicion: but 
montoni’ rage heighten with her indignation, and emily, dread the 
event of it, threw herself between them, and clasp hi knee in 
silence, look up in hi face with an expression, that might have 
soften the heart of a fiend. whether hi wa harden by a convict 
of madam montoni’ guilt, or that a bare suspicion of it made him 
eager to exercis vengeance, he wa total and alik insens to the 
distress of hi wife, and to the plead look of emily, whom he made 
no attempt to raise, but wa vehement menac both, when he wa 
call out of the room by some person at the door. As he shut the door, 
emili heard him turn the lock and take out the key; so that madam 
montoni and herself were now prisoners; and she saw that hi design 
becam more and more terrible. her endeavour to explain hi motiv 
for thi circumst were almost as ineffectu as those to sooth the 
distress of her aunt, whose innoc she could not doubt; but she, at 
length, account for montoni’ readi to suspect hi wife by hi 
own conscious of cruelti toward her, and for the sudden violenc 
of hi present conduct against both, befor even hi suspicion could 
be complet formed, by hi gener eager to effect suddenli 
whatev he wa led to desir and hi careless of justice, or 
humanity, in accomplish it. 

madam montoni, after some time, again look round, in search of a 
possibl of escap from the castle, and convers with emili on the 
subject, who wa now will to encount ani hazard, though she 
forbor to encourag a hope in her aunt, which she herself did not 
admit. how strongli the edific wa secured, and how vigilantli 
guarded, she knew too well; and trembl to commit their safeti to the 
capric of the servant, whose assist they must solicit. old carlo 
wa compassionate, but he seem to be too much in hi master’ 
interest to be trust by them; annett could of herself do little, and 
emili knew ludovico onli from her report. At present, however, these 
consider were useless, madam montoni and her niec be shut up 
from all intercourse, even with the persons, whom there might be these 
reason to reject. 

In the hall, confus and tumult still reigned. emily, as she listen 
anxious to the murmur, that sound along the gallery, sometim 
fanci she heard the clash of swords, and, when she consid the 
natur of the provocation, given by montoni, and hi impetuosity, it 
appear probable, that noth less than arm would termin the 
contention. madam montoni, have exhaust all her express of 
indignation, and emily, her of comfort, they remain silent, in that 
kind of breathless stillness, which, in nature, often succe to the 
uproar of conflict elements; a stillness, like the morning, that 
dawn upon the ruin of an earthquake. 

An uncertain kind of terror pervad emily’ mind; the circumst of 
the past hour still came dimli and confusedli to her memory; and her 
thought were variou and rapid, though without tumult. 

from thi state of wake vision she wa recal by a knock at the 
chamber-door, and, enquir who wa there, heard the whisper voic 
of annette. 

“dear madam, let me come in, I have a great deal to say,” said the poor 
girl. 

“the door is locked,” answer the lady. 

“yes, ma’am, but do pray open it.” 

“the signor ha the key,” said madam montoni. 

“O bless virgin! what will becom of us?” exclaim annette. 

“assist us to escape,” said her mistress. “where is ludovico?” 

“below in the hall, ma’am, amongst them all, fight with the best of 
them!” 

“fighting! who are fighting?” cri madam montoni. 

“whi the signor, ma’am, and all the signors, and a great mani more.” 

“i ani person much hurt?” said emily, in a tremul voice. “hurt! 
yes, ma’amselle,—ther they lie bleeding, and the sword are clashing, 
and—o holi saints! Do let me in, ma’am, they are come thi way—i 
shall be murdered!” 

“fly!” cri emily, “fly! we cannot open the door.” 

annett repeated, that they were coming, and in the same moment fled. 

“be calm, madam,” said emily, turn to her aunt, “I entreat you to be 
calm, I am not frightened—not frighten in the least, do not you be 
alarmed.” 

“you can scarc support yourself,” repli her aunt; “merci god! 
what is it they mean to do with us?” 

“they come, perhaps, to liber us,” said emily, “signor montoni 
perhap is—i conquered.” 

the belief of hi death gave her spirit a sudden shock, and she grew 
faint as she saw him in imagination, expir at her feet. 

“they are coming!” cri madam montoni—“i hear their steps—they are at 
the door!” 

emili turn her languid eye to the door, but terror depriv her of 
utterance. the key sound in the lock; the door opened, and montoni 
appeared, follow by three ruffian-lik men. “execut your orders,” 
said he, turn to them, and point to hi wife, who shrieked, but 
wa immedi carri from the room; while emili sunk, senseless, on 
a couch, by which she had endeavour to support herself. when she 
recovered, she wa alone, and recollect only, that madam montoni had 
been there, togeth with some unconnect particular of the preced 
transaction, which were, however, suffici to renew all her terror. 
she look wildli round the apartment, as if in search of some mean of 
intelligence, concern her aunt, while neither her own danger, nor an 
idea of escap from the room, immedi occurred. 

when her recollect wa more complete, she rais herself and went, 
but with onli a faint hope, to examin whether the door wa unfastened. 
It wa so, and she then step timidli out into the gallery, but 
paus there, uncertain which way she should proceed. her first wish 
wa to gather some information, as to her aunt, and she, at length, 
turn her step to go to the lesser hall, where annett and the other 
servant usual waited. 

everywhere, as she passed, she heard, from a distance, the uproar of 
contention, and the figur and faces, which she met, hurri along 
the passages, struck her mind with dismay. emili might now have 
appeared, like an angel of light, encompass by fiends. At length, she 
reach the lesser hall, which wa silent and deserted, but, pant 
for breath, she sat down to recov herself. the total still of 
thi place wa as aw as the tumult, from which she had escaped: but 
she had now time to recal her scatter thoughts, to rememb her 
person danger, and to consid of some mean of safety. she 
perceived, that it wa useless to seek madam montoni, through the wide 
extent and intricaci of the castle, now, too, when everi avenu 
seem to be beset by ruffians; in thi hall she could not resolv to 
stay, for she knew not how soon it might becom their place of 
rendezvous; and, though she wish to go to her chamber, she dread 
again to encount them on the way. 

thu she sat, trembl and hesitating, when a distant murmur broke on 
the silence, and grew louder and louder, till she distinguish voic 
and step approaching. she then rose to go, but the sound came along 
the onli passage, by which she could depart, and she wa compel to 
await in the hall, the arriv of the persons, whose step she heard. 
As these advanced, she distinguish groans, and then saw a man born 
slowli along by four others. her spirit falter at the sight, and she 
lean against the wall for support. the bearers, meanwhile, enter 
the hall, and, be too busili occupi to detain, or even notic 
emily, she attempt to leav it, but her strength failed, and she 
again sat down on the bench. A damp chill came over her; her sight 
becam confused; she knew not what had passed, or where she was, yet 
the groan of the wound person still vibrat on her heart. In a few 
moments, the tide of life seem again to flow; she began to breath 
more freely, and her sens revived. she had not fainted, nor had ever 
total lost her consciousness, but had contriv to support herself on 
the bench; still without courag to turn her eye upon the unfortun 
object, which remain near her, and about whom the men were yet too 
much engag to attend to her. 

when her strength returned, she rose, and wa suffer to leav the 
hall, though her anxiety, have produc some vain enquiries, 
concern madam montoni, had thu made a discoveri of herself. 
toward her chamber she now hastened, as fast as her step would bear 
her, for she still perceived, upon her passage, the sound of confus 
at a distance, and she endeavoured, by take her way through some 
obscur rooms, to avoid encount the persons, whose look had 
terrifi her before, as well as those part of the castle, where the 
tumult might still rage. 

At length, she reach her chamber, and, have secur the door of the 
corridor, felt herself, for a moment, in safety. A profound still 
reign in thi remot apartment, which not even the faint murmur of 
the most distant sound now reached. she sat down, near one of the 
casements, and, as she gaze on the mountain-view beyond, the deep 
repos of it beauti struck her with all the forc of contrast, and she 
could scarc believ herself so near a scene of savag discord. the 
contend element seem to have retir from their natur spheres, 
and to have collect themselv into the mind of men, for there alon 
the tempest now reigned. 

emili tri to tranquil her spirits, but anxieti made her 
constantli listen for some sound, and often look out upon the ramparts, 
where all, however, wa lone and still. As a sens of her own 
immedi danger had decreased, her apprehens concern madam 
montoni heightened, who, she remembered, had been fierc threaten 
with confin in the east turret, and it wa possible, that her 
husband had satisfi hi present vengeanc with thi punishment. she, 
therefore, determined, when night should return, and the inhabit of 
the castl should be asleep, to explor the way to the turret, which, 
as the direct it stood in wa mentioned, appear not veri difficult 
to be done. she knew, indeed, that although her aunt might be there, 
she could afford her no effectu assistance, but it might give her 
some comfort even to know, that she wa discovered, and to hear the 
sound of her niece’ voice; for herself, ani certainty, concern 
madam montoni’ fate, appear more tolerable, than thi exhaust 
suspense. 

meanwhile, annett did not appear, and emili wa surprised, and 
somewhat alarm for her, whom, in the confus of the late scene, 
variou accid might have befallen, and it wa improbable, that she 
would have fail to come to her apartment, unless someth 
unfortun had happened. 

thu the hour pass in solitude, in silence, and in anxiou 
conjecturing. be not onc disturb by a message, or a sound, it 
appeared, that montoni had wholli forgotten her, and it gave her some 
comfort to find, that she could be so unnoticed. she endeavour to 
withdraw her thought from the anxiety, that prey upon them, but they 
refus control; she could neither read, nor draw, and the tone of her 
lute were so utterli discord with the present state of her feelings, 
that she could not endur them for a moment. 

the sun, at length, set behind the western mountains; hi fieri beam 
fade from the clouds, and then a dun melancholi purpl drew over them, 
and gradual involv the featur of the countri below. soon after, 
the sentinel pass on the rampart to commenc the watch. 

twilight had now spread it gloom over everi object; the dismal 
obscur of her chamber recal fear thoughts, but she remembered, 
that to procur a light she must pass through a great extent of the 
castle, and, abov all, through the halls, where she had alreadi 
experienc so much horror. darkness, indeed, in the present state of 
her spirits, made silenc and solitud terribl to her; it would also 
prevent the possibl of her find her way to the turret, and 
condemn her to remain in suspense, concern the fate of her aunt; yet 
she dare not to ventur forth for a lamp. 

continu at the casement, that she might catch the last linger 
gleam of evening, a thousand vagu imag of fear float on her fancy. 
“what if some of these ruffians,” said she, “should find out the 
privat staircase, and in the dark of night steal into my chamber!” 
then, recollect the mysteri inhabit of the neighbour 
apartment, her terror chang it object. “he is not a prisoner,” said 
she, “though he remain in one chamber, for montoni did not fasten the 
door, when he left it; the unknown person himself did this; it is 
certain, therefore, he can come out when he pleases.” 

she paused, for, notwithstand the terror of darkness, she 
consid it to be veri improbable, whoever he was, that he could have 
ani interest in intrud upon her retirement; and again the subject of 
her emot changed, when, rememb her near to the chamber, 
where the veil had formerli disclos a dread spectacle, she doubt 
whether some passag might not commun between it and the insecur 
door of the staircase. 

It wa now entir dark, and she left the casement. As she sat with 
her eye fix on the hearth, she thought she perceiv there a spark 
of light; it twinkl and disappeared, and then again wa visible. At 
length, with much care, she fan the ember of a wood fire, that had 
been light in the morning, into flame, and, have commun it to 
a lamp, which alway stood in her room, felt a satisfact not to be 
conceived, without a review of her situation. her first care wa to 
guard the door of the staircase, for which purpos she place against 
it all the furnitur she could move, and she wa thu employed, for 
some time, at the end of which she had anoth instanc how much more 
oppress misfortun is to the idle, than to the busy; for, have 
then leisur to think over all the circumst of her present 
afflictions, she imagin a thousand evil for futurity, and these real 
and ideal subject of distress alik wound her mind. 

thu heavili move the hour till midnight, when she count the sullen 
note of the great clock, as they roll along the rampart, unmingl 
with ani sound, except the distant foot-fal of a sentinel, who came to 
reliev guard. she now thought she might ventur toward the turret, 
and, have gentli open the chamber door to examin the corridor, and 
to listen if ani person wa stir in the castle, found all around in 
perfect stillness. yet no sooner had she left the room, than she 
perceiv a light flash on the wall of the corridor, and, without 
wait to see by whom it wa carried, she shrunk back, and close her 
door. No one approaching, she conjectured, that it wa montoni go to 
pay hi midnight visit to her unknown neighbour, and she determin to 
wait, till he should have retir to hi own apartment. 

when the chime had toll anoth half hour, she onc more open the 
door, and, perceiv that no person wa in the corridor, hastili 
cross into a passage, that led along the south side of the castl 
toward the staircase, whenc she believ she could easili find her 
way to the turret. often paus on her way, listen apprehens 
to the murmur of the wind, and look fear onward into the gloom 
of the long passages, she, at length, reach the staircase; but there 
her perplex began. two passag appeared, of which she knew not how 
to prefer one, and wa compelled, at last, to decid by chance, rather 
than by circumstances. that she entered, open first into a wide 
gallery, along which she pass lightli and swiftly; for the lone 
aspect of the place awe her, and she start at the echo of her own 
steps. 

On a sudden, she thought she heard a voice, and, not distinguish 
from whenc it came, fear equal to proceed, or to return. for some 
moments, she stood in an attitud of listen expectation, shrink 
almost from herself and scarc dare to look round her. the voic 
came again, but, though it wa now near her, terror did not allow her 
to judg exactli whenc it proceeded. she thought, however, that it wa 
the voic of complaint, and her belief wa soon confirm by a low 
moan sound, that seem to proceed from one of the chambers, open 
into the gallery. It instantli occur to her, that madam montoni 
might be there confined, and she advanc to the door to speak, but wa 
check by considering, that she was, perhaps, go to commit herself 
to a stranger, who might discov her to montoni; for, though thi 
person, whoever it was, seem to be in affliction, it did not follow, 
that he wa a prisoner. 

while these thought pass over her mind, and left her still in 
hesitation, the voic spoke again, and, call “ludovico,” she then 
perceiv it to be that of annette; on which, no longer hesitating, she 
went in joy to answer her. 

“ludovico!” cri annette, sobbing—“ludovico!” 

“it is not ludovico, it is i—mademoisel emily.” 

annett ceas sobbing, and wa silent. 

“if you can open the door, let me in,” said emily, “here is no person 
to hurt you.” 

“ludovico!—o, ludovico!” cri annette. 

emili now lost her patience, and her fear of be overheard 
increasing, she wa even nearli about to leav the door, when she 
considered, that annett might, possibly, know someth of the 
situat of madam montoni, or direct her to the turret. At length, 
she obtain a reply, though littl satisfactory, to her questions, for 
annett knew noth of madam montoni, and onli conjur emili to tell 
her what wa becom of ludovico. Of him she had no inform to give, 
and she again ask who had shut annett up. 

“ludovico,” said the poor girl, “ludovico shut me up. when I ran away 
from the dressing-room door today, I went I scarc knew where, for 
safety; and, in thi gallery, here, I met ludovico, who hurri me into 
thi chamber, and lock me up to keep me out of harm, as he said. but 
he wa in such a hurri himself, he hardli spoke ten words, but he told 
me he would come, and let me out, when all wa quiet, and he took away 
the key with him. now all these hour are passed, and I have neither 
seen, nor heard a word of him; they have murder him—i know they 
have!” 

emili suddenli rememb the wound person, whom she had seen born 
into the servants’ hall, and she scarc doubted, that he wa 
ludovico, but she conceal the circumst from annette, and 
endeavour to comfort her. then, impati to learn someth of her 
aunt, she again enquir the way to the turret. 

“o! you are not going, ma’amselle,” said annette, “for heaven’ sake, 
do not go, and leav me here by myself.” 

“nay, annette, you do not think I can wait in the galleri all night,” 
repli emily. “direct me to the turret; in the morn I will 
endeavour to releas you.” 

“O holi mary!” exclaim annette, “am I to stay here by myself all 
night! I shall be frighten out of my senses, and I shall die of 
hunger; I have had noth to eat sinc dinner!” 

emili could scarc forbear smile at the heterogen distress of 
annette, though she sincer piti them, and said what she could to 
sooth her. At length, she obtain someth like a direct to the 
east turret, and quit the door, from whence, after mani intricaci 
and perplexities, she reach the steep and wind stair of the 
turret, at the foot of which she stop to rest, and to reanim her 
courag with a sens of her duty. As she survey thi dismal place, 
she perceiv a door on the opposit side of the staircase, and, 
anxiou to know whether it would lead her to madam montoni, she tri 
to undraw the bolts, which fasten it. A fresher air came to her face, 
as she unclos the door, which open upon the east rampart, and the 
sudden current had nearli extinguish her light, which she now remov 
to a distance; and again, look out upon the obscur terrace, she 
perceiv onli the faint outlin of the wall and of some towers, 
while, above, heavi clouds, born along the wind, seem to mingl with 
the stars, and wrap the night in thicker darkness. As she gazed, now 
will to defer the moment of certainty, from which she expect onli 
confirm of evil, a distant footstep remind her, that she might 
be observ by the men on watch, and, hastili close the door, she 
took her lamp, and pass up the staircase. trembl came upon her, as 
she ascend through the gloom. To her melancholi fanci thi seem to 
be a place of death, and the chill silence, that reigned, confirm 
it character. her spirit faltered. “perhaps,” said she, “I am come 
hither onli to learn a dread truth, or to wit some horribl 
spectacle; I feel that my sens would not surviv such an addit of 
horror.” 

the imag of her aunt murdered—murdered, perhaps, by the hand of 
montoni, rose to her mind; she trembled, gasp for breath—rep 
that she had dare to ventur hither, and check her steps. but, after 
she had paus a few minutes, the conscious of her duti returned, 
and she went on. still all wa silent. At length a track of blood, upon 
a stair, caught her eye; and instantli she perceived, that the wall and 
sever other step were stained. she paused, again struggl to 
support herself, and the lamp almost fell from her trembl hand. 
still no sound wa heard, no live be seem to inhabit the turret; 
a thousand time she wish herself again in her chamber; dread to 
enquir farther—dread to encount some horribl spectacle, and yet 
could not resolve, now that she wa so near the termin of her 
efforts, to desist from them. have again collect courag to 
proceed, after ascend about half way up the turret, she came to 
anoth door, but here again she stop in hesitation; listen for 
sound within, and then, summon all her resolution, unclos it, and 
enter a chamber, which, as her lamp shot it feebl ray through the 
darkness, seem to exhibit onli dew-stain and desert walls. As she 
stood examin it, in fear expect of discov the remain 
of her unfortun aunt, she perceiv someth lie in an obscur 
corner of the room, and, struck with a horribl conviction, she became, 
for an instant, motionless and nearli insensible. then, with a kind of 
desper resolution, she hurri toward the object that excit her 
terror, when, perceiv the cloth of some person, on the floor, she 
caught hold of them, and found in her grasp the old uniform of a 
soldier, beneath which appear a heap of pike and other arms. 
scarc dare to trust her sight, she continued, for some moments, to 
gaze on the object of her late alarm, and then left the chamber, so 
much comfort and occupi by the conviction, that her aunt wa not 
there, that she wa go to descend the turret, without enquir 
farther; when, on turn to do so, she observ upon some step on the 
second flight an appear of blood, and remembering, that there wa 
yet anoth chamber to be explored, she again follow the wind of 
the ascent. still, as she ascended, the track of blood glare upon the 
stairs. 

It led her to the door of a landing-place, that termin them, but 
she wa unabl to follow it farther. now that she wa so near the 
sought-for certainty, she dread to know it, even more than before, 
and had not fortitud suffici to speak, or to attempt open the 
door. 

have listened, in vain, for some sound, that might confirm, or 
destroy her fears, she, at length, laid her hand on the lock, and, 
find it fastened, call on madam montoni; but onli a chill 
silenc ensued. 

“she is dead!” she cried,—“murdered!—h blood is on the stairs!” 

emili grew veri faint; could support herself no longer, and had 
scarc presenc of mind to set down the lamp, and place herself on a 
step. 

when her recollect returned, she spoke again at the door, and again 
attempt to open it, and, have linger for some time, without 
receiv ani answer, or hear a sound, she descend the turret, 
and, with all the swift her feebl would permit, sought her own 
apartment. 

As she turn into the corridor, the door of a chamber opened, from 
whenc montoni came forth; but emily, more terrifi than ever to 
behold him, shrunk back into the passag soon enough to escap be 
noticed, and heard him close the door, which she had perceiv wa the 
same she formerli observed. have here listen to hi depart 
steps, till their faint sound wa lost in distance, she ventur to her 
apartment, and, secur it onc again, retir to her bed, leav the 
lamp burn on the hearth. but sleep wa fled from her harass mind, 
to which imag of horror alon occurred. she endeavour to think it 
possible, that madam montoni had not been taken to the turret; but, 
when she recollect the former menac of her husband and the terribl 
spirit of vengeance, which he had display on a late occasion; when 
she rememb hi gener character, the look of the men, who had 
forc madam montoni from her apartment, and the written trace on the 
stair of the turret—sh could not doubt, that her aunt had been 
carri thither, and could scarc hope, that she had not been carri 
to be murdered. 

the grey of morn had long dawn through her casements, befor emili 
close her eye in sleep; when weari nature, at length, yield her a 
respit from suffering. 



chapter XI 

who rear the bloodi hand? 
sayer 


emili remain in her chamber, on the follow morning, without 
receiv ani notic from montoni, or see a human being, except the 
arm men, who sometim pass on the terrac below. have tast no 
food sinc the dinner of the preced day, extrem faint made her 
feel the necess of quit the asylum of her apart to obtain 
refreshment, and she wa also veri anxiou to procur liberti for 
annette. willing, however, to defer ventur forth, as long as 
possible, and considering, whether she should appli to montoni, or to 
the compass of some other person, her excess anxieti concern 
her aunt, at length, overcam her abhorr of hi presence, and she 
determin to go to him, and to entreat, that he would suffer her to 
see madam montoni. 

meanwhile, it wa too certain, from the absenc of annette, that some 
accid had befallen ludovico, and that she wa still in confinement; 
emily, therefore, resolv also to visit the chamber, where she had 
spoken to her, on the preced night, and, if the poor girl wa yet 
there, to inform montoni of her situation. 

It wa near noon, befor she ventur from her apartment, and went 
first to the south gallery, whither she pass without meet a singl 
person, or hear a sound, except, now and then, the echo of a distant 
footstep. 

It wa unnecessari to call annette, whose lament were audibl 
upon the first approach to the gallery, and who, bewail her own and 
ludovico’ fate, told emily, that she should certainli be starv to 
death, if she wa not let out immediately. emili replied, that she wa 
go to beg her releas of montoni; but the terror of hunger now 
yield to those of the signor, and, when emili left her, she wa 
loudli entreating, that her place of refug might be conceal from 
him. 

As emili drew near the great hall, the sound she heard and the peopl 
she met in the passag renew her alarm. the latter, however, were 
peaceable, and did not interrupt her, though they look earnestli at 
her, as she passed, and sometim spoke. On cross the hall toward 
the cedar room, where montoni usual sat, she perceived, on the 
pavement, fragment of swords, some tatter garment stain with 
blood, and almost expect to have seen among them a dead body; but 
from such a spectacl she was, at present, spared. As she approach 
the room, the sound of sever voic issu from within, and a dread 
of appear befor mani strangers, as well as of irrit montoni by 
such an intrusion, made her paus and falter from her purpose. she 
look up through the long arcad of the hall, in search of a servant, 
who might bear a message, but no one appeared, and the urgenc of what 
she had to request made her still linger near the door. the voic 
within were not in contention, though she distinguish those of 
sever of the guest of the preced day; but still her resolut 
failed, whenev she would have tap at the door, and she had 
determin to walk in the hall, till some person should appear, who 
might call montoni from the room, when, as she turn from the door, it 
wa suddenli open by himself. emili trembled, and wa confused, while 
he almost start with surprise, and all the terror of hi counten 
unfold themselves. she forgot all she would have said, and neither 
enquir for her aunt, nor entreat for annette, but stood silent and 
embarrassed. 

after close the door he reprov her for a meanness, of which she had 
not been guilty, and sternli question her what she had overheard; an 
accusation, which reviv her recollect so far, that she assur him 
she had not come thither with an intent to listen to hi 
conversation, but to entreat hi compass for her aunt, and for 
annette. montoni seem to doubt thi assertion, for he regard her 
with a scrutin look; and the doubt evid aros from no 
trifl interest. emili then further explain herself, and conclud 
with entreat him to inform her, where her aunt wa placed, and to 
permit, that she might visit her; but he look upon her onli with a 
malign smile, which instantan confirm her worst fear for 
her aunt, and, at that moment, she had not courag to renew her 
entreaties. 

“for annette,” said he,—“if you go to carlo, he will releas the girl; 
the foolish fellow, who shut her up, die yesterday.” emili 
shuddered.—“but my aunt, signor”—said she, “O tell me of my aunt!” 

“she is taken care of,” repli montoni hastily, “I have no time to 
answer idl questions.” 

He would have pass on, but emily, in a voic of agony, that could not 
be wholli resisted, conjur him to tell her, where madam montoni was; 
while he paused, and she anxious watch hi countenance, a trumpet 
sounded, and, in the next moment, she heard the heavi gate of the 
portal open, and then the clatter of horses’ hoof in the court, 
with the confus of mani voices. she stood for a moment hesit 
whether she should follow montoni, who, at the sound of the trumpet, 
had pass through the hall, and, turn her eye whenc it came, she 
saw through the door, that open beyond a long perspect of arch 
into the courts, a parti of horsemen, whom she judged, as well as the 
distanc and her embarrass would allow, to be the same she had seen 
depart, a few day before. but she staid not to scrutinize, for, when 
the trumpet sound again, the chevali rush out of the cedar room, 
and men came run into the hall from everi quarter of the castle. 
emili onc more hurri for shelter to her own apartment. thither she 
wa still pursu by imag of horror. she reconsid montoni’ 
manner and words, when he had spoken of hi wife, and they serv onli 
to confirm her most terribl suspicions. tear refus ani longer to 
reliev her distress, and she had sat for a consider time absorb 
in thought, when a knock at the chamber door arous her, on open 
which she found old carlo. 

“dear young lady,” said he, “I have been so flurried, I never onc 
thought of you till just now. I have brought you some fruit and wine, 
and I am sure you must stand in need of them by thi time.” 

“thank you, carlo,” said emily, “thi is veri good of you. did the 
signor remind you of me?” 

“no, signora,” repli carlo, “hi _excellenza_ ha busi enough on 
hi hands.” emili then renew her enquiries, concern madam 
montoni, but carlo had been employ at the other end of the castle, 
dure the time, that she wa removed, and he had heard noth since, 
concern her. 

while he spoke, emili look steadili at him, for she scarc knew 
whether he wa realli ignorant, or conceal hi knowledg of the truth 
from a fear of offend hi master. To sever questions, concern 
the content of yesterday, he gave veri limit answers; but told, 
that the disput were now amic settled, and that the signor 
believ himself to have been mistaken in hi suspicion of hi guests. 
“the fight wa about that, signora,” said carlo; “but I trust I 
shall never see such anoth day in thi castle, though strang thing 
are about to be done.” 

On her enquir hi meaning, “ah, signora!” ad he, “it is not for 
me to betray secrets, or tell all I think, but time will tell.” 

she then desir him to releas annette, and, have describ the 
chamber in which the poor girl wa confined, he promis to obey her 
immediately, and wa departing, when she rememb to ask who were the 
person just arrived. her late conjectur wa right; it wa verezzi, 
with hi party. 

her spirit were somewhat sooth by thi short convers with 
carlo; for, in her present circumstances, it afford some comfort to 
hear the accent of compassion, and to meet the look of sympathy. 

An hour pass befor annett appeared, who then came weep and 
sobbing. “O ludovico—ludovico!” cri she. 

“mi poor annette!” said emily, and made her sit down. 

“who could have foreseen this, ma’amselle? O miserable, wretched, 
day—that ever I should live to see it!” and she continu to moan and 
lament, till emili thought it necessari to check her excess of grief. 
“we are continu lose dear friend by death,” said she, with a 
sigh, that came from her heart. “we must submit to the will of 
heaven—our tears, alas! cannot recal the dead!” 

annett took the handkerchief from her face. 

“you will meet ludovico in a better world, I hope,” ad emily. 

“yes—yes,—ma’amselle,” sob annette, “but I hope I shall meet him 
again in this—though he is so wounded!” 

“wounded!” exclaim emily, “doe he live?” 

“yes, ma’am, but—but he ha a terribl wound, and could not come to let 
me out. they thought him dead, at first, and he ha not been rightli 
himself, till within thi hour.” 

“well, annette, I rejoic to hear he lives.” 

“lives! holi saints! whi he will not die, surely!” 

emili said she hope not, but thi express of hope annett thought 
impli fear, and her own increas in proportion, as emili endeavour 
to encourag her. To enquiries, concern madam montoni, she could 
give no satisfactori answers. 

“I quit forgot to ask among the servants, ma’amselle,” said she, “for 
I could think of nobodi but poor ludovico.” 

annette’ grief wa now somewhat assuaged, and emili sent her to make 
enquiries, concern her lady, of whom, however, she could obtain no 
intelligence, some of the peopl she spoke with be realli ignor 
of her fate, and other have probabl receiv order to conceal it. 

thi day pass with emili in continu grief and anxieti for her aunt; 
but she wa unmolest by ani notic from montoni; and, now that 
annett wa liberated, she obtain food, without expos herself to 
danger, or impertinence. 

two follow day pass in the same manner, unmark by ani 
occurrence, dure which she obtain no inform of madam montoni. 
On the even of the second, have dismiss annette, and retir to 
bed, her mind becam haunt by the most dismal images, such as her 
long anxiety, concern her aunt, suggested; and, unabl to forget 
herself, for a moment, or to vanquish the phantoms, that torment her, 
she rose from her bed, and went to one of the casement of her chamber, 
to breath a freer air. 

all without wa silent and dark, unless that could be call light, 
which wa onli the faint glimmer of the stars, show imperfectli the 
outlin of the mountains, the western tower of the castl and the 
rampart below, where a solitari sentinel wa pacing. what an imag of 
repos did thi scene present! the fierc and terribl passions, too, 
which so often agit the inhabit of thi edifice, seem now 
hush in sleep;—thos mysteri workings, that rous the element of 
man’ natur into tempest—wer calm. emily’ heart wa not so; but her 
sufferings, though deep, partook of the gentl charact of her mind. 
her wa a silent anguish, weeping, yet enduring; not the wild energi 
of passion, inflam imagination, bear down the barrier of reason 
and live in a world of it own. 

the air refresh her, and she continu at the casement, look on 
the shadowi scene, over which the planet burn with a clear light, 
amid the deep blue æther, as they silent move in their destin 
course. she rememb how often she had gaze on them with her dear 
father, how often he had point out their way in the heavens, and 
explain their laws; and these reflect led to others, which, in an 
almost equal degree, awaken her grief and astonishment. 

they brought a retrospect of all the strang and mourn events, which 
had occur sinc she live in peac with her parents. and to emily, 
who had been so tenderli educated, so tenderli loved, who onc knew 
onli good and happiness—to her, the late event and her present 
situation—in a foreign land—in a remot castle—surround by vice and 
violence—seem more like the vision of a distemp imagination, 
than the circumst of truth. she wept to think of what her parent 
would have suffered, could they have foreseen the event of her futur 
life. 

while she rais her stream eye to heaven, she observ the same 
planet, which she had seen in languedoc, on the night, preced her 
father’ death, rise abov the eastern tower of the castle, while she 
rememb the conversation, which ha passed, concern the probabl 
state of depart souls; remembered, also, the solemn music she had 
heard, and to which the tender of her spirit had, in spite of her 
reason, given a superstiti meaning. At these recollect she wept 
again, and continu musing, when suddenli the note of sweet music 
pass on the air. A superstiti dread stole over her; she stood 
listening, for some moments, in trembl expectation, and then 
endeavour to recollect her thoughts, and to reason herself into 
composure; but human reason cannot establish her law on subjects, lost 
in the obscur of imagination, ani more than the eye can ascertain 
the form of objects, that onli glimmer through the dim of night. 

her surprise, on hear such sooth and delici sounds, was, at 
least, justifiable; for it wa long—veri long, sinc she had listen 
to anyth like melody. the fierc trumpet and the shrill fife were 
the onli instrument she had heard, sinc her arriv at udolpho. 

when her mind wa somewhat more composed, she tri to ascertain from 
what quarter the sound proceeded, and thought they came from below; 
but whether from a room of the castle, or from the terrace, she could 
not with certainti judge. fear and surpris now yield to the 
enchant of a strain, that float on the silent night, with the 
most soft and melancholi sweetness. suddenly, it seem remov to a 
distance, trembl faintly, and then entir ceased. 

she continu to listen, sunk in that pleas repose, which soft music 
leav on the mind—but it came no more. upon thi strang circumst 
her thought were long engaged, for strang it certainli wa to hear 
music at midnight, when everi inhabit of the castl had long sinc 
retir to rest, and in a place, where noth like harmoni had been 
heard before, probably, for mani years. long suffer had made her 
spirit peculiarli sensibl to terror, and liabl to be affect by the 
illus of superstition.—it now seem to her, as if her dead father 
had spoken to her in that strain, to inspir her with comfort and 
confidence, on the subject, which had then occupi her mind. yet 
reason told her, that thi wa a wild conjecture, and she wa inclin 
to dismiss it; but, with the inconsist so natural, when imagin 
guid the thoughts, she then waver toward a belief as wild. she 
rememb the singular event, connect with the castle, which had 
given it into the possess of it present owner; and, when she 
consid the mysteri manner, in which it late possessor had 
disappeared, and that she had never sinc been heard of, her mind wa 
impress with a high degre of solemn awe; so that, though there 
appear no clue to connect that event with the late music, she wa 
inclin fanci to think they had some relat to each other. At 
thi conjecture, a sudden chill ran through her frame; she look 
fear upon the duski of her chamber, and the dead silence, that 
prevail there, heighten to her fanci it gloomi aspect. 

At length, she left the casement, but her step faltered, as she 
approach the bed, and she stop and look round. the singl lamp, 
that burn in her spaciou chamber, wa expiring; for a moment, she 
shrunk from the dark beyond; and then, asham of the weakness, 
which, however, she could not wholli conquer, went forward to the bed, 
where her mind did not soon know the sooth of sleep. she still 
muse on the late occurrence, and look with anxieti to the next 
night, when, at the same hour, she determin to watch whether the 
music returned. “if those sound were human,” said she, “I shall 
probabl hear them again.” 



chapter xii 

then, oh, you bless minist above, 
keep me in patience; and, in ripen’d time, 
unfold the evil which is here wrapt up 
In countenance. 
shakespear 


annett came almost breathless to emily’ apart in the morning. “O 
ma’amselle!” said she, in broken sentences, “what news I have to tell! 
I have found out who the prison is—but he wa no prisoner, 
neither;—h that wa shut up in the chamber I told you of. I must think 
him a ghost, forsooth!” 

“who wa the prisoner?” enquir emily, while her thought glanc back 
to the circumst of the preced night. 

“you mistake, ma’am,” said annette; “he wa not a prisoner, after all.” 

“who is the person, then?” 

“holi saints!” rejoin annette; “how I wa surprised! I met him just 
now, on the rampart below, there. I never wa so surpris in my life! 
ah! ma’amselle! thi is a strang place! I should never have done 
wondering, if I wa to live here a hundr years. but, as I wa saying, 
I met him just now on the rampart, and I wa think of nobodi less 
than of him.” 

“thi trifl is insupportable,” said emily; “pr’ythee, annette, do 
not tortur my patienc ani longer.” 

“nay, ma’amselle, guess—guess who it was; it wa somebodi you know veri 
well.” 

“I cannot guess,” said emili impatiently. 

“nay, ma’amselle, i’ll tell you someth to guess by—a tall signor, 
with a longish face, who walk so stately, and use to wear such a high 
feather in hi hat; and use often to look down upon the ground, when 
peopl spoke to him; and to look at peopl from under hi eyebrows, as 
it were, all so dark and frowning. you have seen him, often and often, 
at venice, ma’am. then he wa so intim with the signor, too. and, 
now I think of it, I wonder what he could be afraid of in thi lone 
old castle, that he should shut himself up for. but he is come abroad 
now, for I met him on the rampart just thi minute. I trembl when I 
saw him, for I alway wa afraid of him, somehow; but I determin I 
would not let him see it; so I went up to him, and made him a low 
curtesy, ‘you are welcom to the castle, signor orsino,’ said i.” 

“o, it wa signor orsino, then!” said emily. 

“yes, ma’amselle, signor orsino, himself, who caus that venetian 
gentleman to be killed, and ha been pop about from place to place, 
ever since, as I hear.” 

“good god!” exclaim emily, recov from the shock of thi 
intelligence; “and is _he_ come to udolpho! He doe well to endeavour 
to conceal himself.” 

“yes, ma’amselle, but if that wa all, thi desol place would 
conceal him, without hi shut himself up in one room. who would 
think of come to look for him here? I am sure I should as soon think 
of go to look for anybodi in the other world.” 

“there is some truth in that,” said emily, who would now have conclud 
it wa orsino’ music, which she had heard, on the preced night, had 
she not known, that he had neither taste, nor skill in the art. but, 
though she wa unwil to add to the number of annette’ surprises, 
by mention the subject of her own, she enquired, whether ani person 
in the castl play on a music instrument? 

“O yes, ma’amselle! there is benedetto play the great drum to 
admiration; and then, there is launcelot the trumpeter; nay, for that 
matter, ludovico himself can play on the trumpet;—but he is ill now. I 
rememb once—” 

emili interrupt her; “have you heard no other music sinc you came to 
the castle—non last night?” 

“why, did _you_ hear ani last night, ma’amselle?” 

emili evad thi question, by repeat her own. 

“why, no, ma’am,” repli annette; “I never heard ani music here, I 
must say, but the drum and the trumpet; and, as for last night, I did 
noth but dream I saw my late lady’ ghost.” 

“your _late_ lady’s,” said emili in a tremul voice; “you have heard 
more, then. tell me—tel me all, annette, I entreat; tell me the worst 
at once.” 

“nay, ma’amselle, you know the worst already.” 

“I know nothing,” said emily. 

“yes, you do, ma’amselle; you know, that nobodi know anyth about 
her; and it is plain, therefore, she is gone, the way of the first ladi 
of the castle—nobodi ever knew anyth about her.” 

emili lean her head upon her hand, and was, for some time, silent; 
then, tell annett she wish to be alone, the latter left the room. 

the remark of annett had reviv emily’ terribl suspicion, 
concern the fate of madam montoni; and she resolv to make anoth 
effort to obtain certainti on thi subject, by appli to montoni onc 
more. 

when annett returned, a few hour after, she told emily, that the 
porter of the castl wish veri much to speak with her, for that he 
had someth of import to say; her spirit had, however, of late 
been so subject to alarm, that ani new circumst excit it; and 
thi messag from the porter, when her first surpris wa over, made 
her look round for some lurk danger, the more suspiciously, perhaps, 
becaus she had frequent remark the unpleas air and counten 
of thi man. she now hesitated, whether to speak with him, doubt 
even, that thi request wa onli a pretext to draw her into some 
danger; but a littl reflect show her the improb of this, 
and she blush at her weak fears. 

“I will speak to him, annette,” said she; “desir him to come to the 
corridor immediately.” 

annett departed, and soon after returned. 

“barnardine, ma’amselle,” said she, “dare not come to the corridor, 
lest he should be discovered, it is so far from hi post; and he dare 
not even leav the gate for a moment now; but, if you will come to him 
at the portal, through some roundabout passag he told me of, without 
cross the courts, he ha that to tell, which will surpris you. but 
you must not come through the courts, lest the signor should see you.” 

emily, neither approv these “roundabout passage,” nor the other part 
of the request, now posit refus to go. “tell him,” said she, “if 
he ha anyth of consequ to impart, I will hear him in the 
corridor, whenev he ha an opportun of come thither.” 

annett went to deliv thi message, and wa absent a consider 
time. when she returned, “it won’t do, ma’amselle,” said she. 
“barnardin ha been consid all thi time what can be done, for it 
is as much as hi place is worth to leav hi post now. but, if you 
will come to the east rampart in the dusk of the evening, he can, 
perhaps, steal away, and tell you all he ha to say.” 

emili wa surpris and alarmed, at the secreci which thi man seem 
to think so necessary, and hesit whether to meet him, till, 
considering, that he might mean to warn her of some seriou danger, she 
resolv to go. 

“soon after sunset,” said she, “I will be at the end of the east 
rampart. but then the watch will be set,” she added, recollect 
herself, “and how can barnardin pass unobserved?” 

“that is just what I said to him, ma’am, and he answer me, that he 
had the key of the gate, at the end of the rampart, that lead toward 
the courts, and could let himself through that way; and as for the 
sentinels, there were none at thi end of the terrace, becaus the 
place is guard enough by the high wall of the castle, and the east 
turret; and he said those at the other end were too far off to see him, 
if it wa pretti duskyish.” 

“well,” said emily, “I must hear what he ha to tell; and, therefore, 
desir you will go with me to the terrace, thi evening.” 

“he desir it might be pretti duskyish, ma’amselle,” repeat annette, 
“becaus of the watch.” 

emili paused, and then said she would be on the terrace, an hour after 
sunset;—“and tell barnardine,” she added, “to be punctual to the time; 
for that I, also, may be observ by signor montoni. where is the 
signor? I would speak with him.” 

“he is in the cedar chamber, ma’am, counsel with the other signors. 
He is go to give them a sort of treat today, to make up for what 
pass at the last, I suppose; the peopl are all veri busi in the 
kitchen.” 

emili now enquired, if montoni expect ani new guests? and annett 
believ that he did not. “poor ludovico!” ad she, “he would be as 
merri as the best of them, if he wa well; but he may recov yet. 
count morano wa wound as bad, as he, and he is got well again, and 
is gone back to venice.” 

“i he so?” said emily, “when did you hear this?” 

“I heard it last night, ma’amselle, but I forgot to tell it.” 

emili ask some further questions, and then, desir annett would 
observ and inform her, when montoni wa alone, the girl went to 
deliv her messag to barnardine. 

montoni was, however, so much engaged, dure the whole day, that emili 
had no opportun of seek a releas from her terribl suspense, 
concern her aunt. annett wa employ in watch hi steps, and in 
attend upon ludovico, whom she, assist by caterina, nurs with 
the utmost care; and emili was, of course, left much alone. her 
thought dwelt often on the messag of the porter, and were employ in 
conjectur the subject, that occas it, which she sometim 
imagin concern the fate of madam montoni; at others, that it 
relat to some person danger, which threaten herself. the cautiou 
secreci which barnardin observ in hi conduct, inclin her to 
believ the latter. 

As the hour of appoint drew near, her impati increased. At 
length, the sun set; she heard the pass step of the sentinel go 
to their posts; and wait onli for annett to accompani her to the 
terrace, who, soon after, came, and they descend together. when emili 
express apprehens of meet montoni, or some of hi guests, “o, 
there is no fear of that, ma’amselle,” said annette, “they are all set 
in to feast yet, and that barnardin knows.” 

they reach the first terrace, where the sentinel demand who 
passed; and emily, have answered, walk on to the east rampart, at 
the entranc of which they were again stopped; and, have again 
replied, were permit to proceed. but emili did not like to expos 
herself to the discret of these men, at such an hour; and, impati 
to withdraw from the situation, she step hastili on in search of 
barnardine. He wa not yet come. she lean pensiv on the wall of 
the rampart, and wait for him. the gloom of twilight sat deep on the 
surround objects, blend in soft confus the valley, the 
mountains, and the woods, whose tall heads, stir by the even 
breeze, gave the onli sounds, that stole on silence, except a faint, 
faint choru of distant voices, that aros from within the castle. 

“what voic are those?” said emily, as she fear listened. 

“it is onli the signor and hi guests, carousing,” repli annette. 

“good god!” thought emily, “can thi man’ heart be so gay, when he ha 
made anoth be so wretched; if, indeed, my aunt is yet suffer to 
feel her wretchedness? O! whatev are my own sufferings, may my heart 
never, never be harden against those of others!” 

she look up, with a sensat of horror, to the east turret, near 
which she then stood; a light glimmer through the grate of the lower 
chamber, but those of the upper one were dark. presently, she perceiv 
a person move with a lamp across the lower room; but thi 
circumst reviv no hope, concern madam montoni, whom she had 
vainli sought in that apartment, which had appear to contain onli 
soldiers’ accoutrements. emily, however, determin to attempt the 
outer door of the turret, as soon as barnardin should withdraw; and, 
if it wa unfastened, to make anoth effort to discov her aunt. 

the moment passed, but still barnardin did not appear; and emily, 
becom uneasy, hesit whether to wait ani longer. she would have 
sent annett to the portal to hasten him, but fear to be left alone, 
for it wa now almost dark, and a melancholi streak of red, that still 
linger in the west, wa the onli vestig of depart day. the strong 
interest, however, which barnardine’ messag had awakened, overcam 
other apprehensions, and still detain her. 

while she wa conjectur with annett what could thu occas hi 
absence, they heard a key turn in the lock of the gate near them, and 
present saw a man advancing. It wa barnardine, of whom emili hastili 
enquir what he had to communicate, and desired, that he would tell 
her quickly, “for I am chill with thi even air,” said she. 

“you must dismiss your maid, lady,” said the man in a voice, the deep 
tone of which shock her, “what I have to tell is to you only.” 

emily, after some hesitation, desir annett to withdraw to a littl 
distance. “now, my friend, what would you say?” 

He wa silent a moment, as if considering, and then said,— 

“that which would cost me my place, at least, if it came to the 
signor’ ears. you must promise, lady, that noth shall ever make you 
tell a syllabl of the matter; I have been trust in thi affair, and, 
if it wa known, that I betray my trust, my life, perhaps, might 
answer it. but I wa concern for you, lady, and I resolv to tell 
you.” He paused.— 

emili thank him, assur him that he might repos on her discretion, 
and entreat him to dispatch. 

“annett told us in the hall how unhappi you were about signora 
montoni, and how much you wish to know what wa becom of her.” 

“most true,” said emili eagerly, “and you can inform me. I conjur you 
tell me the worst, without hesitation.” she rest her trembl arm 
upon the wall. 

“I can tell you,” said barnardine, and paused.— 

emili had no power to enforc her entreaties. 

“I _can_ tell you,” resum barnardine,—“but—” 

“but what?” exclaim emily, recov her resolution. 

“here I am, ma’amselle,” said annette, who, have heard the eager 
tone, in which emili pronounc these words, came run toward her. 

“retire!” said barnardine, sternly; “you are not wanted;” and, as emili 
said nothing, annett obeyed. 

“I _can_ tell you,” repeat the porter,—“but I know not how—you were 
afflict before.—” 

“I am prepar for the worst, my friend,” said emily, in a firm and 
solemn voice. “I can support ani certainti better than thi suspense.” 

“well, signora, if that is the case, you shall hear.—you know, I 
suppose, that the signor and hi ladi use sometim to disagree. It is 
none of my concern to enquir what it wa about, but I believ you 
know it wa so.” 

“well,” said emily, “proceed.” 

“the signor, it seems, had late been veri wrath against her. I saw 
all, and heard all,—a great deal more than peopl thought for; but it 
wa none of my business, so I said nothing. A few day ago, the signor 
sent for me. ‘barnardine,’ say he, ‘you are—an honest man, I think I 
can trust you.’ I assur hi _excellenza_ that he could. ‘then,’ say 
he, as near as I can remember, ‘I have an affair in hand, which I want 
you to assist me in.’—then he told me what I wa to do; but that I 
shall say noth about—it concern onli the signora.” 

“O heavens!” exclaim emily—“what have you done?” 

barnardin hesitated, and wa silent. 

“what fiend could tempt him, or you, to such an act!” cri emily, 
chill with horror, and scarc abl to support her faint spirits. 

“it wa a fiend,” said barnardin in a gloomi tone of voice. they were 
now both silent;—emili had not courag to enquir further, and 
barnardin seem to shrink from tell more. At length he said, “it 
is of no use to think of the past; the signor wa cruel enough, but he 
would be obeyed. what signifi my refusing? He would have found 
others, who had no scruples.” 

“you have murder her, then!” said emily, in a hollow and inward 
voice—“i am talk with a murderer!” barnardin stood silent; while 
emili turn from him, and attempt to leav the place. 

“stay, lady!” said he, “you deserv to think so still—sinc you can 
believ me capabl of such a deed.” 

“if you are innocent, tell me quickly,” said emily, in faint accents, 
“for I feel I shall not be abl to hear you long.” 

“I will tell you no more,” said he, and walk away. emili had just 
strength enough to bid him stay, and then to call annette, on whose arm 
she leaned, and they walk slowli up the rampart, till they heard 
step behind them. It wa barnardin again. 

“send away the girl,” said he, “and I will tell you more.” 

“she must not go,” said emily; “what you have to say, she may hear.” 

“may she so, lady?” said he. “you shall know no more, then;” and he wa 
going, though slowly, when emily’ anxiety, overcom the resent 
and fear, which the man’ behaviour had roused, she desir him to 
stay, and bade annett retire. 

“the signora is alive,” said he, “for me. she is my prisoner, though; 
hi _excellenza_ ha shut her up in the chamber over the great gate of 
the court, and I have the charg of her. I wa go to have told you, 
you might see her—but now—” 

emily, reliev from an unutter load of anguish by thi speech, had 
now onli to ask barnardine’ forgiveness, and to conjure, that he would 
let her visit her aunt. 

He compli with less reluctance, than she expected, and told her, 
that, if she would repair, on the follow night, when the signor wa 
retir to rest, to the postern-g of the castle, she should, 
perhaps, see madam montoni. 

amid all the thankfulness, which emili felt for thi concession, she 
thought she observ a malici triumph in hi manner, when he 
pronounc the last words; but, in the next moment, she dismiss the 
thought, and, have again thank him, commend her aunt to hi pity, 
and assur him, that she would herself reward him, and would be 
punctual to her appointment, she bade him good night, and retired, 
unobserved, to her chamber. It wa a consider time, befor the 
tumult of joy, which barnardine’ unexpect intellig had 
occasioned, allow emili to think with clearness, or to be consciou 
of the real dangers, that still surround madam montoni and herself. 
when thi agit subsided, she perceived, that her aunt wa yet the 
prison of a man, to whose vengeance, or avarice, she might fall a 
sacrifice; and, when she further consid the savag aspect of the 
person, who wa appoint to guard madam montoni, her doom appear to 
be alreadi sealed, for the counten of barnardin seem to bear the 
stamp of a murderer; and, when she had look upon it, she felt 
inclin to believe, that there wa no deed, howev black, which he 
might not be prevail upon to execute. these reflect brought to 
her remembr the tone of voice, in which he had promis to grant 
her request to see hi prisoner; and she muse upon it long in 
uneasi and doubt. sometimes, she even hesitated, whether to trust 
herself with him at the lone hour he had appointed; and once, and 
onli once, it struck her, that madam montoni might be alreadi 
murdered, and that thi ruffian wa appoint to decoy herself to some 
secret place, where her life also wa to be sacrif to the avaric 
of montoni, who then would claim secur the contest estat in 
languedoc. the consider of the enorm of such guilt did, at 
length, reliev her from the belief of it probability, but not from 
all the doubt and fears, which a recollect of barnardine’ manner 
had occasioned. from these subjects, her thoughts, at length, pass to 
others; and, as the even advanced, she remembered, with somewhat 
more than surprise, the music she had heard, on the preced night, 
and now await it return, with more than curiosity. 

she distinguished, till a late hour, the distant carous of montoni 
and hi companions—th loud contest, the dissolut laugh and the choral 
song, that made the hall re-echo. At length, she heard the heavi gate 
of the castl shut for the night, and those sound instantli sunk into 
a silence, which wa disturb onli by the whisper step of persons, 
pass through the galleri to their remot rooms. emili now judg 
it to be about the time, when she had heard the music, on the preced 
night, dismiss annette, and gentli open the casement to watch for 
it return. the planet she had so particularli noticed, at the 
recurr of the music, wa not yet risen; but, with superstiti 
weakness, she kept her eye fix on that part of the hemisphere, where 
it would rise, almost expecting, that, when it appeared, the sound 
would return. At length, it came, seren bright, over the eastern 
tower of the castle. her heart trembled, when she perceiv it, and 
she had scarc courag to remain at the casement, lest the return 
music should confirm her terror, and subdu the littl strength she yet 
retained. the clock soon after struck one, and, know thi to be 
about the time, when the sound had occurred, she sat down in a chair, 
near the casement, and endeavour to compos her spirits; but the 
anxieti of expect yet disturb them. everything, however, 
remain still; she heard onli the solitari step of a sentinel, and the 
lull murmur of the wood below, and she again lean from the 
casement, and again looked, as if for intelligence, to the planet, 
which wa now risen high abov the towers. 

emili continu to listen, but no music came. “those were sure no 
mortal sounds!” said she, recollect their entranc melody. “no 
inhabit of thi castl could utter such; and, where is the feeling, 
that could modul such exquisit expression? We all know, that it ha 
been affirm celesti sound have sometim been heard on earth. 
father pierr and father antoin declared, that they had sometim 
heard them in the still of night, when they alon were wake to 
offer their orison to heaven. nay, my dear father himself, onc said, 
that, soon after my mother’ death, as he lay watch in grief, sound 
of uncommon sweet call him from hi bed; and, on open hi 
window, he heard lofti music pass along the midnight air. It sooth 
him, he said; he look up with confid to heaven, and resign her 
to hi god.” 

emili paus to weep at thi recollection. “perhaps,” resum she, 
“perhaps, those strain I heard were sent to comfort,—to encourag me! 
never shall I forget those I heard, at thi hour, in languedoc! 
perhaps, my father watch over me, at thi moment!” she wept again in 
tenderness. thu pass the hour in watch and solemn thought; 
but no sound returned; and, after remain at the casement, till the 
light tint of dawn began to edg the mountain-top and steal upon the 
night-shade, she concluded, that they would not return, and retir 
reluctantli to repose. 



volum 3 



chapter I 

I will advis you where to plant yourselves; 
acquaint you with the perfect spi o’ the time, 
the moment on ’t; for ’t must be done tonight. 
macbeth 


emili wa somewhat surprised, on the follow day, to find that 
annett had heard of madam montoni’ confin in the chamber over 
the portal, as well as of her purpos visit there, on the approach 
night. that the circumstance, which barnardin had so solemnli enjoin 
her to conceal, he had himself told to so indiscreet a hearer as 
annette, appear veri improbable, though he had now charg her with a 
message, concern the intend interview. He requested, that emili 
would meet him, unattended, on the terrace, at a littl after midnight, 
when he himself would lead her to the place he had promised; a 
proposal, from which she immedi shrunk, for a thousand vagu fear 
dart athwart her mind, such as had torment her on the preced 
night, and which she neither knew how to trust, nor to dismiss. It 
frequent occur to her, that barnardin might have deceiv her, 
concern madam montoni, whose murderer, perhaps, he realli was; and 
that he had deceiv her by order of montoni, the more easili to draw 
her into some of the desper design of the latter. the terribl 
suspicion, that madam montoni no longer lived, thu came, accompani 
by one not less dread for herself. unless the crime, by which the 
aunt had suffered, wa instig mere by resentment, unconnect 
with profit, a motive, upon which montoni did not appear veri like to 
act, it object must be unattained, till the niec wa also dead, to 
whom montoni knew that hi wife’ estat must descend. emili 
rememb the words, which had inform her, that the contest 
estat in franc would devolv to her, if madam montoni died, without 
consign them to her husband, and the former obstin persever 
of her aunt made it too probable, that she had, to the last, withheld 
them. At thi instant, recollect barnardine’ manner, on the 
preced night, she now believed, what she had then fancied, that it 
express malign triumph. she shudder at the recollection, which 
confirm her fears, and determin not to meet him on the terrace. 
soon after, she wa inclin to consid these suspicion as the 
extravag exagger of a timid and harass mind, and could not 
believ montoni liabl to such preposter deprav as that of 
destroying, from one motive, hi wife and her niece. she blame herself 
for suffer her romant imagin to carri her so far beyond the 
bound of probability, and determin to endeavour to check it rapid 
flights, lest they should sometim extend into madness. still, 
however, she shrunk from the thought of meet barnardine, on the 
terrace, at midnight; and still the wish to be reliev from thi 
terribl suspense, concern her aunt, to see her, and to sooth her 
sufferings, made her hesit what to do. 

“yet how is it possible, annette, I can pass to the terrac at that 
hour?” said she, recollect herself, “the sentinel will stop me, and 
signor montoni will hear of the affair.” 

“O ma’amselle! that is well thought of,” repli annette. “that is what 
barnardin told me about. He gave me thi key, and bade me say it 
unlock the door at the end of the vault gallery, that open near the 
end of the east rampart, so that you need not pass ani of the men on 
watch. He bade me say, too, that hi reason for request you to come 
to the terrac was, becaus he could take you to the place you want to 
go to, without open the great door of the hall, which grate so 
heavily.” 

emily’ spirit were somewhat calm by thi explanation, which seem 
to be honestli given to annette. “but whi did he desir I would come 
alone, annette?” said she. 

“whi that wa what I ask him myself, ma’amselle. say I, ‘whi is my 
young ladi to come alone?—sur I may come with her!—what harm can _i_ 
do?’ but he said ‘no—no—i tell you not,’ in hi gruff way. nay, say I, 
I have been trust in as great affair as this, I warrant, and it’ a 
hard matter if I can’t keep a secret now. still he would say noth 
but—‘no—no—no.’ well, say I, if you will onli trust me, I will tell 
you a great secret, that wa told me a month ago, and I have never 
open my lip about it yet—so you need not be afraid of tell me. 
but all would not do. then, ma’amselle, I went so far as to offer him a 
beauti new sequin, that ludovico gave me for a keepsake, and I would 
not have part with it for all st. marco’ place; but even that would 
not do! now what can be the reason of this? but I know, you know, 
ma’am, who you are go to see.” 

“pray did barnardin tell you this?” 

“he! no, ma’amselle, that he did not.” 

emili enquir who did, but annett showed, that she _could_ keep a 
secret. 

dure the remaind of the day, emily’ mind wa agit with doubt 
and fear and contrari determinations, on the subject of meet thi 
barnardin on the rampart, and submit herself to hi guidance, she 
scarc knew whither. piti for her aunt and anxieti for herself 
altern sway her determination, and night came, befor she had 
decid upon her conduct. she heard the castl clock strike 
eleven—twelve—and yet her mind wavered. the time, however, wa now 
come, when she could hesit no longer: and then the interest she felt 
for her aunt overcam other considerations, and, bid annett follow 
her to the outer door of the vault gallery, and there await her 
return, she descend from her chamber. the castl wa perfectli still, 
and the great hall, where so late she had wit a scene of 
dread contention, now return onli the whisper footstep of the 
two solitari figur glide fear between the pillars, and gleam 
onli to the feebl lamp they carried. emily, deceiv by the long 
shadow of the pillar and by the catch light between, often 
stopped, imagin she saw some person, move in the distant obscur 
of the perspective; and, as she pass these pillars, she fear to 
turn her eye toward them, almost expect to see a figur start out 
from behind their broad shaft. she reached, however, the vault 
gallery, without interruption, but unclos it outer door with a 
trembl hand, and, charg annett not to quit it and to keep it a 
littl open, that she might be heard if she called, she deliv to 
her the lamp, which she did not dare to take herself becaus of the men 
on watch, and, alone, step out upon the dark terrace. everyth wa 
so still, that she feared, lest her own light step should be heard by 
the distant sentinels, and she walk cautious toward the spot, 
where she had befor met barnardine, listen for a sound, and look 
onward through the gloom in search of him. At length, she wa startl 
by a deep voice, that spoke near her, and she paused, uncertain whether 
it wa his, till it spoke again, and she then recognis the hollow 
tone of barnardine, who had been punctual to the moment, and wa at 
the appoint place, rest on the rampart wall. after chide her for 
not come sooner, and say that he had been wait nearli half an 
hour, he desir emily, who made no reply, to follow him to the door 
through which he had enter the terrace. 

while he unlock it, she look back to that she had left, and, 
observ the ray of the lamp stream through a small opening, wa 
certain, that annett wa still there. but her remot situat could 
littl befriend emily, after she had quit the terrace; and, when 
barnardin unclos the gate, the dismal aspect of the passag beyond, 
shown by a torch burn on the pavement, made her shrink from 
follow him alone, and she refus to go, unless annett might 
accompani her. this, however, barnardin absolut refus to permit, 
mingl at the same time with hi refus such art circumst to 
heighten the piti and curios of emili toward her aunt, that she, at 
length, consent to follow him alon to the portal. 

He then took up the torch, and led her along the passage, at the 
extrem of which he unlock anoth door, whenc they descended, a 
few steps, into a chapel, which, as barnardin held up the torch to 
light her, emili observ to be in ruins, and she immedi 
recollect a former convers of annette, concern it, with veri 
unpleas emotions. she look fear on the almost roofless walls, 
green with damps, and on the gothic point of the windows, where the 
ivi and the brioni had long suppli the place of glass, and ran 
mantl among the broken capit of some columns, that had onc 
support the roof. barnardin stumbl over the broken pavement, and 
hi voice, as he utter a sudden oath, wa return in hollow echoes, 
that made it more terrific. emily’ heart sunk; but she still follow 
him, and he turn out of what had been the princip aisl of the 
chapel. “down these steps, lady,” said barnardine, as he descend a 
flight, which appear to lead into the vaults; but emili paus on the 
top, and demanded, in a tremul tone, whither he wa conduct her. 

“to the portal,” said barnardine. 

“cannot we go through the chapel to the portal?” said emily. 

“no, signora, that lead to the inner court, which I don’t choos to 
unlock. thi way, and we shall reach the outer court presently.” 

emili still hesitated; fear not onli to go on, but, sinc she had 
gone thu far, to irrit barnardin by refus to go further. 

“come, lady,” said the man, who had nearli reach the bottom of the 
flight, “make a littl haste; I cannot wait here all night.” 

“whither do these step lead?” said emily, yet pausing. 

“to the portal,” repeat barnardine, in an angri tone, “I will wait no 
longer.” As he said this, he move on with the light, and emily, 
fear to provok him by further delay, reluctantli followed. from the 
steps, they proceed through a passage, adjoin the vaults, the 
wall of which were drop with unwholesom dews, and the vapours, 
that crept along the ground, made the torch burn so dimly, that emili 
expect everi moment to see it extinguished, and barnardin could 
scarc find hi way. As they advanced, these vapour thickened, and 
barnardine, believ the torch wa expiring, stop for a moment to 
trim it. As he then rest against a pair of iron gates, that open 
from the passage, emili saw, by uncertain flash of light, the vault 
beyond, and, near her, heap of earth, that seem to surround an open 
grave. such an object, in such a scene, would, at ani time, have 
disturb her; but now she wa shock by an instantan 
presentiment, that thi wa the grave of her unfortun aunt, and that 
the treacher barnardin wa lead herself to destruction. the 
obscur and terribl place, to which he had conduct her, seem to 
justifi the thought; it wa a place suit for murder, a receptacl for 
the dead, where a deed of horror might be committed, and no vestig 
appear to proclaim it. emili wa so overwhelm with terror, that, for 
a moment, she wa unabl to determin what conduct to pursue. she then 
consid that it would be vain to attempt an escap from barnardin 
by flight, sinc the length and the intricaci of the way she had pass 
would soon enabl him to overtak her, who wa unacquaint with the 
turnings, and whose feebl would not suffer her to run long with 
swiftness. she fear equal to irrit him by a disclosur of her 
suspicions, which a refus to accompani him further certainli would 
do; and, sinc she wa alreadi as much in hi power as it wa possibl 
she could be, if she proceeded, she, at length, determin to suppress, 
as far as she could, the appear of apprehension, and to follow 
silent whither he design to lead her. pale with horror and anxiety, 
she now wait till barnardin had trim the torch, and, as her sight 
glanc again upon the grave, she could not forbear enquiring, for whom 
it wa prepared. He took hi eye from the torch, and fix them upon 
her face without speaking. she faintli repeat the question, but the 
man, shake the torch, pass on; and she followed, trembling, to a 
second flight of steps, have ascend which, a door deliv them 
into the first court of the castle. As they cross it, the light 
show the high black wall around them, fring with long grass and 
dank weeds, that found a scanti soil among the moulder stones; the 
heavi buttresses, with, here and there, between them, a narrow grate, 
that admit a freer circul of air to the court, the massi iron 
gates, that led to the castle, whose cluster turret appear above, 
and, opposite, the huge tower and arch of the portal itself. In thi 
scene the large, uncouth person of barnardine, bear the torch, 
form a characterist figure. thi barnardin wa wrapt in a long 
dark cloak, which scarc allow the kind of half-boots, or sandals, 
that were lace upon hi legs, to appear, and show onli the point of 
a broad sword, which he usual wore, slung in a belt across hi 
shoulders. On hi head wa a heavi flat velvet cap, somewhat resembl 
a turban, in which wa a short feather; the visag beneath it show 
strong features, and a counten furrow with the line of cun 
and darken by habitu discontent. 

the view of the court, however, reanim emily, who, as she cross 
silent toward the portal, began to hope, that her own fears, and not 
the treacheri of barnardine, had deceiv her. she look anxious up 
at the first casement, that appear abov the lofti arch of the 
portcullis; but it wa dark, and she enquired, whether it belong to 
the chamber where madam montoni wa confined. emili spoke low, and 
barnardine, perhaps, did not hear her question, for he return no 
answer; and they, soon after, enter the postern door of the gateway, 
which brought them to the foot of a narrow staircas that wound up one 
of the towers. 

“up thi staircas the signora lies,” said barnardine. 

“lies!” repeat emili faintly, as she began to ascend. 

“she lie in the upper chamber,” said barnardine. 

As they pass up, the wind, which pour through the narrow caviti 
in the wall, made the torch flare, and it threw a stronger gleam upon 
the grim and sallow counten of barnardine, and discov more 
fulli the desol of the place—th rough stone walls, the spiral 
stairs, black with age, and a suit of ancient armour, with an iron 
visor, that hung upon the walls, and appear a trophi of some former 
victory. 

have reach a landing-place, “you may wait here, lady,” said he, 
appli a key to the door of a chamber, “while I go up, and tell the 
signora you are coming.” 

“that ceremoni is unnecessary,” repli emily, “mi aunt will rejoic to 
see me.” 

“I am not so sure of that,” said barnardine, point to the room he 
had opened: “come in here, lady, while I step up.” 

emily, surpris and somewhat shocked, did not dare to oppos him 
further, but, as he wa turn away with the torch, desir he would 
not leav her in darkness. He look around, and, observ a tripod 
lamp, that stood on the stairs, light and gave it to emily, who 
step forward into a larg old chamber, and he close the door. As 
she listen anxious to hi depart steps, she thought he 
descended, instead of ascending, the stairs; but the gust of wind, 
that whistl round the portal, would not allow her to hear distinctli 
ani other sound. still, however, she listened, and, perceiv no step 
in the room above, where he had affirm madam montoni to be, her 
anxieti increased, though she considered, that the thick of the 
floor in thi strong build might prevent ani sound reach her from 
the upper chamber. the next moment, in a paus of the wind, she 
distinguish barnardine’ step descend to the court, and then 
thought she heard hi voice; but, the rise gust again overcom 
other sounds, emily, to be certain on thi point, move softli to the 
door, which, on attempt to open it, she discov wa fastened. all 
the horrid apprehensions, that had late assail her, return at 
thi instant with redoubl force, and no longer appear like the 
exagger of a timid spirit, but seem to have been sent to warn 
her of her fate. she now did not doubt, that madam montoni had been 
murdered, perhap in thi veri chamber; or that she herself wa brought 
hither for the same purpose. the countenance, the manner and the 
recollect word of barnardine, when he had spoken of her aunt, 
confirm her worst fears. for some moments, she wa incap of 
consid of ani means, by which she might attempt an escape. still 
she listened, but heard footstep neither on the stairs, nor in the 
room above; she thought, however, that she again distinguish 
barnardine’ voic below, and went to a grate window, that open upon 
the court, to enquir further. here, she plainli heard hi hoars 
accents, mingl with the blast, that swept by, but they were lost 
again so quickly, that their mean could not be interpreted; and then 
the light of a torch, which seem to issu from the portal below, 
flash across the court, and the long shadow of a man, who wa under 
the arch-way, appear upon the pavement. emily, from the huge of 
thi sudden portrait, conclud it to be that of barnardine; but other 
deep tones, which pass in the wind, soon convinc her he wa not 
alone, and that hi companion wa not a person veri liabl to pity. 

when her spirit had overcom the first shock of her situation, she 
held up the lamp to examine, if the chamber afford a possibl of 
an escape. It wa a spaciou room, whose walls, wainscot with rough 
oak, show no casement but the grate one, which emili had left, and 
no other door than that, by which she had entered. the feebl ray of 
the lamp, however, did not allow her to see at onc it full extent; 
she perceiv no furniture, except, indeed, an iron chair, fasten in 
the centr of the chamber, immedi over which, depend on a chain 
from the ceiling, hung an iron ring. have gaze upon these, for some 
time, with wonder and horror, she next observ iron bar below, made 
for the purpos of confin the feet, and on the arm of the chair 
were ring of the same metal. As she continu to survey them, she 
concluded, that they were instrument of torture, and it struck her, 
that some poor wretch had onc been fasten in thi chair, and had 
there been starv to death. she wa chill by the thought; but, what 
wa her agony, when, in the next moment, it occur to her, that her 
aunt might have been one of these victims, and that she herself might 
be the next! An acut pain seiz her head, she wa scarc abl to 
hold the lamp, and, look round for support, wa seat herself, 
unconsciously, in the iron chair itself; but suddenli perceiv where 
she was, she start from it in horror, and sprung toward a remot end 
of the room. here again she look round for a seat to sustain her, and 
perceiv onli a dark curtain, which, descend from the ceil to 
the floor, wa drawn along the whole side of the chamber. ill as she 
was, the appear of thi curtain struck her, and she paus to gaze 
upon it, in wonder and apprehension. 

It seem to conceal a recess of the chamber; she wished, yet dreaded, 
to lift it, and to discov what it veiled: twice she wa withheld by a 
recollect of the terribl spectacl her dare hand had formerli 
unveil in an apart of the castle, till, suddenli conjecturing, 
that it conceal the bodi of her murder aunt, she seiz it, in a 
fit of desperation, and drew it aside. beyond, appear a corpse, 
stretch on a kind of low couch, which wa crimson with human blood, 
as wa the floor beneath. the features, deform by death, were ghastli 
and horrible, and more than one livid wound appear in the face. 
emily, bend over the body, gazed, for a moment, with an eager, 
frenzi eye; but, in the next, the lamp drop from her hand, and she 
fell senseless at the foot of the couch. 

when her sens returned, she found herself surround by men, among 
whom wa barnardine, who were lift her from the floor, and then bore 
her along the chamber. she wa sensibl of what passed, but the extrem 
languor of her spirit did not permit her to speak, or move, or even to 
feel ani distinct fear. they carri her down the staircase, by which 
she had ascended; when, have reach the arch-way, they stopped, and 
one of the men, take the torch from barnardine, open a small door, 
that wa cut in the great gate, and, as he step out upon the road, 
the light he bore show sever men on horseback, in waiting. whether 
it wa the fresh of the air, that reviv emily, or that the 
object she now saw rous the spirit of alarm, she suddenli spoke, and 
made an ineffectu effort to disengag herself from the grasp of the 
ruffians, who held her. 

barnardine, meanwhile, call loudli for the torch, while distant 
voic answered, and sever person approached, and, in the same 
instant, a light flash upon the court of the castle. again he 
vocifer for the torch, and the men hurri emili through the gate. 
At a short distance, under the shelter of the castl walls, she 
perceiv the fellow, who had taken the light from the porter, hold 
it to a man, busili employ in alter the saddl of a horse, round 
which were sever horsemen, look on, whose harsh featur receiv 
the full glare of the torch; while the broken ground beneath them, the 
opposit walls, with the tuft shrubs, that overhung their summits, 
and an embattl watch-tow above, were redden with the gleam, 
which, fade gradual away, left the remot rampart and the wood 
below to the obscur of night. 

“what do you wast time for, there?” said barnardin with an oath, as 
he approach the horsemen. “dispatch—dispatch!” 

“the saddl will be readi in a minute,” repli the man who wa 
buckl it, at whom barnardin now swore again, for hi negligence, 
and emily, call feebli for help, wa hurri toward the horses, 
while the ruffian disput on which to place her, the one design for 
her not be ready. At thi moment a cluster of light issu from the 
great gates, and she immedi heard the shrill voic of annett 
abov those of sever other persons, who advanced. In the same moment, 
she distinguish montoni and cavigni, follow by a number of 
ruffian-fac fellows, to whom she no longer look with terror, but 
with hope, for, at thi instant, she did not trembl at the thought of 
ani dangers, that might await her within the castle, whenc so lately, 
and so anxious she had wish to escape. those, which threaten her 
from without, had engross all her apprehensions. 

A short contest ensu between the parties, in which that of montoni, 
however, were present victors, and the horsemen, perceiv that 
number were against them, and being, perhaps, not veri warmli 
interest in the affair they had undertaken, gallop off, while 
barnardin had run far enough to be lost in the darkness, and emili wa 
led back into the castle. As she repass the courts, the remembr 
of what she had seen in the portal-chamb came, with all it horror, 
to her mind; and when, soon after, she heard the gate close, that shut 
her onc more within the castl walls, she shudder for herself, and, 
almost forget the danger she had escaped, could scarc think, 
that anyth less preciou than liberti and peac wa to be found 
beyond them. 

montoni order emili to await him in the cedar parlour, whither he 
soon followed, and then sternli question her on thi mysteri 
affair. though she now view him with horror, as the murder of her 
aunt, and scarc knew what she said in repli to hi impati 
enquiries, her answer and her manner convinc him, that she had not 
taken a voluntari part in the late scheme, and he dismiss her upon 
the appear of hi servants, whom he had order to attend, that he 
might enquir further into the affair, and discov those, who had been 
accomplic in it. 

emili had been some time in her apartment, befor the tumult of her 
mind allow her to rememb sever of the past circumstances. then, 
again, the dead form, which the curtain in the portal-chamb had 
disclosed, came to her fancy, and she utter a groan, which terrifi 
annett the more, as emili forbor to satisfi her curiosity, on the 
subject of it, for she fear to trust her with so fatal a secret, lest 
her indiscret should call down the immedi vengeanc of montoni on 
herself. 

thu compel to bear within her own mind the whole horror of the 
secret, that oppress it, her reason seem to totter under the 
intoler weight. she often fix a wild and vacant look on annette, 
and, when she spoke, either did not hear her, or answer from the 
purpose. long fit of abstract succeeded; annett spoke repeatedly, 
but her voic seem not to make ani impress on the sens of the 
long agit emily, who sat fix and silent, except that, now and 
then, she heav a heavi sigh, but without tears. 

terrifi at her condition, annette, at length, left the room, to 
inform montoni of it, who had just dismiss hi servants, without 
have made ani discoveri on the subject of hi enquiry. the wild 
description, which thi girl now gave of emily, induc him to follow 
her immedi to the chamber. 

At the sound of hi voice, emili turn her eyes, and a gleam of 
recollect seem to shoot athwart her mind, for she immedi rose 
from her seat, and move slowli to a remot part of the room. He spoke 
to her in accent somewhat soften from their usual harshness, but she 
regard him with a kind of half curious, half terrifi look, and 
answer onli “yes,” to whatev he said. her mind still seem to 
retain no other impression, than that of fear. 

Of thi disord annett could give no explanation, and montoni, have 
attempted, for some time, to persuad emili to talk, retired, after 
order annett to remain with her, dure the night, and to inform 
him, in the morning, of her condition. 

when he wa gone, emili again came forward, and ask who it was, that 
had been there to disturb her. annett said it wa the signor—signor 
montoni. emili repeat the name after her, sever times, as if she 
did not recollect it, and then suddenli groaned, and relaps into 
abstraction. 

with some difficulty, annett led her to the bed, which emili examin 
with an eager, frenzi eye, befor she lay down, and then, pointing, 
turn with shudder emotion, to annette, who, now more terrified, 
went toward the door, that she might bring one of the femal servant 
to pass the night with them; but emily, observ her going, call her 
by name, and then in the natur soft and plaintiv tone of her 
voice, begged, that she, too, would not forsak her.—“for sinc my 
father died,” ad she, sighing, “everybodi forsak me.” 

“your father, ma’amselle!” said annette, “he wa dead befor you knew 
me.” 

“he was, indeed!” rejoin emily, and her tear began to flow. she now 
wept silent and long, after which, becom quit calm, she at length 
sunk to sleep, annett have had discret enough not to interrupt 
her tears. thi girl, as affection as she wa simple, lost in these 
moment all her former fear of remain in the chamber, and watch 
alon by emily, dure the whole night. 



chapter II 

unfold 
what worlds, or what vast regions, hold 
th’ immort mind, that hath forsook 
her mansion in thi fleshli nook! 
IL penseroso 


emily’ mind wa refresh by sleep. On wake in the morning, she 
look with surpris on annette, who sat sleep in a chair besid the 
bed, and then endeavour to recollect herself; but the circumst 
of the preced night were swept from her memory, which seem to 
retain no trace of what had passed, and she wa still gaze with 
surpris on annette, when the latter awoke. 

“O dear ma’amselle! do you know me?” cri she. 

“know you! certainly,” repli emily, “you are annette; but whi are you 
sit by me thus?” 

“O you have been veri ill, ma’amselle,—veri ill indeed! and I am sure I 
thought—” 

“thi is veri strange!” said emily, still tri to recollect the 
past.—“but I think I do remember, that my fanci ha been haunt by 
fright dreams. good god!” she added, suddenli starting—“sur it 
wa noth more than a dream!” 

she fix a terrifi look upon annette, who, intend to quiet her, 
said “yes, ma’amselle, it wa more than a dream, but it is all over 
now.” 

“she _is_ murdered, then!” said emili in an inward voice, and 
shudder instantaneously. annett screamed; for, be ignor of 
the circumst to which emili referred, she attribut her manner to 
a disord fancy; but, when she had explain to what her own speech 
alluded, emily, recollect the attempt that had been made to carri 
her off, ask if the contriv of it had been discovered. annett 
replied, that he had not, though he might easili be guess at; and 
then told emili she might thank her for her deliverance, who, 
endeavour to command the emotion, which the remembr of her aunt 
had occasioned, appear calmli to listen to annette, though, in truth, 
she heard scarc a word that wa said. 

“and so, ma’amselle,” continu the latter, “I wa determin to be 
even with barnardin for refus to tell me the secret, by find it 
out myself; so I watch you, on the terrace, and, as soon as he had 
open the door at the end, I stole out from the castle, to tri to 
follow you; for, say I, I am sure no good can be planned, or whi all 
thi secrecy? so, sure enough, he had not bolt the door after him, 
and, when I open it, I saw, by the glimmer of the torch, at the other 
end of the passage, which way you were going. I follow the light, at 
a distance, till you came to the vault of the chapel, and there I wa 
afraid to go further, for I had heard strang thing about these 
vaults. but then, again, I wa afraid to go back, all in darkness, by 
myself; so by the time barnardin had trim the light, I had resolv 
to follow you, and I did so, till you came to the great court, and 
there I wa afraid he would see me; so I stop at the door again, and 
watch you across to the gates, and, when you were gone up the stairs, 
I whipt after. there, as I stood under the gateway, I heard horses’ 
feet without, and sever men talking; and I heard them swear at 
barnardin for not bring you out, and just then, he had like to have 
caught me, for he came down the stair again, and I had hardli time to 
get out of hi way. but I had heard enough of hi secret now, and I 
determin to be even with him, and to save you, too, ma’amselle, for I 
guess it to be some new scheme of count morano, though he wa gone 
away. I ran into the castle, but I had hard work to find my way through 
the passag under the chapel, and what is veri strange, I quit forgot 
to look for the ghost they had told me about, though I would not go 
into that place again by myself for all the world! luckili the signor 
and signor cavigni were up, so we had soon a train at our heels, 
suffici to frighten that barnardin and hi rogues, all together.” 

annett ceas to speak, but emili still appear to listen. At length 
she said, suddenly, “I think I will go to him myself;—wher is he?” 

annett ask who wa meant. 

“signor montoni,” repli emily. “I would speak with him;” and annette, 
now rememb the order he had given, on the preced night, 
respect her young lady, rose, and said she would seek him herself. 

thi honest girl’ suspicion of count morano were perfectli just; 
emily, too, when she thought on the scheme, had attribut it to him; 
and montoni, who had not a doubt on thi subject, also, began to 
believe, that it wa by the direct of morano, that poison had 
formerli been mingl with hi wine. 

the profess of repentance, which morano had made to emily, under 
the anguish of hi wound, wa sincer at the moment he offer them; 
but he had mistaken the subject of hi sorrow, for, while he thought he 
wa condemn the cruelti of hi late design, he wa lament onli 
the state of suffering, to which it had reduc him. As these 
suffer abated, hi former view revived, till, hi health be 
re-established, he again found himself readi for enterpris and 
difficulty. the porter of the castle, who had serv him, on a former 
occasion, willingli accept a second bribe; and, have concert the 
mean of draw emili to the gates, morano publicli left the hamlet, 
whither he had been carri after the affray, and withdrew with hi 
peopl to anoth at sever mile distance. from thence, on a night 
agre upon by barnardine, who had discov from the thoughtless 
prattl of annette, the most probabl mean of decoy emily, the 
count sent back hi servant to the castle, while he await her 
arriv at the hamlet, with an intent of carri her immedi to 
venice. how this, hi second scheme, wa frustrated, ha alreadi 
appeared; but the violent, and variou passion with which thi italian 
lover wa now agitated, on hi return to that city, can onli be 
imagined. 

annett have made her report to montoni of emily’ health and of her 
request to see him, he replied, that she might attend him in the cedar 
room, in about an hour. It wa on the subject, that press so heavili 
on her mind, that emili wish to speak to him, yet she did not 
distinctli know what good purpos thi could answer, and sometim she 
even recoil in horror from the expect of hi presence. she 
wished, also, to petition, though she scarc dare to believ the 
request would be granted, that he would permit her, sinc her aunt wa 
no more, to return to her nativ country. 

As the moment of interview approached, her agit increas so much, 
that she almost resolv to excus herself under what could scarc be 
call a pretenc of illness; and, when she consid what could be 
said, either concern herself, or the fate of her aunt, she wa 
equal hopeless as to the event of her entreaty, and terrifi as to 
it effect upon the veng spirit of montoni. yet, to pretend 
ignor of her death, appeared, in some degree, to be share it 
criminality, and, indeed, thi event wa the onli ground, on which 
emili could rest her petit for leav udolpho. 

while her thought thu wavered, a messag wa brought, importing, that 
montoni could not see her, till the next day; and her spirit were then 
relieved, for a moment, from an almost intoler weight of 
apprehension. annett said, she fanci the chevali were go out 
to the war again, for the courtyard wa fill with horses, and she 
heard, that the rest of the party, who went out before, were expect 
at the castle. “and I heard one of the soldiers, too,” ad she, “say 
to hi comrade, that he would warrant they’d bring home a rare deal of 
booty.—so, think I, if the signor can, with a safe conscience, send 
hi peopl out a-robbing—whi it is no busi of mine. I onli wish I 
wa onc safe out of thi castle; and, if it had not been for poor 
ludovico’ sake, I would have let count morano’ peopl run away with 
us both, for it would have been serv you a good turn, ma’amselle, as 
well as myself.” 

annett might have continu thu talk for hour for ani 
interrupt she would have receiv from emily, who wa silent, 
inattentive, absorb in thought, and pass the whole of thi day in a 
kind of solemn tranquillity, such as is often the result of faculti 
overstrain by suffering. 

when night returned, emili recollect the mysteri strain of music, 
that she had late heard, in which she still felt some degre of 
interest, and of which she hope to hear again the sooth sweetness. 
the influenc of superstit now gain on the weak of her 
long-harass mind; she looked, with enthusiast expectation, to the 
guardian spirit of her father, and, have dismiss annett for the 
night, determin to watch alon for their return. It wa not yet, 
however, near the time when she had heard the music on a former night, 
and anxiou to call off her thought from distress subjects, she sat 
down with one of the few books, that she had brought from france; but 
her mind, refus control, becam restless and agitated, and she went 
often to the casement to listen for a sound. once, she thought she 
heard a voice, but then, everyth without the casement remain 
still, she concluded, that her fanci had deceiv her. 

thu pass the time, till twelv o’clock, soon after which the distant 
sounds, that murmur through the castle, ceased, and sleep seem to 
reign over all. emili then seat herself at the casement, where she 
wa soon recal from the reverie, into which she sunk, by veri 
unusu sounds, not of music, but like the low mourn of some person 
in distress. As she listened, her heart falter in terror, and she 
becam convinced, that the former sound wa more than imaginary. still, 
at intervals, she heard a kind of feebl lamentation, and sought to 
discov whenc it came. there were sever room underneath, adjoin 
the rampart, which had been long shut up, and, as the sound probabl 
rose from one of these, she lean from the casement to observe, 
whether ani light wa visibl there. the chambers, as far as she could 
perceive, were quit dark, but, at a littl distance, on the rampart 
below, she thought she saw someth moving. 

the faint twilight, which the star shed, did not enabl her to 
distinguish what it was; but she judg it to be a sentinel, on watch, 
and she remov her light to a remot part of the chamber, that she 
might escap notice, dure her further observation. 

the same object still appeared. presently, it advanc along the 
rampart, toward her window, and she then distinguish someth like 
a human form, but the silence, with which it moved, convinc her it 
wa no sentinel. As it drew near, she hesit whether to retire; a 
thrill curios inclin her to stay, but a dread of she scarc 
knew what warn her to withdraw. 

while she paused, the figur came opposit to her casement, and wa 
stationary. everyth remain quiet; she had not heard even a 
foot-fall; and the solemn of thi silence, with the mysteri form 
she saw, subdu her spirits, so that she wa move from the casement, 
when, on a sudden, she observ the figur start away, and glide down 
the rampart, after which it wa soon lost in the obscur of night. 
emili continu to gaze, for some time, on the way it had passed, and 
then retir within her chamber, muse on thi strang circumstance, 
and scarc doubting, that she had wit a supernatur 
appearance. 

when her spirit recov composure, she look round for some other 
explanation. rememb what she had heard of the dare enterpris 
of montoni, it occur to her, that she had just seen some unhappi 
person, who, have been plunder by hi banditti, wa brought hither 
a captive; and that the music she had formerli heard, came from him. 
yet, if they had plunder him, it still appear improbable, that they 
should have brought him to the castle, and it wa also more consist 
with the manner of banditti to murder those they rob, than to make 
them prisoners. but what, more than ani other circumstance, 
contradict the supposition, that it wa a prisoner, wa that it 
wander on the terrace, without a guard: a consideration, which made 
her dismiss immedi her first surmise. 

afterwards, she wa inclin to believe, that count morano had obtain 
admitt into the castle; but she soon recollect the difficulti 
and dangers, that must have oppos such an enterprise, and that, if he 
had so far succeeded, to come alon and in silenc to her casement at 
midnight wa not the conduct he would have adopted, particularli sinc 
the privat staircase, commun with her apartment, wa known to 
him; neither would he have utter the dismal sound she had heard. 

anoth suggest represented, that thi might be some person, who had 
design upon the castle; but the mourn sound destroyed, also, that 
probability. thus, enquiri onli perplex her. who, or what, it could 
be that haunt thi lone hour, complain in such dole accent 
and in such sweet music (for she wa still inclin to believe, that 
the former strain and the late appear were connected), she had no 
mean of ascertaining; and imagin again assum her empire, and 
rous the mysteri of superstition. 

she determined, however, to watch on the follow night, when her 
doubt might, perhaps, be clear up; and she almost resolv to 
address the figure, if it should appear again. 



chapter iii 

such are those thick and gloomi shadow damp, 
oft seen in charnel-vault and sepulchres, 
lingering, and sitting, by a new-mad grave. 
milton 


On the follow day, montoni sent a second excus to emily, who wa 
surpris at the circumstance. “thi is veri strange!” said she to 
herself. “hi conscienc tell him the purport of my visit, and he 
defer it, to avoid an explanation.” she now almost resolv to throw 
herself in hi way, but terror check the intention, and thi day 
passed, as the preced one, with emily, except that a degre of aw 
expectation, concern the approach night, now somewhat disturb 
the dread calm that had pervad her mind. 

toward evening, the second part of the band, which had made the first 
excurs among the mountains, return to the castle, where, as they 
enter the courts, emily, in her remot chamber, heard their loud 
shout and strain of exultation, like the orgi of furi over some 
horrid sacrifice. she even fear they were about to commit some 
barbar deed; a conjectur from which, however, annett soon reliev 
her, by telling, that the peopl were onli exult over the plunder 
they had brought with them. thi circumst still further confirm 
her in the belief, that montoni had realli commenc to be a captain of 
banditti, and meant to retriev hi broken fortun by the plunder of 
travellers! indeed, when she consid all the circumst of hi 
situation—in an armed, and almost inaccess castle, retir far 
among the recess of wild and solitari mountains, along whose distant 
skirt were scatter towns, and cities, whither wealthi travel 
were continu passing—thi appear to be the situat of all 
other most suit for the success of scheme of rapine, and she 
yield to the strang thought, that montoni wa becom a captain of 
robbers. hi charact also, unprincipled, dauntless, cruel and 
enterprising, seem to fit him for the situation. delight in the 
tumult and in the struggl of life, he wa equal a stranger to piti 
and to fear; hi veri courag wa a sort of anim ferocity; not the 
nobl impuls of a principle, such as inspirit the mind against the 
oppressor, in the caus of the oppressed; but a constitut 
hardi of nerve, that cannot feel, and that, therefore, cannot fear. 

emily’ supposition, howev natural, wa in part erroneous, for she 
wa a stranger to the state of thi countri and to the circumstances, 
under which it frequent war were partli conducted. the revenu of 
the mani state of itali being, at that time, insuffici to the 
support of stand armies, even dure the short periods, which the 
turbul habit both of the govern and the peopl permit to 
pass in peace, an order of men aros not known in our age, and but 
faintli describ in the histori of their own. Of the soldiers, 
disband at the end of everi war, few return to the safe, but 
unprofit occupations, then usual in peace. sometim they pass 
into other countries, and mingl with armies, which still kept the 
field. sometim they form themselv into band of robbers, and 
occupi remot fortresses, where their desper character, the 
weak of the govern which they offended, and the certainty, 
that they could be recal to the armies, when their presenc should 
be again wanted, prevent them from be much pursu by the civil 
power; and, sometimes, they attach themselv to the fortun of a 
popular chief, by whom they were led into the servic of ani state, 
which could settl with him the price of their valour. from thi latter 
practic aros their name—_condottieri_; a term formid all over 
italy, for a period, which conclud in the earlier part of the 
seventeenth century, but of which it is not so easi to ascertain the 
commencement. 

contest between the smaller state were then, for the most part, 
affair of enterpris alone, and the probabl of success were 
estimated, not from the skill, but from the person courag of the 
general, and the soldiers. the ability, which wa necessari to the 
conduct of tediou operations, wa littl valued. It wa enough to know 
how a parti might be led toward their enemies, with the greatest 
secrecy, or conduct from them in the compactest order. the offic 
wa to precipit himself into a situation, where, but for hi 
example, the soldier might not have ventured; and, as the oppos 
parti knew littl of each other’ strength, the event of the day wa 
frequent determin by the bold of the first movements. In such 
servic the _condottieri_ were eminent, and in these, where plunder 
alway follow success, their charact acquir a mixtur of 
intrepid and profligacy, which awe even those whom they served. 

when they were not thu engaged, their chief had usual hi own 
fortress, in which, or in it neighbourhood, they enjoy an irksom 
rest; and, though their want were, at one time, partli suppli from 
the properti of the inhabitants, the lavish distribut of their 
plunder at others, prevent them from be obnoxious; and the 
peasant of such district gradual share the charact of their 
warlik visitors. the neighbour govern sometim professed, but 
seldom endeavoured, to suppress these militari communities; both 
becaus it wa difficult to do so, and becaus a disguis protect 
of them ensured, for the servic of their wars, a bodi of men, who 
could not otherwis be so cheapli maintained, or so perfectli 
qualified. the command sometim even reli so far upon thi polici 
of the sever powers, as to frequent their capitals; and montoni, 
have met them in the game parti of venic and padua, conceiv a 
desir to emul their characters, befor hi ruin fortun tempt 
him to adopt their practices. It wa for the arrang of hi present 
plan of life, that the midnight council were held at hi mansion in 
venice, and at which orsino and some other member of the present 
commun then assist with suggestions, which they had sinc execut 
with the wreck of their fortunes. 

On the return of night, emili resum her station at the casement. 
there wa now a moon; and, as it rose over the tuft woods, it yellow 
light serv to show the lone terrac and the surround objects, 
more distinctly, than the twilight of the star had done, and promis 
emili to assist her observations, should the mysteri form return. On 
thi subject, she again waver in conjecture, and hesit whether to 
speak to the figure, to which a strong and almost irresist interest 
urg her; but terror, at intervals, made her reluct to do so. 

“if thi is a person who ha design upon the castle,” said she, “mi 
curios may prove fatal to me; yet the mysteri music, and the 
lament I heard, must sure have proceed from him: if so, he 
cannot be an enemy.” 

she then thought of her unfortun aunt, and, shudder with grief 
and horror, the suggest of imagin seiz her mind with all the 
forc of truth, and she believed, that the form she had seen wa 
supernatural. she trembled, breath with difficulty, an ici cold 
touch her cheeks, and her fear for a while overcam her judgment. 
her resolut now forsook her, and she determined, if the figur 
should appear, not to speak to it. 

thu the time passed, as she sat at her casement, awe by expectation, 
and by the gloom and still of midnight; for she saw obscur in 
the moonlight onli the mountain and woods, a cluster of towers, that 
form the west angl of the castle, and the terrac below; and heard 
no sound, except, now and then, the lone watch-word, pass by the 
sentinel on duty, and afterward the step of the men who came to 
reliev guard, and whom she knew at a distanc on the rampart by their 
pikes, that glitter in the moonbeam, and then, by the few short 
words, in which they hail their fellow of the night. emili retir 
within her chamber, while they pass the casement. when she return 
to it, all wa again quiet. It wa now veri late, she wa weari with 
watching, and began to doubt the realiti of what she had seen on the 
preced night; but she still linger at the window, for her mind wa 
too perturb to admit of sleep. the moon shone with a clear lustre, 
that afford her a complet view of the terrace; but she saw onli a 
solitari sentinel, pace at one end of it; and, at length, tire with 
expectation, she withdrew to seek rest. 

such, however, wa the impression, left on her mind by the music, and 
the complain she had formerli heard, as well as by the figure, which 
she fanci she had seen, that she determin to repeat the watch, on 
the follow night. 

montoni, on the next day, took no notic of emily’ appoint visit, 
but she, more anxiou than befor to see him, sent annett to enquire, 
at what hour he would admit her. He mention eleven o’clock, and emili 
wa punctual to the moment; at which she call up all her fortitud to 
support the shock of hi presenc and the dread recollect it 
enforced. He wa with sever of hi officers, in the cedar room; on 
observ whom she paused; and her agit increased, while he 
continu to convers with them, appar not observ her, till 
some of hi officers, turn round, saw emily, and utter an 
exclamation. she wa hastili retiring, when montoni’ voic arrest 
her, and, in a faulter accent, she said,—“i would speak with you, 
signor montoni, if you are at leisure.” 

“these are my friends,” he replied, “whatev you would say, they may 
hear.” 

emily, without replying, turn from the rude gaze of the chevaliers, 
and montoni then follow her to the hall, whenc he led her to a small 
room, of which he shut the door with violence. As she look on hi 
dark countenance, she again thought she saw the murder of her aunt; 
and her mind wa so convuls with horror, that she had not power to 
recal thought enough to explain the purport of her visit; and to trust 
herself with the mention of madam montoni wa more than she dared. 

montoni at length impati enquir what she had to say? “I have no 
time for trifling,” he added, “mi moment are important.” 

emili then told him, that she wish to return to france, and came to 
beg, that he would permit her to do so.—but when he look surprised, 
and enquir for the motiv of the request, she hesitated, becam paler 
than before, trembled, and had nearli sunk at hi feet. He observ her 
emotion, with appar indifference, and interrupt the silenc by 
tell her, he must be gone. emily, however, recal her spirit 
suffici to enabl her to repeat her request. and, when montoni 
absolut refus it, her slumber mind wa roused. 

“I can no longer remain here with propriety, sir,” said she, “and I may 
be allow to ask, by what right you detain me.” 

“it is my will that you remain here,” said montoni, lay hi hand on 
the door to go; “let that suffic you.” 

emily, consid that she had no appeal from thi will, forbor to 
disput hi right, and made a feebl effort to persuad him to be just. 
“while my aunt lived, sir,” said she, in a tremul voice, “mi 
resid here wa not improper; but now, that she is no more, I may 
sure be permit to depart. My stay cannot benefit you, sir, and 
will onli distress me.” 

“who told you, that madam montoni wa dead?” said montoni, with an 
inquisit eye. emili hesitated, for nobodi had told her so, and she 
did not dare to avow the have seen that spectacl in the 
portal-chamber, which had compel her to the belief. 

“who told you so?” he repeated, more sternly. 

“alas! I know it too well,” repli emily: “spare me on thi terribl 
subject!” 

she sat down on a bench to support herself. 

“if you wish to see her,” said montoni, “you may; she lie in the east 
turret.” 

He now left the room, without await her reply, and return to the 
cedar chamber, where such of the chevali as had not befor seen 
emily, began to ralli him, on the discoveri they had made; but montoni 
did not appear dispos to bear thi mirth, and they chang the 
subject. 

have talk with the subtl orsino, on the plan of an excursion, 
which he medit for a futur day, hi friend advised, that they 
should lie in wait for the enemy, which verezzi impetu opposed, 
reproach orsino with want of spirit, and swore, that, if montoni 
would let him lead on fifti men, he would conquer all that should 
oppos him. 

orsino smile contemptuously; montoni smile too, but he also listened. 
verezzi then proceed with vehement declam and assertion, till he 
wa stop by an argument of orsino, which he knew not how to answer 
better than by invective. hi fierc spirit detest the cun 
caution of orsino, whom he constantli opposed, and whose inveterate, 
though silent, hatr he had long ago incurred. and montoni wa a calm 
observ of both, whose differ qualif he knew, and how to 
bend their opposit charact to the perfect of hi own designs. but 
verezzi, in the heat of opposition, now did not scrupl to accus 
orsino of cowardice, at which the counten of the latter, while he 
made no reply, wa overspread with a livid paleness; and montoni, who 
watch hi lurk eye, saw him put hi hand hastili into hi bosom. 
but verezzi, whose face, glow with crimson, form a strike 
contrast to the complexion of orsino, remark not the action, and 
continu boldli declaim against coward to cavigni, who wa slili 
laugh at hi vehemence, and at the silent mortif of orsino, 
when the latter, retir a few step behind, drew forth a stilletto to 
stab hi adversari in the back. montoni arrest hi half-extend arm, 
and, with a signific look, made him return the poniard into hi 
bosom, unseen by all except himself; for most of the parti were 
disput at a distant window, on the situat of a dell where they 
meant to form an ambuscade. 

when verezzi had turn round, the deadli hatred, express on the 
featur of hi opponent, raising, for the first time, a suspicion of 
hi intention, he laid hi hand on hi sword, and then, seem to 
recollect himself, strode up to montoni. 

“signor,” said he, with a signific look at orsino, “we are not a 
band of assassins; if you have busi for brave men, employ me on 
thi expedition: you shall have the last drop of my blood; if you have 
onli work for cowards—keep him,” point to orsino, “and let me quit 
udolpho.” 

orsino, still more incensed, again drew forth hi stilletto, and rush 
toward verezzi, who, at the same instant, advanc with hi sword, 
when montoni and the rest of the parti interf and separ them. 

“thi is the conduct of a boy,” said montoni to verezzi, “not of a man: 
be more moder in your speech.” 

“moder is the virtu of cowards,” retort verezzi; “they are 
moder in everything—but in fear.” 

“I accept your words,” said montoni, turn upon him with a fierc and 
haughti look, and draw hi sword out of the scabbard. 

“with all my heart,” cri verezzi, “though I did not mean them for 
you.” 

He direct a pass at montoni; and, while they fought, the villain 
orsino made anoth attempt to stab verezzi, and wa again prevented. 

the combat were, at length, separated; and, after a veri long and 
violent dispute, reconciled. montoni then left the room with orsino, 
whom he detain in privat consult for a consider time. 

emily, meanwhile, stun by the last word of montoni, forgot, for the 
moment, hi declaration, that she should continu in the castle, while 
she thought of her unfortun aunt, who, he had said, wa laid in the 
east turret. In suffer the remain of hi wife to lie thu long 
unburied, there appear a degre of brutal more shock than she 
had suspect even montoni could practise. 

after a long struggle, she determin to accept hi permiss to visit 
the turret, and to take a last look of her ill-fat aunt: with which 
design she return to her chamber, and, while she wait for annett 
to accompani her, endeavour to acquir fortitud suffici to 
support her through the approach scene; for, though she trembl to 
encount it, she knew that to rememb the perform of thi last 
act of duti would hereaft afford her consol satisfaction. 

annett came, and emili mention her purpose, from which the former 
endeavour to dissuad her, though without effect, and annett was, 
with much difficulty, prevail upon to accompani her to the turret; 
but no consider could make her promis to enter the chamber of 
death. 

they now left the corridor, and, have reach the foot of the 
staircase, which emili had formerli ascended, annett declar she 
would go no further, and emili proceed alone. when she saw the track 
of blood, which she had befor observed, her spirit fainted, and, 
be compel to rest on the stairs, she almost determin to proceed 
no further. the paus of a few moment restor her resolution, and she 
went on. 

As she drew near the landing-place, upon which the upper chamber 
opened, she remembered, that the door wa formerli fastened, and 
apprehended, that it might still be so. In thi expectation, however, 
she wa mistaken; for the door open at once, into a duski and silent 
chamber, round which she fear looked, and then slowli advanced, 
when a hollow voic spoke. emily, who wa unabl to speak, or to move 
from the spot, utter no sound of terror. the voic spoke again; and, 
then, think that it resembl that of madam montoni, emily’ 
spirit were instantli roused; she rush toward a bed, that stood in 
a remot part of the room, and drew asid the curtains. within, 
appear a pale and emaci face. she start back, then again 
advanced, shudder as she took up the skeleton hand, that lay 
stretch upon the quilt; then let it drop, and then view the face 
with a long, unsettl gaze. It wa that of madam montoni, though so 
chang by illness, that the resembl of what it had been, could 
scarc be trace in what it now appeared. she wa still alive, and, 
rais her heavi eyes, she turn them on her niece. 

“where have you been so long?” said she, in the same tone, “I thought 
you had forsaken me.” 

“do you inde live,” said emily, at length, “or is thi but a terribl 
apparition?” she receiv no answer, and again she snatch up the 
hand. “thi is substance,” she exclaimed, “but it is cold—cold as 
marble!” she let it fall. “o, if you realli live, speak!” said emily, 
in a voic of desperation, “that I may not lose my senses—say you know 
me!” 

“I do live,” repli madam montoni, “but—i feel that I am about to 
die.” 

emili clasp the hand she held, more eagerly, and groaned. they were 
both silent for some moments. then emili endeavour to sooth her, and 
enquir what had reduc her to thi present deplor state. 

montoni, when he remov her to the turret under the improb 
suspicion of have attempt hi life, had order the men employ on 
the occasion, to observ a strict secreci concern her. To thi he 
wa influenc by a doubl motive. He meant to debar her from the 
comfort of emily’ visits, and to secur an opportun of privat 
dispatch her, should ani new circumst occur to confirm the 
present suggest of hi suspect mind. hi conscious of the 
hatr he deserv it wa natur enough should at first lead him to 
attribut to her the attempt that had been made upon hi life; and, 
though there wa no other reason to believ that she wa concern in 
that atroci design, hi suspicion remained; he continu to confin 
her in the turret, under a strict guard; and, without piti or remorse, 
had suffer her to lie, forlorn and neglected, under a rage fever, 
till it had reduc her to the present state. 

the track of blood, which emili had seen on the stairs, had flow from 
the unbound wound of one of the men employ to carri madam montoni, 
and which he had receiv in the late affray. At night these men, 
have content themselv with secur the door of their prisoner’ 
room, had retir from guard; and then it was, that emily, at the time 
of her first enquiry, had found the turret so silent and deserted. 

when she had attempt to open the door of the chamber, her aunt wa 
sleeping, and thi occas the silence, which had contribut to 
delud her into a belief, that she wa no more; yet had her terror 
permit her to persever longer in the call, she would probabl have 
awaken madam montoni, and have been spare much suffering. the 
spectacl in the portal-chamber, which afterward confirm emily’ 
horribl suspicion, wa the corps of a man, who had fallen in the 
affray, and the same which had been born into the servants’ hall, 
where she took refug from the tumult. thi man had linger under hi 
wound for some days; and, soon after hi death, hi bodi had been 
remov on the couch, on which he died, for inter in the vault 
beneath the chapel, through which emili and barnardin had pass to 
the chamber. 

emily, after ask madam montoni a thousand question concern 
herself, left her, and sought montoni; for the more solemn interest she 
felt for her aunt, made her now regardless of the resent her 
remonstr might draw upon herself, and of the improb of hi 
grant what she meant to entreat. 

“madam montoni is now dying, sir,” said emily, as soon as she saw 
him—“your resentment, sure will not pursu her to the last moment! 
suffer her to be remov from that forlorn room to her own apartment, 
and to have necessari comfort administered.” 

“of what servic will that be, if she is dying?” said montoni, with 
appar indifference. 

“the service, at leave, of save you, sir, from a few of those pang 
of conscienc you must suffer, when you shall be in the same 
situation,” said emily, with imprud indignation, of which montoni 
soon made her sensible, by command her to quit hi presence. then, 
forget her resentment, and impress onli by compass for the 
piteou state of her aunt, die without succour, she submit to 
humbl herself to montoni, and to adopt everi persuas means, that 
might induc him to relent toward hi wife. 

for a consider time he wa proof against all she said, and all she 
looked; but at length the divin of pity, beam in emily’ eyes, 
seem to touch hi heart. He turn away, asham of hi better 
feelings, half sullen and half relenting; but final consented, that 
hi wife should be remov to her own apartment, and that emili should 
attend her. dread equally, that thi relief might arriv too late, 
and that montoni might retract hi concession, emili scarc staid to 
thank him for it, but, assist by annette, she quickli prepar madam 
montoni’ bed, and they carri her a cordial, that might enabl her 
feebl frame to sustain the fatigu of a removal. 

madam wa scarc arriv in her own apartment, when an order wa 
given by her husband, that she should remain in the turret; but emily, 
thank that she had made such dispatch, hasten to inform him of it, 
as well as that a second remov would instantli prove fatal, and he 
suffer hi wife to continu where she was. 

dure thi day, emili never left madam montoni, except to prepar 
such littl nourish thing as she judg necessari to sustain her, 
and which madam montoni receiv with quiet acquiescence, though she 
seem sensibl that they could not save her from approach 
dissolution, and scarc appear to wish for life. emili meanwhil 
watch over her with the most tender solicitude, no longer see her 
imperi aunt in the poor object befor her, but the sister of her 
late belov father, in a situat that call for all her compass 
and kindness. when night came, she determin to sit up with her aunt, 
but thi the latter posit forbade, command her to retir to 
rest, and annett alon to remain in her chamber. rest was, indeed, 
necessari to emily, whose spirit and frame were equal weari by the 
occurr and exert of the day; but she would not leav madam 
montoni, till after the turn of midnight, a period then thought so 
critic by the physicians. 

soon after twelve, have enjoin annett to be wakeful, and to call 
her, should ani chang appear for the worse, emili sorrow bade 
madam montoni good night, and withdrew to her chamber. her spirit 
were more than usual depress by the piteou condit of her aunt, 
whose recoveri she scarc dare to expect. To her own misfortun she 
saw no period, inclos as she was, in a remot castle, beyond the 
reach of ani friends, had she possess such, and beyond the piti even 
of strangers; while she knew herself to be in the power of a man 
capabl of ani action, which hi interest, or hi ambition, might 
suggest. 

occupi by melancholi reflect and by anticip as sad, she did 
not retir immedi to rest, but lean thought on her open 
casement. the scene befor her of wood and mountains, repos in the 
moonlight, form a regret contrast with the state of her mind; but 
the lone murmur of these woods, and the view of thi sleep 
landscape, gradual sooth her emot and soften her to tears. 

she continu to weep, for some time, lost to everything, but to a 
gentl sens of her misfortunes. when she, at length, took the 
handkerchief from her eyes, she perceived, befor her, on the terrac 
below, the figur she had formerli observed, which stood fix and 
silent, immedi opposit to her casement. On perceiv it, she 
start back, and terror for some time overcam curiosity;—at length, 
she return to the casement, and still the figur wa befor it, which 
she now compel herself to observe, but wa utterli unabl to speak, 
as she had formerli intended. the moon shone with a clear light, and it 
was, perhaps, the agit of her mind, that prevent her 
distinguishing, with ani degre of accuracy, the form befor her. It 
wa still stationary, and she began to doubt, whether it wa realli 
animated. 

her scatter thought were now so far return as to remind her, that 
her light expos her to danger observation, and she wa step 
back to remov it, when she perceiv the figur move, and then wave 
what seem to be it arm, as if to beckon her; and, while she gazed, 
fix in fear, it repeat the action. she now attempt to speak, but 
the word die on her lips, and she went from the casement to remov 
her light; as she wa do which, she heard, from without, a faint 
groan. listening, but not dare to return, she present heard it 
repeated. 

“good god!—what can thi mean!” said she. 

again she listened, but the sound came no more; and, after a long 
interv of silence, she recov courag enough to go to the 
casement, when she again saw the same appearance! It beckon again, 
and again utter a low sound. 

“that groan wa sure human!” said she. “I _will_ speak.” “who is it,” 
cri emili in a faint voice, “that wander at thi late hour?” 

the figur rais it head but suddenli start away, and glide down 
the terrace. she watch it, for a long while, pass swiftli in the 
moonlight, but heard no footstep, till a sentinel from the other 
extrem of the rampart walk slowli along. the man stop under her 
window, and, look up, call her by name. she wa retir 
precipitately, but, a second summon induc her to reply, the soldier 
then respect ask if she had seen anyth pass. On her 
answering, that she had; he said no more, but walk away down the 
terrace, emili follow him with her eyes, till he wa lost in the 
distance. but, as he wa on guard, she knew he could not go beyond the 
rampart, and, therefore, resolv to await hi return. 

soon after, hi voic wa heard, at a distance, call loudly; and 
then a voic still more distant answered, and, in the next moment, the 
watch-word wa given, and pass along the terrace. As the soldier 
move hastili under the casement, she call to enquir what had 
happened, but they pass without regard her. 

emily’ thought return to the figur she had seen, “it cannot be a 
person, who ha design upon the castle,” said she; “such a one would 
conduct himself veri differently. He would not ventur where sentinel 
were on watch, nor fix himself opposit to a window, where he perceiv 
he must be observed; much less would he beckon, or utter a sound of 
complaint. yet it cannot be a prisoner, for how could he obtain the 
opportun to wander thus?” 

If she had been subject to vanity, she might have suppos thi figur 
to be some inhabit of the castle, who wander under her casement in 
the hope of see her, and of be allow to declar hi admiration; 
but thi opinion never occur to emily, and, if it had, she would 
have dismiss it as improbable, on considering, that, when the 
opportun of speak had occurred, it had been suffer to pass in 
silence; and that, even at the moment in which she had spoken, the form 
had abruptli quit the place. 

while she mused, two sentinel walk up the rampart in earnest 
conversation, of which she caught a few words, and learn from these, 
that one of their comrad had fallen down senseless. soon after, three 
other soldier appear slowli advanc from the bottom of the 
terrace, but she heard onli a low voice, that came at intervals. As 
they drew near, she perceiv thi to be the voic of him, who walk 
in the middle, appar support by hi comrades; and she again 
call to them, enquir what had happened. At the sound of her voice, 
they stopped, and look up, while she repeat her question, and wa 
told, that roberto, their fellow of the watch, had been seiz with a 
fit, and that hi cry, as he fell, had caus a fals alarm. 

“i he subject to fits?” said emily. 

“yes, signora,” repli roberto; “but if I had not, what I saw wa 
enough to have frighten the pope himself.” 

“what wa it?” enquir emily, trembling. 

“I cannot tell what it was, lady, or what I saw, or how it vanished,” 
repli the soldier, who seem to shudder at the recollection. 

“wa it the person, whom you follow down the rampart, that ha 
occas you thi alarm?” said emily, endeavour to conceal her 
own. 

“person!” exclaim the man,—“it wa the devil, and thi is not the 
first time I have seen him!” 

“nor will it be the last,” observ one of hi comrades, laughing. 

“no, no, I warrant not,” said another. 

“well,” rejoin roberto, “you may be as merri now, as you please; you 
were none so jocos the other night, sebastian, when you were on watch 
with launcelot.” 

“launcelot need not talk of that,” repli sebastian, “let him rememb 
how he stood trembling, and unabl to give the _word_, till the man wa 
gone. If the man had not come so silent upon us, I would have seiz 
him, and soon made him tell who he was.” 

“what man?” enquir emily. 

“it wa no man, lady,” said launcelot, who stood by, “but the devil 
himself, as my comrad says. what man, who doe not live in the castle, 
could get within the wall at midnight? why, I might just as well 
pretend to march to venice, and get among all the senators, when they 
are counselling; and I warrant I should have more chanc of get out 
again alive, than ani fellow, that we should catch within the gate 
after dark. So I think I have prove plainli enough, that thi can be 
nobodi that live out of the castle; and now I will prove, that it can 
be nobodi that live in the castle—for, if he did—whi should he be 
afraid to be seen? So after this, I hope nobodi will pretend to tell me 
it wa anybody. no, I say again, by holi pope! it wa the devil, and 
sebastian, there, know thi is not the first time we have seen him.” 

“when did you see the figure, then, before?” said emili half smiling, 
who, though she thought the convers somewhat too much, felt an 
interest, which would not permit her to conclud it. 

“about a week ago, lady,” said sebastian, take up the story. 

“and where?” 

“on the rampart, lady, higher up.” 

“did you pursu it, that it fled?” 

“no, signora. launcelot and I were on watch together, and everyth 
wa so still, you might have heard a mous stir, when, suddenly, 
launcelot says—sebastian! do you see nothing? I turn my head a littl 
to the left, as it might be—thus. no, say I. hush! said 
launcelot,—look yonder—just by the last cannon on the rampart! I 
looked, and then thought I did see someth move; but there be no 
light, but what the star gave, I could not be certain. We stood quit 
silent, to watch it, and present saw someth pass along the castl 
wall just opposit to us!” 

“whi did you not seiz it, then?” cri a soldier, who had scarc 
spoken till now. 

“aye, whi did you not seiz it?” said roberto. 

“you should have been there to have done that,” repli sebastian. “you 
would have been bold enough to have taken it by the throat, though it 
had been the devil himself; we could not take such a liberty, perhaps, 
becaus we are not so well acquaint with him, as you are. but, as I 
wa saying, it stole by us so quickly, that we had not time to get rid 
of our surprise, befor it wa gone. then, we knew it wa in vain to 
follow. We kept constant watch all that night, but we saw it no more. 
next morning, we told some of our comrades, who were on duti on other 
part of the ramparts, what we had seen; but they had seen nothing, and 
laugh at us, and it wa not till tonight, that the same figur walk 
again.” 

“where did you lose it, friend?” said emili to roberto. 

“when I left you, lady,” repli the man, “you might see me go down the 
rampart, but it wa not till I reach the east terrace, that I saw 
anything. then, the moon shine bright, I saw someth like a shadow 
flit befor me, as it were, at some distance. I stopped, when I 
turn the corner of the east tower, where I had seen thi figur not a 
moment before,—but it wa gone! As I stood, look through the old 
arch which lead to the east rampart, and where I am sure it had 
passed, I heard, all of a sudden, such a sound!—it wa not like a 
groan, or a cry, or a shout, or anyth I ever heard in my life. I 
heard it onli once, and that wa enough for me; for I know noth that 
happen after, till I found my comrades, here, about me.” 

“come,” said sebastian, “let us go to our posts—th moon is setting. 
good night, lady!” 

“aye, let us go,” rejoin roberto. “good night, lady.” 

“good night; the holi mother guard you!” said emily, as she close her 
casement and retir to reflect upon the strang circumst that had 
just occurred, connect which with what had happen on former 
nights, she endeavour to deriv from the whole someth more 
positive, than conjecture. but her imagin wa inflamed, while her 
judgment wa not enlightened, and the terror of superstit again 
pervad her mind. 



chapter IV 

there is one within, 
besid the thing that we have heard and seen, 
recount most horrid sights, seen by the watch. 
juliu cæsar 


In the morning, emili found madam montoni nearli in the same 
condition, as on the preced night; she had slept little, and that 
littl had not refresh her; she smile on her niece, and seem 
cheer by her presence, but spoke onli a few words, and never name 
montoni, who, however, soon after, enter the room. hi wife, when she 
understood that he wa there, appear much agitated, but wa entir 
silent, till emili rose from a chair at the bedside, when she begged, 
in a feebl voice, that she would not leav her. 

the visit of montoni wa not to sooth hi wife, whom he knew to be 
dying, or to console, or to ask her forgiveness, but to make a last 
effort to procur that signature, which would transfer her estat in 
languedoc, after her death, to him rather than to emily. thi wa a 
scene, that exhibited, on hi part, hi usual inhumanity, and, on that 
of madam montoni, a persev spirit, contend with a feebl 
frame; while emili repeatedli declar to him her willing to resign 
all claim to those estates, rather than that the last hour of her aunt 
should be disturb by contention. montoni, however, did not leav the 
room, till hi wife, exhaust by the obstin dispute, had fainted, 
and she lay so long insensible, that emili began to fear that the spark 
of life wa extinguished. At length, she revived, and, look feebli 
up at her niece, whose tear were fall over her, made an effort to 
speak, but her word were unintelligible, and emili again apprehend 
she wa dying. afterwards, however, she recov her speech, and, 
be somewhat restor by a cordial, convers for a consider 
time, on the subject of her estat in france, with clear and 
precision. she direct her niec where to find some paper rel to 
them, which she had hitherto conceal from the search of montoni, and 
earnestli charg her never to suffer these paper to escap her. 

soon after thi conversation, madam montoni sunk into a dose, and 
continu slumbering, till evening, when she seem better than she had 
been sinc her remov from the turret. emili never left her, for a 
moment, till long after midnight, and even then would not have quit 
the room, had not her aunt entreated, that she would retir to rest. 
she then obeyed, the more willingly, becaus her patient appear 
somewhat recruit by sleep; and, give annett the same injunction, 
as on the preced night, she withdrew to her own apartment. but her 
spirit were wake and agitated, and, find it imposs to sleep, 
she determin to watch, onc more, for the mysteri appearance, that 
had so much interest and alarm her. 

It wa now the second watch of the night, and about the time when the 
figur had befor appeared. emili heard the pass step of the 
sentinels, on the rampart, as they chang guard; and, when all wa 
again silent, she took her station at the casement, leav her lamp in 
a remot part of the chamber, that she might escap notic from 
without. the moon gave a faint and uncertain light, for heavi vapour 
surround it, and, often roll over the disk, left the scene below 
in total darkness. It wa in one of these moment of obscurity, that 
she observ a small and lambent flame, move at some distanc on the 
terrace. while she gazed, it disappeared, and, the moon again emerg 
from the lurid and heavi thunder clouds, she turn her attent to 
the heavens, where the vivid lightn dart from cloud to cloud, and 
flash silent on the wood below. she love to catch, in the 
momentari gleam, the gloomi landscape. sometimes, a cloud open it 
light upon a distant mountain, and, while the sudden splendour 
illumin all it recess of rock and wood, the rest of the scene 
remain in deep shadow; at others, partial featur of the castl were 
reveal by the glimpse—th ancient arch lead to the east rampart, 
the turret above, or the fortif beyond; and then, perhaps, the 
whole edific with all it towers, it dark massi wall and point 
casement would appear, and vanish in an instant. 

emily, look again upon the rampart, perceiv the flame she had seen 
before; it move onward; and, soon after, she thought she heard a 
footstep. the light appear and disappear frequently, while, as she 
watched, it glide under her casements, and, at the same instant, she 
wa certain, that a footstep passed, but the dark did not permit 
her to distinguish ani object except the flame. It move away, and 
then, by a gleam of lightning, she perceiv some person on the 
terrace. all the anxieti of the preced night returned. thi person 
advanced, and the play flame altern appear and vanished. 
emili wish to speak, to end her doubts, whether thi figur were 
human or supernatural; but her courag fail as often as she attempt 
utterance, till the light move again under the casement, and she 
faintli demanded, who passed. 

“A friend,” repli a voice. 

“what friend?” said emily, somewhat encourag “who are you, and what 
is that light you carry?” 

“I am anthonio, one of the signor’ soldiers,” repli the voice. 

“and what is that taper light you bear?” said emily, “see how it 
dart upwards,—and now it vanishes!” 

“thi light, lady,” said the soldier, “ha appear tonight as you see 
it, on the point of my lance, ever sinc I have been on watch; but what 
it mean I cannot tell.” 

“thi is veri strange!” said emily. 

“mi fellow-guard,” continu the man, “ha the same flame on hi arms; 
he say he ha sometim seen it before. I never did; I am but late 
come to the castle, for I have not been long a soldier.” 

“how doe your comrad account for it?” said emily. 

“he say it is an omen, lady, and bode no good.” 

“and what harm can it bode?” rejoin emily. 

“he know not so much as that, lady.” 

whether emili wa alarm by thi omen, or not, she certainli wa 
reliev from much terror by discov thi man to be onli a soldier 
on duty, and it immedi occur to her, that it might be he, who 
had occas so much alarm on the preced night. there were, 
however, some circumstances, that still requir explanation. As far as 
she could judg by the faint moonlight, that had assist her 
observation, the figur she had seen did not resembl thi man either 
in shape or size; besides, she wa certain it had carri no arms. the 
silenc of it steps, if step it had, the moan sounds, too, which 
it had uttered, and it strang disappearance, were circumst of 
mysteri import, that did not apply, with probability, to a soldier 
engag in the duti of hi guard. 

she now enquir of the sentinel, whether he had seen ani person 
besid hi fellow watch, walk on the terrace, about midnight; and 
then briefli relat what she had herself observed. 

“I wa not on guard that night, lady,” repli the man, “but I heard of 
what happened. there are amongst us, who believ strang things. 
strang stories, too, have long been told of thi castle, but it is no 
busi of mine to repeat them; and, for my part, I have no reason to 
complain; our chief doe nobli by us.” 

“I commend your prudence,” said emily. “good night, and accept thi 
from me,” she added, throw him a small piec of coin, and then 
close the casement to put an end to the discourse. 

when he wa gone, she open it again, listen with a gloomi pleasur 
to the distant thunder, that began to murmur among the mountains, and 
watch the arrowi lightnings, which broke over the remot scene. the 
peal thunder roll onward, and then, reverb by the mountains, 
other thunder seem to answer from the opposit horizon; while the 
accumul clouds, entir conceal the moon, assum a red 
sulphur tinge, that foretold a violent storm. 

emili remain at her casement, till the vivid lightning, that now, 
everi instant, reveal the wide horizon and the landscap below, made 
it no longer safe to do so, and she went to her couch; but, unabl to 
compos her mind to sleep, still listen in silent awe to the 
tremend sounds, that seem to shake the castl to it foundation. 

she had continu thu for a consider time, when, amidst the uproar 
of the storm, she thought she heard a voice, and, rais herself to 
listen, saw the chamber door open, and annett enter with a counten 
of wild affright. 

“she is dying, ma’amselle, my ladi is dying!” said she. 

emili start up, and ran to madam montoni’ room. when she entered, 
her aunt appear to have fainted, for she wa quit still, and 
insensible; and emili with a strength of mind, that refus to yield to 
grief, while ani duti requir her activity, appli everi mean that 
seem like to restor her. but the last struggl wa over—sh wa 
gone for ever. 

when emili perceived, that all her effort were ineffectual, she 
interrog the terrifi annette, and learned, that madam montoni 
had fallen into a doze soon after emily’ departure, in which she had 
continued, until a few minut befor her death. 

“I wondered, ma’amselle,” said annette, “what wa the reason my ladi 
did not seem frighten at the thunder, when I wa so terrified, and I 
went often to the bed to speak to her, but she appear to be asleep; 
till present I heard a strang noise, and, on go to her, saw she 
wa dying.” 

emily, at thi recital, shed tears. she had no doubt but that the 
violent chang in the air, which the tempest produced, had effect 
thi fatal one, on the exhaust frame of madam montoni. 

after some deliberation, she determin that montoni should not be 
inform of thi event till the morning, for she considered, that he 
might, perhaps, utter some inhuman expressions, such as in the present 
temper of her spirit she could not bear. with annett alone, 
therefore, whom she encourag by her own example, she perform some 
of the last solemn offic for the dead, and compel herself to watch 
dure the night, by the bodi of her deceas aunt. dure thi solemn 
period, render more aw by the tremend storm that shook the air, 
she frequent address herself to heaven for support and protection, 
and her piou prayers, we may believe, were accept of the god, that 
giveth comfort. 



chapter V 

the midnight clock ha toll’d; and hark, the bell 
Of death beat slow! heard ye the note profound? 
It paus now; and now with rise knell 
fling to the hollow gale it sullen sound. 
mason 


when montoni wa inform of the death of hi wife, and consid that 
she had die without give him the signatur so necessari to the 
accomplish of hi wishes, no sens of decenc restrain the 
express of hi resentment. emili anxious avoid hi presence, and 
watched, dure two day and two nights, with littl intermission, by 
the corps of her late aunt. her mind deepli impress with the unhappi 
fate of thi object, she forgot all her faults, her unjust and 
imperi conduct to herself; and, rememb onli her sufferings, 
thought of her onli with tender compassion. sometimes, however, she 
could not avoid muse upon the strang infatu that had prove so 
fatal to her aunt, and had involv herself in a labyrinth of 
misfortune, from which she saw no mean of escaping,—th marriag with 
montoni. but, when she consid thi circumstance, it wa “more in 
sorrow than in anger,”—mor for the purpos of indulg lamentation, 
than reproach. 

In her piou care she wa not disturb by montoni, who not onli 
avoid the chamber, where the remain of hi wife were laid, but that 
part of the castl adjoin to it, as if he had apprehend a 
contagion in death. He seem to have given no order respect the 
funeral, and emili began to fear he meant to offer a new insult to the 
memori of madam montoni; but from thi apprehens she wa relieved, 
when, on the even of the second day, annett inform her, that the 
inter wa to take place that night. she knew, that montoni would 
not attend; and it wa so veri grievou to her to think that the 
remain of her unfortun aunt would pass to the grave without one 
relative, or friend to pay them the last decent rites, that she 
determin to be deter by no consider for herself, from 
observ thi duty. she would otherwis have shrunk from the 
circumst of follow them to the cold vault, to which they were to 
be carri by men whose air and counten seem to stamp them for 
murderers, at the midnight hour of silenc and privacy, which montoni 
had chosen for committing, if possible, to oblivion the reliqu of a 
woman, whom hi harsh conduct had, at least, contribut to destroy. 

emily, shudder with emot of horror and grief, assist by 
annette, prepar the corps for interment; and, have wrapt it in 
cerements, and cover it with a winding-sheet, they watch besid it, 
till past midnight, when they heard the approach footstep of the 
men, who were to lay it in it earthi bed. It wa with difficulti that 
emili overcam her emotion, when, the door of the chamber be thrown 
open, their gloomi counten were seen by the glare of the torch 
they carried, and two of them, without speaking, lift the bodi on 
their shoulders, while the third preced them with the light, 
descend through the castl toward the grave, which wa in the lower 
vault of the chapel within the castl walls. 

they had to cross two courts, toward the east wing of the castle, 
which, adjoin the chapel, was, like it, in ruins: but the silenc 
and gloom of these court had now littl power over emily’ mind, 
occupi as it was, with more mourn ideas; and she scarc heard 
the low and dismal hoot of the night-birds, that roost among the 
ivi battlement of the ruin, or perceiv the still flit of the 
bat, which frequent cross her way. but, when, have enter the 
chapel, and pass between the moulder pillar of the aisles, the 
bearer stop at a flight of steps, that led down to a low arch 
door, and, their comrad have descend to unlock it, she saw 
imperfectli the gloomi abyss beyond;—saw the corps of her aunt carri 
down these steps, and the ruffian-lik figure, that stood with a torch 
at the bottom to receiv it—al her fortitud wa lost in emot of 
inexpress grief and terror. she turn to lean upon annette, who 
wa cold and trembl like herself, and she linger so long on the 
summit of the flight, that the gleam of the torch began to die away on 
the pillar of the chapel, and the men were almost beyond her view. 
then, the gloom around her awaken other fears, and a sens of what 
she consid to be her duti overcom her reluctance, she descend 
to the vaults, follow the echo of footstep and the faint ray, that 
pierc the darkness, till the harsh grate of a distant door, that 
wa open to receiv the corpse, again appal her. 

after the paus of a moment, she went on, and, as she enter the 
vaults, saw between the arches, at some distance, the men lay down the 
bodi near the edg of an open grave, where stood anoth of montoni’ 
men and a priest, whom she did not observe, till he began the burial 
service; then, lift her eye from the ground, she saw the vener 
figur of the friar, and heard him in a low voice, equal solemn and 
affecting, perform the servic for the dead. At the moment, in which 
they let down the bodi into the earth, the scene wa such as onli the 
dark pencil of a domenichino, perhaps, could have done justic to. the 
fierc featur and wild dress of the _condottieri_, bend with their 
torch over the grave, into which the corps wa descending, were 
contrast by the vener figur of the monk, wrapt in long black 
garments, hi cowl thrown back from hi pale face, on which the light 
gleam strongli show the line of afflict soften by piety, and 
the few grey locks, which time had spare on hi temples: while, besid 
him, stood the softer form of emily, who lean for support upon 
annette; her face half averted, and shade by a thin veil, that fell 
over her figure; and her mild and beauti counten fix in grief 
so solemn as admit not of tears, while she thu saw commit 
untim to the earth her last rel and friend. the gleams, thrown 
between the arch of the vaults, where, here and there, the broken 
ground mark the spot in which other bodi had been recent 
interred, and the gener obscur beyond were circumstances, that 
alon would have led on the imagin of a spectat to scene more 
horribl than even that which wa pictur at the grave of the 
misguid and unfortun madam montoni. 

when the servic wa over, the friar regard emili with attent and 
surprise, and look as if he wish to speak to her, but wa 
restrain by the presenc of the _condottieri_, who, as they now led 
the way to the courts, amus themselv with joke upon hi holi 
order, which he endur in silence, demand onli to be conduct 
safe to hi convent, and to which emili listen with concern and 
even horror. when they reach the court, the monk gave her hi 
blessing, and, after a linger look of pity, turn away to the 
portal, whither one of the men carri a torch; while annette, light 
another, preced emili to her apartment. the appear of the friar 
and the express of tender compassion, with which he had regard 
her, had interest emily, who, though it wa at her earnest 
supplication, that montoni had consent to allow a priest to perform 
the last rite for hi deceas wife, knew noth concern thi 
person, till annett now inform her, that he belong to a monastery, 
situat among the mountain at a few mile distance. the superior, who 
regard montoni and hi associates, not onli with aversion, but with 
terror, had probabl fear to offend him by refus hi request, and 
had, therefore, order a monk to offici at the funeral, who, with 
the meek spirit of a christian, had overcom hi reluct to enter 
the wall of such a castle, by the wish of perform what he 
consid to be hi duty, and, as the chapel wa built on consecr 
ground, had not object to commit to it the remain of the late 
unhappi madam montoni. 

sever day pass with emili in total seclusion, and in a state of 
mind partak both of terror for herself, and grief for the departed. 
she, at length, determin to make other effort to persuad montoni to 
permit her return to france. whi he should wish to detain her, she 
could scarc dare to conjecture; but it wa too certain that he did 
so, and the absolut refus he had formerli given to her departur 
allow her littl hope, that he would now consent to it. but the 
horror, which hi presenc inspired, made her defer, from day to day, 
the mention of thi subject; and at last she wa awaken from her 
inact onli by a messag from him, desir her attend at a 
certain hour. she began to hope he meant to resign, now that her aunt 
wa no more, the author he had usurp over her; till she 
recollected, that the estates, which had occas so much contention, 
were now hers, and she then fear montoni wa about to employ some 
stratagem for obtain them, and that he would detain her hi 
prisoner, till he succeeded. thi thought, instead of overcom her 
with despondency, rous all the latent power of her fortitud into 
action; and the property, which she would willingli have resign to 
secur the peac of her aunt, she resolved, that no common suffer 
of her own should ever compel her to give to montoni. for valancourt’ 
sake also she determin to preserv these estates, sinc they would 
afford that competency, by which she hope to secur the comfort of 
their futur lives. As she thought of this, she indulg the tender 
of tears, and anticip the delight of that moment, when, with 
affection generosity, she might tell him they were hi own. she saw 
the smile, that light up hi features—th affection regard, which 
spoke at onc hi joy and thanks; and, at thi instant, she believ 
she could brave ani suffering, which the evil spirit of montoni might 
be prepar for her. rememb then, for the first time sinc her 
aunt’ death, the paper rel to the estat in question, she 
determin to search for them, as soon as her interview with montoni 
wa over. 

with these resolut she met him at the appoint time, and wait to 
hear hi intent befor she renew her request. with him were orsino 
and anoth officer, and both were stand near a table, cover with 
papers, which he appear to be examining. 

“I sent for you, emily,” said montoni, rais hi head, “that you 
might be a wit in some business, which I am transact with my 
friend orsino. all that is requir of you will be to sign your name to 
thi paper:” he then took one up, hurri unintellig over some 
lines, and, lay it befor her on the table, offer her a pen. she 
took it, and wa go to write—when the design of montoni came upon 
her mind like a flash of lightning; she trembled, let the pen fall, and 
refus to sign what she had not read. montoni affect to laugh at her 
scruples, and, take up the paper, again pretend to read; but emily, 
who still trembl on perceiv her danger, and wa astonished, that 
her own credul had so nearli betray her, posit refus to 
sign ani paper whatever. montoni, for some time, persev in 
affect to ridicul thi refusal; but, when he perceiv by her 
steadi perseverance, that she understood hi design, he chang hi 
manner, and bade her follow him to anoth room. there he told her, 
that he had been will to spare himself and her the troubl of 
useless contest, in an affair, where hi will wa justice, and where 
she should find it law; and had, therefore, endeavour to persuade, 
rather than to compel, her to the practic of her duty. 

“i, as the husband of the late signora montoni,” he added, “am the heir 
of all she possessed; the estates, therefore, which she refus to me 
in her life-time, can no longer be withheld, and, for your own sake, I 
would undec you, respect a foolish assert she onc made to 
you in my hearing—that these estat would be yours, if she die 
without resign them to me. she knew at that moment, she had no power 
to withhold them from me, after her decease; and I think you have more 
sense, than to provok my resent by advanc an unjust claim. I am 
not in the habit of flattering, and you will, therefore, receive, as 
sincere, the prais I bestow, when I say, that you possess an 
understand superior to that of your sex; and that you have none of 
those contempt foibles, that frequent mark the femal 
character—such as avaric and the love of power, which latter make 
women delight to contradict and to tease, when they cannot conquer. If 
I understand your disposit and your mind, you hold in sovereign 
contempt these common fail of your sex.” 

montoni paused; and emili remain silent and expecting; for she knew 
him too well, to believ he would condescend to such flattery, unless 
he thought it would promot hi own interest; and, though he had 
forborn to name vaniti among the foibl of women, it wa evident, 
that he consid it to be a predomin one, sinc he design to 
sacrific to her the charact and understand of her whole sex. 

“judg as I do,” resum montoni, “I cannot believ you will oppose, 
where you know you cannot conquer, or, indeed, that you would wish to 
conquer, or be avarici of ani property, when you have not justic on 
your side. I think it proper, however, to acquaint you with the 
alternative. If you have a just opinion of the subject in question, you 
shall be allow a safe convey to france, within a short period; 
but, if you are so unhappi as to be misl by the late assert of the 
signora, you shall remain my prisoner, till you are convinc of your 
error.” 

emili calmli said, 

“I am not so ignorant, signor, of the law on thi subject, as to be 
misl by the assert of ani person. the law, in the present 
instance, give me the estat in question, and my own hand shall never 
betray my right.” 

“I have been mistaken in my opinion of you, it appears,” rejoin 
montoni, sternly. “you speak boldly, and presumptuously, upon a 
subject, which you do not understand. for once, I am will to pardon 
the conceit of ignorance; the weak of your sex, too, from which, it 
seems, you are not exempt, claim some allowance; but, if you persist 
in thi strain—you have everyth to fear from my justice.” 

“from your justice, signor,” rejoin emily, “I have noth to fear—i 
have onli to hope.” 

montoni look at her with vexation, and seem consid what to 
say. “I find that you are weak enough,” he resumed, “to credit the idl 
assert I allud to! for your own sake I lament this; as to me, it 
is of littl consequence. your credul can punish onli yourself; and 
I must piti the weak of mind, which lead you to so much suffer 
as you are compel me to prepar for you.” 

“you may find, perhaps, signor,” said emily, with mild dignity, “that 
the strength of my mind is equal to the justic of my cause; and that I 
can endur with fortitude, when it is in resist of oppression.” 

“you speak like a heroine,” said montoni, contemptuously; “we shall see 
whether you can suffer like one.” 

emili wa silent, and he left the room. 

recollecting, that it wa for valancourt’ sake she had thu resisted, 
she now smile complac upon the threaten sufferings, and retir 
to the spot, which her aunt had point out as the repositori of the 
papers, rel to the estates, where she found them as described; 
and, sinc she knew of no better place of concealment, than this, 
return them, without examin their contents, be fear of 
discovery, while she should attempt a perusal. 

To her own solitari chamber she onc more returned, and there thought 
again of the late convers with montoni, and of the evil she might 
expect from opposit to hi will. but hi power did not appear so 
terribl to her imagination, as it wa wont to do: a sacr pride wa 
in her heart, that taught it to swell against the pressur of 
injustice, and almost to glori in the quiet suffer of ills, in a 
cause, which had also the interest of valancourt for it object. for 
the first time, she felt the full extent of her own superior to 
montoni, and despis the authority, which, till now, she had onli 
feared. 

As she sat musing, a peal of laughter rose from the terrace, and, on 
go to the casement, she saw, with inexpress surprise, three 
ladies, dress in the gala habit of venice, walk with sever 
gentlemen below. she gaze in an astonish that made her remain at 
the window, regardless of be observed, till the group pass under 
it; and, one of the stranger look up, she perceiv the featur of 
signora livona, with whose manner she had been so much charmed, the 
day after her arriv at venice, and who had been there introduc at 
the tabl of montoni. thi discoveri occas her an emot of 
doubt joy; for it wa matter of joy and comfort to know, that a 
person, of a mind so gentle, as that of signora livona seem to be, 
wa near her; yet there wa someth so extraordinari in her be at 
thi castle, circumstanc as it now was, and evidently, by the gaieti 
of her air, with her own consent, that a veri pain surmis arose, 
concern her character. but the thought wa so shock to emily, 
whose affect the fascin manner of the signora had won, and 
appear so improbable, when she rememb these manners, that she 
dismiss it almost instantly. 

On annette’ appearance, however, she enquired, concern these 
strangers; and the former wa as eager to tell, as emili wa to learn. 

“they are just come, ma’amselle,” said annette, “with two signor from 
venice, and I wa glad to see such christian face onc again.—but what 
can they mean by come here? they must sure be stark mad to come 
freeli to such a place as this! yet they do come freely, for they seem 
merri enough, I am sure.” 

“they were taken prisoners, perhaps?” said emily. 

“taken prisoners!” exclaim annette; “no, indeed, ma’amselle, not 
they. I rememb one of them veri well at venice: she came two or three 
times, to the signor’ you know, ma’amselle, and it wa said, but I did 
not believ a word of it—it wa said, that the signor like her better 
than he should do. then why, say I, bring her to my lady? veri true, 
said ludovico; but he look as if he knew more, too.” 

emili desir annett would endeavour to learn who these ladi were, 
as well as all she could concern them; and she then chang the 
subject, and spoke of distant france. 

“ah, ma’amselle! we shall never see it more!” said annette, almost 
weeping.—“i must come on my travels, forsooth!” 

emili tri to sooth and to cheer her, with a hope, in which she 
scarc herself indulged. 

“how—how, ma’amselle, could you leav france, and leav mons. 
valancourt, too?” said annette, sobbing. “i—i—am sure, if ludovico had 
been in france, I would never have left it.” 

“whi do you lament quit france, then?” said emily, tri to smile, 
“since, if you had remain there, you would not have found ludovico.” 

“ah, ma’amselle! I onli wish I wa out of thi fright castle, 
serv you in france, and I would care about noth else!” 

“thank you, my good annette, for your affection regard; the time 
will come, I hope, when you may rememb the express of that wish 
with pleasure.” 

annett depart on her business, and emili sought to lose the sens of 
her own cares, in the visionari scene of the poet; but she had again 
to lament the irresist forc of circumst over the tast and 
power of the mind; and that it requir a spirit at eas to be 
sensibl even to the abstract pleasur of pure intellect. the 
enthusiasm of genius, with all it pictur scenes, now appear cold, 
and dim. As she muse upon the book befor her, she involuntarili 
exclaimed, “are these, indeed, the passages, that have so often given 
me exquisit delight? where did the charm exist?—wa it in my mind, or 
in the imagin of the poet? It live in each,” said she, pausing. 
“but the fire of the poet is vain, if the mind of hi reader is not 
temper like hi own, howev it may be inferior to hi in power.” 

emili would have pursu thi train of thinking, becaus it reliev 
her from more pain reflection, but she found again, that thought 
cannot alway be control by will; and her return to the 
consider of her own situation. 

In the evening, not choos to ventur down to the ramparts, where she 
would be expos to the rude gaze of montoni’ associates, she walk 
for air in the gallery, adjoin her chamber; on reach the further 
end of which she heard distant sound of merriment and laughter. It wa 
the wild uproar of riot, not the cheer gaieti of temper mirth; and 
seem to come from that part of the castle, where montoni usual was. 
such sounds, at thi time, when her aunt had been so few day dead, 
particularli shock her, consist as they were with the late conduct 
of montoni. 

As she listened, she thought she distinguish femal voic mingl 
with the laughter, and thi confirm her worst surmise, concern the 
charact of signora livona and her companions. It wa evident, that 
they had not been brought hither by compulsion; and she beheld herself 
in the remot wild of the apennine, surround by men, whom she 
consid to be littl less than ruffians, and their worst associates, 
amid scene of vice, from which her soul recoil in horror. It wa at 
thi moment, when the scene of the present and the futur open to 
her imagination, that the imag of valancourt fail in it influence, 
and her resolut shook with dread. she thought she understood all the 
horrors, which montoni wa prepar for her, and shrunk from an 
encount with such remorseless vengeance, as he could inflict. the 
disput estat she now almost determin to yield at once, whenev 
he should again call upon her, that she might regain safeti and 
freedom; but then, the remembr of valancourt would steal to her 
heart, and plung her into the distract of doubt. 

she continu walk in the gallery, till even threw it melancholi 
twilight through the paint casements, and deepen the gloom of the 
oak wainscot around her; while the distant perspect of the 
corridor wa so much obscured, as to be discern onli by the 
glimmer window, that termin it. 

along the vault hall and passag below, peal of laughter echo 
faintly, at intervals, to thi remot part of the castle, and seem to 
render the succeed still more dreary. emily, however, unwil 
to return to her more forlorn chamber, whither annett wa not yet 
come, still pace the gallery. As she pass the door of the apartment, 
where she had onc dare to lift the veil, which discov to her a 
spectacl so horrible, that she had never after rememb it, but with 
emot of indescrib awe, thi remembr suddenli recurred. It 
now brought with it reflect more terrible, than it had yet done, 
which the late conduct of montoni occasioned; and, hasten to quit 
the gallery, while she had power to do so, she heard a sudden step 
behind her.—it might be that of annette; but, turn fear to 
look, she saw, through the gloom, a tall figur follow her, and all 
the horror of that chamber rush upon her mind. In the next moment, 
she found herself clasp in the arm of some person, and heard a deep 
voic murmur in her ear. 

when she had power to speak, or to distinguish articul sounds, she 
demand who detain her. 

“it is i,” repli the voice—“whi are you thu alarmed?” 

she look on the face of the person who spoke, but the feebl light, 
that gleam through the high casement at the end of the gallery, did 
not permit her to distinguish the features. 

“whoever you are,” said emily, in a trembl voice, “for heaven’ sake 
let me go!” 

“mi charm emily,” said the man, “whi will you shut yourself up in 
thi obscur place, when there is so much gaieti below? return with me 
to the cedar parlour, where you will be the fairest ornament of the 
party;—y shall not repent the exchange.” 

emili disdain to reply, and still endeavour to liber herself. 

“promise, that you will come,” he continued, “and I will releas you 
immediately; but first give me a reward for so doing.” 

“who are you?” demand emily, in a tone of mingl terror and 
indignation, while she still struggl for liberty—“who are you, that 
have the cruelti thu to insult me?” 

“whi call me cruel?” said the man, “I would remov you from thi dreari 
solitud to a merri parti below. Do you not know me?” 

emili now faintli remembered, that he wa one of the offic who were 
with montoni when she attend him in the morning. “I thank you for the 
kind of your intention,” she replied, without appear to 
understand him, “but I wish for noth so much as that you would leav 
me.” 

“charm emily!” said he, “give up thi foolish whim for solitude, and 
come with me to the company, and eclips the beauti who make part of 
it; you, only, are worthi of my love.” He attempt to kiss her hand, 
but the strong impuls of her indign gave her power to liber 
herself, and she fled toward the chamber. she close the door, befor 
he reach it, have secur which, she sunk in a chair, overcom by 
terror and by the exert she had made, while she heard hi voice, and 
hi attempt to open the door, without have the power to rais 
herself. At length, she perceiv him depart, and had remained, 
listening, for a consider time, and wa somewhat reviv by not 
hear ani sound, when suddenli she rememb the door of the privat 
staircase, and that he might enter that way, sinc it wa fasten onli 
on the other side. she then employ herself in endeavour to secur 
it, in the manner she had formerli done. It appear to her, that 
montoni had alreadi commenc hi scheme of vengeance, by withdraw 
from her hi protection, and she repent of the rashness, that had 
made her brave the power of such a man. To retain the estat seem to 
be now utterli impossible, and to preserv her life, perhap her 
honour, she resolved, if she should escap the horror of thi night, 
to give up all claim to the estates, on the morrow, provid montoni 
would suffer her to depart from udolpho. 

when she had come to thi decision, her mind becam more composed, 
though she still anxious listened, and often start at ideal sounds, 
that appear to issu from the staircase. 

have sat in dark for some hours, dure all which time annett 
did not appear, she began to have seriou apprehens for her; but, 
not dare to ventur down into the castle, wa compel to remain in 
uncertainty, as to the caus of thi unusu absence. 

emili often stole to the staircas door to listen if ani step 
approached, but still no sound alarm her: determining, however, to 
watch, dure the night, she onc more rest on her dark and desol 
couch, and bath the pillow with innoc tears. she thought of her 
deceas parent and then of the absent valancourt, and frequent 
call upon their names; for the profound stillness, that now reigned, 
wa propiti to the muse sorrow of her mind. 

while she thu remained, her ear suddenli caught the note of distant 
music, to which she listen attentively, and, soon perceiv thi to 
be the instrument she had formerli heard at midnight, she rose, and 
step softli to the casement, to which the sound appear to come 
from a lower room. 

In a few moments, their soft melodi wa accompani by a voic so full 
of pathos, that it evid sang not of imaginari sorrows. it sweet 
and peculiar tone she thought she had somewher heard before; yet, if 
thi wa not fancy, it was, at most, a veri faint recollection. It 
stole over her mind, amidst the anguish of her present suffering, like 
a celesti strain, soothing, and reassur her;—“pleas as the gale 
of spring, that sigh on the hunter’ ear, when he awaken from dream 
of joy, and ha heard the music of the spirit of the hill.”* 

(*note: ossian. [a. r.]) 


but her emot can scarc be imagined, when she heard sung, with the 
tast and simplic of true feeling, one of the popular air of her 
nativ province, to which she had so often listen with delight, when 
a child, and which she had so often heard her father repeat! To thi 
well-known song, never, till now, heard but in her nativ country, her 
heart melted, while the memori of past time returned. the pleasant, 
peac scene of gascony, the tender and good of her parents, 
the tast and simplic of her former life—al rose to her fancy, and 
form a picture, so sweet and glowing, so strikingli contrast with 
the scenes, the charact and the dangers, which now surround 
her—that her mind could not bear to paus upon the retrospect, and 
shrunk at the acut of it own sufferings. 

her sigh were deep and convulsed; she could no longer listen to the 
strain, that had so often charm her to tranquillity, and she withdrew 
from the casement to a remot part of the chamber. but she wa not yet 
beyond the reach of the music; she heard the measur change, and the 
succeed air call her again to the window, for she immedi 
recollect it to be the same she had formerli heard in the 
fishing-hous in gascony. assisted, perhaps, by the mystery, which had 
then accompani thi strain, it had made so deep an impress on her 
memory, that she had never sinc entir forgotten it; and the manner, 
in which it wa now sung, convinc her, howev unaccount the 
circumst appeared, that thi wa the same voic she had then 
heard. surpris soon yield to other emotions; a thought darted, like 
lightning, upon her mind, which discov a train of hopes, that 
reviv all her spirits. yet these hope were so new, so unexpected, so 
astonishing, that she did not dare to trust, though she could not 
resolv to discourag them. she sat down by the casement, breathless, 
and overcom with the altern emot of hope and fear; then rose 
again, lean from the window, that she might catch a nearer sound, 
listened, now doubt and then believing, softli exclaim the name of 
valancourt, and then sunk again into the chair. yes, it wa possible, 
that valancourt wa near her, and she recollect circumstances, which 
induc her to believ it wa hi voic she had just heard. she 
rememb he had more than onc said that the fishing-house, where she 
had formerli listen to thi voic and air, and where she had seen 
pencil sonnets, address to herself, had been hi favourit haunt, 
befor he had been made known to her; there, too, she had herself 
unexpectedli met him. It appeared, from these circumstances, more than 
probable, that he wa the musician, who had formerli charm her 
attention, and the author of the lines, which had express such tender 
admiration;—who else, indeed, could it be? she wa unable, at that 
time, to form a conjecture, as to the writer, but, sinc her 
acquaint with valancourt, whenev he had mention the 
fishing-hous to have been known to him, she had not scrupl to 
believ that he wa the author of the sonnets. 

As these consider pass over her mind, joy, fear and tender 
contend at her heart; she lean again from the casement to catch the 
sounds, which might confirm, or destroy her hope, though she did not 
recollect to have ever heard him sing; but the voice, and the 
instrument, now ceased. 

she consid for a moment whether she should ventur to speak: then, 
not choosing, lest it should be he, to mention hi name, and yet too 
much interest to neglect the opportun of enquiring, she call 
from the casement, “i that song from gascony?” her anxiou attent 
wa not cheer by ani reply; everyth remain silent. her 
impati increas with her fears, she repeat the question; but 
still no sound wa heard, except the sigh of the wind among the 
battlement above; and she endeavour to consol herself with a 
belief, that the stranger, whoever he was, had retired, befor she had 
spoken, beyond the reach of her voice, which, it appear certain, had 
valancourt heard and recognised, he would instantli have repli to. 
presently, however, she considered, that a motiv of prudence, and not 
an accident removal, might occas hi silence; but the surmis that 
led to thi reflection, suddenli chang her hope and joy to terror and 
grief; for, if valancourt were in the castle, it wa too probabl that 
he wa here a prisoner, taken with some of hi countrymen, mani of whom 
were at that time engag in the war of italy, or intercept in some 
attempt to reach her. had he even recollect emily’ voice, he would 
have feared, in these circumstances, to repli to it, in the presenc of 
the men, who guard hi prison. 

what so late she had eagerli hope she now believ she 
dreaded;—dread to know, that valancourt wa near her; and, while she 
wa anxiou to be reliev from her apprehens for hi safety, she 
still wa unconscious, that a hope of soon see him, struggl with 
the fear. 

she remain listen at the casement, till the air began to freshen, 
and one high mountain in the east to glimmer with the morning; when, 
weari with anxiety, she retir to her couch, where she found it 
utterli imposs to sleep, for joy, tenderness, doubt and 
apprehension, distract her dure the whole night. now she rose from 
the couch, and open the casement to listen; then she would pace the 
room with impati steps, and, at length, return with despond to 
her pillow. never did hour appear to move so heavily, as those of thi 
anxiou night; after which she hope that annett might appear, and 
conclud her present state of tortur suspense. 



chapter VI 

might we but hear 
the fold flock penn’d in their wattl cotes, 
Or sound of pastor reed with oaten stops, 
Or whistl from the lodge, or villag cock 
count the night watch to hi featheri dames, 
’twould be some solac yet, some littl cheer 
In thi close dungeon of innumer boughs. 
milton 


In the morn emili wa reliev from her fear for annette, who came 
at an earli hour. 

“here were fine do in the castle, last night, ma’amselle,” said 
she, as soon as she enter the room,—“fin doings, indeed! were you 
not frightened, ma’amselle, at not see me?” 

“I wa alarm both on your account and on my own,” repli emily—“what 
detain you?” 

“aye, I said so, I told him so; but it would not do. It wa not my 
fault, indeed, ma’amselle, for I could not get out. that rogu ludovico 
lock me up again.” 

“lock you up!” said emily, with displeasure, “whi do you permit 
ludovico to lock you up?” 

“holi saints!” exclaim annette, “how can I help it! If he will lock 
the door, ma’amselle, and take away the key, how am I to get out, 
unless I jump through the window? but that I should not mind so much, 
if the casement here were not all so high; one can hardli scrambl up 
to them on the inside, and one should break one’ neck, I suppose, 
go down on the outside. but you know, I dare say, ma’am, what a 
hurly-burli the castl wa in last night; you must have heard some of 
the uproar.” 

“what, were they disputing, then?” said emily. 

“no, ma’amselle, nor fighting, but almost as good, for I believ there 
wa not one of the signor sober; and what is more, not one of those 
fine ladi sober, either. I thought, when I saw them first, that all 
those fine silk and fine veils,—why, ma’amselle, their veil were 
work with silver! and fine trimmings—bod no good—i guess what 
they were!” 

“good god!” exclaim emily, “what will becom of me!” 

“aye, ma’am, ludovico said much the same thing of me. ‘good god!’ said 
he, ‘annette, what is to becom of you, if you are to go run about 
the castl among all these drunken signors?’ 

“‘o!’ say I, ‘for that matter, I onli want to go to my young lady’ 
chamber, and I have onli to go, you know, along the vault passag and 
across the great hall and up the marbl staircas and along the north 
galleri and through the west wing of the castl and I am in the 
corridor in a minute.’ ‘are you so?’ say he, ‘and what is to becom of 
you, if you meet ani of those nobl cavali in the way?’ ‘well,’ say 
I, ‘if you think there is danger, then, go with me, and guard me; I am 
never afraid when you are by.’ ‘what!’ say he, ‘when I am scarc 
recov of one wound, shall I put myself in the way of get 
another? for if ani of the cavali meet you, they will fall 
a-fight with me directly. no, no,’ say he, ‘I will cut the way 
shorter, than through the vault passag and up the marbl staircase, 
and along the north galleri and through the west wing of the castle, 
for you shall stay here, annette; you shall not go out of thi room, 
tonight.’ so, with that I says—” 

“well, well,” said emily, impatiently, and anxiou to enquir on 
anoth subject,—“so he lock you up?” 

“yes, he did indeed, ma’amselle, notwithstand all I could say to the 
contrary; and caterina and I and he staid there all night. and in a few 
minut after I wa not so vexed, for there came signor verezzi roar 
along the passage, like a mad bull, and he mistook ludovico’ hall, for 
old carlo’s; so he tri to burst open the door, and call out for 
more wine, for that he had drunk all the flask dry, and wa die of 
thirst. So we were all as still as night, that he might suppos there 
wa nobodi in the room; but the signor wa as cun as the best of 
us, and kept call out at the door, ‘come forth, my ancient hero!’ 
said he, ‘here is no enemi at the gate, that you need hide yourself: 
come forth, my valor signor steward!’ just then old carlo open hi 
door, and he came with a flask in hi hand; for, as soon as the signor 
saw him, he wa as tame as could be, and follow him away as natur 
as a dog doe a butcher with a piec of meat in hi basket. all thi I 
saw through the key-hole. ‘well, annette,’ said ludovico, jeeringly, 
‘shall I let you out now?’ ‘O no,’ say I, ‘I would not—’” 

“I have some question to ask you on anoth subject,” interrupt 
emily, quit weari by thi story. “do you know whether there are ani 
prison in the castle, and whether they are confin at thi end of 
the edifice?” 

“I wa not in the way, ma’amselle,” repli annette, “when the first 
parti came in from the mountains, and the last parti is not come back 
yet, so I don’t know, whether there are ani prisoners; but it is 
expect back tonight, or tomorrow, and I shall know then, perhaps.” 

emili enquir if she had ever heard the servant talk of prisoners. 

“ah ma’amselle!” said annett archly, “now I dare say you are think 
of monsieur valancourt, and that he may have come among the armies, 
which, they say, are come from our country, to fight against thi 
state, and that he ha met with some of _our_ people, and is taken 
captive. O lord! how glad I should be, if it wa so!” 

“would you, indeed, be glad?” said emily, in a tone of mourn 
reproach. 

“to be sure I should, ma’am,” repli annette, “and would not you be 
glad too, to see signor valancourt? I don’t know ani chevali I like 
better, I have a veri great regard for the signor, truly.” 

“your regard for him cannot be doubted,” said emily, “sinc you wish to 
see him a prisoner.” 

“whi no, ma’amselle, not a prison either; but one must be glad to see 
him, you know. and it wa onli the other night I dreamt—i dreamt I saw 
him drive into the castle-yard all in a coach and six, and dress out, 
with a lace coat and a sword, like a lord as he is.” 

emili could not forbear smile at annette’ idea of valancourt, and 
repeat her enquiry, whether she had heard the servant talk of 
prisoners. 

“no, ma’amselle,” repli she, “never; and late they have done 
noth but talk of the apparition, that ha been walk about of a 
night on the ramparts, and that frighten the sentinel into fits. It 
came among them like a flash of fire, they say, and they all fell down 
in a row, till they came to themselv again; and then it wa gone, and 
noth to be seen but the old castl walls; so they help one anoth 
up again as fast as they could. you would not believe, ma’amselle, 
though I show you the veri cannon, where it use to appear.” 

“and are you, indeed, so simple, annette,” said emily, smile at thi 
curiou exagger of the circumst she had witnessed, “a to 
credit these stories?” 

“credit them, ma’amselle! whi all the world could not persuad me out 
of them. roberto and sebastian and half a dozen more of them went into 
fits! To be sure, there wa no occas for that; I said, myself, there 
wa no need of that, for, say I, when the enemi comes, what a pretti 
figur they will cut, if they are to fall down in fits, all of a row! 
the enemi won’t be so civil, perhaps, as to walk off, like the ghost, 
and leav them to help one anoth up, but will fall to, cut and 
slashing, till he make them all rise up dead men. no, no, say I, 
there is reason in all things: though I might have fallen down in a fit 
that wa no rule for them, being, becaus it is no busi of mine to 
look gruff, and fight battles.” 

emili endeavour to correct the superstiti weak of annette, 
though she could not entir subdu her own; to which the latter onli 
replied, “nay, ma’amselle, you will believ nothing; you are almost as 
bad as the signor himself, who wa in a great passion when they told of 
what had happened, and swore that the first man, who repeat such 
nonsense, should be thrown into the dungeon under the east turret. thi 
wa a hard punish too, for onli talk nonsense, as he call it, 
but I dare say he had other reason for call it so, than you have, 
ma’am.” 

emili look displeased, and made no reply. As she muse upon the 
recollect appearance, which had late so much alarm her, and 
consid the circumst of the figur have station itself 
opposit to her casement, she wa for a moment inclin to believ it 
wa valancourt, whom she had seen. yet, if it wa he, whi did he not 
speak to her, when he had the opportun of do so—and, if he wa a 
prison in the castle, and he could be here in no other character, how 
could he obtain the mean of walk abroad on the rampart? thu she 
wa utterli unabl to decide, whether the musician and the form she had 
observed, were the same, or, if they were, whether thi wa valancourt. 
she, however, desir that annett would endeavour to learn whether ani 
prison were in the castle, and also their names. 

“O dear, ma’amselle!” said annette, “I forget to tell you what you bade 
me ask about, the ladies, as they call themselves, who are late come 
to udolpho. whi that signora livona, that the signor brought to see my 
late ladi at venice, is hi mistress now, and wa littl better then, I 
dare say. and ludovico say (but pray be secret, ma’am) that hi 
_excellenza_ introduc her onli to impos upon the world, that had 
begun to make free with her character. So when peopl saw my ladi 
notic her, they thought what they had heard must be scandal. the other 
two are the mistress of signor verezzi and signor bertolini; and 
signor montoni invit them all to the castle; and so, yesterday, he 
gave a great entertainment; and there they were, all drink tuscani 
wine and all sorts, and laugh and singing, till they made the castl 
ring again. but I thought they were dismal sounds, so soon after my 
poor lady’ death too; and they brought to my mind what she would have 
thought, if she had heard them—but she cannot hear them now, poor soul! 
said i.” 

emili turn away to conceal her emotion, and then desir annett to 
go, and make enquiry, concern the prisoners, that might be in the 
castle, but conjur her to do it with caution, and on no account to 
mention her name, or that of monsieur valancourt. 

“now I think of it, ma’amselle,” said annette, “I do believ there are 
prisoners, for I overheard one of the signor’ men, yesterday, in the 
servant hall, talk someth about ransoms, and say what a fine 
thing it wa for hi _excellenza_ to catch up men, and they were as 
good booti as ani other, becaus of the ransoms. and the other man wa 
grumbling, and say it wa fine enough for the signor, but none so 
fine for hi soldiers, because, said he, we don’t go share there.” 

thi inform heighten emily’ impati to know more, and 
annett immedi depart on her enquiry. 

the late resolut of emili to resign her estat to montoni, now gave 
way to new considerations; the possibility, that valancourt wa near 
her, reviv her fortitude, and she determin to brave the threaten 
vengeance, at least, till she could be assur whether he wa realli in 
the castle. she wa in thi temper of mind, when she receiv a messag 
from montoni, requir her attend in the cedar parlour, which she 
obey with trembling, and, on her way thither, endeavour to anim 
her fortitud with the idea of valancourt. 

montoni wa alone. “I sent for you,” said he, “to give you anoth 
opportun of retract your late mistaken assert concern the 
languedoc estates. I will condescend to advise, where I may command.—if 
you are realli delud by an opinion, that you have ani right to these 
estates, at least, do not persist in the error—an error, which you may 
perceive, too late, ha been fatal to you. dare my resent no 
further, but sign the papers.” 

“if I have no right in these estates, sir,” said emily, “of what 
servic can it be to you, that I should sign ani papers, concern 
them? If the land are your by law, you certainli may possess them, 
without my interference, or my consent.” 

“I will have no more argument,” said montoni, with a look that made her 
tremble. “what had I but troubl to expect, when I condescend to 
reason with a baby! but I will be trifl with no longer: let the 
recollect of your aunt’ sufferings, in consequ of her folli and 
obstinacy, teach you a lesson.—sign the papers.” 

emily’ resolut wa for a moment awed:—sh shrunk at the 
recollect he revived, and from the vengeanc he threatened; but 
then, the imag of valancourt, who so long had love her, and who wa 
now, perhaps, so near her, came to her heart, and, togeth with the 
strong feel of indignation, with which she had always, from her 
infancy, regard an act of injustice, inspir her with a noble, 
though imprudent, courage. 

“sign the papers,” said montoni, more impati than before. 

“never, sir,” repli emily; “that request would have prove to me the 
injustic of your claim, had I even been ignor of my right.” 

montoni turn pale with anger, while hi quiver lip and lurk eye 
made her almost repent the bold of her speech. 

“then all my vengeanc fall upon you,” he exclaimed, with a horribl 
oath. “and think not it shall be delayed. neither the estat in 
languedoc, nor gascony, shall be yours; you have dare to question my 
right,—now dare to question my power. I have a punish which you 
think not of; it is terrible! thi night—thi veri night—” 

“thi night!” repeat anoth voice. 

montoni paused, and turn half round, but, seem to recollect 
himself, he proceed in a lower tone. 

“you have late seen one terribl exampl of obstinaci and folly; yet 
this, it appears, ha not been suffici to deter you.—i could tell 
you of others—i could make you trembl at the bare recital.” 

He wa interrupt by a groan, which seem to rise from underneath the 
chamber they were in; and, as he threw a glanc round it, impati 
and rage flash from hi eyes, yet someth like a shade of fear 
pass over hi countenance. emili sat down in a chair, near the door, 
for the variou emot she had suffered, now almost overcam her; but 
montoni paus scarc an instant, and, command hi features, 
resum hi discours in a lower, yet sterner voice. 

“I say, I could give you other instanc of my power and of my 
character, which it seem you do not understand, or you would not defi 
me.—i could tell you, that, when onc my resolut is taken—but I am 
talk to a baby. let me, however, repeat, that terribl as are the 
exampl I could recite, the recit could not now benefit you; for, 
though your repent would put an immedi end to opposition, it 
would not now appeas my indignation.—i will have vengeanc as well as 
justice.” 

anoth groan fill the paus which montoni made. 

“leav the room instantly!” said he, seem not to notic thi strang 
occurrence. without power to implor hi pity, she rose to go, but 
found that she could not support herself; awe and terror overcam her, 
and she sunk again into the chair. 

“quit my presence!” cri montoni. “thi affect of fear ill 
becom the heroin who ha just dare to brave my indignation.” 

“did you hear nothing, signor?” said emily, trembling, and still unabl 
to leav the room. 

“I heard my own voice,” rejoin montoni, sternly. 

“and noth else?” said emily, speak with difficulty.—“ther again! 
Do you hear noth now?” 

“obey my order,” repeat montoni. “and for these fool’ tricks—i will 
soon discov by whom they are practised.” 

emili again rose, and exert herself to the utmost to leav the room, 
while montoni follow her; but, instead of call aloud to hi 
servant to search the chamber, as he had formerli done on a similar 
occurrence, pass to the ramparts. 

as, in her way to the corridor, she rest for a moment at an open 
casement, emili saw a parti of montoni’ troop wind down a distant 
mountain, whom she notic no further than as they brought to her mind 
the wretch prison they were, perhaps, bring to the castle. At 
length, have reach her apartment, she threw herself upon the couch, 
overcom with the new horror of her situation. her thought lost in 
tumult and perplexity, she could neither repent of, nor approve, her 
late conduct; she could onli remember, that she wa in the power of a 
man, who had no principl of action—but hi will; and the astonish 
and terror of superstition, which had, for a moment, so strongli 
assail her, now yield to those of reason. 

she was, at length, rous from the reveri which engag her, by a 
confus of distant voices, and a clatter of hoofs, that seem to 
come, on the wind, from the courts. A sudden hope, that some good wa 
approaching, seiz her mind, till she rememb the troop she had 
observ from the casement, and conclud thi to be the party, which 
annett had said were expect at udolpho. 

soon after, she heard voic faintli from the halls, and the nois of 
horses’ feet sunk away in the wind; silenc ensued. emili listen 
anxious for annette’ step in the corridor, but a paus of total 
still continued, till again the castl seem to be all tumult and 
confusion. she heard the echo of mani footsteps, pass to and fro 
in the hall and avenu below, and then busi tongu were loud on the 
rampart. have hurri to her casement, she perceiv montoni, with 
some of hi officers, lean on the walls, and point from them; 
while sever soldier were employ at the further end of the rampart 
about some cannon; and she continu to observ them, careless of the 
pass time. 

annett at length appeared, but brought no intellig of valancourt, 
“for, ma’amselle,” said she, “all the peopl pretend to know noth 
about ani prisoners. but here is a fine piec of business! the rest of 
the parti are just arrived, ma’am; they came scamper in, as if they 
would have broken their necks; one scarc knew whether the man, or 
hi hors would get within the gate first. and they have brought 
word—and such news! they have brought word, that a parti of the enemy, 
as they call them, are come toward the castle; so we shall have all 
the offic of justice, I suppose, besieg it! all those 
terrible-look fellow one use to see at venice.” 

“thank god!” exclaim emily, fervently, “there is yet a hope left for 
me, then!” 

“what mean you, ma’amselle? Do you wish to fall into the hand of those 
sad-look men! whi I use to shudder as I pass them, and should 
have guess what they were, if ludovico had not told me.” 

“we cannot be in wors hand than at present,” repli emily, 
unguardedly; “but what reason have you to suppos these are offic of 
justice?” 

“whi _our_ people, ma’am, are all in such a fright, and a fuss; and I 
don’t know anyth but the fear of justice, that could make them so. I 
use to think noth on earth could fluster them, unless, indeed, it 
wa a ghost, or so; but now, some of them are for hide down in the 
vault under the castle; but you must not tell the signor this, 
ma’amselle, and I overheard two of them talking—holi mother! what make 
you look so sad, ma’amselle? you don’t hear what I say!” 

“yes, I do, annette; pray proceed.” 

“well, ma’amselle, all the castl is in such hurly-burly. some of the 
men are load the cannon, and some are examin the great gates, and 
the wall all round, and are hammer and patch up, just as if all 
those repair had never been made, that were so long about. but what is 
to becom of me and you, ma’amselle, and ludovico? O! when I hear the 
sound of the cannon, I shall die with fright. If I could but catch the 
great gate open for one minute, I would be even with it for shut me 
within these wall so long!—it should never see me again.” 

emili caught the latter word of annette. “o! if you could find it 
open, but for one moment!” she exclaimed, “mi peac might yet be 
saved!” the heavi groan she uttered, and the wild of her look, 
terrifi annette, still more than her words; who entreat emili to 
explain the mean of them, to whom it suddenli occurred, that 
ludovico might be of some service, if there should be a possibl of 
escape, and who repeat the substanc of what had pass between 
montoni and herself, but conjur her to mention thi to no person 
except to ludovico. “it may, perhaps, be in hi power,” she added, “to 
effect our escape. Go to him, annette, tell him what I have to 
apprehend, and what I have alreadi suffered; but entreat him to be 
secret, and to lose no time in attempt to releas us. If he is 
will to undertak thi he shall be ampli rewarded. I cannot speak 
with him myself, for we might be observed, and then effectu care 
would be taken to prevent our flight. but be quick, annette, and, abov 
all, be discreet—i will await your return in thi apartment.” 

the girl, whose honest heart had been much affect by the recital, wa 
now as eager to obey, as emili wa to employ her, and she immedi 
quit the room. 

emily’ surpris increased, as she reflect upon annette’ 
intelligence. “alas!” said she, “what can the offic of justic do 
against an arm castle? these cannot be such.” upon further 
consideration, however, she concluded, that, montoni’ band have 
plunder the countri round, the inhabit had taken arms, and were 
come with the offic of polic and a parti of soldiers, to forc 
their way into the castle. “but they know not,” thought she, “it 
strength, or the arm number within it. alas! except from flight, I 
have noth to hope!” 

montoni, though not precis what emili apprehend him to be—a 
captain of banditti—had employ hi troop in enterpris not less 
daring, or less atrocious, than such a charact would have undertaken. 
they had not onli pillaged, whenev opportun offered, the helpless 
traveller, but had attacked, and plunder the villa of sever 
persons, which, be situat among the solitari recess of the 
mountains, were total unprepar for resistance. In these expedit 
the command of the parti did not appear, and the men, partli 
disguised, had sometim been mistaken for common robbers, and, at 
others, for band of the foreign enemy, who, at that period, invad 
the country. but, though they had alreadi pillag sever mansions, 
and brought home consider treasures, they had ventur to approach 
onli one castle, in the attack of which they were assist by other 
troop of their own order; from this, however, they were vigor 
repulsed, and pursu by some of the foreign enemy, who were in leagu 
with the besieged. montoni’ troop fled precipit toward udolpho, 
but were so close track over the mountains, that, when they reach 
one of the height in the neighbourhood of the castle, and look back 
upon the road, they perceiv the enemi wind among the cliff below, 
and at not more than a leagu distant. upon thi discovery, they 
hasten forward with increas speed, to prepar montoni for the 
enemy; and it wa their arrival, which had thrown the castl into such 
confus and tumult. 

As emili await anxious some inform from below, she now saw 
from her casement a bodi of troop pour over the neighbour heights; 
and, though annett had been gone a veri short time, and had a 
difficult and danger busi to accomplish, her impati for 
intellig becam painful: she listened; open her door; and often 
went out upon the corridor to meet her. 

At length, she heard a footstep approach her chamber; and, on open 
the door, saw, not annette, but old carlo! new fear rush upon her 
mind. He said he came from the signor, who had order him to inform 
her, that she must be readi to depart from udolpho immediately, for 
that the castl wa about to be besieged; and that mule were prepar 
to convey her, with her guides, to a place of safety. 

“of safety!” exclaim emily, thoughtlessly; “has, then, the signor so 
much consider for me?” 

carlo look upon the ground, and made no reply. A thousand opposit 
emot agit emily, successively, as she listen to old carlo; 
those of joy, grief, distrust and apprehension, appeared, and vanish 
from her mind, with the quick of lightning. one moment, it seem 
impossible, that montoni could take thi measur mere for her 
preservation; and so veri strang wa hi send her from the castl 
at all, that she could attribut it onli to the design of carri into 
execut the new scheme of vengeance, with which he had menac her. 
In the next instant, it appear so desir to quit the castle, under 
ani circumstances, that she could not but rejoic in the prospect, 
believ that chang must be for the better, till she rememb the 
probabl of valancourt be detain in it, when sorrow and regret 
usurp her mind, and she wished, much more fervent than she had yet 
done, that it might not be hi voic which she had heard. 

carlo have remind her, that she had no time to lose, for that the 
enemi were within sight of the castle, emili entreat him to inform 
her whither she wa to go; and, after some hesitation, he said he had 
receiv no order to tell; but, on her repeat the question, 
replied, that he believ she wa to be carri into tuscany. 

“to tuscany!” exclaim emily—“and whi thither?” 

carlo answered, that he knew noth further, than that she wa to be 
lodg in a cottag on the border of tuscany, at the feet of the 
apennines—“not a day’ journey distant,” said he. 

emili now dismiss him; and, with trembl hands, prepar the small 
package, that she meant to take with her; while she wa employ about 
which annett returned. 

“O ma’amselle!” said she, “noth can be done! ludovico say the new 
porter is more watch even than barnardin was, and we might as well 
throw ourselv in the way of a dragon, as in his. ludovico is almost 
as broken-heart as you are, ma’am, on my account, he says, and I am 
sure I shall never live to hear the cannon fire twice!” 

she now began to weep, but reviv upon hear of what had just 
occurred, and entreat emili to take her with her. 

“that I will do most willingly,” repli emily, “if signor montoni 
permit it;” to which annett made no reply, but ran out of the room, 
and immedi sought montoni, who wa on the terrace, surround by 
hi officers, where she began her petition. He sharpli bade her go into 
the castle, and absolut refus her request. annette, however, not 
onli plead for herself, but for ludovico; and montoni had order 
some of hi men to take her from hi presence, befor she would retire. 

In an agoni of disappointment, she return to emily, who forebod 
littl good toward herself, from thi refus to annette, and who, 
soon after, receiv a summon to repair to the great court, where the 
mules, with her guides, were in waiting. emili here tri in vain to 
sooth the weep annette, who persist in saying, that she should 
never see her dear young ladi again; a fear, which her mistress 
secretli thought too well justified, but which she endeavour to 
restrain, while, with appar composure, she bade thi affection 
servant farewell. annette, however, follow to the courts, which were 
now throng with people, busi in prepar for the enemy; and, 
have seen her mount her mule and depart, with her attendants, through 
the portal, turn into the castl and wept again. 

emily, meanwhile, as she look back upon the gloomi court of the 
castle, no longer silent as when she had first enter them, but 
resound with the nois of prepar for their defence, as well as 
crowd with soldier and workmen, hurri to and fro; and, when she 
pass onc more under the huge portcullis, which had formerli struck 
her with terror and dismay, and, look round, saw no wall to confin 
her steps—felt, in spite of anticipation, the sudden joy of a prisoner, 
who unexpectedli find himself at liberty. thi emot would not 
suffer her now to look imparti on the danger that await her 
without; on mountain infest by hostil parties, who seiz everi 
opportun for plunder; and on a journey commend under the guidanc 
of men, whose counten certainli did not speak favour of their 
dispositions. In the present moments, she could onli rejoice, that she 
wa liber from those walls, which she had enter with such dismal 
forebodings; and, rememb the superstiti presentiment, which had 
then seiz her, she could now smile at the impress it had made upon 
her mind. 

As she gazed, with these emotions, upon the turret of the castle, 
rise high over the woods, among which she wound, the stranger, whom 
she believ to be confin there, return to her remembrance, and 
anxieti and apprehension, lest he should be valancourt, again pass 
like a cloud upon her joy. she recollect everi circumstance, 
concern thi unknown person, sinc the night, when she had first 
heard him play the song of her nativ province;—circumstances, which 
she had so often recollected, and compar before, without extract 
from them anyth like conviction, and which still onli prompt her 
to believe, that valancourt wa a prison at udolpho. It wa possible, 
however, that the men, who were her conductors, might afford her 
information, on thi subject; but, fear to question them 
immediately, lest they should be unwil to discov ani circumst 
to her in the presenc of each other, she watch for an opportun of 
speak with them separately. 

soon after, a trumpet echo faintli from a distance; the guid 
stopped, and look toward the quarter whenc it came, but the thick 
woods, which surround them, exclud all view of the countri beyond, 
one of the men rode on to the point of an eminence, that afford a 
more extens prospect, to observ how near the enemy, whose trumpet 
he guess thi to be, were advanced; the other, meanwhile, remain 
with emily, and to him she put some questions, concern the stranger 
at udolpho. ugo, for thi wa hi name, said, that there were sever 
prison in the castle, but he neither recollect their persons, nor 
the precis time of their arrival, and could therefor give her no 
information. there wa a surli in hi manner, as he spoke, that 
made it probabl he would not have satisfi her enquiries, even if he 
could have done so. 

have ask him what prison had been taken, about the time, as 
nearli as she could remember, when she had first heard the music, “all 
that week,” said ugo, “I wa out with a party, upon the mountains, and 
knew noth of what wa do at the castle. We had enough upon our 
hands, we had warm work of it.” 

bertrand, the other man, be now returned, emili enquir no further, 
and, when he had relat to hi companion what he had seen, they 
travel on in deep silence; while emili often caught, between the 
open woods, partial glimps of the castl above—th west towers, 
whose battlement were now crowd with archers, and the rampart 
below, where soldier were seen hurri along, or busi upon the walls, 
prepar the cannon. 

have emerg from the woods, they wound along the valley in an 
opposit direct to that, from whenc the enemi were approaching. 
emili now had a full view of udolpho, with it grey walls, tower and 
terraces, high over-top the precipic and the dark woods, and 
glitter partial with the arm of the _condottieri_, as the sun’ 
rays, stream through an autumn cloud, glanc upon a part of the 
edifice, whose remain featur stood in darken majesty. she 
continu to gaze, through her tears, upon wall that, perhaps, 
confin valancourt, and which now, as the cloud float away, were 
light up with sudden splendour, and then, as suddenli were shroud 
in gloom; while the pass gleam fell on the wood-top below, and 
heighten the first tint of autumn, that had begun to steal upon the 
foliage. the wind mountains, at length, shut udolpho from her view, 
and she turned, with mourn reluctance, to other objects. the 
melancholi sigh of the wind among the pines, that wave high over 
the steeps, and the distant thunder of a torrent assist her musings, 
and conspir with the wild sceneri around, to diffus over her mind 
emot solemn, yet not unpleasing, but which were soon interrupt by 
the distant roar of cannon, echo among the mountains. the sound 
roll along the wind, and were repeat in faint and fainter 
reverberation, till they sunk in sullen murmurs. thi wa a signal, 
that the enemi had reach the castle, and fear for valancourt again 
torment emily. she turn her anxiou eye toward that part of the 
country, where the edific stood, but the interven height conceal 
it from her view; still, however, she saw the tall head of a mountain, 
which immedi front her late chamber, and on thi she fix her 
gaze, as if it could have told her of all that wa pass in the scene 
it overlooked. the guid twice remind her, that she wa lose time 
and that they had far to go, befor she could turn from thi 
interest object, and, even when she again move onward, she often 
sent a look back, till onli it blue point, brighten in a gleam of 
sunshine, appear peep over other mountains. 

the sound of the cannon affect ugo, as the blast of the trumpet doe 
the war-horse; it call forth all the fire of hi nature; he wa 
impati to be in the midst of the fight, and utter frequent 
execr against montoni for have sent him to a distance. the 
feel of hi comrad seem to be veri opposite, and adapt rather 
to the cruelties, than to the danger of war. 

emili ask frequent questions, concern the place of her 
destination, but could onli learn, that she wa go to a cottag in 
tuscany; and, whenev she mention the subject, she fanci she 
perceived, in the counten of these men, an express of malic 
and cunning, that alarm her. 

It wa afternoon, when they had left the castle. dure sever hours, 
they travel through region of profound solitude, where no bleat of 
sheep, or bark of watch-dog, broke on silence, and they were now too 
far off to hear even the faint thunder of the cannon. toward evening, 
they wound down precipices, black with forest of cypress, pine and 
cedar, into a glen so savag and secluded, that, if solitud ever had 
local habitation, thi might have been “her place of dearest 
residence.” To emili it appear a spot exactli suit for the retreat 
of banditti, and, in her imagination, she alreadi saw them lurk 
under the brow of some project rock, whenc their shadows, 
lengthen by the set sun, stretch across the road, and warn 
the travel of hi danger. she shudder at the idea, and, look at 
her conductors, to observ whether they were armed, thought she saw in 
them the banditti she dreaded! 

It wa in thi glen, that they propos to alight, “for,” said ugo, 
“night will come on presently, and then the wolv will make it 
danger to stop.” thi wa a new subject of alarm to emily, but 
inferior to what she suffer from the thought of be left in these 
wilds, at midnight, with two such men as her present conductors. dark 
and dread hint of what might be montoni’ purpos in send her 
hither, came to her mind. she endeavour to dissuad the men from 
stopping, and enquired, with anxiety, how far they had yet to go. 

“mani leagu yet,” repli bertrand. “a for you, signora, you may do 
as you pleas about eating, but for us, we will make a hearti supper, 
while we can. We shall have need of it, I warrant, befor we finish our 
journey. the sun’ go down apace; let us alight under that rock, 
yonder.” 

hi comrad assented, and, turn the mule out of the road, they 
advanc toward a cliff, overhung with cedars, emili follow in 
trembl silence. they lift her from her mule, and, have seat 
themselv on the grass, at the foot of the rocks, drew some home 
fare from a wallet, of which emili tri to eat a little, the better to 
disguis her apprehensions. 

the sun wa now sunk behind the high mountain in the west, upon which 
a purpl haze began to spread, and the gloom of twilight to draw over 
the surround objects. To the low and sullen murmur of the breeze, 
pass among the woods, she no longer listen with ani degre of 
pleasure, for it conspir with the wild of the scene and the 
even hour, to depress her spirits. 

suspens had so much increas her anxiety, as to the prison at 
udolpho, that, find it impractic to speak alon with bertrand, 
on that subject, she renew her question in the presenc of ugo; but 
he either was, or pretend to be entir ignorant, concern the 
stranger. when he had dismiss the question, he talk with ugo on 
some subject, which led to the mention of signor orsino and of the 
affair that had banish him from venice; respect which emili had 
ventur to ask a few questions. ugo appear to be well acquaint 
with the circumst of that tragic event, and relat some minut 
particulars, that both shock and surpris her; for it appear veri 
extraordinari how such particular could be known to any, but to 
persons, present when the assassin wa committed. 

“he wa of rank,” said bertrand, “or the state would not have troubl 
itself to enquir after hi assassins. the signor ha been lucki 
hitherto; thi is not the first affair of the kind he ha had upon hi 
hands; and to be sure, when a gentleman ha no other way of get 
redress—whi he must take this.” 

“aye,” said ugo, “and whi is not thi as good as another? thi is the 
way to have justic done at once, without more ado. If you go to law, 
you must stay till the judg please, and may lose your cause, at last. 
whi the best way, then, is to make sure of your right, while you can, 
and execut justic yourself.” 

“yes, yes,” rejoin bertrand, “if you wait till justic is done 
you—you may stay long enough. whi if I want a friend of mine properli 
served, how am I to get my revenge? ten to one they will tell me he is 
in the right, and I am in the wrong. or, if a fellow ha got possess 
of property, which I think ought to be mine, whi I may wait, till I 
starve, perhaps, befor the law will give it me, and then, after all, 
the judg may say—th estat is his. what is to be done then?—whi the 
case is plain enough, I must take it at last.” 

emily’ horror at thi convers wa heighten by a suspicion, that 
the latter part of it wa point against herself, and that these men 
had been commiss by montoni to execut a similar kind of 
_justice_, in hi cause. 

“but I wa speak of signor orsino,” resum bertrand, “he is one of 
those, who love to do justic at once. I remember, about ten year ago, 
the signor had a quarrel with a cavaliero of milan. the stori wa told 
me then, and it is still fresh in my head. they quarrel about a 
lady, that the signor liked, and she wa pervers enough to prefer the 
gentleman of milan, and even carri her whim so far as to marri him. 
thi provok the signor, as well it might, for he had tri to talk 
reason to her a long while, and use to send peopl to serenad her, 
under her windows, of a night; and use to make vers about her, and 
would swear she wa the handsomest ladi in milan—but all would not 
do—noth would bring her to reason; and, as I said, she went so far 
at last, as to marri thi other cavaliero. thi made the signor wrath, 
with a vengeance; he resolv to be even with her though, and he 
watch hi opportunity, and did not wait long, for, soon after the 
marriage, they set out for padua, noth doubting, I warrant, of what 
wa prepar for them. the cavaliero thought, to be sure, he wa to be 
call to no account, but wa to go off triumphant; but he wa soon 
made to know anoth sort of story.” 

“what then, the ladi had promis to have signor orsino?” said ugo. 

“promised! no,” repli bertrand, “she had not wit enough even to tell 
him she like him, as I heard, but the contrary, for she use to say, 
from the first, she never meant to have him. and thi wa what provok 
the signor, so, and with good reason, for, who like to be told that he 
is disagreeable? and thi wa say as good. It wa enough to tell him 
this; she need not have gone, and marri another.” 

“what, she married, then, on purpos to plagu the signor?” said ugo. 

“I don’t know as for that,” repli bertrand, “they said, indeed, that 
she had had a regard for the other gentleman a great while; but that is 
noth to the purpose, she should not have marri him, and then the 
signor would not have been so much provoked. she might have expect 
what wa to follow; it wa not to be suppos he would bear her ill 
usag tamely, and she might thank herself for what happened. but, as I 
said, they set out for padua, she and her husband, and the road lay 
over some barren mountain like these. thi suit the signor’ purpos 
well. He watch the time of their departure, and sent hi men after 
them, with direct what to do. they kept their distance, till they 
saw their opportunity, and thi did not happen, till the second day’ 
journey, when, the gentleman have sent hi servant forward to the 
next town, mayb to have hors in readiness, the signor’ men 
quicken their pace, and overtook the carriage, in a hollow, between 
two mountains, where the wood prevent the servant from see what 
passed, though they were then not far off. when we came up, we fire 
our tromboni, but missed.” 

emili turn pale, at these words, and then hope she had mistaken 
them; while bertrand proceeded: 

“the gentleman fire again, but he wa soon made to alight, and it wa 
as he turn to call hi people, that he wa struck. It wa the most 
dexter feat you ever saw—h wa struck in the back with three 
stilletto at once. He fell, and wa dispatch in a minute; but the 
ladi escaped, for the servant had heard the firing, and came up befor 
she could be taken care of. ‘bertrand,’ said the signor, when hi men 
returned—” 

“bertrand!” exclaim emily, pale with horror, on whom not a syllabl 
of thi narr had been lost. 

“bertrand, did I say?” rejoin the man, with some confusion—“no, 
giovanni. but I have forgot where I was;—‘bertrand,’ said the signor— 

“bertrand, again!” said emily, in a falter voice, “whi do you repeat 
that name?” 

bertrand swore. “what signifi it,” he proceeded, “what the man wa 
called—bertrand, or giovanni—or roberto? it’ all one for that. you 
have put me out twice with that—question. bertrand, or giovanni—or what 
you will—‘bertrand,’ said the signor, ‘if your comrad had done their 
duty, as well as you, I should not have lost the lady. go, my honest 
fellow, and be happi with this.’ He gave him a purs of gold—and littl 
enough too, consid the servic he had done him.” 

“aye, aye,” said ugo, “littl enough—littl enough.” 

emili now breath with difficulty, and could scarc support herself. 
when first she saw these men, their appear and their connect 
with montoni had been suffici to impress her with distrust; but now, 
when one of them had betray himself to be a murderer, and she saw 
herself, at the approach of night, under hi guidance, among wild and 
solitari mountains, and go she scarc knew whither, the most 
agon terror seiz her, which wa the less support from the 
necess she found herself under of conceal all symptom of it from 
her companions. reflect on the charact and the menac of montoni, 
it appear not improbable, that he had deliv her to them, for the 
purpos of have her murdered, and of thu secur to himself, 
without further opposition, or delay, the estates, for which he had so 
long and so desper contended. yet, if thi wa hi design, there 
appear no necess for send her to such a distanc from the 
castle; for, if ani dread of discoveri had made him unwil to 
perpetr the deed there, a much nearer place might have suffic for 
the purpos of concealment. these considerations, however, did not 
immedi occur to emily, with whom so mani circumst conspir 
to rous terror, that she had no power to oppos it, or to enquir 
coolli into it grounds; and, if she had done so, still there were mani 
appear which would too well have justifi her most terribl 
apprehensions. she did not now dare to speak to her conductors, at the 
sound of whose voic she trembled; and when, now and then, she stole a 
glanc at them, their countenances, seen imperfectli through the gloom 
of evening, serv to confirm her fears. 

the sun had now been set some time; heavi clouds, whose lower skirt 
were ting with sulphur crimson, linger in the west, and threw a 
reddish tint upon the pine forests, which sent forth a solemn sound, as 
the breez roll over them. the hollow moan struck upon emily’ heart, 
and serv to render more gloomi and terrif everi object around 
her,—th mountains, shade in twilight—th gleam torrent, hoars 
roaring—th black forests, and the deep glen, broken into rocki 
recesses, high overshadow by cypress and sycamor and wind into 
long obscurity. To thi glen, emily, as she sent forth her anxiou eye, 
thought there wa no end; no hamlet, or even cottage, wa seen, and 
still no distant bark of watch-dog, or even faint, far-off halloo came 
on the wind. In a tremul voice, she now ventur to remind the 
guides, that it wa grow late, and to ask again how far they had to 
go: but they were too much occupi by their own discours to attend to 
her question, which she forbor to repeat, lest it should provok a 
surli answer. having, however, soon after, finish their supper, the 
men collect the fragment into their wallet, and proceed along thi 
wind glen, in gloomi silence; while emili again muse upon her own 
situation, and concern the motiv of montoni for involv her in 
it. that it wa for some evil purpos toward herself, she could not 
doubt; and it seemed, that, if he did not intend to destroy her, with a 
view of immedi seiz her estates, he meant to reserv her a 
while in concealment, for some more terribl design, for one that might 
equal gratifi hi avaric and still more hi deep revenge. At thi 
moment, rememb signor brochio and hi behaviour in the corridor, a 
few preced nights, the latter supposition, horribl as it was, 
strengthen in her belief. yet, whi remov her from the castle, where 
deed of dark had, she feared, been often execut with 
secrecy?—from chambers, perhap 

with mani a foul, and midnight murder stain’d. 


the dread of what she might be go to encount wa now so excessive, 
that it sometim threaten her senses; and, often as she went, she 
thought of her late father and of all he would have suffered, could he 
have foreseen the strang and dread event of her futur life; and 
how anxious he would have avoid that fatal confidence, which 
commit hi daughter to the care of a woman so weak as wa madam 
montoni. So romant and improbable, indeed, did her present situat 
appear to emili herself, particularli when she compar it with the 
repos and beauti of her earli days, that there were moments, when she 
could almost have believ herself the victim of fright visions, 
glare upon a disord fancy. 

restrain by the presenc of her guid from express her terrors, 
their acut was, at length, lost in gloomi despair. the dread 
view of what might await her hereaft render her almost indiffer 
to the surround dangers. she now looked, with littl emotion, on the 
wild dingles, and the gloomi road and mountains, whose outlin were 
onli distinguish through the dusk;—objects, which but late had 
affect her spirit so much, as to awaken horrid view of the future, 
and to ting these with their own gloom. 

It wa now so nearli dark, that the travellers, who proceed onli by 
the slowest pace, could scarc discern their way. the clouds, which 
seem charg with thunder, pass slowli along the heavens, showing, 
at intervals, the trembl stars; while the grove of cypress and 
sycamore, that overhung the rocks, wave high in the breeze, as it 
swept over the glen, and then rush among the distant woods. emili 
shiver as it passed. 

“where is the torch?” said ugo, “it grow dark.” 

“not so dark yet,” repli bertrand, “but we may find our way, and ’ti 
best not light the torch, befor we can help, for it may betray us, if 
ani straggl parti of the enemi is abroad.” 

ugo mutter something, which emili did not understand, and they 
proceed in darkness, while she almost wished, that the enemi might 
discov them; for from chang there wa someth to hope, sinc she 
could scarc imagin ani situat more dread than her present 
one. 

As they move slowli along, her attent wa surpris by a thin 
taper flame, that appeared, by fits, at the point of the pike, which 
bertrand carried, resembl what she had observ on the lanc of the 
sentinel, the night madam montoni died, and which he had said wa an 
omen. the event immedi follow it appear to justifi the 
assertion, and a superstiti impress had remain on emily’ mind, 
which the present appear confirmed. she thought it wa an omen of 
her own fate, and watch it success vanish and return, in gloomi 
silence, which wa at length interrupt by bertrand. 

“let us light the torch,” said he, “and get under shelter of the 
woods;—a storm is come on—look at my lance.” 

He held it forth, with the flame taper at it point.* 

(*note: see the abbé berthelon on electricity. [a. r.]) 


“aye,” said ugo, “you are not one of those, that believ in omens: we 
have left coward at the castle, who would turn pale at such a sight. I 
have often seen it befor a thunder-storm, it is an omen of that, and 
one is come now, sure enough. the cloud flash fast already.” 

emili wa reliev by thi convers from some of the terror of 
superstition, but those of reason increased, as, wait while ugo 
search for a flint, to strike fire, she watch the pale lightn 
gleam over the wood they were about to enter, and illumin the harsh 
counten of her companions. ugo could not find a flint, and 
bertrand becam impatient, for the thunder sound hollowli at a 
distance, and the lightn wa more frequent. sometimes, it reveal 
the nearer recess of the woods, or, display some open in their 
summits, illumin the ground beneath with partial splendour, the thick 
foliag of the tree preserv the surround scene in deep shadow. 

At length, ugo found a flint, and the torch wa lighted. the men then 
dismounted, and, have assist emily, led the mule toward the 
woods, that skirt the glen, on the left, over broken ground, 
frequent interrupt with brush-wood and wild plants, which she wa 
often oblig to make a circuit to avoid. 

she could not approach these woods, without experienc keener sens 
of her danger. their deep silence, except when the wind swept among 
their branches, and impenetr gloom shown partial by the sudden 
flash, and then, by the red glare of the torch, which serv onli to 
make “dark visible,” were circumstances, that contribut to renew 
all her most terribl apprehensions; she thought, too, that, at thi 
moment, the counten of her conductor display more than their 
usual fierceness, mingl with a kind of lurk exultation, which they 
seem endeavour to disguise. To her affright fanci it occurred, 
that they were lead her into these wood to complet the will of 
montoni by her murder. the horrid suggest call a groan from her 
heart, which surpris her companions, who turn round quickli toward 
her, and she demand whi they led her thither, beseech them to 
continu their way along the open glen, which she repres to be 
less danger than the woods, in a thunder-storm. 

“no, no,” said bertrand, “we know best where the danger lies. see how 
the cloud open over our heads. besides, we can glide under cover of 
the wood with less hazard of be seen, should ani of the enemi be 
wander thi way. By holi st. peter and all the rest of them, i’v as 
stout a heart as the best, as mani a poor devil could tell, if he were 
aliv again—but what can we do against numbers?” 

“what are you whine about?” said ugo, contemptuously, “who fear 
numbers! let them come, though they were as mani as the signor’ castl 
could hold; I would show the knave what fight is. for you—i would 
lay you quietli in a dri ditch, where you might peep out, and see me 
put the rogu to flight.—who talk of fear!” 

bertrand replied, with a horribl oath, that he did not like such 
jesting, and a violent alterc ensued, which was, at length, 
silenc by the thunder, whose deep volley wa heard afar, roll 
onward till it burst over their head in sounds, that seem to shake 
the earth to it centre. the ruffian paused, and look upon each 
other. between the bole of the trees, the blue lightn flash and 
quiver along the ground, while, as emili look under the boughs, the 
mountain beyond, frequent appear to be cloth in livid flame. At 
thi moment, perhaps, she felt less fear of the storm, than did either 
of her companions, for other terror occupi her mind. 

the men now rest under an enorm chesnut-tree, and fix their 
pike in the ground, at some distance, on the iron point of which 
emili repeatedli observ the lightn play, and then glide down them 
into the earth. 

“I would we were well in the signor’ castle!” said bertrand, “I know 
not whi he should send us on thi business. hark! how it rattl above, 
there! I could almost find in my heart to turn priest, and pray. ugo, 
hast got a rosary?” 

“no,” repli ugo, “I leav it to coward like thee, to carri 
rosaries—i carri a sword.” 

“and much good may it do thee in fight against the storm!” said 
bertrand. 

anoth peal, which wa reverber in tremend echo among the 
mountains, silenc them for a moment. As it roll away, ugo propos 
go on. “we are onli lose time here,” said he, “for the thick 
bough of the wood will shelter us as well as thi chesnut-tree.” 

they again led the mule forward, between the bole of the trees, and 
over pathless grass, that conceal their high knot roots. the 
rise wind wa now heard contend with the thunder, as it rush 
furious among the branch above, and brighten the red flame of the 
torch, which threw a stronger light forward among the woods, and show 
their gloomi recess to be suitabl resort for the wolves, of which 
ugo had formerli spoken. 

At length, the strength of the wind seem to drive the storm befor 
it, for the thunder roll away into distance, and wa onli faintli 
heard. after travel through the wood for nearli an hour, dure 
which the element seem to have return to repose, the travellers, 
gradual ascend from the glen, found themselv upon the open brow 
of a mountain, with a wide valley, extend in misti moonlight, at 
their feet, and above, the blue sky, trembl through the few thin 
clouds, that linger after the storm, and were sink slowli to the 
verg of the horizon. 

emily’ spirits, now that she had quit the woods, began to revive; 
for she considered, that, if these men had receiv an order to destroy 
her, they would probabl have execut their barbar purpos in the 
solitari wild, from whenc they had just emerged, where the deed would 
have been shroud from everi human eye. reassur by thi reflection, 
and by the quiet demeanour of her guides, emily, as they proceed 
silently, in a kind of sheep track, that wound along the skirt of the 
woods, which ascend on the right, could not survey the sleep 
beauti of the vale, to which they were declining, without a momentari 
sensat of pleasure. It seem vari with woods, pastures, and 
slope grounds, and wa screen to the north and the east by an 
amphitheatr of the apennines, whose outlin on the horizon wa here 
broken into vari and eleg forms; to the west and the south, the 
landscap extend indistinctli into the lowland of tuscany. 

“there is the sea yonder,” said bertrand, as if he had known that emili 
wa examin the twilight view, “yonder in the west, though we cannot 
see it.” 

emili alreadi perceiv a chang in the climate, from that of the wild 
and mountain tract she had left; and, as she continu descending, 
the air becam perfum by the breath of a thousand nameless flower 
among the grass, call forth by the late rain. So soothingli beauti 
wa the scene around her, and so strikingli contrast to the gloomi 
grandeur of those, to which she had long been confined, and to the 
manner of the people, who move among them, that she could almost have 
fanci herself again at La vallée, and, wonder whi montoni had sent 
her hither, could scarc believe, that he had select so enchant 
a spot for ani cruel design. It was, however, probabl not the spot, 
but the persons, who happen to inhabit it, and to whose care he could 
safe commit the execut of hi plans, whatev they might be, that 
had determin hi choice. 

she now ventur again to enquire, whether they were near the place of 
their destination, and wa answer by ugo, that they had not far to 
go. “onli to the wood of chesnut in the valley yonder,” said he, 
“there, by the brook, that sparkl with the moon; I wish I wa onc at 
rest there, with a flask of good wine, and a slice of tuscani bacon.” 

emily’ spirit revived, when she heard, that the journey wa so nearli 
concluded, and saw the wood of chesnut in an open part of the vale, on 
the margin of the stream. 

In a short time they reach the entranc of the wood, and perceived, 
between the twinkl leaves, a light, stream from a distant cottag 
window. they proceed along the edg of the brook to where the trees, 
crowd over it, exclud the moonbeams, but a long line of light, 
from the cottag above, wa seen on it dark tremul surface. 
bertrand now step on first, and emili heard him knock, and call 
loudli at the door. As she reach it, the small upper casement, where 
the light appeared, wa unclos by a man, who, have enquir what 
they wanted, immedi descended, let them into a neat rustic cot, 
and call up hi wife to set refresh befor the travellers. As 
thi man conversed, rather apart, with bertrand, emili anxious 
survey him. He wa a tall, but not robust, peasant, of a sallow 
complexion, and had a shrewd and cun eye; hi counten wa not 
of a charact to win the readi confid of youth, and there wa 
noth in hi manner, that might concili a stranger. 


ugo call impati for supper, and in a tone as if he knew hi 
author here to be unquestionable. “I expect you an hour ago,” said 
the peasant, “for I have had signor montoni’ letter these three hours, 
and I and my wife had given you up, and gone to bed. how did you fare 
in the storm?” 

“ill enough,” repli ugo, “ill enough and we are like to fare ill 
enough here, too, unless you will make more haste. get us more wine, 
and let us see what you have to eat.” 

the peasant place befor them all that hi cottag afforded—ham, wine, 
figs, and grape of such size and flavour, as emili had seldom tasted. 

after take refreshment, she wa shown by the peasant’ wife to her 
littl bed-chamber, where she ask some question concern montoni, 
to which the woman, whose name wa dorina, gave reserv answers, 
pretend ignor of hi _excellenza_’ intent in send emili 
hither, but acknowledg that her husband had been appriz of the 
circumstance. perceiv that she could obtain no intellig 
concern her destination, emili dismiss dorina, and retir to 
repose; but all the busi scene of her past and the anticip one of 
the futur came to her anxiou mind, and conspir with the sens of 
her new situat to banish sleep. 



chapter vii 

wa nought around but imag of rest, 
sleep-sooth grove and quiet lawn between, 
and floweri bed that slumbrou influenc kept, 
from poppi breath’d, and bank of pleasant green, 
where never yet wa creep creatur seen. 
meantim unnumb glitter streamlet play’d, 
and hurl everywher their water’ sheen, 
that, as they bicker’d through the sunni glade, 
though restless still themselves, a lull murmur made. 
thomson 


when emily, in the morning, open her casement, she wa surpris to 
observ the beauties, that surround it. the cottag wa nearli 
embow in the woods, which were chiefli of chesnut intermix with 
some cypress, larch and sycamore. beneath the dark and spread 
branch appear to the north and to the east the woodi apennines, 
rise in majest amphitheatre, not black with pines, as she had been 
accustom to see them, but their loftiest summit crown with ancient 
forest of chesnut, oak, and orient plane, now anim with the rich 
tint of autumn, and which swept downward to the valley 
uninterruptedly, except where some bold rocki promontori look out 
from among the foliage, and caught the pass gleam. vineyard 
stretch along the feet of the mountains, where the eleg villa of 
the tuscan nobil frequent adorn the scene, and overlook slope 
cloth with grove of olive, mulberry, orang and lemon. the plain, to 
which these declined, wa colour with the rich of cultivation, 
whose mingl hue were mellow into harmoni by an italian sun. vines, 
their purpl cluster blush between the russet foliage, hung in 
luxuri festoon from the branch of standard fig and cherri trees, 
while pastur of verdure, such as emili had seldom seen in italy, 
enrich the bank of a stream that, after descend from the 
mountains, wound along the landscape, which it reflected, to a bay of 
the sea. there, far in the west, the waters, fade into the sky, 
assum a tint of the faintest purple, and the line of separ 
between them was, now and then, discern onli by the progress of a 
sail, brighten with the sunbeam, along the horizon. 

the cottage, which wa shade by the wood from the intens ray of 
the sun, and wa open onli to hi even light, wa cover entir 
with vines, fig-tre and jessamine, whose flower surpass in size 
and fragranc ani that emili had seen. these and ripen cluster of 
grape hung round her littl casement. the turf, that grew under the 
woods, wa inlaid with a varieti of wild flower and perfum herbs, 
and, on the opposit margin of the stream, whose current diffus 
fresh beneath the shades, rose a grove of lemon and orang trees. 
this, though nearli opposit to emily’ window, did not interrupt her 
prospect, but rather heightened, by it dark verdure, the effect of the 
perspective; and to her thi spot wa a bower of sweets, whose charm 
commun impercept to her mind somewhat of their own serenity. 

she wa soon summon to breakfast, by the peasant’ daughter, a girl 
about seventeen, of a pleasant countenance, which, emili wa glad to 
observe, seem anim with the pure affect of nature, though the 
others, that surround her, expressed, more or less, the worst 
qualities—cruelty, ferocity, cun and duplicity; of the latter style 
of countenance, especially, were those of the peasant and hi wife. 
maddelina spoke little, but what she said wa in a soft voice, and with 
an air of modesti and complacency, that interest emily, who 
breakfast at a separ tabl with dorina, while ugo and bertrand 
were take a repast of tuscani bacon and wine with their host, near 
the cottag door; when they had finish which, ugo, rise hastily, 
enquir for hi mule, and emili learn that he wa to return to 
udolpho, while bertrand remain at the cottage; a circumstance, which, 
though it did not surprise, distress her. 

when ugo wa departed, emili propos to walk in the neighbour 
woods; but, on be told, that she must not quit the cottage, without 
have bertrand for her attendant, she withdrew to her own room. there, 
as her eye settl on the tower apennines, she recollect the 
terrif sceneri they had exhibit and the horror she had suffered, 
on the preced night, particularli at the moment when bertrand had 
betray himself to be an assassin; and these remembr awaken a 
train of images, which, sinc they abstract her from a consider 
of her own situation, she pursu for some time, and then arrang in 
the follow lines; pleas to have discov ani innoc means, by 
which she could beguil an hour of misfortune. 

the pilgrim* 

slow o’er the apennine, with bleed feet, 
A patient pilgrim wound hi lone way, 
To deck the ladi of loretto’ seat 
with all the littl wealth hi zeal could pay. 
from mountain-top cold die the even ray, 
and, stretch’d in twilight, slept the vale below; 
and now the last, last purpl streak of day 
along the melancholi west fade slow. 
high o’er hi head, the restless pine complain, 
As on their summit roll the breez of night; 
beneath, the hoars stream chide the rock in vain: 
the pilgrim paus on the dizzi height. 
then to the vale hi cautiou step he press’d, 
for there a hermit’ cross wa dimli seen, 
crest the rock, and there hi limb might rest, 
cheer’d in the good man’ cave, by faggot’ sheen, 
On leafi beds, nor guil hi sleep molest. 
unhappi luke! he trust a treacher clue! 
behind the cliff the lurk robber stood; 
No friendli moon hi giant shadow threw 
athwart the road, to save the pilgrim’ blood; 
On as he went a vesper-hymn he sang, 
the hymn, that nightli sooth’d him to repose. 
fierc on hi harmless prey the ruffian sprang! 
the pilgrim bleed to death, hi eye-lid close. 
yet hi meek spirit knew no veng care, 
but, dying, for hi murd’rer breath’d—a saint pray’r! 


(*note: thi poem and that entitl _the traveller_ in vol. ii, have 
alreadi appear in a period publication. [a. r.]) 


prefer the solitud of her room to the compani of the person below 
stairs, emili dine above, and maddelina wa suffer to attend her, 
from whose simpl convers she learned, that the peasant and hi 
wife were old inhabit of thi cottage, which had been purchas for 
them by montoni, in reward of some service, render him, mani year 
before, by marco, to whom carlo, the steward at the castle, wa nearli 
related. “so mani year ago, signora,” ad maddelina, “that I know 
noth about it; but my father did the signor a great good, for my 
mother ha often said to him, thi cottag wa the least he ought to 
have had.” 

To the mention of thi circumst emili listen with a pain 
interest, sinc it appear to give a fright colour to the charact 
of marco, whose service, thu reward by montoni, she could scarc 
doubt have been criminal; and, if so, had too much reason to believe, 
that she had been commit into hi hand for some desper purpose. 
“did you ever hear how mani year it is,” said emily, who wa 
consid of signora laurentini’ disappear from udolpho, “sinc 
your father perform the servic you spoke of?” 

“it wa a littl befor he came to live at the cottage, signora,” 
repli maddelina, “and that is about eighteen year ago.” 

thi wa near the period, when signora laurentini had been said to 
disappear, and it occur to emily, that marco had assist in that 
mysteri affair, and, perhaps, had been employ in a murder! thi 
horribl suggest fix her in such profound reverie, that maddelina 
quit the room, unperceiv by her, and she remain unconsci of 
all around her, for a consider time. tears, at length, came to her 
relief, after indulg which, her spirit becom calmer, she ceas 
to trembl at a view of evils, that might never arrive; and had 
suffici resolut to endeavour to withdraw her thought from the 
contempl of her own interests. rememb the few books, which 
even in the hurri of her departur from udolpho she had put into her 
littl package, she sat down with one of them at her pleasant casement, 
whenc her eye often wander from the page to the landscape, whose 
beauti gradual sooth her mind into gentl melancholy. 

here, she remain alone, till evening, and saw the sun descend the 
western sky, throw all hi pomp of light and shadow upon the mountains, 
and gleam upon the distant ocean and the steal sails, as he sunk 
amidst the waves. then, at the muse hour of twilight, her soften 
thought return to valancourt; she again recollect everi 
circumstance, connect with the midnight music, and all that might 
assist her conjecture, concern hi imprison at the castle, and, 
becom confirm in the supposition, that it wa hi voic she had 
heard there, she look back to that gloomi abod with emot of 
grief and momentari regret. 

refresh by the cool and fragrant air, and her spirit sooth to a 
state of gentl melancholi by the still murmur of the brook below and 
of the wood around, she linger at her casement long after the sun 
had set, watch the valley sink into obscurity, till onli the 
grand outlin of the surround mountains, shadow upon the horizon, 
remain visible. but a clear moonlight, that succeeded, gave to the 
landscape, what time give to the scene of past life, when it soften 
all their harsher features, and throw over the whole the mellow 
shade of distant contemplation. the scene of La vallée, in the earli 
morn of her life, when she wa protect and belov by parent equal 
loved, appear in emily’ memori tenderli beautiful, like the prospect 
befor her, and awaken mourn comparisons. unwil to encount 
the coars behaviour of the peasant’ wife, she remain supperless in 
her room, while she wept again over her forlorn and peril situation, 
a review of which entir overcam the small remain of her fortitude, 
and, reduc her to temporari despondence, she wish to be releas 
from the heavi load of life, that had so long oppress her, and pray 
to heaven to take her, in it mercy, to her parents. 

weari with weeping, she, at length, lay down on her mattress, and 
sunk to sleep, but wa soon awaken by a knock at her chamber door, 
and, start up in terror, she heard a voic call her. the imag of 
bertrand, with a stilletto in hi hand, appear to her alarm fancy, 
and she neither open the door nor answered, but listen in profound 
silence, till, the voic repeat her name in the same low tone, she 
demand who called. “it is I, signora,” repli the voice, which she 
now distinguish to be maddelina’s, “pray open the door. don’t be 
frightened, it is i.” 

“and what bring you here so late, maddelina?” said emily, as she let 
her in. 

“hush! signora, for heaven’ sake hush!—if we are overheard I shall 
never be forgiven. My father and mother and bertrand are all gone to 
bed,” continu maddelina, as she gentli shut the door, and crept 
forward, “and I have brought you some supper, for you had none, you 
know, signora, below stairs. here are some grape and fig and half a 
cup of wine.” emili thank her, but express apprehens lest thi 
kind should draw upon her the resent of dorina, when she 
perceiv the fruit wa gone. “take it back, therefore, maddelina,” 
ad emily, “I shall suffer much less from the want of it, than I 
should do, if thi act of good-natur wa to subject you to your 
mother’ displeasure.” 

“O signora! there is no danger of that,” repli maddelina, “mi mother 
cannot miss the fruit, for I save it from my own supper. you will make 
me veri unhappy, if you refus to take it, signora.” emili wa so much 
affect by thi instanc of the good girl’ generosity, that she 
remain for some time unabl to reply, and maddelina watch her in 
silence, till, mistak the caus of her emotion, she said, “do not 
weep so, signora! My mother, to be sure, is a littl cross, sometimes, 
but then it is soon over,—so don’t take it so much to heart. she often 
scold me, too, but then I have learn to bear it, and, when she ha 
done, if I can but steal out into the woods, and play upon my sticcado, 
I forget it all directly.” 

emily, smile through her tears, told maddelina, that she wa a good 
girl, and then accept her offering. she wish anxious to know, 
whether bertrand and dorina had spoken of montoni, or of hi designs, 
concern herself, in the presenc of maddelina, but disdain to 
tempt the innoc girl to a conduct so mean, as that of betray the 
privat convers of her parents. when she wa departing, emili 
requested, that she would come to her room as often as she dared, 
without offend her mother, and maddelina, after promis that she 
would do so, stole softli back again to her own chamber. 

thu sever day passed, dure which emili remain in her own room, 
maddelina attend her onli at her repast, whose gentl counten 
and manner sooth her more than ani circumst she had known for 
mani months. Of her pleasant embow chamber she now becam fond, and 
began to experi in it those feel of security, which we 
natur attach to home. In thi interv also, her mind, have been 
undisturb by ani new circumst of disgust, or alarm, recov it 
tone suffici to permit her the enjoy of her books, among which 
she found some unfinish sketch of landscapes, sever blank sheet 
of paper, with her draw instruments, and she wa thu enabl to 
amus herself with select some of the love featur of the 
prospect, that her window commanded, and combin them in scenes, to 
which her tast fanci gave a last grace. In these littl sketch 
she gener place interest groups, characterist of the sceneri 
they animated, and often contriv to tell, with perspicuity, some 
simpl and affect story, when, as a tear fell over the pictur 
griefs, which her imagin drew, she would forget, for a moment, her 
real sufferings. thu innoc she beguil the heavi hour of 
misfortune, and, with meek patience, await the event of futurity. 

A beauti evening, that had succeed to a sultri day, at length 
induc emili to walk, though she knew that bertrand must attend her, 
and, with maddelina for her companion, she left the cottage, follow 
by bertrand, who allow her to choos her own way. the hour wa cool 
and silent, and she could not look upon the countri around her without 
delight. how lovely, too, appear the brilliant blue that colour all 
the upper region of the air, and, thenc fade downward, wa lost in 
the saffron glow of the horizon! nor less so were the vari shade and 
warm colour of the apennines, as the even sun threw hi slant 
ray athwart their broken surface. emili follow the cours of the 
stream, under the shades, that overhung it grassi margin. On the 
opposit banks, the pastur were anim with herd of cattl of a 
beauti cream-colour; and, beyond, were grove of lemon and orange, 
with fruit glow on the branches, frequent almost as the leaves, 
which partli conceal it. she pursu her way toward the sea, which 
reflect the warm glow of sunset, while the cliffs, that rose over it 
edge, were tint with the last rays. the valley wa termin on the 
right by a lofti promontory, whose summit, impend over the waves, 
wa crown with a ruin tower, now serv for the purpos of a 
beacon, whose shatter battlement and the extend wing of some 
sea-fowl, that circl near it, were still illumin by the upward 
beam of the sun, though hi disk wa now sunk beneath the horizon; 
while the lower part of the ruin, the cliff on which it stood and the 
wave at it foot, were shade with the first tint of twilight. 

have reach thi headland, emili gaze with solemn pleasur on the 
cliffs, that extend on either hand along the sequest shores, some 
crown with grove of pine, and other exhibit onli barren 
precipic of greyish marble, except where the crag were tuft with 
myrtl and other aromat shrubs. the sea slept in a perfect calm; it 
waves, die in murmur on the shores, flow with the gentlest 
undulation, while it clear surfac reflect in soften beauti the 
vermeil tint of the west. emily, as she look upon the ocean, thought 
of franc and of past times, and she wished, oh! how ardently, and 
vainly—wished! that it wave would bear her to her distant nativ 
home! 

“ah! that vessel,” said she, “that vessel, which glide along so 
stately, with it tall sail reflect in the water is, perhaps, bound 
for france! happy—happi bark!” she continu to gaze upon it, with warm 
emotion, till the grey of twilight obscur the distance, and veil it 
from her view. the melancholi sound of the wave at her feet assist 
the tenderness, that occas her tears, and thi wa the onli sound, 
that broke upon the hour, till, have follow the wind of the 
beach, for some time, a choru of voic pass her on the air. she 
paus a moment, wish to hear more, yet fear to be seen, and, for 
the first time, look back to bertrand, as her protector, who wa 
following, at a short distance, in compani with some other person. 
reassur by thi circumstance, she advanc toward the sounds, which 
seem to aris from behind a high promontory, that project athwart 
the beach. there wa now a sudden paus in the music, and then one 
femal voic wa heard to sing in a kind of chant. emili quicken her 
steps, and, wind round the rock, saw, within the sweep bay, 
beyond, which wa hung with wood from the border of the beach to the 
veri summit of the cliffs, two group of peasants, one seat beneath 
the shades, and the other stand on the edg of the sea, round the 
girl, who wa singing, and who held in her hand a chaplet of flowers, 
which she seem about to drop into the waves. 

emily, listen with surpris and attention, distinguish the 
follow invoc deliv in the pure and eleg tongu of 
tuscany, and accompani by a few pastor instruments. 

TO A sea-nymph 

O nymph! who love to float on the green wave, 
when neptun sleep beneath the moonlight hour, 
lull’d by the music’ melancholi pow’r, 
O nymph, aris from out thi pearli cave! 

for hesper beam amid the twilight shade, 
and soon shall cynthia trembl o’er the tide, 
gleam on these cliffs, that bound the ocean’ pride, 
and lone silenc all the air pervade. 

then, let thi tender voic at distanc swell, 
and steal along thi solitari shore, 
sink on the breeze, till dying—heard no more— 
thou wak’st the sudden magic of thi shell. 

while the long coast in echo sweet replies, 
thi sooth strain the pensiv heart beguile, 
and bid the vision of the futur smile, 
O nymph! from out thi pearli cave—arise! 

(chorus)—_arise!_ 
(semi-chorus)—_arise!_ 


the last word be repeat by the surround group, the garland of 
flower wa thrown into the waves, and the chorus, sink gradual 
into a chant, die away in silence. 

“what can thi mean, maddelina?” said emily, awaken from the 
pleas trance, into which the music had lull her. “thi is the eve 
of a festival, signora,” repli maddelina; “and the peasant then 
amus themselv with all kind of sports.” 

“but they talk of a sea-nymph,” said emily: “how came these good 
peopl to think of a sea-nymph?” 

“o, signora,” rejoin maddelina, mistak the reason of emily’ 
surprise, “nobodi _believes_ in such things, but our old song tell of 
them, and, when we are at our sports, we sometim sing to them, and 
throw garland into the sea.” 

emili had been earli taught to vener florenc as the seat of 
literatur and of the fine arts; but, that it tast for classic stori 
should descend to the peasant of the country, occas her both 
surpris and admiration. the arcadian air of the girl next attract 
her attention. their dress wa a veri short full petticoat of light 
green, with a boddic of white silk; the sleev loose, and tie up at 
the shoulder with ribbon and bunch of flowers. their hair, fall 
in ringlet on their necks, wa also ornament with flowers, and with 
a small straw hat, which, set rather backward and on one side of the 
head, gave an express of gaieti and smart to the whole figure. 
when the song had concluded, sever of these girl approach emily, 
and, invit her to sit down among them, offer her, and maddelina, 
whom they knew, grape and figs. 

emili accept their courtesy, much pleas with the gentl and 
grace of their manners, which appear to be perfectli natur to them; 
and when bertrand, soon after, approached, and wa hastili draw her 
away, a peasant, hold up a flask, invit him to drink; a 
temptation, which bertrand wa seldom veri valiant in resisting. 

“let the young ladi join in the dance, my friend,” said the peasant, 
“while we empti thi flask. they are go to begin directly. strike 
up! my lads, strike up your tambourin and merri flutes!” 

they sound gaily; and the younger peasant form themselv into a 
circle, which emili would readili have joined, had her spirit been in 
unison with their mirth. maddelina, however, trip it lightly, and 
emily, as she look on the happi group, lost the sens of her 
misfortun in that of a benevol pleasure. but the pensiv 
melancholi of her mind returned, as she sat rather apart from the 
company, listen to the mellow music, which the breez soften as it 
bore it away, and watch the moon, steal it tremul light over 
the wave and on the woodi summit of the cliffs, that wound along 
these tuscan shores. 

meanwhile, bertrand wa so well pleas with hi first flask, that he 
veri willingli commenc the attack on a second, and it wa late befor 
emily, not without some apprehension, return to the cottage. 

after thi evening, she frequent walk with maddelina, but wa never 
unattend by bertrand; and her mind becam by degre as tranquil as 
the circumst of her situat would permit. the quiet, in which 
she wa suffer to live, encourag her to hope, that she wa not sent 
hither with an evil design; and, had it not appear probable, that 
valancourt wa at thi time an inhabit of udolpho, she would have 
wish to remain at the cottage, till an opportun should offer of 
return to her nativ country. but, concern montoni’ motiv for 
send her into tuscany, she wa more than ever perplexed, nor could 
she believ that ani consider for her safeti had influenc him on 
thi occasion. 

she had been some time at the cottage, befor she recollected, that, in 
the hurri of leav udolpho, she had forgotten the paper commit to 
her by her late aunt, rel to the languedoc estates; but, though 
thi remembr occas her much uneasiness, she had some hope, 
that, in the obscur place, where they were deposited, they would 
escap the detect of montoni. 



chapter viii 

My tongu hath but a heavier tale to say. 
I play the torturer, by small and small, 
To lengthen out the worst that must be spoken. 
richard II 


We now return, for a moment, to venice, where count morano wa 
suffer under an accumul of misfortunes. soon after hi arriv 
in that city, he had been arrest by order of the senate, and, without 
know of what he wa suspected, wa convey to a place of 
confinement, whither the most strenuou enquiri of hi friend had 
been unabl to trace him. who the enemi was, that had occas him 
thi calamity, he had not been abl to guess, unless, indeed, it wa 
montoni, on whom hi suspicion rested, and not onli with much appar 
probability, but with justice. 

In the affair of the poison cup, montoni had suspect morano; but, 
be unabl to obtain the degre of proof, which wa necessari to 
convict him of a guilti intention, he had recours to mean of other 
revenge, than he could hope to obtain by prosecution. He employ a 
person, in whom he believ he might confide, to drop a letter of 
accus into the _denunzi secrete_, or lions’ mouths, which are 
fix in a galleri of the doge’ palace, as receptacl for anonym 
information, concern persons, who may be disaffect toward the 
state. as, on these occasions, the accus is not confront with the 
accused, a man may fals impeach hi enemy, and accomplish an unjust 
revenge, without fear of punishment, or detection. that montoni should 
have recours to these diabol mean of ruin a person, whom he 
suspect of have attempt hi life, is not in the least surprising. 
In the letter, which he had employ as the instrument of hi revenge, 
he accus morano of design against the state, which he attempt to 
prove, with all the plausibl simplic of which he wa master; and 
the senate, with whom a suspicion was, at that time, almost equal to a 
proof, arrest the count, in consequ of thi accusation; and, 
without even hint to him hi crime, threw him into one of those 
secret prisons, which were the terror of the venetians, and in which 
person often languished, and sometim died, without be discov 
by their friends. 

morano had incur the person resent of mani member of the 
state; hi habit of life had render him obnoxi to some; and hi 
ambition, and the bold rivalship, which he discovered, on sever 
public occasions,—to others; and it wa not to be expected, that merci 
would soften the rigour of a law, which wa to be dispens from the 
hand of hi enemies. 

montoni, meantime, wa beset by danger of anoth kind. hi castl wa 
besieg by troops, who seem will to dare everything, and to 
suffer patient ani hardship in pursuit of victory. the strength of 
the fortress, however, withstood their attack, and this, with the 
vigor defenc of the garrison and the scarciti of provis on these 
wild mountains, soon compel the assail to rais the siege. 

when udolpho wa onc more left to the quiet possess of montoni, he 
dispatch ugo into tuscani for emily, whom he had sent from 
consider of her person safety, to a place of greater security, 
than a castle, which was, at that time, liabl to be overrun by hi 
enemies. tranquil be onc more restor to udolpho, he wa 
impati to secur her again under hi roof, and had commiss ugo 
to assist bertrand in guard her back to the castle. thu compel 
to return, emili bade the kind maddelina farewell, with regret, and, 
after about a fortnight’ stay in tuscany, where she had experienc an 
interv of quiet, which wa absolut necessari to sustain her 
long-harass spirits, began onc more to ascend the apennines, from 
whose height she gave a long and sorrow look to the beauti 
country, that extend at their feet, and to the distant mediterranean, 
whose wave she had so often wish would bear her back to france. the 
distress she felt, on her return toward the place of her former 
sufferings, was, however, soften by a conjecture, that valancourt wa 
there, and she found some degre of comfort in the thought of be 
near him, notwithstand the consideration, that he wa probabl a 
prisoner. 

It wa noon when she had left the cottage, and the even wa closed, 
long befor she came within the neighbourhood of udolpho. there wa a 
moon, but it shone onli at intervals, for the night wa cloudy, and, 
light by the torch, which ugo carried, the travel pace silent 
along, emili muse on her situation, and bertrand and ugo anticip 
the comfort of a flask of wine and a good fire, for they had perceiv 
for some time the differ between the warm climat of the lowland 
of tuscani and the nip air of these upper regions. emili was, at 
length, rous from her reveri by the far-off sound of the castl 
clock, to which she listen not without some degre of awe, as it 
roll away on the breeze. anoth and anoth note succeeded, and die 
in sullen murmur among the mountains:—to her mourn imagin it 
seem a knell measur out some fate period for her. 

“aye, there is the old clock,” said bertrand, “there he is still; the 
cannon have not silenc him!” 

“no,” answer ugo, “he crow as loud as the best of them in the midst 
of it all. there he wa roar out in the hottest fire I have seen 
thi mani a day! I said that some of them would have a hit at the old 
fellow, but he escaped, and the tower too.” 

the road wind round the base of a mountain, they now came within 
view of the castle, which wa shown in the perspect of the valley by 
a gleam of moonshine, and then vanish in shade; while even a 
transient view of it had awaken the poignanc of emily’ feelings. 
it massi and gloomi wall gave her terribl idea of imprison and 
suffering: yet, as she advanced, some degre of hope mingl with her 
terror; for, though thi wa certainli the resid of montoni, it wa 
possibly, also, that of valancourt, and she could not approach a place, 
where he might be, without experienc somewhat of the joy of hope. 

they continu to wind along the valley, and, soon after, she saw again 
the old wall and moonlit towers, rise over the woods: the strong 
ray enabl her, also, to perceiv the ravages, which the sieg had 
made,—with the broken walls, and shatter battlements, for they were 
now at the foot of the steep, on which udolpho stood. massi fragment 
had roll down among the woods, through which the travel now began 
to ascend, and there mingl with the loos earth, and piec of rock 
they had brought with them. the woods, too, had suffer much from the 
batteri above, for here the enemi had endeavour to screen 
themselv from the fire of the ramparts. mani nobl tree were 
level with the ground, and others, to a wide extent, were entir 
strip of their upper branches. “we had better dismount,” said ugo, 
“and lead the mule up the hill, or we shall get into some of the 
holes, which the ball have left. here are plenti of them. give me the 
torch,” continu ugo, after they had dismounted, “and take care you 
don’t stumbl over anything, that lie in your way, for the ground is 
not yet clear of the enemy.” 

“how!” exclaim emily, “are ani of the enemi here, then?” 

“nay, I don’t know for that, now,” he replied, “but when I came away I 
saw one or two of them lie under the trees.” 

As they proceeded, the torch threw a gloomi light upon the ground, and 
far among the recess of the woods, and emili fear to look forward, 
lest some object of horror should meet her eye. the path wa often 
strewn with broken head of arrows, and with shatter remain of 
armour, such as at that period wa mingl with the lighter dress of 
the soldiers. “bring the light hither,” said bertrand, “I have stumbl 
over something, that rattl loud enough.” ugo hold up the torch, 
they perceiv a steel breastplat on the ground, which bertrand 
raised, and they saw, that it wa pierc through, and that the line 
wa entir cover with blood; but upon emily’ earnest entreati 
that they would proceed, bertrand, utter some joke upon the 
unfortun person, to whom it had belonged, threw it hard upon the 
ground, and they pass on. 

At everi step she took, emili fear to see some vestig of death. 
come soon after to an open in the woods, bertrand stop to 
survey the ground, which wa encumb with massi trunk and branch 
of the trees, that had so late adorn it, and seem to have been a 
spot particularli fatal to the besiegers; for it wa evid from the 
destruct of the trees, that here the hottest fire of the garrison 
had been directed. As ugo held again forth the torch, steel glitter 
between the fallen trees; the ground beneath wa cover with broken 
arms, and with the torn vestment of soldiers, whose mangl form 
emili almost expect to see; and she again entreat her companion to 
proceed, who were, however, too intent in their examination, to regard 
her, and she turn her eye from thi desol scene to the castl 
above, where she observ light glide along the ramparts. presently, 
the castl clock struck twelve, and then a trumpet sounded, of which 
emili enquir the occasion. 

“o! they are onli chang watch,” repli ugo. “I do not rememb thi 
trumpet,” said emily, “it is a new custom.” “it is onli an old one 
revived, lady; we alway use it in time of war. We have sound it, at 
midnight, ever sinc the place wa besieged.” 

“hark!” said emily, as the trumpet sound again; and, in the next 
moment, she heard a faint clash of arms, and then the watchword pass 
along the terrac above, and wa answer from a distant part of the 
castle; after which all wa again still. she complain of cold, and 
beg to go on. “presently, lady,” said bertrand, turn over some 
broken arm with the pike he usual carried. “what have we here?” 

“hark!” cri emily, “what nois wa that?” 

“what nois wa it?” said ugo, start up and listening. 

“hush!” repeat emily. “it sure came from the rampart above:” and, 
on look up, they perceiv a light move along the walls, while, in 
the next instant, the breez swelling, the voic sound louder than 
before. 

“who goe yonder?” cri a sentinel of the castle. “speak or it will be 
wors for you.” bertrand utter a shout of joy. “hah! my brave 
comrade, is it you?” said he, and he blew a shrill whistle, which 
signal wa answer by anoth from the soldier on watch; and the 
party, then pass forward, soon after emerg from the wood upon the 
broken road, that led immedi to the castl gates, and emili saw, 
with renew terror, the whole of that stupend structure. “alas!” 
said she to herself, “I am go again into my prison!” 

“here ha been warm work, by st. marco!” cri bertrand, wave a torch 
over the ground; “the ball have torn up the earth here with a 
vengeance.” 

“aye,” repli ugo, “they were fire from that redoubt, yonder, and 
rare execut they did. the enemi made a furiou attack upon the great 
gates; but they might have guess they could never carri it there; 
for, besid the cannon from the walls, our archers, on the two round 
towers, shower down upon them at such a rate, that, by holi peter! 
there wa no stand it. I never saw a better sight in my life; I 
laughed, till my side aked, to see how the knave scampered. bertrand, 
my good fellow, thou shouldst have been among them; I warrant thou 
wouldst have won the race!” 

“hah! you are at your old trick again,” said bertrand in a surli tone. 
“it is well for thee thou art so near the castle; thou knowest I have 
kill my man befor now.” ugo repli onli by a laugh, and then gave 
some further account of the siege, to which as emili listened, she wa 
struck by the strong contrast of the present scene with that which had 
so late been act here. 

the mingl uproar of cannon, drums, and trumpets, the groan of the 
conquered, and the shout of the conqueror were now sunk into a 
silenc so profound, that it seem as if death had triumph alik 
over the vanquish and the victor. the shatter condit of one of 
the tower of the great gate by no mean confirm the _valiant_ 
account just given by ugo of the scamper party, who, it wa evident, 
had not onli made a stand, but had done much mischief befor they took 
to flight; for thi tower appeared, as far as emili could judg by the 
dim moonlight that fell upon it, to be laid open, and the battlement 
were nearli demolished. while she gazed, a light glimmer through one 
of the lower loop-holes, and disappeared; but, in the next moment, she 
perceiv through the broken wall, a soldier, with a lamp, ascend 
the narrow staircase, that wound within the tower, and, rememb 
that it wa the same she had pass up, on the night, when barnardin 
had delud her with a promis of see madam montoni, fanci gave her 
somewhat of the terror she had then suffered. she wa now veri near the 
gates, over which the soldier have open the door of the 
portal-chamber, the lamp he carri gave her a duski view of that 
terribl apartment, and she almost sunk under the recollect horror 
of the moment, when she had drawn asid the curtain, and discov the 
object it wa meant to conceal. 

“perhaps,” said she to herself, “it is now use for a similar purpose; 
perhaps, that soldier goes, at thi dead hour, to watch over the corps 
of hi friend!” the littl remain of her fortitud now gave way to the 
unit forc of rememb and anticip horrors, for the melancholi 
fate of madam montoni appear to foretel her own. she considered, 
that, though the languedoc estates, if she relinquish them, would 
satisfi montoni’ avarice, they might not appeas hi vengeance, which 
wa seldom pacifi but by a terribl sacrifice; and she even thought, 
that, were she to resign them, the fear of justic might urg him 
either to detain her a prisoner, or to take away her life. 

they were now arriv at the gates, where bertrand, observ the light 
glimmer through a small casement of the portal-chamber, call aloud; 
and the soldier, look out, demand who wa there. “here, I have 
brought you a prisoner,” said ugo, “open the gate, and let us in.” 

“tell me first who it is, that demand entrance,” repli the soldier. 
“what! my old comrade,” cri ugo, “don’t you know me? not know ugo? I 
have brought home a prison here, bound hand and foot—a fellow, who 
ha been drink tuscani wine, while we here have been fighting.” 

“you will not rest till you meet with your match,” said bertrand 
sullenly. “hah! my comrade, is it you?” said the soldier—“i’l be with 
you directly.” 

emili present heard hi step descend the stair within, and then 
the heavi chain fall, and the bolt undraw of a small postern door, 
which he open to admit the party. He held the lamp low, to show the 
step of the gate, and she found herself onc more beneath the gloomi 
arch, and heard the door close, that seem to shut her from the world 
for ever. In the next moment, she wa in the first court of the castle, 
where she survey the spaciou and solitari area, with a kind of calm 
despair; while the dead hour of the night, the gothic gloom of the 
surround buildings, and the hollow and imperfect echoes, which they 
returned, as ugo and the soldier convers together, assist to 
increas the melancholi forebod of her heart. pass on to the 
second court, a distant sound broke feebli on the silence, and 
gradual swell louder, as they advanced, emili distinguish voic 
of revelri and laughter, but they were to her far other than sound of 
joy. “why, you have got some tuscani wine among you, _here_,” said 
bertrand, “if one may judg by the uproar that is go forward. ugo 
ha taken a larger share of that than of fighting, i’ll be sworn. who 
is carous at thi late hour?” 

“hi _excellenza_ and the signors,” repli the soldier: “it is a sign 
you are a stranger at the castle, or you would not need to ask the 
question. they are brave spirits, that do without sleep—they gener 
pass the night in good cheer; would that we, who keep the watch, had a 
littl of it! It is cold work, pace the rampart so mani hour of the 
night, if one ha no good liquor to warm one’ heart.” 

“courage, my lad, courag ought to warm your heart,” said ugo. 
“courage!” repli the soldier sharply, with a menac air, which ugo 
perceiving, prevent hi say more, by return to the subject of 
the carousal. “thi is a new custom,” said he; “when I left the castle, 
the signor use to sit up counselling.” 

“aye, and for that matter, carous too,” repli the soldier, “but, 
sinc the siege, they have done noth but make merry: and if I wa 
they, I would settl account with myself, for all my hard fighting, 
the same way.” 

they had now cross the second court, and reach the hall door, when 
the soldier, bid them good night, hasten back to hi post; and, 
while they wait for admittance, emili consid how she might avoid 
see montoni, and retir unnot to her former apartment, for she 
shrunk from the thought of encount either him, or ani of hi 
party, at thi hour. the uproar within the castl wa now so loud, 
that, though ugo knock repeatedli at the hall door, he wa not heard 
by ani of the servants, a circumstance, which increas emily’ alarm, 
while it allow her time to deliber on the mean of retir 
unobserved; for, though she might, perhaps, pass up the great staircas 
unseen, it wa imposs she could find the way to her chamber, 
without a light, the difficulti of procur which, and the danger of 
wander about the castle, without one, immedi struck her. 
bertrand had onli a torch, and she knew, that the servant never 
brought a taper to the door, for the hall wa suffici light by 
the larg tripod lamp, which hung in the vault roof; and, while she 
should wait till annett could bring a taper, montoni, or some of hi 
companions, might discov her. 

the door wa now open by carlo; and emily, have request him to 
send annett immedi with a light to the great gallery, where she 
determin to await her, pass on with hasti step toward the 
staircase; while bertrand and ugo, with the torch, follow old carlo 
to the servants’ hall, impati for supper and the warm blaze of a 
wood fire. emily, light onli by the feebl rays, which the lamp abov 
threw between the arch of thi extens hall, endeavour to find 
her way to the staircase, now hid in obscurity; while the shout of 
merriment, that burst from a remot apartment, served, by heighten 
her terror, to increas her perplexity, and she expected, everi 
instant, to see the door of that room open, and montoni and hi 
companion issu forth. having, at length, reach the staircase, and 
found her way to the top, she seat herself on the last stair, to 
await the arriv of annette; for the profound dark of the galleri 
deter her from proceed farther, and, while she listen for her 
footstep, she heard onli distant sound of revelry, which rose in 
sullen echo from among the arcad below. onc she thought she heard 
a low sound from the dark galleri behind her; and, turn her eyes, 
fanci she saw someth lumin move in it; and, sinc she could 
not, at thi moment, subdu the weak that caus her fears, she 
quit her seat, and crept softli down a few stair lower. 

annett not yet appearing, emili now concluded, that she wa gone to 
bed, and that nobodi chose to call her up; and the prospect, that 
present itself, of pass the night in darkness, in thi place, or 
in some other equal forlorn (for she knew it would be impractic 
to find her way through the intricaci of the galleri to her 
chamber), drew tear of mingl terror and despond from her eyes. 

while thu she sat, she fanci she heard again an odd sound from the 
gallery, and she listened, scarc dare to breathe, but the 
increas voic below overcam everi other sound. soon after, she 
heard montoni and hi companion burst into the hall, who spoke, as if 
they were much intoxicated, and seem to be advanc toward the 
staircase. she now remembered, that they must come thi way to their 
chambers, and, forget all the terror of the gallery, hurri 
toward it with an intent of secret herself in some of the 
passages, that open beyond, and of endeavouring, when the signor 
were retired, to find her way to her own room, or to that of annette, 
which wa in a remot part of the castle. 

with extend arms, she crept along the gallery, still hear the 
voic of person below, who seem to stop in convers at the foot 
of the staircase, and then paus for a moment to listen, half fear 
of go further into the dark of the gallery, where she still 
imagined, from the nois she had heard, that some person wa lurking, 
“they are alreadi inform of my arrival,” said she, “and montoni is 
come himself to seek me! In the present state of hi mind, hi 
purpos must be desperate.” then, recollect the scene, that had 
pass in the corridor, on the night preced her departur from the 
castle, “O valancourt!” said she, “I must then resign you for ever. To 
brave ani longer the injustic of montoni, would not be fortitude, but 
rashness.” still the voic below did not draw nearer, but they becam 
louder, and she distinguish those of verezzi and bertolini abov the 
rest, while the few word she caught made her listen more anxious for 
others. the convers seem to concern herself; and, have 
ventur to step a few pace nearer to the staircase, she discovered, 
that they were disput about her, each seem to claim some former 
promis of montoni, who appeared, at first, inclin to appeas and to 
persuad them to return to their wine, but afterward to be weari of 
the dispute, and, say that he left them to settl it as they could, 
wa return with the rest of the parti to the apart he had just 
quitted. verezzi then stop him. “where is she? signor,” said he, in 
a voic of impatience: “tell us where she is.” “I have alreadi told you 
that I do not know,” repli montoni, who seem to be somewhat 
overcom with wine; “but she is most probabl gone to her apartment.” 
verezzi and bertolini now desist from their enquiries, and sprang to 
the staircas together, while emily, who, dure thi discourse, had 
trembl so excessively, that she had with difficulti support 
herself, seem inspir with new strength, the moment she heard the 
sound of their steps, and ran along the gallery, dark as it was, with 
the fleet of a fawn. but, long befor she reach it extremity, 
the light, which verezzi carried, flash upon the walls; both 
appeared, and, instantli perceiv emily, pursu her. At thi moment, 
bertolini, whose steps, though swift, were not steady, and whose 
impati overcam what littl caution he had hitherto used, stumbled, 
and fell at hi length. the lamp fell with him, and wa present 
expir on the floor; but verezzi, regardless of save it, seiz the 
advantag thi accid gave him over hi rival, and follow emily, to 
whom, however, the light had shown one of the passag that branch 
from the gallery, and she instantli turn into it. verezzi could just 
discern the way she had taken, and thi he pursued; but the sound of 
her step soon sunk in distance, while he, less acquaint with the 
passage, wa oblig to proceed through the dark, with caution, lest he 
should fall down a flight of steps, such as in thi extens old 
castl frequent termin an avenue. thi passag at length brought 
emili to the corridor, into which her own chamber opened, and, not 
hear ani footstep, she paus to take breath, and consid what wa 
the safest design to be adopted. she had follow thi passage, mere 
becaus it wa the first that appeared, and now that she had reach 
the end of it, wa as perplex as before. whither to go, or how 
further to find her way in the dark, she knew not; she wa awar onli 
that she must not seek her apartment, for there she would certainli be 
sought, and her danger increas everi instant, while she remain near 
it. her spirit and her breath, however, were so much exhausted, that 
she wa compel to rest, for a few minutes, at the end of the 
passage, and still she heard no step approaching. As thu she stood, 
light glimmer under an opposit door of the gallery, and, from it 
situation, she knew, that it wa the door of that mysteri chamber, 
where she had made a discoveri so shocking, that she never rememb 
it but with the utmost horror. that there should be light in thi 
chamber, and at thi hour, excit her strong surprise, and she felt a 
momentari terror concern it, which did not permit her to look again, 
for her spirit were now in such a state of weakness, that she almost 
expect to see the door slowli open, and some horribl object appear 
at it. still she listen for a step along the passage, and look up 
it, where, not a ray of light appearing, she concluded, that verezzi 
had gone back for the lamp; and, believ that he would shortli be 
there, she again consid which way she should go, or rather which 
way she could find in the dark. 

A faint ray still glimmer under the opposit door, but so great, and, 
perhaps, so just wa her horror of that chamber, that she would not 
again have tempt it secrets, though she had been certain of 
obtain the light so import to her safety. she wa still breath 
with difficulty, and rest at the end of the passage, when she heard 
a rustl sound, and then a low voice, so veri near her, that it 
seem close to her ear; but she had presenc of mind to check her 
emotions, and to remain quit still; in the next moment, she perceiv 
it to be the voic of verezzi, who did not appear to know, that she wa 
there, but to have spoken to himself. “the air is fresher here,” said 
he: “thi should be the corridor.” perhaps, he wa one of those heroes, 
whose courag can defi an enemi better than darkness, and he tri to 
ralli hi spirit with the sound of hi own voice. howev thi might 
be, he turn to the right, and proceeded, with the same steal 
steps, toward emily’ apartment, appar forgetting, that, in 
darkness, she could easili elud hi search, even in her chamber; and, 
like an intox person, he follow pertinaci the one idea, 
that had possess hi imagination. 

the moment she heard hi step steal away, she left her station and 
move softli to the other end of the corridor, determin to trust 
again to chance, and to quit it by the first avenu she could find; 
but, befor she could effect this, light broke upon the wall of the 
gallery, and, look back, she saw verezzi cross it toward her 
chamber. she now glide into a passage, that open on the left, 
without, as she thought, be perceived; but, in the next instant, 
anoth light, glimmer at the further end of thi passage, threw her 
into new terror. while she stop and hesit which way to go, the 
paus allow her to perceive, that it wa annette, who advanced, and 
she hurri to meet her: but her imprud again alarm emily, on 
perceiv whom, she burst into a scream of joy, and it wa some 
minutes, befor she could be prevail with to be silent, or to releas 
her mistress from the ardent clasp, in which she held her. when, at 
length, emili made annett comprehend her danger, they hurri toward 
annette’ room, which wa in a distant part of the castle. No 
apprehensions, however, could yet silenc the latter. “oh dear 
ma’amselle,” said she, as they pass along, “what a terrifi time 
have I had of it! oh! I thought I should have die a hundr times! I 
never thought I should live to see you again! and I never wa so glad 
to see anybodi in my whole life, as I am to see you now.” “hark!” cri 
emily, “we are pursued; that wa the echo of steps!” “no, ma’amselle,” 
said annette, “it wa onli the echo of a door shutting; sound run 
along these vault passag so, that one is continu deceiv by 
it; if one doe but speak, or cough, it make a nois as loud as a 
cannon.” “then there is the greater necess for us to be silent,” 
said emily: “pr’ythe say no more, till we reach your chamber.” here, 
at length, they arrived, without interruption, and, annett have 
fasten the door, emili sat down on her littl bed, to recov breath 
and composure. To her enquiry, whether valancourt wa among the 
prison in the castle, annett replied, that she had not been abl to 
hear, but that she knew there were sever person confined. she then 
proceeded, in her tediou way, to give an account of the siege, or 
rather a detail of her terror and variou sufferings, dure the 
attack. “but,” ad she, “when I heard the shout of victori from the 
ramparts, I thought we were all taken, and gave myself up for lost, 
instead of which, _we_ had driven the enemi away. I went then to the 
north gallery, and saw a great mani of them scamper away among the 
mountains; but the rampart wall were all in ruins, as one may say, and 
there wa a dismal sight to see down among the wood below, where the 
poor fellow were lie in heaps, but were carri off present by 
their comrades. while the sieg wa go on, the signor wa here, and 
there, and everywhere, at the same time, as ludovico told me, for he 
would not let me see anyth hardly, and lock me up, as he ha often 
done before, in a room in the middl of the castle, and use to bring 
me food, and come and talk with me as often as he could; and I must 
say, if it had not been for ludovico, I should have die outright.” 

“well, annette,” said emily, “and how have affair gone on, sinc the 
siege?” 

“o! sad hurly-burli doings, ma’amselle,” repli annette; “the signor 
have done noth but sit and drink and game, ever since. they sit up, 
all night, and play among themselves, for all those rich and fine 
things, they brought in, some time since, when they use to go out 
a-robbing, or as good, for day together; and then they have dread 
quarrel about who loses, and who wins. that fierc signor verezzi is 
alway losing, as they tell me, and signor orsino win from him, and 
thi make him veri wroth, and they have had sever hard set-to’ 
about it. then, all those fine ladi are at the castl still; and I 
declar I am frighted, whenev I meet ani of them in the passages—” 

“surely, annette,” said emili starting, “I heard a noise: listen.” 
after a long pause, “no, ma’amselle,” said annette, “it wa onli the 
wind in the gallery; I often hear it, when it shake the old doors, at 
the other end. but won’t you go to bed, ma’amselle? you sure will not 
sit up starving, all night.” emili now laid herself down on the 
mattress, and desir annett to leav the lamp burn on the hearth; 
have done which, the latter place herself besid emily, who, 
however, wa not suffer to sleep, for she again thought she heard a 
nois from the passage; and annett wa again tri to convinc her, 
that it wa onli the wind, when footstep were distinctli heard near 
the door. annett wa now start from the bed, but emili prevail 
with her to remain there, and listen with her in a state of terribl 
expectation. the step still loiter at the door, when present an 
attempt wa made on the lock, and, in the next instant, a voic called. 
“for heaven’ sake, annette, do not answer,” said emili softly, “remain 
quit still; but I fear we must extinguish the lamp, or it glare will 
betray us.” “holi virgin!” exclaim annette, forget her 
discretion, “I would not be in dark now for the whole world.” while 
she spoke, the voic becam louder than before, and repeat annette’ 
name; “bless virgin!” cri she suddenly, “it is onli ludovico.” she 
rose to open the door, but emili prevent her, till they should be 
more certain, that it wa he alone; with whom annette, at length, 
talk for some time, and learned, that he wa come to enquir after 
herself, whom he had let out of her room to go to emily, and that he 
wa now return to lock her in again. emily, fear of be 
overheard, if they convers ani longer through the door, consent 
that it should be opened, and a young man appeared, whose open 
counten confirm the favour opinion of him, which hi care of 
annett had alreadi prompt her to form. she entreat hi protection, 
should verezzi make thi requisite; and ludovico offer to pass the 
night in an old chamber, adjoining, that open from the gallery, and, 
on the first alarm, to come to their defence. 

emili wa much sooth by thi proposal; and ludovico, have light 
hi lamp, went to hi station, while she, onc more, endeavour to 
repos on her mattress. but a varieti of interest press upon her 
attention, and prevent sleep. she thought much on what annett had 
told her of the dissolut manner of montoni and hi associates, and 
more of hi present conduct toward herself, and of the danger, from 
which she had just escaped. from the view of her present situat she 
shrunk, as from a new pictur of terror. she saw herself in a castle, 
inhabit by vice and violence, seat beyond the reach of law or 
justice, and in the power of a man, whose persever wa equal to 
everi occasion, and in whom passions, of which reveng wa not the 
weakest, entir suppli the place of principles. she wa compelled, 
onc more, to acknowledge, that it would be folly, and not fortitude, 
ani longer to dare hi power; and, resign all hope of futur 
happi with valancourt, she determined, that, on the follow 
morning, she would compromis with montoni, and give up her estates, on 
condition, that he would permit her immedi return to france. such 
consider kept her wake for mani hours; but, the night passed, 
without further alarm from verezzi. 

On the next morning, emili had a long convers with ludovico, in 
which she heard circumst concern the castle, and receiv hint 
of the design of montoni, that consider increas her alarms. On 
express her surprise, that ludovico, who seem to be so sensibl of 
the evil of hi situation, should continu in it, he inform her, 
that it wa not hi intent to do so, and she then ventur to ask 
him, if he would assist her to escap from the castle. ludovico assur 
her of hi readi to attempt this, but strongli repres the 
difficulti of the enterprise, and the certain destruct which must 
ensue, should montoni overtak them, befor they had pass the 
mountains; he, however, promis to be watch of everi circumstance, 
that might contribut to the success of the attempt, and to think upon 
some plan of departure. 

emili now confid to him the name of valancourt, and beg he would 
enquir for such a person among the prison in the castle; for the 
faint hope, which thi convers awakened, made her now reced from 
her resolut of an immedi compromis with montoni. she determined, 
if possible, to delay this, till she heard further from ludovico, and, 
if hi design were found to be impracticable, to resign the estat at 
once. her thought were on thi subject, when montoni, who wa now 
recov from the intox of the preced night, sent for her, 
and she immedi obey the summons. He wa alone. “I find,” said 
he, “that you were not in your chamber, last night; where were you?” 
emili relat to him some circumst of her alarm, and entreat hi 
protect from a repetit of them. “you know the term of my 
protection,” said he; “if you realli valu this, you will secur it.” 
hi open declaration, that he would onli condit protect her, 
while she remain a prison in the castle, show emili the necess 
of an immedi complianc with hi terms; but she first demanded, 
whether he would permit her immedi to depart, if she gave up her 
claim to the contest estates. In a veri solemn manner he then assur 
her, that he would, and immedi laid befor her a paper, which wa 
to transfer the right of those estat to himself. 

she was, for a consider time, unabl to sign it, and her heart wa 
torn with contend interests, for she wa about to resign the 
happi of all her futur years—th hope, which had sustain her in 
so mani hour of adversity. 

after hear from montoni a recapitul of the condit of her 
compliance, and a remonstrance, that hi time wa valuable, she put her 
hand to the paper; when she had done which, she fell back in her chair, 
but soon recovered, and desired, that he would give order for her 
departure, and that he would allow annett to accompani her. montoni 
smiled. “it wa necessari to deceiv you,” said he,—“ther wa no other 
way of make you act reasonably; you shall go, but it must not be at 
present. I must first secur these estat by possession: when that is 
done, you may return to franc if you will.” 

the deliber villany, with which he violat the solemn engag he 
had just enter into, shock emili as much, as the certainty, that 
she had made a fruitless sacrifice, and must still remain hi prisoner. 
she had no word to express what she felt, and knew, that it would have 
been useless, if she had. As she look piteous at montoni, he turn 
away, and at the same time desir she would withdraw to her apartment; 
but, unabl to leav the room, she sat down in a chair near the door, 
and sigh heavily. she had neither word nor tears. 

“whi will you indulg thi childish grief?” said he. “endeavour to 
strengthen your mind, to bear patient what cannot now be avoided; you 
have no real evil to lament; be patient, and you will be sent back to 
france. At present retir to your apartment.” 

“I dare not go, sir,” said she, “where I shall be liabl to the 
intrus of signor verezzi.” “have I not promis to protect you?” 
said montoni. “you have promised, sir,”—repli emily, after some 
hesitation. “and is not my promis sufficient?” ad he sternly. “you 
will recollect your former promise, signor,” said emily, trembling, 
“and may determin for me, whether I ought to reli upon this.” “will 
you provok me to declar to you, that I will not protect you then?” 
said montoni, in a tone of haughti displeasure. “if that will satisfi 
you, I will do it immediately. withdraw to your chamber, befor I 
retract my promise; you have noth to fear there.” emili left the 
room, and move slowli into the hall, where the fear of meet 
verezzi, or bertolini, made her quicken her steps, though she could 
scarc support herself; and soon after she reach onc more her own 
apartment. have look fear round her, to examin if ani person 
wa there, and have search everi part of it, she fasten the door, 
and sat down by one of the casements. here, while she look out for 
some hope to support her faint spirits, which had been so long 
harass and oppressed, that, if she had not now struggl much against 
misfortune, they would have left her, perhaps, for ever, she 
endeavour to believe, that montoni did realli intend to permit her 
return to franc as soon as he had secur her property, and that he 
would, in the mean time, protect her from insult; but her chief hope 
rest with ludovico, who, she doubt not, would be zealou in her 
cause, though he seem almost to despair of success in it. one 
circumstance, however, she had to rejoic in. her prudence, or rather 
her fears, had save her from mention the name of valancourt to 
montoni, which she wa sever time on the point of doing, befor she 
sign the paper, and of stipul for hi release, if he should be 
realli a prison in the castle. had she done this, montoni’ jealou 
fear would now probabl have load valancourt with new severities, 
and have suggest the advantag of hold him a captiv for life. 

thu pass the melancholi day, as she had befor pass mani in thi 
same chamber. when night drew on, she would have withdrawn herself to 
annette’ bed, had not a particular interest inclin her to remain in 
thi chamber, in spite of her fears; for, when the castl should be 
still, and the customari hour arrived, she determin to watch for the 
music, which she had formerli heard. though it sound might not enabl 
her posit to determine, whether valancourt wa there, they would 
perhap strengthen her opinion that he was, and impart the comfort, so 
necessari to her present support. but, on the other hand, if all should 
be silent! she hardli dare to suffer her thought to glanc that way, 
but waited, with impati expectation, the approach hour. 

the night wa stormy; the battlement of the castl appear to rock in 
the wind, and, at intervals, long groan seem to pass on the air, 
such as those, which often deceiv the melancholi mind, in tempests, 
and amidst scene of desolation. emili heard, as formerly, the 
sentinel pass along the terrac to their posts, and, look out from 
her casement, observed, that the watch wa doubled; a precaution, which 
appear necessari enough, when she threw her eye on the walls, and 
saw their shatter condition. the well-known sound of the soldiers’ 
march, and of their distant voices, which pass her in the wind, and 
were lost again, recal to her memori the melancholi sensat she 
had suffered, when she formerli heard the same sounds; and occas 
almost involuntari comparison between her present, and her late 
situation. but thi wa no subject for congratulations, and she wise 
check the cours of her thoughts, while, as the hour wa not yet 
come, in which she had been accustom to hear the music, she close 
the casement, and endeavour to await it in patience. the door of the 
staircas she tri to secure, as usual, with some of the furnitur of 
the room; but thi expedi her fear now repres to her to be 
veri inadequ to the power and persever of verezzi; and she often 
look at a larg and heavi chest, that stood in the chamber, with 
wish that she and annett had strength enough to move it. while she 
blame the long stay of thi girl, who wa still with ludovico and some 
other of the servants, she trim her wood fire, to make the room 
appear less desolate, and sat down besid it with a book, which her 
eye perused, while her thought wander to valancourt, and her own 
misfortunes. As she sat thus, she thought, in a paus of the wind, she 
distinguish music, and went to the casement to listen, but the loud 
swell of the gust overcam everi other sound. when the wind sunk again, 
she heard distinctly, in the deep paus that succeeded, the sweet 
string of a lute; but again the rise tempest bore away the notes, 
and again wa succeed by a solemn pause. emily, trembl with hope 
and fear, open her casement to listen, and to tri whether her own 
voic could be heard by the musician; for to endur ani longer thi 
state of tortur suspens concern valancourt, seem to be utterli 
impossible. there wa a kind of breathless still in the chambers, 
that permit her to distinguish from below the tender note of the 
veri lute she had formerli heard, and with it, a plaintiv voice, made 
sweeter by the low rustl sound, that now began to creep along the 
wood-tops, till it wa lost in the rise wind. their tall head then 
began to wave, while, through a forest of pine, on the left, the wind, 
groan heavily, roll onward over the wood below, bend them 
almost to their roots; and, as the long-resound gale swept away, 
other woods, on the right, seem to answer the “loud lament;” then, 
others, further still, soften it into a murmur, that die into 
silence. emili listened, with mingl awe and expectation, hope and 
fear; and again the melt sweet of the lute wa heard, and the 
same solemn-breath voice. convinc that these came from an 
apart underneath, she lean far out of her window, that she might 
discov whether ani light wa there; but the casement below, as well 
as those above, were sunk so deep in the thick wall of the castle, 
that she could not see them, or even the faint ray, that probabl 
glimmer through their bars. she then ventur to call; but the wind 
bore her voic to the other end of the terrace, and then the music wa 
heard as before, in the paus of the gust. suddenly, she thought she 
heard a nois in her chamber, and she drew herself within the casement; 
but, in a moment after, distinguish annette’ voic at the door, she 
conclud it wa her she had heard before, and she let her in. “move 
softly, annette, to the casement,” said she, “and listen with me; the 
music is returned.” they were silent till, the measur changing, 
annett exclaimed, “holi virgin! I know that song well; it is a french 
song, one of the favourit song of my dear country.” thi wa the 
ballad emili had heard on a former night, though not the one she had 
first listen to from the fishing-hous in gascony. “o! it is a 
frenchman, that sings,” said annette: “it must be monsieur valancourt.” 
“hark! annette, do not speak so loud,” said emily, “we may be 
overheard.” “what! by the chevalier?” said annette. “no,” repli emili 
mournfully, “but by somebody, who may report us to the signor. what 
reason have you to think it is monsieur valancourt, who sings? but 
hark! now the voic swell louder! Do you recollect those tones? I fear 
to trust my own judgment.” “I never happen to hear the chevali 
sing, mademoiselle,” repli annette, who, as emili wa disappoint to 
perceive, had no stronger reason for conclud thi to be valancourt, 
than that the musician must be a frenchman. soon after, she heard the 
song of the fishing-house, and distinguish her own name, which wa 
repeat so distinctly, that annett had heard it also. she trembled, 
sunk into a chair by the window, and annett call aloud, “monsieur 
valancourt! monsieur valancourt!” while emili endeavour to check her, 
but she repeat the call more loudli than before, and the lute and the 
voic suddenli stopped. emili listened, for some time, in a state of 
intoler suspense; but, no answer be returned, “it doe not 
signify, mademoiselle,” said annette; “it is the chevalier, and I will 
speak to him.” “no, annette,” said emily, “I think I will speak myself; 
if it is he, he will know my voice, and speak again.” “who is it,” said 
she, “that sing at thi late hour?” 

A long silenc ensued, and, have repeat the question, she perceiv 
some faint accents, mingl in the blast, that swept by; but the 
sound were so distant, and pass so suddenly, that she could scarc 
hear them, much less distinguish the word they uttered, or recognis 
the voice. after anoth pause, emili call again; and again they 
heard a voice, but as faintli as before; and they perceived, that there 
were other circumstances, besid the strength, and direct of the 
wind, to content with; for the great depth, at which the casement were 
fix in the castl walls, contributed, still more than the distance, 
to prevent articul sound from be understood, though gener 
one were easili heard. emily, however, ventur to believe, from the 
circumst of her voic alon have been answered, that the stranger 
wa valancourt, as well as that he knew her, and she gave herself up to 
speechless joy. annette, however, wa not speechless. she renew her 
calls, but receiv no answer; and emily, fearing, that a further 
attempt, which certainli was, as present, highli dangerous, might 
expos them to the guard of the castle, while it could not perhap 
termin her suspense, insist on annette’ drop the enquiri for 
thi night; though she determin herself to question ludovico, on the 
subject, in the morning, more urgent than she had yet done. she wa 
now enabl to say, that the stranger, whom she had formerli heard, wa 
still in the castle, and to direct ludovico to that part of it, in 
which he wa confined. 

emily, attend by annette, continu at the casement, for some time, 
but all remain still; they heard neither lute nor voic again, and 
emili wa now as much oppress by anxiou joy, as she late wa by a 
sens of her misfortunes. with hasti step she pace the room, now half 
call on valancourt’ name, then suddenli stopping, and now go to 
the casement and listening, where, however, she heard noth but the 
solemn wave of the woods. sometim her impati to speak to 
ludovico prompt her to send annett to call him; but a sens of the 
improprieti of thi at midnight restrain her. annette, meanwhile, as 
impati as her mistress, went as often to the casement to listen, and 
return almost as much disappointed. she, at length, mention signor 
verezzi, and her fear, lest he should enter the chamber by the 
staircase, door. “but the night is now almost past, mademoiselle,” said 
she, recollect herself; “there is the morn light, begin to 
peep over those mountain yonder in the east.” 

emili had forgotten, till thi moment, that such a person exist as 
verezzi, and all the danger that had appear to threaten her; but the 
mention of hi name renew her alarm, and she rememb the old 
chest, that she had wish to place against the door, which she now, 
with annette, attempt to move, but it wa so heavy, that they could 
not lift it from the floor. “what is in thi great old chest, 
mademoiselle,” said annette, “that make it so weighty?” emili have 
replied, “that she found it in the chamber, when she first came to the 
castle, and had never examin it.”—“then I will, ma’amselle,” said 
annette, and she tri to lift the lid; but thi wa held by a lock, 
for which she had no key, and which, indeed, appeared, from it 
peculiar construction, to open with a spring. the morn now glimmer 
through the casements, and the wind had sunk into a calm. emili look 
out upon the duski woods, and on the twilight mountains, just steal 
in the eye, and saw the whole scene, after the storm, lie in profound 
stillness, the wood motionless, and the cloud above, through which 
the dawn trembled, scarc appear to move along the heavens. one 
soldier wa pace the terrac beneath, with measur steps; and two, 
more distant, were sunk asleep on the walls, weari with the night’ 
watch. have inhaled, for a while, the pure spirit of the air, and of 
vegetation, which the late rain had call forth; and have listened, 
onc more, for a note of music, she now close the casement, and 
retir to rest. 



chapter IX 

thu on the chill lapponian’ dreari land, 
for mani a long month lost in snow profound, 
when sol from cancer send the season bland, 
and in their northern cave the storm hath bound; 
from silent mountains, straight, with startl sound, 
torrent are hurl’d, green hill emerge, and lo, 
the tree with foliage, cliff with flower are crown’d; 
pure rill through vale of verdur warbl go; 
and wonder, love, and joy, the peasant’ heart o’erflow. 
beatti 


sever of her succeed day pass in suspense, for ludovico could 
onli learn from the soldiers, that there wa a prison in the 
apartment, describ to him by emily, and that he wa a frenchman, whom 
they had taken in one of their skirmishes, with a parti of hi 
countrymen. dure thi interval, emili escap the persecut of 
bertolini, and verezzi, by confin herself to her apartment; except 
that sometimes, in an evening, she ventur to walk in the adjoin 
corridor. montoni appear to respect hi last promise, though he had 
prophan hi first; for to hi protect onli could she attribut her 
present repose; and in thi she wa now so secure, that she did not 
wish to leav the castle, till she could obtain some certainti 
concern valancourt; for which she waited, indeed, without ani 
sacrific of her own comfort, sinc no circumst had occur to 
make her escap probable. 

On the fourth day, ludovico inform her, that he had hope of be 
admit to the presenc of the prisoner; it be the turn of a 
soldier, with whom he had been for some time familiar, to attend him on 
the follow night. He wa not deceiv in hi hope; for, under 
pretenc of carri in a pitcher of water, he enter the prison, 
though, hi prudenc have prevent him from tell the sentinel the 
real motiv of hi visit, he wa oblig to make hi confer with 
the prison a veri short one. 

emili await the result in her own apartment, ludovico have promis 
to accompani annett to the corridor, in the evening; where, after 
sever hour impati counted, he arrived. emily, have then 
utter the name of valancourt, could articul no more, but hesit 
in trembl expectation. “the chevali would not entrust me with hi 
name, signora,” repli ludovico; “but, when I just mention yours, he 
seem overwhelm with joy, though he wa not so much surpris as I 
expected.” “doe he then rememb me?” she exclaimed. 

“o! it is mons. valancourt,” said annette, and look impati at 
ludovico, who understood her look, and repli to emily: “yes, lady, 
the chevali does, indeed, rememb you, and, I am sure, ha a veri 
great regard for you, and I made bold to say you had for him. He then 
enquir how you came to know he wa in the castle, and whether you 
order me to speak to him. the first question I could not answer, but 
the second I did; and then he went off into hi ecstasi again. I wa 
afraid hi joy would have betray him to the sentinel at the door.” 

“but how doe he look, ludovico?” interrupt emily: “i he not 
melancholi and ill with thi long confinement?”—“why, as to melancholy, 
I saw no symptom of that, lady, while I wa with him, for he seem in 
the finest spirit I ever saw anybodi in, in all my life. hi 
counten wa all joy, and, if one may judg from that, he wa veri 
well; but I did not ask him.” “did he send me no message?” said emily. 
“O yes, signora, and someth besides,” repli ludovico, who search 
hi pockets. “surely, I have not lost it,” ad he. “the chevali 
said, he would have written, madam, if he had had pen and ink, and wa 
go to have sent a veri long message, when the sentinel enter the 
room, but not befor he had give me this.” ludovico then drew forth a 
miniatur from hi bosom, which emili receiv with a trembl hand, 
and perceiv to be a portrait of herself—th veri picture, which her 
mother had lost so strang in the fishing-hous at La vallée. 

tear of mingl joy and tender flow to her eyes, while ludovico 
proceeded—“‘tel your lady,’ said the chevalier, as he gave me the 
picture, ‘that thi ha been my companion, and onli solac in all my 
misfortunes. tell her, that I have worn it next my heart, and that I 
sent it her as the pledg of an affection, which can never die; that I 
would not part with it, but to her, for the wealth of worlds, and that 
I now part with it, onli in the hope of soon receiv it from her 
hands. tell her—’ just then, signora, the sentinel came in, and the 
chevali said no more; but he had befor ask me to contriv an 
interview for him with you; and when I told him, how littl hope I had 
of prevail with the guard to assist me, he said, that wa not, 
perhaps, of so much consequ as I imagined, and bade me contriv to 
bring back your answer, and he would inform me of more than he chose to 
do then. So this, I think, lady, is the whole of what passed.” 

“how, ludovico, shall I reward you for your zeal?” said emily: “but, 
indeed, I do not now possess the means. when can you see the chevali 
again?” “that is uncertain, signora,” repli he. “it depend upon who 
stand guard next: there are not more than one or two among them, from 
whom I would dare to ask admitt to the prison-chamber.” 

“I need not bid you remember, ludovico,” resum emily, “how veri much 
interest I am in your see the chevali soon; and, when you do so, 
tell him, that I have receiv the picture, and, with the sentiment he 
wished. tell him I have suffer much, and still suffer—” she paused. 
“but shall I tell him you will see him, lady?” said ludovico. “most 
certainli I will,” repli emily. “but when, signora, and where?” “that 
must depend upon circumstances,” return emily. “the place, and the 
hour, must be regul by hi opportunities.” 

“a to the place, mademoiselle,” said annette, “there is no other place 
in the castle, besid thi corridor, where _we_ can see him in safety, 
you know; and, as for the hour,—it must be when all the signor are 
asleep, if that ever happens!” “you may mention these circumst to 
the chevalier, ludovico,” said she, check the flippanc of annette, 
“and leav them to hi judgment and opportunity. tell him, my heart is 
unchanged. but, abov all, let him see you again as soon as possible; 
and, ludovico, I think it is needless to tell you I shall veri 
anxious look for you.” have then wish her good night, ludovico 
descend the staircase, and emili retir to rest, but not to sleep, 
for joy now render her as wakeful, as she had ever been from grief. 
montoni and hi castl had all vanish from her mind, like the 
fright vision of a necromancer, and she wandered, onc more, in 
fairi scene of unfad happiness: 

As when, beneath the beam 
Of summer moons, the distant wood among, 
Or by some flood, all silver’d with the gleam, 
the soft embodi fay thro’ airi portal stream. 


A week elapsed, befor ludovico again visit the prison; for the 
sentinels, dure that period, were men, in whom he could not confide, 
and he fear to awaken curiosity, by ask to see their prisoner. In 
thi interval, he commun to emili terrif report of what wa 
pass in the castle; of riots, quarrels, and of carous more 
alarm than either; while from some circumstances, which he 
mentioned, she not onli doubted, whether montoni meant ever to releas 
her, but greatli feared, that he had designs, concern her,—such as 
she had formerli dreaded. her name wa frequent mention in the 
conversations, which bertolini and verezzi held together, and, at those 
times, they were frequent in contention. montoni had lost larg sum 
to verezzi, so that there wa a dread possibl of hi design 
her to be a substitut for the debt; but, as she wa ignorant, that he 
had formerli encourag the hope of bertolini also, concern 
herself, after the latter had done him some signal service, she knew 
not how to account for these content between bertolini and verezzi. 
the caus of them, however, appear to be of littl consequence, for 
she thought she saw destruct approach in mani forms, and her 
entreati to ludovico to contriv an escap and to see the prison 
again, were more urgent than ever. 

At length, he inform her, that he had again visit the chevalier, 
who had direct him to confid in the guard of the prison, from whom 
he had alreadi receiv some instanc of kindness, and who had 
promis to permit hi go into the castl for half an hour, on the 
ensu night, when montoni and hi companion should be engag at 
their carousals. “thi wa kind, to be sure,” ad ludovico: “but 
sebastian know he run no risk in let the chevali out, for, if 
he can get beyond the bar and iron door of the castle, he must be 
cun indeed. but the chevali desir me, signora, to go to you 
immediately, and to beg you would allow him to visit you, thi night, 
if it wa onli for a moment, for that he could no longer live under the 
same roof, without see you; the hour, he said, he could not mention, 
for it must depend on circumst (just as you said, signora); and 
the place he desir you would appoint, as know which wa best for 
your own safety.” 

emili wa now so much agit by the near prospect of meet 
valancourt, that it wa some time, befor she could give ani answer to 
ludovico, or consid of the place of meeting; when she did, she saw 
none, that promis so much security, as the corridor, near her own 
apartment, which she wa check from leaving, by the apprehens of 
meet ani of montoni’ guests, on their way to their rooms; and she 
dismiss the scruples, which delicaci opposed, now that a seriou 
danger wa to be avoid by encount them. It wa settled, 
therefore, that the chevali should meet her in the corridor, at that 
hour of the night, which ludovico, who wa to be upon the watch, should 
judg safest: and emily, as may be imagined, pass thi interv in a 
tumult of hope and joy, anxieti and impatience. never, sinc her 
resid in the castle, had she watched, with so much pleasure, the 
sun set behind the mountains, and twilight shade, and dark veil the 
scene, as on thi evening. she count the note of the great clock, 
and listen to the step of the sentinels, as they chang the watch, 
onli to rejoice, that anoth hour wa gone. “o, valancourt!” said she, 
“after all I have suffered; after our long, long separation, when I 
thought I should never—nev see you more—w are still to meet again! 
O! I have endur grief, and anxiety, and terror, and let me, then, not 
sink beneath thi joy!” these were moments, when it wa imposs for 
her to feel emot of regret, or melancholy, for ani ordinari 
interests;—even the reflection, that she had resign the estates, 
which would have been a provis for herself and valancourt for life, 
threw onli a light and transient shade upon her spirits. the idea of 
valancourt, and that she should see him so soon, alon occupi her 
heart. 

At length the clock struck twelve; she open the door to listen, if 
ani nois wa in the castle, and heard onli distant shout of riot and 
laughter, echo feebli along the gallery. she guessed, that the signor 
and hi guest were at the banquet. “they are now engag for the 
night,” said she; “and valancourt will soon be here.” have softli 
close the door, she pace the room with impati steps, and often 
went to the casement to listen for the lute; but all wa silent, and, 
her agit everi moment increasing, she wa at length unabl to 
support herself, and sat down by the window. annette, whom she 
detained, was, in the meantime, as loquaci as usual; but emili heard 
scarc anyth she said, and have at length risen to the casement, 
she distinguish the chord of the lute, struck with an express 
hand, and then the voice, she had formerli listen to, accompani it. 

now rise love they fann’d, now pleas dole 
they breath’d in tender muse through the heart; 
and now a graver, sacr strain they stole, 
As when seraph hand a hymn impart! 


emili wept in doubt joy and tenderness; and, when the strain ceased, 
she consid it as a signal, that valancourt wa about to leav the 
prison. soon after, she heard step in the corridor;—they were the 
light, quick step of hope; she could scarc support herself, as they 
approached, but open the door of the apartment, she advanc to meet 
valancourt, and, in the next moment, sunk in the arm of a stranger. 
hi voice—hi counten instantli convinc her, and she faint 
away. 

On reviving, she found herself support by the stranger, who wa 
watch over her recovery, with a counten of ineff tender 
and anxiety. she had no spirit for reply, or enquiry; she ask no 
questions, but burst into tears, and disengag herself from hi arms; 
when the express of hi counten chang to surpris and 
disappointment, and he turn to ludovico, for an explanation; annett 
soon gave the information, which ludovico could not. “o, sir!” said 
she, in a voice, interrupt with sobs; “o, sir! you are not the other 
chevalier. We expect monsieur valancourt, but you are not he! O 
ludovico! how could you deceiv us so? my poor ladi will never recov 
it—never!” the stranger, who now appear much agitated, attempt to 
speak, but hi word faltered; and then strike hi hand against hi 
forehead, as if in sudden despair, he walk abruptli to the other end 
of the corridor. 

suddenly, annett dri her tears, and spoke to ludovico. “but, 
perhaps,” said she, “after all, the other chevali is not this: 
perhap the chevali valancourt is still below.” emili rais her 
head. “no,” repli ludovico, “monsieur valancourt never wa below, if 
thi gentleman is not he.” “if you, sir,” said ludovico, address the 
stranger, “would but have had the good to trust me with your name, 
thi mistak had been avoided.” “most true,” repli the stranger, 
speak in broken italian, “but it wa of the utmost consequ to 
me, that my name should be conceal from montoni. madam,” ad he 
then, address emili in french, “will you permit me to apologis for 
the pain I have occas you, and to explain to you alon my name, 
and the circumstance, which ha led me into thi error? I am of 
france;—i am your countryman;—w are met in a foreign land.” emili 
tri to compos her spirits; yet she hesit to grant hi request. 
At length, desiring, that ludovico would wait on the staircase, and 
detain annette, she told the stranger, that her woman understood 
veri littl italian, and beg he would commun what he wish to 
say, in that language.—hav withdrawn to a distant part of the 
corridor, he said, with a long-drawn sigh, “you, madam, are no stranger 
to me, though I am so unhappi as to be unknown to you.—mi name is Du 
pont; I am of france, of gascony, your nativ province, and have long 
admired,—and, whi should I affect to disguis it?—hav long love you.” 
He paused, but, in the next moment, proceeded. “mi family, madam, is 
probabl not unknown to you, for we live within a few mile of La 
vallée, and I have, sometimes, had the happi of meet you, on 
visit in the neighbourhood. I will not offend you by repeat how 
much you interest me; how much I love to wander in the scene you 
frequented; how often I visit your favourit fishing-house, and 
lament the circumstance, which, at that time, forbad me to reveal my 
passion. I will not explain how I surrend to temptation, and becam 
possess of a treasure, which wa to me inestimable; a treasure, which 
I commit to your messenger, a few day ago, with expect veri 
differ from my present ones. I will say noth of these 
circumstances, for I know they will avail me little; let me onli 
supplic from you forgiveness, and the picture, which I so unwarili 
returned. your generos will pardon the theft, and restor the prize. 
My crime ha been my punishment; for the portrait I stole ha 
contribut to nourish a passion, which must still be my torment.” 

emili now interrupt him. “I think, sir, I may leav it to your 
integr to determine, whether, after what ha just appeared, 
concern mons. valancourt, I ought to return the picture. I think you 
will acknowledge, that thi would not be generosity; and you will allow 
me to add, that it would be do myself an injustice. I must consid 
myself honour by your good opinion, but”—and she hesitated,—“th 
mistak of thi even make it unnecessari for me to say more.” 

“it does, madam,—alas! it does!” said the stranger, who, after a long 
pause, proceeded.—“but you will allow me to show my disinterestedness, 
though not my love, and will accept the servic I offer. yet, alas! 
what servic can I offer? I am myself a prisoner, a sufferer, like 
you. but, dear as liberti is to me, I would not seek it through half 
the hazard I would encount to deliv you from thi recess of vice. 
accept the offer servic of a friend; do not refus me the reward of 
having, at least, attempt to deserv your thanks.” 

“you deserv them already, sir,” said emily; “the wish deserv my 
warmest thanks. but you will excus me for remind you of the danger 
you incur by prolong thi interview. It will be a great consol 
to me to remember, whether your friendli attempt to releas me succeed 
or not, that I have a countryman, who would so gener protect 
me.”—monsieur Du pont took her hand, which she but feebli attempt to 
withdraw, and press it respect to hi lips. “allow me to breath 
anoth fervent sigh for your happiness,” said he, “and to applaud 
myself for an affection, which I cannot conquer.” As he said this, 
emili heard a nois from her apartment, and, turn round, saw the 
door from the staircas open, and a man rush into her chamber. “I will 
teach you to conquer it,” cri he, as he advanc into the corridor, 
and drew a stiletto, which he aim at Du pont, who wa unarmed, but 
who, step back, avoid the blow, and then sprung upon verezzi, 
from whom he wrench the stiletto. while they struggl in each 
other’ grasp, emily, follow by annette, ran further into the 
corridor, call on ludovico, who was, however, gone from the 
staircase, and, as she advanced, terrifi and uncertain what to do, a 
distant noise, that seem to aris from the hall, remind her of the 
danger she wa incurring; and, send annett forward in search of 
ludovico, she return to the spot where Du pont and verezzi were still 
struggl for victory. It wa her own caus which wa to be decid 
with that of the former, whose conduct, independ of thi 
circumstance, would, however, have interest her in hi success, even 
had she not dislik and dread verezzi. she threw herself in a chair, 
and supplic them to desist from further violence, till, at length, 
Du pont forc verezzi to the floor, where he lay stun by the 
violenc of hi fall; and she then entreat Du pont to escap from the 
room, befor montoni, or hi party, should appear; but he still refus 
to leav her unprotected; and, while emily, now more terrifi for him, 
than for herself, enforc the entreaty, they heard step ascend the 
privat staircase. 

“O you are lost!” cri she, “these are montoni’ people.” Du pont made 
no reply, but support emily, while, with a steady, though eager, 
countenance, he await their appearance, and, in the next moment, 
ludovico, alone, mount the landing-place. throw a hasti glanc 
round the chamber, “follow me,” said he, “a you valu your lives; we 
have not an instant to lose!” 

emili enquir what had occurred, and whither they were to go? 

“I cannot stay to tell you now, signora,” repli ludovico: “fly! fly!” 

she immedi follow him, accompani by mons. Du pont, down the 
staircase, and along a vault passage, when suddenli she recollect 
annette, and enquir for her. “she await us further on, signora,” 
said ludovico, almost breathless with haste; “the gate were open, a 
moment since, to a parti just come in from the mountains: they will be 
shut, I fear, befor we can reach them! through thi door, signora,” 
ad ludovico, hold down the lamp, “take care, here are two steps.” 

emili followed, trembl still more, than befor she had understood, 
that her escap from the castle, depend upon the present moment; 
while Du pont support her, and endeavoured, as they pass along, to 
cheer her spirits. 

“speak low, signor,” said ludovico, “these passag send echo all 
round the castle.” 

“take care of the light,” cri emily, “you go so fast, that the air 
will extinguish it.” 

ludovico now open anoth door, where they found annette, and the 
parti then descend a short flight of step into a passage, which, 
ludovico said, led round the inner court of the castle, and open into 
the outer one. As they advanced, confus and tumultu sounds, that 
seem to come from the inner court, alarm emily. “nay, signora,” 
said ludovico, “our onli hope is in that tumult; while the signor’ 
peopl are busi about the men, who are just arrived, we may, perhaps, 
pass unnot through the gates. but hush!” he added, as they 
approach the small door, that open into the outer court, “if you 
will remain here a moment, I will go to see whether the gate are open, 
and anybodi is in the way. pray extinguish the light, signor, if you 
hear me talking,” continu ludovico, deliv the lamp to Du pont, 
“and remain quit still.” 

say this, he step out upon the court, and they close the door, 
listen anxious to hi depart steps. No voice, however, wa 
heard in the court, which he wa crossing, though a confus of mani 
voic yet issu from the inner one. “we shall soon be beyond the 
walls,” said Du pont softli to emily, “support yourself a littl 
longer, madam, and all will be well.” 

but soon they heard ludovico speak loud, and the voic also of some 
other person, and Du pont immedi extinguish the lamp. “ah! it is 
too late!” exclaim emily, “what is to becom of us?” they listen 
again, and then perceived, that ludovico wa talk with a sentinel, 
whose voic were heard also by emily’ favourit dog, that had 
follow her from the chamber, and now bark loudly. “thi dog will 
betray us!” said Du pont, “I will hold him.” “I fear he ha alreadi 
betray us!” repli emily. Du pont, however, caught him up, and, 
again listen to what wa go on without, they heard ludovico say, 
“i’ll watch the gate the while.” 

“stay a minute,” repli the sentinel, “and you need not have the 
trouble, for the hors will be sent round to the outer stables, then 
the gate will be shut, and I can leav my post.” “I don’t mind the 
trouble, comrade,” said ludovico, “you will do such anoth good turn 
for me, some time. go—go, and fetch the wine; the rogues, that are just 
come in, will drink it all else.” 

the soldier hesitated, and then call aloud to the peopl in the 
second court, to know whi they did not send out the horses, that the 
gate might be shut; but they were too much engaged, to attend to him, 
even if they had heard hi voice. 

“aye—aye,” said ludovico, “they know better than that; they are share 
it all among them; if you wait till the hors come out, you must wait 
till the wine is drunk. I have had my share already, but, sinc you do 
not care about yours, I see no reason whi I should not have that too.” 

“hold, hold, not so fast,” cri the sentinel, “do watch then, for a 
moment: i’ll be with you presently.” 

“don’t hurri yourself,” said ludovico, coolly, “I have kept guard 
befor now. but you may leav me your trombone,* that, if the castl 
should be attacked, you know, I may be abl to defend the pass, like a 
hero.” 

(*note: A kind of blunderbuss. [a. r.]) 


“there, my good fellow,” return the soldier, “there, take it—it ha 
seen service, though it could do littl in defend the castle. i’ll 
tell you a good story, though, about thi same trombone.” 

“you’ll tell it better when you have had the wine,” said ludovico. 
“there! they are come out from the court already.” 

“i’ll have the wine, though,” said the sentinel, run off. “I won’t 
keep you a minute.” 

“take your time, I am in no haste,” repli ludovico, who wa alreadi 
hurri across the court, when the soldier came back. “whither so 
fast, friend—whith so fast?” said the latter. “what! is thi the way 
you keep watch! I must stand to my post myself, I see.” 

“aye, well,” repli ludovico, “you have save me the troubl of 
follow you further, for I want to tell you, if you have a mind to 
drink the tuscani wine, you must go to sebastian, he is deal it out; 
the other that federico has, is not worth having. but you are not 
like to have any, I see, for they are all come out.” 

“bi st. peter! so they are,” said the soldier, and again ran off, while 
ludovico, onc more at liberty, hasten to the door of the passage, 
where emili wa sink under the anxieti thi long discours had 
occasioned; but, on hi tell them the court wa clear, they follow 
him to the gates, without wait anoth instant, yet not befor he 
had seiz two horses, that had stray from the second court, and were 
pick a scanti meal among the grass, which grew between the pavement 
of the first. 

they passed, without interruption, the dread gates, and took the 
road that led down among the woods, emily, monsieur Du pont and annett 
on foot, and ludovico, who wa mount on one horse, lead the other. 
have reach them, they stopped, while emili and annett were place 
on horseback with their two protectors, when, ludovico lead the way, 
they set off as fast as the broken road, and the feebl light, which a 
rise moon threw among the foliage, would permit. 

emili wa so much astonish by thi sudden departure, that she 
scarc dare to believ herself awake; and she yet much doubt 
whether thi adventur would termin in escape,—a doubt, which had 
too much probabl to justifi it; for, befor they quit the woods, 
they heard shout in the wind, and, on emerg from them, saw light 
move quickli near the castl above. Du pont whip hi horse, and 
with some difficulti compel him to go faster. 

“ah! poor beast,” said ludovico, “he is weari enough;—h ha been out 
all day; but, signor, we must fli for it, now; for yonder are light 
come thi way.” 

have given hi own hors a lash, they now both set off on a full 
gallop; and, when they again look back, the light were so distant as 
scarc to be discerned, and the voic were sunk into silence. the 
travel then abat their pace, and, consult whither they should 
direct their course, it wa determin they should descend into 
tuscany, and endeavour to reach the mediterranean, where they could 
readili embark for france. thither Du pont meant to attend emily, if he 
should learn, that the regiment he had accompani into italy, wa 
return to hi nativ country. 

they were now in the road, which emili had travel with ugo and 
bertrand; but ludovico, who wa the onli one of the party, acquaint 
with the pass of these mountains, said, that, a littl further on, a 
by-road, branch from this, would lead them down into tuscani with 
veri littl difficulty; and that, at a few leagu distance, wa a 
small town, where necessari could be procur for their journey. 

“but, I hope,” ad he, “we shall meet with no straggl parti of 
banditti; some of them are abroad, I know. however, I have got a good 
trombone, which will be of some service, if we should encount ani of 
those brave spirits. you have no arms, signor?” “yes,” repli Du pont, 
“I have the villain’ stilletto, who would have stab me—but let us 
rejoic in our escap from udolpho, nor torment ourselv with look 
out for dangers, that may never arrive.” 

the moon wa now risen high over the woods, that hung upon the side of 
the narrow glen, through which they wandered, and afford them light 
suffici to distinguish their way, and to avoid the loos and broken 
stones, that frequent cross it. they now travel leisurely, and 
in profound silence; for they had scarc yet recov from the 
astonishment, into which thi sudden escap had thrown them.—emily’ 
mind, especially, wa sunk, after the variou emot it had suffered, 
into a kind of muse stillness, which the repos beauti of the 
surround scene and the creep murmur of the night-breez among the 
foliag abov contribut to prolong. she thought of valancourt and of 
france, with hope, and she would have thought of them with joy, had not 
the first event of thi even harass her spirit too much, to 
permit her now to feel so live a sensation. meanwhile, emili wa 
alon the object of Du pont’ melancholi consideration; yet, with the 
despond he suffered, as he muse on hi recent disappointment, wa 
mingl a sweet pleasure, occas by her presence, though they did 
not now exchang a singl word. annett thought of thi wonder 
escape, of the bustl in which montoni and hi peopl must be, now that 
their flight wa discovered; of her nativ country, whither she hope 
she wa returning, and of her marriag with ludovico, to which there no 
longer appear ani impediment, for poverti she did not consid such. 
ludovico, on hi part, congratul himself, on have rescu hi 
annett and signora emili from the danger, that had surround them; on 
hi own liber from people, whose manner he had long detested; on 
the freedom he had given to monsieur Du pont; on hi prospect of 
happi with the object of hi affections, and not a littl on the 
address, with which he had deceiv the sentinel, and conduct the 
whole of thi affair. 

thu various engag in thought, the travel pass on silently, 
for abov an hour, a question onli being, now and then, ask by Du 
pont, concern the road, or a remark utter by annette, respect 
objects, seen imperfectli in the twilight. At length, light were 
perceiv twinkl on the side of a mountain, and ludovico had no 
doubt, that they proceed from the town he had mentioned, while hi 
companions, satisfi by thi assurance, sunk again into silence. 
annett wa the first who interrupt this. “holi peter!” said she, 
“what shall we do for money on our journey? for I know neither I, nor 
my lady, have a singl sequin; the signor took care of that!” 

thi remark produc a seriou enquiry, which end in as seriou an 
embarrassment, for Du pont had been rifl of nearli all hi money, 
when he wa taken prisoner; the remaind he had given to the sentinel, 
who had enabl him occasion to leav hi prison-chamber; and 
ludovico, who had for some time found a difficulty, in procur ani 
part of the wage due to him, had now scarc cash suffici to 
procur necessari refresh at the first town, in which they should 
arrive. 

their poverti wa the more distressing, sinc it would detain them 
among the mountains, where, even in a town, they could scarc 
consid themselv safe from montoni. the travellers, however, had 
onli to proceed and dare the future; and they continu their way 
through lone wild and duski valleys, where the overhang foliag 
now admitted, and then exclud the moonlight; wild so desolate, that 
they appeared, on the first glance, as if no human be had ever trod 
them before. even the road, in which the parti were, did but slightli 
contradict thi error, for the high grass and other luxuri 
vegetation, with which it wa overgrown, told how veri seldom the foot 
of a travel had pass it. 

At length, from a distance, wa heard the faint tinkl of a 
sheep-bell; and, soon after, the bleat of flocks, and the parti then 
knew, that they were near some human habitation, for the light, which 
ludovico had fanci to proceed from a town, had long been conceal by 
interven mountains. cheer by thi hope, they quicken their pace 
along the narrow pass they were winding, and it open upon one of 
those pastor valley of the apennines, which might be paint for a 
scene of arcadia, and whose beauti and simplic are fine contrast 
by the grandeur of the snowtop mountain above. 

the morn light, now glimmer in the horizon, show faintly, at a 
littl distance, upon the brow of a hill, which seem to peep from 
“under the open eye-lid of the morn,” the town they were in search 
of, and which they soon after reached. It wa not without some 
difficulty, that they there found a house, which could afford shelter 
for themselv and their horses; and emili desir they might not rest 
longer than wa necessari for refreshment. her appear excit some 
surprise, for she wa without a hat, have had time onli to throw on 
her veil befor she left the castle, a circumstance, that compel her 
to regret again the want of money, without which it wa imposs to 
procur thi necessari articl of dress. 

ludovico, on examin hi purse, found it even insuffici to suppli 
present refreshment, and Du pont, at length, ventur to inform the 
landlord, whose counten wa simpl and honest, of their exact 
situation, and requested, that he would assist them to pursu their 
journey; a purpose, which he promis to compli with, as far as he wa 
able, when he learn that they were prison escap from montoni, 
whom he had too much reason to hate. but, though he consent to lend 
them fresh hors to carri them to the next town, he wa too poor 
himself to trust them with money, and they were again lament their 
poverty, when ludovico, who had been with hi tire hors to the 
hovel, which serv for a stable, enter the room, half frantic with 
joy, in which hi auditor soon participated. On remov the saddl 
from one of the horses, he had found beneath it a small bag, 
containing, no doubt, the booti of one of the _condottieri_, who had 
return from a plunder excursion, just befor ludovico left the 
castle, and whose hors have stray from the inner court, while hi 
master wa engag in drinking, had brought away the treasure, which 
the ruffian had consid the reward of hi exploit. 

On count over this, Du pont found, that it would be more than 
suffici to carri them all to france, where he now determin to 
accompani emily, whether he should obtain intellig of hi regiment, 
or not; for, though he had as much confid in the integr of 
ludovico, as hi small knowledg of him allowed, he could not endur 
the thought of commit her to hi care for the voyage; nor, perhaps, 
had he resolut enough to deni himself the danger pleasure, which 
he might deriv from her presence. 

He now consult them, concern the sea-port, to which they should 
direct their way, and ludovico, better inform of the geographi of the 
country, said, that leghorn wa the nearest port of consequence, which 
Du pont knew also to be the most like of ani in itali to assist their 
plan, sinc from thenc vessel of all nation were continu 
departing. thither, therefore, it wa determined, that they should 
proceed. 

emily, have purchas a littl straw hat, such as wa worn by the 
peasant girl of tuscany, and some other littl necessari equip 
for the journey, and the travellers, have exchang their tire 
hors for other better abl to carri them, recommenc their joyou 
way, as the sun wa rise over the mountains, and, after travel 
through thi romant country, for sever hours, began to descend into 
the vale of arno. and here emili beheld all the charm of sylvan and 
pastor landscap united, adorn with the eleg villa of the 
florentin nobles, and diversifi with the variou rich of 
cultivation. how vivid the shrub that embow the slopes, with the 
woods, that stretch amphitheatr along the mountains! and, abov 
all, how eleg the outlin of these wave apennines, now soften 
from the wildness, which their interior region exhibited! At a 
distance, in the east, emili discov florence, with it tower 
rise on the brilliant horizon, and it luxuri plain, spread to 
the feet of the apennines, speckl with garden and magnific 
villas, or colour with grove of orang and lemon, with vines, corn, 
and plantat of oliv and mulberry; while, to the west, the vale 
open to the water of the mediterranean, so distant, that they were 
known onli by a bluish line, that appear upon the horizon, and by the 
light marin vapour, which just stain the æther above. 

with a full heart, emili hail the waves, that were to bear her back 
to her nativ country, the remembr of which, however, brought with 
it a pang; for she had there no home to receive, no parent to welcom 
her, but wa going, like a forlorn pilgrim, to weep over the sad spot, 
where he, who _was_ her father, lay interred. nor were her spirit 
cheered, when she consid how long it would probabl be befor she 
should see valancourt, who might be station with hi regiment in a 
distant part of france, and that, when they did meet, it would be onli 
to lament the success villani of montoni; yet, still she would have 
felt inexpress delight at the thought of be onc more in the 
same countri with valancourt, had it even been certain, that she could 
not see him. 

the intens heat, for it wa now noon, oblig the travel to look 
out for a shadi recess, where they might rest, for a few hours, and the 
neighbour thickets, abound with wild grapes, raspberries, and 
figs, promis them grate refreshment. soon after, they turn from 
the road into a grove, whose thick foliag entir exclud the 
sunbeams, and where a spring, gush from the rock, gave cool to 
the air; and, have alight and turn the hors to graze, annett 
and ludovico ran to gather fruit from the surround thickets, of 
which they soon return with an abundance. the travellers, seat 
under the shade of a pine and cypress grove and on turf, enrich with 
such a profus of fragrant flowers, as emili had scarc ever seen, 
even among the pyrenees, took their simpl repast, and viewed, with new 
delight, beneath the dark umbrag of gigant pines, the glow 
landscap stretch to the sea. 

emili and Du pont gradual becam thought and silent; but annett 
wa all joy and loquacity, and ludovico wa gay, without forget the 
respect distance, which wa due to hi companions. the repast be 
over, Du pont recommend emili to endeavour to sleep, dure these 
sultri hours, and, desir the servant would do the same, said he 
would watch the while; but ludovico wish to spare him thi trouble; 
and emili and annette, weari with travelling, tri to repose, while 
he stood guard with hi trombone. 

when emily, refresh by slumber, awoke, she found the sentinel asleep 
on hi post and Du pont awake, but lost in melancholi thought. As the 
sun wa yet too high to allow them to continu their journey, and as it 
wa necessary, that ludovico, after the toil and troubl he had 
suffered, should finish hi sleep, emili took thi opportun of 
enquir by what accid Du pont becam montoni’ prisoner, and he, 
pleas with the interest thi enquiri express and with the excus it 
gave him for talk to her of himself, immedi answer her 
curiosity. 

“I came into italy, madam,” said Du pont, “in the servic of my 
country. In an adventur among the mountain our party, engag with 
the band of montoni, wa routed, and I, with a few of my comrades, wa 
taken prisoner. when they told me, whose captiv I was, the name of 
montoni struck me, for I remembered, that madam cheron, your aunt, had 
marri an italian of that name, and that you had accompani them into 
italy. It wa not, however, till some time after, that I becam 
convinc thi wa the same montoni, or learn that you, madam, wa 
under the same roof with myself. I will not pain you by describ what 
were my emot upon thi discovery, which I owe to a sentinel, whom 
I had so far won to my interest, that he grant me mani indulgences, 
one of which wa veri import to me, and somewhat danger to 
himself; but he persist in refus to convey ani letter, or notic 
of my situat to you, for he justli dread a discoveri and the 
consequ vengeanc of montoni. He howev enabl me to see you more 
than once. you are surprised, madam, and I will explain myself. My 
health and spirit suffer extrem from want of air and exercise, 
and, at length, I gain so far upon the pity, or the avaric of the 
man, that he gave me the mean of walk on the terrace.” 

emili now listened, with veri anxiou attention, to the narr of Du 
pont, who proceeded: 

“in grant thi indulgence, he knew, that he had noth to apprehend 
from a chanc of my escap from a castle, which wa vigilantli 
guarded, and the nearest terrac of which rose over a perpendicular 
rock; he show me also,” continu Du pont, “a door conceal in the 
cedar wainscot of the apart where I wa confined, which he 
instruct me how to open; and which, lead into a passage, form 
within the thick of the wall, that extend far along the castle, 
final open in an obscur corner of the eastern rampart. I have 
sinc been informed, that there are mani passag of the same kind 
conceal within the prodigi wall of that edifice, and which were, 
undoubtedly, contriv for the purpos of facilit escap in time 
of war. through thi avenue, at the dead of night, I often stole to the 
terrace, where I walk with the utmost caution, lest my step should 
betray me to the sentinel on duti in distant parts; for thi end of 
it, be guard by high buildings, wa not watch by soldiers. In 
one of these midnight wanderings, I saw light in a casement that 
overlook the rampart, and which, I observed, wa immedi over my 
prison-chamber. It occur to me, that you might be in that apartment, 
and, with the hope of see you, I place myself opposit to the 
window.” 

emily, rememb the figur that had formerli appear on the 
terrace, and which had occas her so much anxiety, exclaimed, “it 
wa you then, monsieur Du pont, who occas me much foolish terror; 
my spirit were, at that time, so much weaken by long suffering, that 
they took alarm at everi hint.” Du pont, after lamenting, that he had 
occas her ani apprehension, added, “a I rest on the wall, 
opposit to your casement, the consider of your melancholi 
situat and of my own call from me involuntari sound of 
lamentation, which drew you, I fancy, to the casement; I saw there a 
person, whom I believ to be you. O! I will say noth of my emot 
at that moment; I wish to speak, but prudenc restrain me, till the 
distant foot-step of a sentinel compel me suddenli to quit my 
station. 

“it wa some time, befor I had anoth opportun of walking, for I 
could onli leav my prison, when it happen to be the turn of one man 
to guard me; meanwhil I becam convinc from some circumst 
relat by him, that your apart wa over mine, and, when again I 
ventur forth, I return to your casement, where again I saw you, but 
without dare to speak. I wave my hand, and you suddenli disappeared; 
then it was, that I forgot my prudence, and yield to lamentation; 
again you appeared—y spoke—i heard the well-known accent of your 
voice! and, at that moment, my discret would have forsaken me again, 
had I not heard also the approach step of a soldier, when I 
instantli quit the place, though not befor the man had seen me. He 
follow down the terrac and gain so fast upon me, that I wa 
compel to make use of a stratagem, ridicul enough, to save 
myself. I had heard of the superstit of mani of these men, and I 
utter a strang noise, with a hope, that my pursuer would mistak it 
for someth supernatural, and desist from pursuit. luckili for myself 
I succeeded; the man, it seems, wa subject to fits, and the terror he 
suffer threw him into one, by which accid I secur my retreat. A 
sens of the danger I had escaped, and the increas watchfulness, 
which my appear had occas among the sentinels, deter me 
ever after from walk on the terrace; but, in the still of night, 
I frequent beguil myself with an old lute, procur for me by a 
soldier, which I sometim accompani with my voice, and sometimes, I 
will acknowledge, with a hope of make myself heard by you; but it wa 
onli a few even ago, that thi hope wa answered. I then thought I 
heard a voic in the wind, call me; yet, even then I fear to 
reply, lest the sentinel at the prison door should hear me. wa I 
right, madam, in thi conjecture—wa it you who spoke?” 

“yes,” said emily, with an involuntari sigh, “you were right indeed.” 

Du pont, observ the pain emotions, which thi question revived, 
now chang the subject. “in one of my excurs through the passage, 
which I have mentioned, I overheard a singular conversation,” said he. 

“in the passage!” said emily, with surprise. 

“I heard it in the passage,” said Du pont, “but it proceed from an 
apartment, adjoin the wall, within which the passag wound, and the 
shell of the wall wa there so thin, and wa also somewhat decayed, 
that I could distinctli hear everi word, spoken on the other side. It 
happen that montoni and hi companion were assembl in the room, 
and montoni began to relat the extraordinari histori of the lady, hi 
predecessor, in the castle. He did, indeed, mention some veri 
surpris circumstances, and whether they were strictli true, hi 
conscienc must decide; I fear it will determin against him. but you, 
madam, have doubtless heard the report, which he design should 
circulate, on the subject of that lady’ mysteri fate.” 

“I have, sir,” repli emily, “and I perceive, that you doubt it.” 

“I doubt it befor the period I am speak of,” rejoin Du 
pont;—“but some circumstances, mention by montoni, greatli 
contribut to my suspicions. the account I then heard, almost 
convinc me, that he wa a murderer. I trembl for you;—th more so 
that I had heard the guest mention your name in a manner, that 
threaten your repose; and, knowing, that the most impiou men are 
often the most superstitious, I determin to tri whether I could not 
awaken their consciences, and awe them from the commiss of the crime 
I dreaded. I listen close to montoni, and, in the most strike 
passag of hi story, I join my voice, and repeat hi last words, 
in a disguis and hollow tone.” 

“but were you not afraid of be discovered?” said emily. 

“I wa not,” repli Du pont; “for I knew, that, if montoni had been 
acquaint with the secret of thi passage, he would not have confin 
me in the apartment, to which it led. I knew also, from better 
authority, that he wa ignor of it. the party, for some time, 
appear inattent to my voice; but, at length, were so much alarmed, 
that they quit the apartment; and, have heard montoni order hi 
servant to search it, I return to my prison, which wa veri distant 
from thi part of the passage.” “I rememb perfectli to have heard of 
the convers you mention,” said emily; “it spread a gener alarm 
among montoni’ people, and I will own I wa weak enough to partak of 
it.” 

monsieur Du pont and emili thu continu to convers of montoni, and 
then of france, and of the plan of their voyage; when emili told him, 
that it wa her intent to retir to a convent in languedoc, where 
she had been formerli treat with much kindness, and from thenc to 
write to her relat monsieur quesnel, and inform him of her conduct. 
there, she design to wait, till La vallé should again be her own, 
whither she hope her incom would some time permit her to return; for 
Du pont now taught her to expect, that the estate, of which montoni had 
attempt to defraud her, wa not irrecover lost, and he again 
congratul her on her escap from montoni, who, he had not a doubt, 
meant to have detain her for life. the possibl of recov her 
aunt’ estat for valancourt and herself light up a joy in emily’ 
heart, such as she had not known for mani months; but she endeavour 
to conceal thi from monsieur Du pont, lest it should lead him to a 
pain remembr of hi rival. 

they continu to converse, till the sun wa declin in the west, 
when Du pont awok ludovico, and they set forward on their journey. 
gradual descend the lower slope of the valley, they reach the 
arno, and wound along it pastor margin, for mani miles, delight 
with the sceneri around them, and with the remembrances, which it 
classic wave revived. At a distance, they heard the gay song of the 
peasant among the vineyards, and observ the set sun tint the 
wave with yellow lustre, and twilight draw a duski purpl over the 
mountains, which, at length, deepen into night. then the _lucciola_, 
the fire-fli of tuscany, wa seen to flash it sudden spark among the 
foliage, while the _cicala_, with it shrill note, becam more 
clamor than even dure the noon-day heat, love best the hour when 
the english beetle, with less offens sound, 

wind 
hi small but sullen horn, 
As oft he rise ’midst the twilight path, 
against the pilgrim born in heedless hum. 
collin 


the travel cross the arno by moonlight, at a ferry, and, learn 
that pisa wa distant onli a few mile down the river, they wish to 
have proceed thither in a boat, but, as none could be procured, they 
set out on their weari hors for that city. As they approach it, 
the vale expand into a plain, varieg with vineyards, corn, oliv 
and mulberri groves; but it wa late, befor they reach it gates, 
where emili wa surpris to hear the busi sound of footstep and the 
tone of music instruments, as well as to see the live groups, that 
fill the streets, and she almost fanci herself again at venice; but 
here wa no moonlight sea—no gay gondolas, dash the waves,—no 
_palladian_ palaces, to throw enchant over the fanci and lead it 
into the wild of fairi story. the arno roll through the town, but no 
music trembl from balconi over it waters; it gave onli the busi 
voic of sailor on board vessel just arriv from the mediterranean; 
the melancholi heav of the anchor, and the shrill boatswain’ 
whistle;—sounds, which, sinc that period, have there sunk almost into 
silence. they then serv to remind Du pont, that it wa probabl he 
might hear of a vessel, sail soon to franc from thi port, and thu 
be spare the troubl of go to leghorn. As soon as emili had reach 
the inn, he went therefor to the quay, to make hi enquiries; but, 
after all the endeavour of himself and ludovico, they could hear of no 
bark, destin immedi for france, and the travel return to 
their resting-place. here also, Du pont endeavour to learn where hi 
regiment then lay, but could acquir no inform concern it. the 
travel retir earli to rest, after the fatigu of thi day; and, 
on the following, rose early, and, without paus to view the 
celebr antiqu of the place, or the wonder of it hang 
tower, pursu their journey in the cooler hours, through a charm 
country, rich with wine, and corn and oil. the apennines, no longer 
awful, or even grand, here soften into the beauti of sylvan and 
pastor landscape; and emily, as she descend them, look down 
delight on leghorn, and it spaciou bay, fill with vessels, and 
crown with these beauti hills. 

she wa no less surpris and amused, on enter thi town, to find it 
crowd with person in the dress of all nations; a scene, which 
remind her of a venetian masquerade, such as she had wit at the 
time of the carnival; but here wa bustl without gaiety, and nois 
instead of music, while eleg wa to be look for onli in the 
wave outlin of the surround hills. 

monsieur Du pont, immedi on their arrival, went down to the quay, 
where he heard of sever french vessels, and of one, that wa to sail, 
in a few days, for marseilles, from whenc anoth vessel could be 
procured, without difficulty, to take them across the gulf of lyon 
toward narbonne, on the coast not mani leagu from which citi he 
understood the convent wa seated, to which emili wish to retire. he, 
therefore, immedi engag with the captain to take them to 
marseilles, and emili wa delight to hear, that her passag to franc 
wa secured. her mind wa now reliev from the terror of pursuit, and 
the pleas hope of soon see her nativ country—that countri which 
held valancourt, restor to her spirit a degre of cheerfulness, such 
as she had scarc known, sinc the death of her father. At leghorn 
also, Du pont heard of hi regiment, and that it had embark for 
france; a circumstance, which gave him great satisfaction, for he could 
now accompani emili thither, without reproach to hi conscience, or 
apprehens of displeasur from hi commander. dure these days, he 
scrupul forbor to distress her by a mention of hi passion, and 
she wa compel to esteem and pity, though she could not love him. He 
endeavour to amus her by show the environ of the town, and they 
often walk togeth on the sea-shore, and on the busi quays, where 
emili wa frequent interest by the arriv and departur of 
vessels, particip in the joy of meet friends, and, sometimes, 
shed a sympathet tear to the sorrow of those, that were 
separating. It wa after have wit a scene of the latter kind, 
that she arrang the follow stanzas: 

the marin 

soft came the breath of spring; smooth flow’d the tide; 
and blue the heaven in it mirror smil’d; 
the white sail trembled, swell’d, expand wide, 
the busi sailor at the anchor toil’d. 

with anxiou friends, that shed the part tear, 
the deck wa throng’d—how swift the moment fly! 
the vessel heaves, the farewel sign appear; 
mute is each tongue, and eloqu each eye! 

the last dread moment comes!—th sailor youth 
hide the big drop, then smile amid hi pain, 
sooth hi sad bride, and vow etern truth, 
“farewell, my love—w shall—shal meet again!” 

long on the stern, with wave hand, he stood; 
the crowd shore sinks, lessening, from hi view, 
As gradual glide the bark along the flood; 
hi bride is seen no more—“adieu!—adieu!” 

the breez of eve moan low, her smile is o’er, 
dim steal her twilight down the crimson’d west, 
He climb the top-most mast, to seek onc more 
the far-seen coast, where all hi wish rest. 

He view it dark line on the distant sky, 
and fanci lead him to hi littl home, 
He see hi weep love, he hear her sigh, 
He sooth her griefs, and tell of joy to come. 

eve yield to night, the breez to wintri gales, 
In one vast shade the sea and shore repose; 
He turn hi ach eyes,—hi spirit fails, 
the chill tear falls;—sad to the deck he goes! 

the storm of midnight swells, the sail are furl’d, 
deep sound the lead, but find no friendli shore, 
fast o’er the wave the wretch bark is hurl’d, 
“O ellen, ellen! we must meet no more!” 

lightnings, that show the vast and foami deep, 
the rend thunders, as they onward roll, 
the loud, loud winds, that o’er the billow sweep— 
shake the firm nerve, appal the bravest soul! 

ah! what avail the seamen’ toil care! 
the strain cordag bursts, the mast is riv’n; 
the sound of terror groan along the air, 
then sink afar;—th bark on rock is driv’n! 

fierc o’er the wreck the whelm water pass’d, 
the helpless crew sunk in the roar main! 
henry’ faint accent trembl in the blast— 
“farewell, my love!—w ne’er shall meet again!” 

oft, at the calm and silent even hour, 
when summer-breez linger on the wave, 
A melancholi voic is heard to pour 
it lone sweet o’er poor henry’ grave! 

and oft, at midnight, airi strain are heard 
around the grove, where ellen’ form is laid; 
nor is the dirg by village-maiden fear’d, 
for lovers’ spirit guard the holi shade! 




chapter X 

oh! the joy 
Of young idea paint on the mind 
In the warm glow colour fanci spread 
On object not yet known, when all is new, 
and all is lovely! 
sacr drama 


We now return to languedoc and to the mention of count De villefort, 
the nobleman, who succeed to an estat of the marqui De villeroi 
situat near the monasteri of st. claire. It may be recollected, that 
thi château wa uninhabited, when st. aubert and hi daughter were in 
the neighbourhood, and that the former wa much affect on discov 
himself to be so near château-le-blanc, a place, concern which the 
good old La voisin afterward drop some hints, that had alarm 
emily’ curiosity. 

It wa in the year 1584, the begin of that, in which st. aubert 
died, that franci beauveau, count De villefort, came into possess 
of the mansion and extens domain call château-le-blanc, situat 
in the provinc of languedoc, on the shore of the mediterranean. thi 
estate, which, dure some centuries, had belong to hi family, now 
descend to him, on the deceas of hi relative, the marqui De 
villeroi, who had been latterli a man of reserv manner and auster 
character; circumstances, which, togeth with the duti of hi 
profession, that often call him into the field, had prevent ani 
degre of intimaci with hi cousin, the count De villefort. for mani 
years, they had known littl of each other, and the count receiv the 
first intellig of hi death, which happen in a distant part of 
france, togeth with the instruments, that gave him possess of the 
domain château-le-blanc; but it wa not till the follow year, that 
he determin to visit that estate, when he design to pass the autumn 
there. the scene of château-le-blanc often came to hi remembrance, 
heighten by the touches, which a warm imagin give to the 
recollect of earli pleasures; for, mani year before, in the 
life-tim of the marchioness, and at that age when the mind is 
particularli sensibl to impress of gaieti and delight, he had onc 
visit thi spot, and, though he had pass a long interven period 
amidst the vexat and tumult of public affairs, which too 
frequent corrod the heart, and vitiat the taste, the shade of 
languedoc and the grandeur of it distant sceneri had never been 
rememb by him with indifference. 

dure mani years, the château had been abandon by the late marquis, 
and, be inhabit onli by an old steward and hi wife, had been 
suffer to fall much into decay. To superintend the repairs, that 
would be requisit to make it a comfort residence, had been a 
princip motiv with the count for pass the autumn month in 
languedoc; and neither the remonstrances, nor the tear of the 
countess, for, on urgent occasions, she could weep, were power 
enough to overcom hi determination. she prepared, therefore, to obey 
the command, which she could not conquer, and to resign the gay 
assembl of paris,—wher her beauti wa gener unrival and won 
the applause, to which her wit had but feebl claim—for the twilight 
canopi of woods, the lone grandeur of mountain and the solemn of 
gothic hall and of long, long galleries, which echo onli the 
solitari step of a domestic, or the measur clink, that ascend from 
the great clock—th ancient monitor of the hall below. from these 
melancholi expect she endeavour to reliev her spirit by 
recollect all that she had ever heard, concern the joyou vintag 
of the plain of languedoc; but there, alas! no airi form would bound 
to the gay melodi of parisian dances, and a view of the rustic 
festiv of peasant could afford littl pleasur to a heart, in 
which even the feel of ordinari benevol had long sinc decay 
under the corrupt of luxury. 

the count had a son and a daughter, the children of a former marriage, 
who, he designed, should accompani him to the south of france; henri, 
who wa in hi twentieth year, wa in the french service; and blanche, 
who wa not yet eighteen, had been hitherto confin to the convent, 
where she had been place immedi on her father’ second marriage. 
the present countess, who had neither suffici ability, nor 
inclination, to superintend the educ of her daughter-in-law, had 
advis thi step, and the dread of superior beauti had sinc urg her 
to employ everi art, that might prevail on the count to prolong the 
period of blanche’ seclusion; it was, therefore, with extrem 
mortification, that she now understood he would no longer submit on 
thi subject, yet it afford her some consol to consider, that, 
though the ladi blanch would emerg from her convent, the shade of 
the countri would, for some time, veil her beauti from the public eye. 

On the morning, which commenc the journey, the postillion stop at 
the convent, by the count’ order, to take up blanche, whose heart beat 
with delight, at the prospect of novelti and freedom now befor her. As 
the time of her departur drew nigh, her impati had increased, and 
the last night, dure which she count everi note of everi hour, had 
appear the most tediou of ani she had ever known. the morn light, 
at length, dawned; the matin-bel rang; she heard the nun descend 
from their chambers, and she start from a sleepless pillow to welcom 
the day, which wa to emancip her from the sever of a cloister, 
and introduc her to a world, where pleasur wa ever smiling, and 
good ever blessed—where, in short, noth but pleasur and 
good reigned! when the bell of the great gate rang, and the sound 
wa follow by that of carriag wheels, she ran, with a palpit 
heart, to her lattice, and, perceiv her father’ carriag in the 
court below, danced, with airi steps, along the gallery, where she wa 
met by a nun with a summon from the abbess. In the next moment, she 
wa in the parlour, and in the presenc of the countess who now 
appear to her as an angel, that wa to lead her into happiness. but 
the emot of the countess, on behold her, were not in unison with 
those of blanche, who had never appear so love as at thi moment, 
when her countenance, anim by the lightn smile of joy, glow 
with the beauti of happi innocence. 

after convers for a few minut with the abbess, the countess rose 
to go. thi wa the moment, which blanch had anticip with such 
eager expectation, the summit from which she look down upon the 
fairy-land of happiness, and survey all it enchantment; wa it a 
moment, then, for tear of regret? yet it wa so. she turned, with an 
alter and deject countenance, to her young companions, who were 
come to bid her farewell, and wept! even my ladi abbess, so state and 
so solemn, she salut with a degre of sorrow, which, an hour before, 
she would have believ it imposs to feel, and which may be 
account for by consid how reluctantli we all part, even with 
unpleas objects, when the separ is conscious for ever. again, 
she kiss the poor nun and then follow the countess from that spot 
with tears, which she expect to leav onli with smiles. 

but the presenc of her father and the varieti of objects, on the road, 
soon engag her attention, and dissip the shade, which tender 
regret had thrown upon her spirits. inattent to a conversation, 
which wa pass between the countess and a mademoisel bearn, her 
friend, blanch sat, lost in pleas reverie, as she watch the 
cloud float silent along the blue expanse, now veil the sun 
and stretch their shadow along the distant scene, and then 
disclos all hi brightness. the journey continu to give blanch 
inexpress delight, for new scene of natur were everi instant 
open to her view, and her fanci becam store with gay and beauti 
imagery. 

It wa on the even of the seventh day, that the travel came 
within view of château-le-blanc, the romant beauti of whose situat 
strongli impress the imagin of blanche, who observed, with 
sublim astonishment, the pyrenean mountains, which had been seen onli 
at a distanc dure the day, now rise within a few leagues, with 
their wild cliff and immens precipices, which the even clouds, 
float round them, now disclosed, and again veiled. the set rays, 
that ting their snowi summit with a roseat hue, touch their lower 
point with variou colouring, while the bluish tint, that pervad 
their shadowi recesses, gave the strength of contrast to the splendour 
of light. the plain of languedoc, blush with the purpl vine and 
diversifi with grove of mulberry, almond and olives, spread far to 
the north and the east; to the south, appear the mediterranean, clear 
as crystal, and blue as the heaven it reflected, bear on it bosom 
vessels, whose white sail caught the sunbeams, and gave anim to 
the scene. On a high promontory, wash by the water of the 
mediterranean, stood her father’ mansion, almost seclud from the eye 
by wood of intermingl pine, oak and chesnut, which crown the 
eminence, and slope toward the plains, on one side; while, on the 
other, they extend to a consider distanc along the sea-shores. 

As blanch drew nearer, the gothic featur of thi ancient mansion 
success appeared—first an embattl turret, rise abov the 
trees—then the broken arch of an immens gateway, retir beyond them; 
and she almost fanci herself approach a castle, such as is often 
celebr in earli story, where the knight look out from the 
battlement on some champion below, who, cloth in black armour, 
comes, with hi companions, to rescu the fair ladi of hi love from 
the oppress of hi rival; a sort of legends, to which she had onc 
or twice obtain access in the librari of her convent, that, like mani 
others, belong to the monks, wa store with these reliqu of 
romant fiction. 

the carriag stop at a gate, which led into the domain of the 
château, but which wa now fastened; and the great bell, that had 
formerli serv to announc the arriv of strangers, have long sinc 
fallen from it station, a servant climb over a ruin part of the 
adjoin wall, to give notic to those within of the arriv of their 
lord. 

As blanch lean from the coach window, she resign herself to the 
sweet and gentl emotions, which the hour and the sceneri awakened. the 
sun had now left the earth, and twilight began to darken the mountains; 
while the distant waters, reflect the blush that still glow in the 
west, appear like a line of light, skirt the horizon. the low 
murmur of waves, break on the shore, came in the breeze, and, now 
and then, the melancholi dash of oar wa feebli heard from a 
distance. she wa suffer to indulg her pensiv mood, for the 
thought of the rest of the parti were silent engag upon the 
subject of their sever interests. meanwhile, the countess, 
reflecting, with regret, upon the gay parti she had left at paris, 
surveyed, with disgust, what she thought the gloomi wood and solitari 
wild of the scene; and, shrink from the prospect of be shut 
up in an old castle, wa prepar to meet everi object with 
displeasure. the feel of henri were somewhat similar to those of 
the countess; he gave a mourn sigh to the delight of the capital, 
and to the remembr of a lady, who, he believed, had engag hi 
affections, and who had certainli fascin hi imagination; but the 
surround country, and the mode of life, on which he wa entering, 
had, for him, at least, the charm of novelty, and hi regret wa 
soften by the gay expect of youth. the gate be at length 
unbarred, the carriag move slowli on, under spread chesnuts, that 
almost exclud the remain of day, follow what had been formerli a 
road, but which now, overgrown with luxuri vegetation, could be 
trace onli by the boundary, form by trees, on either side, and which 
wound for near half a mile among the woods, befor it reach the 
château. thi wa the veri avenu that st. aubert and emili had 
formerli entered, on their first arriv in the neighbourhood, with the 
hope of find a house, that would receiv them, for the night, and 
had so abruptli quitted, on perceiv the wild of the place, and a 
figure, which the postillion had fanci wa a robber. 

“what a dismal place is this!” exclaim the countess, as the carriag 
penetr the deeper recess of the woods. “surely, my lord, you do 
not mean to pass all the autumn in thi barbar spot! one ought to 
bring hither a cup of the water of lethe, that the remembr of 
pleasant scene may not heighten, at least, the natur dreari of 
these.” 

“I shall be govern by circumstances, madam,” said the count, “thi 
barbar spot wa inhabit by my ancestors.” 

the carriag now stop at the château, where, at the door of the 
great hall, appear the old steward and the parisian servants, who had 
been sent to prepar the château, wait to receiv their lord. ladi 
blanch now perceived, that the edific wa not built entir in the 
gothic style, but that it had addit of a more modern date; the 
larg and gloomi hall, however, into which she now entered, wa 
entir gothic, and sumptuou tapestry, which it wa now too dark to 
distinguish, hung upon the walls, and depictur scene from some of 
the ancient provenç romances. A vast gothic window, embroid with 
_clematis_ and eglantine, that ascend to the south, led the eye, now 
that the casement were thrown open, through thi verdant shade, over a 
slope lawn, to the top of dark woods, that hung upon the brow of the 
promontory. beyond, appear the water of the mediterranean, 
stretch far to the south, and to the east, where they were lost in 
the horizon; while, to the north-east, they were bound by the 
luxuri shore of languedoc and provence, enrich with wood, and gay 
with vine and slope pastures; and, to the south-west, by the 
majest pyrenees, now fade from the eye, beneath the gradual gloom. 

blanche, as she cross the hall, stop a moment to observ thi 
love prospect, which the even twilight obscured, yet did not 
conceal. but she wa quickli awaken from the complac delight, 
which thi scene had diffus upon her mind, by the countess, who, 
discont with everi object around, and impati for refresh 
and repose, hasten forward to a larg parlour, whose cedar wainscot, 
narrow, point casements, and dark ceil of carv cypress wood, 
gave it an aspect of peculiar gloom, which the dingi green velvet of 
the chair and couches, fring with tarnish gold, had onc been 
design to enliven. 

while the countess enquir for refreshment, the count, attend by hi 
son, went to look over some part of the château, and ladi blanch 
reluctantli remain to wit the discont and ill-humour of her 
step-mother. 

“how long have you live in thi desol place?” said her ladyship, to 
the old housekeeper, who came to pay her duty. 

“abov twenti years, your ladyship, on the next feast of st. jerome.” 

“how happen it, that you have live here so long, and almost alone, 
too? I understood, that the château had been shut up for some years?” 

“yes, madam, it wa for mani year after my late lord, the count, went 
to the wars; but it is abov twenti years, sinc I and my husband came 
into hi service. the place is so large, and ha of late been so 
lonely, that we were lost in it, and, after some time, we went to live 
in a cottag at the end of the woods, near some of the tenants, and 
came to look after the château, everi now and then. when my lord 
return to franc from the wars, he took a dislik to the place, and 
never came to live here again, and so he wa satisfi with our 
remain at the cottage. alas—alas! how the château is chang from 
what it onc was! what delight my late ladi use to take in it! I well 
rememb when she came here a bride, and how fine it was. now, it ha 
been neglect so long, and is gone into such decay! I shall never see 
those day again!” 

the countess appear to be somewhat offend by the thoughtless 
simplicity, with which the old woman regret former times, dorothé 
added—“but the château will now be inhabited, and cheer again; not 
all the world could tempt me to live in it alone.” 

“well, the experi will not be made, I believe,” said the countess, 
displeas that her own silenc had been unabl to awe the loquac of 
thi rustic old housekeeper, now spare from further attend by the 
entranc of the count, who said he had been view part of the 
château, and found, that it would requir consider repair and some 
alterations, befor it would be perfectli comfortable, as a place of 
residence. “I am sorri to hear it, my lord,” repli the countess. “and 
whi sorry, madam?” “becaus the place will ill repay your trouble; and 
were it even a paradise, it would be insuffer at such a distanc 
from paris.” 

the count made no reply, but walk abruptli to a window. “there are 
windows, my lord, but they neither admit entertainment, nor light; they 
show onli a scene of savag nature.” 

“I am at a loss, madam,” said the count, “to conjectur what you mean 
by savag nature. Do those plains, or those woods, or that fine expans 
of water, deserv the name?” 

“those mountain certainli do, my lord,” rejoin the countess, 
point to the pyrenees, “and thi château, though not a work of rude 
nature, is, to my taste, at least, one of savag art.” the count 
colour highly. “thi place, madam, wa the work of my ancestors,” 
said he, “and you must allow me to say, that your present convers 
discov neither good taste, nor good manners.” blanche, now shock 
at an altercation, which appear to be increas to a seriou 
disagreement, rose to leav the room, when her mother’ woman enter 
it; and the countess, immedi desir to be shown to her own 
apartment, withdrew, attend by mademoisel bearn. 

ladi blanche, it be not yet dark, took thi opportun of explor 
new scenes, and, leav the parlour, she pass from the hall into a 
wide gallery, whose wall were decor by marbl pilasters, which 
support an arch roof, compos of a rich mosaic work. through a 
distant window, that seem to termin the gallery, were seen the 
purpl cloud of even and a landscape, whose features, thinli veil 
in twilight, no longer appear distinctly, but, blend into one grand 
mass, stretch to the horizon, colour onli with a tint of solemn 
grey. 

the galleri termin in a saloon, to which the window she had seen 
through an open door, belonged; but the increas dusk permit her 
onli an imperfect view of thi apartment, which seem to be 
magnific and of modern architecture; though it had been either 
suffer to fall into decay, or had never been properli finished. the 
windows, which were numer and large, descend low, and afford a 
veri extensive, and what blanche’ fanci repres to be, a veri 
love prospect; and she stood for some time, survey the grey 
obscur and depictur imaginari wood and mountains, valley and 
rivers, on thi scene of night; her solemn sensat rather assisted, 
than interrupted, by the distant bark of a watch-dog, and by the 
breeze, as it trembl upon the light foliag of the shrubs. now and 
then, appear for a moment, among the woods, a cottag light; and, at 
length, wa heard, afar off, the even bell of a convent, die on 
the air. when she withdrew her thought from these subject of fanci 
delight, the gloom and silenc of the saloon somewhat awe her; and, 
have sought the door of the gallery, and pursued, for a consider 
time, a dark passage, she came to a hall, but one total differ 
from that she had formerli seen. By the twilight, admit through an 
open portico, she could just distinguish thi apart to be of veri 
light and airi architecture, and that it wa pave with white marble, 
pillar of which support the roof, that rose into arch built in the 
moorish style. while blanch stood on the step of thi portico, the 
moon rose over the sea, and gradual disclosed, in partial light, the 
beauti of the eminence, on which she stood, whenc a lawn, now rude 
and overgrown with high grass, slope to the woods, that, almost 
surround the château, extend in a grand sweep down the southern 
side of the promontori to the veri margin of the ocean. beyond the 
woods, on the north-side, appear a long tract of the plain of 
languedoc; and, to the east, the landscap she had befor dimli seen, 
with the tower of a monastery, illumin by the moon, rise over dark 
groves. 

the soft and shadowi tint, that overspread the scene, the waves, 
undul in the moonlight, and their low and measur murmur on the 
beach, were circumstances, that unit to elev the unaccustom mind 
of blanch to enthusiasm. 

“and have I live in thi gloriou world so long,” said she, “and never 
till now beheld such a prospect—nev experienc these delights! everi 
peasant girl, on my father’ domain, ha view from her infanc the 
face of nature; ha ranged, at liberty, her romant wilds, while I 
have been shut in a cloister from the view of these beauti 
appearances, which were design to enchant all eyes, and awaken all 
hearts. how can the poor nun and friar feel the full fervour of 
devotion, if they never see the sun rise, or set? never, till thi 
evening, did I know what true devot is; for, never befor did I see 
the sun sink below the vast earth! tomorrow, for the first time in my 
life, I will see it rise. O, who would live in paris, to look upon 
black wall and dirti streets, when, in the country, they might gaze on 
the blue heavens, and all the green earth!” 

thi enthusiast soliloquy wa interrupt by a rustl nois in the 
hall; and, while the loneli of the place made her sensibl to fear, 
she thought she perceiv someth move between the pillars. for a 
moment, she continu silent observ it, till, asham of her 
ridicul apprehensions, she recollect courag enough to demand who 
wa there. “O my young lady, is it you?” said the old housekeeper, who 
wa come to shut the windows, “I am glad it is you.” the manner, in 
which she spoke this, with a faint breath, rather surpris blanche, 
who said, “you seem frightened, dorothée, what is the matter?” 

“no, not frightened, ma’amselle,” repli dorothée, hesit and 
tri to appear composed, “but I am old, and—a littl matter startl 
me.” the ladi blanch smile at the distinction. “I am glad, that my 
lord the count is come to live at the château, ma’amselle,” continu 
dorothée, “for it ha been mani a year deserted, and dreari enough; 
now, the place will look a littl as it use to do, when my poor ladi 
wa alive.” blanch enquir how long it was, sinc the marchio 
died? “alas! my lady,” repli dorothée, “so long—that I have ceas to 
count the years! the place, to my mind, ha mourn ever since, and I 
am sure my lord’ vassal have! but you have lost yourself, 
ma’amselle,—shal I show you to the other side of the château?” 

blanch enquir how long thi part of the edific had been built. 
“soon after my lord’ marriage, ma’am,” repli dorothée. “the place 
wa larg enough without thi addition, for mani room of the old 
build were even then never made use of, and my lord had a princ 
household too; but he thought the ancient mansion gloomy, and gloomi 
enough it is!” ladi blanch now desir to be shown to the inhabit 
part of the château; and, as the passag were entir dark, dorothé 
conduct her along the edg of the lawn to the opposit side of the 
edifice, where, a door open into the great hall, she wa met by 
mademoisel bearn. “where have you been so long?” said she, “I had 
begun to think some wonder adventur had befallen you, and that the 
giant of thi enchant castle, or the ghost, which, no doubt, haunt 
it, had convey you through a trap-door into some subterranean vault, 
whenc you were never to return.” 

“no,” repli blanche, laughingly, “you seem to love adventur so 
well, that I leav them for you to achieve.” 

“well, I am will to achiev them, provid I am allow to describ 
them.” 

“mi dear mademoisel bearn,” said henri, as he met her at the door of 
the parlour, “no ghost of these day would be so savag as to impos 
silenc on you. our ghost are more civil than to condemn a ladi to 
a purgatori sever even, than their own, be it what it may.” 

mademoisel bearn repli onli by a laugh; and, the count now enter 
the room, supper wa served, dure which he spoke little, frequent 
appear to be abstract from the company, and more than onc 
remarked, that the place wa greatli altered, sinc he had last seen 
it. “mani year have interven sinc that period,” said he; “and, 
though the grand featur of the sceneri admit of no change, they 
impress me with sensat veri differ from those I formerli 
experienced.” 

“did these scenes, sir,” said blanche, “ever appear more lovely, than 
they do now? To me thi seem hardli possible.” the count, regard 
her with a melancholi smile, said, “they onc were as delight to me, 
as they are now to you; the landscap is not changed, but time ha 
chang me; from my mind the illusion, which gave spirit to the 
colour of nature, is fade fast! If you live, my dear blanche, to 
revisit thi spot, at the distanc of mani years, you will, perhaps, 
rememb and understand the feel of your father.” 

ladi blanche, affect by these words, remain silent; she look 
forward to the period, which the count anticipated, and considering, 
that he, who now spoke, would then probabl be no more, her eyes, bent 
to the ground, were file with tears. she gave her hand to her father, 
who, smile affectionately, rose from hi chair, and went to a window 
to conceal hi emotion. 

the fatigu of the day made the parti separ at an earli hour, when 
blanch retir through a long oak galleri to her chamber, whose 
spaciou and lofti walls, high antiqu casements, and, what wa the 
effect of these, it gloomi air, did not reconcil her to it remot 
situation, in thi ancient building. the furniture, also, wa of 
ancient date; the bed wa of blue damask, trim with tarnish gold 
lace, and it lofti tester rose in the form of a canopy, whenc the 
curtain descended, like those of such tent as are sometim 
repres in old pictures, and, indeed, much resembl those, 
exhibit on the fade tapestry, with which the chamber wa hung. To 
blanche, everi object here wa matter of curiosity; and, take the 
light from her woman to examin the tapestry, she perceived, that it 
repres scene from the war of troy, though the almost colourless 
worst now mock the glow action they onc had painted. she 
laugh at the ludicr absurd she observed, till, recollecting, 
that the hands, which had wove it, were, like the poet, whose thought 
of fire they had attempt to express, long sinc moulder into dust, 
a train of melancholi idea pass over her mind, and she almost wept. 

have given her woman a strict injunct to awaken her, befor 
sunrise, she dismiss her; and then, to dissip the gloom, which 
reflect had cast upon her spirits, open one of the high casements, 
and wa again cheer by the face of live nature. the shadowi earth, 
the air, and ocean—al wa still. along the deep seren of the heavens, 
a few light cloud float slowly, through whose skirt the star now 
seem to tremble, and now to emerg with purer splendour. blanche’ 
thought aros involuntarili to the great author of the sublim object 
she contemplated, and she breath a prayer of finer devotion, than ani 
she had ever utter beneath the vault roof of a cloister. At thi 
casement, she remain till the gloom of midnight were stretch over 
the prospect. she then retir to her pillow, and, “with gay vision of 
tomorrow,” to those sweet slumbers, which health and happi innoc 
onli know. 

tomorrow, to fresh wood and pastur new. 




chapter XI 

what transport to retrac our earli plays, 
our easi bliss, when each thing joy suppli 
the woods, the mountain and the warbl maze 
Of the wild brooks! 
thomson 


blanche’ slumber continued, till long after the hour, which she had 
so impati anticipated, for her woman, fatigu with travelling, 
did not call her, till breakfast wa nearli ready. her disappointment, 
however, wa instantli forgotten, when, on open the casement, she 
saw, on one hand, the wide sea sparkl in the morn rays, with it 
steal sail and glanc oars; and, on the other, the fresh woods, 
the plain far-stretch and the blue mountains, all glow with the 
splendour of day. 

As she inspir the pure breeze, health spread a deeper blush upon her 
countenance, and pleasur danc in her eyes. 

“who could first invent convents!” said she, “and who could first 
persuad peopl to go into them? and to make religion a pretence, too, 
where all that should inspir it, is so care shut out! god is best 
pleas with the homag of a grate heart, and, when we view hi 
glories, we feel most grateful. I never felt so much devotion, dure 
the mani dull year I wa in the convent, as I have done in the few 
hours, that I have been here, where I need onli look on all around 
me—to ador god in my inmost heart!” 

say this, she left the window, bound along the gallery, and, in 
the next moment, wa in the breakfast room, where the count wa alreadi 
seated. the cheer of a bright sunshin had dispers the 
melancholi gloom of hi reflections, a pleasant smile wa on hi 
countenance, and he spoke in an enliven voic to blanche, whose 
heart echo back the tones. henri and, soon after, the countess with 
mademoisel bearn appeared, and the whole parti seem to acknowledg 
the influenc of the scene; even the countess wa so much reanim as 
to receiv the civil of her husband with complacency, and but onc 
forgot her good-humour, which wa when she ask whether they had ani 
neighbours, who were like to make _thi barbar spot _ more 
tolerable, and whether the count believ it possibl for her to exist 
here, without some amusement? 

soon after breakfast the parti dispersed; the count, order hi 
steward to attend him in the library, went to survey the condit of 
hi premises, and to visit some of hi tenants; henri hasten with 
alacr to the shore to examin a boat, that wa to bear them on a 
littl voyag in the even and to superintend the adjust of a 
silk awning; while the countess, attend by mademoisel bearn, 
retir to an apart on the modern side of the château, which wa 
fit up with airi elegance; and, as the window open upon 
balconies, that front the sea, she wa there save from a view of the 
_horrid_ pyrenees. here, while she reclin on a sofa, and, cast her 
languid eye over the ocean, which appear beyond the wood-tops, 
indulg in the luxuri of _ennui_, her companion read aloud a 
sentiment novel, on some fashion system of philosophy, for the 
countess wa herself somewhat of a _philosopher_, especi as to 
_infidelity_, and among a certain circl her opinion were wait for 
with impatience, and receiv as doctrines. 

the ladi blanche, meanwhile, hasten to indulge, amidst the wild 
wood-walk around the château, her new enthusiasm, where, as she 
wander under the shades, her gay spirit gradual yield to pensiv 
complacency. now, she move with solemn steps, beneath the gloom of 
thickli interwoven branches, where the fresh dew still hung upon everi 
flower, that peep from among the grass; and now trip sportiv 
along the path, on which the sunbeam dart and the checquer foliag 
trembled—wher the tender green of the beech, the acacia and the 
mountain-ash, mingl with the solemn tint of the cedar, the pine and 
cypress, exhibit as fine a contrast of colouring, as the majest oak 
and orient plane did of form, to the featheri light of the cork 
tree and the wave grace of the poplar. 

have reach a rustic seat, within a deep recess of the woods, she 
rest awhile, and, as her eye caught, through a distant opening, a 
glimps of the blue water of the mediterranean, with the white sail, 
glide on it bosom, or of the broad mountain, glow beneath the 
mid-day sun, her mind experienc somewhat of that exquisit delight, 
which awaken the fancy, and lead to poetry. the hum of bee alon 
broke the still around her, as, with other insect of variou hues, 
they sport gaili in the shade, or sip sweet from the fresh 
flowers: and, while blanch watch a butter-fly, flit from bud to 
bud, she indulg herself in imagin the pleasur of it short day, 
till she had compos the follow stanzas. 

the butter-fli TO hi love 

what boweri dell, with fragrant breath, 
court thee to stay thi airi flight; 
nor seek again the purpl heath, 
So oft the scene of gay delight? 

long i’v watch’d i’ the lily’ bell, 
whose white stole the morning’ beam; 
No flutter sound thi come tell, 
No wave wings, at distance, gleam. 

but fountain fresh, nor breath grove, 
nor sunni mead, nor blossom’d tree, 
So sweet as lily’ cell shall prove,— 
the bower of constant love and me. 

when april bud begin to blow, 
the prim-rose, and the hare-bel blue, 
that on the verdant moss bank grow, 
with violet cups, that weep in dew; 

when wanton gale breath through the shade, 
and shake the blooms, and steal their sweets, 
and swell the song of ev’ri glade, 
I rang the forest’ green retreats: 

there, through the tangl wood-walk play, 
where no rude urchin pace near, 
where spare peep the sultri day, 
and light dew freshen all the air. 

high on a sunbeam oft I sport 
o’er bower and fountain, vale and hill; 
oft ev’ri blush flow’ret court, 
that hang it head o’er wind rill. 

but these i’ll leav to be thi guide, 
and show thee, where the jasmin spread 
her snowi leaf, where may-flow’r hide, 
and rose-bud rear their peep heads. 

with me the mountain’ summit scale, 
and tast the wild-thyme’ honi bloom, 
whose fragrance, float on the gale, 
oft lead me to the cedar’ gloom. 

yet, yet, no sound come in the breeze! 
what shade thu dare to tempt thi stay? 
once, me alon thou wish’d to please, 
and with me onli thou wouldst stray. 

but, while thi long delay I mourn, 
and chide the sweet shade for their guile, 
thou may’st be true, and they forlorn, 
and fairi favour court thi smile. 

the tini queen of fairy-land, 
who know thi speed, hath sent thee far, 
To bring, or ere the night-watch stand, 
rich essenc for her shadowi car: 

perchanc her acorn-cup to fill 
with nectar from the indian rose, 
Or gather, near some haunt rill, 
may-dews, that lull to sleep love’ woes: 

or, o’er the mountains, bade thee fly, 
To tell her fairi love to speed, 
when ev’n steal upon the sky, 
To danc along the twilight mead. 

but now I see thee sail low, 
gay as the brightest flow’r of spring, 
thi coat of blue and jet I know, 
and well thi gold and purpl wing. 

born on the gale, thou com’st to me; 
O! welcome, welcom to my home! 
In lily’ cell we’ll live in glee, 
togeth o’er the mountain roam! 


when ladi blanch return to the château, instead of go to the 
apart of the countess, she amus herself with wander over that 
part of the edifice, which she had not yet examined, of which the most 
ancient first attract her curiosity; for, though what she had seen of 
the modern wa gay and elegant, there wa someth in the former more 
interest to her imagination. have pass up the great staircase, 
and through the oak gallery, she enter upon a long suit of chambers, 
whose wall were either hung with tapestry, or wainscot with cedar, 
the furnitur of which look almost as ancient as the room 
themselves; the spaciou fire-places, where no mark of social cheer 
remained, present an imag of cold desolation; and the whole suit 
had so much the air of neglect and desertion, that it seemed, as if the 
vener persons, whose portrait hung upon the walls, had been the 
last to inhabit them. 

On leav these rooms, she found herself in anoth gallery, one end 
of which wa termin by a back staircase, and the other by a door, 
that seem to commun with the north-sid of the château, but 
which be fastened, she descend the staircase, and, open a door 
in the wall, a few step down, found herself in a small squar room, 
that form part of the west turret of the castle. three window 
present each a separ and beauti prospect; that to the north, 
overlook languedoc; anoth to the west, the hill ascend toward 
the pyrenees, whose aw summit crown the landscape; and a third, 
front the south, gave the mediterranean, and a part of the wild 
shore of rousillon, to the eye. 

have left the turret, and descend the narrow staircase, she found 
herself in a duski passage, where she wandered, unabl to find her way, 
till impati yield to apprehension, and she call for assistance. 
present step approached, and light glimmer through a door at the 
other extrem of the passage, which wa open with caution by some 
person, who did not ventur beyond it, and whom blanch observ in 
silence, till the door wa closing, when she call aloud, and, 
hasten toward it, perceiv the old housekeeper. “dear ma’amselle! 
is it you?” said dorothée, “how could you find your way hither?” had 
blanch been less occupi by her own fears, she would probabl have 
observ the strong express of terror and surpris on dorothée’ 
countenance, who now led her through a long success of passag and 
rooms, that look as if they had been uninhabit for a century, till 
they reach that appropri to the housekeeper, where dorothé 
entreat she would sit down and take refreshment. blanch accept the 
sweet meats, offer to her, mention her discoveri of the pleasant 
turret, and her wish to appropri it to her own use. whether 
dorothée’ tast wa not so sensibl to the beauti of landscap as 
her young lady’s, or that the constant view of love sceneri had 
deaden it, she forbor to prais the subject of blanche’ enthusiasm, 
which, however, her silenc did not repress. To ladi blanche’ enquiri 
of whither the door she had found fasten at the end of the galleri 
led, she replied, that it open to a suit of rooms, which had not 
been entered, dure mani years, “for,” ad she, “mi late ladi die 
in one of them, and I could never find in my heart to go into them 
since.” 

blanche, though she wish to see these chambers, forbore, on observ 
that dorothée’ eye were fill with tears, to ask her to unlock them, 
and, soon after, went to dress for dinner, at which the whole parti met 
in good spirit and good humour, except the countess, whose vacant 
mind, overcom by the languor of idleness, would neither suffer her to 
be happi herself, nor to contribut to the happi of others. 
mademoisel bearn, attempt to be witty, direct her badinag 
against henri, who answered, becaus he could not well avoid it, rather 
than from ani inclin to notic her, whose liveli sometim 
amused, but whose conceit and insens often disgust him. 

the cheerfulness, with which blanch rejoin the party, vanished, on 
her reach the margin of the sea; she gaze with apprehens upon 
the immens expans of waters, which, at a distance, she had beheld 
onli with delight and astonishment, and it wa by a strong effort, that 
she so far overcam her fear as to follow her father into the boat. 

As she silent survey the vast horizon, bend round the distant 
verg of the ocean, an emot of sublimest raptur struggl to 
overcom a sens of person danger. A light breez play on the 
water, and on the silk awn of the boat, and wave the foliag of the 
reced woods, that crown the cliffs, for mani miles, and which the 
count survey with the pride of consciou property, as well as with 
the eye of taste. 

At some distance, among these woods, stood a pavilion, which had onc 
been the scene of social gaiety, and which it situat still made one 
of romant beauty. thither, the count had order coffe and other 
refresh to be carried, and thither the sailor now steer their 
course, follow the wind of the shore round mani a woodi 
promontori and circl bay; while the pensiv tone of horn and other 
wind instruments, play by the attend in a distant boat, echo 
among the rocks, and die along the waves. blanch had now subdu her 
fears; a delight tranquil stole over her mind, and held her in 
silence; and she wa too happi even to rememb the convent, or her 
former sorrows, as subject of comparison with her present felicity. 

the countess felt less unhappi than she had done, sinc the moment of 
her leav paris; for her mind wa now under some degre of restraint; 
she fear to indulg it wayward humours, and even wish to recov 
the count’ good opinion. On hi family, and on the surround scene, 
he look with temper pleasur and benevol satisfaction, while hi 
son exhibit the gay spirit of youth, anticip new delights, and 
regretless of those, that were passed. 

after near an hour’ rowing, the parti landed, and ascend a littl 
path, overgrown with vegetation. At a littl distanc from the point of 
the eminence, within the shadowi recess of the woods, appear the 
pavilion, which blanch perceived, as she caught a glimps of it 
portico between the trees, to be built of varieg marble. As she 
follow the countess, she often turn her eye with raptur toward 
the ocean, seen beneath the dark foliage, far below, and from thenc 
upon the deep woods, whose silenc and impenetr gloom awaken 
emot more solemn, but scarc less delightful. 

the pavilion had been prepared, as far as wa possible, on a veri short 
notice, for the recept of it visitors; but the fade colour of it 
paint wall and ceiling, and the decay draperi of it onc 
magnific furniture, declar how long it had been neglected, and 
abandon to the empir of the chang seasons. while the parti 
partook of a collat of fruit and coffee, the horns, place in a 
distant part of the woods, where an echo sweeten and prolong their 
melancholi tones, broke softli on the still of the scene. thi spot 
seem to attract even the admir of the countess, or, perhaps, it 
wa mere the pleasur of plan furnitur and decorations, that 
made her dwell so long on the necess of repair and adorn it; 
while the count, never happier than when he saw her mind engag by 
natur and simpl objects, acquiesc in all her designs, concern 
the pavilion. the paint on the wall and cove ceil were to be 
renewed, the canopi and sofa were to be of light green damask; 
marbl statu of wood-nymphs, bear on their head basket of live 
flowers, were to adorn the recess between the windows, which, 
descend to the ground, were to admit to everi part of the room, and 
it wa of octagon form, the variou landscape. one window open upon 
a romant glade, where the eye rove among the woodi recesses, and the 
scene wa bound onli by a lengthen pomp of groves; from another, 
the wood reced disclos the distant summit of the pyrenees; a 
third front an avenue, beyond which the grey tower of 
château-le-blanc, and a picturesqu part of it ruin were seen 
partial among the foliage; while a fourth gave, between the trees, a 
glimps of the green pastur and villages, that diversifi the bank of 
the aude. the mediterranean, with the bold cliffs, that overlook it 
shores, were the grand object of a fifth window, and the other gave, 
in differ point of view, the wild sceneri of the woods. 

after wandering, for some time, in these, the parti return to the 
shore and embarked; and, the beauti of the even tempt them to 
extend their excursion, they proceed further up the bay. A dead calm 
had succeed the light breeze, that waft them hither, and the men 
took to their oars. around, the water were spread into one vast 
expans of polish mirror, reflect the grey cliff and featheri 
woods, that over-hung it surface, the glow of the western horizon and 
the dark clouds, that came slowli from the east. blanch love to see 
the dip oar imprint the water, and to watch the spread circl 
they left, which gave a tremul motion to the reflect landscape, 
without destroy the harmoni of it features. 

abov the dark of the woods, her eye now caught a cluster of high 
towers, touch with the splendour of the set rays; and, soon 
after, the horn be then silent, she heard the faint swell of choral 
voic from a distance. 

“what voic are those, upon the air?” said the count, look round, 
and listening; but the strain had ceased. “it seem to be a 
vesper-hymn, which I have often heard in my convent,” said blanche. 

“we are near the monastery, then,” observ the count; and, the boat 
soon after doubl a lofti head-land, the monasteri of st. clair 
appeared, seat near the margin of the sea, where the cliffs, suddenli 
sinking, form a low shore within a small bay, almost encircl with 
woods, among which partial featur of the edific were seen;—th great 
gate and gothic window of the hall, the cloister and the side of a 
chapel more remote; while a vener arch, which had onc led to a 
part of the fabric, now demolished, stood a majest ruin detach from 
the main building, beyond which appear a grand perspect of the 
woods. On the grey walls, the moss had fastened, and, round the point 
window of the chapel, the ivi and the brioni hung in mani a fantast 
wreath. 

all without wa silent and forsaken; but, while blanch gaze with 
admir on thi vener pile, whose effect wa heighten by the 
strong light and shadow thrown athwart it by a cloudi sunset, a sound 
of mani voices, slowli chanting, aros from within. the count bade hi 
men rest on their oars. the monk were sing the hymn of vespers, and 
some femal voic mingl with the strain, which rose by soft degrees, 
till the high organ and the choral sound swell into full and solemn 
harmony. the strain, soon after, drop into sudden silence, and wa 
renew in a low and still more solemn key, till, at length, the holi 
choru die away, and wa heard no more.—blanch sighed, tear trembl 
in her eyes, and her thought seem waft with the sound to heaven. 
while a rapt still prevail in the boat, a train of friars, and 
then of nuns, veil in white, issu from the cloisters, and passed, 
under the shade of the woods, to the main bodi of the edifice. 

the countess wa the first of her parti to awaken from thi paus of 
silence. 

“these dismal hymn and friar make one quit melancholy,” said she; 
“twilight is come on; pray let us return, or it will be dark befor 
we get home.” 

the count, look up, now perceived, that the twilight of even wa 
anticip by an approach storm. In the east a tempest wa 
collecting; a heavi gloom came on, oppos and contrast the glow 
splendour of the set sun. the clamor sea-fowl skim in fleet 
circl upon the surfac of the sea, dip their light pinion in the 
wave, as they fled away in search of shelter. the boatmen pull hard 
at their oars; but the thunder, that now mutter at a distance, and 
the heavi drops, that began to dimpl the water, made the count 
determin to put back to the monasteri for shelter, and the cours of 
the boat wa immedi changed. As the cloud approach the west, 
their lurid dark chang to a deep ruddi glow, which, by 
reflection, seem to fire the top of the wood and the shatter 
tower of the monastery. 

the appear of the heaven alarm the countess and mademoisel 
bearn, whose express of apprehens distress the count, and 
perplex hi men; while blanch continu silent, now agit with 
fear, and now with admiration, as she view the grandeur of the 
clouds, and their effect on the scenery, and listen to the long, long 
peal of thunder, that roll through the air. 

the boat have reach the lawn befor the monastery, the count sent a 
servant to announc hi arrival, and to entreat shelter of the 
superior, who, soon after, appear at the great gate, attend by 
sever monks, while the servant return with a message, express at 
onc of hospit and pride, but of pride disguis in submission. 
the parti immedi disembarked, and, have hastili cross the 
lawn—for the shower wa now heavy—wer receiv at the gate by the 
superior, who, as they entered, stretch forth hi hand and gave hi 
blessing; and they pass into the great hall, where the ladi abbess 
waited, attend by sever nuns, clothed, like herself, in black, and 
veil in white. the veil of the abbess was, however, thrown half back, 
and discov a countenance, whose chast digniti wa sweeten by the 
smile of welcome, with which she address the countess, whom she led, 
with blanch and mademoisel bearn, into the convent parlour, while 
the count and henri were conduct by the superior to the refectory. 

the countess, fatigu and discontented, receiv the polit of the 
abbess with careless haughtiness, and had follow her, with indol 
steps, to the parlour, over which the paint casement and wainscot of 
larch-wood threw, at all times, a melancholi shade, and where the gloom 
of even now lour almost to darkness. 

while the ladi abbess order refreshment, and convers with the 
countess, blanch withdrew to a window, the lower pane of which, be 
without painting, allow her to observ the progress of the storm over 
the mediterranean, whose dark waves, that had so late slept, now came 
boldli swelling, in long succession, to the shore, where they burst in 
white foam, and threw up a high spray over the rocks. A red sulphur 
tint overspread the long line of clouds, that hung abov the western 
horizon, beneath whose dark skirt the sun look out, illumin the 
distant shore of languedoc, as well as the tuft summit of the 
nearer woods, and shed a partial gleam on the western waves. the rest 
of the scene wa in deep gloom, except where a sunbeam, dart between 
the clouds, glanc on the white wing of the sea-fowl, that circl 
high among them, or touch the swell sail of a vessel, which wa 
seen labour in the storm. blanche, for some time, anxious watch 
the progress of the bark, as it threw the wave in foam around it, and, 
as the lightn flashed, look to the open heavens, with mani a 
sigh for the fate of the poor mariners. 

the sun, at length, set, and the heavi clouds, which had long impended, 
drop over the splendour of hi course; the vessel, however, wa yet 
dimli seen, and blanch continu to observ it, till the quick 
success of flashes, light up the gloom of the whole horizon, 
warn her to retir from the window, and she join the abbess, who, 
have exhaust all her topic of convers with the countess, had 
now leisur to notic her. 

but their discours wa interrupt by tremend peal of thunder; and 
the bell of the monasteri soon after ring out, summon the 
inhabit to prayer. As blanch pass the window, she gave anoth 
look to the ocean, where, by the momentari flash, that illumin the 
vast bodi of the waters, she distinguish the vessel she had observ 
before, amidst a sea of foam, break the billows, the mast now bow 
to the waves, and then rise high in air. 

she sigh fervent as she gazed, and then follow the ladi abbess 
and the countess to the chapel. meanwhile, some of the count’ 
servants, have gone by land to the château for carriages, return 
soon after vesper had concluded, when, the storm be somewhat 
abated, the count and hi famili return home. blanch wa surpris 
to discov how much the wind of the shore had deceiv her, 
concern the distanc of the château from the monastery, whose vesper 
bell she had heard, on the preced evening, from the window of the 
west saloon, and whose tower she would also have seen from thence, had 
not twilight veil them. 

On their arriv at the château, the countess, affect more fatigue, 
than she realli felt, withdrew to her apartment, and the count, with 
hi daughter and henri, went to the supper-room, where they had not 
been long, when they heard, in a paus of the gust, a fire of guns, 
which the count understand to be signal of distress from some 
vessel in the storm, went to a window, that open toward the 
mediterranean, to observ further; but the sea wa now involv in 
utter darkness, and the loud howl of the tempest had again overcom 
everi other sound. blanche, rememb the bark, which she had befor 
seen, now join her father, with trembl anxiety. In a few moments, 
the report of gun wa again born along the wind, and as suddenli 
waft away; a tremend burst of thunder followed, and, in the flash, 
that had preced it, and which seem to quiver over the whole surfac 
of the waters, a vessel wa discovered, toss amidst the white foam 
of the wave at some distanc from the shore. impenetr dark 
again involv the scene, but soon a second flash show the bark, with 
one sail unfurled, drive toward the coast. blanch hung upon her 
father’ arm, with look full of the agoni of unit terror and pity, 
which were unnecessari to awaken the heart of the count, who gaze upon 
the sea with a piteou expression, and, perceiving, that no boat could 
live in the storm, forbor to send one; but he gave order to hi 
peopl to carri torch out upon the cliffs, hope they might prove a 
kind of beacon to the vessel, or, at least, warn the crew of the rock 
they were approaching. while henri went out to direct on what part of 
the cliff the light should appear, blanch remain with her father, 
at the window, catching, everi now and then, as the lightn flashed, 
a glimps of the vessel; and she soon saw, with reviv hope, the 
torch flame on the black of night, and, as they wave over the 
cliffs, cast a red gleam on the gasp billows. when the fire of 
gun wa repeated, the torch were toss high in the air, as if 
answer the signal, and the fire wa then redoubled; but, though 
the wind bore the sound away, she fancied, as the lightn glanced, 
that the vessel wa much nearer the shore. 

the count’ servant were now seen, run to and fro, on the rocks; 
some ventur almost to the point of the crags, and bend over, held 
out their torch fasten to long poles; while others, whose step 
could be trace onli by the cours of the lights, descend the steep 
and danger path, that wound to the margin of the sea, and, with loud 
halloos, hail the mariners, whose shrill whistle, and then feebl 
voices, were heard, at intervals, mingl with the storm. sudden 
shout from the peopl on the rock increas the anxieti of blanch to 
an almost intoler degree: but her suspense, concern the fate of 
the mariners, wa soon over, when henri, run breathless into the 
room, told that the vessel wa anchor in the bay below, but in so 
shatter a condition, that it wa fear she would part befor the 
crew could disembark. the count immedi gave order for hi own 
boat to assist in bring them to shore, and that such of these 
unfortun stranger as could not be accommod in the adjac 
hamlet should be entertain at the château. among the latter, were 
emili st. aubert, monsieur Du pont, ludovico and annette, who, have 
embark at leghorn and reach marseilles, were from thenc cross 
the gulf of lyons, when thi storm overtook them. they were receiv by 
the count with hi usual benignity, who, though emili wish to have 
proceed immedi to the monasteri of st. claire, would not allow 
her to leav the château, that night; and, indeed, the terror and 
fatigu she had suffer would scarc have permit her to go 
farther. 

In monsieur Du pont the count discov an old acquaintance, and much 
joy and congratul pass between them, after which emili wa 
introduc by name to the count’ family, whose hospit benevol 
dissip the littl embarrassment, which her situat had occas 
her, and the parti were soon seat at the supper-table. the unaffect 
kind of blanch and the live joy she express on the escap of 
the strangers, for whom her piti had been so much interested, gradual 
reviv emily’ languid spirits; and Du pont, reliev from hi terror 
for her and for himself, felt the full contrast, between hi late 
situat on a dark and tremend ocean, and hi present one, in a 
cheer mansion, where he wa surround with plenty, eleg and 
smile of welcome. 

annette, meanwhile, in the servants’ hall, wa tell of all the 
danger she had encountered, and congratul herself so heartili 
upon her own and ludovico’ escape, and on her present comforts, that 
she often made all that part of the château ring with merriment and 
laughter. ludovico’ spirit were as gay as her own, but he had 
discret enough to restrain them, and tri to check hers, though in 
vain, till her laughter, at length, ascend to _mi lady’s_ chamber, 
who sent to enquir what occas so much uproar in the château, and 
to command silence. 

emili withdrew earli to seek the repos she so much required, but her 
pillow wa long a sleepless one. On thi her return to her nativ 
country, mani interest remembr were awakened; all the event 
and suffer she had experienced, sinc she quit it, came in long 
success to her fancy, and were chase onli by the imag of 
valancourt, with whom to believ herself onc more in the same land, 
after they had been so long, and so distantli separated, gave her 
emot of indescrib joy, but which afterward yield to anxieti 
and apprehension, when she consid the long period, that had 
elapsed, sinc ani letter had pass between them, and how much might 
have happen in thi interv to affect her futur peace. but the 
thought that valancourt might be now no more, or, if living, might have 
forgotten her, wa so veri terribl to her heart, that she would 
scarc suffer herself to paus upon the possibility. she determin 
to inform him, on the follow day, of her arriv in france, which it 
wa scarc possibl he could know but by a letter from herself, and, 
after sooth her spirit with the hope of soon hearing, that he wa 
well, and unchang in hi affections, she, at length, sunk to repose. 



chapter xii 

oft woo’d the gleam of cynthia, silver-bright, 
In cloister dim, far from the haunt of folly, 
with freedom by my side, and soft-ey’d melancholy. 
gray 


the ladi blanch wa so much interest for emily, that, upon hear 
she wa go to resid in the neighbour convent, she request the 
count would invit her to lengthen her stay at the château. “and you 
know, my dear sir,” ad blanche, “how delight I shall be with such 
a companion; for, at present, I have no friend to walk, or to read 
with, sinc mademoisel bearn is my mamma’ friend only.” 

the count smile at the youth simplicity, with which hi daughter 
yield to first impressions; and, though he chose to warn her of their 
danger, he silent applaud the benevolence, that could thu readili 
expand in confid to a stranger. He had observ emily, with 
attention, on the preced evening, and wa as much pleas with her, 
as it wa possibl he could be with ani person, on so short an 
acquaintance. the mention, made of her by mons. Du pont, had also given 
him a favour impress of emily; but, extrem cautiou as to 
those, whom he introduc to the intimaci of hi daughter, he 
determined, on hear that the former wa no stranger at the convent 
of st. claire, to visit the abbess, and, if her account correspond 
with hi wish, to invit emili to pass some time at the château. On 
thi subject, he wa influenc by a consider of the ladi 
blanche’ welfare, still more than by either a wish to oblig her, or 
to befriend the orphan emily, for whom, however, he felt consider 
interested. 

On the follow morning, emili wa too much fatigu to appear; but 
mons. Du pont wa at the breakfast-table, when the count enter the 
room, who press him, as hi former acquaintance, and the son of a 
veri old friend, to prolong hi stay at the château; an invitation, 
which Du pont willingli accepted, sinc it would allow him to be near 
emily; and, though he wa not consciou of encourag a hope, that she 
would ever return hi affection, he had not fortitud enough to 
attempt, at present, to overcom it. 

emily, when she wa somewhat recovered, wander with her new friend 
over the ground belong to the château, as much delight with the 
surround views, as blanche, in the benevol of her heart, had 
wished; from thenc she perceived, beyond the woods, the tower of the 
monastery, and remarked, that it wa to thi convent she design to 
go. 

“ah!” said blanch with surprise, “I am but just releas from a 
convent, and would you go into one? If you could know what pleasur I 
feel in wander here, at liberty,—and in see the sky and the 
fields, and the wood all round me, I think you would not.” emily, 
smile at the warmth, with which the ladi blanch spoke, observed, 
that she did not mean to confin herself to a convent for life. 

“no, you may not intend it now,” said blanche; “but you do not know to 
what the nun may persuad you to consent: I know how kind they will 
appear, and how happy, for I have seen too much of their art.” 

when they return to the château, ladi blanch conduct emili to her 
favourit turret, and from thenc they rambl through the ancient 
chambers, which blanch had visit before. emili wa amus by 
observ the structur of these apartments, and the fashion of their 
old but still magnific furniture, and by compar them with those 
of the castl of udolpho, which were yet more antiqu and grotesque. 
she wa also interest by dorothé the housekeeper, who attend them, 
whose appear wa almost as antiqu as the object around her, and 
who seem no less interest by emily, on whom she frequent gaze 
with so much deep attention, as scarc to hear what wa said to her. 

while emili look from one of the casements, she perceived, with 
surprise, some objects, that were familiar to her memory;—th field 
and woods, with the gleam brook, which she had pass with La 
voisin, one evening, soon after the death of monsieur st. aubert, in 
her way from the monasteri to her cottage; and she now knew thi to be 
the château, which he had then avoided, and concern which he had 
drop some remark hints. 

shock by thi discovery, yet scarc know why, she muse for some 
time in silence, and rememb the emotion, which her father had 
betray on find himself so near thi mansion, and some other 
circumst of hi conduct, that now greatli interest her. the 
music, too, which she had formerli heard, and, respect which La 
voisin had given such an odd account, occur to her, and, desir of 
know more concern it, she ask dorothé whether it return at 
midnight, as usual, and whether the musician had yet been discovered. 

“yes, ma’amselle,” repli dorothée, “that music is still heard, but 
the musician ha never been found out, nor ever will, I believe; though 
there are some people, who can guess.” 

“indeed!” said emily, “then whi do they not pursu the enquiry?” 

“ah, young lady! enquiri enough ha been made—but who can pursu a 
spirit?” 

emili smiled, and, rememb how late she had suffer herself to 
be led away by superstition, determin now to resist it contagion; 
yet, in spite of her efforts, she felt awe mingl with her curiosity, 
on thi subject; and blanche, who had hitherto listen in silence, now 
enquir what thi music was, and how long it had been heard. 

“ever sinc the death of my lady, madam,” repli dorothée. 

“why, the place is not haunted, surely?” said blanche, between jest 
and seriousness. 

“I have heard that music almost ever sinc my dear ladi died,” 
continu dorothée, “and never befor then. but that is noth to some 
thing I could tell of.” 

“do, pray, tell them, then,” said ladi blanche, now more in earnest 
than in jest. “I am much interested, for I have heard sister henriette, 
and sister sophie, in the convent, tell of such strang appearances, 
which they themselv had witnessed!” 

“you never heard, my lady, I suppose, what made us leav the château, 
and go and live in a cottage,” said dorothée. “never!” repli blanch 
with impatience. 

“nor the reason, that my lord, the marquis”—dorothé check herself, 
hesitated, and then endeavour to chang the topic; but the curios 
of blanch wa too much awaken to suffer the subject thu easili to 
escap her, and she press the old housekeep to proceed with her 
account, upon whom, however, no entreati could prevail; and it wa 
evident, that she wa alarm for the imprudence, into which she had 
alreadi betray herself. 

“I perceive,” said emily, smiling, “that all old mansion are haunted; 
I am late come from a place of wonders; but unluckily, sinc I left 
it, I have heard almost all of them explained.” 

blanch wa silent; dorothé look grave, and sighed; and emili felt 
herself still inclin to believ more of the wonderful, than she chose 
to acknowledge. just then, she rememb the spectacl she had 
wit in a chamber of udolpho, and, by an odd kind of coincidence, 
the alarm words, that had accident met her eye in the ms. 
papers, which she had destroyed, in obedi to the command of her 
father; and she shudder at the mean they seem to impart, almost 
as much as at the horribl appearance, disclos by the black veil. 

the ladi blanche, meanwhile, unabl to prevail with dorothé to explain 
the subject of her late hints, had desired, on reach the door, that 
termin the gallery, and which she found fasten on the preced 
day, to see the suit of room beyond. “dear young lady,” said the 
housekeeper, “I have told you my reason for not open them; I have 
never seen them, sinc my dear ladi died; and it would go hard with me 
to see them now. pray, madam, do not ask me again.” 

“certainli I will not,” repli blanche, “if that is realli your 
objection.” 

“alas! it is,” said the old woman: “we all love her well, and I shall 
alway griev for her. time run round! it is now mani years, sinc she 
died; but I rememb everything, that happen then, as if it wa but 
yesterday. mani things, that have pass of late years, are gone quit 
from my memory, while those so long ago, I can see as if in a glass.” 
she paused, but afterwards, as they walk up the gallery, ad to 
emily, “thi young ladi sometim bring the late marchio to my 
mind; I can remember, when she look just as blooming, and veri like 
her, when she smiles. poor lady! how gay she was, when she first came 
to the château!” 

“and wa she not gay, afterwards?” said blanche. 

dorothé shook her head; and emili observ her, with eye strongli 
express of the interest she now felt. “let us sit down in thi 
window,” said the ladi blanche, on reach the opposit end of the 
gallery: “and pray, dorothée, if it is not pain to you, tell us 
someth more about the marchioness. I should like to look into the 
glass you spoke of just now, and see a few of the circumstances, which 
you say often pass over it.” 

“no, my lady,” repli dorothée; “if you knew as much as I do, you 
would not, for you would find there a dismal train of them; I often 
wish I could shut them out, but they will rise to my mind. I see my 
dear ladi on her death-bed,—h veri look,—and rememb all she said—it 
wa a terribl scene!” 

“whi wa it so terrible?” said emili with emotion. 

“ah, dear young lady! is not death alway terrible?” repli dorothée. 

To some further enquiri of blanch dorothé wa silent; and emily, 
observ the tear in her eyes, forbor to urg the subject, and 
endeavour to withdraw the attent of her young friend to some 
object in the gardens, where the count, with the countess and monsieur 
Du pont, appearing, they went down to join them. 

when he perceiv emily, he advanc to meet her, and present her to 
the countess, in a manner so benign, that it recal most power 
to her mind the idea of her late father, and she felt more gratitud to 
him, than embarrass toward the countess, who, however, receiv 
her with one of those fascin smiles, which her capric sometim 
allow her to assume, and which wa now the result of a convers 
the count had held with her, concern emily. whatev thi might be, 
or whatev had pass in hi convers with the ladi abbess, whom 
he had just visited, esteem and kind were strongli appar in hi 
manner, when he address emily, who experienc that sweet emotion, 
which aris from the conscious of possess the approb of 
the good; for to the count’ worth she had been inclin to yield her 
confid almost from the first moment, in which she had seen him. 

befor she could finish her acknowledg for the hospit she had 
received, and mention of her design of go immedi to the 
convent, she wa interrupt by an invit to lengthen her stay at 
the château, which wa press by the count and the countess, with an 
appear of such friendli sincerity, that, though she much wish to 
see her old friend at the monastery, and to sigh, onc more, over her 
father’ grave, she consent to remain a few day at the château. 

To the abbess, however, she immedi wrote, mention her arriv 
in languedoc and her wish to be receiv into the convent, as a 
boarder; she also sent letter to monsieur quesnel and to valancourt, 
whom she mere inform of her arriv in france; and, as she knew not 
where the latter might be stationed, she direct her letter to hi 
brother’ seat in gascony. 

In the evening, ladi blanch and mons. Du pont walk with emili to the 
cottag of La voisin, which she had now a melancholi pleasur in 
approaching, for time had soften her grief for the loss of st. 
aubert, though it could not annihil it, and she felt a sooth 
sad in indulg the recollections, which thi scene recalled. La 
voisin wa still living, and seem to enjoy, as much as formerly, the 
tranquil even of a blameless life. He wa sit at the door of hi 
cottage, watch some of hi grandchildren, play on the grass 
befor him, and, now and then, with a laugh, or a commendation, 
encourag their sports. He immedi recollect emily, whom he wa 
much pleas to see, and she wa as rejoic to hear, that he had not 
lost one of hi family, sinc her departure. 

“yes, ma’amselle,” said the old man, “we all live merrili togeth 
still, thank god! and I believ there is not a happier famili to be 
found in languedoc, than ours.” 

emili did not trust herself in the chamber, where st. aubert died; and, 
after half an hour’ convers with La voisin and hi family, she 
left the cottage. 

dure these the first day of her stay at château-le-blanc, she wa 
often affected, by observ the deep, but silent melancholy, which, at 
times, stole over Du pont; and emily, piti the self-delusion, which 
disarm him of the will to depart, determin to withdraw herself as 
soon as the respect she owe the count and countess De villefort would 
permit. the deject of hi friend soon alarm the anxieti of the 
count, to whom Du pont, at length, confid the secret of hi hopeless 
affection, which, however, the former could onli commiserate, though he 
secretli determin to befriend hi suit, if an opportun of do so 
should ever occur. consid the danger situat of Du pont, he 
but feebli oppos hi intent of leav château-le-blanc, on the 
follow day, but drew from him a promis of a longer visit, when he 
could return with safeti to hi peace. emili herself, though she could 
not encourag hi affection, esteem him both for the mani virtu he 
possessed, and for the servic she had receiv from him; and it wa 
not without tender emot of gratitud and pity, that she now saw him 
depart for hi famili seat in gascony; while he took leav of her with 
a counten so express of love and grief, as to interest the count 
more warmli in hi caus than before. 

In a few days, emili also left the château, but not befor the count 
and countess had receiv her promis to repeat her visit veri soon; 
and she wa welcom by the abbess, with the same matern kind she 
had formerli experienced, and by the nuns, with much express of 
regard. the well-known scene of the convent occas her mani 
melancholi recollections, but with these were mingl others, that 
inspir gratitud for have escap the variou dangers, that had 
pursu her, sinc she quit it, and for the good, which she yet 
possessed; and, though she onc more wept over her father’ grave, with 
tear of tender affection, her grief wa soften from it former 
acuteness. 

some time after her return to the monastery, she receiv a letter from 
her uncle, mons. quesnel, in answer to inform that she had arriv 
in france, and to her enquiries, concern such of her affair as he 
had undertaken to conduct dure her absence, especi as to the 
period for which La vallé had been let, whither it wa her wish to 
return, if it should appear, that her incom would permit her to do so. 
the repli of mons. quesnel wa cold and formal, as she expected, 
express neither concern for the evil she suffered, nor pleasure, 
that she wa now remov from them; nor did he allow the opportun to 
pass, of reprov her for her reject of count morano, whom he 
affect still to believ a man of honour and fortune; nor of 
vehement declaim against montoni, to whom he had always, till now, 
felt himself to be inferior. On emily’ pecuniari concerns, he wa not 
veri explicit; he inform her, however, that the term, for which La 
vallé had been engaged, wa nearli expired; but, without invit her 
to hi own house, added, that her circumst would by no mean allow 
her to resid there, and earnestli advis her to remain, for the 
present, in the convent of st. claire. 

To her enquiri respect poor old theresa, her late father’ 
servant, he gave no answer. In the postscript to hi letter, monsieur 
quesnel mention M. motteville, in whose hand the late st. aubert had 
place the chief of hi person property, as be like to arrang 
hi affair nearli to the satisfact of hi creditors, and that emili 
would recov much more of her fortune, than she had formerli reason to 
expect. the letter also inclos to emili an order upon a merchant at 
narbonne, for a small sum of money. 

the tranquil of the monastery, and the liberti she wa suffer to 
enjoy, in wander among the wood and shore of thi delight 
province, gradual restor her spirit to their natur tone, except 
that anxieti would sometim intrude, concern valancourt, as the 
time approached, when it wa possibl that she might receiv an answer 
to her letter. 



chapter xiii 

As when a wave, that from a cloud impends, 
and, swell’d with tempests, on the ship descends, 
white are the deck with foam; the wind aloud, 
howl o’er the masts, and sing through ev’ri shroud: 
pale, trembling, tir’d, the sailor freez with fears, 
and instant death on ev’ri wave appears. 
pope’ homer 


the ladi blanche, meanwhile, who wa left much alone, becam impati 
for the compani of her new friend, whom she wish to observ share 
in the delight she receiv from the beauti sceneri around. she had 
now no person, to whom she could express her admir and commun 
her pleasures, no eye, that sparkl to her smile, or countenance, that 
reflect her happiness; and she becam spiritless and pensive. the 
count, observ her dissatisfaction, readili yield to her 
entreaties, and remind emili of her promis visit; but the silenc 
of valancourt, which wa now prolong far beyond the period, when a 
letter might have arriv from estuvière, oppress emili with sever 
anxiety, and, render her avers to society, she would willingli have 
defer her accept of thi invitation, till her spirit should be 
relieved. the count and hi family, however, press to see her; and, 
as the circumstances, that prompt her wish for solitude, could not be 
explained, there wa an appear of capric in her refusal, which she 
could not persever in, without offend the friends, whose esteem she 
valued. At length, therefore, she return upon a second visit to 
château-le-blanc. here the friendli manner of count De villefort 
encourag emili to mention to him her situation, respect the 
estat of her late aunt, and to consult him on the mean of recov 
them. He had littl doubt, that the law would decid in her favour, 
and, advis her to appli to it, offer first to write to an advoc 
at avignon, on whose opinion he thought he could rely. hi kind wa 
grate accept by emily, who, sooth by the courtesi she daili 
experienced, would have been onc more happy, could she have been 
assur of valancourt’ welfar and unalt affection. she had now 
been abov a week at the château, without receiv intellig of 
him, and, though she knew, that, if he wa absent from hi brother’ 
residence, it wa scarc probabl her letter had yet reach him, she 
could not forbear to admit doubt and fears, that destroy her peace. 
again she would consid of all, that might have happen in the long 
period, sinc her first seclus at udolpho, and her mind wa 
sometim so overwhelm with an apprehension, that valancourt wa no 
more, or that he live no longer for her, that the compani even of 
blanch becam intoler oppressive, and she would sit alon in her 
apart for hour together, when the engag of the famili 
allow her to do so, without incivility. 

In one of these solitari hours, she unlock a littl box, which 
contain some letter of valancourt, with some draw she had 
sketched, dure her stay in tuscany, the latter of which were no 
longer interest to her; but, in the letters, she now, with 
melancholi indulgence, meant to retrac the tenderness, that had so 
often sooth her, and render her, for a moment, insens of the 
distance, which separ her from the writer. but their effect wa now 
changed; the affect they express appeal so forcibl to her 
heart, when she consid that it had, perhaps, yield to the power 
of time and absence, and even the view of the hand-writ recal so 
mani pain recollections, that she found herself unabl to go through 
the first she had opened, and sat musing, with her cheek rest on her 
arm, and tear steal from her eyes, when old dorothé enter the 
room to inform her, that dinner would be ready, an hour befor the 
usual time. emili start on perceiv her, and hastili put up the 
papers, but not befor dorothé had observ both her agit and her 
tears. 

“ah, ma’amselle!” said she, “you, who are so young,—hav you reason for 
sorrow?” 

emili tri to smile, but wa unabl to speak. 

“alas! dear young lady, when you come to my age, you will not weep at 
trifles; and sure you have noth serious, to griev you.” 

“no, dorothée, noth of ani consequence,” repli emily. dorothée, 
now stoop to pick up something, that had drop from among the 
papers, suddenli exclaimed, “holi mary! what is it I see?” and then, 
trembling, sat down in a chair, that stood by the table. 

“what is it you do see?” said emily, alarm by her manner, and look 
round the room. 

“it is herself,” said dorothée, “her veri self! just as she look a 
littl befor she died!” 

emily, still more alarmed, began now to fear, that dorothé wa seiz 
with sudden frenzy, but entreat her to explain herself. 

“that picture!” said she, “where did you find it, lady? it is my 
bless mistress herself!” 

she laid on the tabl the miniature, which emili had long ago found 
among the paper her father had enjoin her to destroy, and over which 
she had onc seen him shed such tender and affect tears; and, 
recollect all the variou circumst of hi conduct, that had 
long perplex her, her emot increas to an excess, which depriv 
her of all power to ask the question she trembl to have answered, 
and she could onli enquire, whether dorothé wa certain the pictur 
resembl the late marchioness. 

“o, ma’amselle!” said she, “how came it to strike me so, the instant I 
saw it, if it wa not my lady’ likeness? ah!” ad she, take up the 
miniature, “these are her own blue eyes—look so sweet and so mild; 
and there is her veri look, such as I have often seen it, when she had 
sat think for a long while, and then, the tear would often steal 
down her cheeks—but she never would complain! It wa that look so meek, 
as it were, and resigned, that use to break my heart and make me love 
her so!” 

“dorothée!” said emili solemnly, “I am interest in the caus of that 
grief, more so, perhaps, than you may imagine; and I entreat, that you 
will no longer refus to indulg my curiosity;—it is not a common one.” 

As emili said this, she rememb the papers, with which the pictur 
had been found, and had scarc a doubt, that they had concern the 
marchio de villeroi; but with thi supposit came a scruple, 
whether she ought to enquir further on a subject, which might prove to 
be the same, that her father had so care endeavour to conceal. 
her curiosity, concern the marchioness, power as it was, it is 
probabl she would now have resisted, as she had formerli done, on 
unwarili observ the few terribl word in the papers, which had 
never sinc been eras from her memory, had she been certain that the 
histori of that ladi wa the subject of those papers, or, that such 
simpl particular onli as it wa probabl dorothé could relat were 
includ in her father’ command. what wa known to her could be no 
secret to mani other persons; and, sinc it appear veri unlikely, 
that st. aubert should attempt to conceal what emili might learn by 
ordinari means, she at length concluded, that, if the paper had 
relat to the stori of the marchioness, it wa not those circumst 
of it, which dorothé could disclose, that he had thought suffici 
import to wish to have concealed. she, therefore, no longer 
hesit to make the enquiries, that might lead to the gratif 
of her curiosity. 

“ah, ma’amselle!” said dorothée, “it is a sad story, and cannot be told 
now: but what am I saying? I never will tell it. mani year have 
passed, sinc it happened; and I never love to talk of the marchio 
to anybody, but my husband. He live in the family, at that time, as 
well as myself, and he knew mani particular from me, which nobodi els 
did; for I wa about the person of my ladi in her last illness, and saw 
and heard as much, or more than my lord himself. sweet saint! how 
patient she was! when she died, I thought I could have die with her!” 

“dorothée,” said emily, interrupt her, “what you shall tell, you may 
depend upon it, shall never be disclos by me. I have, I repeat it, 
particular reason for wish to be inform on thi subject, and am 
will to bind myself, in the most solemn manner, never to mention 
what you shall wish me to conceal.” 

dorothé seem surpris at the earnest of emily’ manner, and, 
after regard her for some moments, in silence, said, “young lady! 
that look of your plead for you—it is so like my dear mistress’s, 
that I can almost fanci I see her befor me; if you were her daughter, 
you could not remind me of her more. but dinner will be ready—had you 
not better go down?” 

“you will first promis to grant my request,” said emily. 

“and ought not you first to tell me, ma’amselle, how thi pictur fell 
into your hands, and the reason you say you have for curios about 
my lady?” 

“why, no, dorothée,” repli emily, recollect herself, “I have also 
particular reason for observ silence, on these subjects, at least, 
till I know further; and, remember, I do not promis ever to speak upon 
them; therefore, do not let me induc you to satisfi my curiosity, from 
an expectation, that I shall gratifi yours. what I may judg proper to 
conceal, doe not concern myself alone, or I should have less scrupl 
in reveal it: let a confid in my honour alon persuad you to 
disclos what I request.” 

“well, lady!” repli dorothée, after a long pause, dure which her 
eye were fix upon emily, “you seem so much interested,—and thi 
pictur and that face of your make me think you have some reason to be 
so,—that I will trust you—and tell some things, that I never told 
befor to anybody, but my husband, though there are people, who have 
suspect as much. I will tell you the particular of my lady’ death, 
too, and some of my own suspicions; but you must first promis me by 
all the saints—” 

emily, interrupt her, solemnli promis never to reveal what should 
be confid to her, without dorothée’ consent. 

“but there is the horn, ma’amselle, sound for dinner,” said 
dorothée; “I must be gone.” 

“when shall I see you again?” enquir emily. 

dorothé mused, and then replied, “why, madam, it may make peopl 
curious, if it is known I am so much in your apartment, and that I 
should be sorri for; so I will come when I am least like to be 
observed. I have littl leisur in the day, and I shall have a good 
deal to say; so, if you please, ma’am, I will come, when the famili are 
all in bed.” 

“that will suit me veri well,” repli emily: “remember, then, 
tonight—” 

“aye, that is well remembered,” said dorothée, “I fear I cannot come 
tonight, madam, for there will be the danc of the vintage, and it will 
be late, befor the servant go to rest; for, when they onc set in to 
dance, they will keep it up, in the cool of the air, till morning; at 
least, it use to be so in my time.” 

“ah! is it the danc of the vintage?” said emily, with a deep sigh, 
remembering, that it wa on the even of thi festival, in the 
preced year, that st. aubert and herself had arriv in the 
neighbourhood of château-le-blanc. she paus a moment, overcom by the 
sudden recollection, and then, recov herself, added—“but thi 
danc is in the open woods; you, therefore, will not be wanted, and can 
easili come to me.” 

dorothé replied, that she had been accustom to be present at the 
danc of the vintage, and she did not wish to be absent now; “but if I 
can get away, madam, I will,” said she. 

emili then hasten to the dining-room, where the count conduct 
himself with the courtesy, which is insepar from true dignity, and 
of which the countess frequent practis little, though her manner to 
emili wa an except to her usual habit. but, if she retain few of 
the ornament virtues, she cherish other qualities, which she seem 
to consid invaluable. she had dismiss the grace of modesty, but 
then she knew perfectli well how to manag the stare of assurance; her 
manner had littl of the temper sweetness, which is necessari to 
render the femal charact interesting, but she could occasion 
throw into them an affect of spirits, which seem to triumph over 
everi person, who approach her. In the country, however, she 
gener affect an eleg languor, that persuad her almost to 
faint, when her favourit read to her a stori of fictiti sorrow; but 
her counten suffer no change, when live object of distress 
solicit her charity, and her heart beat with no transport to the 
thought of give them instant relief;—sh wa a stranger to the 
highest luxury, of which, perhaps, the human mind can be sensible, for 
her benevol had never yet call smile upon the face of misery. 

In the evening, the count, with all hi family, except the countess and 
mademoisel bearn, went to the wood to wit the festiv of the 
peasants. the scene wa in a glade, where the trees, opening, form a 
circl round the turf they highli overshadowed; between their branches, 
vines, load with ripe clusters, were hung in gay festoons; and, 
beneath, were tables, with fruit, wine, chees and other rural 
fare,—and seat for the count and hi family. At a littl distance, 
were bench for the elder peasants, few of whom, however, could 
forbear to join the jocund dance, which began soon after sunset, when 
sever of sixti trip it with almost as much glee and airi 
lightness, as those of sixteen. 

the musicians, who sat carelessli on the grass, at the foot of a tree, 
seem inspir by the sound of their own instruments, which were 
chiefli flute and a kind of long guitar. behind, stood a boy, 
flourish a tamborine, and danc a solo, except that, as he 
sometim gaili toss the instrument, he trip among the other 
dancers, when hi antic gestur call forth a broader laugh, and 
heighten the rustic spirit of the scene. 

the count wa highli delight with the happi he witnessed, to 
which hi bounti had larg contributed, and the ladi blanch join 
the danc with a young gentleman of her father’ party. Du pont 
request emily’ hand, but her spirit were too much depressed, to 
permit her to engag in the present festivity, which call to her 
remembr that of the preced year, when st. aubert wa living, and 
of the melancholi scenes, which had immedi follow it. 

overcom by these recollections, she, at length, left the spot, and 
walk slowli into the woods, where the soften music, float at a 
distance, sooth her melancholi mind. the moon threw a mellow light 
among the foliage; the air wa balmi and cool, and emily, lost in 
thought, stroll on, without observ whither, till she perceiv the 
sound sink afar off, and an aw still round her, except that, 
sometimes, the nightingal beguil the silenc with 

liquid notes, that close the eye of day. 


At length, she found herself near the avenue, which, on the night of 
her father’ arrival, michael had attempt to pass in search of a 
house, which wa still nearli as wild and desol as it had then 
appeared; for the count had been so much engag in direct other 
improvements, that he had neglect to give orders, concern thi 
extens approach, and the road wa yet broken, and the tree 
overload with their own luxuriance. 

As she stood survey it, and rememb the emotions, which she had 
formerli suffer there, she suddenli recollect the figure, that had 
been seen steal among the trees, and which had return no answer to 
michael’ repeat calls; and she experienc somewhat of the fear, 
that had then assail her, for it did not appear improbable, that 
these deep wood were occasion the haunt of banditti. she, 
therefore, turn back, and wa hastili pursu her way to the 
dancers, when she heard step approach from the avenue; and, be 
still beyond the call of the peasant on the green, for she could 
neither hear their voices, nor their music, she quicken her pace; but 
the person follow gain fast upon her, and, at length, 
distinguish the voic of henri, she walk leisurely, till he came 
up. He express some surpris at meet her so far from the company; 
and, on her saying, that the pleasant moonlight had beguil her to 
walk farther than she intended, an exclam burst from the lip of 
hi companion, and she thought she heard valancourt speak! It was, 
indeed, he! and the meet wa such as may be imagined, between 
person so affectionate, and so long separ as they had been. 

In the joy of these moments, emili forgot all her past sufferings, and 
valancourt seem to have forgotten, that ani person but emili existed; 
while henri wa a silent and astonish spectat of the scene. 

valancourt ask a thousand questions, concern herself and montoni, 
which there wa now no time to answer; but she learned, that her letter 
had been forward to him, at paris, which he had previous quitted, 
and wa return to gascony, whither the letter also returned, which, 
at length, inform him of emily’ arrival, and on the receipt of which 
he had immedi set out for languedoc. On reach the monastery, 
whenc she had date her letter, he found, to hi extrem 
disappointment, that the gate were alreadi close for the night; and 
believing, that he should not see emily, till the morrow, he wa 
return to hi littl inn, with the intent of write to her, when 
he wa overtaken by henri, with whom he had been intim at paris, and 
wa led to her, whom he wa secretli lament that he should not see, 
till the follow day. 

emily, with valancourt and henri, now return to the green, where the 
latter present valancourt to the count, who, she fancied, receiv 
him with less than hi usual benignity, though it appeared, that they 
were not stranger to each other. He wa invited, however, to partak 
of the divers of the evening; and, when he had paid hi respect to 
the count, and while the dancer continu their festivity, he seat 
himself by emily, and conversed, without restraint. the lights, which 
were hung among the trees, under which they sat, allow her a more 
perfect view of the counten she had so frequent in absenc 
endeavour to recollect, and she perceived, with some regret, that it 
wa not the same as when last she saw it. there wa all it wont 
intellig and fire; but it had lost much of the simplicity, and 
somewhat of the open benevolence, that use to characteris it. still, 
however, it wa an interest countenance; but emili thought she 
perceived, at intervals, anxieti contract, and melancholi fix the 
featur of valancourt; sometimes, too, he fell into a momentari 
musing, and then appear anxiou to dissip thought; while, at 
others, as he fix hi eye on emily, a kind of sudden distract 
seem to cross hi mind. In her he perceiv the same good and 
beauti simplicity, that had charm him, on their first 
acquaintance. the bloom of her counten wa somewhat faded, but all 
it sweet remained, and it wa render more interesting, than 
ever, by the faint express of melancholy, that sometim mingl 
with her smile. 

At hi request, she relat the most import circumstances, that had 
occur to her, sinc she left france, and emot of piti and 
indign altern prevail in hi mind, when he heard how much 
she had suffer from the villani of montoni. more than once, when she 
wa speak of hi conduct, of which the guilt wa rather softened, 
than exaggerated, by her representation, he start from hi seat, and 
walk away, appar overcom as much by self-accus as by 
resentment. her suffer alon were mention in the few words, which 
he could address to her, and he listen not to the account, which she 
wa care to give as distinctli as possible, of the present loss of 
madam montoni’ estates, and of the littl reason there wa to expect 
their restoration. At length, valancourt remain lost in thought, and 
then some secret caus seem to overcom him with anguish. again he 
abruptli left her. when he returned, she perceiv that he had been 
weeping, and tenderli begged, that he would compos himself. “mi 
suffer are all pass now,” said she, “for I have escap from the 
tyranni of montoni, and I see you well—let me also see you happy.” 

valancourt wa more agit than before. “I am unworthi of you, 
emily,” said he, “I am unworthi of you;”—words, by hi manner of 
utter which emili wa then more shock than by their import. she 
fix on him a mourn and enquir eye. “do not look thu on me,” 
said he, turn away and press her hand; “I cannot bear those 
looks.” 

“I would ask,” said emily, in a gentle, but agit voice, “the 
mean of your words; but I perceive, that the question would distress 
you now. let us talk on other subjects. tomorrow, perhaps, you may be 
more composed. observ those moonlight woods, and the towers, which 
appear obscur in the perspective. you use to be a great admir of 
landscape, and I have heard you say, that the faculti of deriv 
consolation, under misfortune, from the sublim prospects, which 
neither oppression, nor poverti withhold from us, wa the peculiar 
bless of the innocent.” valancourt wa deepli affected. “yes,” 
repli he, “I had onc a tast for innoc and eleg delights—i had 
onc an uncorrupt heart.” then, check himself, he added, “do you 
rememb our journey togeth in the pyrenees?” 

“can I forget it?” said emily.—“would that I could!” he replied;—“that 
wa the happiest period of my life. I then loved, with enthusiasm, 
whatev wa truli great, or good.” It wa some time befor emili could 
repress her tears, and tri to command her emotions. “if you wish to 
forget that journey,” said she, “it must certainli be my wish to forget 
it also.” she paused, and then added, “you make me veri uneasy; but 
thi is not the time for further enquiry;—yet, how can I bear to 
believe, even for a moment, that you are less worthi of my esteem than 
formerly? I have still suffici confid in your candour, to 
believe, that, when I shall ask for an explanation, you will give it 
me.”—“yes,” said valancourt, “yes, emily: I have not yet lost my 
candour: if I had, I could better have disguis my emotions, on 
learn what were your sufferings—your virtues, while i—i—but I will 
say no more. I did not mean to have said even so much—i have been 
surpris into the self-accusation. tell me, emily, that you will not 
forget that journey—wil not wish to forget it, and I will be calm. I 
would not lose the remembr of it for the whole earth.” 

“how contradictori is this!” said emily;—“but we may be overheard. My 
recollect of it shall depend upon yours; I will endeavour to forget, 
or to recollect it, as you may do. let us join the count.”—“tel me 
first,” said valancourt, “that you forgiv the uneasi I have 
occas you, thi evening, and that you will still love me.”—“i 
sincer forgiv you,” repli emily. “you best know whether I shall 
continu to love you, for you know whether you deserv my esteem. At 
present, I will believ that you do. It is unnecessari to say,” ad 
she, observ hi dejection, “how much pain it would give me to 
believ otherwise.—th young lady, who approaches, is the count’ 
daughter.” 

valancourt and emili now join the ladi blanche; and the party, soon 
after, sat down with the count, hi son, and the chevali Du pont, at 
a banquet, spread under a gay awning, beneath the trees. At the tabl 
also were seat sever of the most vener of the count’ tenants, 
and it wa a festiv repast to all but valancourt and emily. when the 
count retir to the château, he did not invit valancourt to accompani 
him, who, therefore, took leav of emily, and retir to hi solitari 
inn for the night: meanwhile, she soon withdrew to her own apartment, 
where she mused, with deep anxieti and concern, on hi behaviour, and 
on the count’ recept of him. her attent wa thu so wholli 
engaged, that she forgot dorothé and her appointment, till morn wa 
far advanced, when, know that the good old woman would not come, she 
retired, for a few hours, to repose. 

On the follow day, when the count had accident join emili in 
one of the walks, they talk of the festiv of the preced evening, 
and thi led him to a mention of valancourt. “that is a young man of 
talents,” said he; “you were formerli acquaint with him, I perceive.” 
emili said, that she was. “he wa introduc to me, at paris,” said the 
count, “and I wa much pleas with him, on our first acquaintance.” He 
paused, and emili trembled, between the desir of hear more and the 
fear of show the count, that she felt an interest on the subject. 
“may I ask,” said he, at length, “how long you have known monsieur 
valancourt?”—“wil you allow me to ask your reason for the question, 
sir?” said she; “and I will answer it immediately.”—“certainly,” said 
the count, “that is but just. I will tell you my reason. I cannot but 
perceive, that monsieur valancourt admir you; in that, however, there 
is noth extraordinary; everi person, who see you, must do the same. 
I am abov use common-plac compliments; I speak with sincerity. what 
I fear, is, that he is a favour admirer.”—“whi do you fear it, sir?” 
said emily, endeavour to conceal her emotion.—“because,” repli the 
count, “I think him not worthi of your favour.” emily, greatli 
agitated, entreat further explanation. “I will give it,” said he, “if 
you will believe, that noth but a strong interest in your welfar 
could induc me to hazard that assertion.”—“i must believ so, sir,” 
repli emily. 

“but let us rest under these trees,” said the count, observ the 
pale of her countenance; “here is a seat—you are fatigued.” they 
sat down, and the count proceeded. “mani young ladies, circumstanc as 
you are, would think my conduct, on thi occasion, and on so short an 
acquaintance, impertinent, instead of friendly; from what I have 
observ of your temper and understanding, I do not fear such a return 
from you. our acquaint ha been short, but long enough to make me 
esteem you, and feel a live interest in your happiness. you deserv 
to be veri happy, and I trust that you will be so.” emili sigh 
softly, and bow her thanks. the count paus again. “I am 
unpleasantli circumstanced,” said he; “but an opportun of render 
you import servic shall overcom inferior considerations. will you 
inform me of the manner of your first acquaint with the chevali 
valancourt, if the subject is not too painful?” 

emili briefli relat the accid of their meet in the presenc of 
her father, and then so earnestli entreat the count not to hesit 
in declar what he knew, that he perceiv the violent emotion, 
against which she wa contending, and, regard her with a look of 
tender compassion, consid how he might commun hi inform 
with least pain to hi anxiou auditor. 

“the chevali and my son,” said he, “were introduc to each other, at 
the tabl of a brother officer, at whose hous I also met him, and 
invit him to my own, whenev he should be disengaged. I did not then 
know, that he had form an acquaint with a set of men, a disgrac 
to their species, who live by plunder and pass their live in continu 
debauchery. I knew sever of the chevalier’ family, resid at 
paris, and consid them as suffici pledg for hi introduct 
to my own. but you are ill; I will leav the subject.”—“no, sir,” said 
emily, “I beg you will proceed: I am onli distressed.”—“_only!_” said 
the count, with emphasis; “however, I will proceed. I soon learned, 
that these, hi associates, had drawn him into a cours of dissipation, 
from which he appear to have neither the power, nor the inclination, 
to extric himself. He lost larg sum at the gaming-table; he becam 
infatu with play; and wa ruined. I spoke tenderli of thi to hi 
friends, who assur me, that they had remonstr with him, till they 
were weary. I afterward learned, that, in consider of hi talent 
for play, which were gener successful, when unoppos by the trick 
of villany,—that in consider of these, the parti had initi him 
into the secret of their trade, and allot him a share of their 
profits.” “impossible!” said emili suddenly; “but—pardon me, sir, I 
scarc know what I say; allow for the distress of my mind. I must, 
indeed, I must believe, that you have not been truli informed. the 
chevali had, doubtless, enemies, who misrepres him.”—“i should 
be most happi to believ so,” repli the count, “but I cannot. noth 
short of conviction, and a regard for your happiness, could have urg 
me to repeat these unpleas reports.” 

emili wa silent. she recollect valancourt’ sayings, on the 
preced evening, which discov the pang of self-reproach, and 
seem to confirm all that the count had related. yet she had not 
fortitud enough to dare conviction. her heart wa overwhelm with 
anguish at the mere suspicion of hi guilt, and she could not endur a 
belief of it. after a silence, the count said, “I perceive, and can 
allow for, your want of conviction. It is necessari I should give some 
proof of what I have asserted; but thi I cannot do, without subject 
one, who is veri dear to me, to danger.”—“what is the danger you 
apprehend, sir?” said emily; “if I can prevent it, you may safe 
confid in my honour.”—“on your honour I am certain I can rely,” said 
the count; “but can I trust your fortitude? Do you think you can resist 
the solicit of a favour admirer, when he pleads, in affliction, 
for the name of one, who ha rob him of a blessing?”—“i shall not be 
expos to such a temptation, sir,” said emily, with modest pride, “for 
I cannot favour one, whom I must no longer esteem. I, however, readili 
give my word.” tears, in the mean time, contradict her first 
assertion; and she felt, that time and effort onli could erad an 
affection, which had been form on virtuou esteem, and cherish by 
habit and difficulty. 

“I will trust you then,” said the count, “for convict is necessari 
to your peace, and cannot, I perceive, be obtained, without thi 
confidence. My son ha too often been an eye-wit of the chevalier’ 
ill conduct; he wa veri near be drawn in by it; he was, indeed, 
drawn in to the commiss of mani follies, but I rescu him from 
guilt and destruction. judg then, mademoisel st. aubert, whether a 
father, who had nearli lost hi onli son by the exampl of the 
chevalier, ha not, from conviction, reason to warn those, whom he 
esteems, against trust their happi in such hands. I have myself 
seen the chevali engag in deep play with men, whom I almost 
shudder to look upon. If you still doubt, I will refer you to my 
son.” 

“I must not doubt what you have yourself witnessed,” repli emily, 
sink with grief, “or what you assert. but the chevali has, 
perhaps, been drawn onli into a transient folly, which he may never 
repeat. If you had known the just of hi former principles, you 
would allow for my present incredulity.” 

“alas!” observ the count, “it is difficult to believ that, which 
will make us wretched. but I will not sooth you by flatter and fals 
hopes. We all know how fascin the vice of game is, and how 
difficult it is, also, to conquer habits; the chevali might, perhaps, 
reform for a while, but he would soon relaps into dissipation—for I 
fear, not onli the bond of habit would be powerful, but that hi 
moral are corrupted. and—whi should I conceal from you, that play is 
not hi onli vice? he appear to have a tast for everi viciou 
pleasure.” 

the count hesit and paused; while emili endeavour to support 
herself, as, with increas perturbation, she expect what he might 
further say. A long paus of silenc ensued, dure which he wa 
visibl agitated; at length, he said, “it would be a cruel delicacy, 
that could prevail with me to be silent—and I will inform you, that the 
chevalier’ extravag ha brought him twice into the prison of 
paris, from whenc he wa last extricated, as I wa told upon 
authority, which I cannot doubt, by a well-known parisian countess, 
with whom he continu to reside, when I left paris.” 

He paus again; and, look at emily, perceiv her counten 
change, and that she wa fall from the seat; he caught her, but she 
had fainted, and he call loudli for assistance. they were, however, 
beyond the hear of hi servant at the château, and he fear to 
leav her while he went thither for assistance, yet knew not how 
otherwis to obtain it; till a fountain at no great distanc caught hi 
eye, and he endeavour to support emili against the tree, under which 
she had been sitting, while he went thither for water. but again he wa 
perplexed, for he had noth near him, in which water could be 
brought; but while, with increas anxiety, he watch her, he thought 
he perceiv in her counten symptom of return life. 

It wa long, however, befor she revived, and then she found herself 
supported—not by the count, but by valancourt, who wa observ her 
with look of earnest apprehension, and who now spoke to her in a tone, 
tremul with hi anxiety. At the sound of hi well-known voice, she 
rais her eyes, but present close them, and a faint again came 
over her. 

the count, with a look somewhat stern, wave him to withdraw; but he 
onli sigh heavily, and call on the name of emily, as he again held 
the water, that had been brought, to her lips. On the count’ repeat 
hi action, and accompani it with words, valancourt answer him 
with a look of deep resentment, and refus to leav the place, till 
she should revive, or to resign her for a moment to the care of ani 
person. In the next instant, hi conscienc seem to inform him of 
what had been the subject of the count’ convers with emily, and 
indign flash in hi eyes; but it wa quickli repressed, and 
succeed by an express of seriou anguish, that induc the count 
to regard him with more piti than resentment, and the view of which so 
much affect emily, when she again revived, that she yield to the 
weak of tears. but she soon restrain them, and, exert her 
resolut to appear recovered, she rose, thank the count and henri, 
with whom valancourt had enter the garden, for their care, and move 
toward the château, without notic valancourt, who, heart-struck by 
her manner, exclaim in a low voice—“good god! how have I deserv 
this?—what ha been said, to occas thi change?” 

emily, without replying, but with increas emotion, quicken her 
steps. “what ha thu disord you, emily?” said he, as he still 
walk by her side: “give me a few moments’ conversation, I entreat 
you;—i am veri miserable!” 

though thi wa spoken in a low voice, it wa overheard by the count, 
who immedi replied, that mademoisel st. aubert wa then too much 
indisposed, to attend to ani conversation, but that he would ventur to 
promis she would see monsieur valancourt on the morrow, if she wa 
better. 

valancourt’ cheek wa crimsoned: he look haughtili at the count, and 
then at emily, with success express of surprise, grief and 
supplication, which she could neither misunderstand, nor resist, and 
she said languidly—“i shall be better tomorrow, and if you wish to 
accept the count’ permission, I will see you then.” 

“see me!” exclaim valancourt, as he threw a glanc of mingl pride 
and resent upon the count; and then, seem to recollect himself, 
he added—“but I will come, madam; I will accept the count’ 
_permission_.” 

when they reach the door of the château, he linger a moment, for 
hi resent wa now fled; and then, with a look so express of 
tender and grief, that emily’ heart wa not proof against it, he 
bade her good morning, and, bow slightli to the count, disappeared. 

emili withdrew to her own apartment, under such oppress of heart as 
she had seldom known, when she endeavour to recollect all that the 
count had told, to examin the probabl of the circumst he 
himself believed, and to consid of her futur conduct toward 
valancourt. but, when she attempt to think, her mind refus control, 
and she could onli feel that she wa miserable. one moment, she sunk 
under the conviction, that valancourt wa no longer the same, whom she 
had so tenderli loved, the idea of whom had hitherto support her 
under affliction, and cheer her with the hope of happier days,—but a 
fallen, a worthless character, whom she must teach herself to 
despise—if she could not forget. then, unabl to endur thi terribl 
supposition, she reject it, and disdain to believ him capabl of 
conduct, such as the count had described, to whom she believ he had 
been misrepres by some art enemy; and there were moments, when 
she even ventur to doubt the integr of the count himself, and to 
suspect, that he wa influenc by some selfish motive, to break her 
connect with valancourt. but thi wa the error of an instant, only; 
the count’ character, which she had heard spoken of by Du pont and 
mani other persons, and had herself observed, enabl her to judge, and 
forbad the supposition; had her confidence, indeed, been less, there 
appear to be no temptat to betray him into conduct so treacherous, 
and so cruel. nor did reflect suffer her to preserv the hope, that 
valancourt had been mis-repres to the count, who had said, that he 
spoke chiefli from hi own observation, and from hi son’ experience. 
she must part from valancourt, therefore, for ever—for what of either 
happi or tranquil could she expect with a man, whose tast 
were degener into low inclinations, and to whom vice wa becom 
habitual? whom she must no longer esteem, though the remembr of 
what he onc was, and the long habit of love him, would render it 
veri difficult for her to despis him. “O valancourt!” she would 
exclaim, “have been separ so long—do we meet, onli to be 
miserable—onli to part for ever?” 

amidst all the tumult of her mind, she rememb pertinaci the 
seem candour and simplic of hi conduct, on the preced night; 
and, had she dare to trust her own heart, it would have led her to 
hope much from this. still she could not resolv to dismiss him for 
ever, without obtain further proof of hi ill conduct; yet she saw 
no probabl of procur it, if, indeed, proof more posit wa 
possible. something, however, it wa necessari to decid upon, and she 
almost determin to be guid in her opinion sole by the manner, 
with which valancourt should receiv her hint concern hi late 
conduct. 

thu pass the hour till dinner-time, when emily, struggl against 
the pressur of her grief, dri her tears, and join the famili at 
table, where the count preserv toward her the most delic 
attention; but the countess and mademoisel bearn, have looked, for 
a moment, with surprise, on her deject countenance, began, as usual, 
to talk of trifles, while the eye of ladi blanch ask much of her 
friend, who could onli repli by a mourn smile. 

emili withdrew as soon after dinner as possible, and wa follow by 
the ladi blanche, whose anxiou enquiries, however, she found herself 
quit unequ to answer, and whom she entreat to spare her on the 
subject of her distress. To convers on ani topic, wa now, indeed, so 
extrem pain to her, that she soon gave up the attempt, and 
blanch left her, with piti of the sorrow, which she perceiv she had 
no power to assuage. 

emili secretli determin to go to her convent in a day or two; for 
company, especi that of the countess and mademoisel bearn, wa 
intoler to her, in the present state of her spirits; and, in the 
retir of the convent, as well as the kind of the abbess, she 
hope to recov the command of her mind, and to teach it resign 
to the event, which, she too plainli perceived, wa approaching. 

To have lost valancourt by death, or to have seen him marri to a 
rival, would, she thought, have given her less anguish, than a 
convict of hi unworthiness, which must termin in miseri to 
himself, and which rob her even of the solitari imag her heart so 
long had cherished. these pain reflect were interrupted, for a 
moment, by a note from valancourt, written in evid distract of 
mind, entreating, that she would permit him to see her on the 
approach evening, instead of the follow morning; a request, which 
occas her so much agitation, that she wa unabl to answer it. she 
wish to see him, and to termin her present state of suspense, yet 
shrunk from the interview, and, incap of decid for herself, she, 
at length, sent to beg a few moments’ convers with the count in 
hi library, where she deliv to him the note, and request hi 
advice. after read it, he said, that, if she believ herself well 
enough to support the interview, hi opinion was, that, for the relief 
of both parties, it ought to take place, that evening. 

“hi affect for you is, undoubtedly, a veri sincer one,” ad the 
count; “and he appear so much distressed, and you, my amiabl friend, 
are so ill at ease—that the sooner the affair is decided, the better.” 

emili replied, therefore, to valancourt, that she would see him, and 
then exert herself in endeavour to attain fortitud and composure, 
to bear her through the approach scene—a scene so afflictingli the 
revers of any, to which she had look forward! 



volum 4 



chapter I 

Is all the council that we two have shared, 
the hour that we have spent, 
when we have chid the hasty-foot time 
for part us—oh! and is all forgot? 

and will you rend our ancient love asunder? 
midsumm night’ dream 


In the evening, when emili wa at length informed, that count De 
villefort request to see her, she guess that valancourt wa below, 
and, endeavour to assum composur and to recollect all her spirits, 
she rose and left the apartment; but on reach the door of the 
library, where she imagin him to be, her emot return with such 
energy, that, fear to trust herself in the room, she return into 
the hall, where she continu for a consider time, unabl to 
command her agit spirits. 

when she could recal them, she found in the librari valancourt, seat 
with the count, who both rose on her entrance; but she did not dare to 
look at valancourt, and the count, have led her to a chair, 
immedi withdrew. 

emili remain with her eye fix on the floor, under such oppress 
of heart, that she could not speak, and with difficulti breathed; while 
valancourt threw himself into a chair besid her, and, sigh heavily, 
continu silent, when, had she rais her eyes, she would have 
perceiv the violent emotions, with which he wa agitated. 

At length, in a tremul voice, he said, “I have solicit to see you 
thi evening, that I might, at least, be spare the further tortur of 
suspense, which your alter manner had occas me, and which the 
hint I have just receiv from the count have in part explained. I 
perceiv I have enemies, emily, who envi me my late happiness, and 
who have been busi in search out the mean to destroy it: I 
perceive, too, that time and absenc have weaken the affect you 
onc felt for me, and that you can now easili be taught to forget me.” 

hi last word faltered, and emily, less abl to speak than before, 
continu silent. 

“O what a meet is this!” exclaim valancourt, start from hi 
seat, and pace the room with hurri steps, “what a meet is this, 
after our long—long separation!” again he sat down, and, after the 
struggl of a moment, he ad in a firm but despair tone, “thi is 
too much—i cannot bear it! emily, will you not speak to me?” 

He cover hi face with hi hand, as if to conceal hi emotion, and 
took emily’s, which she did not withdraw. her tear could no longer be 
restrained; and, when he rais hi eye and perceiv that she wa 
weeping, all hi tender returned, and a gleam of hope appear to 
cross hi mind, for he exclaimed, “o! you do piti me, then, you do love 
me! yes, you are still my own emily—let me believ those tears, that 
tell me so!” 

emili now made an effort to recov her firmness, and, hastili dri 
them, “yes,” said she, “I do piti you—i weep for you—but, ought I to 
think of you with affection? you may remember, that yester-even I 
said, I had still suffici confid in your candour to believe, 
that, when I should request an explan of your words, you would 
give it. thi explan is now unnecessary, I understand them too 
well; but prove, at least, that your candour is deserv of the 
confid I give it, when I ask you, whether you are consciou of 
be the same estim valancourt—whom I onc loved.” 

“onc loved!” cri he,—“th same—th same!” He paus in extrem 
emotion, and then added, in a voic at onc solemn, and dejected,—“no—i 
am not the same!—i am lost—i am no longer worthi of you!” 

He again conceal hi face. emili wa too much affect by thi honest 
confess to repli immediately, and, while she struggl to overcom 
the plead of her heart, and to act with the decis firmness, 
which wa necessari for her futur peace, she perceiv all the danger 
of trust long to her resolution, in the presenc of valancourt, and 
wa anxiou to conclud an interview, that tortur them both; yet, 
when she considered, that thi wa probabl their last meeting, her 
fortitud sunk at once, and she experienc onli emot of tender 
and of despondency. 

valancourt, meanwhile, lost in emot of remors and grief, which he 
had neither the power, nor the will to express, sat insens almost 
of the presenc of emily, hi featur still concealed, and hi breast 
agit by convuls sighs. 

“spare me the necessity,” said emily, recollect her fortitude, 
“spare me the necess of mention those circumst of your 
conduct, which oblig me to break our connect for ever.—w must 
part, I now see you for the last time.” 

“impossible!” cri valancourt, rous from hi deep silence, “you 
cannot mean what you say!—you cannot mean to throw me from you for 
ever!” 

“we must part,” repeat emily, with emphasis,—“and that for ever! your 
own conduct ha made thi necessary.” 

“thi is the count’ determination,” said he haughtily, “not yours, and 
I shall enquir by what author he interfer between us.” He now 
rose, and walk about the room in great emotion. 

“let me save you from thi error,” said emily, not less agitated—“it is 
my determination, and, if you reflect a moment on your late conduct, 
you will perceive, that my futur peac requir it.” 

“your futur peac requires, that we should part—part for ever!” said 
valancourt, “how littl did I ever expect to hear you say so!” 

“and how littl did I expect, that it would be necessari for me to say 
so!” rejoin emily, while her voic soften into tenderness, and her 
tear flow again.—“that you—you, valancourt, would ever fall from my 
esteem!” 

He wa silent a moment, as if overwhelm by the conscious of no 
longer deserv thi esteem, as well as the certainti of have lost 
it, and then, with impass grief, lament the crimin of hi 
late conduct and the miseri to which it had reduc him, till, overcom 
by a recollect of the past and a convict of the future, he burst 
into tears, and utter onli deep and broken sighs. 

the remors he had expressed, and the distress he suffer could not be 
wit by emili with indifference, and, had she not call to her 
recollect all the circumstances, of which count De villefort had 
inform her, and all he had said of the danger of confid in 
repentance, form under the influenc of passion, she might perhap 
have trust to the assur of her heart, and have forgotten hi 
misconduct in the tenderness, which that repent excited. 

valancourt, return to the chair besid her, at length, said, in a 
calm voice, “’ti true, I am fallen—fallen from my own esteem! but 
could you, emily, so soon, so suddenli resign, if you had not befor 
ceas to love me, or, if your conduct wa not govern by the designs, 
I will say, the selfish design of anoth person! would you not 
otherwis be will to hope for my reformation—and could you bear, by 
estrang me from you, to abandon me to misery—to myself!”—emili wept 
aloud.—“no, emily—no—y would not do this, if you still love me. you 
would find your own happi in save mine.” 

“there are too mani probabl against that hope,” said emily, “to 
justifi me in trust the comfort of my whole life to it. may I not 
also ask, whether you could wish me to do this, if you realli love 
me?” 

“realli love you!” exclaim valancourt—“i it possibl you can doubt 
my love! yet it is reasonable, that you should do so, sinc you see, 
that I am less readi to suffer the horror of part with you, than 
that of involv you in my ruin. yes, emily—i am ruined—irrepar 
ruined—i am involv in debts, which I can never discharge!” 
valancourt’ look, which wa wild, as he spoke this, soon settl into 
an express of gloomi despair; and emily, while she wa compel to 
admir hi sincerity, saw, with unutter anguish, new reason for 
fear in the sudden of hi feel and the extent of the misery, in 
which they might involv him. after some minutes, she seem to contend 
against her grief and to struggl for fortitud to conclud the 
interview. “I will not prolong these moments,” said she, “bi a 
conversation, which can answer no good purpose. valancourt, farewell!” 

“you are not going?” said he, wildli interrupt her—“you will not 
leav me thus—you will not abandon me even befor my mind ha suggest 
ani possibl of compromis between the last indulg of my despair 
and the endur of my loss!” emili wa terrifi by the stern of 
hi look, and said, in a sooth voice, “you have yourself 
acknowledged, that it is necessari we should part;—if you wish, that I 
should believ you love me, you will repeat the 
acknowledgment.”—“never—never,” cri he—“i wa distract when I made 
it. O! emily—thi is too much;—though you are not deceiv as to my 
faults, you must be delud into thi exasper against them. the 
count is the barrier between us; but he shall not long remain so.” 

“you are, indeed, distracted,” said emily, “the count is not your 
enemy; on the contrary, he is my friend, and that might, in some 
degree, induc you to consid him as yours.”—“your friend!” said 
valancourt, hastily, “how long ha he been your friend, that he can so 
easili make you forget your lover? wa it he, who recommend to your 
favour the monsieur Du pont, who, you say, accompani you from italy, 
and who, I say, ha stolen your affections? but I have no right to 
question you;—you are your own mistress. Du pont, perhaps, may not long 
triumph over my fallen fortunes!” emily, more frighten than befor by 
the frantic look of valancourt, said, in a tone scarc audible, “for 
heaven’ sake be reasonable—b composed. monsieur Du pont is not your 
rival, nor is the count hi advocate. you have no rival; nor, except 
yourself, an enemy. My heart is wrung with anguish, which must increas 
while your frantic behaviour show me, more than ever, that you are no 
longer the valancourt I have been accustom to love.” 

He made no reply, but sat with hi arm rest on the tabl and hi 
face conceal by hi hands; while emili stood, silent and trembling, 
wretch for herself and dread to leav him in thi state of mind. 

“O excess of misery!” he suddenli exclaimed, “that I can never lament 
my sufferings, without accus myself, nor rememb you, without 
recollect the folli and the vice, by which I have lost you! whi wa 
I forc to paris, and whi did I yield to allurements, which were to 
make me despic for ever! O! whi cannot I look back, without 
interruption, to those day of innoc and peace, the day of our 
earli love!”—th recollect seem to melt hi heart, and the frenzi 
of despair yield to tears. after a long pause, turn toward her 
and take her hand, he said, in a soften voice, “emily, can you bear 
that we should part—can you resolv to give up a heart, that love you 
like mine—a heart, which, though it ha erred—wid erred, is not 
irretriev from error, as, you well know, it never can be 
retriev from love?” emili made no reply, but with her tears. “can 
you,” continu he, “can you forget all our former day of happi 
and confidence—when I had not a thought, that I might wish to conceal 
from you—when I had no taste—no pleasures, in which you did not 
participate?” 

“O do not lead me to the remembr of those days,” said emily, 
“unless you can teach me to forget the present; I do not mean to 
reproach you; if I did, I should be spare these tears; but whi will 
you render your present suffer more conspicuous, by contrast 
them with your former virtues?” 

“those virtues,” said valancourt, “might, perhaps, again be mine, if 
your affection, which nurtur them, wa unchanged;—but I fear, indeed, 
I see, that you can no longer love me; els the happi hours, which we 
have pass together, would plead for me, and you could not look back 
upon them unmoved. yet, whi should I tortur myself with the 
remembrance—whi do I linger here? Am I not ruined—would it not be 
mad to involv you in my misfortunes, even if your heart wa still 
my own? I will not distress you further. yet, befor I go,” ad he, 
in a solemn voice, “let me repeat, that, whatev may be my 
destiny—whatev I may be doom to suffer, I must alway love you—most 
fondli love you! I am going, emily, I am go to leav you—to leav 
you, for ever!” As he spoke the last words, hi voic trembled, and he 
threw himself again into the chair, from which he had risen. emili wa 
utterli unabl to leav the room, or to say farewell. all impress of 
hi crimin conduct and almost of hi folli wa obliter from her 
mind, and she wa sensibl onli of piti and grief. 

“mi fortitud is gone,” said valancourt at length; “I can no longer 
even struggl to recal it. I cannot now leav you—i cannot bid you an 
etern farewell; say, at least, that you will see me onc again.” 
emily’ heart wa somewhat reliev by the request, and she endeavour 
to believe, that she ought not to refus it. yet she wa embarrass by 
recollecting, that she wa a visitor in the hous of the count, who 
could not be pleas by the return of valancourt. other considerations, 
however, soon overcam this, and she grant hi request, on the 
condition, that he would neither think of the count, as hi enemy, nor 
Du pont as hi rival. He then left her, with a heart, so much lighten 
by thi short respite, that he almost lost everi former sens of 
misfortune. 

emili withdrew to her own room, that she might compos her spirit and 
remov the trace of her tears, which would encourag the censori 
remark of the countess and her favourite, as well as excit the 
curios of the rest of the family. she found it, however, imposs 
to tranquil her mind, from which she could not expel the 
remembr of the late scene with valancourt, or the consciousness, 
that she wa to see him again, on the morrow. thi meet now appear 
more terribl to her than the last, for the ingenu confess he had 
made of hi ill conduct and hi embarrass circumstances, with the 
strength and tender of affection, which thi confess discovered, 
had deepli impress her, and, in spite of all she had heard and 
believ to hi disadvantage, her esteem began to return. It frequent 
appear to her impossible, that he could have been guilti of the 
depravities, report of him, which, if not inconsist with hi 
warmth and impetuosity, were entir so with hi candour and 
sensibility. whatev wa the criminality, which had given rise to the 
reports, she could not now believ them to be wholli true, nor that hi 
heart wa final close against the charm of virtue. the deep 
consciousness, which he felt as well as express of hi errors, seem 
to justifi the opinion; and, as she understood not the instabl of 
youth dispositions, when oppos by habit, and that profess 
frequent deceiv those, who make, as well as those, who hear them, 
she might have yield to the flatter persuas of her own heart 
and the plead of valancourt, had she not been guid by the 
superior prudenc of the count. He repres to her, in a clear 
light, the danger of her present situation, that of listen to 
promis of amendment, made under the influenc of strong passion, and 
the slight hope, which could attach to a connection, whose chanc of 
happi rest upon the retriev of ruin circumst and the 
reform of corrupt habits. On these accounts, he lamented, that emili 
had consent to a second interview, for he saw how much it would shake 
her resolut and increas the difficulti of her conquest. 

her mind wa now so entir occupi by nearer interests, that she 
forgot the old housekeep and the promis history, which so late 
had excit her curiosity, but which dorothé wa probabl not veri 
anxiou to disclose, for night came; the hour passed; and she did not 
appear in emily’ chamber. with the latter it wa a sleepless and 
dismal night; the more she suffer her memori to dwell on the late 
scene with valancourt, the more her resolut declined, and she wa 
oblig to recollect all the arguments, which the count had made use of 
to strengthen it, and all the precepts, which she had receiv from her 
deceas father, on the subject of self-command, to enabl her to act, 
with prudenc and dignity, on thi the most sever occas of her 
life. there were moments, when all her fortitud forsook her, and when, 
rememb the confid of former times, she thought it impossible, 
that she could renounc valancourt. hi reform then appear 
certain; the argument of count De villefort were forgotten; she 
readili believ all she wished, and wa will to encount ani evil, 
rather than that of an immedi separation. 

thu pass the night in ineffectu struggl between affect and 
reason, and she rose, in the morning, with a mind, weaken and 
irresolute, and a frame, trembl with illness. 



chapter II 

come, weep with me;—past hope, past cure, past help! 
romeo and juliet 


valancourt, meanwhile, suffer the tortur of remors and despair. 
the sight of emili had renew all the ardour, with which he first 
love her, and which had suffer a temporari abat from absenc 
and the pass scene of busi life. when, on the receipt of her 
letter, he set out for languedoc, he then knew, that hi own folli had 
involv him in ruin, and it wa no part of hi design to conceal thi 
from her. but he lament onli the delay which hi ill-conduct must 
give to their marriage, and did not foresee, that the inform could 
induc her to break their connect for ever. while the prospect of 
thi separ overwhelm hi mind, befor stung with self-reproach, 
he await their second interview, in a state littl short of 
distraction, yet wa still inclin to hope, that hi plead might 
prevail upon her not to exact it. In the morning, he sent to know at 
what hour she would see him; and hi note arrived, when she wa with 
the count, who had sought an opportun of again convers with her 
of valancourt; for he perceiv the extrem distress of her mind, and 
feared, more than ever, that her fortitud would desert her. emili 
have dismiss the messenger, the count return to the subject of 
their late conversation, urg hi fear of valancourt’ entreaties, 
and again point out to her the lengthen misery, that must ensue, 
if she should refus to encount some present uneasiness. hi repeat 
argument could, indeed, alon have protect her from the affect 
she still felt for valancourt, and she resolv to be govern by them. 

the hour of interview, at length, arrived. emili went to it, at least, 
with composur of manner, but valancourt wa so much agitated, that he 
could not speak, for sever minutes, and hi first word were 
altern those of lamentation, entreaty, and self-reproach. 
afterward, he said, “emily, I have love you—i do love you, better than 
my life; but I am ruin by my own conduct. yet I would seek to 
entangl you in a connection, that must be miser for you, rather 
than subject myself to the punishment, which is my due, the loss of 
you. I am a wretch, but I will be a villain no longer.—i will not 
endeavour to shake your resolut by the plead of a selfish 
passion. I resign you, emily, and will endeavour to find consol in 
considering, that, though I am miserable, you, at least, may be happy. 
the merit of the sacrific is, indeed, not my own, for I should never 
have attain strength of mind to surrend you, if your prudenc had 
not demand it.” 

He paus a moment, while emili attempt to conceal the tears, which 
came to her eyes. she would have said, “you speak now, as you were wont 
to do,” but she check herself.—“forg me, emily,” said he, “all the 
suffer I have occas you, and, sometimes, when you think of the 
wretch valancourt, remember, that hi onli consol would be to 
believe, that you are no longer unhappi by hi folly.” the tear now 
fell fast upon her cheek, and he wa relaps into the frenzi of 
despair, when emili endeavour to recal her fortitud and to 
termin an interview, which onli seem to increas the distress of 
both. perceiv her tear and that she wa rise to go, valancourt 
struggled, onc more, to overcom hi own feel and to sooth hers. 
“the remembr of thi sorrow,” said he, “shall in futur be my 
protection. O! never again will example, or temptat have power to 
seduc me to evil, exalt as I shall be by the recollect of your 
grief for me.” 

emili wa somewhat comfort by thi assurance. “we are now part for 
ever,” said she; “but, if my happi is dear to you, you will alway 
remember, that noth can contribut to it more, than to believe, that 
you have recov your own esteem.” valancourt took her hand;—hi eye 
were cover with tears, and the farewel he would have spoken wa lost 
in sighs. after a few moments, emili said, with difficulti and emotion, 
“farewell, valancourt, may you be happy!” she repeat her “farewell,” 
and attempt to withdraw her hand, but he still held it and bath it 
with hi tears. “whi prolong these moments?” said emily, in a voic 
scarc audible, “they are too pain to us both.” “thi is too—too 
much,” exclaim valancourt, resign her hand and throw himself 
into a chair, where he cover hi face with hi hand and wa 
overcome, for some moments, by convuls sighs. after a long pause, 
dure which emili wept in silence, and valancourt seem struggl 
with hi grief, she again rose to take leav of him. then, endeavour 
to recov hi composure, “I am again afflict you,” said he, “but 
let the anguish I suffer plead for me.” He then added, in a solemn 
voice, which frequent trembl with the agit of hi heart, 
“farewell, emily, you will alway be the onli object of my tenderness. 
sometim you will think of the unhappi valancourt, and it will be with 
pity, though it may not be with esteem. O! what is the whole world to 
me, without you—without your esteem!” He check himself—“i am fall 
again into the error I have just lamented. I must not intrud longer 
upon your patience, or I shall relaps into despair.” 

He onc more bade emili adieu, press her hand to hi lips, look at 
her, for the last time, and hurri out of the room. 

emili remain in the chair, where he had left her, oppress with a 
pain at her heart, which scarc permit her to breathe, and 
listen to hi depart steps, sink fainter and fainter, as he 
cross the hall. she was, at length, rous by the voic of the 
countess in the garden, and, her attent be then awakened, the 
first object, which struck her sight, wa the vacant chair, where 
valancourt had sat. the tears, which had been, for some time, repress 
by the kind of astonishment, that follow hi departure, now came to 
her relief, and she was, at length, suffici compos to return to 
her own room. 



chapter iii 

thi is no mortal business, nor no sound 
that the earth owes! 
shakespear 


We now return to the mention of montoni, whose rage and disappoint 
were soon lost in nearer interests, than any, which the unhappi emili 
had awakened. hi depred have exceed their usual limits, and 
reach an extent, at which neither the timid of the then commerci 
senat of venice, nor their hope of hi occasion assist would 
permit them to connive, the same effort, it wa resolved, should 
complet the suppress of hi power and the correct of hi 
outrages. while a corp of consider strength wa upon the point of 
receiv order to march for udolpho, a young officer, prompt partli 
by resentment, for some injury, receiv from montoni, and partli by 
the hope of distinction, solicit an interview with the minister, who 
direct the enterprise. To him he represented, that the situat of 
udolpho render it too strong to be taken by open force, except after 
some tediou operations; that montoni had late shown how capabl he 
wa of ad to it strength all the advantages, which could be 
deriv from the skill of a commander; that so consider a bodi of 
troops, as that allot to the expedition, could not approach udolpho 
without hi knowledge, and that it wa not for the honour of the 
republ to have a larg part of it regular forc employed, for such a 
time as the sieg of udolpho would require, upon the attack of a 
hand of banditti. the object of the expedition, he thought, might be 
accomplish much more safe and speedili by mingl contriv with 
force. It wa possibl to meet montoni and hi party, without their 
walls, and to attack them then; or, by approach the fortress, with 
the secrecy, consist with the march of smaller bodi of troops, to 
take advantag either of the treachery, or neglig of some of hi 
party, and to rush unexpectedli upon the whole even in the castl of 
udolpho. 

thi advic wa serious attend to, and the officer, who gave it, 
receiv the command of the troops, demand for hi purpose. hi first 
effort were accordingli those of contriv alone. In the 
neighbourhood of udolpho, he waited, till he had secur the assist 
of sever of the _condottieri_, of whom he found none, that he 
addressed, unwil to punish their imperi master and to secur 
their own pardon from the senate. He learn also the number of 
montoni’ troops, and that it had been much increased, sinc hi late 
successes. the conclus of hi plan wa soon effected. have 
return with hi party, who receiv the watch-word and other 
assist from their friend within, montoni and hi offic were 
surpris by one division, who had been direct to their apartment, 
while the other maintain the slight combat, which preced the 
surrend of the whole garrison. among the persons, seiz with 
montoni, wa orsino, the assassin, who had join him on hi first 
arriv at udolpho, and whose conceal had been made known to the 
senat by count morano, after the unsuccess attempt of the latter to 
carri off emily. It was, indeed, partli for the purpos of captur 
thi man, by whom one of the senat had been murdered, that the 
expedit wa undertaken, and it success wa so accept to them, 
that morano wa instantli released, notwithstand the polit 
suspicions, which montoni, by hi secret accusation, had excit 
against him. the celer and ease, with which thi whole transact 
wa completed, prevent it from attract curiosity, or even from 
obtain a place in ani of the publish record of that time; so that 
emily, who remain in languedoc, wa ignor of the defeat and signal 
humili of her late persecutor. 

her mind wa now occupi with sufferings, which no effort of reason 
had yet been abl to control. count De villefort, who sincer 
attempt whatev benevol could suggest for soften them, 
sometim allow her the solitud she wish for, sometim led her 
into friendli parties, and constantli protect her, as much as 
possible, from the shrewd enquiri and critic convers of the 
countess. He often invit her to make excursions, with him and hi 
daughter, dure which he convers entir on questions, suitabl to 
her taste, without appear to consult it, and thu endeavour 
gradual to withdraw her from the subject of her grief, and to awak 
other interest in her mind. emily, to whom he appear as the 
enlighten friend and protector of her youth, soon felt for him the 
tender affect of a daughter, and her heart expand to her young 
friend blanche, as to a sister, whose kind and simplic 
compens for the want of more brilliant qualities. It wa long 
befor she could suffici abstract her mind from valancourt to 
listen to the story, promis by old dorothée, concern which her 
curios had onc been so deepli interested; but dorothée, at length, 
remind her of it, and emili desired, that she would come, that night, 
to her chamber. 

still her thought were employ by considerations, which weaken her 
curiosity, and dorothée’ tap at the door, soon after twelve, surpris 
her almost as much as if it had not been appointed. “I am come, at 
last, lady,” said she; “I wonder what it is make my old limb shake 
so, tonight. I thought, onc or twice, I should have dropped, as I wa 
a-coming.” emili seat her in a chair, and desired, that she would 
compos her spirits, befor she enter upon the subject, that had 
brought her thither. “alas,” said dorothée, “it is think of that, I 
believe, which ha disturb me so. In my way hither too, I pass the 
chamber, where my dear ladi died, and everyth wa so still and 
gloomi about me, that I almost fanci I saw her, as she appear upon 
her death-bed.” 

emili now drew her chair near to dorothée, who went on. “it is about 
twenti year sinc my ladi marchio came a bride to the château. O! 
I well rememb how she looked, when she came into the great hall, 
where we servant were all assembl to welcom her, and how happi my 
lord the marqui seemed. ah! who would have thought then!—but, as I wa 
saying, ma’amselle, I thought the marchioness, with all her sweet 
looks, did not look happi at heart, and so I told my husband, and he 
said it wa all fancy; so I said no more, but I made my remarks, for 
all that. My ladi marchio wa then about your age, and, as I have 
often thought, veri like you. well! my lord the marqui kept open 
house, for a long time, and gave such entertain and there were 
such gay do as have never been in the château since. I wa younger, 
ma’amselle, then, than I am now, and wa as gay at the best of them. I 
rememb I danc with philip, the butler, in a pink gown, with yellow 
ribbons, and a coif, not such as they wear now, but plait high, with 
ribbon all about it. It wa veri becom truly;—mi lord, the marquis, 
notic me. ah! he wa a good-natur gentleman then—who would have 
thought that he—” 

“but the marchioness, dorothée,” said emily, “you were tell me of 
her.” 

“O yes, my ladi marchioness, I thought she did not seem happi at heart, 
and once, soon after the marriage, I caught her cri in her chamber; 
but, when she saw me, she dri her eyes, and pretend to smile. I did 
not dare then to ask what wa the matter; but, the next time I saw her 
crying, I did, and she seem displeased;—so I said no more. I found 
out, some time after, how it was. her father, it seems, had command 
her to marri my lord, the marquis, for hi money, and there wa anoth 
nobleman, or els a chevalier, that she like better and that wa veri 
fond of her, and she fret for the loss of him, I fancy, but she 
never told me so. My ladi alway tri to conceal her tear from the 
marquis, for I have often seen her, after she ha been so sorrowful, 
look so calm and sweet, when he came into the room! but my lord, all of 
a sudden, grew gloomi and fretful, and veri unkind sometim to my 
lady. thi afflict her veri much, as I saw, for she never complained, 
and she use to tri so sweetli to oblig him and to bring him into a 
good humour, that my heart ha often ach to see it. but he use to be 
stubborn, and give her harsh answers, and then, when she found it all 
in vain, she would go to her own room, and cri so! I use to hear her 
in the ante-room, poor dear lady! but I seldom ventur to go to her. I 
used, sometimes, to think my lord wa jealous. To be sure my ladi wa 
greatli admired, but she wa too good to deserv suspicion. among the 
mani chevaliers, that visit at the château, there wa one, that I 
alway thought seem just suit for my lady; he wa so courteous, yet 
so spirited, and there wa such a grace, as it were, in all he did, or 
said. I alway observed, that, whenev he had been there, the marqui 
wa more gloomi and my ladi more thoughtful, and it came into my head, 
that thi wa the chevali she ought to have married, but I never 
could learn for certain.” 

“what wa the chevalier’ name, dorothée?” said emily. 

“whi that I will not tell even to you, ma’amselle, for evil may come of 
it. I onc heard from a person, who is sinc dead, that the marchio 
wa not in law the wife of the marquis, for that she had befor been 
privat marri to the gentleman she wa so much attach to, and wa 
afterward afraid to own it to her father, who wa a veri stern man; 
but thi seem veri unlikely, and I never gave much faith to it. As I 
wa saying, the marqui wa most out of humour, as I thought, when the 
chevali I spoke of had been at the château, and, at last, hi ill 
treatment of my ladi made her quit miserable. He would see hardli ani 
visitor at the castle, and made her live almost by herself. I wa her 
constant attendant, and saw all she suffered, but still she never 
complained. 

“after matter had gone on thus, for near a year, my ladi wa taken 
ill, and I thought her long fret had made her so,—but, alas! I fear 
it wa wors than that.” 

“worse! dorothée,” said emily, “can that be possible?” 

“I fear it wa so, madam, there were strang appearances. but I will 
onli tell what happened. My lord, the marquis—” 

“hush, dorothée, what sound were those?” said emily. 

dorothé chang countenance, and, while they both listened, they 
heard, on the still of the night, music of uncommon sweetness. 

“I have sure heard that voic before!” said emily, at length. 

“I have often heard it, and at thi same hour,” said dorothée, 
solemnly, “and, if spirit ever bring music—that is sure the music of 
one!” 

emily, as the sound drew nearer, knew them to be the same she had 
formerli heard at the time of her father’ death, and, whether it wa 
the remembr they now reviv of that melancholi event, or that she 
wa struck with superstiti awe, it is certain she wa so much 
affected, that she had nearli fainted. 

“I think I onc told you, madam,” said dorothée, “that I first heard 
thi music, soon after my lady’ death! I well rememb the night!”— 
“hark! it come again!” said emily, “let us open the window, and 
listen.” 

they did so; but, soon, the sound float gradual away into 
distance, and all wa again still; they seem to have sunk among the 
woods, whose tuft top were visibl upon the clear horizon, while 
everi other featur of the scene wa involv in the night-shade, 
which, however, allow the eye an indistinct view of some object in 
the garden below. 

As emili lean on the window, gaze with a kind of thrill awe upon 
the obscur beneath, and then upon the cloudless arch above, 
enlighten onli by the stars, dorothée, in a low voice, resum her 
narrative. 

“I wa saying, ma’amselle, that I well rememb when first I heard that 
music. It wa one night, soon after my lady’ death, that I had sat up 
later than usual, and I don’t know how it was, but I had been think 
a great deal about my poor mistress, and of the sad scene I had late 
witnessed. the château wa quit still, and I wa in the chamber at a 
good distanc from the rest of the servants, and this, with the 
mourn thing I had been think of, I suppose, made me low 
spirited, for I felt veri lone and forlorn, as it were, and listen 
often, wish to hear a sound in the château, for you know, 
ma’amselle, when one can hear peopl moving, one doe not so much mind, 
about one’ fears. but all the servant were gone to bed, and I sat, 
think and thinking, till I wa almost afraid to look round the room, 
and my poor lady’ counten often came to my mind, such as I had 
seen her when she wa dying, and, onc or twice, I almost thought I saw 
her befor me,—when suddenli I heard such sweet music! It seem just 
at my window, and I shall never forget what I felt. I had not power to 
move from my chair, but then, when I thought it wa my dear lady’ 
voice, the tear came to my eyes. I had often heard her sing, in her 
life-time, and to be sure she had a veri fine voice; it had made me cri 
to hear her, mani a time, when she ha sat in her oriel, of an evening, 
play upon her lute such sad songs, and sing so. O! it went to 
one’ heart! I have listen in the ante-chamber, for the hour 
together, and she would sometim sit playing, with the window open, 
when it wa summer time, till it wa quit dark, and when I have gone 
in, to shut it, she ha hardli seem to know what hour it was. but, as 
I said, madam,” continu dorothée, “when first I heard the music, that 
came just now, I thought it wa my late lady’s, and I have often 
thought so again, when I have heard it, as I have done at intervals, 
ever since. sometimes, mani month have gone by, but still it ha 
returned.” 

“it is extraordinary,” observ emily, “that no person ha yet 
discov the musician.” 

“aye, ma’amselle, if it had been anyth earthli it would have been 
discov long ago, but who could have courag to follow a spirit, and 
if they had, what good could it do?—for spirits, _you know_, ma’am, can 
take ani shape, or no shape, and they will be here, one minute, and, 
the next perhaps, in a quit differ place!” 

“pray resum your stori of the marchioness,” said emily, “and acquaint 
me with the manner of her death.” 

“I will, ma’am,” said dorothée, “but shall we leav the window?” 

“thi cool air refresh me,” repli emily, “and I love to hear it 
creep along the woods, and to look upon thi duski landscape. you were 
speak of my lord, the marquis, when the music interrupt us.” 

“yes, madam, my lord, the marquis, becam more and more gloomy; and my 
ladi grew wors and worse, till, one night, she wa taken veri ill, 
indeed. I wa call up, and, when I came to her bedside, I wa shock 
to see her countenance—it wa so changed! she look piteous up at 
me, and desir I would call the marqui again, for he wa not yet 
come, and tell him she had someth particular to say to him. At last, 
he came, and he did, to be sure, seem veri sorri to see her, but he 
said veri little. My ladi told him she felt herself to be dying, and 
wish to speak with him alone, and then I left the room, but I shall 
never forget hi look as I went.” 

“when I returned, I ventur to remind my lord about send for a 
doctor, for I suppos he had forgot to do so, in hi grief; but my 
ladi said it wa then too late; but my lord, so far from think so, 
seem to think light of her disorder—til she wa seiz with such 
terribl pains! O, I never shall forget her shriek! My lord then sent 
off a man and hors for the doctor, and walk about the room and all 
over the château in the greatest distress; and I staid by my dear lady, 
and did what I could to eas her sufferings. she had interv of ease, 
and in one of these she sent for my lord again; when he came, I wa 
going, but she desir I would not leav her. O! I shall never forget 
what a scene passed—i can hardli bear to think of it now! My lord wa 
almost distracted, for my ladi behav with so much goodness, and took 
such pain to comfort him, that, if he ever had suffer a suspicion to 
enter hi head, he must now have been convinc he wa wrong. and to be 
sure he did seem to be overwhelm with the thought of hi treatment of 
her, and thi affect her so much, that she faint away. 

“we then got my lord out of the room; he went into hi library, and 
threw himself on the floor, and there he staid, and would hear no 
reason, that wa talk to him. when my ladi recovered, she enquir 
for him, but, afterwards, said she could not bear to see hi grief, and 
desir we would let her die quietly. she die in my arms, ma’amselle, 
and she went off as peac as a child, for all the violenc of her 
disord wa passed.” 

dorothé paus and wept, and emili wept with her; for she wa much 
affect by the good of the late marchioness, and by the meek 
patienc with which she had suffered. 

“when the doctor came,” resum dorothée, “alas! he came too late; he 
appear greatli shock to see her, for soon after her death a 
fright black spread all over her face. when he had sent the 
attend out of the room, he ask me sever odd question about the 
marchioness, particularli concern the manner, in which she had been 
seized, and he often shook hi head at my answers, and seem to mean 
more, than he chose to say. but I understood him too well. however, I 
kept my remark to myself, and onli told them to my husband, who bade 
me hold my tongue. some of the other servants, however, suspect what 
I did, and strang report were whisper about the neighbourhood, but 
nobodi dare to make ani stir about them. when my lord heard that my 
ladi wa dead, he shut himself up, and would see nobodi but the doctor, 
who use to be with him alone, sometim for an hour together; and, 
after that, the doctor never talk with me again about my lady. when 
she wa buri in the church of the convent, at a littl distanc 
yonder, if the moon wa up you might see the tower here, ma’amselle, 
all my lord’ vassal follow the funeral, and there wa not a dri eye 
among them, for she had done a deal of good among the poor. My lord, 
the marquis, I never saw anybodi so melancholi as he wa afterwards, 
and sometim he would be in such fit of violence, that we almost 
thought he had lost hi senses. He did not stay long at the château, 
but join hi regiment, and, soon after, all the servants, except my 
husband and I, receiv notic to go, for my lord went to the wars. I 
never saw him after, for he would not return to the château, though it 
is such a fine place, and never finish those fine room he wa 
build on the west side of it, and it has, in a manner, been shut up 
ever since, till my lord the count came here.” 

“the death of the marchio appear extraordinary,” said emily, who 
wa anxiou to know more than she dare to ask. 

“yes, madam,” repli dorothée, “it wa extraordinary; I have told you 
all I saw, and you may easili guess what I think, I cannot say more, 
becaus I would not spread reports, that might offend my lord the 
count.” 

“you are veri right,” said emily;—“wher did the marqui die?”—“in the 
north of france, I believe, ma’amselle,” repli dorothée. “I wa veri 
glad, when I heard my lord the count wa coming, for thi had been a 
sad desol place, these mani years, and we heard such strang noises, 
sometimes, after my lady’ death, that, as I told you before, my 
husband and I left it for a neighbour cottage. and now, lady, I have 
told you all thi sad history, and all my thoughts, and you have 
promised, you know, never to give the least hint about it.”—“i have,” 
said emily, “and I will be faith to my promise, dorothée;—what you 
have told ha interest me more than you can imagine. I onli wish I 
could prevail upon you to tell the name of the chevalier, whom you 
thought so deserv of the marchioness.” 

dorothée, however, steadili refus to do this, and then return to 
the notic of emily’ like to the late marchioness. “there is 
anoth pictur of her,” ad she, “hang in a room of the suite, 
which wa shut up. It wa drawn, as I have heard, befor she wa 
married, and is much more like you than the miniature.” when emili 
express a strong desir to see this, dorothé replied, that she did 
not like to open those rooms; but emili remind her, that the count 
had talk the other day of order them to be opened; of which 
dorothé seem to consid much, and then she owned, that she should 
feel less, if she went into them with emili first, than otherwise, and 
at length promis to show the picture. 

the night wa too far advanc and emili wa too much affect by the 
narr of the scenes, which had pass in those apartments, to wish 
to visit them at thi hour, but she request that dorothé would 
return on the follow night, when they were not like to be 
observed, and conduct her thither. besid her wish to examin the 
portrait, she felt a thrill curios to see the chamber, in which 
the marchio had died, and which dorothé had said remained, with 
the bed and furniture, just as when the corps wa remov for 
interment. the solemn emotions, which the expect of view such a 
scene had awakened, were in unison with the present tone of her mind, 
depress by sever disappointment. cheer object rather ad to, 
than remov thi depression; but, perhaps, she yield too much to her 
melancholi inclination, and imprud lament the misfortune, which 
no virtu of her own could have taught her to avoid, though no effort 
of reason could make her look unmov upon the self-degrad of him, 
whom she had onc esteem and loved. 

dorothé promis to return, on the follow night, with the key of 
the chambers, and then wish emili good repose, and departed. emily, 
however, continu at the window, muse upon the melancholi fate of 
the marchio and listening, in aw expectation, for a return of 
the music. but the still of the night remain long unbroken, 
except by the murmur sound of the woods, as they wave in the 
breeze, and then by the distant bell of the convent, strike one. she 
now withdrew from the window, and, as she sat at her bedside, indulg 
melancholi reveries, which the loneli of the hour assisted, the 
still wa suddenli interrupt not by music, but by veri uncommon 
sounds, that seem to come either from the room adjoin her own, or 
from one below. the terribl catastroph that had been relat to her, 
togeth with the mysteri circumst said to have sinc occur 
in the château, had so much shock her spirits, that she now sunk for 
a moment under the weak of superstition. the sounds, however, did 
not return, and she retired, to forget in sleep the disastr stori 
she had heard. 



chapter IV 

now it is the time of night, 
that, the grave all gape wide, 
everi one let forth hi sprite, 
In the church-way path to glide. 
shakespear 


On the next night, about the same hour as before, dorothé came to 
emily’ chamber, with the key of that suit of rooms, which had been 
particularli appropri to the late marchioness. these extend along 
the north side of the château, form part of the old building; and, 
as emily’ room wa in the south, they had to pass over a great extent 
of the castle, and by the chamber of sever of the family, whose 
observ dorothé wa anxiou to avoid, sinc it might excit 
enquiry, and rais reports, such as would displeas the count. she, 
therefore, requested, that emili would wait half an hour, befor they 
ventur forth, that they might be certain all the servant were gone 
to bed. It wa nearli one, befor the château wa perfectli still, or 
dorothé thought it prudent to leav the chamber. In thi interval, her 
spirit seem to be greatli affect by the remembr of past 
events, and by the prospect of enter again upon places, where these 
had occurred, and in which she had not been for so mani years. emili 
too wa affected, but her feel had more of solemnity, and less of 
fear. from the silence, into which reflect and expect had 
thrown them, they, at length, rous themselves, and left the chamber. 
dorothée, at first, carri the lamp, but her hand trembl so much 
with infirm and alarm, that emili took it from her, and offer her 
arm, to support her feebl steps. 

they had to descend the great staircase, and, after pass over a wide 
extent of the château, to ascend another, which led to the suit of 
room they were in quest of. they step cautious along the open 
corridor, that ran round the great hall, and into which the chamber of 
the count, countess, and the ladi blanche, opened, and, from thence, 
descend the chief staircase, they cross the hall itself. 
proceed through the servant hall, where the die ember of a wood 
fire still glimmer on the hearth, and the supper tabl wa surround 
by chairs, that obstruct their passage, they came to the foot of the 
back staircase. old dorothé here paused, and look around; “let us 
listen,” said she, “if anyth is stirring; ma’amselle, do you hear 
ani voice?” “none,” said emily, “there certainli is no person up in the 
château, besid ourselves.”—“no, ma’amselle,” said dorothée, “but I 
have never been here at thi hour before, and, after what I know, my 
fear are not wonderful.”—“what do you know?” said emily.—“o, 
ma’amselle, we have no time for talk now; let us go on. that door on 
the left is the one we must open.” 

they proceeded, and, have reach the top of the staircase, dorothé 
appli the key to the lock. “ah,” said she, as she endeavour to turn 
it, “so mani year have pass sinc thi wa opened, that I fear it 
will not move.” emili wa more successful, and they present enter a 
spaciou and ancient chamber. 

“alas!” exclaim dorothée, as she entered, “the last time I pass 
through thi door—i follow my poor lady’ corpse!” 

emily, struck with the circumstance, and affect by the duski and 
solemn air of the apartment, remain silent, and they pass on 
through a long suit of rooms, till they came to one more spaciou than 
the rest, and rich in the remain of fade magnificence. 

“let us rest here awhile, madam,” said dorothé faintly, “we are go 
into the chamber, where my ladi died! that door open into it. ah, 
ma’amselle! whi did you persuad me to come?” 

emili drew one of the massi arm-chairs, with which the apart wa 
furnished, and beg dorothé would sit down, and tri to compos her 
spirits. 

“how the sight of thi place bring all that pass formerli to my 
mind!” said dorothée; “it seem as if it wa but yesterday sinc all 
that sad affair happened!” 

“hark! what nois is that?” said emily. 

dorothée, half start from her chair, look round the apartment, and 
they listened—but, everyth remain still, the old woman spoke 
again upon the subject of her sorrow. “thi saloon, ma’amselle, wa in 
my lady’ time the finest apart in the château, and it wa fit 
up accord to her own taste. all thi grand furniture, but you can 
now hardli see what it is for the dust, and our light is none of the 
best—ah! how I have seen thi room light up in my lady’ time!—al 
thi grand furnitur came from paris, and wa made after the fashion of 
some in the louvr there, except those larg glasses, and they came 
from some outlandish place, and that rich tapestry. how the colour are 
fade already!—sinc I saw it last!” 

“I understood, that wa twenti year ago,” observ emily. 

“thereabout, madam,” said dorothée, “and well remembered, but all the 
time between then and now seem as nothing. that tapestri use to be 
greatli admir at, it tell the stori out of some famou book, or 
other, but I have forgot the name.” 

emili now rose to examin the figur it exhibited, and discovered, by 
vers in the provenç tongue, wrought underneath each scene, that it 
exhibit stori from some of the most celebr ancient romances. 

dorothée’ spirit be now more composed, she rose, and unlock the 
door that led into the late marchioness’ apartment, and emili pass 
into a lofti chamber, hung round with dark arras, and so spacious, that 
the lamp she held up did not show it extent; while dorothée, when she 
entered, had drop into a chair, where, sigh deeply, she scarc 
trust herself with the view of a scene so affect to her. It wa 
some time befor emili perceived, through the dusk, the bed on which 
the marchio wa said to have died; when, advanc to the upper end 
of the room, she discov the high canopi tester of dark green 
damask, with the curtain descend to the floor in the fashion of a 
tent, half drawn, and remain apparently, as they had been left 
twenti year before; and over the whole bed wa thrown a 
counterpane, or pall, of black velvet, that hung down to the floor. 
emili shuddered, as she held the lamp over it, and look within the 
dark curtains, where she almost expect to have seen a human face, 
and, suddenli rememb the horror she had suffer upon discov 
the die madam montoni in the turret-chamb of udolpho, her spirit 
fainted, and she wa turn from the bed, when dorothée, who had now 
reach it, exclaimed, “holi virgin! methink I see my ladi stretch 
upon that pall—a when last I saw her!” 

emily, shock by thi exclamation, look involuntarili again within 
the curtains, but the black of the pall onli appeared; while 
dorothé wa compel to support herself upon the side of the bed, and 
present tear brought her some relief. 

“ah!” said she, after she had wept awhile, “it wa here I sat on that 
terribl night, and held my lady’ hand, and heard her last words, and 
saw all her sufferings—_here_ she die in my arms!” 

“do not indulg these pain recollections,” said emily, “let us go. 
show me the pictur you mentioned, if it will not too much affect you.” 

“it hang in the oriel,” said dorothé rising, and go toward a 
small door near the bed’ head, which she opened, and emili follow 
with the light into the closet of the late marchioness. 

“alas! there she is, ma’amselle,” said dorothée, point to a portrait 
of a lady, “there is her veri self! just as she look when she came 
first to the château. you see, madam, she wa all bloom like you, 
then—and so soon to be cut off!” 

while dorothé spoke, emili wa attent examin the picture, 
which bore a strong resembl to the miniature, though the express 
of the counten in each wa somewhat different; but still she 
thought she perceiv someth of that pensiv melancholi in the 
portrait, which so strongli characteris the miniature. 

“pray, ma’amselle, stand besid the picture, that I may look at you 
together,” said dorothée, who, when the request wa compli with, 
exclaim again at the resemblance. emili also, as she gaze upon it, 
thought that she had somewher seen a person veri like it, though she 
could not now recollect who thi was. 

In thi closet were mani memori of the depart marchioness; a robe 
and sever articl of her dress were scatter upon the chairs, as if 
they had just been thrown off. On the floor were a pair of black satin 
slippers, and, on the dressing-table, a pair of glove and a long black 
veil, which, as emili took it up to examine, she perceiv wa drop 
to piec with age. 

“ah!” said dorothée, observ the veil, “mi lady’ hand laid it there; 
it ha never been move since!” 

emily, shuddering, immedi laid it down again. “I well rememb 
see her take it off,” continu dorothée, “it wa on the night 
befor her death, when she had return from a littl walk I had 
persuad her to take in the gardens, and she seem refresh by it. I 
told her how much better she looked, and I rememb what a languid 
smile she gave me; but, alas! she littl thought, or I either, that she 
wa to die that night.” 

dorothé wept again, and then, take up the veil, threw it suddenli 
over emily, who shudder to find it wrap round her, descend even 
to her feet, and, as she endeavour to throw it off, dorothé 
entreat that she would keep it on for one moment. “I thought,” ad 
she, “how like you would look to my dear mistress in that veil;—may 
your life, ma’amselle, be a happier one than hers!” 

emily, have disengag herself from the veil, laid it again on the 
dressing-table, and survey the closet, where everi object, on which 
her eye fixed, seem to speak of the marchioness. In a larg oriel 
window of paint glass, stood a table, with a silver crucifix, and a 
prayer-book open; and emili rememb with emot what dorothé had 
mention concern her custom of play on her lute in thi window, 
befor she observ the lute itself, lie on a corner of the table, as 
if it had been carelessli place there by the hand, that had so often 
awaken it. 

“thi is a sad forlorn place!” said dorothée, “for, when my dear ladi 
died, I had no heart to put it to rights, or the chamber either; and my 
lord never came into the room after, so they remain just as they did 
when my ladi wa remov for interment.” 

while dorothé spoke, emili wa still look on the lute, which wa a 
spanish one, and remark large; and then, with a hesit hand, 
she took it up, and pass her finger over the chords. they were out 
of tune, but utter a deep and full sound. dorothé start at their 
well-known tones, and, see the lute in emily’ hand, said, “thi is 
the lute my ladi marchio love so! I rememb when last she play 
upon it—it wa on the night that she died. I came as usual to undress 
her, and, as I enter the bed-chamber, I heard the sound of music from 
the oriel, and perceiv it wa my lady’s, who wa sit there, I 
step softli to the door, which stood a littl open, to listen; for 
the music—though it wa mournful—wa so sweet! there I saw her, with 
the lute in her hand, look upwards, and the tear fell upon her 
cheeks, while she sung a vesper hymn, so soft, and so solemn! and her 
voic trembled, as it were, and then she would stop for a moment, and 
wipe away her tears, and go on again, lower than before. O! I had often 
listen to my lady, but never heard anyth so sweet as this; it made 
me cry, almost, to hear it. she had been at prayers, I fancy, for there 
wa the book open on the tabl besid her—aye, and there it lie open 
still! pray, let us leav the oriel, ma’amselle,” ad dorothée, “thi 
is a heart-break place!” 

have return into the chamber, she desir to look onc more upon 
the bed, when, as they came opposit to the open door, lead into the 
saloon, emily, in the partial gleam, which the lamp threw into it, 
thought she saw someth glide along into the obscur part of the 
room. her spirit had been much affect by the surround scene, or 
it is probabl thi circumstance, whether real or imaginary, would not 
have affect her in the degre it did; but she endeavour to conceal 
her emot from dorothée, who, however, observ her counten 
change, enquir if she wa ill. 

“let us go,” said emily, faintly, “the air of these room is 
unwholesome;” but, when she attempt to do so, consid that she 
must pass through the apart where the phantom of her terror had 
appeared, thi terror increased, and, too faint to support herself, she 
sat down on the side of the bed. 

dorothée, believ that she wa onli affect by a consider of 
the melancholi catastrophe, which had happen on thi spot, 
endeavour to cheer her; and then, as they sat togeth on the bed, 
she began to relat other particular concern it, and thi without 
reflecting, that it might increas emily’ emotion, but becaus they 
were particularli interest to herself. “A littl befor my lady’ 
death,” said she, “when the pain were gone off, she call me to her, 
and stretch out her hand to me, I sat down just there—wher the 
curtain fall upon the bed. how well I rememb her look at the 
time—death wa in it!—i can almost fanci I see her now.—ther she lay, 
ma’amselle—h face wa upon the pillow there! thi black counterpan 
wa not upon the bed then; it wa laid on, after her death, and she wa 
laid out upon it.” 

emili turn to look within the duski curtains, as if she could have 
seen the counten of which dorothé spoke. the edg of the white 
pillow onli appear abov the black of the pall, but, as her eye 
wander over the pall itself, she fanci she saw it move. without 
speaking, she caught dorothée’ arm, who, surpris by the action, and 
by the look of terror that accompani it, turn her eye from emili 
to the bed, where, in the next moment she, too, saw the pall slowli 
lifted, and fall again. 

emili attempt to go, but dorothé stood fix and gaze upon the 
bed; and, at length, said—“it is onli the wind, that wave it, 
ma’amselle; we have left all the door open: see how the air wave the 
lamp, too.—it is onli the wind.” 

she had scarc utter these words, when the pall wa more violent 
agit than before; but emily, somewhat asham of her terrors, 
step back to the bed, will to be convinc that the wind onli had 
occas her alarm; when, as she gaze within the curtains, the pall 
move again, and, in the next moment, the apparit of a human 
counten rose abov it. 

scream with terror, they both fled, and got out of the chamber as 
fast as their trembl limb would bear them, leav open the door 
of all the rooms, through which they passed. when they reach the 
staircase, dorothé threw open a chamber door, where some of the femal 
servant slept, and sunk breathless on the bed; while emily, depriv 
of all presenc of mind, made onli a feebl attempt to conceal the 
occas of her terror from the astonish servants; and, though 
dorothée, when she could speak, endeavour to laugh at her own fright, 
and wa join by emily, no remonstr could prevail with the 
servants, who had quickli taken the alarm, to pass even the remaind 
of the night in a room so near to these terrif chambers. 

dorothé have accompani emili to her own apartment, they then began 
to talk over, with some degre of coolness, the strang circumstance, 
that had just occurred; and emili would almost have doubt her own 
perceptions, had not those of dorothé attest their truth. have now 
mention what she had observ in the outer chamber, she ask the 
housekeeper, whether she wa certain no door had been left unfastened, 
by which a person might secretli have enter the apartments? dorothé 
replied, that she had constantli kept the key of the sever door in 
her own possession; that, when she had gone her round through the 
castle, as she frequent did, to examin if all wa safe, she had 
tri these door among the rest, and had alway found them fastened. 
It was, therefore, impossible, she added, that ani person could have 
got admitt into the apartments; and, if they could—it wa veri 
improb they should have chosen to sleep in a place so cold and 
forlorn. 

emili observed, that their visit to these chamber had, perhaps, been 
watched, and that some person, for a frolic, had follow them into the 
rooms, with a design to frighten them, and, while they were in the 
oriel, had taken the opportun of conceal himself in the bed. 

dorothé allowed, that thi wa possible, till she recollected, that, 
on enter the apartments, she had turn the key of the outer door, 
and this, which had been done to prevent their visit be notic by 
ani of the family, who might happen to be up, must effectu have 
exclud everi person, except themselves, from the chambers; and she 
now persist in affirming, that the ghastli counten she had seen 
wa noth human, but some dread apparition. 

emili wa veri solemnli affected. Of whatev natur might be the 
appear she had witnessed, whether human or supernatural, the fate 
of the deceas marchio wa a truth not to be doubted; and thi 
unaccount circumstance, occur in the veri scene of her 
sufferings, affect emily’ imagin with a superstiti awe, to 
which, after have detect the fallaci at udolpho, she might not 
have yielded, had she been ignor of the unhappi story, relat by 
the housekeeper. her she now solemnli conjur to conceal the 
occurr of thi night, and to make light of the terror she had 
alreadi betrayed, that the count might not be distress by reports, 
which would certainli spread alarm and confus among hi family. 
“time,” she added, “may explain thi mysteri affair; meanwhil let 
us watch the event in silence.” 

dorothé readili acquiesced; but she now recollect that she had left 
all the door of the north suit of room open, and, not have courag 
to return alon to lock even the outer one, emily, after some effort, 
so far conquer her own fears, that she offer to accompani her to 
the foot of the back staircase, and to wait there while dorothé 
ascended, whose resolut be reassur by thi circumstance, she 
consent to go, and they left emily’ apart together. 

No sound disturb the stillness, as they pass along the hall and 
galleries; but, on reach the foot of the back staircase, dorothée’ 
resolut fail again; having, however, paus a moment to listen, 
and no sound be heard above, she ascended, leav emili below, and, 
scarc suffer her eye to glanc within the first chamber, she 
fasten the door, which shut up the whole suit of apartments, and 
return to emily. 

As they step along the passage, lead into the great hall, a sound 
of lament wa heard, which seem to come from the hall itself, 
and they stop in new alarm to listen, when emili present 
distinguish the voic of annette, whom she found cross the hall, 
with anoth femal servant, and so terrifi by the report, which the 
other maid had spread, that, believ she could be safe onli where 
her ladi was, she wa go for refug to her apartment. emily’ 
endeavour to laugh, or to argu her out of these terrors, were equal 
vain, and, in compass to her distress, she consent that she should 
remain in her room dure the night. 



chapter V 

hail, mildly-pleas solitude! 
companion of the wise and good! 

thine is the balmi breath of morn, 
just as the dew-bent rose is born. 

but chief when even scene decay 
and the faint landscap swim away, 
thine is the doubtful, soft decline, 
and that best hour of muse thine. 
thomson 


emily’ injunct to annett to be silent on the subject of her 
terror were ineffectual, and the occurr of the preced night 
spread such alarm among the servants, who now all affirmed, that they 
had frequent heard unaccount nois in the château, that a report 
soon reach the count of the north side of the castl be haunted. 
He treat this, at first, with ridicule, but, perceiving, that it wa 
product of seriou evil, in the confus it occas among hi 
household, he forbad ani person to repeat it, on pain of punishment. 

the arriv of a parti of hi friend soon withdrew hi thought 
entir from thi subject, and hi servant had now littl leisur to 
brood over it, except, indeed, in the even after supper, when they 
all assembl in their hall, and relat stori of ghosts, till they 
fear to look round the room; started, if the echo of a close door 
murmur along the passage, and refus to go singli to ani part of the 
castle. 

On these occas annett made a distinguish figure. when she told 
not onli of all the wonder she had witnessed, but of all that she had 
imagined, in the castl of udolpho, with the stori of the strang 
disappear of signora laurentini, she made no trifl impress on 
the mind of her attent auditors. her suspicions, concern montoni, 
she would also have freeli disclosed, had not ludovico, who wa now in 
the servic of the count, prudent check her loquacity, whenev it 
point to that subject. 

among the visitor at the château wa the baron de saint foix, an old 
friend of the count, and hi son, the chevali st. foix, a sensibl 
and amiabl young man, who, have in the preced year seen the ladi 
blanche, at paris, had becom her declar admirer. the friendship, 
which the count had long entertain for hi father, and the equal 
of their circumst made him secretli approv of the connection; 
but, think hi daughter at thi time too young to fix her choic for 
life, and wish to prove the sincer and strength of the 
chevalier’ attachment, he then reject hi suit, though without 
forbid hi futur hope. thi young man now came, with the baron, 
hi father, to claim the reward of a steadi affection, a claim, which 
the count admit and which blanch did not reject. 

while these visitor were at the château, it becam a scene of gaieti 
and splendour. the pavilion in the wood wa fit up and frequented, 
in the fine evenings, as a supper-room, when the hour usual conclud 
with a concert, at which the count and countess, who were scientif 
performers, and the chevali henri and st. foix, with the ladi 
blanch and emily, whose voic and fine tast compens for the want 
of more skil execution, usual assisted. sever of the count’ 
servant perform on horn and other instruments, some of which, 
place at a littl distanc among the woods, spoke, in sweet response, 
to the harmony, that proceed from the pavilion. 

At ani other period, these parti would have been delight to emily; 
but her spirit were now oppress with a melancholy, which she 
perceiv that no kind of what is call amus had power to 
dissipate, and which the tender and, frequently, pathetic, melodi of 
these concert sometim increas to a veri pain degree. 

she wa particularli fond of walk in the woods, that hung on a 
promontory, overlook the sea. their luxuri shade wa sooth to 
her pensiv mind, and, in the partial views, which they afford of the 
mediterranean, with it wind shore and pass sails, tranquil 
beauti wa unit with grandeur. the path were rude and frequent 
overgrown with vegetation, but their tast owner would suffer littl 
to be done to them, and scarc a singl branch to be lop from the 
vener trees. On an eminence, in one of the most sequest part 
of these woods, wa a rustic seat, form of the trunk of a decay 
oak, which had onc been a nobl tree, and of which mani lofti branch 
still flourish unit with beech and pine to over-canopi the spot. 
beneath their deep umbrage, the eye pass over the top of other 
woods, to the mediterranean, and, to the left, through an opening, wa 
seen a ruin watch-tower, stand on a point of rock, near the sea, 
and rise from among the tuft foliage. 

hither emili often came alon in the silenc of evening, and, sooth 
by the sceneri and by the faint murmur, that rose from the waves, would 
sit, till dark oblig her to return to the château. frequently, 
also, she visit the watch-tower, which command the entir prospect, 
and, when she lean against it broken walls, and thought of 
valancourt, she not onc imagined, what wa so true, that thi tower 
had been almost as frequent hi resort, as her own, sinc hi 
estrang from the neighbour château. 

one evening, she linger here to a late hour. she had sat on the step 
of the building, watching, in tranquil melancholy, the gradual effect 
of even over the extens prospect, till the grey water of the 
mediterranean and the massi wood were almost the onli featur of the 
scene, that remain visible; when, as she gaze altern on these, 
and on the mild blue of the heavens, where the first pale star of 
even appeared, she personifi the hour in the follow lines:— 

song OF the even hour 

last of the hours, that track the fade day, 
I move along the realm of twilight air, 
and hear, remote, the choral song decay 
Of sister-nymphs, who danc around hi car. 

then, as I follow through the azur void, 
hi partial splendour from my strain eye 
sink in the depth of space; my onli guid 
hi faint ray dawn on the farthest sky; 

save that sweet, linger strain of gayer hours, 
whose close my voic prolong in die notes, 
while mortal on the green earth own it pow’rs, 
As downward on the even gale it floats. 

when fade along the west the sun’ last beam, 
as, weary, to the nether world he goes, 
and mountain-summit catch the purpl gleam, 
and slumber ocean faint and fainter glows, 

silent upon the globe’ broad shade I steal, 
and o’er it dri turf shed the cool dews, 
and ev’ri fever’d herb and flow’ret heal, 
and all their fragranc on the air diffuse. 

where’ I move, a tranquil pleasur reigns; 
o’er all the scene the duski tint I send, 
that forest wild and mountains, stretch plain 
and peopl towns, in soft confus blend. 

wide o’er the world I waft the fresh’n wind, 
low breath through the wood and twilight vale, 
In whisper soft, that woo the pensiv mind 
Of him, who love my lone step to hail. 

hi tender oaten reed I watch to hear, 
steal it sweet o’er some plain rill, 
Or sooth ocean’ wave, when storm are near, 
Or swell in the breez from distant hill! 

I wake the fairi elves, who shun the light; 
when, from their blossom’d beds, they slili peep, 
and spi my pale star, lead on the night,— 
forth to their game and revelri they leap; 

send all the prison’d sweet abroad in air, 
that with them slumber’d in the flow’ret’ cell; 
then to the shore and moonlight brook repair, 
till the high lark their matin-carol swell. 

the wood-nymph hail my air and temper’d shade, 
with ditti soft and lightli sportiv dance, 
On river margin of some bow’ri glade, 
and strew their fresh bud as my step advance: 

but, swift I pass, and distant region trace, 
for moonbeam silver all the eastern cloud, 
and day’ last crimson vestig fade apace; 
down the steep west I fli from midnight’ shroud. 


the moon wa now rise out of the sea. she watch it gradual 
progress, the extend line of radianc it threw upon the waters, the 
sparkl oars, the sail faintli silvered, and the wood-top and the 
battlement of the watch-tower, at whose foot she wa sitting, just 
tint with the rays. emily’ spirit were in harmoni with thi scene. 
As she sat meditating, sound stole by her on the air, which she 
immedi knew to be the music and the voic she had formerli heard 
at midnight, and the emot of awe, which she felt, wa not unmix 
with terror, when she consid her remot and lone situation. the 
sound drew nearer. she would have risen to leav the place, but they 
seem to come from the way she must have taken toward the château, 
and she await the event in trembl expectation. the sound 
continu to approach, for some time, and then ceased. emili sat 
listening, gaze and unabl to move, when she saw a figur emerg from 
the shade of the wood and pass along the bank, at some littl distanc 
befor her. It went swiftly, and her spirit were so overcom with awe, 
that, though she saw, she did not much observ it. 

have left the spot, with a resolut never again to visit it alone, 
at so late an hour, she began to approach the château, when she heard 
voic call her from the part of the wood, which wa nearest to it. 
they were the shout of the count’ servants, who were sent to search 
for her; and when she enter the supper-room, where he sat with henri 
and blanche, he gentli reproach her with a look, which she blush to 
have deserved. 

thi littl occurr deepli impress her mind, and, when she 
withdrew to her own room, it recal so forcibl the circumst she 
had witnessed, a few night before, that she had scarc courag to 
remain alone. she watch to a late hour, when, no sound have renew 
her fears, she, at length, sunk to repose. but thi wa of short 
continuance, for she wa disturb by a loud and unusu noise, that 
seem to come from the gallery, into which her chamber opened. groan 
were distinctli heard, and, immedi after, a dead weight fell 
against the door, with a violence, that threaten to burst it open. 
she call loudli to know who wa there, but receiv no answer, 
though, at intervals, she still thought she heard someth like a low 
moaning. fear depriv her of the power to move. soon after, she heard 
footstep in a remot part of the gallery, and, as they approached, she 
call more loudli than before, till the step paus at her door. she 
then distinguish the voic of sever of the servants, who seem 
too much engag by some circumst without, to attend to her calls; 
but, annett soon after enter the room for water, emili understood, 
that one of the maid had fainted, whom she immedi desir them to 
bring into her room, where she assist to restor her. when thi girl 
had recov her speech, she affirmed, that, as she wa pass up the 
back staircase, in the way to her chamber, she had seen an apparit 
on the second landing-place; she held the lamp low, she said, that she 
might pick her way, sever of the stair be infirm and even 
decayed, and it wa upon rais her eyes, that she saw thi 
appearance. It stood for a moment in the corner of the landing-place, 
which she wa approaching, and then, glide up the stairs, vanish at 
the door of the apartment, that had been late opened. she heard 
afterward a hollow sound. 

“then the devil ha got a key to that apartment,” said dorothée, “for 
it could be nobodi but he; I lock the door myself!” 

the girl, spring down the stair and pass up the great staircase, 
had run, with a faint scream, till she reach the gallery, where she 
fell, groaning, at emily’ door. 

gentli chide her for the alarm she had occasioned, emili tri to 
make her asham of her fears; but the girl persist in saying, that 
she had seen an apparition, till she went to her own room, whither she 
wa accompani by all the servant present, except dorothée, who, at 
emily’ request, remain with her dure the night. emili wa 
perplexed, and dorothé wa terrified, and mention mani occurr 
of former times, which had long sinc confirm her superstitions; 
among these, accord to her belief, she had onc wit an 
appearance, like that just described, and on the veri same spot, and it 
wa the remembr of it, that had made her pause, when she wa go 
to ascend the stair with emily, and which had increas her reluct 
to open the north apartments. whatev might be emily’ opinions, she 
did not disclos them, but listen attent to all that dorothé 
communicated, which occas her much thought and perplexity. 

from thi night the terror of the servant increas to such an excess, 
that sever of them determin to leav the château, and request 
their discharg of the count, who, if he had ani faith in the subject 
of their alarm, thought proper to dissembl it, and, anxiou to avoid 
the inconveni that threaten him, employ ridicul and then 
argument to convinc them they had noth to apprehend from 
supernatur agency. but fear had render their mind inaccess to 
reason; and it wa now, that ludovico prove at onc hi courag and 
hi gratitud for the kind he had receiv from the count, by 
offer to watch, dure a night, in the suit of rooms, reput to be 
haunted. He feared, he said, no spirits, and, if anyth of human form 
appeared—h would prove that he dread that as little. 

the count paus upon the offer, while the servants, who heard it, 
look upon one anoth in doubt and amazement, and annette, terrifi 
for the safeti of ludovico, employ tear and entreati to dissuad 
him from hi purpose. 

“you are a bold fellow,” said the count, smiling, “think well of what 
you are go to encounter, befor you final determin upon it. 
however, if you persever in your resolution, I will accept your offer, 
and your intrepid shall not go unrewarded.” 

“I desir no reward, your _excellenza_,” repli ludovico, “but your 
approbation. your _excellenza_ ha been suffici good to me 
already; but I wish to have arms, that I may be equal to my enemy, if 
he should appear.” 

“your sword cannot defend you against a ghost,” repli the count, 
throw a glanc of ironi upon the other servants, “neither can bars, 
nor bolts; for a spirit, you know, can glide through a keyhol as 
easili as through a door.” 

“give me a sword, my lord count,” said ludovico, “and I will lay all 
the spirits, that shall attack me, in the red sea.” 

“well,” said the count, “you shall have a sword, and good cheer, too; 
and your brave comrad here will, perhaps, have courag enough to 
remain anoth night in the château, sinc your bold will 
certainly, for thi night, at least, confin all the malic of the 
spectr to yourself.” 

curios now struggl with fear in the mind of sever of hi fellow 
servants, and, at length, they resolv to await the event of 
ludovico’ rashness. 

emili wa surpris and concerned, when she heard of hi intention, and 
wa frequent inclin to mention what she had wit in the north 
apart to the count, for she could not entir divest herself of 
fear for ludovico’ safety, though her reason repres these to be 
absurd. the necessity, however, of conceal the secret, with which 
dorothé had entrust her, and which must have been mentioned, with 
the late occurrence, in excus for her have so privat visit the 
north apartments, kept her entir silent on the subject of her 
apprehension; and she tri onli to sooth annette, who held, that 
ludovico wa certainli to be destroyed; and who wa much less affect 
by emily’ consolatori efforts, than by the manner of old dorothée, who 
often, as she exclaim ludovico, sighed, and threw up her eye to 
heaven. 



chapter VI 

Ye god of quiet, and of sleep profound! 
whose soft dominion o’er thi castl sways, 
and all the widely-sil place round, 
forgiv me, if my trembl pen display 
what never yet wa sung in mortal lays. 
thomson 


the count gave order for the north apart to be open and 
prepar for the recept of ludovico; but dorothée, rememb what 
she had late wit there, fear to obey, and, not one of the 
other servant dare to ventur thither, the room remain shut up 
till the time when ludovico wa to retir thither for the night, an 
hour, for which the whole household wait with impatience. 

after supper, ludovico, by the order of the count, attend him in hi 
closet, where they remain alon for near half an hour, and, on 
leav which, hi lord deliv to him a sword. 

“it ha seen servic in mortal quarrels,” said the count, jocosely, 
“you will use it honourably, no doubt, in a spiritu one. tomorrow, 
let me hear that there is not one ghost remain in the château.” 

ludovico receiv it with a respect bow. “you shall be obeyed, my 
lord,” said he; “I will engage, that no spectr shall disturb the peac 
of the château after thi night.” 

they now return to the supper-room, where the count’ guest await 
to accompani him and ludovico to the door of the north apartments, and 
dorothée, be summon for the keys, deliv them to ludovico, who 
then led the way, follow by most of the inhabit of the château. 
have reach the back staircase, sever of the servant shrunk back, 
and refus to go further, but the rest follow him to the top of the 
staircase, where a broad landing-plac allow them to flock round him, 
while he appli the key to the door, dure which they watch him 
with as much eager curios as if he had been perform some magic 
rite. 

ludovico, unaccustom to the lock, could not turn it, and dorothée, 
who had linger far behind, wa call forward, under whose hand the 
door open slowly, and, her eye glanc within the duski chamber, she 
utter a sudden shriek, and retreated. At thi signal of alarm, the 
greater part of the crowd hurri down the stairs, and the count, henri 
and ludovico were left alon to pursu the enquiry, who instantli 
rush into the apartment, ludovico with a drawn sword, which he had 
just time to draw from the scabbard, the count with the lamp in hi 
hand, and henri carri a basket, contain provis for the 
courag adventurer. 

have look hastili round the first room, where noth appear to 
justifi alarm, they pass on to the second; and, here too all be 
quiet, they proceed to a third with a more temper step. the count 
had now leisur to smile at the discomposure, into which he had been 
surprised, and to ask ludovico in which room he design to pass the 
night. 

“there are sever chamber beyond these, your _excellenza_,” said 
ludovico, point to a door, “and in one of them is a bed, they say. I 
will pass the night there, and when I am weari of watching, I can lie 
down.” 

“good;” said the count; “let us go on. you see these room show 
nothing, but damp wall and decay furniture. I have been so much 
engag sinc I came to the château, that I have not look into them 
till now. remember, ludovico, to tell the housekeeper, tomorrow, to 
throw open these windows. the damask hang are drop to pieces, I 
will have them taken down, and thi antiqu furnitur removed.” 

“dear sir!” said henri, “here is an arm-chair so massi with gilding, 
that it resembl one of the state chair at the louvre, more then 
anyth else.” 

“yes,” said the count, stop a moment to survey it, “there is a 
histori belong to that chair, but I have not time to tell it.—let us 
pass on. thi suit run to a greater extent than I had imagined; it is 
mani year sinc I wa in them. but where is the bedroom you speak of, 
ludovico?—thes are onli ante-chamb to the great drawing-room. I 
rememb them in their splendour!” 

“the bed, my lord,” repli ludovico, “they told me, wa in a room that 
open beyond the saloon, and termin the suite.” 

“o, here is the saloon,” said the count, as they enter the spaciou 
apartment, in which emili and dorothé had rested. He here stood for a 
moment, survey the reliqu of fade grandeur, which it 
exhibited—th sumptuou tapestry—th long and low sopha of velvet, 
with frame heavili carv and gilded—th floor inlaid with small 
squar of fine marble, and cover in the centr with a piec of veri 
rich tapestry-work—th casement of paint glass, and the larg 
venetian mirrors, of a size and quality, such as at that period franc 
could not make, which reflected, on everi side, the spaciou apartment. 
these had formerli also reflect a gay and brilliant scene, for thi 
had been the state-room of the château, and here the marchio had 
held the assemblies, that made part of the festiv of her nuptials. 
If the wand of a magician could have recal the vanish groups, mani 
of them vanish even from the earth, that onc had pass over these 
polish mirrors, what a vari and contrast pictur would they have 
exhibit with the present! now, instead of a blaze of lights, and a 
splendid and busi crowd, they reflect onli the ray of the one 
glimmer lamp, which the count held up, and which scarc serv to 
show the three forlorn figures, that stood survey the room, and the 
spaciou and duski wall around them. 

“ah!” said the count to henri, awak from hi deep reverie, “how the 
scene is chang sinc last I saw it! I wa a young man, then, and the 
marchio wa aliv and in her bloom; mani other person were here, 
too, who are now no more! there stood the orchestra; here we trip in 
mani a sprightli maze—th wall echo to the dance! now, they resound 
onli one feebl voice—and even that will, ere long, be heard no more! 
My son, remember, that I wa onc as young as yourself, and that you 
must pass away like those, who have preced you—lik those, who, as 
they sung and danc in thi onc gay apartment, forgot, that year are 
made up of moments, and that everi step they took carri them nearer 
to their graves. but such reflect are useless, I had almost said 
criminal, unless they teach us to prepar for eternity, since, 
otherwise, they cloud our present happiness, without guid us to a 
futur one. but enough of this; let us go on.” 

ludovico now open the door of the bedroom, and the count, as he 
entered, wa struck with the funer appear which the dark arra 
gave to it. He approach the bed with an emot of solemnity, and, 
perceiv it to be cover with the pall of black velvet, paused; 
“what can thi mean?” said he, as he gaze upon it. 

“I have heard, my lord,” said ludovico, as he stood at the feet, 
look within the canopi curtains, “that the ladi marchio de 
villeroi die in thi chamber, and remain here till she wa remov 
to be buried; and this, perhaps, signor, may account for the pall.” 

the count made no reply, but stood for a few moment engag in 
thought, and evid much affected. then, turn to ludovico, he 
ask him with a seriou air whether he thought hi courag would 
support him through the night? “if you doubt this,” ad the count, 
“do not be asham to own it; I will releas you from your engagement, 
without expos you to the triumph of your fellow-servants.” 

ludovico paused; pride, and someth veri like fear, seem struggl 
in hi breast; pride, however, wa victorious;—h blushed, and hi 
hesit ceased. 

“no, my lord,” said he, “I will go through with what I have begun; and 
I am grate for your consideration. On that hearth I will make a 
fire, and, with the good cheer in thi basket, I doubt not I shall do 
well.” 

“be it so,” said the count; “but how will you beguil the tedious 
of the night, if you do not sleep?” 

“when I am weary, my lord,” repli ludovico, “I shall not fear to 
sleep; in the meanwhile, I have a book that will entertain me.” 

“well,” said the count, “I hope noth will disturb you; but if you 
should be serious alarm in the night, come to my apartment. I have 
too much confid in your good sens and courag to believ you will 
be alarm on slight grounds; or suffer the gloom of thi chamber, or 
it remot situation, to overcom you with ideal terrors. tomorrow, I 
shall have to thank you for an import service; these room shall 
then be thrown open, and my peopl will be convinc of their error. 
good night, ludovico; let me see you earli in the morning, and rememb 
what I late said to you.” 

“I will, my lord; good night to your _excellenza_; let me attend you 
with the light.” 

He light the count and henri through the chamber to the outer door. 
On the landing-plac stood a lamp, which one of the affright servant 
had left, and henri, as he took it up, again bade ludovico good night, 
who, have respect return the wish, close the door upon them, 
and fasten it. then, as he retir to the bed-chamber, he examin 
the room through which he passed, with more minut than he had 
done before, for he apprehend that some person might have conceal 
himself in them, for the purpos of frighten him. No one, however, 
but himself, wa in these chambers, and leav open the door through 
which he passed, he came again to the great drawing-room, whose 
spacious and silent gloom somewhat awe him. for a moment he stood, 
look back through the long suit of room he had quitted, and as he 
turned, perceiv a light and hi own figur reflect in one of the 
larg mirrors, he started. other object too were seen obscur on it 
dark surface, but he paus not to examin them, and return hastili 
into the bedroom, as he survey which, he observ the door of the 
oriel, and open it. all within wa still. On look round, hi eye 
wa arrest by the portrait of the deceas marchioness, upon which he 
gaze for a consider time with great attent and some surprise; 
and then, have examin the closet, he return into the bedroom, 
where he kindl a wood fire, the bright blaze of which reviv hi 
spirits, which had begun to yield to the gloom and silenc of the 
place, for gust of wind alon broke at interv thi silence. He now 
drew a small tabl and a chair near the fire, took a bottl of wine and 
some cold provis out of hi basket, and regal himself. when he had 
finish hi repast, he laid hi sword upon the table, and, not feel 
dispos to sleep, drew from hi pocket the book he had spoken of.—it 
wa a volum of old provenç tales. have stir the fire into a 
brighter blaze, he began to read, and hi attent wa soon wholli 
occupi by the scene which the page disclosed. 

the count, meanwhile, had return to the supper-room, whither those of 
the parti who had attend him to the north apart had retreated, 
upon hear dorothée’ scream, and who were now earnest in their 
enquiri concern those chambers. the count ralli hi guest on 
their precipit retreat, and on the superstiti inclin which 
had occas it, and thi led to the question, whether the spirit, 
after it ha quit the body, is ever permit to revisit the earth; 
and if it is, whether it wa possibl for spirit to becom visibl to 
the sense. the baron wa of opinion, that the first wa probable, and 
the last wa possible, and he endeavour to justifi thi opinion by 
respect authorities, both ancient and modern, which he quoted. the 
count, however, wa decidedli against him, and a long convers 
ensued, in which the usual argument on these subject were on both 
side brought forward with skill, and discuss with candour, but 
without convert either parti to the opinion of hi opponent. the 
effect of their convers on their auditor wa various. though the 
count had much the superior of the baron in point of argument, he 
had consider fewer adherents; for that love, so natur to the 
human mind, of whatev is abl to distend it faculti with wonder 
and astonishment, attach the major of the compani to the side of 
the baron; and, though mani of the count’ proposit were 
unanswerable, hi oppon were inclin to believ thi the 
consequ of their own want of knowledg on so abstract a subject, 
rather than that argument did not exist which were forcibl enough to 
conquer his. 

blanch wa pale with attention, till the ridicul in her father’ 
glanc call a blush upon her countenance, and she then endeavour to 
forget the superstiti tale she had been told in her convent. 
meanwhile, emili had been listen with deep attent to the 
discuss of what wa to her a veri interest question, and, 
rememb the appear she had wit in the apart of the 
late marchioness, she wa frequent chill with awe. sever time 
she wa on the point of mention what she had seen, but the fear of 
give pain to the count, and the dread of hi ridicule, restrain 
her; and, await in anxiou expect the event of ludovico’ 
intrepidity, she determin that her futur silenc should depend upon 
it. 

when the parti had separ for the night, and the count retir to 
hi dressing-room, the remembr of the desol scene he had late 
wit in hi own mansion deepli affect him, but at length he wa 
arous from hi reveri and hi silence. “what music is that I hear?” 
said he suddenli to hi valet, “who play at thi late hour?” 

the man made no reply, and the count continu to listen, and then 
added, “that is no common musician; he touch the instrument with a 
delic hand; who is it, pierre?” 

“mi lord!” said the man, hesitatingly. 

“who play that instrument?” repeat the count. 

“doe not your lordship know, then?” said the valet. 

“what mean you?” said the count, somewhat sternly. 

“nothing, my lord, I meant nothing,” rejoin the man 
submissively—“only—that music—go about the hous at midnight often, 
and I thought your lordship might have heard it before.” 

“music goe about the hous at midnight! poor fellow!—do nobodi danc 
to the music, too?” 

“it is not in the château, I believe, my lord; the sound come from the 
woods, they say, though they seem so near;—but then a spirit can do 
anything!” 

“ah, poor fellow!” said the count, “I perceiv you are as silli as the 
rest of them; tomorrow you will be convinc of your ridicul error. 
but hark!—what voic is that?” 

“O my lord! that is the voic we often hear with the music.” 

“often!” said the count, “how often, pray? It is a veri fine one.” 

“why, my lord, I myself have not heard it more than two or three times, 
but there are those who have live here longer, that have heard it 
often enough.” 

“what a swell wa that!” exclaim the count, as he still listened, 
“and now, what a die cadence! thi is sure someth more than 
mortal!” 

“that is what they say, my lord,” said the valet; “they say it is 
noth mortal, that utter it; and if I might say my thoughts—” 

“peace!” said the count, and he listen till the strain die away. 

“thi is strange!” said he, as he turn from the window, “close the 
casements, pierre.” 

pierr obeyed, and the count soon after dismiss him, but did not so 
soon lose the remembr of the music, which long vibrat in hi 
fanci in tone of melt sweetness, while surpris and perplex 
engag hi thoughts. 

ludovico, meanwhile, in hi remot chamber, heard, now and then, the 
faint echo of a close door, as the famili retir to rest, and then 
the hall clock, at a great distance, strike twelve. “it is midnight,” 
said he, and he look suspici round the spaciou chamber. the 
fire on the hearth wa now nearli expiring, for hi attent have 
been engag by the book befor him, he had forgotten everyth 
besides; but he soon ad fresh wood, not becaus he wa cold, though 
the night wa stormy, but becaus he wa cheerless; and, have again 
trim hi lamp, he pour out a glass of wine, drew hi chair nearer 
to the crackl blaze, tri to be deaf to the wind, that howl 
mourn at the casements, endeavour to abstract hi mind from the 
melancholi that wa steal upon him, and again took up hi book. It 
had been lent to him by dorothée, who had formerli pick it up in an 
obscur corner of the marquis’ library, and who, have open it and 
perceiv some of the marvel it related, had care preserv it 
for her own entertainment, it condit give her some excus for 
detain it from it proper station. the damp corner into which it had 
fallen had caus the cover to be disfigur and mouldy, and the leav 
to be so discolour with spots, that it wa not without difficulti the 
letter could be traced. the fiction of the provenç writers, whether 
drawn from the arabian legends, brought by the saracen into spain, or 
recount the chivalr exploit perform by the crusaders, whom the 
troubador accompani to the east, were gener splendid and alway 
marvellous, both in sceneri and incident; and it is not wonderful, that 
dorothé and ludovico should be fascin by inventions, which had 
captiv the careless imagin in everi rank of society, in a 
former age. some of the tales, however, in the book now befor 
ludovico, were of simpl structure, and exhibit noth of the 
magnific machineri and heroic manners, which usual characteris 
the fabl of the twelfth century, and of thi descript wa the one 
he now happen to open, which, in it origin style, wa of great 
length, but which may be thu shortli related. the reader will perceiv 
that it is strongli tinctur with the superstit of the times. 

the provenç tale 


“there lived, in the provinc of bretagne, a nobl baron, famou for 
hi magnific and courtli hospitalities. hi castl wa grace with 
ladi of exquisit beauty, and throng with illustri knights; for 
the honour he paid to feat of chivalri invit the brave of distant 
countri to enter hi lists, and hi court wa more splendid than 
those of mani princes. eight minstrel were retain in hi service, 
who use to sing to their harp romant fictions, taken from the 
arabians, or adventur of chivalry, that befel knight dure the 
crusades, or the martial deed of the baron, their lord;—whil he, 
surround by hi knight and ladies, banquet in the great hall of 
hi castle, where the costli tapestry, that adorn the wall with 
pictur exploit of hi ancestors, the casement of paint glass, 
enrich with armori bearings, the gorgeou banners, that wave along 
the roof, the sumptuou canopies, the profus of gold and silver that 
glitter on the sideboards, the numer dishes, that cover the 
tables, the number and gay liveri of the attendants, with the 
chivalr and splendid attir of the guests, unit to form a scene of 
magnificence, such as we may not hope to see in these _degener 
days_. 

“of the baron, the follow adventur is related. one night, have 
retir late from the banquet to hi chamber, and dismiss hi 
attendants, he wa surpris by the appear of a stranger of a nobl 
air, but of a sorrow and deject countenance. believing, that thi 
person had been secret in the apartment, sinc it appear imposs 
he could have late pass the ante-room, unobserv by the page in 
waiting, who would have prevent thi intrus on their lord, the 
baron, call loudli for hi people, drew hi sword, which he had not 
yet taken from hi side, and stood upon hi defence. the stranger 
slowli advancing, told him, that there wa noth to fear; that he 
came with no hostil design, but to commun to him a terribl 
secret, which it wa necessari for him to know. 

“the baron, appeas by the courteou manner of the stranger, after 
survey him, for some time, in silence, return hi sword into the 
scabbard, and desir him to explain the means, by which he had 
obtain access to the chamber, and the purpos of thi extraordinari 
visit. 

“without answer either of these enquiries, the stranger said, that 
he could not then explain himself, but that, if the baron would follow 
him to the edg of the forest, at a short distanc from the castl 
walls, he would there convinc him, that he had someth of import 
to disclose. 

“thi propos again alarm the baron, who could scarc believe, 
that the stranger meant to draw him to so solitari a spot, at thi hour 
of the night, without harbour a design against hi life, and he 
refus to go, observing, at the same time, that, if the stranger’ 
purpos wa an honour one, he would not persist in refus to 
reveal the occas of hi visit, in the apart where they were. 

“while he spoke this, he view the stranger still more attent 
than before, but observ no chang in hi countenance, or ani symptom, 
that might intim a conscious of evil design. He wa habit like 
a knight, wa of a tall and majest stature, and of dignifi and 
courteou manners. still, however, he refus to commun the 
subject of hi errand in ani place, but that he had mentioned, and, at 
the same time, gave hint concern the secret he would disclose, that 
awaken a degre of solemn curios in the baron, which, at length, 
induc him to consent to follow the stranger on certain conditions. 

“‘sir knight,’ said he, ‘I will attend you to the forest, and will take 
with me onli four of my people, who shall wit our conference.’ 

“to this, however, the knight objected. 

“‘what I would disclose,’ said he, with solemnity, ‘i to you alone. 
there are onli three live persons, to whom the circumst is known; 
it is of more consequ to you and your house, than I shall now 
explain. In futur years, you will look back to thi night with 
satisfact or repentance, accordingli as you now determine. As you 
would hereaft prosper—follow me; I pledg you the honour of a knight, 
that no evil shall befal you;—if you are content to dare 
futurity—remain in your chamber, and I will depart as I came.’ 

“‘sir knight,’ repli the baron, ‘how is it possible, that my futur 
peac can depend upon my present determination?’ 

“‘that is not now to be told,’ said the stranger, ‘I have explain 
myself to the utmost. It is late; if you follow me it must be 
quickly;—y will do well to consid the alternative.’ 

“the baron mused, and, as he look upon the knight, he perceiv hi 
counten assum a singular solemnity.” 

[here ludovico thought he heard a noise, and he threw a glanc round 
the chamber, and then held up the lamp to assist hi observation; but, 
not perceiv anyth to confirm hi alarm, he took up the book again 
and pursu the story.] 

“the baron pace hi apartment, for some time, in silence, impress by 
the last word of the stranger, whose extraordinari request he fear 
to grant, and feared, also, to refuse. At length, he said, ‘sir knight, 
you are utterli unknown to me; tell me yourself,—i it reasonable, that 
I should trust myself alon with a stranger, at thi hour, in a 
solitari forest? tell me, at least, who you are, and who assist to 
secret you in thi chamber.’ 

“the knight frown at these latter words, and wa a moment silent; 
then, with a counten somewhat stern, he said, 

“‘i am an english knight; I am call sir bevi of lancaster,—and my 
deed are not unknown at the holi city, whenc I wa return to my 
nativ land, when I wa benight in the neighbour forest.’ 

“‘your name is not unknown to fame,’ said the baron, ‘I have heard of 
it.’ (the knight look haughtily.) ‘but why, sinc my castl is known 
to entertain all true knights, did not your herald announc you? whi 
did you not appear at the banquet, where your presenc would have been 
welcomed, instead of hide yourself in my castle, and steal to my 
chamber, at midnight?’ 

“the stranger frowned, and turn away in silence; but the baron 
repeat the questions. 

“‘i come not,’ said the knight, ‘to answer enquiries, but to reveal 
facts. If you would know more, follow me, and again I pledg the honour 
of a knight that you shall return in safety.—b quick in your 
determination—i must be gone.’ 

“after some further hesitation, the baron determin to follow the 
stranger, and to see the result of hi extraordinari request; he, 
therefore, again drew forth hi sword, and, take up a lamp, bade the 
knight lead on. the latter obeyed, and, open the door of the 
chamber, they pass into the ante-room, where the baron, surpris to 
find all hi page asleep, stopped, and, with hasti violence, wa go 
to reprimand them for their carelessness, when the knight wave hi 
hand, and look so express upon the baron, that the latter 
restrain hi resentment, and pass on. 

“the knight, have descend a staircase, open a secret door, which 
the baron had believ wa known onli to himself, and, proceed 
through sever narrow and wind passages, came, at length, to a 
small gate, that open beyond the wall of the castle. meanwhile, the 
baron follow in silenc and amazement, on perceiv that these 
secret passag were so well known to a stranger, and felt inclin to 
return from an adventur that appear to partak of treachery, as well 
as danger. then, consid that he wa armed, and observ the 
courteou and nobl air of hi conductor, hi courag returned, he 
blushed, that it had fail him for a moment, and he resolv to trace 
the mysteri to it source. 

“he now found himself on the heathi platform, befor the great gate of 
hi castle, where, on look up, he perceiv light glimmer in the 
differ casement of the guests, who were retir to sleep; and, 
while he shiver in the blast, and look on the dark and desol 
scene around him, he thought of the comfort of hi warm chamber, 
render cheer by the blaze of wood, and felt, for a moment, the 
full contrast of hi present situation.” 

[here ludovico paus a moment, and, look at hi own fire, gave it a 
brighten stir.] 

“the wind wa strong, and the baron watch hi lamp with anxiety, 
expect everi moment to see it extinguished; but, though the flame 
wavered, it did not expire, and he still follow the stranger, who 
often sigh as he went, but did not speak. 

“when they reach the border of the forest, the knight turned, and 
rais hi head, as if he meant to address the baron, but then, close 
hi lip in silence, he walk on. 

“a they enter beneath the dark and spread boughs, the baron, 
affect by the solemn of the scene, hesit whether to proceed, 
and demand how much further they were to go. the knight repli onli 
by a gesture, and the baron, with hesit step and a suspici 
eye, follow through an obscur and intric path, till, have 
proceed a consider way, he again demand whither they were 
going, and refus to proceed unless he wa informed. 

“a he said this, he look at hi own sword, and at the knight 
alternately, who shook hi head, and whose deject counten 
disarm the baron, for a moment, of suspicion. 

“‘a littl further is the place, whither I would lead you,’ said the 
stranger; ‘no evil shall befal you—i have sworn it on the honour of a 
knight.’ 

“the baron, reassured, again follow in silence, and they soon arriv 
at a deep recess of the forest, where the dark and lofti chesnut 
entir exclud the sky, and which wa so overgrown with underwood, 
that they proceed with difficulty. the knight sigh deepli as he 
passed, and sometim paused; and having, at length, reach a spot, 
where the tree crowd into a knot, he turned, and, with a terrif 
look, point to the ground, the baron saw there the bodi of a man, 
stretch at it length, and welter in blood; a ghastli wound wa on 
the forehead, and death appear alreadi to have contract the 
features. 

“the baron, on perceiv the spectacle, start in horror, look at 
the knight for explanation, and wa then go to rais the bodi and 
examin if there were yet ani remain of life; but the stranger, wave 
hi hand, fix upon him a look so earnest and mournful, as not onli 
much surpris him, but made him desist. 

“but, what were the baron’ emotions, when, on hold the lamp near 
the featur of the corpse, he discov the exact resembl of the 
stranger hi conductor, to whom he now look up in astonish and 
enquiry? As he gazed, he perceiv the counten of the knight 
change, and begin to fade, till hi whole form gradual vanish from 
hi astonish sense! while the baron stood, fix to the spot, a voic 
wa heard to utter these words:—” 

[ludovico started, and laid down the book, for he thought he heard a 
voic in the chamber, and he look toward the bed, where, however, he 
saw onli the dark curtain and the pall. He listened, scarc dare 
to draw hi breath, but heard onli the distant roar of the sea in 
the storm, and the blast, that rush by the casements; when, 
concluding, that he had been deceiv by it sighings, he took up hi 
book to finish the story.] 

“while the baron stood, fix to the spot, a voic wa heard to utter 
these words:—* 

(*note: thi repetit seem to be intentional. ludovico is pick up 
the thread.) 


“the bodi of sir bevi of lancaster, a nobl knight of england, lie 
befor you. He was, thi night, waylaid and murdered, as he journey 
from the holi citi toward hi nativ land. respect the honour of 
knighthood and the law of humanity; inter the bodi in christian ground, 
and caus hi murder to be punished. As ye observe, or neglect this, 
shall peac and happiness, or war and misery, light upon you and your 
hous for ever!” 

“the baron, when he recov from the awe and astonishment, into which 
thi adventur had thrown him, return to hi castle, whither he 
caus the bodi of sir bevi to be removed; and, on the follow day, 
it wa interred, with the honour of knighthood, in the chapel of the 
castle, attend by all the nobl knight and ladies, who grace the 
court of baron de brunne.” 



ludovico, have finish thi story, laid asid the book, for he felt 
drowsy, and, after put more wood on the fire and take anoth 
glass of wine, he repos himself in the arm-chair on the hearth. In 
hi dream he still beheld the chamber where he realli was, and, onc or 
twice, start from imperfect slumbers, imagin he saw a man’ face, 
look over the high back of hi arm-chair. thi idea had so strongli 
impress him, that, when he rais hi eyes, he almost expect to 
meet other eyes, fix upon hi own, and he quit hi seat and look 
behind the chair, befor he felt perfectli convinced, that no person 
wa there. 

thu close the hour. 



chapter vii 

enjoy the honey-heavi dew of slumber; 
thou hast no figures, nor no fantasies, 
which busi care draw in the brain of men; 
therefor thou sleep’st so sound. 
shakespear 


the count, who had slept littl dure the night, rose early, and, 
anxiou to speak with ludovico, went to the north apartment; but, the 
outer door have been fastened, on the preced night, he wa oblig 
to knock loudli for admittance. neither the knocking, nor hi voic wa 
heard; but, consid the distanc of thi door from the bedroom, and 
that ludovico, weari with watching, had probabl fallen into a deep 
sleep, the count wa not surpris on receiv no answer, and, leav 
the door, he went down to walk in hi grounds. 

It wa a grey autumn morning. the sun, rise over provence, gave 
onli a feebl light, as hi ray struggl through the vapour that 
ascend from the sea, and float heavili over the wood-tops, which 
were now vari with mani a mellow tint of autumn. the storm wa 
passed, but the wave were yet violent agitated, and their cours wa 
trace by long line of foam, while not a breez flutter in the sail 
of the vessels, near the shore, that were weigh anchor to depart. 
the still gloom of the hour wa pleas to the count, and he pursu 
hi way through the woods, sunk in deep thought. 

emili also rose at an earli hour, and took her customari walk along the 
brow of the promontory, that overhung the mediterranean. her mind wa 
now not occupi with the occurr of the château, and valancourt 
wa the subject of her mourn thoughts; whom she had not yet taught 
herself to consid with indifference, though her judgment constantli 
reproach her for the affection, that linger in her heart, after her 
esteem for him wa departed. remembr frequent gave her hi 
part look and the tone of hi voice, when he had bade her a last 
farewell; and, some accident associ now recal these 
circumst to her fancy, with peculiar energy, she shed bitter tear 
to the recollection. 

have reach the watch-tower, she seat herself on the broken steps, 
and, in melancholi dejection, watch the waves, half hid in vapour, as 
they came roll toward the shore, and threw up their light spray 
round the rock below. their hollow murmur and the obscur mists, 
that came in wreath up the cliffs, gave a solemn to the scene, 
which wa in harmoni with the temper of her mind, and she sat, given up 
to the remembr of past times, till thi becam too painful, and she 
abruptli quit the place. On pass the littl gate of the 
watch-tower, she observ letters, engrav on the stone postern, which 
she paus to examine, and, though they appear to have been rude 
cut with a pen-knife, the charact were familiar to her; at length, 
recognis the hand-writ of valancourt, she read, with trembl 
anxieti the follow lines, entitl 

shipwreck 

’til solemn midnight! On thi lone steep, 
beneath thi watch-tow’r’ desol wall, 
where mystic shape the wonder appall, 
I rest; and view below the desert deep, 
As through tempestu cloud the moon’ cold light 
gleam on the wave. viewless, the wind of night 
with loud mysteri forc the billow sweep, 
and sullen roar the surges, far below. 
In the still paus of the gust I hear 
the voic of spirits, rise sweet and slow, 
and oft among the cloud their form appear. 
but hark! what shriek of death come in the gale, 
and in the distant ray what glimmer sail 
bend to the storm?—now sink the note of fear! 
ah! wretch mariners!—no more shall day 
unclos hi cheer eye to light ye on your way! 


from these line it appeared, that valancourt had visit the tower; 
that he had probabl been here on the preced night, for it wa such 
a one as they described, and that he had left the build veri lately, 
sinc it had not long been light, and without light it wa imposs 
these letter could have been cut. It wa thu even probable, that he 
might be yet in the gardens. 

As these reflect pass rapidli over the mind of emily, they call 
up a varieti of contend emotions, that almost overcam her spirits; 
but her first impuls wa to avoid him, and, immedi leav the 
tower, she returned, with hasti steps, toward the château. As she 
pass along, she rememb the music she had late heard near the 
tower, with the figure, which had appeared, and, in thi moment of 
agitation, she wa inclin to believe, that she had then heard and 
seen valancourt; but other recollect soon convinc her of her 
error. On turn into a thicker part of the woods, she perceiv a 
person, walk slowli in the gloom at some littl distance, and, her 
mind engag by the idea of him, she start and paused, imagin thi 
to be valancourt. the person advanc with quicker steps, and, befor 
she could recov recollect enough to avoid him, he spoke, and she 
then knew the voic of the count, who express some surprise, on 
find her walk at so earli an hour, and made a feebl effort to 
ralli her on her love of solitude. but he soon perceiv thi to be 
more a subject of concern than of light laughter, and, chang hi 
manner, affection expostul with emily, on thu indulg 
unavail regret; who, though she acknowledg the just of all he 
said, could not restrain her tears, while she did so, and he present 
quit the topic. express surpris at not have yet heard from hi 
friend, the advoc at avignon, in answer to the question propos to 
him, respect the estat of the late madam montoni, he, with 
friendli zeal, endeavour to cheer emili with hope of establish 
her claim to them; while she felt, that the estat could now 
contribut littl to the happi of a life, in which valancourt had 
no longer an interest. 

when they return to the château, emili retir to her apartment, and 
count De villefort to the door of the north chambers. thi wa still 
fastened, but, be now determin to arous ludovico, he renew hi 
call more loudli than before, after which a total silenc ensued, and 
the count, find all hi effort to be heard ineffectual, at length 
began to fear, that some accid had befallen ludovico, whom terror of 
an imaginari be might have depriv of hi senses. he, therefore, 
left the door with an intent of summon hi servant to forc it 
open, some of whom he now heard move in the lower part of the 
château. 

To the count’ enquiries, whether they had seen or heard ludovico, they 
repli in affright, that not one of them had ventur on the north 
side of the château, sinc the preced night. 

“he sleep soundli then,” said the count, “and is at such a distanc 
from the outer door, which is fastened, that to gain admitt to the 
chamber it will be necessari to forc it. bring an instrument, and 
follow me.” 

the servant stood mute and dejected, and it wa not till nearli all 
the household were assembled, that the count’ order were obeyed. In 
the mean time, dorothé wa tell of a door, that open from a 
gallery, lead from the great staircas into the last ante-room of 
the saloon, and, thi be much nearer to the bed-chamber, it appear 
probable, that ludovico might be easili awaken by an attempt to open 
it. thither, therefore, the count went, but hi voic wa as 
ineffectu at thi door as it had prove at the remot one; and now, 
serious interest for ludovico, he wa himself go to strike upon 
the door with the instrument, when he observ it singular beauty, and 
withheld the blow. It appeared, on the first glance, to be of ebony, so 
dark and close wa it grain and so high it polish; but it prove to 
be onli of larch wood, of the growth of provence, then famou for it 
forest of larch. the beauti of it polish hue and of it delic 
carv determin the count to spare thi door, and he return to 
that lead from the back staircase, which being, at length, forced, 
he enter the first ante-room, follow by henri and a few of the most 
courag of hi servants, the rest await the event of the enquiri 
on the stair and landing-place. 

all wa silent in the chambers, through which the count passed, and, 
have reach the saloon, he call loudli upon ludovico; after which, 
still receiv no answer, he threw open the door of the bedroom, and 
entered. 

the profound still within confirm hi apprehens for ludovico, 
for not even the breath of a person in sleep were heard; and hi 
uncertainti wa not soon terminated, sinc the shutter be all 
closed, the chamber wa too dark for ani object to be distinguish in 
it. 

the count bade a servant open them, who, as he cross the room to do 
so, stumbl over something, and fell to the floor, when hi cri 
occas such panic among the few of hi fellows, who had ventur 
thu far, that they instantli fled, and the count and henri were left 
to finish the adventure. 

henri then sprung across the room, and, open a window-shutter, they 
perceived, that the man had fallen over a chair near the hearth, in 
which ludovico had been sitting;—for he sat there no longer, nor could 
anywher be seen by the imperfect light, that wa admit into the 
apartment. the count, serious alarmed, now open other shutters, 
that he might be enabl to examin further, and, ludovico not yet 
appearing, he stood for a moment, suspend in astonish and 
scarc trust hi senses, till, hi eye glanc on the bed, he 
advanc to examin whether he wa there asleep. No person, however, 
wa in it, and he proceed to the oriel, where everyth remain as 
on the preced night, but ludovico wa nowher to be found. 

the count now check hi amazement, consid that ludovico might 
have left the chambers, dure the night, overcom by the terrors, 
which their lone desol and the recollect reports, concern 
them, had inspired. yet, if thi had been the fact, the man would 
natur have sought society, and hi fellow servant had all declar 
they had not seen him; the door of the outer room also had been found 
fastened, with the key on the inside; it wa impossible, therefore, for 
him to have pass through that, and all the outer door of thi suit 
were found, on examination, to be bolt and locked, with the key also 
within them. the count, be then compel to believe, that the lad 
had escap through the casements, next examin them, but such as 
open wide enough to admit the bodi of a man were found to be 
care secur either by iron bars, or by shutters, and no vestig 
appear of ani person have attempt to pass them; neither wa it 
probable, that ludovico would have incur the risk of break hi 
neck, by leap from a window, when he might have walk safe 
through a door. 

the count’ amaz did not admit of words; but he return onc more 
to examin the bedroom, where wa no appear of disorder, except 
that occas by the late overthrow of the chair, near which had 
stood a small table, and on thi ludovico’ sword, hi lamp, the book 
he had been reading, and the remnant of hi flask of wine still 
remained. At the foot of the table, too, wa the basket with some 
fragment of provis and wood. 

henri and the servant now utter their astonish without reserve, 
and, though the count said little, there wa a serious in hi 
manner, that express much. It appeared, that ludovico must have 
quit these room by some conceal passage, for the count could not 
believe, that ani supernatur mean had occas thi event, yet, if 
there wa ani such passage, it seem inexplic whi he should 
retreat through it, and it wa equal surprising, that not even the 
smallest vestig should appear, by which hi progress could be traced. 
In the room everyth remain as much in order as if he had just 
walk out by the common way. 

the count himself assist in lift the arras, with which the 
bed-chamber, saloon and one of the ante-room were hung, that he might 
discov if ani door had been conceal behind it; but, after a 
labori search, none wa found, and he, at length, quit the 
apartments, have secur the door of the last ante-chamber, the key 
of which he took into hi own possession. He then gave orders, that 
strict search should be made for ludovico not onli in the château, but 
in the neighbourhood, and, retir with henri to hi closet, they 
remain there in convers for a consider time, and whatev 
wa the subject of it, henri from thi hour lost much of hi vivacity, 
and hi manner were particularli grave and reserved, whenev the 
topic, which now agit the count’ famili with wonder and alarm, wa 
introduced. 

On the disappear of ludovico, baron st. foix seem strengthen in 
all hi former opinion concern the probabl of apparitions, 
though it wa difficult to discov what connect there could 
possibl be between the two subjects, or to account for thi effect 
otherwis than by supposing, that the mysteri attend ludovico, by 
excit awe and curiosity, reduc the mind to a state of sensibility, 
which render it more liabl to the influenc of superstit in 
general. It is, however, certain, that from thi period the baron and 
hi adher becam more bigot to their own system than before, 
while the terror of the count’ servant increas to an excess, that 
occas mani of them to quit the mansion immediately, and the rest 
remain onli till other could be procur to suppli their places. 

the most strenuou search after ludovico prove unsuccessful, and, 
after sever day of indefatig enquiry, poor annett gave herself 
up to despair, and the other inhabit of the château to amazement. 

emily, whose mind had been deepli affect by the disastr fate of 
the late marchio and with the mysteri connection, which she 
fanci had exist between her and st. aubert, wa particularli 
impress by the late extraordinari event, and much concern for the 
loss of ludovico, whose integr and faith servic claim both 
her esteem and gratitude. she wa now veri desir to return to the 
quiet retir of her convent, but everi hint of thi wa receiv 
with real sorrow by the ladi blanche, and affection set asid by 
the count, for whom she felt much of the respect love and admir 
of a daughter, and to whom, by dorothée’ consent, she, at length, 
mention the appearance, which they had wit in the chamber of 
the deceas marchioness. At ani other period, he would have smile at 
such a relation, and have believed, that it object had exist onli in 
the distemp fanci of the relater; but he now attend to emili with 
seriousness, and, when she concluded, request of her a promise, that 
thi occurr should rest in silence. “whatev may be the caus and 
the import of these extraordinari occurrences,” ad the count, “time 
onli can explain them. I shall keep a wari eye upon all that pass in 
the château, and shall pursu everi possibl mean of discov the 
fate of ludovico. meanwhile, we must be prudent and be silent. I will 
myself watch in the north chambers, but of thi we will say nothing, 
till the night arrives, when I purpos do so.” 

the count then sent for dorothée, and requir of her also a promis of 
silence, concern what she had already, or might in futur wit of 
an extraordinari nature; and thi ancient servant now relat to him 
the particular of the marchio de villeroi’ death, with some of 
which he appear to be alreadi acquainted, while by other he wa 
evid surpris and agitated. after listen to thi narrative, 
the count retir to hi closet, where he remain alon for sever 
hours; and, when he again appeared, the solemn of hi manner 
surpris and alarm emily, but she gave no utter to her thoughts. 

On the week follow the disappear of ludovico, all the count’ 
guest took leav of him, except the baron, hi son mons. st. foix, and 
emily; the latter of whom wa soon after embarrass and distress by 
the arriv of anoth visitor, mons. Du pont, which made her determin 
upon withdraw to her convent immediately. the delight, that appear 
in hi countenance, when he met her, told that he brought back the same 
ardour of passion, which had formerli banish him from 
château-le-blanc. He wa receiv with reserv by emily, and with 
pleasur by the count, who present him to her with a smile, that 
seem intend to plead hi cause, and who did not hope the less for 
hi friend, from the embarrass she betrayed. 

but M. Du pont, with truer sympathy, seem to understand her manner, 
and hi counten quickli lost it vivacity, and sunk into the 
languor of despondency. 

On the follow day, however, he sought an opportun of declar 
the purport of hi visit, and renew hi suit; a declaration, which 
wa receiv with real concern by emily, who endeavour to lessen the 
pain she might inflict by a second rejection, with assur of esteem 
and friendship; yet she left him in a state of mind, that claim and 
excit her tenderest compassion; and, be more sensibl than ever of 
the improprieti of remain longer at the château, she immedi 
sought the count, and commun to him her intent of return to 
the convent. 

“mi dear emily,” said he, “I observ with extrem concern, the illus 
you are encouraging—an illus common to young and sensibl minds. 
your heart ha receiv a sever shock; you believ you can never 
entir recov it, and you will encourag thi belief, till the habit 
of indulg sorrow will subdu the strength of your mind, and 
discolour your futur view with melancholi and regret. let me 
dissip thi illusion, and awaken you to a sens of your danger.” 

emili smile mournfully, “I know what you would say, my dear sir,” said 
she, “and am prepar to answer you. I feel, that my heart can never 
know a second affection; and that I must never hope even to recov it 
tranquillity—if I suffer myself to enter into a second engagement.” 

“I know, that you feel all this,” repli the count; “and I know, also, 
that time will overcom these feelings, unless you cherish them in 
solitude, and, pardon me, with romant tenderness. then, indeed, time 
will onli confirm habit. I am particularli empow to speak on thi 
subject, and to sympathis in your sufferings,” ad the count, with 
an air of solemnity, “for I have known what it is to love, and to 
lament the object of my love. yes,” continu he, while hi eye fill 
with tears, “I have suffered!—but those time have pass away—long 
passed! and I can now look back upon them without emotion.” 

“mi dear sir,” said emily, timidly, “what mean those tears?—they speak, 
I fear, anoth language—they plead for me.” 

“they are weak tears, for they are useless ones,” repli the count, 
dri them, “I would have you superior to such weakness. these, 
however, are onli faint trace of a grief, which, if it had not been 
oppos by long continu effort, might have led me to the verg of 
madness! judge, then, whether I have not caus to warn you of an 
indulgence, which may produc so terribl an effect, and which must 
certainly, if not opposed, overcloud the years, that otherwis might be 
happy. M. Du pont is a sensibl and amiabl man, who ha long been 
tenderli attach to you; hi famili and fortun are 
unexceptionable;—aft what I have said, it is unnecessari to add, that 
I should rejoic in your felicity, and that I think M. Du pont would 
promot it. Do not weep, emily,” continu the count, take her hand, 
“there _is_ happi reserv for you.” 

He wa silent a moment; and then added, in a firmer voice, “I do not 
wish, that you should make a violent effort to overcom your feelings; 
all I, at present, ask, is, that you will check the thoughts, that 
would lead you to a remembr of the past; that you will suffer your 
mind to be engag by present objects; that you will allow yourself to 
believ it possibl you may yet be happy; and that you will sometim 
think with complac of poor Du pont, and not condemn him to the 
state of despondency, from which, my dear emily, I am endeavour to 
withdraw you.” 

“ah! my dear sir,” said emily, while her tear still fell, “do not 
suffer the benevol of your wish to mislead mons. Du pont with an 
expect that I can ever accept hi hand. If I understand my own 
heart, thi never can be; your instruct I can obey in almost everi 
other particular, than that of adopt a contrari belief.” 

“leav me to understand your heart,” repli the count, with a faint 
smile. “if you pay me the compliment to be guid by my advic in other 
instances, I will pardon your incredulity, respect your futur 
conduct toward mons. Du pont. I will not even press you to remain 
longer at the château than your own satisfact will permit; but 
though I forbear to oppos your present retirement, I shall urg the 
claim of friendship for your futur visits.” 

tear of gratitud mingl with those of tender regret, while emili 
thank the count for the mani instanc of friendship she had receiv 
from him; promis to be direct by hi advic upon everi subject but 
one, and assur him of the pleasure, with which she should, at some 
futur period, accept the invit of the countess and himself—if 
mons. Du pont wa not at the château. 

the count smile at thi condition. “be it so,” said he, “meanwhil the 
convent is so near the château, that my daughter and I shall often 
visit you; and if, sometimes, we should dare to bring you anoth 
visitor—wil you forgiv us?” 

emili look distressed, and remain silent. 

“well,” rejoin the count, “I will pursu thi subject no further, and 
must now entreat your forgiv for have press it thu far. you 
will, however, do me the justic to believe, that I have been urg 
onli by a sincer regard for your happiness, and that of my amiabl 
friend mons. Du pont.” 

emily, when she left the count, went to mention her intend departur 
to the countess, who oppos it with polit express of regret; 
after which, she sent a note to acquaint the ladi abbess, that she 
should return to the convent; and thither she withdrew on the even 
of the follow day. M. Du pont, in extrem regret, saw her depart, 
while the count endeavour to cheer him with a hope, that emili would 
sometim regard him with a more favour eye. 

she wa pleas to find herself onc more in the tranquil retir of 
the convent, where she experienc a renew of all the matern 
kind of the abbess, and of the sisterli attent of the nuns. A 
report of the late extraordinari occurr at the château had alreadi 
reach them, and, after supper, on the even of her arrival, it wa 
the subject of convers in the convent parlour, where she wa 
request to mention some particular of that unaccount event. 
emili wa guard in her convers on thi subject, and briefli 
relat a few circumst concern ludovico, whose disappearance, 
her auditor almost unanim agreed, had been effect by 
supernatur means. 

“A belief had so long prevailed,” said a nun, who wa call sister 
frances, “that the château wa haunted, that I wa surprised, when I 
heard the count had the temer to inhabit it. it former possessor, I 
fear, had some deed of conscienc to aton for; let us hope, that the 
virtu of it present owner will preserv him from the punish due 
to the error of the last, if, indeed, he wa a criminal.” 

“of what crime, then, wa he suspected?” said a mademoisel feydeau, a 
boarder at the convent. 

“let us pray for hi soul!” said a nun, who had till now sat in silent 
attention. “if he wa criminal, hi punish in thi world wa 
sufficient.” 

there wa a mixtur of wild and solemn in her manner of 
deliv this, which struck emili exceedingly; but mademoisel 
repeat her question, without notic the solemn eager of the 
nun. 

“I dare not presum to say what wa hi crime,” repli sister frances; 
“but I have heard mani report of an extraordinari nature, respect 
the late marqui de villeroi, and among others, that, soon after the 
death of hi lady, he quit château-le-blanc, and never afterward 
return to it. I wa not here at the time, so I can onli mention it 
from report, and so mani year have pass sinc the marchio died, 
that few of our sisterhood, I believe, can do more.” 

“but I can,” said the nun, who had befor spoke, and whom they call 
sister agnes. 

“you then,” said mademoisel feydeau, “are possibl acquaint with 
circumstances, that enabl you to judge, whether he wa crimin or 
not, and what wa the crime imput to him.” 

“I am,” repli the nun; “but who shall dare to scrutin my 
thoughts—who shall dare to pluck out my opinion? god onli is hi judge, 
and to that judg he is gone!” 

emili look with surpris at sister frances, who return her a 
signific glance. 

“I onli request your opinion,” said mademoisel feydeau, mildly; “if 
the subject is displeas to you, I will drop it.” 

“displeasing!”—said the nun, with emphasis.—“w are idl talkers; we do 
not weigh the mean of the word we use; _displeasing_ is a poor 
word. I will go pray.” As she said thi she rose from her seat, and 
with a profound sigh quit the room. 

“what can be the mean of this?” said emily, when she wa gone. 

“it is noth extraordinary,” repli sister frances, “she is often 
thus; but she had no mean in what she says. her intellect are at 
time deranged. did you never see her thu before?” 

“never,” said emily. “I have, indeed, sometimes, thought, that there 
wa the melancholi of mad in her look, but never befor perceiv 
it in her speech. poor soul, I will pray for her!” 

“your prayer then, my daughter, will unit with ours,” observ the 
ladi abbess, “she ha need of them.” 

“dear lady,” said mademoisel feydeau, address the abbess, “what is 
your opinion of the late marquis? the strang circumstances, that have 
occur at the château, have so much awaken my curiosity, that I 
shall be pardon the question. what wa hi imput crime, and what 
the punishment, to which sister agn alluded?” 

“we must be cautiou of advanc our opinion,” said the abbess, with 
an air of reserve, mingl with solemnity, “we must be cautiou of 
advanc our opinion on so delic a subject. I will not take upon me 
to pronounce, that the late marqui wa criminal, or to say what wa 
the crime of which he wa suspected; but, concern the punish our 
daughter agn hinted, I know of none he suffered. she probabl allud 
to the sever one, which an exasper conscienc can inflict. beware, 
my children, of incur so terribl a punishment—it is the purgatori 
of thi life! the late marchio I knew well; she wa a pattern to 
such as live in the world; nay, our sacr order need not have blush 
to copi her virtues! our holi convent receiv her mortal part; her 
heavenli spirit, I doubt not, ascend to it sanctuary!” 

As the abbess spoke this, the last bell of vesper struck up, and she 
rose. “let us go, my children,” said she, “and interced for the 
wretched; let us go and confess our sins, and endeavour to purifi our 
soul for the heaven, to which _she_ is gone!” 

emili wa affect by the solemn of thi exhortation, and, 
rememb her father, “the heaven, to which _he_, too, is gone!” said 
she, faintly, as she suppress her sighs, and follow the abbess and 
the nun to the chapel. 



chapter viii 

Be thou a spirit of health, or goblin damn’d, 
bring with thee air from heaven, or blast from hell, 
Be thi intent wicked, or charitable, 

I will speak to thee. 
hamlet 


count de villefort, at length, receiv a letter from the advoc at 
avignon, encourag emili to assert her claim to the estat of the 
late madam montoni; and, about the same time, a messeng arriv from 
monsieur quesnel with intelligence, that made an appeal to the law on 
thi subject unnecessary, sinc it appeared, that the onli person, who 
could have oppos her claim, wa now no more. A friend of monsieur 
quesnel, who resid at venice, had sent him an account of the death of 
montoni who had been brought to trial with orsino, as hi suppos 
accomplic in the murder of the venetian nobleman. orsino wa found 
guilty, condemn and execut upon the wheel, but, noth be 
discov to crimin montoni, and hi colleagues, on thi charge, 
they were all released, except montoni, who, be consid by the 
senat as a veri danger person, was, for other reasons, order 
again into confinement, where, it wa said, he had die in a doubt 
and mysteri manner, and not without suspicion of have been 
poisoned. the authority, from which M. quesnel had receiv thi 
information, would not allow him to doubt it truth, and he told emily, 
that she had now onli to lay claim to the estat of her late aunt, to 
secur them, and added, that he would himself assist in the necessari 
form of thi business. the term, for which La vallé had been let 
be now also nearli expired, he acquaint her with the circumstance, 
and advis her to take the road thither, through thoulouse, where he 
promis to meet her, and where it would be proper for her to take 
possess of the estat of the late madam montoni; adding, that he 
would spare her ani difficulties, that might occur on that occas 
from the want of knowledg on the subject, and that he believ it 
would be necessari for her to be at thoulouse, in about three week 
from the present time. 

An increas of fortun seem to have awaken thi sudden kind in 
M. quesnel toward hi niece, and it appeared, that he entertain more 
respect for the rich heiress, than he had ever felt compass for the 
poor and unfriend orphan. 

the pleasure, with which she receiv thi intelligence, wa cloud 
when she considered, that he, for whose sake she had onc regret the 
want of fortune, wa no longer worthi of share it with her; but, 
rememb the friendli admonit of the count, she check thi 
melancholi reflection, and endeavour to feel onli gratitud for the 
unexpect good, that now attend her; while it form no 
inconsider part of her satisfact to know, that La vallée, her 
nativ home, which wa endear to her by it’ have been the 
resid of her parents, would soon be restor to her possession. 
there she meant to fix her futur residence, for, though it could not 
be compar with the château at thoulouse, either for extent, or 
magnificence, it pleasant scene and the tender remembrances, that 
haunt them, had claim upon her heart, which she wa not inclin to 
sacrific to ostentation. she wrote immedi to thank M. quesnel for 
the activ interest he took in her concerns, and to say, that she would 
meet him at thoulous at the appoint time. 

when count de villefort, with blanche, came to the convent to give 
emili the advic of the advocate, he wa inform of the content of M. 
quesnel’ letter, and gave her hi sincer congratulations, on the 
occasion; but she observed, that, when the first express of 
satisfact had fade from hi countenance, an unusu graviti 
succeeded, and she scarc hesit to enquir it cause. 

“it ha no new occasion,” repli the count; “I am harass and 
perplex by the confusion, into which my famili is thrown by their 
foolish superstition. idl report are float round me, which I can 
neither admit to be true, nor prove to be false; and I am, also, veri 
anxiou about the poor fellow, ludovico, concern whom I have not 
been abl to obtain information. everi part of the château and everi 
part of the neighbourhood, too, has, I believe, been searched, and I 
know not what further can be done, sinc I have alreadi offer larg 
reward for the discoveri of him. the key of the north apart I 
have not suffer to be out of my possession, sinc he disappeared, and 
I mean to watch in those chambers, myself, thi veri night.” 

emily, serious alarm for the count, unit her entreati with 
those of the ladi blanche, to dissuad him from hi purpose. 

“what should I fear?” said he. “I have no faith in supernatur 
combats, and for human opposit I shall be prepared; nay, I will even 
promis not to watch alone.” 

“but who, dear sir, will have courag enough to watch with you?” said 
emily. 

“mi son,” repli the count. “if I am not carri off in the night,” 
ad he, smiling, “you shall hear the result of my adventure, 
tomorrow.” 

the count and ladi blanche, shortli afterwards, took leav of emily, 
and return to the château, where he inform henri of hi intention, 
who, not without some secret reluctance, consent to be the partner of 
hi watch; and, when the design wa mention after supper, the 
countess wa terrified, and the baron, and M. Du pont join with her 
in entreating, that he would not tempt hi fate, as ludovico had done. 
“we know not,” ad the baron, “the nature, or the power of an evil 
spirit; and that such a spirit haunt those chamber can now, I think, 
scarc be doubted. beware, my lord, how you provok it vengeance, 
sinc it ha alreadi given us one terribl exampl of it malice. I 
allow it may be probable, that the spirit of the dead are permit to 
return to the earth onli on occas of high import; but the present 
import may be your destruction.” 

the count could not forbear smiling; “do you think then, baron,” said 
he, “that my destruct is of suffici import to draw back to 
earth the soul of the departed? alas! my good friend, there is no 
occas for such mean to accomplish the destruct of ani 
individual. wherev the mysteri rests, I trust I shall, thi night, be 
abl to detect it. you know I am not superstitious.” 

“I know that you are incredulous,” interrupt the baron. 

“well, call it what you will, I mean to say, that, though you know I am 
free from superstition—if anyth supernatur ha appeared, I doubt 
not it will appear to me, and if ani strang event hang over my house, 
or if ani extraordinari transact ha formerli been connect with 
it, I shall probabl be made acquaint with it. At all event I will 
invit discovery; and, that I may be equal to a mortal attack, which in 
good truth, my friend, is what I most expect, I shall take care to be 
well armed.” 

the count took leav of hi family, for the night, with an assum 
gaiety, which but ill conceal the anxiety, that depress hi 
spirits, and retir to the north apartments, accompani by hi son 
and follow by the baron, M. Du pont and some of the domestics, who 
all bade him good night at the outer door. In these chamber everyth 
appear as when he had last been here; even in the bedroom no 
alter wa visible, where he light hi own fire, for none of the 
domest could be prevail upon to ventur thither. after care 
examin the chamber and the oriel, the count and henri drew their 
chair upon the hearth, set a bottl of wine and a lamp befor them, 
laid their sword upon the table, and, stir the wood into a blaze, 
began to convers on indiffer topics. but henri wa often silent and 
abstracted, and sometim threw a glanc of mingl awe and curios 
round the gloomi apartment; while the count gradual ceas to 
converse, and sat either lost in thought, or read a volum of 
tacitus, which he had brought to beguil the tedious of the night. 



chapter IX 

give thi thought no tongue. 
shakespear 


the baron st. foix, whom anxieti for hi friend had kept awake, rose 
earli to enquir the event of the night, when, as he pass the count’ 
closet, hear step within, he knock at the door, and it wa open 
by hi friend himself. rejoic to see him in safety, and curiou to 
learn the occurr of the night, he had not immedi leisur to 
observ the unusu gravity, that overspread the featur of the count, 
whose reserv answer first occas him to notic it. the count, 
then smiling, endeavour to treat the subject of hi curios with 
levity, but the baron wa serious, and pursu hi enquiri so 
closely, that the count, at length, resum hi gravity, said, “well, 
my friend, press the subject no further, I entreat you; and let me 
request also, that you will hereaft be silent upon anyth you may 
think extraordinari in my futur conduct. I do not scrupl to tell you, 
that I am unhappy, and that the watch of the last night ha not 
assist me to discov ludovico; upon everi occurr of the night 
you must excus my reserve.” 

“but where is henri?” said the baron, with surpris and disappoint 
at thi denial. 

“he is well in hi own apartment,” repli the count. “you will not 
question him on thi topic, my friend, sinc you know my wish.” 

“certainli not,” said the baron, somewhat chagrined, “sinc it would be 
displeas to you; but methinks, my friend, you might reli on my 
discretion, and drop thi unusu reserve. however, you must allow me 
to suspect, that you have seen reason to becom a convert to my system, 
and are no longer the incredul knight you late appear to be.” 

“let us talk no more upon thi subject,” said the count; “you may be 
assured, that no ordinari circumst ha impos thi silenc upon me 
toward a friend, whom I have call so for near thirti years; and my 
present reserv cannot make you question either my esteem, or the 
sincer of my friendship.” 

“I will not doubt either,” said the baron, “though you must allow me to 
express my surprise, at thi silence.” 

“to me I will allow it,” repli the count, “but I earnestli entreat 
that you will forbear to notic it to my family, as well as everyth 
remark you may observ in my conduct toward them.” 

the baron readili promis this, and, after convers for some time on 
gener topics, they descend to the breakfast-room, where the count 
met hi famili with a cheer countenance, and evad their enquiri 
by employ light ridicule, and assum an air of uncommon gaiety, 
while he assur them, that they need not apprehend ani evil from the 
north chambers, sinc henri and himself had been permit to return 
from them in safety. 

henri, however, wa less success in disguis hi feelings. from 
hi counten an express of terror wa not entir faded; he wa 
often silent and thoughtful, and when he attempt to laugh at the 
eager enquiri of mademoisel bearn, it wa evid onli an 
attempt. 

In the evening, the count called, as he had promised, at the convent, 
and emili wa surpris to perceiv a mixtur of play ridicul and 
of reserv in hi mention of the north apartment. Of what had occur 
there, however, he said nothing, and, when she ventur to remind him 
of hi promis to tell her the result of hi enquiries, and to ask if 
he had receiv ani proof, that those chamber were haunted, hi look 
becam solemn, for a moment, then, seem to recollect himself, he 
smiled, and said, “mi dear emily, do not suffer my ladi abbess to 
infect your good understand with these fancies; she will teach you 
to expect a ghost in everi dark room. but believ me,” ad he, with a 
profound sigh, “the apparit of the dead come not on light, or 
sportiv errands, to terrify, or to surpris the timid.” He paused, and 
fell into a momentari thoughtfulness, and then added, “we will say no 
more on thi subject.” 

soon after, he took leave, and, when emili join some of the nuns, she 
wa surpris to find them acquaint with a circumstance, which she 
had care avoid to mention, and express their admir of 
hi intrepid in have dare to pass a night in the apartment, 
whenc ludovico had disappeared; for she had not consid with what 
rapid a tale of wonder circulates. the nun had acquir their 
inform from peasants, who brought fruit to the monastery, and 
whose whole attent had been fixed, sinc the disappear of 
ludovico, on what wa pass in the castle. 

emili listen in silenc to the variou opinion of the nuns, 
concern the conduct of the count, most of whom condemn it as rash 
and presumptuous, affirming, that it wa provok the vengeanc of an 
evil spirit, thu to intrud upon it haunts. 

sister franc contended, that the count had act with the braveri of 
a virtuou mind. He knew himself guiltless of aught, that should 
provok a good spirit, and did not fear the spell of an evil one, 
sinc he could claim the protect of a higher power, of him, who can 
command the wicked, and will protect the innocent. 

“the guilti cannot claim that protection!” said sister agnes, “let the 
count look to hi conduct, that he do not forfeit hi claim! yet who is 
he, that shall dare to call himself innocent!—al earthli innoc is 
but comparative. yet still how wide asund are the extrem of guilt, 
and to what a horribl depth may we fall! oh!—” 

the nun, as she concluded, utter a shudder sigh, that startl 
emily, who, look up, perceiv the eye of agn fix on hers, 
after which the sister rose, took her hand, gaze earnestli upon her 
countenance, for some moments, in silence, and then said, 

“you are young—you are innocent! I mean you are yet innoc of ani 
great crime!—but you have passion in your heart,—scorpions; they sleep 
now—bewar how you awaken them!—they will sting you, even unto death!” 

emily, affect by these word and by the solemnity, with which they 
were delivered, could not suppress her tears. 

“ah! is it so?” exclaim agnes, her counten soften from it 
sternness—“so young, and so unfortunate! We are sisters, then indeed. 
yet, there is no bond of kind among the guilty,” she added, while 
her eye resum their wild expression, “no gentleness,—no peace, no 
hope! I knew them all once—mi eye could weep—but now they burn, for 
now, my soul is fixed, and fearless!—i lament no more!” 

“rather let us repent, and pray,” said anoth nun. “we are taught to 
hope, that prayer and penit will work our salvation. there is hope 
for all who repent!” 

“who repent and turn to the true faith,” observ sister frances. 

“for all but me!” repli agn solemnly, who paused, and then abruptli 
added, “mi head burns, I believ I am not well. O! could I strike from 
my memori all former scenes—th figures, that rise up, like furies, to 
torment me!—i see them, when I sleep, and, when I am awake, they are 
still befor my eyes! I see them now—now!” 

she stood in a fix attitud of horror, her strain eye move 
slowli round the room, as if they follow something. one of the nun 
gentli took her hand, to lead her from the parlour. agn becam calm, 
drew her other hand across her eyes, look again, and, sigh deeply, 
said, “they are gone—they are gone! I am feverish, I know not what I 
say. I am thus, sometimes, but it will go off again, I shall soon be 
better. wa not that the vesper-bell?” 

“no,” repli frances, “the even servic is passed. let margaret 
lead you to your cell.” 

“you are right,” repli sister agnes, “I shall be better there. good 
night, my sisters, rememb me in your orisons.” 

when they had withdrawn, frances, observ emily’ emotion, said, “do 
not be alarmed, our sister is often thu deranged, though I have not 
late seen her so frantic; her usual mood is melancholy. thi fit ha 
been come on, for sever days; seclus and the customari treatment 
will restor her.” 

“but how ration she conversed, at first!” observ emily, “her 
idea follow each other in perfect order.” 

“yes,” repli the nun, “thi is noth new; nay, I have sometim 
known her argu not onli with method, but with acuteness, and then, in 
a moment, start off into madness.” 

“her conscienc seem afflicted,” said emily, “did you ever hear what 
circumst reduc her to thi deplor condition?” 

“I have,” repli the nun, who said no more till emili repeat the 
question, when she ad in a low voice, and look significantli 
toward the other boarders, “I cannot tell you now, but, if you think 
it worth your while, come to my cell, tonight, when our sisterhood are 
at rest, and you shall hear more; but rememb we rise to midnight 
prayers, and come either before, or after midnight.” 

emili promis to remember, and, the abbess soon after appearing, they 
spoke no more of the unhappi nun. 

the count meanwhile, on hi return home, had found M. Du pont in one of 
those fit of despondency, which hi attach to emili frequent 
occas him, an attachment, that had subsist too long to be easili 
subdued, and which had alreadi outliv the opposit of hi friends. 
M. Du pont had first seen emili in gascony, dure the lifetim of hi 
parent, who, on discov hi son’ partial for mademoisel st. 
aubert, hi inferior in point of fortune, forbad him to declar it to 
her family, or to think of her more. dure the life of hi father, he 
had observ the first command, but had found it impractic to obey 
the second, and had, sometimes, sooth hi passion by visit her 
favourit haunts, among which wa the fishing-house, where, onc or 
twice, he address her in verse, conceal hi name, in obedi to 
the promis he had given hi father. there too he play the pathet 
air, to which she had listen with such surpris and admiration; and 
there he found the miniature, that had sinc cherish a passion fatal 
to hi repose. dure hi expedit into italy, hi father died; but 
he receiv hi liberti at a moment, when he wa the least enabl to 
profit by it, sinc the object, that render it most valuable, wa no 
longer within the reach of hi vows. By what accid he discov 
emily, and assist to releas her from a terribl imprisonment, ha 
alreadi appeared, and also the unavail hope, with which he then 
encourag hi love, and the fruitless efforts, that he had sinc made 
to overcom it. 

the count still endeavoured, with friendli zeal, to sooth him with a 
belief, that patience, persever and prudenc would final obtain 
for him happi and emily: “time,” said he, “will wear away the 
melancholi impression, which disappoint ha left on her mind, and 
she will be sensibl of your merit. your servic have alreadi awaken 
her gratitude, and your suffer her pity; and trust me, my friend, 
in a heart so sensibl as hers, gratitud and piti lead to love. when 
her imagin is rescu from it present delusion, she will readili 
accept the homag of a mind like yours.” 

Du pont sighed, while he listen to these words; and, endeavour to 
hope what hi friend believed, he willingli yield to an invit to 
prolong hi visit at the château, which we now leav for the monasteri 
of st. claire. 

when the nun had retir to rest, emili stole to her appoint with 
sister frances, whom she found in her cell, engag in prayer, befor a 
littl table, where appear the imag she wa addressing, and, above, 
the dim lamp that gave light to the place. turn her eyes, as the 
door opened, she beckon to emili to come in, who, have done so, 
seat herself in silenc besid the nun’ littl mattress of straw, 
till her orison should conclude. the latter soon rose from her knees, 
and, take down the lamp and place it on the table, emili perceiv 
there a human skull and bones, lie besid an hour-glass; but the nun, 
without observ her emotion, sat down on the mattress by her, saying, 
“your curiosity, sister, ha made you punctual, but you have noth 
remark to hear in the histori of poor agnes, of whom I avoid to 
speak in the presenc of my lay-sisters, onli becaus I would not 
publish her crime to them.” 

“I shall consid your confid in me as a favour,” said emily, “and 
will not misus it.” 

“sister agnes,” resum the nun, “i of a nobl family, as the digniti 
of her air must alreadi have inform you, but I will not dishonour 
their name so much as to reveal it. love wa the occas of her crime 
and of her madness. she wa belov by a gentleman of inferior fortune, 
and her father, as I have heard, bestow her on a nobleman, whom she 
disliked, an ill-govern passion prove her destruction.—everi 
oblig of virtu and of duti wa forgotten, and she prophan her 
marriag vows; but her guilt wa soon detected, and she would have 
fallen a sacrific to the vengeanc of her husband, had not her father 
contriv to convey her from hi power. By what mean he did this, I 
never could learn; but he secret her in thi convent, where he 
afterward prevail with her to take the veil, while a report wa 
circul in the world, that she wa dead, and the father, to save hi 
daughter, assist the rumour, and employ such mean as induc her 
husband to believ she had becom a victim to hi jealousy. you look 
surprised,” ad the nun, observ emily’ countenance; “I allow the 
stori is uncommon, but not, I believe, without a parallel.” 

“pray proceed,” said emily, “I am interested.” 

“the stori is alreadi told,” resum the nun, “I have onli to mention, 
that the long struggle, which agn suffered, between love, remors and 
a sens of the duti she had taken upon herself in becom of our 
order, at length unsettl her reason. At first, she wa frantic and 
melancholi by quick alternatives; then, she sunk into a deep and 
settl melancholy, which still, however, has, at times, been 
interrupt by fit of wildness, and, of late, these have again been 
frequent.” 

emili wa affect by the histori of the sister, some part of whose 
stori brought to her remembr that of the marchio de villeroi, 
who had also been compel by her father to forsak the object of her 
affections, for a nobleman of hi choice; but, from what dorothé had 
related, there appear no reason to suppose, that she had escap the 
vengeanc of a jealou husband, or to doubt for a moment the innoc 
of her conduct. but emily, while she sigh over the miseri of the nun, 
could not forbear shed a few tear to the misfortun of the 
marchioness; and, when she return to the mention of sister agnes, she 
ask franc if she rememb her in her youth, and whether she wa 
then beautiful. 

“I wa not here at the time, when she took the vows,” repli frances, 
“which is so long ago, that few of the present sisterhood, I believe, 
were wit of the ceremony; nay, ever our ladi mother did not then 
presid over the convent: but I can remember, when sister agn wa a 
veri beauti woman. she retain that air of high rank, which alway 
distinguish her, but her beauty, you must perceive, is fled; I can 
scarc discov even a vestig of the loveliness, that onc anim 
her features.” 

“it is strange,” said emily, “but there are moments, when her 
counten ha appear familiar to my memory! you will think me 
fanciful, and I think myself so, for I certainli never saw sister 
agnes, befor I came to thi convent, and I must, therefore, have seen 
some person, whom she strongli resembles, though of thi I have no 
recollection.” 

“you have been interest by the deep melancholi of her countenance,” 
said frances, “and it impress ha probabl delud your 
imagination; for I might as reason think I perceiv a like 
between you and agnes, as you, that you have seen her anywher but in 
thi convent, sinc thi ha been her place of refuge, for nearli as 
mani year as make your age.” 

“indeed!” said emily. 

“yes,” rejoin frances, “and whi doe that circumst excit your 
surprise?” 

emili did not appear to notic thi question, but remain thoughtful, 
for a few moments, and then said, “it wa about that same period that 
the marchio de villeroi expired.” 

“that is an odd remark,” said frances. 

emily, recal from her reverie, smiled, and gave the convers 
anoth turn, but it soon came back to the subject of the unhappi nun, 
and emili remain in the cell of sister frances, till the midnight 
bell arous her; when, apologis for have interrupt the sister’ 
repose, till thi late hour, they quit the cell together. emili 
return to her chamber, and the nun, bear a glimmer taper, went 
to her devot in the chapel. 

sever day followed, dure which emili saw neither the count, nor 
ani of hi family; and, when, at length, he appeared, she remarked, 
with concern, that hi air wa unusu disturbed. 

“mi spirit are harassed,” said he, in answer to her anxiou enquiries, 
“and I mean to chang my residence, for a littl while, an experiment, 
which, I hope, will restor my mind to it usual tranquillity. My 
daughter and myself will accompani the baron st. foix to hi château. 
It lie in a valley of the pyrenees, that open toward gascony, and I 
have been thinking, emily, that, when you set out for La vallée, we may 
go part of the way together; it would be a satisfact to me to guard 
you toward your home.” 

she thank the count for hi friendli consideration, and lamented, 
that the necess for her go first to thoulous would render thi 
plan impracticable. “but, when you are at the baron’ residence,” she 
added, “you will be onli a short journey from La vallée, and I think, 
sir, you will not leav the countri without visit me; it is 
unnecessari to say with what pleasur I should receiv you and the ladi 
blanche.” 

“I do not doubt it,” repli the count, “and I will not deni myself and 
blanch the pleasur of visit you, if your affair should allow you 
to be at La vallée, about the time when we can meet you there.” 

when emili said that she should hope to see the countess also, she wa 
not sorri to learn that thi ladi wa going, accompani by 
mademoisel bearn, to pay a visit, for a few weeks, to a famili in 
lower languedoc. 

the count, after some further convers on hi intend journey and 
on the arrang of emily’s, took leave; and mani day did not 
succeed thi visit, befor a second letter from M. quesnel inform 
her, that he wa then at thoulouse, that La vallé wa at liberty, and 
that he wish her to set off for the former place, where he await 
her arrival, with all possibl dispatch, sinc hi own affair press 
him to return to gascony. emili did not hesit to obey him, and, 
have taken an affect leav of the count’ family, in which M. Du 
pont wa still included, and of her friend at the convent, she set out 
for thoulouse, attend by the unhappi annette, and guard by a steadi 
servant of the count. 



chapter X 

lull’d in the countless chamber of the brain, 
our thought are link’d by mani a hidden chain: 
awak but one, and lo! what myriad rise! 
each stamp it imag as the other flies! 
pleasur OF memori 


emili pursu her journey, without ani accident, along the plain of 
languedoc toward the north-west; and, on thi her return to thoulouse, 
which she had last left with madam montoni, she thought much on the 
melancholi fate of her aunt, who, but for her own imprudence, might now 
have been live in happi there! montoni, too, often rose to her 
fancy, such as she had seen him in hi day of triumph, bold, spirit 
and commanding; such also as she had sinc beheld him in hi day of 
vengeance; and now, onli a few short month had passed—and he had no 
longer the power, or the will to afflict;—h had becom a clod of 
earth, and hi life wa vanish like a shadow! emili could have wept 
at hi fate, had she not rememb hi crimes; for that of her 
unfortun aunt she did weep, and all sens of her error wa overcom 
by the recollect of her misfortunes. 

other thought and other emot succeeded, as emili drew near the 
well-known scene of her earli love, and considered, that valancourt 
wa lost to her and to himself, for ever. At length, she came to the 
brow of the hill, whence, on her departur for italy, she had given a 
farewel look to thi belov landscape, amongst whose wood and field 
she had so often walk with valancourt, and where he wa then to 
inhabit, when she would be far, far away! she saw, onc more, that 
chain of the pyrenees, which overlook La vallée, rising, like faint 
clouds, on the horizon. “there, too, is gascony, extend at their 
feet!” said she, “O my father,—mi mother! and there, too, is the 
garonne!” she added, dri the tears, that obscur her sight,—“and 
thoulouse, and my aunt’ mansion—and the grove in her garden!—o my 
friends! are ye all lost to me—must I never, never see ye more!” tear 
rush again to her eyes, and she continu to weep, till an abrupt 
turn in the road had nearli occas the carriag to overset, when, 
look up, she perceiv anoth part of the well-known scene around 
thoulouse, and all the reflect and anticipations, which she had 
suffered, at the moment, when she bade it last adieu, came with 
recollect forc to her heart. she rememb how anxious she had 
look forward to the futurity, which wa to decid her happi 
concern valancourt, and what depress fear had assail her; the 
veri word she had uttered, as she withdrew her last look from the 
prospect, came to her memory. “could I but be certain,” she had then 
said, “that I should ever return, and that valancourt would still live 
for me—i should go in peace!” 

now, that futurity, so anxious anticipated, wa arrived, she wa 
returned—but what a dreari blank appeared!—valancourt no longer live 
for her! she had no longer even the melancholi satisfact of 
contempl hi imag in her heart, for he wa no longer the same 
valancourt she had cherish there—th solac of mani a mourn hour, 
the anim friend, that had enabl her to bear up against the 
oppress of montoni—th distant hope, that had beam over her gloomi 
prospect! On perceiv thi belov idea to be an illus of her own 
creation, valancourt seem to be annihilated, and her soul sicken at 
the blank, that remained. hi marriag with a rival, even hi death, 
she thought she could have endur with more fortitude, than thi 
discovery; for then, amidst all her grief, she could have look in 
secret upon the imag of goodness, which her fanci had drawn of him, 
and comfort would have mingl with her suffering! 

dri her tears, she looked, onc more, upon the landscape, which had 
excit them, and perceived, that she wa pass the veri bank, where 
she had taken leav of valancourt, on the morn of her departur from 
thoulouse, and she now saw him, through her return tears, such as he 
had appeared, when she look from the carriag to give him a last 
adieu—saw him lean mourn against the high trees, and rememb 
the fix look of mingl tender and anguish, with which he had 
then regard her. thi recollect wa too much for her heart, and 
she sunk back in the carriage, nor onc look up, till it stop at 
the gate of what wa now her own mansion. 

these be opened, and by the servant, to whose care the château had 
been entrusted, the carriag drove into the court, where, alighting, 
she hastili pass through the great hall, now silent and solitary, to 
a larg oak parlour, the common sit room of the late madam 
montoni, where, instead of be receiv by M. quesnel, she found a 
letter from him, inform her that busi of consequ had oblig 
him to leav thoulous two day before. emili was, upon the whole, not 
sorri to be spare hi presence, sinc hi abrupt departur appear to 
indic the same indifference, with which he had formerli regard 
her. thi letter inform her, also, of the progress he had made in the 
settlement of her affairs, and conclud with directions, concern 
the form of some business, which remain for her to transact. but M. 
quesnel’ unkind did not long occupi her thoughts, which return 
the remembr of the person she had been accustom to see in thi 
mansion, and chiefli of the ill-guid and unfortun madam montoni. 
In the room, where she now sat, she had breakfast with her on the 
morn of their departur for italy; and the view of it brought most 
forcibl to her recollect all she had herself suffered, at that 
time, and the mani gay expectations, which her aunt had formed, 
respect the journey befor her. while emily’ mind wa thu engaged, 
her eye wander unconsci to a larg window, that look upon the 
garden, and here new memori of the past spoke to her heart, for she 
saw extend befor her the veri avenue, in which she had part with 
valancourt, on the eve of her journey; and all the anxiety, the tender 
interest he had shown, concern her futur happiness, hi earnest 
remonstr against her commit herself to the power of montoni, 
and the truth of hi affection, came afresh to her memory. At thi 
moment, it appear almost impossible, that valancourt could have 
becom unworthi of her regard, and she doubt all that she had late 
heard to hi disadvantage, and even hi own words, which had confirm 
count De villefort’ report of him. overcom by the recollections, 
which the view of thi avenu occasioned, she turn abruptli from the 
window, and sunk into a chair besid it, where she sat, given up to 
grief, till the entranc of annette, with coffee, arous her. 

“dear madam, how melancholi thi place look now,” said annette, “to 
what it use to do! It is dismal come home, when there is nobodi to 
welcom one!” 

thi wa not the moment, in which emili could bear the remark; her 
tear fell again, and, as soon as she had taken the coffee, she retir 
to her apartment, where she endeavour to repos her fatigu spirits. 
but busi memori would still suppli her with the vision of former 
times: she saw valancourt interest and benevolent, as he had been 
wont to appear in the day of their earli love, and, amidst the scenes, 
where she had believ that they should sometim pass their year 
together!—but, at length, sleep close these afflict scene from her 
view. 

On the follow morning, seriou occup recov her from such 
melancholi reflections; for, be desir of quit thoulouse, and 
of hasten on to La vallée, she made some enquiri into the 
condit of the estate, and immedi dispatch a part of the 
necessari busi concern it, accord to the direct of mons. 
quesnel. It requir a strong effort to abstract her thought from 
other interest suffici to attend to this, but she wa reward 
for her exert by again experiencing, that employ is the surest 
antidot to sorrow. 

thi day wa devot entir to business; and, among other concerns, 
she employ mean to learn the situat of all her poor tenants, that 
she might reliev their wants, or confirm their comforts. 

In the evening, her spirit were so much strengthened, that she thought 
she could bear to visit the gardens, where she had so often walk with 
valancourt; and, knowing, that, if she delay to do so, their scene 
would onli affect her the more, whenev they should be viewed, she 
took advantag of the present state of her mind, and enter them. 

pass hastili the gate lead from the court into the gardens, she 
hurri up the great avenue, scarc permit her memori to dwell 
for a moment on the circumst of her have here part with 
valancourt, and soon quit thi for other walk less interest to 
her heart. these brought her, at length, to the flight of steps, that 
led from the lower garden to the terrace, on see which, she becam 
agitated, and hesit whether to ascend, but, her resolut 
returning, she proceeded. 

“ah!” said emily, as she ascended, “these are the same high trees, that 
use to wave over the terrace, and these the same floweri thickets—th 
liburnum, the wild rose, and the cerinthe—which were wont to grow 
beneath them! ah! and there, too, on that bank, are the veri plants, 
which valancourt so care reared!—o, when last I saw them!”—sh 
check the thought, but could not restrain her tears, and, after 
walk slowli on for a few moments, her agitation, upon the view of 
thi well-known scene, increas so much, that she wa oblig to stop, 
and lean upon the wall of the terrace. It wa a mild, and beauti 
evening. the sun wa set over the extens landscape, to which hi 
beams, slope from beneath a dark cloud, that overhung the west, gave 
rich and partial colouring, and touch the tuft summit of the 
groves, that rose from the garden below, with a yellow gleam. emili and 
valancourt had often admir togeth thi scene, at the same hour; and 
it wa exactli on thi spot, that, on the night preced her departur 
for italy, she had listen to hi remonstr against the journey, 
and to the plead of passion affection. some observations, which 
she made on the landscape, brought thi to her remembrance, and with it 
all the minut particular of that conversation;—th alarm doubt he 
had express concern montoni, doubts, which had sinc been fatal 
confirmed; the reason and entreati he had employ to prevail with 
her to consent to an immedi marriage; the tender of hi love, 
the paroxysm of thi grief, and the convict that he had repeatedli 
expressed, that they should never meet again in happiness! all these 
circumst rose afresh to her mind, and awaken the variou 
emot she had then suffered. her tender for valancourt becam as 
power as in the moments, when she thought, that she wa part with 
him and happi together, and when the strength of her mind had 
enabl her to triumph over present suffering, rather than to deserv 
the reproach of her conscienc by engag in a clandestin 
marriage.—“alas!” said emily, as these recollect came to her mind, 
“and what have I gain by the fortitud I then practised?—am I happi 
now?—h said, we should meet no more in happiness; but, O! he littl 
thought hi own misconduct would separ us, and lead to the veri evil 
he then dreaded!” 

her reflect increas her anguish, while she wa compel to 
acknowledge, that the fortitud she had formerli exerted, if it had not 
conduct her to happiness, had save her from irretriev 
misfortune—from valancourt himself! but in these moment she could not 
congratul herself on the prudence, that had save her; she could 
onli lament, with bitterest anguish, the circumstances, which had 
conspir to betray valancourt into a cours of life so differ from 
that, which the virtues, the tastes, and the pursuit of hi earli 
year had promised; but she still love him too well to believe, that 
hi heart wa even now depraved, though hi conduct had been criminal. 
An observation, which had fallen from M. st. aubert more than once, now 
occur to her. “thi young man,” said he, speak of valancourt, 
“ha never been at paris;” a remark, that had surpris her at the time 
it wa uttered, but which she now understood, and she exclaim 
sorrowfully, “O valancourt! if such a friend as my father had been with 
you at paris—your noble, ingenu natur would not have fallen!” 

the sun wa now set, and, recal her thought from their melancholi 
subject, she continu her walk; for the pensiv shade of twilight wa 
pleas to her, and the nightingal from the surround grove began 
to answer each other in the long-drawn, plaintiv note, which alway 
touch her heart; while all the fragranc of the floweri thickets, 
that bound the terrace, wa awaken by the cool even air, which 
float so lightli among their leaves, that they scarc trembl as 
it passed. 

emili came, at length, to the step of the pavilion, that termin 
the terrace, and where her last interview with valancourt, befor her 
departur from thoulouse, had so unexpectedli taken place. the door wa 
now shut, and she trembled, while she hesit whether to open it; but 
her wish to see again a place, which had been the chief scene of her 
former happiness, at length overcom her reluct to encount the 
pain regret it would renew, she entered. the room wa obscur by a 
melancholi shade; but through the open lattices, darken by the 
hang foliag of the vines, appear the duski landscape, the garonn 
reflect the even light, and the west still glowing. A chair wa 
place near one of the balconies, as if some person had been sit 
there, but the other furnitur of the pavilion remain exactli as 
usual, and emili thought it look as if it had not onc been move 
sinc she set out for italy. the silent and desert air of the place 
ad solemn to her emotions, for she heard onli the low whisper of 
the breeze, as it shook the leav of the vines, and the veri faint 
murmur of the garonne. 

she seat herself in a chair, near the lattice, and yield to the 
sad of her heart, while she recollect the circumst of her 
part interview with valancourt, on thi spot. It wa here too, that 
she had pass some of the happiest hour of her life with him, when 
her aunt favour the connection, for here she had often sat and 
worked, while he conversed, or read; and she now well rememb with 
what discrimin judgment, with what temper energy, he use to 
repeat some of the sublimest passag of their favourit authors; how 
often he would paus to admir with her their excellence, and with what 
tender delight he would listen to her remarks, and correct her taste. 

“and is it possible,” said emily, as these recollect returned—“i 
it possible, that a mind, so suscept of whatev is grand and 
beautiful, could stoop to low pursuits, and be subdu by frivol 
temptations?” 

she rememb how often she had seen the sudden tear start in hi eye, 
and had heard hi voic trembl with emotion, while he relat ani 
great or benevol action, or repeat a sentiment of the same 
character. “and such a mind,” said she, “such a heart, were to be 
sacrif to the habit of a great city!” 

these recollect becom too pain to be endured, she abruptli 
left the pavilion, and, anxiou to escap from the memori of her 
depart happiness, return toward the château. As she pass along 
the terrace, she perceiv a person, walking, with a slow step, and a 
deject air, under the trees, at some distance. the twilight, which 
wa now deep, would not allow her to distinguish who it was, and she 
imagin it to be one of the servants, till, the sound of her step 
seem to reach him, he turn half round, and she thought she saw 
valancourt! 

whoever it was, he instantli struck among the thicket on the left, and 
disappeared, while emily, her eye fix on the place, whenc he had 
vanished, and her frame trembl so excessively, that she could 
scarc support herself, remained, for some moments, unabl to quit 
the spot, and scarc consciou of existence. with her recollection, 
her strength returned, and she hurri toward the house, where she did 
not ventur to enquir who had been in the gardens, lest she should 
betray her emotion; and she sat down alone, endeavour to recollect 
the figure, air and featur of the person she had just seen. her view 
of him, however, had been so transient, and the gloom had render it 
so imperfect, that she could rememb noth with exactness; yet the 
gener appear of hi figure, and hi abrupt departure, made her 
still believe, that thi person wa valancourt. sometimes, indeed, she 
thought, that her fancy, which had been occupi by the idea of him, 
had suggest hi imag to her uncertain sight: but thi conjectur wa 
fleeting. If it wa himself whom she had seen, she wonder much, that 
he should be at thoulouse, and more, how he had gain admitt into 
the garden; but as often as her impati prompt her to enquir 
whether ani stranger had been admitted, she wa restrain by an 
unwilling to betray her doubts; and the even wa pass in 
anxiou conjecture, and in effort to dismiss the subject from her 
thoughts. but, these endeavour were ineffectual, and a thousand 
inconsist emot assail her, whenev she fanci that 
valancourt might be near her; now, she dread it to be true, and now 
she fear it to be false; and, while she constantli tri to persuad 
herself, that she wish the person, whom she had seen, might not be 
valancourt, her heart as constantli contradict her reason. 

the follow day wa occupi by the visit of sever neighbour 
families, formerli intim with madam montoni, who came to condol 
with emili on her death, to congratul her upon the acquisit of 
these estates, and to enquir about montoni, and concern the strang 
report they had heard of her own situation; all which wa done with 
the utmost decorum, and the visitor depart with as much composur as 
they had arrived. 

emili wa weari by these formalities, and disgust by the 
subservi manner of mani persons, who had thought her scarc 
worthi of common attention, while she wa believ to be a depend on 
madam montoni. 

“surely,” said she, “there is some magic in wealth, which can thu make 
person pay their court to it, when it doe not even benefit 
themselves. how strang it is, that a fool or a knave, with riches, 
should be treat with more respect by the world, than a good man, or a 
wise man in poverty!” 

It wa evening, befor she wa left alone, and she then wish to have 
refresh her spirit in the free air of her garden; but she fear to 
go thither, lest she should meet again the person, whom she had seen on 
the preced night, and he should prove to be valancourt. the suspens 
and anxieti she suffered, on thi subject, she found all her effort 
unabl to control, and her secret wish to see valancourt onc more, 
though unseen by him, power prompt her to go, but prudenc and a 
delic pride restrain her, and she determin to avoid the 
possibl of throw herself in hi way, by forbear to visit the 
gardens, for sever days. 

when, after near a week, she again ventur thither, she made annett 
her companion, and confin her walk to the lower grounds, but often 
start as the leav rustl in the breeze, imagining, that some 
person wa among the thickets; and, at the turn of everi alley, she 
look forward with apprehens expectation. she pursu her walk 
thought and silently, for her agit would not suffer her to 
convers with annette, to whom, however, thought and silenc were so 
intolerable, that she did not scrupl at length to talk to her 
mistress. 

“dear madam,” said she, “whi do you start so? one would think you knew 
what ha happened.” 

“what ha happened?” said emily, in a falter voice, and tri to 
command her emotion. 

“the night befor last, you know, madam—” 

“I know nothing, annette,” repli her ladi in a more hurri voice. 

“the night befor last, madam, there wa a robber in the garden.” 

“A robber!” said emily, in an eager, yet doubt tone. 

“I suppos he wa a robber, madam. what els could he be?” 

“where did you see him, annette?” rejoin emily, look round her, 
and turn back toward the château. 

“it wa not I that saw him, madam, it wa jean the gardener. It wa 
twelv o’clock at night, and, as he wa come across the court to go 
the back way into the house, what should he see—but somebodi walk in 
the avenue, that front the garden gate! so, with that, jean guess 
how it was, and he went into the hous for hi gun.” 

“hi gun!” exclaim emily. 

“yes, madam, hi gun; and then he came out into the court to watch him. 
presently, he see him come slowli down the avenue, and lean over the 
garden gate, and look up at the hous for a long time; and I warrant he 
examin it well, and settl what window he should break in at.” 

“but the gun,” said emily—“th gun!” 

“yes, madam, all in good time. presently, jean says, the robber open 
the gate, and wa come into the court, and then he thought proper to 
ask him hi business: so he call out again, and bade him say who he 
was, and what he wanted. but the man would do neither; but turn upon 
hi heel, and pass into the garden again. jean knew then well enough 
how it was, and so he fire after him.” 

“fired!” exclaim emily. 

“yes, madam, fire off hi gun; but, holi virgin! what make you look 
so pale, madam? the man wa not killed,—i dare say; but if he was, hi 
comrad carri him off: for, when jean went in the morning, to look 
for the body, it wa gone, and noth to be seen but a track of blood 
on the ground. jean follow it, that he might find out where the man 
got into the garden, but it wa lost in the grass, and—” 

annett wa interrupted: for emily’ spirit die away, and she would 
have fallen to the ground, if the girl had not caught her, and 
support her to a bench, close to them. 

when, after a long absence, her sens returned, emili desir to be 
led to her apartment; and, though she trembl with anxieti to enquir 
further on the subject of her alarm, she found herself too ill at 
present, to dare the intellig which it wa possibl she might 
receiv of valancourt. have dismiss annette, that she might weep 
and think at liberty, she endeavour to recollect the exact air of the 
person, whom she had seen on the terrace, and still her fanci gave her 
the figur of valancourt. she had, indeed, scarc a doubt, that it 
wa he whom she had seen, and at whom the garden had fired: for the 
manner of the latter person, as describ by annette, wa not that of a 
robber; nor did it appear probable, that a robber would have come 
alone, to break into a hous so spaciou as this. 

when emili thought herself suffici recovered, to listen to what 
jean might have to relate, she sent for him; but he could inform her of 
no circumstance, that might lead to a knowledg of the person, who had 
been shot, or of the consequ of the wound; and, after sever 
reprimand him, for have fire with bullets, and order dilig 
enquiri to be made in the neighbourhood for the discoveri of the 
wound person, she dismiss him, and herself remain in the same 
state of terribl suspense. all the tender she had ever felt for 
valancourt, wa recal by the sens of hi danger; and the more she 
consid the subject, the more her convict strengthened, that it 
wa he, who had visit the gardens, for the purpos of sooth the 
miseri of disappoint affection, amidst the scene of hi former 
happiness. 

“dear madam,” said annette, when she returned, “I never saw you so 
affect before! I dare say the man is not killed.” 

emili shuddered, and lament bitterli the rash of the garden in 
have fired. 

“I knew you would be angri enough about that, madam, or I should have 
told you before; and he knew so too; for, say he, ‘annette, say 
noth about thi to my lady. she lie on the other side of the house, 
so did not hear the gun, perhaps; but she would be angri with me, if 
she knew, see there is blood. but then,’ say he, ‘how is one to 
keep the garden clear, if one is afraid to fire at a robber, when one 
see him?’” 

“no more of this,” said emily, “pray leav me.” 

annett obeyed, and emili return to the agon considerations, 
that had assail her before, but which she, at length, endeavour to 
sooth by a new remark. If the stranger wa valancourt, it wa certain 
he had come alone, and it appeared, therefore, that he had been abl to 
quit the gardens, without assistance; a circumst which did not seem 
probable, had hi wound been dangerous. with thi consideration, she 
endeavour to support herself, dure the enquiries, that were make 
by her servant in the neighbourhood; but day after day came, and still 
close in uncertainty, concern thi affair: and emily, suffer in 
silence, at length, drooped, and sunk under the pressur of her 
anxiety. she wa attack by a slow fever, and when she yield to the 
persuas of annett to send for medic advice, the physician 
prescrib littl besid air, gentl exercis and amusement: but how 
wa thi last to be obtained? she, however, endeavour to abstract her 
thought from the subject of her anxiety, by employ them in 
promot that happi in others, which she had lost herself; and, 
when the even wa fine, she usual took an airing, includ in her 
ride the cottag of some of her tenants, on whose condit she made 
such observations, as often enabl her, unasked, to fulfil their 
wishes. 

her indisposit and the busi she engag in, rel to thi 
estate, had alreadi protract her stay at thoulouse, beyond the period 
she had formerli fix for her departur to La vallée; and now she wa 
unwil to leav the onli place, where it seem possible, that 
certainti could be obtain on the subject of her distress. but the 
time wa come, when her presenc wa necessari at La vallée, a letter 
from the ladi blanch now inform her, that the count and herself, 
be then at the château of the baron st. foix, purpos to visit her 
at La vallée, on their way home, as soon as they should be inform of 
her arriv there. blanch added, that they made thi visit, with the 
hope of induc her to return with them to château-le-blanc. 

emily, have repli to the letter of her friend, and said that she 
should be at La vallé in a few days, made hasti prepar for the 
journey; and, in thu leav thoulouse, endeavour to support herself 
with a belief, that, if ani fatal accid had happen to valancourt, 
she must in thi interv have heard of it. 

On the even befor her departure, she went to take leav of the 
terrac and the pavilion. the day had been sultry, but a light shower, 
that fell just befor sunset, had cool the air, and given that soft 
verdur to the wood and pastures, which is so refresh to the eye; 
while the rain drops, still trembl on the shrubs, glitter in the 
last yellow gleam, that light up the scene, and the air wa fill 
with fragrance, exhal by the late shower, from herb and flower and 
from the earth itself. but the love prospect, which emili beheld from 
the terrace, wa no longer view by her with delight; she sigh 
deepli as her eye wander over it, and her spirit were in a state of 
such dejection, that she could not think of her approach return to 
La vallée, without tears, and seem to mourn again the death of her 
father, as if it had been an event of yesterday. have reach the 
pavilion, she seat herself at the open lattice, and, while her eye 
settl on the distant mountains, that overlook gascony, still 
gleam on the horizon, though the sun had now left the plain below, 
“alas!” said she, “I return to your long-lost scenes, but shall meet no 
more the parents, that were wont to render them delightful!—no more 
shall see the smile of welcome, or hear the well-known voic of 
fondness:—al will now be cold and silent in what wa onc my happi 
home.” 

tear stole down her cheek, as the remembr of what that home had 
been, return to her; but, after indulg her sorrow for some time, 
she check it, accus herself of ingratitud in forget the 
friends, that she possessed, while she lament those that were 
departed; and she, at length, left the pavilion and the terrace, 
without have observ a shadow of valancourt or of ani other person. 



chapter XI 

Ah happi hills! ah pleas shade! 
Ah field belov’d in vain! 
where onc my careless childhood stray’d, 
A stranger yet to pain! 
I feel the gales, that from ye blow, 
A momentari bliss bestow, 
As wave fresh their gladsom wing, 
My weari soul they seem to sooth. 
gray 


On the follow morning, emili left thoulous at an earli hour, and 
reach La vallé about sunset. with the melancholi she experienc on 
the review of a place which had been the resid of her parents, and 
the scene of her earliest delight, wa mingled, after the first shock 
had subsided, a tender and undescrib pleasure. for time had so far 
blunt the acut of her grief, that she now court everi scene, 
that awaken the memori of her friends; in everi room, where she had 
been accustom to see them, they almost seem to live again; and she 
felt that La vallé wa still her happiest home. one of the first 
apart she visited, wa that, which had been her father’ library, 
and here she seat herself in hi arm-chair, and, while she 
contemplated, with temper resignation, the pictur of past times, 
which her memori gave, the tear she shed could scarc be call 
those of grief. 

soon after her arrival, she wa surpris by a visit from the vener 
M. barreaux, who came impati to welcom the daughter of hi late 
respect neighbour, to her long-desert home. emili wa comfort by 
the presenc of an old friend, and they pass an interest hour in 
convers of former times, and in relat some of the circumstances, 
that had occur to each, sinc they parted. 

the even wa so far advanced, when M. barreaux left emily, that she 
could not visit the garden that night; but, on the follow morning, 
she trace it long-regret scene with fond impatience; and, as she 
walk beneath the groves, which her father had planted, and where she 
had so often saunter in affection convers with him, hi 
countenance, hi smile, even the accent of hi voice, return with 
exact to her fancy, and her heart melt to the tender 
recollections. 

this, too, wa hi favourit season of the year, at which they had 
often togeth admir the rich and varieg tint of these wood and 
the magic effect of autumn light upon the mountains; and now, the 
view of these circumst made memori eloquent. As she wander 
pensiv on, she fanci the follow address 

TO autumn 

sweet autumn! how thi melancholi grace 
steal on my heart, as through these shade I wind! 
sooth’d by thi breath sigh, I fondli trace 
each lone imag of the pensiv mind! 
lov’d scenes, lov’d friends—long lost! around me rise, 
and wake the melt thought, the tender tear! 
that tear, that thought, which more than mirth I prize— 
sweet as the gradual tint, that paint thi year! 
thi farewel smile, with fond regret, I view, 
thi beam lights, soft glide o’er the woods; 
thi distant landscape, touch’d with yellow hue 
while fall the lengthen’d gleam; thi wind floods, 
now veil’d in shade, save where the skiff’ white sail 
swell to the breeze, and catch thi stream ray. 
but now, e’en now!—th partial vision fails, 
and the wave smiles, as sweep the cloud away! 
emblem of life!—thu checquer’d is it plan, 
thu joy succe to grief—thu smile the vari man! 


one of emily’ earliest enquiries, after her arriv at La vallée, wa 
concern theresa, her father’ old servant, whom it may be rememb 
that M. quesnel had turn from the hous when it wa let, without ani 
provision. understand that she live in a cottag at no great 
distance, emili walk thither, and, on approaching, wa pleas to 
see, that her habit wa pleasantli situat on a green slope, 
shelter by a tuft of oaks, and had an appear of comfort and 
extrem neatness. she found the old woman within, pick vine-stalks, 
who, on perceiv her young mistress, wa nearli overcom with joy. 

“ah! my dear young lady!” said she, “I thought I should never see you 
again in thi world, when I heard you were gone to that outlandish 
country. I have been hardli used, sinc you went; I littl thought they 
would have turn me out of my old master’ famili in my old age!” 

emili lament the circumstance, and then assur her, that she would 
make her latter day comfortable, and express satisfaction, on see 
her in so pleasant a habitation. 

theresa thank her with tears, adding, “yes, mademoiselle, it is a 
veri comfort home, thank to the kind friend, who took me out of my 
distress, when you were too far off to help me, and place me here! I 
littl thought!—but no more of that—” 

“and who wa thi kind friend?” said emily: “whoever it was, I shall 
consid him as mine also.” 

“ah, mademoiselle! that friend forbad me to blazon the good deed—i 
must not say, who it was. but how you are alter sinc I saw you last! 
you look so pale now, and so thin, too; but then, there is my old 
master’ smile! yes, that will never leav you, ani more than the 
goodness, that use to make him smile. alas-a-day! the poor lost a 
friend indeed, when he died!” 

emili wa affect by thi mention of her father, which theresa 
observing, chang the subject. “I heard, mademoiselle,” said she, 
“that madam cheron marri a foreign gentleman, after all, and took 
you abroad; how doe she do?” 

emili now mention her death. “alas!” said theresa, “if she had not 
been my master’ sister, I should never have love her; she wa alway 
so cross. but how doe that dear young gentleman do, M. valancourt? he 
wa a handsom youth, and a good one; is he well, mademoiselle?” 

emili wa much agitated. 

“A bless on him!” continu theresa. “ah, my dear young lady, you 
need not look so shy; I know all about it. Do you think I do not know, 
that he love you? why, when you were away, mademoiselle, he use to 
come to the château and walk about it, so disconsolate! He would go 
into everi room in the lower part of the house, and, sometimes, he 
would sit himself down in a chair, with hi arm across, and hi eye 
on the floor, and there he would sit, and think, and think, for the 
hour together. He use to be veri fond of the south parlour, becaus I 
told him it use to be yours; and there he would stay, look at the 
pictures, which I said you drew, and play upon your lute, that hung 
up by the window, and read in your books, till sunset, and then he 
must go back to hi brother’ château. and then—” 

“it is enough, theresa,” said emily.—“how long have you live in thi 
cottage—and how can I serv you? will you remain here, or return and 
live with me?” 

“nay, mademoiselle,” said theresa, “do not be so shi to your poor old 
servant. I am sure it is no disgrac to like such a good young 
gentleman.” 

A deep sigh escap from emily. 

“ah! how he did love to talk of you! I love him for that. nay, for 
that matter, he like to hear me talk, for he did not say much himself. 
but I soon found out what he came to the château about. then, he would 
go into the garden, and down to the terrace, and sit under that great 
tree there, for the day together, with one of your book in hi hand; 
but he did not read much, I fancy; for one day I happen to go that 
way, and I heard somebodi talking. who can be here? say I: I am sure I 
let nobodi into the garden, but the chevalier. So I walk softly, to 
see who it could be; and behold! it wa the chevali himself, talk 
to himself about you. and he repeat your name, and sigh so! and 
said he had lost you for ever, for that you would never return for him. 
I thought he wa out in hi reckon there, but I said nothing, and 
stole away.” 

“no more of thi trifling,” said emily, awaken from her reverie: “it 
displeas me.” 

“but, when M. quesnel let the château, I thought it would have broke 
the chevalier’ heart.” 

“theresa,” said emili seriously, “you must name the chevali no more!” 

“not name him, mademoiselle!” cri theresa: “what time are come up 
now? why, I love the chevali next to my old master and you, 
mademoiselle.” 

“perhap your love wa not well bestowed, then,” repli emily, tri 
to conceal her tears; “but, howev that might be, we shall meet no 
more.” 

“meet no more!—not well bestowed!” exclaim theresa. “what do I hear? 
no, mademoiselle, my love wa well bestowed, for it wa the chevali 
valancourt, who gave me thi cottage, and ha support me in my old 
age, ever sinc M. quesnel turn me from my master’ house.” 

“the chevali valancourt!” said emily, trembl extremely. 

“yes, mademoiselle, he himself, though he made me promis not to tell; 
but how could one help, when one heard him ill spoken of? ah! dear 
young lady, you may well weep, if you have behav unkindli to him, for 
a more tender heart than hi never young gentleman had. He found me out 
in my distress, when you were too far off to help me; and M. quesnel 
refus to do so, and bade me go to servic again—alas! I wa too old 
for that!—th chevali found me, and bought me thi cottage, and gave 
me money to furnish it, and bade me seek out anoth poor woman to live 
with me; and he order hi brother’ steward to pay me, everi quarter, 
that which ha support me in comfort. think then, mademoiselle, 
whether I have not reason to speak well of the chevalier. and there are 
others, who could have afford it better than he: and I am afraid he 
ha hurt himself by hi generosity, for quarter day is gone by long 
since, and no money for me! but do not weep so, mademoiselle: you are 
not sorri sure to hear of the poor chevalier’ goodness?” 

“sorry!” said emily, and wept the more. “but how long is it sinc you 
have seen him?” 

“not thi mani a day, mademoiselle.” 

“when did you hear of him?” enquir emily, with increas emotion. 

“alas! never sinc he went away so suddenli into languedoc; and he wa 
but just come from pari then, or I should have seen him, I am sure. 
quarter day is gone by long since, and, as I said, no money for me; and 
I begin to fear some harm ha happen to him: and if I wa not so far 
from estuvièr and so lame, I should have gone to enquir befor thi 
time; and I have nobodi to send so far.” 

emily’ anxiety, as to the fate of valancourt, wa now scarc 
endurable, and, sinc proprieti would not suffer her to send to the 
château of hi brother, she request that theresa would immedi 
hire some person to go to hi steward from herself, and, when he ask 
for the quarterag due to her, to make enquiri concern valancourt. 
but she first made theresa promis never to mention her name in thi 
affair, or ever with that of the chevali valancourt; and her former 
faith to M. st. aubert induc emili to confid in her 
assurances. theresa now joy undertook to procur a person for thi 
errand, and then emily, after give her a sum of money to suppli her 
with present comforts, returned, with spirit heavili oppressed, to her 
home, lamenting, more than ever, that a heart, possess of so much 
benevol as valancourt’s, should have been contamin by the vice 
of the world, but affect by the delic affection, which hi 
kind to her old servant express for herself. 



chapter xii 

light thickens, and the crow 
make wing to the rooki wood: 
good thing of day begin to droop, and drowse; 
while night’ black agent to their prey do rouse. 
macbeth 


meanwhil count De villefort and ladi blanch had pass a pleasant 
fortnight at the château de st. foix, with the baron and baroness, 
dure which they made frequent excurs among the mountains, and 
were delight with the romant wild of pyrenean scenery. It wa 
with regret, that the count bade adieu to hi old friends, although 
with the hope of be soon unit with them in one family; for it wa 
settl that M. st. foix, who now attend them into gascony, should 
receiv the hand of the ladi blanche, upon their arriv at 
château-le-blanc. As the road, from the baron’ resid to La vallée, 
wa over some of the wildest tract of the pyrenees, and where a 
carriage-wheel had never passed, the count hire mule for himself and 
hi family, as well as a coupl of stout guides, who were well armed, 
inform of all the pass of the mountains, and who boasted, too, that 
they were acquaint with everi brake and dingl in the way, could tell 
the name of all the highest point of thi chain of alps, knew everi 
forest, that spread along their narrow valleys, the shallowest part of 
everi torrent they must cross, and the exact distanc of everi 
goat-herd’ and hunter’ cabin they should have occas to pass,—which 
last articl of learn requir no veri capaci memory, for even 
such simpl inhabit were but thinli scatter over these wilds. 

the count left the château de st. foix, earli in the morning, with an 
intent of pass the night at a littl inn upon the mountains, 
about half way to La vallée, of which hi guid had inform him; and, 
though thi wa frequent chiefli by spanish muleteers, on their rout 
into france, and, of course, would afford onli sorri accommodation, the 
count had no alternative, for it wa the onli place like an inn, on the 
road. 

after a day of admir and fatigue, the travel found themselves, 
about sunset, in a woodi valley, overlooked, on everi side, by abrupt 
heights. they had proceed for mani leagues, without see a human 
habitation, and had onli heard, now and then, at a distance, the 
melancholi tinkl of a sheep-bell; but now they caught the note of 
merri music, and present saw, within a littl green recess among the 
rocks, a group of mountaineers, trip through a dance. the count, 
who could not look upon the happiness, ani more than on the miseri of 
others, with indifference, halt to enjoy thi scene of simpl 
pleasure. the group befor him consist of french and spanish 
peasants, the inhabit of a neighbour hamlet, some of whom were 
perform a sprightli dance, the women with castanet in their hands, 
to the sound of a lute and a tamborine, till, from the brisk melodi of 
france, the music soften into a slow movement, to which two femal 
peasant danc a spanish pavan. 

the count, compar thi with the scene of such gaieti as he had 
wit at paris, where fals tast paint the features, and, while 
it vainli tri to suppli the glow of nature, conceal the charm of 
animation—wher affect so often distort the air, and vice 
pervert the manners—sigh to think, that natur grace and innoc 
pleasur flourish in the wild of solitude, while they droop 
amidst the concours of polish society. but the lengthen shadow 
remind the travellers, that they had no time to lose; and, leav 
thi joyou group, they pursu their way toward the littl inn, which 
wa to shelter them from the night. 

the ray of the set sun now threw a yellow gleam upon the forest 
of pine and chesnut, that swept down the lower region of the mountains, 
and gave resplend tint to the snowi point above. but soon, even 
thi light fade fast, and the sceneri assum a more tremend 
appearance, invest with the obscur of twilight. where the torrent 
had been seen, it wa now onli heard; where the wild cliff had 
display everi varieti of form and attitude, a dark mass of mountain 
now alon appeared; and the vale, which far, far below had open it 
dread chasm, the eye could no longer fathom. A melancholi gleam 
still linger on the summit of the highest alps, overlook the deep 
repos of evening, and seem to make the still of the hour more 
awful. 

blanch view the scene in silence, and listen with enthusiasm to 
the murmur of the pines, that extend in dark line along the 
mountains, and to the faint voic of the izard, among the rocks, that 
came at interv on the air. but her enthusiasm sunk into 
apprehension, when, as the shadow deepened, she look upon the 
doubt precipice, that border the road, as well as on the variou 
fantast form of danger, that glimmer through the obscur beyond 
it; and she ask her father, how far they were from the inn, and 
whether he did not consid the road to be danger at thi late hour. 
the count repeat the first question to the guides, who return a 
doubt answer, adding, that, when it wa darker, it would be safest 
to rest, till the moon rose. “it is scarc safe to proceed now,” said 
the count; but the guides, assur him that there wa no danger, went 
on. blanche, reviv by thi assurance, again indulg a pensiv 
pleasure, as she watch the progress of twilight gradual spread 
it tint over the wood and mountains, and steal from the eye everi 
minut featur of the scene, till the grand outlin of natur alon 
remained. then fell the silent dews, and everi wild flower, and 
aromat plant, that bloom among the cliffs, breath forth it 
sweetness; then, too, when the mountain-be had crept into it 
blossom bed, and the hum of everi littl insect, that had float 
gaili in the sunbeam, wa hushed, the sound of mani streams, not heard 
till now, murmur at a distance.—th bat alone, of all the anim 
inhabit thi region, seem awake; and, while they flit across 
the silent path, which blanch wa pursuing, she rememb the 
follow lines, which emili had given her: 

TO the bat 

from haunt of man, from day’ obtrus glare, 
thou shroud’st thee in the ruin’ ivy’d tow’r. 
Or in some shadowi glen’ romant bow’r, 
where wizard form their mystic charm prepare, 
where horror lurks, and ever-bod care! 
but, at the sweet and silent ev’n hour, 
when clos’d in sleep is ev’ri languid flow’r, 
thou lov’st to sport upon the twilight air, 
mock the eye, that would thi cours pursue, 
In mani a wanton-round, elastic, gay, 
thou flit’st athwart the pensiv wand’rer’ way, 
As hi lone footstep print the mountain-dew. 
from indian isl thou com’st, with summer’ car, 
twilight thi love—thi guid her beam star! 


To a warm imagination, the dubiou forms, that float, half veil in 
darkness, afford a higher delight, than the most distinct scenery, that 
the sun can show. while the fanci thu wander over landscap partli 
of it own creation, a sweet complac steal upon the mind, and 

refin it all to subtlest feeling, 
bid the tear of raptur roll. 


the distant note of a torrent, the weak trembl of the breez among 
the woods, or the far-off sound of a human voice, now lost and heard 
again, are circumstances, which wonder heighten the enthusiast 
tone of the mind. the young st. foix, who saw the present of a 
fervid fancy, and felt whatev enthusiasm could suggest, sometim 
interrupt the silence, which the rest of the parti seem by mutual 
consent to preserve, remark and point out to blanch the most 
strike effect of the hour upon the scenery; while blanche, whose 
apprehens were beguil by the convers of her lover, yield 
to the tast so congeni to his, and they convers in a low 
restrain voice, the effect of the pensiv tranquillity, which 
twilight and the scene inspired, rather than of ani fear, that they 
should be heard. but, while the heart wa thu sooth to tenderness, 
st. foix gradual mingled, with hi admir of the country, a 
mention of hi affection; and he continu to speak, and blanch to 
listen, till the mountains, the woods, and the magic illus of 
twilight, were rememb no more. 

the shadow of even soon shift to the gloom of night, which wa 
somewhat anticip by the vapours, that, gather fast round the 
mountains, roll in dark wreath along their sides; and the guid 
propos to rest, till the moon should rise, adding, that they thought 
a storm wa come on. As they look round for a spot, that might 
afford some kind of shelter, an object wa perceiv obscur through 
the dusk, on a point of rock, a littl way down the mountain, which 
they imagin to be a hunter’ or a shepherd’ cabin, and the party, 
with cautiou steps, proceed toward it. their labour, however, wa 
not rewarded, or their apprehens soothed; for, on reach the 
object of their search, they discov a monument cross, which 
mark the spot to have been pollut by murder. 

the dark would not permit them to read the inscription; but the 
guid knew thi to be a cross, rais to the memori of a count de 
beliard, who had been murder here by a hord of banditti, that had 
infest thi part of the pyrenees, a few year before; and the 
uncommon size of the monument seem to justifi the supposition, that 
it wa erect for a person of some distinction. blanch shuddered, as 
she listen to some horrid particular of the count’ fate, which one 
of the guid relat in a low, restrain tone, as if the sound of hi 
own voic frighten him; but, while they linger at the cross, 
attend to hi narrative, a flash of lightn glanc upon the 
rocks, thunder mutter at a distance, and the travellers, now alarmed, 
quit thi scene of solitari horror, in search of shelter. 

have regain their former track, the guides, as they pass on, 
endeavour to interest the count by variou stori of robbery, and 
even of murder, which had been perpetr in the veri place they must 
unavoid pass, with account of their own dauntless courag and 
wonder escapes. the chief guide, or rather he, who wa the most 
complet armed, draw forth one of the four pistols, that were 
tuck into hi belt, swore, that it had shot three robber within the 
year. He then brandish a clasp-knif of enorm length, and wa 
go to recount the wonder execut it had done, when st. foix, 
perceiving, that blanch wa terrified, interrupt him. the count, 
meanwhile, secretli laugh at the terribl histori and extravag 
boast of the man, resolv to humour him, and, tell blanch in a 
whisper, hi design, began to recount some exploit of hi own, which 
infinit exceed ani relat by the guide. 

To these surpris circumst he so art gave the colour of 
truth, that the courag of the guid wa visibl affect by them, who 
continu silent, long after the count had ceas to speak. the 
loquac of the chief hero thu laid asleep, the vigil of hi eye 
and ear seem more thoroughli awakened, for he listened, with much 
appear of anxiety, to the deep thunder, which murmur at 
intervals, and often paused, as the breeze, that wa now rising, rush 
among the pines. but, when he made a sudden halt befor a tuft of cork 
trees, that project over the road, and drew forth a pistol, befor he 
would ventur to brave the banditti which might lurk behind it, the 
count could no longer refrain from laughter. 

have now, however, arriv at a level spot, somewhat shelter from 
the air, by overhang cliff and by a wood of larch, that rose over 
the precipic on the left, and the guid be yet ignor how far 
they were from the inn, the travel determin to rest, till the 
moon should rise, or the storm disperse. blanche, recal to a sens 
of the present moment, look on the surround gloom, with terror; 
but give her hand to st. foix, she alighted, and the whole parti 
enter a kind of cave, if such it could be called, which wa onli a 
shallow cavity, form by the curv of impend rocks. A light be 
struck, a fire wa kindled, whose blaze afford some degre of 
cheerfulness, and no small comfort, for, though the day had been hot, 
the night air of thi mountain region wa chilling; a fire wa 
partli necessari also to keep off the wolves, with which those wild 
were infested. 

provis be spread upon a project of the rock, the count and 
hi famili partook of a supper, which, in a scene less rude, would 
certainli have been thought less excellent. when the repast wa 
finished, st. foix, impati for the moon, saunter along the 
precipice, to a point, that front the east; but all wa yet wrapt in 
gloom, and the silenc of night wa broken onli by the murmur of 
woods, that wave far below, or by distant thunder, and, now and then, 
by the faint voic of the parti he had quitted. He viewed, with 
emot of aw sublimity, the long volum of sulphur clouds, 
that float along the upper and middl region of the air, and the 
lightn that flash from them, sometim silently, and, at others, 
follow by sullen peal of thunder, which the mountain feebli 
prolonged, while the whole horizon, and the abyss, on which he stood, 
were discov in the momentari light. upon the succeed darkness, 
the fire, which had been kindl in the cave, threw a partial gleam, 
illumin some point of the opposit rocks, and the summit of 
pine-woods, that hung beetl on the cliff below, while their 
recess seem to frown in deeper shade. 

st. foix stop to observ the picture, which the parti in the cave 
presented, where the eleg form of blanch wa fine contrast by 
the majest figur of the count, who wa seat by her on a rude 
stone, and each wa render more impress by the grotesqu habit 
and strong featur of the guid and other attendants, who were in the 
back ground of the piece. the effect of the light, too, wa 
interesting; on the surround figur it threw a strong, though pale 
gleam, and glitter on their bright arms; while upon the foliag of a 
gigant larch, that impend it shade over the cliff above, appear 
a red, duski tint, deepen almost impercept into the black of 
night. 

while st. foix contempl the scene, the moon, broad and yellow, rose 
over the eastern summits, from among embattl clouds, and show dimli 
the grandeur of the heavens, the mass of vapours, that roll half way 
down the precipic beneath, and the doubt mountains. 

what dread pleasure! there to stand sublime, 
like shipwreck’d marin on desert coast, 
and view th’enorm wast of vapour, tost 
In billow length’n to th’horizon round! 
the minstrel 


from thi romant reveri he wa awaken by the voic of the guides, 
repeat hi name, which wa reverb from cliff to cliff, till a 
hundr tongu seem to call him; when he soon quiet the fear of 
the count and the ladi blanche, by return to the cave. As the storm, 
however, seem approaching, they did not quit their place of shelter; 
and the count, seat between hi daughter and st. foix, endeavour to 
divert the fear of the former, and convers on subjects, relat to 
the natur histori of the scene, among which they wandered. He spoke 
of the miner and fossil substances, found in the depth of these 
mountains,—th vein of marbl and granite, with which they abounded, 
the strata of shells, discov near their summits, mani thousand 
fathom abov the level of the sea, and at a vast distanc from it 
present shore;—of the tremend chasm and cavern of the rocks, the 
grotesqu form of the mountains, and the variou phenomena, that seem 
to stamp upon the world the histori of the deluge. from the natur 
histori he descend to the mention of event and circumstances, 
connect with the civil stori of the pyrenees; name some of the most 
remark fortresses, which franc and spain had erect in the pass 
of these mountains; and gave a brief account of some celebr sieg 
and encount in earli times, when ambit first frighten solitud 
from these her deep recesses, made her mountains, which befor had 
echo onli to the torrent’ roar, trembl with the clang of arms, and, 
when man’ first footstep in her sacr haunt had left the print of 
blood! 

As blanch sat, attent to the narrative, that render the scene 
doubli interesting, and resign to solemn emotion, while she 
considered, that she wa on the veri ground, onc pollut by these 
events, her reveri wa suddenli interrupt by a sound, that came in 
the wind.—it wa the distant bark of a watch-dog. the travel 
listen with eager hope, and, as the wind blew stronger, fancied, that 
the sound came from no great distance; and, the guid have littl 
doubt, that it proceed from the inn they were in search of, the count 
determin to pursu hi way. the moon now afford a stronger, though 
still an uncertain light, as she move among broken clouds; and the 
travellers, led by the sound, recommenc their journey along the brow 
of the precipice, preced by a singl torch, that now contend with 
the moonlight; for the guides, believ they should reach the inn soon 
after sunset, had neglect to provid more. In silent caution they 
follow the sound, which wa heard but at intervals, and which, after 
some time entir ceased. the guid endeavoured, however, to point 
their cours to the quarter, whenc it had issued, but the deep roar 
of a torrent soon seiz their attention, and present they came to a 
tremend chasm of the mountain, which seem to forbid all further 
progress. blanch alight from her mule, as did the count and st. 
foix, while the guid travers the edg in search of a bridge, which, 
howev rude, might convey them to the opposit side, and they, at 
length, confessed, what the count had begun to suspect, that they had 
been, for some time, doubt of their way, and were now certain only, 
that they had lost it. 

At a littl distance, wa discov a rude and danger passage, 
form by an enorm pine, which, thrown across the chasm, unit the 
opposit precipices, and which had been fell probabl by the hunter, 
to facilit hi chace of the izard, or the wolf. the whole party, the 
guid excepted, shudder at the prospect of cross thi alpin 
bridge, whose side afford no kind of defence, and from which to fall 
wa to die. the guides, however, prepar to lead over the mules, while 
blanch stood trembl on the brink, and listen to the roar of the 
waters, which were seen descend from rock above, overhung with 
lofti pines, and thenc precipit themselv into the deep abyss, 
where their white surg gleam faintli in the moonlight. the poor 
anim proceed over thi peril bridg with instinct caution, 
neither frighten by the nois of the cataract, nor deceiv by the 
gloom, which the impend foliag threw athwart their way. It wa now, 
that the solitari torch, which had been hitherto of littl service, wa 
found to be an inestim treasure; and blanche, terrified, shrinking, 
but endeavour to recollect all her firm and presenc of mind, 
preced by her lover and support by her father, follow the red 
gleam of the torch, in safety, to the opposit cliff. 

As they went on, the height contracted, and form a narrow pass, at 
the bottom of which, the torrent they had just crossed, wa heard to 
thunder. but they were again cheer by the bark of a dog, keep 
watch, perhaps, over the flock of the mountains, to protect them from 
the nightli descent of the wolves. the sound wa much nearer than 
before, and, while they rejoic in the hope of soon reach a place 
of repose, a light wa seen to glimmer at a distance. It appear at a 
height consider abov the level of their path, and wa lost and 
seen again, as if the wave branch of tree sometim exclud and 
then admit it rays. the guid halloo with all their strength, 
but the sound of no human voic wa heard in return, and, at length, as 
a more effectu mean of make themselv known, they fire a pistol. 
but, while they listen in anxiou expectation, the nois of the 
explos wa alon heard, echo among the rocks, and it gradual 
sunk into silence, which no friendli hint of man disturbed. the light, 
however, that had been seen before, now becam plainer, and, soon 
after, voic were heard indistinctli on the wind; but, upon the guid 
repeat the call, the voic suddenli ceased, and the light 
disappeared. 

the ladi blanch wa now almost sink beneath the pressur of 
anxiety, fatigu and apprehension, and the unit effort of the count 
and st. foix could scarc support her spirits. As they continu to 
advance, an object wa perceiv on a point of rock above, which, the 
strong ray of the moon then fall on it, appear to be a 
watch-tower. the count, from it situat and some other 
circumstances, had littl doubt, that it wa such, and believing, that 
the light had proceed from thence, he endeavour to reanim hi 
daughter’ spirit by the near prospect of shelter and repose, which, 
howev rude the accommodation, a ruin watch-tow might afford. 

“numer watch-tow have been erect among the pyrenees,” said the 
count, anxiou onli to call blanche’ attent from the subject of her 
fears; “and the method, by which they give intellig of the approach 
of the enemy, is, you know, by fires, kindl on the summit of these 
edifices. signal have thus, sometimes, been commun from post to 
post, along a frontier line of sever hundr mile in length. then, 
as occas may require, the lurk armi emerg from their 
fortress and the forests, and march forth, to defend, perhaps, the 
entranc of some grand pass, where, plant themselv on the heights, 
they assail their astonish enemies, who wind along the glen below, 
with fragment of the shatter cliff, and pour death and defeat upon 
them. the ancient forts, and watch-towers, overlook the grand pass 
of the pyrenees, are care preserved; but some of those in inferior 
station have been suffer to fall into decay, and are now frequent 
convert into the more peac habit of the hunter, or the 
shepherd, who, after a day of toil, retir hither, and, with hi 
faith dogs, forgets, near a cheer blaze, the labour of the chace, 
or the anxieti of collect hi wander flocks, while he is 
shelter from the nightli storm.” 

“but are they alway thu peac inhabited?” said the ladi blanche. 

“no,” repli the count, “they are sometim the asylum of french and 
spanish smugglers, who cross the mountain with contraband good from 
their respect countries, and the latter are particularli numerous, 
against whom strong parti of the king’ troop are sometim sent. 
but the desper resolut of these adventurers, who, knowing, that, 
if they are taken, they must expiat the breach of the law by the most 
cruel death, travel in larg parties, well armed, often daunt the 
courag of the soldiers. the smugglers, who seek onli safety, never 
engage, when they can possibl avoid it; the military, also, who know, 
that in these encounters, danger is certain, and glori almost 
unattainable, are equal reluct to fight; an engagement, therefore, 
veri seldom happens, but, when it does, it never conclud till after 
the most desper and bloodi conflict. you are inattentive, blanche,” 
ad the count: “I have weari you with a dull subject; but see, 
yonder, in the moonlight, is the edific we have been in search of, and 
we are fortun to be so near it, befor the storm bursts.” 

blanche, look up, perceived, that they were at the foot of the 
cliff, on whose summit the build stood, but no light now issu from 
it; the bark of the dog too had, for some time, ceased, and the 
guid began to doubt, whether thi wa realli the object of their 
search. from the distance, at which they survey it, shown imperfectli 
by a cloudi moon, it appear to be of more extent than a singl 
watch-tower; but the difficulti wa how to ascend the height, whose 
abrupt decliv seem to afford no kind of pathway. 

while the guid carri forward the torch to examin the cliff, the 
count, remain with blanch and st. foix at it foot, under the 
shadow of the woods, endeavour again to beguil the time by 
conversation, but again anxieti abstract the mind of blanche; and he 
then consulted, apart with st. foix, whether it would be advisable, 
should a path be found, to ventur to an edifice, which might possibl 
harbour banditti. they considered, that their own parti wa not small, 
and that sever of them were well armed; and, after enumer the 
dangers, to be incur by pass the night in the open wild, exposed, 
perhaps, to the effect of a thunder-storm, there remain not a doubt, 
that they ought to endeavour to obtain admitt to the edific above, 
at ani hazard respect the inhabit it might harbour; but the 
darkness, and the dead silence, that surround it, appear to 
contradict the probabl of it be inhabit at all. 

A shout from the guid arous their attention, after which, in a few 
minutes, one of the count’ servant return with intelligence, that a 
path wa found, and they immedi hasten to join the guides, when 
they all ascend a littl wind way cut in the rock among thicket 
of dwarf wood, and, after much toil and some danger, reach the 
summit, where sever ruin towers, surround by a massi wall, rose 
to their view, partial illumin by the moonlight. the space around 
the build wa silent, and appar forsaken, but the count wa 
cautious; “step softly,” said he, in a low voice, “while we reconnoitr 
the edifice.” 

have proceed silent along for some paces, they stop at a gate, 
whose portal were terribl even in ruins, and, after a moment’ 
hesitation, pass on to the court of entrance, but paus again at the 
head of a terrace, which, branch from it, ran along the brow of a 
precipice. over this, rose the main bodi of the edifice, which wa now 
seen to be, not a watch-tower, but one of those ancient fortresses, 
that, from age and neglect, had fallen to decay. mani part of it, 
however, appear to be still entire; it wa built of grey stone, in 
the heavi saxon-goth style, with enorm round towers, buttress of 
proportion strength, and the arch of the larg gate, which seem 
to open into the hall of the fabric, wa round, as wa that of a window 
above. the air of solemnity, which must so strongli have characteris 
the pile even in the day of it earli strength, wa now consider 
heighten by it shatter battlement and half-demolish walls, and 
by the huge mass of ruin, scatter in it wide area, now silent and 
grass grown. In thi court of entranc stood the gigant remain of an 
oak, that seem to have flourish and decay with the building, 
which it still appear frowningli to protect by the few remain 
branches, leafless and moss-grown, that crown it trunk, and whose 
wide extent told how enorm the tree had been in a former age. thi 
fortress wa evid onc of great strength, and, from it situat 
on a point of rock, impend over a deep glen, had been of great power 
to annoy, as well as to resist; the count, therefore, as he stood 
survey it, wa somewhat surprised, that it had been suffered, 
ancient as it was, to sink into ruins, and it present lone and 
desert air excit in hi breast emot of melancholi awe. while he 
indulged, for a moment, these emotions, he thought he heard a sound of 
remot voic steal upon the stillness, from within the building, the 
front of which he again survey with scrutin eyes, but yet no 
light wa visible. He now determin to walk round the fort, to that 
remot part of it, whenc he thought the voic had arisen, that he 
might examin whether ani light could be discern there, befor he 
ventur to knock at the gate; for thi purpose, he enter upon the 
terrace, where the remain of cannon were yet appar in the thick 
walls, but he had not proceed mani paces, when hi step were 
suddenli arrest by the loud bark of a dog within, and which he 
fanci to be the same, whose voic had been the mean of bring the 
travel thither. It now appear certain, that the place wa 
inhabited, and the count return to consult again with st. foix, 
whether he should tri to obtain admittance, for it wild aspect had 
somewhat shaken hi former resolution; but, after a second 
consultation, he submit to the considerations, which befor 
determin him, and which were strengthen by the discoveri of the 
dog, that guard the fort, as well as by the still that pervad 
it. he, therefore, order one of hi servant to knock at the gate, 
who wa advanc to obey him, when a light appear through the 
loop-hol of one of the towers, and the count call loudly, but, 
receiv no answer, he went up to the gate himself, and struck upon it 
with an iron-point pole, which had assist him to climb the steep. 
when the echo had ceased, that thi blow had awakened, the renew 
barking,—and there were now more than one dog,—wa the onli sound, that 
wa heard. the count step back, a few paces, to observ whether the 
light wa in the tower, and, perceiving, that it wa gone, he return 
to the portal, and had lift the pole to strike again, when again he 
fanci he heard the murmur of voic within, and paus to listen. He 
wa confirm in the supposition, but they were too remote, to be heard 
otherwis than in a murmur, and the count now let the pole fall heavili 
upon the gate; when almost immedi a profound silenc followed. It 
wa apparent, that the peopl within had heard the sound, and their 
caution in admit stranger gave him a favour opinion of them. 
“they are either hunter or shepherds,” said he, “who, like ourselves, 
have probabl sought shelter from the night within these walls, and are 
fear of admit strangers, lest they should prove robbers. I will 
endeavour to remov their fears.” So saying, he call aloud, “we are 
friends, who ask shelter from the night.” In a few moments, step were 
heard within, which approached, and a voic then enquired—“who calls?” 
“friends,” repeat the count; “open the gates, and you shall know 
more.”—strong bolt were now heard to be undrawn, and a man, arm with 
a hunt spear, appeared. “what is it you want at thi hour?” said he. 
the count beckon hi attendants, and then answered, that he wish to 
enquir the way to the nearest cabin. “are you so littl acquaint 
with these mountains,” said the man, “a not to know, that there is 
none, within sever leagues? I cannot show you the way; you must seek 
it—there’ a moon.” say this, he wa close the gate, and the count 
wa turn away, half disappoint and half afraid, when anoth voic 
wa heard from above, and, on look up, he saw a light, and a man’ 
face, at the grate of the portal. “stay, friend, you have lost your 
way?” said the voice. “you are hunters, I suppose, like ourselves: I 
will be with you presently.” the voic ceased, and the light 
disappeared. blanch had been alarm by the appear of the man, who 
had open the gate, and she now entreat her father to quit the 
place; but the count had observ the hunter’ spear, which he carried; 
and the word from the tower encourag him to await the event. the 
gate wa soon opened, and sever men in hunters’ habits, who had heard 
abov what had pass below, appeared, and, have listen some time 
to the count, told him he wa welcom to rest there for the night. they 
then press him, with much courtesy, to enter, and to partak of such 
fare as they were about to sit down to. the count, who had observ 
them attent while they spoke, wa cautious, and somewhat 
suspicious; but he wa also weary, fear of the approach storm, 
and of encount alpin height in the obscur of night; be 
likewis somewhat confid in the strength and number of hi 
attendants, he, after some further consideration, determin to accept 
the invitation. with thi resolut he call hi servants, who, 
advanc round the tower, behind which some of them had silent 
listen to thi conference, follow their lord, the ladi blanche, and 
st. foix into the fortress. the stranger led them on to a larg and 
rude hall, partial seen by a fire that blaze at it extremity, round 
which four men, in the hunter’ dress, were seated, and on the hearth 
were sever dog stretch in sleep. In the middl of the hall stood a 
larg table, and over the fire some part of an anim wa boiling. As 
the count approached, the men arose, and the dogs, half rais 
themselves, look fierc at the strangers, but, on hear their 
masters’ voices, kept their postur on the hearth. 

blanch look round thi gloomi and spaciou hall; then at the men, 
and to her father, who, smile cheer at her, address himself to 
the hunters. “thi is a hospit hearth,” said he, “the blaze of a 
fire is reviv after have wander so long in these dreari wilds. 
your dog are tired; what success have you had?” “such as we usual 
have,” repli one of the men, who had been seat in the hall, “we 
kill our game with toler certainty.” “these are fellow hunters,” 
said one of the men who had brought the count hither, “that have lost 
their way, and I have told them there is room enough in the fort for us 
all.” “veri true, veri true,” repli hi companion, “what luck have 
you had in the chace, brothers? We have kill two izards, and that, 
you will say, is pretti well.” “you mistake, friend,” said the count, 
“we are not hunters, but travellers; but, if you will admit us to 
hunters’ fare, we shall be well contented, and will repay your 
kindness.” “sit down then, brother,” said one of the men: “jacques, lay 
more fuel on the fire, the kid will soon be ready; bring a seat for the 
ladi too. ma’amselle, will you tast our brandy? it is true barcelona, 
and as bright as ever flow from a keg.” blanch timidli smiled, and 
wa go to refuse, when her father prevent her, by taking, with a 
good humour air, the glass offer to hi daughter; and mons. st. 
foix, who wa seat next her, press her hand, and gave her an 
encourag look, but her attent wa engag by a man, who sat 
silent by the fire, observ st. foix, with a steadi and earnest 
eye. 

“you lead a jolli life here,” said the count. “the life of a hunter is 
a pleasant and a healthi one; and the repos is sweet, which succe 
to your labour.” 

“yes,” repli one of hi hosts, “our life is pleasant enough. We live 
here onli dure the summer, and autumn months; in winter, the place 
is dreary, and the swoln torrents, that descend from the heights, put a 
stop to the chace.” 

“’ti a life of liberti and enjoyment,” said the count: “I should like 
to pass a month in your way veri well.” 

“we find employ for our gun too,” said a man who stood behind the 
count: “here are plenti of birds, of delici flavour, that feed upon 
the wild thyme and herbs, that grow in the valleys. now I think of it, 
there is a brace of bird hung up in the stone gallery; go fetch them, 
jacques, we will have them dressed.” 

the count now made enquiry, concern the method of pursu the chace 
among the rock and precipic of these romant regions, and wa 
listen to a curiou detail, when a horn wa sound at the gate. 
blanch look timidli at her father, who continu to convers on the 
subject of the chace, but whose counten wa somewhat express of 
anxiety, and who often turn hi eye toward that part of the hall 
nearest the gate. the horn sound again, and a loud halloo succeeded. 
“these are some of our companions, return from their day’ labour,” 
said a man, go lazili from hi seat toward the gate; and in a few 
minutes, two men appeared, each with a gun over hi shoulder, and 
pistol in hi belt. “what cheer, my lads? what cheer?” said they, as 
they approached. “what luck?” return their companions: “have you 
brought home your supper? you shall have none else.” 

“hah! who the devil have you brought home?” said they in bad spanish, 
on perceiv the count’ party, “are they from france, or spain?—wher 
did you meet with them?” 

“they met with us, and a merri meet too,” repli hi companion 
aloud in good french. “thi chevalier, and hi party, had lost their 
way, and ask a night’ lodg in the fort.” the other made no 
reply, but threw down a kind of knapsack, and drew forth sever brace 
of birds. the bag sound heavili as it fell to the ground, and the 
glitter of some bright metal within glanc on the eye of the count, 
who now surveyed, with a more enquir look, the man, that held the 
knapsack. He wa a tall robust figure, of a hard countenance, and had 
short black hair, curl in hi neck. instead of the hunter’ dress, 
he wore a fade militari uniform; sandal were lace on hi broad legs, 
and a kind of short trowser hung from hi waist. On hi head he wore a 
leathern cap, somewhat resembl in shape an ancient roman helmet; but 
the brow that scowl beneath it, would have characteris those of 
the barbarians, who conquer rome, rather than those of a roman 
soldier. the count, at length, turn away hi eyes, and remain 
silent and thoughtful, till, again rais them, he perceiv a figur 
stand in an obscur part of the hall, fix in attent gaze on st. 
foix, who wa convers with blanche, and did not observ this; but 
the count, soon after, saw the same man look over the shoulder of 
the soldier as attent at himself. He withdrew hi eye, when that 
of the count met it, who felt mistrust gather fast upon hi mind, 
but fear to betray it in hi countenance, and, forc hi featur 
to assum a smile, address blanch on some indiffer subject. when 
he again look round, he perceived, that the soldier and hi companion 
were gone. 

the man, who wa call jacques, now return from the stone gallery. 
“A fire is light there,” said he, “and the bird are dressing; the 
tabl too is spread there, for that place is warmer than this.” 

hi companion approv of the removal, and invit their guest to 
follow to the gallery, of whom blanch appear distressed, and 
remain seated, and st. foix look at the count, who said, he 
prefer the comfort blaze of the fire he wa then near. the 
hunters, however, commend the warmth of the other apartment, and 
press hi remov with such seem courtesy, that the count, half 
doubting, and half fear of betray hi doubts, consent to go. 
the long and ruinou passages, through which they went, somewhat 
daunt him, but the thunder, which now burst in loud peal above, made 
it danger to quit thi place of shelter, and he forbor to provok 
hi conductor by show that he distrust them. the hunter led the 
way, with a lamp; the count and st. foix, who wish to pleas their 
host by some instanc of familiarity, carri each a seat, and 
blanch followed, with falter steps. As she pass on, part of her 
dress caught on a nail in the wall, and, while she stopped, somewhat 
too scrupulously, to disengag it, the count, who wa talk to st. 
foix, and neither of whom observ the circumstance, follow their 
conductor round an abrupt angl of the passage, and blanch wa left 
behind in darkness. the thunder prevent them from hear her call 
but, have disengag her dress, she quickli followed, as she thought, 
the way they had taken. A light, that glimmer at a distance, 
confirm thi belief, and she proceed toward an open door, whenc 
it issued, conjectur the room beyond to be the stone galleri the men 
had spoken of. hear voic as she advanced, she paus within a few 
pace of the chamber, that she might be certain whether she wa right, 
and from thence, by the light of a lamp, that hung from the ceiling, 
observ four men, seat round a table, over which they lean in 
appar consultation. In one of them she distinguish the featur of 
him, whom she had observed, gaze at st. foix, with such deep 
attention; and who wa now speak in an earnest, though restrain 
voice, till, one of hi companion seem to oppos him, they spoke 
togeth in a loud and harsher tone. blanche, alarm by perceiv 
that neither her father, nor st. foix were there, and terrifi at the 
fierc counten and manner of these men, wa turn hastili from 
the chamber, to pursu her search of the gallery, when she heard one of 
the men say: 

“let all disput end here. who talk of danger? follow my advice, and 
there will be none—secur _them_, and the rest are an easi prey.” 
blanche, struck with these words, paus a moment, to hear more. “there 
is noth to be got by the rest,” said one of hi companions, “I am 
never for blood when I can help it—dispatch the two others, and our 
busi is done; the rest may go.” 

“may they so?” exclaim the first ruffian, with a tremend 
oath—“what! to tell how we have dispos of their masters, and to send 
the king’ troop to drag us to the wheel! you were alway a choic 
adviser—i warrant we have not yet forgot st. thomas’ eve last year.” 

blanche’ heart now sunk with horror. her first impuls wa to retreat 
from the door, but, when she would have gone, her trembl frame 
refus to support her, and, have totter a few paces, to a more 
obscur part of the passage, she wa compel to listen to the 
dread council of those, who, she wa no longer suffer to doubt, 
were banditti. In the next moment, she heard the follow words, “whi 
you would not murder the whole _gang?_” 

“I warrant our live are as good as theirs,” repli hi comrade. “if 
we don’t kill them, they will hang us: better they should die than we 
be hanged.” 

“better, better,” cri hi comrades. 

“to commit murder, is a hope way of escap the gallows!” said the 
first ruffian—“mani an honest fellow ha run hi head into the noos 
that way, though.” there wa a paus of some moments, dure which they 
appear to be considering. 

“confound those fellows,” exclaim one of the robber impatiently, 
“they ought to have been here by thi time; they will come back 
present with the old story, and no booty: if they were here, our 
busi would be plain and easy. I see we shall not be abl to do the 
busi tonight, for our number are not equal to the enemy, and in 
the morn they will be for march off, and how can we detain them 
without force?” 

“I have been think of a scheme, that will do,” said one of hi 
comrades: “if we can dispatch the two chevali silently, it will be 
easi to master the rest.” 

“that’ a plausibl scheme, in good faith,” said anoth with a smile 
of scorn—“if I can eat my way through the prison wall, I shall be at 
liberty!—how can we dispatch them _silently?_” 

“bi poison,” repli hi companions. 

“well said! that will do,” said the second ruffian, “that will give a 
linger death too, and satisfi my revenge. these baron shall take 
care how they again tempt our vengeance.” 

“I knew the son, the moment I saw him,” said the man, whom blanch had 
observ gaze on st. foix, “though he doe not know me; the father I 
had almost forgotten.” 

“well, you may say what you will,” said the third ruffian, “but I don’t 
believ he is the baron, and I am as like to know as ani of you, for 
I wa one of them, that attack him, with our brave lads, that 
suffered.” 

“and wa not I another?” said the first ruffian, “I tell you he is the 
baron; but what doe it signifi whether he is or not?—shal we let all 
thi booti go out of our hands? It is not often we have such luck at 
this. while we run the chanc of the wheel for smuggl a few pound 
of tobacco, to cheat the king’ manufactory, and of break our neck 
down the precipic in the chace of our food; and, now and then, rob a 
brother smuggler, or a straggl pilgrim, of what scarc repay us 
the powder we fire at them, shall we let such a prize as thi go? whi 
they have enough about them to keep us for—” 

“I am not for that, I am not for that,” repli the third robber, “let 
us make the most of them: only, if thi is the baron, I should like to 
have a flash the more at him, for the sake of our brave comrades, that 
he brought to the gallows.” 

“aye, aye, flash as much as you will,” rejoin the first man, “but I 
tell you the baron is a taller man.” 

“confound your quibbling,” said the second ruffian, “shall we let them 
go or not? If we stay here much longer, they will take the hint, and 
march off without our leave. let them be who they will, they are rich, 
or whi all those servants? did you see the ring, he, you call the 
baron, had on hi finger?—it wa a diamond; but he ha not got it on 
now: he saw me look at it, I warrant, and took it off.” 

“aye, and then there is the picture; did you see that? she ha not 
taken that off,” observ the first ruffian, “it hang at her neck; if 
it had not sparkl so, I should not have found it out, for it wa 
almost hid by her dress; those are diamond too, and a rare mani of 
them there must be, to go round such a larg picture.” 

“but how are we to manag thi business?” said the second ruffian: “let 
us talk of that, there is no fear of there be booti enough, but how 
are we to secur it?” 

“aye, aye,” said hi comrades, “let us talk of that, and rememb no 
time is to be lost.” 

“I am still for poison,” observ the third, “but consid their 
number; whi there are nine or ten of them, and arm too; when I saw so 
mani at the gate, I wa not for let them in, you know, nor you 
either.” 

“I thought they might be some of our enemies,” repli the second, “I 
did not so much mind numbers.” 

“but you must mind them now,” rejoin hi comrade, “or it will be 
wors for you. We are not more than six, and how can we master ten by 
open force? I tell you we must give some of them a dose, and the rest 
may then be managed.” 

“i’ll tell you a better way,” rejoin the other impatiently, “draw 
closer.” 

blanche, who had listen to thi conversation, in an agony, which it 
would be imposs to describe, could no longer distinguish what wa 
said, for the ruffian now spoke in lower voices; but the hope, that 
she might save her friend from the plot, if she could find her way 
quickli to them, suddenli reanim her spirits, and lent her strength 
enough to turn her step in search of the gallery. terror, however, and 
dark conspir against her, and, have move a few yards, the 
feebl light, that issu from the chamber, no longer even contend 
with the gloom, and, her foot stumbl over a step that cross the 
passage, she fell to the ground. 

the nois startl the banditti, who becam suddenli silent, and then 
all rush to the passage, to examin whether ani person wa there, who 
might have overheard their councils. blanch saw them approaching, and 
perceiv their fierc and eager looks: but, befor she could rais 
herself, they discov and seiz her, and, as they drag her 
toward the chamber they had quitted, her scream drew from them 
horribl threatenings. 

have reach the room, they began to consult what they should do with 
her. “let us first know what she had heard,” said the chief robber. 
“how long have you been in the passage, lady, and what brought you 
there?” 

“let us first secur that picture,” said one of hi comrades, 
approach the trembl blanche. “fair lady, by your leav that 
pictur is mine; come, surrend it, or I shall seiz it.” 

blanche, entreat their mercy, immedi gave up the miniature, 
while anoth of the ruffian fierc interrog her, concern 
what she had overheard of their conversation, when, her confus and 
terror too plainli tell what her tongu fear to confess, the 
ruffian look express upon one another, and two of them withdrew 
to a remot part of the room, as if to consult further. 

“these are diamonds, by st. peter!” exclaim the fellow, who had been 
examin the miniature, “and here is a veri pretti pictur too, 
“faith; as handsom a young chevalier, as you would wish to see by a 
summer’ sun. lady, thi is your spouse, I warrant, for it is the 
spark, that wa in your compani just now.” 

blanche, sink with terror, conjur him to have piti on her, and, 
deliv him her purse, promis to say noth of what had passed, 
if he would suffer her to return to her friends. 

He smile ironically, and wa go to reply, when hi attent wa 
call off by a distant noise; and, while he listened, he grasp the 
arm of blanch more firmly, as if he fear she would escap from him, 
and she again shriek for help. 

the approach sound call the ruffian from the other part of the 
chamber. “we are betrayed,” said they; “but let us listen a moment, 
perhap it is onli our comrad come in from the mountains, and if so, 
our work is sure; listen!” 

A distant discharg of shot confirm thi supposit for a moment, 
but, in the next, the former sound draw nearer, the clash of 
swords, mingl with the voic of loud content and with heavi 
groans, were distinguish in the avenu lead to the chamber. while 
the ruffian prepar their arms, they heard themselv call by some 
of their comrad afar off, and then a shrill horn wa sound without 
the fortress, a signal, it appeared, they too well understood; for 
three of them, leav the ladi blanch to the care of the fourth, 
instantli rush from the chamber. 

while blanche, trembling, and nearli fainting, wa supplic for 
release, she heard amid the tumult, that approached, the voic of st. 
foix, and she had scarc renew her shriek, when the door of the 
room wa thrown open, and he appeared, much disfigur with blood, and 
pursu by sever ruffians. blanch neither saw, nor heard ani more; 
her head swam, her sight failed, and she becam senseless in the arm 
of the robber, who had detain her. 

when she recovered, she perceived, by the gloomi light that trembl 
round her, that she wa in the same chamber, but neither the count, st. 
foix, nor ani other person appeared, and she continued, for some time, 
entir still, and nearli in a state of stupefaction. but, the 
dread imag of the past returning, she endeavour to rais 
herself, that she might seek her friends, when a sullen groan, at a 
littl distance, remind her of st. foix, and of the condition, in 
which she had seen him enter thi room; then, start from the floor, 
by a sudden effort of horror, she advanc to the place whenc the 
sound had proceeded, where a bodi wa lie stretch upon the 
pavement, and where, by the glimmer light of a lamp, she discov 
the pale and disfigur counten of st. foix. her horrors, at that 
moment, may be easili imagined. He wa speechless; hi eye were half 
closed, and, on the hand, which she grasp in the agoni of despair, 
cold damp had settled. while she vainli repeat hi name, and call 
for assistance, step approached, and a person enter the chamber, 
who, she soon perceived, wa not the count, her father; but, what wa 
her astonishment, when, supplic him to give hi assist to st. 
foix, she discov ludovico! He scarc paus to recognis her, but 
immedi bound up the wound of the chevalier, and, perceiving, that 
he had faint probabl from loss of blood, ran for water; but he had 
been absent onli a few moments, when blanch heard other step 
approaching, and, while she wa almost frantic with apprehens of the 
ruffians, the light of a torch flash upon the walls, and then count 
De villefort appeared, with an affright countenance, and breathless 
with impatience, call upon hi daughter. At the sound of hi voice, 
she rose, and ran to hi arms, while he, let fall the bloodi sword 
he held, press her to hi bosom in a transport of gratitud and joy, 
and then hastili enquir for st. foix, who now gave some sign of 
life. ludovico soon after return with water and brandy, the former 
wa appli to hi lips, and the latter to hi templ and hands, and 
blanche, at length, saw him unclos hi eyes, and then heard him 
enquir for her; but the joy she felt, on thi occasion, wa 
interrupt by new alarms, when ludovico said it would be necessari to 
remov mons. st. foix immediately, and added, “the banditti, that are 
out, my lord, were expect home, an hour ago, and they will certainli 
find us, if we delay. that shrill horn, they know, is never sound by 
their comrad but on most desper occasions, and it echo among the 
mountain for mani leagu round. I have known them brought home by it 
sound even from the pie de melicant. Is anybodi stand watch at the 
great gate, my lord?” 

“nobody,” repli the count; “the rest of my peopl are now scatter 
about, I scarc know where. go, ludovico, collect them together, and 
look out yourself, and listen if you hear the feet of mules.” 

ludovico then hurri away, and the count consult as to the mean of 
remov st. foix, who could not have born the motion of a mule, even 
if hi strength would have support him in the saddle. 

while the count wa telling, that the banditti, whom they had found in 
the fort, were secur in the dungeon, blanch observ that he wa 
himself wounded, and that hi left arm wa entir useless; but he 
smile at her anxiety, assur her the wound wa trifling. 

the count’ servants, except two who kept watch at the gate, now 
appeared, and, soon after, ludovico. “I think I hear mule come along 
the glen, my lord,” said he, “but the roar of the torrent below will 
not let me be certain; however, I have brought what will serv the 
chevalier,” he added, show a bear’ skin, fasten to a coupl of 
long poles, which had been adapt for the purpos of bring home 
such of the banditti as happen to be wound in their encounters. 
ludovico spread it on the ground, and, place the skin of sever 
goat upon it, made a kind of bed, into which the chevalier, who wa 
howev now much revived, wa gentli lifted; and, the pole be 
rais upon the shoulder of the guides, whose foot among these 
steep could best be depend upon, he wa born along with an easi 
motion. some of the count’ servant were also wounded—but not 
materially, and, their wound be bound up, they now follow to the 
great gate. As they pass along the hall, a loud tumult wa heard at 
some distance, and blanch wa terrified. “it is onli those villain in 
the dungeon, my lady,” said ludovico. “they seem to be burst it 
open,” said the count. “no, my lord,” repli ludovico, “it ha an iron 
door; we have noth to fear from them; but let me go first, and look 
out from the rampart.” 

they quickli follow him, and found their mule brows befor the 
gates, where the parti listen anxiously, but heard no sound, except 
that of the torrent below and of the earli breeze, sigh among the 
branch of the old oak, that grew in the court; and they were now glad 
to perceiv the first tint of dawn over the mountain-tops. when they 
had mount their mules, ludovico, undertak to be their guide, led 
them by an easier path, than that by which they had formerli ascended, 
into the glen. “we must avoid that valley to the east, my lord,” said 
he, “or we may meet the banditti; they went out that way in the 
morning.” 

the travellers, soon after, quit thi glen, and found themselv in 
a narrow valley that stretch toward the north-west. the morn 
light upon the mountain now strengthen fast, and gradual 
discov the green hillocks, that skirt the wind feet of the 
cliffs, tuft with cork tree, and ever-green oak. the thunder-cloud 
be dispersed, had left the sky perfectli serene, and blanch wa 
reviv by the fresh breeze, and by the view of verdure, which the late 
rain had brightened. soon after, the sun arose, when the drip 
rocks, with the shrub that fring their summits, and mani a turfi 
slope below, sparkl in hi rays. A wreath of mist wa seen, float 
along the extrem of the valley, but the gale bore it befor the 
travellers, and the sunbeam gradual drew it up toward the summit of 
the mountains. they had proceed about a league, when, st. foix have 
complain of extrem faintness, they stop to give him refreshment, 
and, that the men, who bore him, might rest. ludovico had brought from 
the fort some flask of rich spanish wine, which now prove a reviv 
cordial not onli to st. foix but to the whole party, though to him it 
gave onli temporari relief, for it fed the fever, that burn in hi 
veins, and he could neither disguis in hi counten the anguish he 
suffered, nor suppress the wish, that he wa arriv at the inn, where 
they had design to pass the preced night. 

while they thu repos themselv under the shade of the dark green 
pines, the count desir ludovico to explain shortly, by what mean he 
had disappear from the north apartment, how he came into the hand of 
the banditti, and how he had contribut so essenti to serv him 
and hi family, for to him he justli attribut their present 
deliverance. ludovico wa go to obey him, when suddenli they heard 
the echo of a pistol-shot, from the way they had passed, and they rose 
in alarm, hastili to pursu their route. 



chapter xiii 

Ah whi did fate hi step decoy 
In stormi path to roam, 
remot from all congeni joy! 
beatti 


emily, meanwhile, wa still suffer anxieti as to the fate of 
valancourt; but theresa, having, at length, found a person, whom she 
could entrust on her errand to the steward, inform her, that the 
messeng would return on the follow day; and emili promis to be 
at the cottage, theresa be too lame to attend her. 

In the evening, therefore, emili set out alon for the cottage, with a 
melancholi foreboding, concern valancourt, while, perhaps, the gloom 
of the hour might contribut to depress her spirits. It wa a grey 
autumn even toward the close of the season; heavi mist partial 
obscur the mountains, and a chill breeze, that sigh among the 
beech woods, strew her path with some of their last yellow leaves. 
these, circl in the blast and foretel the death of the year, 
gave an imag of desol to her mind, and, in her fancy, seem to 
announc the death of valancourt. Of thi she had, indeed, more than 
onc so strong a presentiment, that she wa on the point of return 
home, feel herself unequ to an encount with the certainti she 
anticipated, but, contend with her emotions, she so far command 
them, as to be abl to proceed. 

while she walk mourn on, gaze on the long volum of vapour, 
that pour upon the sky, and watch the swallows, toss along the 
wind, now disappear among tempestu clouds, and then emerging, for 
a moment, in circl upon the calmer air, the afflict and 
vicissitud of her late life seem portray in these fleet 
images;—thu had she been toss upon the stormi sea of misfortun for 
the last year, with but short interv of peace, if peac that could 
be called, which wa onli the delay of evils. and now, when she had 
escap from so mani dangers, wa becom independ of the will of 
those, who had oppress her, and found herself mistress of a larg 
fortune, now, when she might reason have expect happiness, she 
perceiv that she wa as distant from it as ever. she would have 
accus herself of weak and ingratitud in thu suffer a sens 
of the variou bless she possess to be overcom by that of a 
singl misfortune, had thi misfortun affect herself alone; but, 
when she had wept for valancourt even as living, tear of compass 
had mingl with those of regret, and while she lament a human be 
degrad to vice, and consequ to misery, reason and human 
claim these tears, and fortitud had not yet taught her to separ 
them from those of love; in the present moments, however, it wa not 
the certainti of hi guilt, but the apprehens of hi death (of a 
death also, to which she herself, howev innocently, appear to have 
been in some degre instrumental) that oppress her. thi fear 
increased, as the mean of certainti concern it approached; and, 
when she came within view of theresa’ cottage, she wa so much 
disordered, and her resolut fail her so entirely, that, unabl to 
proceed, she rest on a bank, besid her path; where, as she sat, the 
wind that groan sullenli among the lofti branch above, seem to 
her melancholi imagin to bear the sound of distant lamentation, 
and, in the paus of the gust, she still fanci she heard the feebl 
and far-off note of distress. attent convinc her, that thi wa 
no more than fancy; but the increas gloom, which seem the sudden 
close of day, soon warn her to depart, and, with falter steps, she 
again move toward the cottage. through the casement appear the 
cheer blaze of a wood fire, and theresa, who had observ emili 
approaching, wa alreadi at the door to receiv her. 

“it is a cold evening, madam,” said she, “storm are come on, and I 
thought you would like a fire. Do take thi chair by the hearth.” 

emily, thank her for thi consideration, sat down, and then, look 
in her face, on which the wood fire threw a gleam, she wa struck with 
it expression, and, unabl to speak, sunk back in her chair with a 
counten so full of woe, that theresa instantli comprehend the 
occas of it, but she remain silent. “ah!” said emily, at length, 
“it is unnecessari for me to ask the result of your enquiry, your 
silence, and that look, suffici explain it;—h is dead!” 

“alas! my dear young lady,” repli theresa, while tear fill her 
eyes, “thi world is made up of trouble! the rich have their share as 
well as the poor! but we must all endeavour to bear what heaven 
pleases.” 

“he is dead, then!”—interrupt emily—“valancourt is dead!” 

“a-well-a-day! I fear he is,” repli theresa. 

“you fear!” said emily, “do you onli fear?” 

“alas! yes, madam, I fear he is! neither the steward, nor ani of the 
epourvil family, have heard of him sinc he left languedoc, and the 
count is in great afflict about him, for he say he wa alway 
punctual in writing, but that now he ha not receiv a line from him, 
sinc he left languedoc; he appoint to be at home, three week ago, 
but he ha neither come, nor written, and they fear some accid ha 
befallen him. alas! that ever I should live to cri for hi death! I am 
old, and might have die without be missed, but he”—emili wa faint, 
and ask for some water, and theresa, alarm by the voice, in which 
she spoke, hasten to her assistance, and, while she held the water to 
emily’ lips, continued, “mi dear young mistress, do not take it so to 
heart; the chevali may be aliv and well, for all this; let us hope 
the best!” 

“O no! I cannot hope,” said emily, “I am acquaint with circumstances, 
that will not suffer me to hope. I am somewhat better now, and can hear 
what you have to say. tell me, I entreat, the particular of what you 
know.” 

“stay, till you are a littl better, mademoiselle, you look sadly!” 

“O no, theresa, tell me all, while I have the power to hear it,” said 
emily, “tell me all, I conjur you!” 

“well, madam, I will then; but the steward did not say much, for 
richard say he seem shi of talk about mons. valancourt, and what 
he gather wa from gabriel, one of the servants, who said he had 
heard it from my lord’ gentleman.” 

“what did he hear?” said emily. 

“why, madam, richard ha but a bad memory, and could not rememb half 
of it, and, if I had not ask him a great mani questions, I should 
have heard littl indeed. but he say that gabriel said, that he and 
all the other servant were in great troubl about M. valancourt, for 
that he wa such a kind young gentleman, they all love him, as well as 
if he had been their own brother—and now, to think what wa becom of 
him! for he use to be so courteou to them all, and, if ani of them 
had been in fault, M. valancourt wa the first to persuad my lord to 
forgiv them. and then, if ani poor famili wa in distress, M. 
valancourt wa the first, too, to reliev them, though some folks, not 
a great way off, could have afford that much better than he. and 
then, said gabriel, he wa so gentl to everybody, and, for all he had 
such a nobl look with him, he never would command, and call about him, 
as some of your qualiti peopl do, and we never mind him the less for 
that. nay, say gabriel, for that matter, we mind him the more, and 
would all have run to obey him at a word, sooner than if some folk had 
told us what to do at full length; aye, and were more afraid of 
displeas him, too, than of them, that use rough word to us.” 

emily, who no longer consid it to be danger to listen to praise, 
bestow on valancourt, did not attempt to interrupt theresa, but sat, 
attent to her words, though almost overwhelm with grief. “mi 
lord,” continu theresa, “fret about M. valancourt sadly, and the 
more, because, they say, he had been rather harsh against him lately. 
gabriel say he had it from my lord’ valet, that M. valancourt had 
_comported_ himself wildli at paris, and had spent a great deal of 
money, more a great deal than my lord liked, for he love money better 
than M. valancourt, who had been led astray sadly. nay, for that 
matter, M. valancourt had been put into prison at paris, and my lord, 
say gabriel, refus to take him out, and said he deserv to suffer; 
and, when old gregoire, the butler, heard of this, he actual bought a 
walking-stick to take with him to paris, to visit hi young master; but 
the next thing we hear is, that M. valancourt is come home. O, it wa 
a joy day when he came; but he wa sadli altered, and my lord look 
veri cool upon him, and he wa veri sad, indeed. and, soon after, he 
went away again into languedoc, and, sinc that time, we have never 
seen him.” 

theresa paused, and emily, sigh deeply, remain with her eye fix 
upon the floor, without speaking. after a long pause, she enquir what 
further theresa had heard. “yet whi should I ask?” she added; “what you 
have alreadi told is too much. O valancourt! thou art gone—for ever 
gone! and i—i have murder thee!” these words, and the counten of 
despair which accompani them, alarm theresa, who began to fear, 
that the shock of the intellig emili had just received, had 
affect her senses. “mi dear young lady, be composed,” said she, “and 
do not say such fright words. you murder M. valancourt,—dear heart!” 
emili repli onli by a heavi sigh. 

“dear lady, it break my heart to see you look so,” said theresa, “do 
not sit with your eye upon the ground, and all so pale and melancholy; 
it frighten me to see you.” emili wa still silent, and did not appear 
to hear anyth that wa said to her. “besides, mademoiselle,” 
continu theresa, “m. valancourt may be aliv and merri yet, for what 
we know.” 

At the mention of hi name, emili rais her eyes, and fix them, in a 
wild gaze, upon theresa, as if she wa endeavour to understand what 
had been said. “aye, my dear lady,” said theresa, mistak the mean 
of thi consider air, “m. valancourt may be aliv and merri yet.” 

On the repetit of these words, emili comprehend their import, but, 
instead of produc the effect intended, they seem onli to heighten 
her distress. she rose hastili from her chair, pace the littl room, 
with quick steps, and, often sigh deeply, clasp her hands, and 
shuddered. 

meanwhile, theresa, with simple, but honest affection, endeavour to 
comfort her; put more wood on the fire, stir it up into a brighter 
blaze, swept the hearth, set the chair, which emili had left, in a 
warmer situation, and then drew forth from a cupboard a flask of wine. 
“it is a stormi night, madam,” said she, “and blow cold—do come nearer 
the fire, and take a glass of thi wine; it will comfort you, as it ha 
done me, often and often, for it is not such wine as one get everi 
day; it is rich languedoc, and the last of six flask that M. 
valancourt sent me, the night befor he left gasconi for paris. they 
have serv me, ever since, as cordials, and I never drink it, but I 
think of him, and what kind word he said to me when he gave them. 
‘theresa,’ say he, ‘you are not young now, and should have a glass of 
good wine, now and then. I will send you a few flasks, and, when you 
tast them, you will sometim rememb me your friend.’ yes—thos were 
hi veri words—m your friend!” emili still pace the room, without 
seem to hear what theresa said, who continu speaking. “and I have 
rememb him, often enough, poor young gentleman!—for he gave me thi 
roof for a shelter, and that, which ha support me. ah! he is in 
heaven, with my bless master, if ever saint was!” 

theresa’ voic faltered; she wept, and set down the flask, unabl to 
pour out the wine. her grief seem to recal emili from her own, who 
went toward her, but then stopped, and, have gaze on her, for a 
moment, turn suddenli away, as if overwhelm by the reflection, that 
it wa valancourt, whom theresa lamented. 

while she yet pace the room, the still, soft note of an oboe, or 
flute, wa heard mingl with the blast, the sweet of which 
affect emily’ spirits; she paus a moment in attention; the tender 
tones, as they swell along the wind, till they were lost again in the 
ruder gust, came with a plaintiveness, that touch her heart, and she 
melt into tears. 

“aye,” said theresa, dri her eyes, “there is richard, our 
neighbour’ son, play on the oboe; it is sad enough, to hear such 
sweet music now.” emili continu to weep, without replying. “he often 
play of an evening,” ad theresa, “and, sometimes, the young folk 
danc to the sound of hi oboe. but, dear young lady! do not cri so; 
and pray take a glass of thi wine,” continu she, pour some into a 
glass, and hand it to emily, who reluctantli took it. 

“tast it for M. valancourt’ sake,” said theresa, as emili lift the 
glass to her lips, “for he gave it me, you know, madam.” emily’ hand 
trembled, and she spilt the wine as she withdrew it from her lips. “for 
whose sake!—who gave the wine?” said she in a falter voice. “m. 
valancourt, dear lady. I knew you would be pleas with it. It is the 
last flask I have left.” 

emili set the wine upon the table, and burst into tears, while theresa, 
disappoint and alarmed, tri to comfort her; but she onli wave her 
hand, entreat she might be left alone, and wept the more. 

A knock at the cottag door prevent theresa from immedi obey 
her mistress, and she wa go to open it, when emily, check her, 
request she would not admit ani person; but, afterwards, 
recollecting, that she had order her servant to attend her home, she 
said it wa onli philippe, and endeavour to restrain her tears, while 
theresa open the door. 

A voice, that spoke without, drew emily’ attention. she listened, 
turn her eye to the door, when a person now appeared, and 
immedi a bright gleam, that flash from the fire, 
discovered—valancourt! 

emily, on perceiv him, start from her chair, trembled, and, 
sink into it again, becam insens to all around her. 

A scream from theresa now told, that she knew valancourt, whom her 
imperfect sight, and the duski of the place had prevent her from 
immedi recollecting; but hi attent wa immedi call from 
her to the person, whom he saw, fall from a chair near the fire; 
and, hasten to her assistance,—h perceived, that he wa support 
emily! the variou emotions, that seiz him upon thu unexpectedli 
meet with her, from whom he had believ he had part for ever, and 
on behold her pale and lifeless in hi arms—may, perhaps, be 
imagined, though they could neither be then expressed, nor now 
described, ani more than emily’ sensations, when, at length, she 
unclos her eyes, and, look up, again saw valancourt. the intens 
anxiety, with which he regard her, wa instantli chang to an 
express of mingl joy and tenderness, as hi eye met hers, and he 
perceived, that she wa reviving. but he could onli exclaim, “emily!” 
as he silent watch her recovery, while she avert her eye, and 
feebli attempt to withdraw her hand; but, in these the first moments, 
which succeed to the pang hi suppos death had occas her, she 
forgot everi fault, which had formerli claim indignation, and 
behold valancourt such as he had appeared, when he won her earli 
affection, she experienc emot of onli tender and joy. this, 
alas! wa but the sunshin of a few short moments; recollect rose, 
like clouds, upon her mind, and, darken the illus image, that 
possess it, she again beheld valancourt, degraded—valancourt unworthi 
of the esteem and tender she had onc bestow upon him; her 
spirit faltered, and, withdraw her hand, she turn from him to 
conceal her grief, while he, yet more embarrass and agitated, 
remain silent. 

A sens of what she owe to herself restrain her tears, and taught 
her soon to overcome, in some degree, the emot of mingl joy and 
sorrow, that contend at her heart, as she rose, and, have thank 
him for the assist he had given her, bade theresa good evening. As 
she wa leav the cottage, valancourt, who seem suddenli awaken 
as from a dream, entreated, in a voice, that plead power for 
compassion, a few moment attention. emily’ heart, perhaps, plead as 
powerfully, but she had resolut enough to resist both, togeth with 
the clamor entreati of theresa, that she would not ventur home 
alon in the dark, and had alreadi open the cottag door, when the 
pelt storm compel her to obey their requests. 

silent and embarrassed, she return to the fire, while valancourt, 
with increas agitation, pace the room, as if he wished, yet feared, 
to speak, and theresa express without restraint her joy and wonder 
upon see him. 

“dear heart! sir,” said she, “I never wa so surpris and overjoy in 
my life. We were in great tribul befor you came, for we thought 
you were dead, and were talking, and lament about you, just when you 
knock at the door. My young mistress there wa crying, fit to break 
her heart—” 

emili look with much displeasur at theresa, but, befor she could 
speak, valancourt, unabl to repress the emotion, which theresa’ 
imprud discoveri occasioned, exclaimed, “O my emily! am I then still 
dear to you! did you, indeed, honour me with a thought—a tear? O 
heavens! you weep—you weep now!” 

“theresa, sir,” said emily, with a reserv air, and tri to conquer 
her tears, “ha reason to rememb you with gratitude, and she wa 
concerned, becaus she had not late heard of you. allow me to thank 
you for the kind you have shown her, and to say, that, sinc I am 
now upon the spot, she must not be further indebt to you.” 

“emily,” said valancourt, no longer master of hi emotions, “i it thu 
you meet him, whom onc you meant to honour with your hand—thu you 
meet him, who ha love you—suff for you?—yet what do I say? pardon 
me, pardon me, mademoisel st. aubert, I know not what I utter. I have 
no longer ani claim upon your remembrance—i have forfeit everi 
pretens to your esteem, your love. yes! let me not forget, that I 
onc possess your affections, though to know that I have lost them, 
is my severest affliction. affliction—do I call it!—that is a term of 
mildness.” 

“dear heart!” said theresa, prevent emili from replying, “talk of 
onc have her affections! why, my dear young ladi love you now, 
better than she doe anybodi in the whole world, though she pretend to 
deni it.” 

“thi is insupportable!” said emily; “theresa, you know not what you 
say. sir, if you respect my tranquillity, you will spare me from the 
continu of thi distress.” 

“I do respect your tranquil too much, voluntarili to interrupt it,” 
repli valancourt, in whose bosom pride now contend with tenderness; 
“and will not be a voluntari intruder. I would have entreat a few 
moment attention—yet I know not for what purpose. you have ceas to 
esteem me, and to recount to you my suffer will degrad me more, 
without excit even your pity. yet I have been, O emily! I am inde 
veri wretched!” ad valancourt, in a voice, that soften from 
solemn into grief. 

“what! is my dear young master go out in all thi rain!” said 
theresa. “no, he shall not stir a step. dear! dear! to see how 
gentlefolk can afford to throw away their happiness! now, if you were 
poor people, there would be none of this. To talk of unworthiness, and 
not care about one another, when I know there are not such a 
kind-heart ladi and gentleman in the whole province, nor ani that 
love one anoth half so well, if the truth wa spoken!” 

emily, in extrem vexation, now rose from her chair, “I must be gone,” 
said she, “the storm is over.” 

“stay, emily, stay, mademoisel st. aubert!” said valancourt, 
summon all hi resolution, “I will no longer distress you by my 
presence. forgiv me, that I did not sooner obey you, and, if you can, 
sometimes, piti one, who, in lose you—ha lost all hope of peace! may 
you be happy, emily, howev wretch I remain, happi as my fondest 
wish would have you!” 

hi voic falter with the last words, and hi counten changed, 
while, with a look of ineff tender and grief, he gaze upon her 
for an instant, and then quit the cottage. 

“dear heart! dear heart!” cri theresa, follow him to the door, 
“why, monsieur valancourt! how it rains! what a night is thi to turn 
him out in! whi it will give him hi death; and it wa but now you were 
crying, mademoiselle, becaus he wa dead. well! young ladi do chang 
their mind in a minute, as one may say!” 

emili made no reply, for she heard not what wa said, while, lost in 
sorrow and thought, she remain in her chair by the fire, with her 
eye fixed, and the imag of valancourt still befor them. 

“m. valancourt is sadli altered! madam,” said theresa; “he look so 
thin to what he use to do, and so melancholy, and then he wear hi 
arm in a sling.” 

emili rais her eye at these words, for she had not observ thi 
last circumstance, and she now did not doubt, that valancourt had 
receiv the shot of her garden at thoulouse; with thi convict 
her piti for him returning, she blame herself for have occas 
him to leav the cottage, dure the storm. 

soon after her servant arriv with the carriage, and emily, have 
censur theresa for her thoughtless convers to valancourt, and 
strictli charg her never to repeat ani hint of the same kind to 
him, withdrew to her home, thought and disconsolate. 

meanwhile, valancourt had return to a littl inn of the village, 
whither he had arriv onli a few moment befor hi visit to theresa’ 
cottage, on the way from thoulous to the château of the count de 
duvarney, where he had not been sinc he bade adieu to emili at 
château-le-blanc, in the neighbourhood of which he had linger for a 
consider time, unabl to summon resolut enough to quit a place, 
that contain the object most dear to hi heart. there were times, 
indeed, when grief and despair urg him to appear again befor emily, 
and, regardless of hi ruin circumstances, to renew hi suit. pride, 
however, and the tender of hi affection, which could not long 
endur the thought of involv her in hi misfortunes, at length, so 
far triumph over passion, that he relinquish thi desper design, 
and quit château-le-blanc. but still hi fanci wander among the 
scenes, which had wit hi earli love, and, on hi way to gascony, 
he stop at thoulouse, where he remain when emili arrived, 
concealing, yet indulg hi melancholi in the gardens, where he had 
formerli pass with her so mani happi hours; often recurring, with 
vain regret, to the even befor her departur for italy, when she 
had so unexpectedli met him on the terrace, and endeavour to recal 
to hi memori everi word and look, which had then charm him, the 
argument he had employ to dissuad her from the journey, and the 
tender of their last farewell. In such melancholi recollect he 
had been indulging, when emili unexpectedli arriv to him on thi veri 
terrace, the even after her arriv at thoulouse. hi emotions, on 
thu see her, can scarc be imagined; but he so far overcam the 
first prompt of love, that he forbor to discov himself, and 
abruptli quit the gardens. still, however, the vision he had seen 
haunt hi mind; he becam more wretch than before, and the onli 
solac of hi sorrow wa to return in the silenc of the night; to 
follow the path which he believ her step had pressed, dure the 
day; and, to watch round the habit where she reposed. It wa in 
one of these mourn wanderings, that he had receiv by the fire of 
the gardener, who mistook him for a robber, a wound in hi arm, which 
had detain him at thoulous till veri lately, under the hand of a 
surgeon. there, regardless of himself and careless of hi friends, 
whose late unkind had urg him to believe, that they were 
indiffer as to hi fate, he remained, without inform them of hi 
situation; and now, be suffici recov to bear travelling, he 
had taken La vallé in hi way to estuvière, the count’ residence, 
partli for the purpos of hear of emily, and of be again near 
her, and partli for that of enquir into the situat of poor old 
theresa, who, he had reason to suppose, had been depriv of her 
stipend, small as it was, and which enquiri had brought him to her 
cottage, when emili happen to be there. 

thi unexpect interview, which had at onc shown him the tender 
of her love and the strength of her resolution, renew all the 
acut of the despair, that had attend their former separation, 
and which no effort of reason could teach him, in these moments, to 
subdue. her image, her look, the tone of her voice, all dwelt on hi 
fancy, as power as they had late appear to hi senses, and 
banish from hi heart everi emotion, except those of love and 
despair. 

befor the even concluded, he return to theresa’ cottage, that he 
might hear her talk of emily, and be in the place, where she had so 
late been. the joy, felt and express by that faith servant, wa 
quickli chang to sorrow, when she observed, at one moment, hi wild 
and frenzi look, and, at another, the dark melancholy, that overhung 
him. 

after he had listened, and for a consider time, to all she had to 
relate, concern emily, he gave theresa nearli all the money he had 
about him, though she repeatedli refus it, declaring, that her 
mistress had ampli suppli her wants; and then, draw a ring of 
valu from hi finger, he deliv it her with a solemn charg to 
present it to emily, of whom he entreated, as a last favour, that she 
would preserv it for hi sake, and sometimes, when she look upon it, 
rememb the unhappi giver. 

theresa wept, as she receiv the ring, but it wa more from sympathy, 
than from ani presenti of evil; and befor she could reply, 
valancourt abruptli left the cottage. she follow him to the door, 
call upon hi name and entreat him to return; but she receiv no 
answer, and saw him no more. 



chapter xiv 

call up him, that left half told 
the stori of cambuscan bold. 
milton 


On the follow morning, as emili sat in the parlour adjoin the 
library, reflect on the scene of the preced night, annett rush 
wildli into the room, and, without speaking, sunk breathless into a 
chair. It wa some time befor she could answer the anxiou enquiri 
of emily, as to the occas of her emotion, but, at length, she 
exclaimed, “I have seen hi ghost, madam, I have seen hi ghost!” 

“who do you mean?” said emily, with extrem impatience. 

“it came in from the hall, madam,” continu annette, “a I wa 
cross to the parlour.” 

“who are you speak of?” repeat emily, “who came in from the hall?” 

“it wa dress just as I have seen him, often and often,” ad 
annette. “ah! who could have thought—” 

emily’ patienc wa now exhausted, and she wa reprimand her for 
such idl fancies, when a servant enter the room, and inform her, 
that a stranger without beg leav to speak with her. 

It immedi occur to emily, that thi stranger wa valancourt, 
and she told the servant to inform him, that she wa engaged, and could 
not see ani person. 

the servant, have deliv hi message, return with one from the 
stranger, urg the first request, and saying, that he had someth 
of consequ to communicate; while annette, who had hitherto sat 
silent and amazed, now start up, and crying, “it is ludovico!—it is 
ludovico!” ran out of the room. emili bade the servant follow her, and, 
if it realli wa ludovico, to show him into the parlour. 

In a few minutes, ludovico appeared, accompani by annette, who, as 
joy render her forget of all rule of decorum toward her 
mistress, would not suffer ani person to be heard, for some time, but 
herself. emili express surpris and satisfaction, on see ludovico 
in safety, and the first emot increased, when he deliv letter 
from count De villefort and the ladi blanche, inform her of their 
late adventure, and of their present situat at an inn among the 
pyrenees, where they had been detain by the ill of mons. st. 
foix, and the indisposit of blanche, who added, that the baron st. 
foix wa just arriv to attend hi son to hi château, where he would 
remain till the perfect recoveri of hi wounds, and then return to 
languedoc, but that her father and herself purpos to be at La vallée, 
on the follow day. she added, that emily’ presenc would be 
expect at the approach nuptials, and beg she would be prepar 
to proceed, in a few day to château-le-blanc. for an account of 
ludovico’ adventure, she refer her to himself; and emily, though 
much interested, concern the means, by which he had disappear from 
the north apartments, had the forbear to suspend the gratif 
of her curiosity, till he had taken some refreshment, and had convers 
with annette, whose joy, on see him in safety, could not have been 
more extravagant, had he arisen from the grave. 

meanwhile, emili perus again the letter of her friends, whose 
express of esteem and kind were veri necessari consol to 
her heart, awaken as it wa by the late interview to emot of 
keener sorrow and regret. 

the invit to château-le-blanc wa press with so much kind by 
the count and hi daughter, who strengthen it by a messag from the 
countess, and the occas of it wa so import to her friend, that 
emili could not refus to accept it, nor, though she wish to remain 
in the quiet shade of her nativ home, could she avoid perceiv the 
improprieti of remain there alone, sinc valancourt wa again in the 
neighbourhood. sometimes, too, she thought, that chang of sceneri and 
the societi of her friend might contribute, more than retirement, to 
restor her to tranquillity. 

when ludovico again appeared, she desir him to give a detail of hi 
adventur in the north apartments, and to tell by what mean he becam 
a companion of the banditti, with whom the count had found him. 

He immedi obeyed, while annette, who had not yet had leisur to 
ask him mani questions, on the subject, prepar to listen, with a 
counten of extrem curiosity, ventur to remind her ladi of her 
incredulity, concern spirits, in the castl of udolpho, and of her 
own sagac in believ in them; while emily, blush at the 
conscious of her late credulity, observed, that, if ludovico’ 
adventur could justifi annette’ superstition, he had probabl not 
been here to relat it. 

ludovico smile at annette, and bow to emily, and then began as 
follows: 

“you may remember, madam, that, on the night, when I sat up in the 
north chamber, my lord, the count, and mons. henri accompani me 
thither, and that, while they remain there, noth happen to 
excit ani alarm. when they were gone I made a fire in the bedroom, 
and, not be inclin to sleep, I sat down on the hearth with a book 
I had brought with me to divert my mind. I confess I did sometim look 
round the chamber, with someth like apprehension—” 

“O veri like it, I dare say,” interrupt annette, “and I dare say too, 
if the truth wa known, you shook from head to foot.” 

“not quit so bad as that,” repli ludovico, smiling, “but sever 
times, as the wind whistl round the castle, and shook the old 
casements, I did fanci I heard odd noises, and, onc or twice, I got up 
and look about me; but noth wa to be seen, except the grim 
figur in the tapestry, which seem to frown upon me, as I look at 
them. I had sat thu for abov an hour,” continu ludovico, “when 
again I thought I heard a noise, and glanc my eye round the room, to 
discov what it came from, but, not perceiv anything, I began to 
read again, and, when I had finish the stori I wa upon, I felt 
drowsy, and drop asleep. but present I wa awaken by the nois I 
had heard before, and it seem to come from that part of the chamber, 
where the bed stood; and then, whether it wa the stori I had been 
read that affect my spirits, or the strang reports, that had been 
spread of these apartments, I don’t know, but, when I look toward 
the bed again, I fanci I saw a man’ face within the duski curtains.” 

At the mention of this, emili trembled, and look anxiously, 
rememb the spectacl she had herself wit there with 
dorothée. 

“I confess, madam, my heart did fail me, at that instant,” continu 
ludovico, “but a return of the nois drew my attent from the bed, 
and I then distinctli heard a sound, like that of a key, turn in a 
lock, but what surpris me more was, that I saw no door where the 
sound seem to come from. In the next moment, however, the arra near 
the bed wa slowli lifted, and a person appear behind it, enter 
from a small door in the wall. He stood for a moment as if half 
retreating, with hi head bend under the arra which conceal the 
upper part of hi face except hi eye scowl beneath the tapestri as 
he held it; and then, while he rais it higher, I saw the face of 
anoth man behind, look over hi shoulder. I know not how it was, 
but, though my sword wa upon the tabl befor me, I had not the power 
just then to seiz it, but sat quit still, watch them, with my eye 
half shut as if I wa asleep. I suppos they thought me so, and were 
debat what they should do, for I heard them whisper, and they stood 
in the same postur for the valu of a minute, and then, I thought I 
perceiv other face in the duski beyond the door, and heard 
louder whispers.” 

“thi door surpris me,” said emily, “becaus I understood, that the 
count had caus the arra to be lifted, and the wall examined, 
suspecting, that they might have conceal a passag through which you 
had departed.” 

“it doe not appear so extraordinari to me, madam,” repli ludovico, 
“that thi door should escap notice, becaus it wa form in a narrow 
compartment, which appear to be part of the outward wall, and, if the 
count had not pass over it, he might have thought it wa useless to 
search for a door where it seem as if no passag could commun 
with one; but the truth was, that the passag wa form within the 
wall itself.—but, to return to the men, whom I saw obscur beyond the 
door, and who did not suffer me to remain long in suspense, concern 
their design. they all rush into the room, and surround me, though 
not befor I had snatch up my sword to defend myself. but what could 
one man do against four? they soon disarm me, and, have fasten my 
arms, and gag my mouth, forc me through the privat door, leav 
my sword upon the table, to assist, as they said, those who should come 
in the morn to look for me, in fight against the ghosts. they 
then led me through mani narrow passages, cut, as I fancied, in the 
walls, for I had never seen them before, and down sever flight of 
steps, till we came to the vault underneath the castle; and then 
open a stone door, which I should have taken for the wall itself, we 
went through a long passage, and down other step cut in the solid 
rock, when anoth door deliv us into a cave. after turn and 
twine about, for some time, we reach the mouth of it, and I found 
myself on the sea-beach at the foot of the cliffs, with the château 
above. A boat wa in waiting, into which the ruffian got, forc me 
along with them, and we soon reach a small vessel, that wa at 
anchor, where other men appeared, when set me aboard, two of the 
fellow who had seiz me, followed, and the other two row back to 
the shore, while we set sail. I soon found out what all thi meant, and 
what wa the busi of these men at the château. We land in 
rousillon, and, after linger sever day about the shore, some of 
their comrad came down from the mountains, and carri me with them 
to the fort, where I remain till my lord so unexpectedli arrived, for 
they had taken good care to prevent my run away, have blindfold 
me, dure the journey, and, if they had not done this, I think I never 
could have found my road to ani town, through the wild countri we 
traversed. after I reach the fort I wa watch like a prisoner, and 
never suffer to go out, without two or three companions, and I becam 
so weari of life, that I often wish to get rid of it.” 

“well, but they let you talk,” said annette, “they did not gagg you 
after they got you away from the château, so I don’t see what reason 
there wa to be so veri weari of living; to say noth about the 
chanc you had of see me again.” 

ludovico smiled, and emili also, who enquir what wa the motiv of 
these men for carri him off. 

“I soon found out, madam,” resum ludovico, “that they were pirates, 
who had, dure mani years, secret their spoil in the vault of the 
castle, which, be so near the sea, suit their purpos well. To 
prevent detect they had tri to have it believed, that the château 
wa haunted, and, have discov the privat way to the north 
apartments, which had been shut up ever sinc the death of the ladi 
marchioness, they easili succeeded. the housekeep and her husband, 
who were the onli persons, that had inhabit the castle, for some 
years, were so terrifi by the strang nois they heard in the 
nights, that they would live there no longer; a report soon went 
abroad, that it wa haunted, and the whole countri believ thi the 
more readily, I suppose, becaus it had been said, that the ladi 
marchio had die in a strang way, and becaus my lord never would 
return to the place afterwards.” 

“but why,” said emily, “were not these pirat content with the 
cave—whi did they think it necessari to deposit their spoil in the 
castle?” 

“the cave, madam,” repli ludovico, “wa open to anybody, and their 
treasur would not long have remain undiscov there, but in the 
vault they were secur so long as the report prevail of their be 
haunted. thu then, it appears, that they brought at midnight, the 
spoil they took on the seas, and kept it till they had opportun of 
dispos of it to advantage. the pirat were connect with spanish 
smuggler and banditti, who live among the wild of the pyrenees, and 
carri on variou kind of traffic, such as nobodi would think of; and 
with thi desper hord of banditti I remained, till my lord arrived. 
I shall never forget what I felt, when I first discov him—i almost 
gave him up for lost! but I knew, that, if I show myself, the 
banditti would discov who he was, and probabl murder us all, to 
prevent their secret in the château be detected. I, therefore, kept 
out of my lord’ sight, but had a strict watch upon the ruffians, and 
determined, if they offer him or hi famili violence, to discov 
myself, and fight for our lives. soon after, I overheard some of them 
lay a most diabol plan for the murder and plunder of the whole 
party, when I contriv to speak to some of my lord’ attendants, 
tell them what wa go forward, and we consult what wa best to 
be done; meanwhil my lord, alarm at the absenc of the ladi blanche, 
demand her, and the ruffian have given some unsatisfactori answer, 
my lord and mons. st. foix becam furious, so then we thought it a good 
time to discov the plot, and rush into the chamber, I call out, 
‘treachery! my lord count, defend yourself!’ hi lordship and the 
chevali drew their sword directly, and a hard battl we had, but we 
conquer at last, as, madam, you are alreadi inform of by my lord 
count.” 

“thi is an extraordinari adventure,” said emily, “and much prais is 
due, ludovico, to your prudenc and intrepidity. there are some 
circumstances, however, concern the north apartments, which still 
perplex me; but, perhaps, you may be abl to explain them. did you ever 
hear the banditti relat anyth extraordinari of these rooms?” 

“no, madam,” repli ludovico, “I never heard them speak about the 
rooms, except to laugh at the credul of the old housekeeper, who 
onc wa veri near catch one of the pirates; it wa sinc the count 
arriv at the château, he said, and he laugh heartili as he relat 
the trick he had play off.” 

A blush overspread emily’ cheek, and she impati desir ludovico 
to explain himself. 

“why, my lady,” said he, “a thi fellow was, one night in the bedroom, 
he heard somebodi approach through the next apartment, and not 
have time to lift up the arras, and unfasten the door, he hid himself 
in the bed just by. there he lay for some time in as great a fright, I 
suppose—” 

“a you were in,” interrupt annette, “when you sat up so boldli to 
watch by yourself.” 

“aye,” said ludovico, “in as great a fright as he ever made anybodi 
els suffer; and present the housekeep and some other person came 
up to the bed, when he, think they were go to examin it, 
bethought him, that hi onli chanc of escap detection, wa by 
terrifi them; so he lift up the counterpane, but that did not do, 
till he rais hi face abov it, and then they both set off, he said, 
as if they had seen the devil, and he got out of the room 
undiscovered.” 

emili could not forbear smile at thi explan of the deception, 
which had given her so much superstiti terror, and wa surprised, 
that she could have suffer herself to be thu alarmed, till she 
considered, that, when the mind ha onc begun to yield to the weak 
of superstition, trifl impress it with the forc of conviction. 
still, however, she rememb with awe the mysteri music, which had 
been heard, at midnight, near château-le-blanc, and she ask ludovico 
if he could give ani explan of it; but he could not. 

“I onli know, madam,” he added, “that it did not belong to the pirates, 
for I have heard them laugh about it, and say, they believ the devil 
wa in leagu with them there.” 

“yes, I will answer for it he was,” said annette, her counten 
brightening, “I wa sure all along, that he or hi spirit had 
someth to do with the north apartments, and now you see, madam, I am 
right at last.” 

“it cannot be denied, that hi spirit were veri busi in that part of 
the château,” repli emily, smiling. “but I am surprised, ludovico, 
that these pirat should persever in their schemes, after the arriv 
of the count; what could they expect but certain detection?” 

“I have reason to believe, madam,” repli ludovico, “that it wa their 
intent to persever no longer than wa necessari for the remov of 
the stores, which were deposit in the vaults; and it appeared, that 
they had been employ in do so from within a short period after the 
count’ arrival; but, as they had onli a few hour in the night for 
thi business, and were carri on other scheme at the same time, the 
vault were not abov half emptied, when they took me away. they 
glori exceedingli in thi opportun of confirm the superstiti 
reports, that had been spread of the north chambers, were care to 
leav everyth there as they had found it, the better to promot the 
deception, and frequently, in their jocos moods, would laugh at the 
consternation, which they believ the inhabit of the castl had 
suffer upon my disappearing, and it wa to prevent the possibl of 
my betray their secret, that they had remov me to such a distance. 
from that period they consid the château as nearli their own; but I 
found from the discours of their comrades, that, though they were 
cautious, at first, in show their power there, they had onc veri 
nearli betray themselves. going, one night, as wa their custom, to 
the north chamber to repeat the noises, that had occas such alarm 
among the servants, they heard, as they were about to unfasten the 
secret door, voic in the bedroom. My lord ha sinc told me, that 
himself and M. henri were then in the apartment, and they heard veri 
extraordinari sound of lamentation, which it seem were made by these 
fellows, with their usual design of spread terror; and my lord ha 
owned, he then felt somewhat more, than surprise; but, as it wa 
necessari to the peac of hi family, that no notic should be taken, 
he wa silent on the subject, and enjoin silenc to hi son.” 

emily, recollect the change, that had appear in the spirit of the 
count, after the night, when he had watch in the north room, now 
perceiv the caus of it; and, have made some further enquiri upon 
thi strang affair, she dismiss ludovico, and went to give order 
for the accommod of her friends, on the follow day. 

In the evening, theresa, lame as she was, came to deliv the ring, 
with which valancourt had entrust her, and, when she present it, 
emili wa much affected, for she rememb to have seen him wear it 
often in happier days. she was, however, much displeased, that theresa 
had receiv it, and posit refus to accept it herself, though to 
have done so would have afford her a melancholi pleasure. theresa 
entreated, expostulated, and then describ the distress of valancourt, 
when he had given the ring, and repeat the message, with which he had 
commiss her to deliv it; and emili could not conceal the extrem 
sorrow thi recit occas her, but wept, and remain lost in 
thought. 

“alas! my dear young lady!” said theresa, “whi should all thi be? I 
have known you from your infancy, and it may well be suppos I love 
you, as if you were my own, and wish as much to see you happy. M. 
valancourt, to be sure, I have not known so long, but then I have 
reason to love him, as though he wa my own son. I know how well you 
love one another, or whi all thi weep and wailing?” emili wave her 
hand for theresa to be silent, who, disregard the signal, continued, 
“and how much you are alik in your temper and ways, and, that, if you 
were married, you would be the happiest coupl in the whole 
province—then what is there to prevent your marrying? dear dear! to see 
how some peopl fling away their happiness, and then cri and lament 
about it, just as if it wa not their own doing, and as if there wa 
more pleasur in wail and weeping, than in be at peace. learning, 
to be sure, is a fine thing, but, if it teach folk no better than 
that, whi I had rather be without it; if it would teach them to be 
happier, I would say someth to it, then it would be learn and 
wisdom too.” 

age and long servic had given theresa a privileg to talk, but emili 
now endeavour to check her loquacity, and, though she felt the 
just of some of her remarks, did not choos to explain the 
circumstances, that had determin her conduct toward valancourt. she, 
therefore, onli told theresa, that it would much displeas her to hear 
the subject renewed; that she had reason for her conduct, which she 
did not think it proper to mention, and that the ring must be returned, 
with an assurance, that she could not accept it with propriety; and, at 
the same time, she forbad theresa to repeat ani futur messag from 
valancourt, as she valu her esteem and kindness. theresa wa 
afflicted, and made anoth attempt, though feeble, to interest her for 
valancourt, but the unusu displeasure, express in emily’ 
countenance, soon oblig her to desist, and she depart in wonder and 
lamentation. 

To reliev her mind, in some degree, from the pain recollections, 
that intrud upon it, emili busi herself in prepar for the 
journey into languedoc, and, while annette, who assist her, spoke 
with joy and affect of the safe return of ludovico, she wa 
consid how she might best promot their happiness, and determined, 
if it appeared, that hi affect wa as unchang as that of the 
simpl and honest annette, to give her a marriag portion, and settl 
them on some part of her estate. these consider led her to the 
remembr of her father’ patern domain, which hi affair had 
formerli compel him to dispos of to M. quesnel, and which she 
frequent wish to regain, becaus st. aubert had lamented, that the 
chief land of hi ancestor had pass into anoth family, and 
becaus they had been hi birth-plac and the haunt of hi earli years. 
To the estat at thoulous she had no peculiar attachment, and it wa 
her wish to dispos of this, that she might purchas her patern 
domains, if M. quesnel could be prevail on to part with them, which, 
as he talk much of live in italy, did not appear veri improbable. 



chapter XV 

sweet is the breath of vernal shower, 
the bees’ collect treasur sweet, 
sweet music’ melt fall, but sweeter yet 
the still, small voic of gratitude. 
gray 


On the follow day, the arriv of her friend reviv the droop 
emily, and La vallé becam onc more the scene of social kind and 
of eleg hospitality. ill and the terror she had suffer had 
stolen from blanch much of her sprightliness, but all her affection 
simplic remained, and, though she appear less blooming, she wa 
not less engag than before. the unfortun adventur on the 
pyrene had made the count veri anxiou to reach home, and, after 
littl more than a week’ stay at La vallée, emili prepar to set out 
with her friend for languedoc, assign the care of her house, dure 
her absence, to theresa. On the evening, preced her departure, thi 
old servant brought again the ring of valancourt, and, with tears, 
entreat her mistress to receiv it, for that she had neither seen, 
nor heard of M. valancourt, sinc the night when he deliv it to 
her. As she said this, her counten express more alarm, than she 
dare to utter; but emily, check her own propens to fear, 
considered, that he had probabl return to the resid of hi 
brother, and, again refus to accept the ring, bade theresa preserv 
it, till she saw him, which, with extrem reluctance, she promis to 
do. 

On the follow day, count De villefort, with emili and the ladi 
blanche, left La vallée, and, on the ensu evening, arriv at the 
château-le-blanc, where the countess, henri, and M. Du pont, whom emili 
wa surpris to find there, receiv them with much joy and 
congratulation. she wa concern to observe, that the count still 
encourag the hope of hi friend, whose counten declared, that 
hi affect had suffer no abat from absence; and wa much 
distressed, when, on the second even after her arrival, the count, 
have withdrawn her from the ladi blanche, with whom she wa walking, 
renew the subject of M. Du pont’ hopes. the mildness, with which she 
listen to hi intercess at first, deceiv him, as to her 
sentiments, he began to believe, that, her affect for valancourt 
be overcome, she was, at length, dispos to think favour of M. 
Du pont; and, when she afterward convinc him of hi mistake, he 
ventured, in the earnest of hi wish to promot what he consid 
to be the happi of two persons, whom he so much esteemed, gentli to 
remonstr with her, on thu suffer an ill-plac affect to 
poison the happi of her most valuabl years. 

observ her silenc and the deep deject of her countenance, he 
conclud with saying, “I will not say more now, but I will still 
believe, my dear mademoisel st. aubert, that you will not alway 
reject a person, so truli estim as my friend Du pont.” 

He spare her the pain of replying, by leav her; and she stroll 
on, somewhat displeas with the count for have persev to plead 
for a suit, which she had repeatedli rejected, and lost amidst the 
melancholi recollections, which thi topic had revived, till she had 
insens reach the border of the woods, that screen the 
monasteri of st. clair, when, perceiv how far she had wandered, she 
determin to extend her walk a littl farther, and to enquir about 
the abbess and some of her friend among the nuns. 

though the even wa now draw to a close, she accept the 
invit of the friar, who open the gate, and, anxiou to meet some 
of her old acquaintances, proceed toward the convent parlour. As she 
cross the lawn, that slope from the front of the monasteri toward 
the sea, she wa struck with the pictur of repose, exhibit by some 
monks, sit in the cloisters, which extend under the brow of the 
woods, that crown thi eminence; where, as they meditated, at thi 
twilight hour, holi subjects, they sometim suffer their attent 
to be reliev by the scene befor them, nor thought it profan to look 
at nature, now that it had exchang the brilliant colour of day for 
the sober hue of evening. befor the cloisters, however, spread an 
ancient chesnut, whose ampl branch were design to screen the full 
magnific of a scene, that might tempt the wish to worldli 
pleasures; but still, beneath the dark and spread foliage, gleam a 
wide extent of ocean, and mani a pass sail; while, to the right and 
left, thick wood were seen stretch along the wind shores. So 
much as thi had been admitted, perhaps, to give to the seclud votari 
an imag of the danger and vicissitud of life, and to consol him, 
now that he had renounc it pleasures, by the certainti of have 
escap it evils. As emili walk pensiv along, consid how 
much suffer she might have escaped, had she becom a votaress of the 
order, and remain in thi retir from the time of her father’ 
death, the vesper-bel struck up, and the monk retir slowli toward 
the chapel, while she, pursu her way, enter the great hall, where 
an unusu silenc seem to reign. the parlour too, which open from 
it, she found vacant, but, as the even bell wa sounding, she 
believ the nun had withdrawn into the chapel, and sat down to rest, 
for a moment, befor she return to the château, where, however, the 
increas gloom made her now anxiou to be. 

not mani minut had elapsed, befor a nun, enter in haste, enquir 
for the abbess, and wa retiring, without recollect emily, when she 
made herself known, and then learned, that a mass wa go to be 
perform for the soul of sister agnes, who had been declining, for 
some time, and who wa now believ to be dying. 

Of her suffer the sister gave a melancholi account, and of the 
horrors, into which she had frequent started, but which had now 
yield to a deject so gloomy, that neither the prayers, in which 
she wa join by the sisterhood, nor the assur of her confessor, 
had power to recal her from it, or to cheer her mind even with a 
momentari gleam of comfort. 

To thi relat emili listen with extrem concern, and, recollect 
the frenzi manner and the express of horror, which she had 
herself wit of agnes, togeth with the history, that sister 
franc had communicated, her compass wa heighten to a veri 
pain degree. As the even wa alreadi far advanced, emili did not 
now desir to see her, or to join in the mass, and, after leav mani 
kind remembr with the nun, for her old friends, she quit the 
monastery, and return over the cliff toward the château, medit 
upon what she had just heard, till, at length she forc her mind upon 
less interest subjects. 

the wind wa high, and as she drew near the château, she often paus 
to listen to it aw sound, as it swept over the billows, that beat 
below, or groan along the surround woods; and, while she rest on 
a cliff at a short distanc from the château, and look upon the wide 
waters, seen dimli beneath the last shade of twilight, she thought of 
the follow address: 

TO the wind 

viewless, through heaven’ vast vault your cours ye steer, 
unknown from whenc ye come, or whither go! 
mysteri pow’rs! I hear ye murmur low, 
till swell your loud gust on my startl ear, 
and, awful! seem to say—som god is near! 
I love to list your midnight voic float 
In the dread storm, that o’er the ocean rolls, 
and, while their charm the angri wave controls, 
mix with it sullen roar, and sink remote. 
then, rise in the pause, a sweeter note, 
the dirg of spirits, who your deed bewail, 
A sweeter note oft swell while sleep the gale! 
but soon, ye sightless pow’rs! your rest is o’er, 
solemn and slow, ye rise upon the air, 
speak in the shrouds, and bid the sea-boy fear, 
and the faint-warbl dirge—i heard no more! 
oh! then I deprec your aw reign! 
the loud lament yet bear not on your breath! 
bear not the crash of bark far on the main, 
bear not the cri of men, who cri in vain, 
the crew’ dread choru sink into death! 
oh! give not these, ye pow’rs! I ask alone, 
As rapt I climb these dark romant steeps, 
the element war, the billow’ moan; 
I ask the still, sweet tear, that listen fanci weeps! 




chapter xvi 

unnatur deed 
Do breed unnatur troubles: infect mind 
To their deaf pillow will discharg their secrets. 
more need she the divine, than the physician. 
macbeth 


On the follow evening, the view of the convent towers, rise among 
the shadowi woods, remind emili of the nun, whose condit had so 
much affect her; and, anxiou to know how she was, as well as to see 
some of her former friends, she and the ladi blanch extend their 
walk to the monastery. At the gate stood a carriage, which, from the 
heat of the horses, appear to have just arrived; but a more than 
common still pervad the court and the cloisters, through which 
emili and blanch pass in their way to the great hall, where a nun, 
who wa cross to the staircase, repli to the enquiri of the 
former, that sister agn wa still living, and sensible, but that it 
wa thought she could not surviv the night. In the parlour, they found 
sever of the boarders, who rejoic to see emily, and told her mani 
littl circumst that had happen in the convent sinc her 
departure, and which were interest to her onli becaus they relat 
to persons, whom she had regard with affection. while they thu 
convers the abbess enter the room, and express much satisfact 
at see emily, but her manner wa unusu solemn, and her 
counten dejected. “our house,” said she, after the first 
salut were over, “i truli a hous of mourning—a daughter is now 
pay the debt of nature.—y have heard, perhaps, that our daughter 
agn is dying?” 

emili express her sincer concern. 

“her death present to us a great and aw lesson,” continu the 
abbess; “let us read it, and profit by it; let it teach us to prepar 
ourselv for the change, that await us all! you are young, and have 
it yet in your power to secur ‘the peac that passeth all 
understanding’—th peac of conscience. preserv it in your youth, that 
it may comfort you in age; for vain, alas! and imperfect are the good 
deed of our latter years, if those of our earli life have been evil!” 

emili would have said, that good deeds, she hoped, were never vain; but 
she consid that it wa the abbess who spoke, and she remain 
silent. 

“the latter day of agnes,” resum the abbess, “have been exemplary; 
would they might aton for the error of her former ones! her 
suffer now, alas! are great; let us believe, that they will make 
her peac hereafter! I have left her with her confessor, and a 
gentleman, whom she ha long been anxiou to see, and who is just 
arriv from paris. they, I hope, will be abl to administ the 
repose, which her mind ha hitherto wanted.” 

emili fervent join in the wish. 

“dure her illness, she ha sometim name you,” resum the abbess; 
“perhaps, it would comfort her to see you; when her present visitor 
have left her, we will go to her chamber, if the scene will not be too 
melancholi for your spirits. but, indeed, to such scenes, howev 
painful, we ought to accustom ourselves, for they are salutari to the 
soul, and prepar us for what we are ourselv to suffer.” 

emili becam grave and thoughtful; for thi convers brought to her 
recollect the die moment of her belov father, and she wish 
onc more to weep over the spot, where hi remain were buried. dure 
the silence, which follow the abbess’ speech, mani minut 
circumst attend hi last hour occur to her—hi emot on 
perceiv himself to be in the neighbourhood of château-le-blanc—hi 
request to be inter in a particular spot in the church of thi 
monastery—and the solemn charg he had deliv to her to destroy 
certain papers, without examin them.—sh recollect also the 
mysteri and horribl word in those manuscripts, upon which her eye 
had involuntarili glanced; and, though they now, and, indeed, whenev 
she rememb them, reviv an excess of pain curiosity, concern 
their full import, and the motiv for her father’ command, it wa 
ever her chief consolation, that she had strictli obey him in thi 
particular. 

littl more wa said by the abbess, who appear too much affect by 
the subject she had late left, to be will to converse, and her 
companion had been for some time silent from the same cause, when thi 
gener reveri wa interrupt by the entranc of a stranger, monsieur 
bonnac, who had just quit the chamber of sister agnes. He appear 
much disturbed, but emili fancied, that hi counten had more the 
express of horror, than of grief. have drawn the abbess to a 
distant part of the room, he convers with her for some time, dure 
which she seem to listen with earnest attention, and he to speak with 
caution, and a more than common degre of interest. when he had 
concluded, he bow silent to the rest of the company, and quit 
the room. the abbess, soon after, propos go to the chamber of 
sister agnes, to which emili consented, though not without some 
reluctance, and ladi blanch remain with the boarder below. 

At the door of the chamber they met the confessor, whom, as he lift 
up hi head on their approach, emili observ to be the same that had 
attend her die father; but he pass on, without notic her, and 
they enter the apartment, where, on a mattress, wa laid sister 
agnes, with one nun watch in the chair besid her. her counten 
wa so much changed, that emili would scarc have recollect her, 
had she not been prepar to do so: it wa ghastly, and overspread with 
gloomi horror; her dim and hollow eye were fix on a crucifix, which 
she held upon her bosom; and she wa so much engag in thought, as not 
to perceiv the abbess and emily, till they stood at the bedside. then, 
turn her heavi eyes, she fix them, in wild horror, upon emily, 
and, screaming, exclaimed, “ah! that vision come upon me in my die 
hours!” 

emili start back in terror, and look for explan to the abbess, 
who made her a signal not to be alarmed, and calmli said to agnes, 
“daughter, I have brought mademoisel st. aubert to visit you: I 
thought you would be glad to see her.” 

agn made no reply; but, still gaze wildli upon emily, exclaimed, 
“it is her veri self! oh! there is all that fascin in her look, 
which prove my destruction! what would you have—what is it you came to 
demand—retribution?—it will soon be yours—it is your already. how mani 
year have passed, sinc last I saw you! My crime is but as 
yesterday.—yet I am grown old beneath it; while you are still young and 
blooming—bloom as when you forc me to commit that most abhor 
deed! O! could I onc forget it!—yet what would that avail?—th deed is 
done!” 

emily, extrem shocked, would now have left the room; but the abbess, 
take her hand, tri to support her spirits, and beg she would 
stay a few moments, when agn would probabl be calm, whom now she 
tri to sooth. but the latter seem to disregard her, while she still 
fix her eye on emily, and added, “what are year of prayer and 
repentance? they cannot wash out the foul of murder!—yes, murder! 
where is he—wher is he?—look there—look there!—se where he stalk 
along the room! whi do you come to torment me now?” continu agnes, 
while her strain eye were bent on air, “whi wa not I punish 
before?—o! do not frown so sternly! hah! there again! ’ti she herself! 
whi do you look so piteous upon me—and smile, too? smile on me! what 
groan wa that?” 

agn sunk down, appar lifeless, and emily, unabl to support 
herself, lean against the bed, while the abbess and the attend nun 
were appli the usual remedi to agnes. “peace,” said the abbess, 
when emili wa go to speak, “the delirium is go off, she will 
soon revive. when wa she thu before, daughter?” 

“not of mani weeks, madam,” repli the nun, “but her spirit have been 
much agit by the arriv of the gentleman she wish so much to 
see.” 

“yes,” observ the abbess, “that ha undoubtedli occas thi 
paroxysm of frenzy. when she is better, we will leav her to repose.” 

emili veri readili consented, but, though she could now give littl 
assistance, she wa unwil to quit the chamber, while ani might be 
necessary. 

when agn recov her senses, she again fix her eye on emily, but 
their wild express wa gone, and a gloomi melancholi had succeeded. 
It wa some moment befor she recov suffici spirit to speak; 
she then said feebly—“th like is wonderful!—sur it must be 
someth more than fancy. tell me, I conjur you,” she added, 
address emily, “though your name is st. aubert, are you not the 
daughter of the marchioness?” 

“what marchioness?” said emily, in extrem surprise; for she had 
imagined, from the calm of agnes’ manner, that her intellect were 
restored. the abbess gave her a signific glance, but she repeat 
the question. 

“what marchioness?” exclaim agnes, “I know but of one—th marchio 
de villeroi.” 

emily, rememb the emot of her late father, upon the unexpect 
mention of thi lady, and hi request to be laid near to the tomb of 
the villerois, now felt greatli interested, and she entreat agn to 
explain the reason of her question. the abbess would now have withdrawn 
emili from the room, who being, however, detain by a strong interest, 
repeat her entreaties. 

“bring me that casket, sister,” said agnes; “I will show her to you; 
yet you need onli look in that mirror, and you will behold her; you 
sure are her daughter: such strike resembl is never found but 
among near relations.” 

the nun brought the casket, and agnes, have direct her how to 
unlock it, she took thenc a miniature, in which emili perceiv the 
exact resembl of the picture, which she had found among her late 
father’ papers. agn held out her hand to receiv it; gaze upon it 
earnestli for some moment in silence; and then, with a counten of 
deep despair, threw up her eye to heaven, and pray inwardly. when 
she had finished, she return the miniatur to emily. “keep it,” said 
she, “I bequeath it to you, for I must believ it is your right. I have 
frequent observ the resembl between you; but never, till thi 
day, did it strike upon my conscienc so powerfully! stay, sister, do 
not remov the casket—ther is anoth pictur I would show.” 

emili trembl with expectation, and the abbess again would have 
withdrawn her. “agn is still disordered,” said she, “you observ how 
she wanders. In these mood she say anything, and doe not scruple, as 
you have witnessed, to accus herself of the most horribl crimes.” 

emily, however, thought she perceiv someth more than mad in 
the inconsist of agnes, whose mention of the marchioness, and 
product of her picture, had interest her so much, that she 
determin to obtain further information, if possible, respect the 
subject of it. 

the nun return with the casket, and, agn point out to her a 
secret drawer, she took from it anoth miniature. “here,” said agnes, 
as she offer it to emily, “learn a lesson for your vanity, at least; 
look well at thi picture, and see if you can discov ani resembl 
between what I was, and what I am.” 

emili impati receiv the miniature, which her eye had scarc 
glanc upon, befor her trembl hand had nearli suffer it to 
fall—it wa the resembl of the portrait of signora laurentini, 
which she had formerli seen in the castl of udolpho—th lady, who had 
disappear in so mysteri a manner, and whom montoni had been 
suspect of have caus to be murdered. 

In silent astonishment, emili continu to gaze altern upon the 
pictur and the die nun, endeavour to trace a resembl between 
them, which no longer existed. 

“whi do you look so sternli on me?” said agnes, mistak the natur of 
emily’ emotion. 

“I have seen thi face before,” said emily, at length; “wa it realli 
your resemblance?” 

“you may well ask that question,” repli the nun,—“but it wa onc 
esteem a strike like of me. look at me well, and see what guilt 
ha made me. I then wa innocent; the evil passion of my natur slept. 
sister!” ad she solemnly, and stretch forth her cold, damp hand 
to emily, who shudder at it touch—“sister! bewar of the first 
indulg of the passions; bewar of the first! their course, if not 
check then, is rapid—their forc is uncontrollable—they lead us we 
know not whither—they lead us perhap to the commiss of crimes, for 
which whole year of prayer and penit cannot atone!—such may be the 
forc of even a singl passion, that it overcom everi other, and 
sear up everi other approach to the heart. possess us like a fiend, 
it lead us on to the act of a fiend, make us insens to piti and 
to conscience. and, when it purpos is accomplished, like a fiend, it 
leav us to the tortur of those feelings, which it power had 
suspended—not annihilated,—to the tortur of compassion, remorse, and 
conscience. then, we awaken as from a dream, and perceiv a new world 
around us—w gaze in astonishment, and horror—but the deed is 
committed; not all the power of heaven and earth unit can undo 
it—and the spectr of conscienc will not fly! what are 
riches—grandeur—health itself, to the luxuri of a pure conscience, the 
health of the soul;—and what the suffer of poverty, disappointment, 
despair—to the anguish of an afflict one! O! how long is it sinc I 
knew that luxury! I believed, that I had suffer the most agon 
pang of human nature, in love, jealousy, and despair—but these pang 
were ease, compar with the sting of conscience, which I have sinc 
endured. I tast too what wa call the sweet of revenge—but it wa 
transient, it expir even with the object, that provok it. remember, 
sister, that the passion are the seed of vice as well as of virtues, 
from which either may spring, accordingli as they are nurtured. unhappi 
they who have never been taught the art to govern them!” 

“alas! unhappy!” said the abbess, “and ill-inform of our holi 
religion!” emili listen to agnes, in silent awe, while she still 
examin the miniature, and becam confirm in her opinion of it 
strong resembl to the portrait at udolpho. “thi face is familiar 
to me,” said she, wish to lead the nun to an explanation, yet 
fear to discov too abruptli her knowledg of udolpho. 

“you are mistaken,” repli agnes, “you certainli never saw that 
pictur before.” 

“no,” repli emily, “but I have seen one extrem like it.” 
“impossible,” said agnes, who may now be call the ladi laurentini. 

“it wa in the castl of udolpho,” continu emily, look steadfastli 
at her. 

“of udolpho!” exclaim laurentini, “of udolpho in italy!” “the same,” 
repli emily. 

“you know me then,” said laurentini, “and you are the daughter of the 
marchioness.” emili wa somewhat surpris at thi abrupt assertion. “I 
am the daughter of the late mons. st. aubert,” said she; “and the ladi 
you name is an utter stranger to me.” 

“at least you believ so,” rejoin laurentini. 

emili ask what reason there could be to believ otherwise. 

“the famili likeness, that you bear her,” said the nun. “the 
marchioness, it is known, wa attach to a gentleman of gascony, at 
the time when she accept the hand of the marquis, by the command of 
her father. ill-fated, unhappi woman!” 

emily, rememb the extrem emot which st. aubert had betray on 
the mention of the marchioness, would now have suffer someth more 
than surprise, had her confid in hi integr been less; as it 
was, she could not, for a moment, believ what the word of laurentini 
insinuated; yet she still felt strongli interested, concern them, 
and begged, that she would explain them further. 

“do not urg me on that subject,” said the nun, “it is to me a terribl 
one! would that I could blot it from my memory!” she sigh deeply, 
and, after the paus of a moment, ask emily, by what mean she had 
discov her name? 

“bi your portrait in the castl of udolpho, to which thi miniatur 
bear a strike resemblance,” repli emily. 

“you have been at udolpho then!” said the nun, with great emotion. 
“alas! what scene doe the mention of it reviv in my fancy—scen of 
happiness—of suffering—and of horror!” 

At thi moment, the terribl spectacle, which emili had wit in a 
chamber of that castle, occur to her, and she shuddered, while she 
look upon the nun—and recollect her late words—that “year of 
prayer and penit could not wash out the foul of murder.” she 
wa now compel to attribut these to anoth cause, than that of 
delirium. with a degre of horror, that almost depriv her of sense, 
she now believ she look upon a murderer; all the recollect 
behaviour of laurentini seem to confirm the supposition, yet emili 
wa still lost in a labyrinth of perplexities, and, not know how to 
ask the questions, which might lead to truth, she could onli hint them 
in broken sentences. 

“your sudden departur from udolpho”—said she. 

laurentini groaned. 

“the report that follow it,” continu emily—“th west chamber—th 
mourn veil—th object it conceals!—when murder are committed—” 

the nun shrieked. “what! there again!” said she, endeavour to rais 
herself, while her start eye seem to follow some object round the 
room—“com from the grave! what! blood—blood too!—ther wa no 
blood—thou canst not say it!—nay, do not smile,—do not smile so 
piteously!” 

laurentini fell into convulsions, as she utter the last words; and 
emily, unabl ani longer to endur the horror of the scene, hurri 
from the room, and sent some nun to the assist of the abbess. 

the ladi blanche, and the boarders, who were in the parlour, now 
assembl round emily, and, alarm by her manner and affright 
countenance, ask a hundr questions, which she avoid answer 
further, than by saying, that she believ sister agn wa dying. they 
receiv thi as a suffici explan of her terror, and had then 
leisur to offer restoratives, which, at length, somewhat reviv 
emily, whose mind was, however, so much shock with the terribl 
surmises, and perplex with doubt by some word from the nun, that 
she wa unabl to converse, and would have left the convent 
immediately, had she not wish to know whether laurentini would 
surviv the late attack. after wait some time, she wa informed, 
that, the convuls have ceased, laurentini seem to be reviving, 
and emili and blanch were departing, when the abbess appeared, who, 
draw the former aside, said she had someth of consequ to say 
to her, but, as it wa late, she would not detain her then, and 
request to see her on the follow day. 

emili promis to visit her, and, have taken leave, return with the 
ladi blanch toward the château, on the way to which the deep gloom of 
the wood made blanch lament, that the even wa so far advanced; 
for the surround still and obscur render her sensibl of 
fear, though there wa a servant to protect her; while emili wa too 
much engag by the horror of the scene she had just witnessed, to be 
affect by the solemn of the shades, otherwis than as they serv 
to promot her gloomi reverie, from which, however, she wa at length 
recal by the ladi blanche, who point out, at some distance, in the 
duski path they were winding, two person slowli advancing. It wa 
imposs to avoid them without strike into a still more seclud 
part of the wood, whither the stranger might easili follow; but all 
apprehens vanished, when emili distinguish the voic of mons. Du 
pont, and perceived, that hi companion wa the gentleman, whom she had 
seen at the monastery, and who wa now convers with so much 
earnest as not immedi to perceiv their approach. when Du pont 
join the ladies, the stranger took leave, and they proceed to the 
château, where the count, when he heard of mons. bonnac, claim him 
for an acquaintance, and, on learn the melancholi occas of hi 
visit to languedoc, and that he wa lodg at a small inn in the 
village, beg the favour of mons. Du pont to invit him to the 
château. 

the latter wa happi to do so, and the scrupl of reserve, which made 
M. bonnac hesit to accept the invitation, be at length overcome, 
they went to the château, where the kind of the count and the 
sprightli of hi son were exert to dissip the gloom, that 
overhung the spirit of the stranger. M. bonnac wa an offic in the 
french service, and appear to be about fifty; hi figur wa tall and 
commanding, hi manner had receiv the last polish, and there wa 
someth in hi counten uncommonli interesting; for over features, 
which, in youth, must have been remark handsome, wa spread a 
melancholy, that seem the effect of long misfortune, rather than of 
constitution, or temper. 

the convers he held, dure supper, wa evid an effort of 
politeness, and there were interv in which, unabl to struggl 
against the feelings, that depress him, he relaps into silenc and 
abstraction, from which, however, the count, sometimes, withdrew him in 
a manner so delic and benevolent, that emily, while she observ 
him, almost fanci she beheld her late father. 

the parti separated, at an earli hour, and then, in the solitud of her 
apartment, the scenes, which emili had late witnessed, return to 
her fancy, with dread energy. that in the die nun she should have 
discov signora laurentini, who, instead of have been murder by 
montoni, was, as it now seemed, herself guilti of some dread crime, 
excit both horror and surpris in a high degree; nor did the hints, 
which she had dropped, respect the marriag of the marchio de 
villeroi, and the enquiri she had made concern emily’ birth, 
occas her a less degre of interest, though it wa of a differ 
nature. 

the history, which sister franc had formerli related, and had said to 
be that of agnes, it now appeared, wa erroneous; but for what purpos 
it had been fabricated, unless the more effectu to conceal the true 
story, emili could not even guess. abov all, her interest wa excit 
as to the relation, which the stori of the late marchio de villeroi 
bore to that of her father; for, that some kind of relat exist 
between them, the grief of st. aubert, upon hear her named, hi 
request to be buri near her, and her picture, which had been found 
among hi papers, certainli proved. sometim it occur to emily, 
that he might have been the lover, to whom it wa said the marchio 
wa attached, when she wa compel to marri the marqui de villeroi; 
but that he had afterward cherish a passion for her, she could not 
suffer herself to believe, for a moment. the papers, which he had so 
solemnli enjoin her to destroy, she now fanci had relat to thi 
connection, and she wish more earnestli than befor to know the 
reasons, that made him consid the injunct necessary, which, had 
her faith in hi principl been less, would have led to believe, that 
there wa a mysteri in her birth dishonour to her parents, which 
those manuscript might have revealed. 

reflections, similar to these, engag her mind, dure the greater 
part of the night, and when, at length, she fell into a slumber, it wa 
onli to behold a vision of the die nun, and to awaken in horrors, 
like those she had witnessed. 

On the follow morning, she wa too much indispos to attend her 
appoint with the abbess, and, befor the day concluded, she heard, 
that sister agn wa no more. mons. bonnac receiv thi intelligence, 
with concern; but emili observed, that he did not appear so much 
affect now, as on the preced evening, immedi after quit 
the apart of the nun, whose death wa probabl less terribl to 
him, than the confess he had been then call upon to witness. 
howev thi might be, he wa perhap consoled, in some degree, by a 
knowledg of the legaci bequeath him, sinc hi famili wa large, and 
the extravag of some part of it had late been the mean of 
involv him in great distress, and even in the horror of a prison; 
and it wa the grief he had suffer from the wild career of a 
favourit son, with the pecuniari anxieti and misfortun consequ 
upon it, that had given to hi counten the air of dejection, which 
had so much interest emily. 

To hi friend mons. Du pont he recit some particular of hi late 
sufferings, when it appeared, that he had been confin for sever 
month in one of the prison of paris, with littl hope of release, and 
without the comfort of see hi wife, who had been absent in the 
country, endeavouring, though in vain, to procur assist from hi 
friends. when, at length, she had obtain an order for admittance, she 
wa so much shock at the change, which long confin and sorrow 
had made in hi appearance, that she wa seiz with fits, which, by 
their long continuance, threaten her life. 

“our situat affect those, who happen to wit it,” continu 
mons. bonnac, “and one gener friend, who wa in confin at the 
same time, afterward employ the first moment of hi liberti in 
effort to obtain mine. He succeeded; the heavi debt, that oppress 
me, wa discharged; and, when I would have express my sens of the 
oblig I had received, my benefactor wa fled from my search. I 
have reason to believ he wa the victim of hi own generosity, and 
that he return to the state of confinement, from which he had 
releas me; but everi enquiri after him wa unsuccessful. amiabl and 
unfortun valancourt!” 

“valancourt!” exclaim mons. Du pont. “of what family?” 

“the valancourts, count duvarney,” repli mons. bonnac. 

the emot of mons. Du pont, when he discov the gener 
benefactor of hi friend to be the rival of hi love, can onli be 
imagined; but, have overcom hi first surprise, he dissip the 
apprehens of mons. bonnac by acquaint him, that valancourt wa 
at liberty, and had late been in languedoc; after which hi affect 
for emili prompt him to make some enquiries, respect the conduct 
of hi rival, dure hi stay at paris, of which M. bonnac appear to 
be well informed. the answer he receiv were such as convinc him, 
that valancourt had been much misrepresented, and, pain as wa the 
sacrifice, he form the just design of relinquish hi pursuit of 
emili to a lover, who, it now appeared, wa not unworthi of the regard, 
with which she honour him. 

the convers of mons. bonnac discovered, that valancourt, some time 
after hi arriv at paris, had been drawn into the snares, which 
determin vice had spread for him, and that hi hour had been chiefli 
divid between the parti of the captiv marchio and those 
game assemblies, to which the envy, or the avarice, of hi brother 
offic had spare no art to seduc him. In these parti he had lost 
larg sums, in effort to recov small ones, and to such loss the 
count De villefort and mons. henri had been frequent witnesses. hi 
resourc were, at length, exhausted; and the count, hi brother, 
exasper by hi conduct, refus to continu the suppli necessari 
to hi present mode of life, when valancourt, in consequ of 
accumul debts, wa thrown into confinement, where hi brother 
suffer him to remain, in the hope, that punish might effect a 
reform of conduct, which had not yet been confirm by long habit. 

In the solitud of hi prison, valancourt had leisur for reflection, 
and caus for repentance; here, too, the imag of emily, which, amidst 
the dissip of the citi had been obscured, but never obliter 
from hi heart, reviv with all the charm of innoc and beauty, to 
reproach him for have sacrif hi happi and debas hi 
talent by pursuits, which hi nobler faculti would formerli have 
taught him to consid were as tasteless as they were degrading. but, 
though hi passion had been seduced, hi heart wa not depraved, nor 
had habit rivet the chains, that hung heavili on hi conscience; and, 
as he retain that energi of will, which wa necessari to burst them, 
he, at length, emancip himself from the bondag of vice, but not 
till after much effort and sever suffering. 

be releas by hi brother from the prison, where he had wit 
the affect meet between mons. bonnac and hi wife, with whom he 
had been for some time acquainted, the first use of hi liberti form 
a strike instanc of hi human and hi rashness; for with nearli 
all the money, just receiv from hi brother, he went to a 
gaming-house, and gave it as a last stake for the chanc of restor 
hi friend to freedom, and to hi afflict family. the event wa 
fortunate, and, while he had await the issu of thi moment stake, 
he made a solemn vow never again to yield to the destruct and 
fascin vice of gaming. 

have restor the vener mons. bonnac to hi rejoic family, he 
hurri from pari to estuvière; and, in the delight of have made the 
wretch happy, forgot, for a while, hi own misfortunes. soon, 
however, he remembered, that he had thrown away the fortune, without 
which he could never hope to marri emily; and life, unless pass with 
her, now scarc appear supportable; for her goodness, refinement, 
and simplic of heart, render her beauti more enchanting, if 
possible, to hi fancy, than it had ever yet appeared. experi had 
taught him to understand the full valu of the qualities, which he had 
befor admired, but which the contrast charact he had seen in the 
world made him now adore; and these reflections, increas the pang 
of remors and regret, occas the deep dejection, that had 
accompani him even into the presenc of emily, of whom he consid 
himself no longer worthy. To the ignomini of have receiv pecuniari 
oblig from the marchio chamfort, or ani other ladi of 
intrigue, as the count De villefort had been informed, or of have 
been engag in the depred scheme of gamesters, valancourt had 
never submitted; and these were some of such scandal as often mingl 
with truth, against the unfortunate. count De villefort had receiv 
them from author which he had no reason to doubt, and which the 
imprud conduct he had himself wit in valancourt, had certainli 
induc him the more readili to believe. be such as emili could not 
name to the chevalier, he had no opportun of refut them; and, 
when he confess himself to be unworthi of her esteem, he littl 
suspected, that he wa confirm to her the most dread calumnies. 
thu the mistak had been mutual, and had remain so, when mons. 
bonnac explain the conduct of hi generous, but imprud young 
friend to Du pont, who, with sever justice, determin not onli to 
undec the count on thi subject, but to resign all hope of emily. 
such a sacrific as hi love render this, wa deserv of a nobl 
reward, and mons. bonnac, if it had been possibl for him to forget the 
benevol valancourt, would have wish that emili might accept the 
just Du pont. 

when the count wa inform of the error he had committed, he wa 
extrem shock at the consequ of hi credulity, and the account 
which mons. bonnac gave of hi friend’ situation, while at paris, 
convinc him, that valancourt had been entrap by the scheme of a 
set of dissip young men, with whom hi profess had partli 
oblig him to associate, rather than by an inclin to vice; and, 
charm by the humanity, and noble, though rash generosity, which hi 
conduct toward mons. bonnac exhibited, he forgav him the transient 
errors, that had stain hi youth, and restor him to the high degre 
of esteem, with which he had regard him, dure their earli 
acquaintance. but, as the least repar he could now make valancourt 
wa to afford him an opportun of explain to emili hi former 
conduct, he immedi wrote, to request hi forgiv of the 
unintent injuri he had done him, and to invit him to 
château-le-blanc. motiv of delicaci withheld the count from inform 
emili of thi letter, and of kind from acquaint her with the 
discoveri respect valancourt, till hi arriv should save her from 
the possibl of anxiety, as to it event; and thi precaut spare 
her even sever inquietude, than the count had foreseen, sinc he wa 
ignor of the symptom of despair, which valancourt’ late conduct 
had betrayed. 



chapter xvii 

but in these cases, 
We still have judgment here; that we but teach 
bloodi instructions, which, be taught, return 
To plagu the inventor: thu even-hand justic 
commend the ingredi of our poison’d chalic 
To our own lips. 
macbeth 


some circumst of an extraordinari natur now withdrew emili from 
her own sorrows, and excit emotions, which partook of both surpris 
and horror. 

A few day follow that, on which signora laurentini died, her will 
wa open at the monastery, in the presenc of the superior and mons. 
bonnac, when it wa found, that one third of her person properti wa 
bequeath to the nearest surviv rel of the late marchio de 
villeroi, and that emili wa the person. 

with the secret of emily’ famili the abbess had long been acquainted, 
and it wa in observ of the earnest request of st. aubert, who wa 
known to the friar, that attend him on hi death-bed, that hi 
daughter had remain in ignor of her relationship to the 
marchioness. but some hints, which had fallen from signora laurentini, 
dure her last interview with emily, and a confess of a veri 
extraordinari nature, given in her die hours, had made the abbess 
think it necessari to convers with her young friend, on the topic she 
had not befor ventur to introduce; and it wa for thi purpose, that 
she had request to see her on the morn that follow her interview 
with the nun. emily’ indisposit had then prevent the intend 
conversation; but now, after the will had been examined, she receiv a 
summons, which she immedi obeyed, and becam inform of 
circumstances, that power affect her. As the narr of the 
abbess was, however, defici in mani particulars, of which the reader 
may wish to be informed, and the histori of the nun is materi 
connect with the fate of the marchio de villeroi, we shall omit 
the conversation, that pass in the parlour of the convent, and mingl 
with our relat a brief histori of 

laurentini DI udolpho, 


who wa the onli child of her parents, and heiress of the ancient hous 
of udolpho, in the territori of venice. It wa the first misfortun of 
her life, and that which led to all her succeed misery, that the 
friends, who ought to have restrain her strong passions, and mildli 
instruct her in the art of govern them, nurtur them by earli 
indulgence. but they cherish their own fail in her; for their 
conduct wa not the result of ration kindness, and, when they either 
indulged, or oppos the passion of their child, they gratifi their 
own. thu they indulg her with weakness, and reprehend her with 
violence; her spirit wa exasper by their vehemence, instead of 
be correct by their wisdom; and their opposit becam contest 
for victory, in which the due tender of the parents, and the 
affection duti of the child, were equal forgotten; but, as 
return fond disarm the parents’ resent soonest, laurentini 
wa suffer to believ that she had conquered, and her passion becam 
stronger by everi effort, that had been employ to subdu them. 

the death of her father and mother in the same year left her to her own 
discretion, under the danger circumst attend on youth and 
beauty. she wa fond of company, delight with admiration, yet 
disdain of the opinion of the world, when it happen to contradict 
her inclinations; had a gay and brilliant wit, and wa mistress of all 
the art of fascination. her conduct wa such as might have been 
expected, from the weak of her principl and the strength of her 
passions. 

among her numer admir wa the late marqui de villeroi, who, on 
hi tour through italy, saw laurentini at venice, where she usual 
resided, and becam her passion adorer. equal captiv by the 
figur and accomplish of the marquis, who wa at that period one 
of the most distinguish noblemen of the french court, she had the art 
so effectu to conceal from him the danger trait of her 
charact and the blemish of her late conduct, that he solicit her 
hand in marriage. 

befor the nuptial were concluded, she retir to the castl of 
udolpho, whither the marqui followed, and, where her conduct, relax 
from the propriety, which she had late assumed, discov to him the 
precipice, on which he stood. A minut enquiri than he had befor 
thought it necessari to make, convinc him, that he had been deceiv 
in her character, and she, whom he had design for hi wife, 
afterward becam hi mistress. 

have pass some week at udolpho, he wa call abruptli to france, 
whither he return with extrem reluctance, for hi heart wa still 
fascin by the art of laurentini, with whom, however, he had on 
variou pretenc delay hi marriage; but, to reconcil her to thi 
separation, he now gave repeat promis of return to conclud the 
nuptials, as soon as the affair, which thu suddenli call him to 
france, should permit. 

soothed, in some degree, by these assurances, she suffer him to 
depart; and, soon after, her relative, montoni, arriv at udolpho, 
renew the addresses, which she had befor refused, and which she now 
again rejected. meanwhile, her thought were constantli with the 
marqui de villeroi, for whom she suffer all the delirium of italian 
love, cherish by the solitude, to which she confin herself; for she 
had now lost all tast for the pleasur of societi and the gaieti of 
amusement. her onli indulg were to sigh and weep over a miniatur 
of the marquis; to visit the scenes, that had wit their 
happiness, to pour forth her heart to him in writing, and to count the 
weeks, the days, which must interven befor the period that he had 
mention as probabl for hi return. but thi period pass without 
bring him; and week after week follow in heavi and almost 
intoler expectation. dure thi interval, laurentini’ fancy, 
occupi incessantli by one idea, becam disordered; and, her whole 
heart be devot to one object, life becam hate to her, when she 
believ that object lost. 

sever month passed, dure which she heard noth from the marqui 
de villeroi, and her day were marked, at intervals, with the frenzi of 
passion and the sullen of despair. she seclud herself from all 
visitors, and, sometimes, remain in her apartment, for week 
together, refus to speak to everi person, except her favourit 
femal attendant, write scrap of letters, reading, again and again, 
those she had receiv from the marquis, weep over hi picture, and 
speak to it, for mani hours, upbraiding, reproach and caress 
it alternately. 

At length, a report reach her, that the marqui had marri in 
france, and, after suffer all the extrem of love, jealousi and 
indignation, she form the desper resolut of go secretli to 
that country, and, if the report prove true, of attempt a deep 
revenge. To her favourit woman onli she confid the plan of her 
journey, and she engag her to partak of it. have collect her 
jewels, which, descend to her from mani branch of her family, were 
of immens value, and all her cash, to a veri larg amount, they were 
pack in a trunk, which wa privat convey to a neighbour town, 
whither laurentini, with thi onli servant, followed, and thenc 
proceed secretli to leghorn, where they embark for france. 

when, on her arriv in languedoc, she found, that the marqui de 
villeroi had been married, for some months, her despair almost depriv 
her of reason, and she altern project and abandon the horribl 
design of murder the marquis, hi wife and herself. At length she 
contriv to throw herself in hi way, with an intent of reproach 
him, for hi conduct, and of stab herself in hi presence; but, 
when she again saw him, who so long had been the constant object of her 
thought and affections, resent yield to love; her resolut 
failed; she trembl with the conflict of emotions, that assail her 
heart, and faint away. 

the marqui wa not proof against her beauti and sensibility; all the 
energy, with which he had first loved, returned, for hi passion had 
been resist by prudence, rather than overcom by indifference; and, 
sinc the honour of hi famili would not permit him to marri her, he 
had endeavour to subdu hi love, and had so far succeeded, as to 
select the then marchio for hi wife, whom he love at first with a 
temper and ration affection. but the mild virtu of that amiabl 
ladi did not recompens him for her indifference, which appeared, 
notwithstand her effort to conceal it; and he had, for some time, 
suspect that her affect were engag by anoth person, when 
laurentini arriv in languedoc. thi art italian soon perceived, 
that she had regain her influenc over him, and, sooth by the 
discovery, she determin to live, and to employ all her enchant 
to win hi consent to the diabol deed, which she believ wa 
necessari to the secur of her happiness. she conduct her scheme 
with deep dissimul and patient perseverance, and, have 
complet estrang the affect of the marqui from hi wife, whose 
gentl good and unimpass manner had ceas to please, when 
contrast with the captiv of the italian, she proceed to 
awaken in hi mind the jealousi of pride, for it wa no longer that of 
love, and even point out to him the person, to whom she affirm the 
marchio had sacrif her honour; but laurentini had first 
extort from him a solemn promis to forbear aveng himself upon hi 
rival. thi wa an import part of her plan, for she knew, that, if 
hi desir of vengeanc wa restrain toward one party, it would burn 
more fierc toward the other, and he might then, perhaps, be 
prevail on to assist in the horribl act, which would releas him 
from the onli barrier, that withheld him from make her hi wife. 

the innoc marchioness, meanwhile, observed, with extrem grief, the 
alter in her husband’ manners. He becam reserv and thought 
in her presence; hi conduct wa austere, and sometim even rude; and 
he left her, for mani hour together, to weep for hi unkindness, and 
to form plan for the recoveri of hi affection. hi conduct afflict 
her the more, because, in obedi to the command of her father, she 
had accept hi hand, though her affect were engag to another, 
whose amiabl disposition, she had reason to believe, would have 
ensur her happiness. thi circumst laurentini had discovered, 
soon after her arriv in france, and had made ampl use of it in 
assist her design upon the marquis, to whom she adduc such 
seem proof of hi wife’ infidelity, that, in the frantic rage of 
wound honour, he consent to destroy hi wife. A slow poison wa 
administered, and she fell a victim to the jealousi and subtleti of 
laurentini and to the guilti weak of her husband. 

but the moment of laurentini’ triumph, the moment, to which she had 
look forward for the complet of all her wishes, prove onli the 
commenc of a suffering, that never left her to her die hour. 

the passion of revenge, which had in part stimul her to the 
commiss of thi atroci deed, died, even at the moment when it wa 
gratified, and left her to the horror of unavail piti and remorse, 
which would probabl have empoison all the year she had promis 
herself with the marqui de villeroi, had her expect of an 
allianc with him been realised. but he, too, had found the moment of 
hi reveng to be that of remorse, as to himself, and detestation, as 
to the partner of hi crime; the feeling, which he had mistaken for 
conviction, wa no more; and he stood astonished, and aghast, that no 
proof remain of hi wife’ infidelity, now that she had suffer the 
punish of guilt. even when he wa informed, that she wa dying, he 
had felt suddenli and unaccount reassur of her innocence, nor wa 
the solemn assur she made him in her last hour, capabl of 
afford him a stronger convict of her blameless conduct. 

In the first horror of remors and despair, he felt inclin to 
deliv up himself and the woman, who had plung him into thi abyss 
of guilt, into the hand of justice; but, when the paroxysm of hi 
suffer wa over, hi intent changed. laurentini, however, he saw 
onli onc afterwards, and that was, to curs her as the instig of 
hi crime, and to say, that he spare her life onli on condition, that 
she pass the rest of her day in prayer and penance. overwhelm with 
disappointment, on receiv contempt and abhorr from the man, for 
whose sake she had not scrupl to stain her conscienc with human 
blood, and, touch with horror of the unavail crime she had 
committed, she renounc the world, and retir to the monasteri of st. 
claire, a dread victim to unresist passion. 

the marquis, immedi after the death of hi wife, quit 
château-le-blanc, to which he never returned, and endeavour to lose 
the sens of hi crime amidst the tumult of war, or the dissip of 
a capital; but hi effort were vain; a deep deject hung over him 
ever after, for which hi most intim friend could not account, and 
he, at length, died, with a degre of horror nearli equal to that, 
which laurentini had suffered. the physician, who had observ the 
singular appear of the unfortun marchioness, after death, had 
been bribe to silence; and, as the surmis of a few of the servant 
had proceed no further than a whisper, the affair had never been 
investigated. whether thi whisper ever reach the father of the 
marchioness, and, if it did, whether the difficulti of obtain proof 
deter him from prosecut the marqui de villeroi, is uncertain; 
but her death wa deepli lament by some part of her family, and 
particularli by her brother, M. st. aubert; for that wa the degre of 
relationship, which had exist between emily’ father and the 
marchioness; and there is no doubt, that he suspect the manner of her 
death. mani letter pass between the marqui and him, soon after the 
deceas of hi belov sister, the subject of which wa not known, but 
there is reason to believe, that they relat to the caus of her 
death; and these were the papers, togeth with some letter of the 
marchioness, who had confid to her brother the occas of her 
unhappiness, which st. aubert had so solemnli enjoin hi daughter to 
destroy: and anxieti for her peac had probabl made him forbid her to 
enquir into the melancholi story, to which they alluded. such, indeed, 
had been hi affliction, on the prematur death of thi hi favourit 
sister, whose unhappi marriag had from the first excit hi tenderest 
pity, that he never could hear her named, or mention her himself after 
her death, except to madam st. aubert. from emily, whose sensibl 
he fear to awaken, he had so care conceal her histori and 
name, that she wa ignorant, till now, that she ever had such a 
rel as the marchio de villeroi; and from thi motiv he had 
enjoin silenc to hi onli surviv sister, madam cheron, who had 
scrupul observ hi request. 

It wa over some of the last pathet letter of the marchioness, that 
st. aubert wa weeping, when he wa observ by emily, on the eve of 
her departur from La vallée, and it wa her picture, which he had so 
tenderli caressed. her disastr death may account for the emot he 
had betrayed, on hear her name by La voisin, and for hi request to 
be inter near the monument of the villerois, where her remain were 
deposited, but not those of her husband, who wa buried, where he died, 
in the north of france. 

the confessor, who attend st. aubert in hi last moments, recollect 
him to be the brother of the late marchioness, when st. aubert, from 
tender to emily, had conjur him to conceal the circumstance, and 
to request that the abbess, to whose care he particularli recommend 
her, would do the same; a request, which had been exactli observed. 

laurentini, on her arriv in france, had care conceal her name 
and family, and, the better to disguis her real history, had, on 
enter the convent, caus the stori to be circulated, which had 
impos on sister frances, and it is probable, that the abbess, who did 
not presid in the convent, at the time of her noviciation, wa also 
entir ignor of the truth. the deep remorse, that seiz on the 
mind of laurentini, togeth with the suffer of disappoint 
passion, for she still love the marquis, again unsettl her 
intellects, and, after the first paroxysm of despair were passed, a 
heavi and silent melancholi had settl upon her spirits, which 
suffer few interrupt from fit of frenzy, till the time of her 
death. dure mani years, it had been her onli amus to walk in the 
wood near the monastery, in the solitari hour of night, and to play 
upon a favourit instrument, to which she sometim join the 
delight melodi of her voice, in the most solemn and melancholi air 
of her nativ country, modul by all the energet feeling, that 
dwelt in her heart. the physician, who had attend her, recommend it 
to the superior to indulg her in thi whim, as the onli mean of 
sooth her distemp fancy; and she wa suffer to walk in the 
lone hour of night, attend by the servant, who had accompani her 
from italy; but, as the indulg transgress against the rule of 
the convent, it wa kept as secret as possible; and thu the mysteri 
music of laurentini had combin with other circumstances, to produc a 
report, that not onli the château, but it neighbourhood, wa haunted. 

soon after her entranc into thi holi community, and befor she had 
shown ani symptom of insan there, she made a will, in which, after 
bequeath a consider legaci to the convent, she divid the 
remaind of her person property, which her jewel made veri 
valuable, between the wife of mons. bonnac, who wa an italian ladi and 
her relation, and the nearest surviv rel of the late 
marchio de villeroi. As emili st. aubert wa not onli the nearest, 
but the sole relative, thi legaci descend to her, and thu explain 
to her the whole mysteri of her father’ conduct. 

the resembl between emili and her unfortun aunt had frequent 
been observ by laurentini, and had occas the singular behaviour, 
which had formerli alarm her; but it wa in the nun’ die hour, 
when her conscienc gave her perpetu the idea of the marchioness, 
that she becam more sensible, than ever, of thi likeness, and, in her 
frenzy, deem it no resembl of the person she had injured, but the 
origin herself. the bold assertion, that had followed, on the 
recoveri of her senses, that emili wa the daughter of the marchio 
de villeroi, aros from a suspicion that she wa so; for, know that 
her rival, when she marri the marquis, wa attach to anoth lover, 
she had scarc scrupl to believe, that her honour had been 
sacrificed, like her own, to an unresist passion. 

Of a crime, however, to which emili had suspected, from her frenzi 
confess of murder, that she had been instrument in the castl of 
udolpho, laurentini wa innocent; and she had herself been deceived, 
concern the spectacle, that formerli occas her so much terror, 
and had sinc compel her, for a while, to attribut the horror of 
the nun to a conscious of a murder, commit in that castle. 

It may be remembered, that, in a chamber of udolpho, hung a black veil, 
whose singular situat had excit emily’ curiosity, and which 
afterward disclos an object, that had overwhelm her with horror; 
for, on lift it, there appeared, instead of the pictur she had 
expected, within a recess of the wall, a human figur of ghastli 
paleness, stretch at it length, and dress in the habili of 
the grave. what ad to the horror of the spectacle, was, that the 
face appear partli decay and disfigur by worms, which were 
visibl on the featur and hands. On such an object, it will be 
readili believed, that no person could endur to look twice. emily, it 
may be recollected, had, after the first glance, let the veil drop, and 
her terror had prevent her from ever after provok a renew of 
such suffering, as she had then experienced. had she dare to look 
again, her delus and her fear would have vanish together, and she 
would have perceived, that the figur befor her wa not human, but 
form of wax. the histori of it is somewhat extraordinary, though not 
without exampl in the record of that fierc severity, which monkish 
superstit ha sometim inflict on mankind. A member of the hous 
of udolpho, have commit some offenc against the prerog of 
the church, had been condemn to the penanc of contemplating, dure 
certain hour of the day, a waxen image, made to resembl a human bodi 
in the state, to which it is reduc after death. thi penance, serv 
as a memento of the condit at which he must himself arrive, had been 
design to reprov the pride of the marqui of udolpho, which had 
formerli so much exasper that of the romish church; and he had not 
onli superstiti observ thi penanc himself, which, he had 
believed, wa to obtain a pardon for all hi sins, but had made it a 
condit in hi will, that hi descend should preserv the image, 
on pain of forfeit to the church a certain part of hi domain, that 
they also might profit by the humili moral it conveyed. the 
figure, therefore, had been suffer to retain it station in the wall 
of the chamber, but hi descend excus themselv from observ 
the penance, to which he had been enjoined. 

thi imag wa so horribl natural, that it is not surpris emili 
should have mistaken it for the object it resembled, nor, sinc she had 
heard such an extraordinari account, concern the disappear of the 
late ladi of the castle, and had such experi of the charact of 
montoni, that she should have believ thi to be the murder bodi of 
the ladi laurentini, and that he had been the contriv of her death. 

the situation, in which she had discov it, occas her, at 
first, much surpris and perplexity; but the vigilance, with which the 
door of the chamber, where it wa deposited, were afterward secured, 
had compel her to believe, that montoni, not dare to confid the 
secret of her death to ani person, had suffer her remain to decay in 
thi obscur chamber. the ceremoni of the veil, however, and the 
circumst of the door have been left open, even for a moment, had 
occas her much wonder and some doubts; but these were not 
suffici to overcom her suspicion of montoni; and it wa the dread 
of hi terribl vengeance, that had seal her lip in silence, 
concern what she had seen in the west chamber. 

emily, in discov the marchio de villeroi to have been the 
sister of mons. st. aubert, wa various affected; but, amidst the 
sorrow, which she suffer for her untim death, she wa releas 
from an anxiou and pain conjecture, occas by the rash 
assert of signora laurentini, concern her birth and the honour of 
her parents. her faith in st. aubert’ principl would scarc allow 
her to suspect that he had act dishonourably; and she felt such 
reluct to believ herself the daughter of ani other, than her, whom 
she had alway consid and love as a mother, that she would hardli 
admit such a circumst to be possible; yet the likeness, which it 
had frequent been affirm she bore to the late marchioness, the 
former behaviour of dorothé the old housekeeper, the assert of 
laurentini, and the mysteri attachment, which st. aubert had 
discovered, awaken doubts, as to hi connect with the marchioness, 
which her reason could neither vanquish, nor confirm. from these, 
however, she wa now relieved, and all the circumst of her 
father’ conduct were fulli explained: but her heart wa oppress by 
the melancholi catastroph of her amiabl relative, and by the aw 
lesson, which the histori of the nun exhibited, the indulg of whose 
passion had been the mean of lead her gradual to the commiss 
of a crime, from the propheci of which in her earli year she would 
have recoil in horror, and exclaimed—that it could not be!—a crime, 
which whole year of repent and of the severest penanc had not 
been abl to obliter from her conscience. 



chapter xviii 

then, fresh tear 
stood on her cheek, as doth the honey-dew 
upon a gather’d lili almost wither’d 
shakespear 


after the late discoveries, emili wa distinguish at the château by 
the count and hi family, as a rel of the hous of villeroi, and 
received, if possible, more friendli attention, than had yet been shown 
her. 

count De villefort’ surpris at the delay of an answer to hi letter, 
which had been direct to valancourt, at estuvière, wa mingl with 
satisfact for the prudence, which had save emili from a share of 
the anxieti he now suffered, though, when he saw her still droop 
under the effect of hi former error, all hi resolut wa necessari 
to restrain him from relat the truth, that would afford her a 
momentari relief. the approach nuptial of the ladi blanch now 
divid hi attent with thi subject of hi anxiety, for the 
inhabit of the château were alreadi busi in prepar for that 
event, and the arriv of mons. st. foix wa daili expected. In the 
gaiety, which surround her, emili vainli tri to participate, her 
spirit be depress by the late discoveries, and by the anxieti 
concern the fate of valancourt, that had been occas by the 
descript of hi manner, when he had deliv the ring. she seem 
to perceiv in it the gloomi wild of despair; and, when she 
consid to what that despair might have urg him, her heart sunk 
with terror and grief. the state of suspense, as to hi safety, to 
which she believ herself condemned, till she should return to La 
vallée, appear insupportable, and, in such moments, she could not 
even struggl to assum the composure, that had left her mind, but 
would often abruptli quit the compani she wa with, and endeavour to 
sooth her spirit in the deep solitud of the woods, that overbrow 
the shore. here, the faint roar of foam waves, that beat below, and 
the sullen murmur of the wind among the branch around, were 
circumst in unison with the temper of her mind; and she would sit 
on a cliff, or on the broken step of her favourit watch-tower, 
observ the chang colour of the even clouds, and the gloom of 
twilight draw over the sea, till the white top of billows, ride 
toward the shore, could scarc be discern amidst the darken 
waters. the lines, engrav by valancourt on thi tower, she frequent 
repeat with melancholi enthusiasm, and then would endeavour to check 
the recollect and the grief they occasioned, and to turn her 
thought to indiffer subjects. 

one evening, have wander with her lute to thi her favourit spot, 
she enter the ruin tower, and ascend a wind staircase, that 
led to a small chamber, which wa less decay than the rest of the 
building, and whenc she had often gazed, with admiration, on the wide 
prospect of sea and land, that extend below. the sun wa now set 
on that tract of the pyrenees, which divid languedoc from rousillon, 
and, place herself opposit to a small grate window, which, like the 
wood-top beneath, and the wave lower still, gleam with the red glow 
of the west, she touch the chord of her lute in solemn symphony, and 
then accompani it with her voice, in one of the simpl and affect 
airs, to which, in happier days, valancourt had often listen in 
rapture, and which she now adapt to the follow lines. 

TO melancholi 

spirit of love and sorrow—hail! 
thi solemn voic from far I hear, 
mingl with ev’ning’ die gale: 
hail, with thi sadly-pleas tear! 

O! at thi still, thi lone hour, 
thine own sweet hour of close day, 
awak thi lute, whose charm pow’r 
shall call up fanci to obey: 

To paint the wild romant dream, 
that meet the poet’ muse eye, 
as, on the bank of shadowi stream, 
He breath to her the fervid sigh. 

O lone spirit! let thi song 
lead me through all thi sacr haunt; 
the minister’ moonlight aisl along, 
where spectr rais the midnight chaunt. 

I hear their dirg faintli swell! 
then, sink at onc in silenc drear, 
while, from the pillar’d cloister’ cell, 
dimli their glide form appear! 

lead where the pine-wood wave on high, 
whose pathless sod is darkli seen, 
As the cold moon, with trembl eye, 
dart her long beam the leav between. 

lead to the mountain’ duski head, 
where, far below, in shade profound, 
wide forests, plain and hamlet spread, 
and sad the chime of vesper sound, 

Or guid me, where the dash oar 
just break the still of the vale, 
As slow it track the wind shore, 
To meet the ocean’ distant sail: 

To pebbl banks, that neptun laves, 
with measur’d surges, loud and deep, 
where the dark cliff bend o’er the waves, 
and wild the wind of autumn sweep. 

there paus at midnight’ spectr hour, 
and list the long-resound gale; 
and catch the fleet moonlight’ pow’r, 
o’er foam sea and distant sail. 


the soft tranquil of the scene below, where the even breez 
scarc curl the water, or swell the pass sail, that caught the 
last gleam of the sun, and where, now and then, a dip oar wa all 
that disturb the trembl radiance, conspir with the tender melodi 
of her lute to lull her mind into a state of gentl sadness, and she 
sung the mourn song of past times, till the remembr they 
awaken were too power for her heart, her tear fell upon the lute, 
over which she drooped, and her voic trembled, and wa unabl to 
proceed. 

though the sun had now sunk behind the mountains, and even hi 
reflect light wa fade from their highest points, emili did not 
leav the watch-tower, but continu to indulg her melancholi reverie, 
till a footstep, at a littl distance, startl her, and, on look 
through the grate, she observ a person walk below, whom, however, 
soon perceiv to be mons. bonnac, she return to the quiet 
thought hi step had interrupted. after some time, she again 
struck her lute, and sung her favourit air; but again a step disturb 
her, and, as she paus to listen, she heard it ascend the staircas 
of the tower. the gloom of the hour, perhaps, made her sensibl to some 
degre of fear, which she might not otherwis have felt; for, onli a 
few minut before, she had seen mons. bonnac pass. the step were 
quick and bounding, and, in the next moment, the door of the chamber 
opened, and a person entered, whose featur were veil in the 
obscur of twilight; but hi voic could not be concealed, for it wa 
the voic of valancourt! At the sound, never heard by emily, without 
emotion, she started, in terror, astonish and doubt pleasure, 
and had scarc beheld him at her feet, when she sunk into a seat, 
overcom by the variou emotions, that contend at her heart, and 
almost insens to that voice, whose earnest and trembl call 
seem as if endeavour to save her. valancourt, as he hung over 
emily, deplor hi own rash impatience, in have thu surpris her: 
for when he had arriv at the château, too anxiou to await the return 
of the count, who, he understood, wa in the grounds, he went himself 
to seek him, when, as he pass the tower, he wa struck by the sound 
of emily’ voice, and immedi ascended. 

It wa a consider time befor she revived, but, when her 
recollect returned, she repuls hi attentions, with an air of 
reserve, and enquired, with as much displeasur as it wa possibl she 
could feel in these first moment of hi appearance, the occas of 
hi visit. 

“ah emily!” said valancourt, “that air, those words—alas! I have, then, 
littl to hope—when you ceas to esteem me, you ceas also to love 
me!” 

“most true, sir,” repli emily, endeavour to command her trembl 
voice; “and if you had valu my esteem, you would not have given me 
thi new occas for uneasiness.” 

valancourt’ counten chang suddenli from the anxieti of doubt 
to an express of surpris and dismay: he wa silent a moment, and 
then said, “I had been taught to hope for a veri differ reception! 
Is it, then, true, emily, that I have lost your regard for ever? am I 
to believe, that, though your esteem for me may return—your affect 
never can? can the count have medit the cruelty, which now tortur 
me with a second death?” 

the voice, in which he spoke this, alarm emili as much as hi word 
surpris her, and, with trembl impatience, she beg that he would 
explain them. 

“can ani explan be necessary?” said valancourt, “do you not know 
how cruelli my conduct ha been misrepresented? that the action of 
which you onc believ me guilti (and, O emily! how could you so 
degrad me in your opinion, even for a moment!) those actions—i hold in 
as much contempt and abhorr as yourself? are you, indeed, ignorant, 
that count de villefort ha detect the slanders, that have rob me 
of all I hold dear on earth, and ha invit me hither to justifi to 
you my former conduct? It is sure imposs you can be uninform of 
these circumstances, and I am again tortur myself with a fals 
hope!” 

the silenc of emili confirm thi supposition; for the deep twilight 
would not allow valancourt to distinguish the astonish and doubt 
joy, that fix her features. for a moment, she continu unabl to 
speak; then a profound sigh seem to give some relief to her spirits, 
and she said, 

“valancourt! I was, till thi moment, ignor of all the circumst 
you have mentioned; the emot I now suffer may assur you of the 
truth of this, and, that, though I had ceas to esteem, I had not 
taught myself entir to forget you.” 

“thi moment,” said valancourt, in a low voice, and lean for support 
against the window—“thi moment bring with it a convict that 
overpow me!—i am dear to you then—stil dear to you, my emily!” 

“i it necessari that I should tell you so?” she replied, “i it 
necessary, that I should say—thes are the first moment of joy I have 
known, sinc your departure, and that they repay me for all those of 
pain I have suffer in the interval?” 

valancourt sigh deeply, and wa unabl to reply; but, as he press 
her hand to hi lips, the tears, that fell over it, spoke a language, 
which could not be mistaken, and to which word were inadequate. 

emily, somewhat tranquillized, propos return to the château, and 
then, for the first time, recollect that the count had invit 
valancourt thither to explain hi conduct, and that no explan had 
yet been given. but, while she acknowledg this, her heart would not 
allow her to dwell, for a moment, on the possibl of hi 
unworthiness; hi look, hi voice, hi manner, all spoke the nobl 
sincerity, which had formerli distinguish him; and she again 
permit herself to indulg the emot of a joy, more surpris and 
powerful, than she had ever befor experienced. 

neither emily, nor valancourt, were consciou how they reach the 
château, whither they might have been transfer by the spell of a 
fairy, for anyth they could remember; and it wa not, till they had 
reach the great hall, that either of them recollect there were 
other person in the world besid themselves. the count then came 
forth with surprise, and with the joy of pure benevolence, to 
welcom valancourt, and to entreat hi forgiv of the injustic he 
had done him; soon after which, mons. bonnac join thi happi group, 
in which he and valancourt were mutual rejoic to meet. 

when the first congratul were over, and the gener joy becam 
somewhat more tranquil, the count withdrew with valancourt to the 
library, where a long convers pass between them, in which the 
latter so clearli justifi himself of the crimin part of the 
conduct, imput to him, and so candidli confess and so feelingli 
lament the follies, which he had committed, that the count wa 
confirm in hi belief of all he had hoped; and, while he perceiv so 
mani nobl virtu in valancourt, and that experi had taught him to 
detest the follies, which befor he had onli not admired, he did not 
scrupl to believe, that he would pass through life with the digniti of 
a wise and good man, or to entrust to hi care the futur happi of 
emili st. aubert, for whom he felt the solicitud of a parent. Of thi 
he soon inform her, in a short conversation, when valancourt had left 
him. while emili listen to a relat of the services, that 
valancourt had render mons. bonnac, her eye overflow with tear of 
pleasure, and the further convers of count De villefort perfectli 
dissip everi doubt, as to the past and futur conduct of him, to 
whom she now restored, without fear, the esteem and affection, with 
which she had formerli receiv him. 

when they return to the supper-room, the countess and ladi blanch 
met valancourt with sincer congratulations; and blanche, indeed, wa 
so much rejoic to see emili return to happiness, as to forget, for 
a while, that mons. st. foix wa not yet arriv at the château, though 
he had been expect for some hours; but her gener sympathi was, 
soon after, reward by hi appearance. He wa now perfectli recov 
from the wounds, received, dure hi peril adventur among the 
pyrenees, the mention of which serv to heighten to the parties, who 
had been involv in it, the sens of their present happiness. new 
congratul pass between them, and round the supper-t 
appear a group of faces, smile with felicity, but with a felicity, 
which had in each a differ character. the smile of blanch wa frank 
and gay, that of emili tender and pensive; valancourt’ wa rapturous, 
tender and gay alternately; mons. st. foix’ wa joyous, and that of 
the count, as he look on the surround party, express the 
temper complac of benevolence; while the featur of the 
countess, henri, and mons. bonnac, discov fainter trace of 
animation. poor mons. Du pont did not, by hi presence, throw a shade 
of regret over the company; for, when he had discovered, that 
valancourt wa not unworthi of the esteem of emily, he determin 
serious to endeavour at the conquest of hi own hopeless affection, 
and had immedi withdrawn from château-le-blanc—a conduct, which 
emili now understood, and reward with her admir and pity. 

the count and hi guest continu togeth till a late hour, yield 
to the delight of social gaiety, and to the sweet of friendship. when 
annett heard of the arriv of valancourt, ludovico had some 
difficulti to prevent her go into the supper-room, to express her 
joy, for she declared, that she had never been so rejoic at ani 
_accident_ as this, sinc she had found ludovico himself. 



chapter xix 

now my task is smoothli done, 
I can fly, or I can run 
quickli to the green earth’ end, 
where the bow’d welkin low doth bend, 
and, from thence, can soar as soon 
To the corner of the moon. 
milton 


the marriag of the ladi blanch and emili st. aubert were celebrated, 
on the same day, and with the ancient baroni magnificence, at 
château-le-blanc. the feast were held in the great hall of the castle, 
which, on thi occasion, wa hung with superb new tapestry, 
repres the exploit of charlemagn and hi twelv peers; here, 
were seen the saracens, with their horribl visors, advanc to 
battle; and there, were display the wild solemn of incantation, 
and the necromant feats, exhibit by the magician _jarl_ befor the 
emperor. the sumptuou banner of the famili of villeroi, which had 
long slept in dust, were onc more unfurled, to wave over the gothic 
point of paint casements; and music echoed, in mani a linger 
close, through everi wind galleri and colonnad of that vast 
edifice. 

As annett look down from the corridor upon the hall, whose arch 
and window were illumin with brilliant festoon of lamps, and 
gaze on the splendid dress of the dancers, the costli liveri of 
the attendants, the canopi of purpl velvet and gold, and listen to 
the gay strain that float along the vault roof, she almost fanci 
herself in an enchant palace, and declared, that she had not met with 
ani place, which charm her so much, sinc she read the fairi tales; 
nay, that the fairi themselves, at their nightli revel in thi old 
hall, could display noth finer; while old dorothée, as she survey 
the scene, sighed, and said, the castl look as it wa wont to do in 
the time of her youth. 

after grace the festiv of château-le-blanc, for some days, 
valancourt and emili took leav of their kind friends, and return to 
La vallée, where the faith theresa receiv them with unfeign joy, 
and the pleasant shade welcom them with a thousand tender and 
affect remembrances; and, while they wander togeth over the 
scenes, so long inhabit by the late mons. and madam st. aubert, and 
emili point out, with pensiv affection, their favourit haunts, her 
present happi wa heightened, by considering, that it would have 
been worthi of their approbation, could they have wit it. 

valancourt led her to the plane-tre on the terrace, where he had first 
ventur to declar hi love, and where now the remembr of the 
anxieti he had then suffered, and the retrospect of all the danger and 
misfortun they had each encountered, sinc last they sat togeth 
beneath it broad branches, exalt the sens of their present 
felicity, which, on thi spot, sacr to the memori of st. aubert, they 
solemnli vow to deserve, as far as possible, by endeavour to 
imit hi benevolence,—bi remembering, that superior attain of 
everi sort bring with them duti of superior exertion,—and by 
afford to their fellow-beings, togeth with that portion of 
ordinari comforts, which prosper alway owe to misfortune, the 
exampl of live pass in happi thank to god, and, therefore, 
in care tender to hi creatures. 

soon after their return to La vallée, the brother of valancourt came to 
congratul him on hi marriage, and to pay hi respect to emily, 
with whom he wa so much pleased, as well as with the prospect of 
ration happiness, which these nuptial offer to valancourt, that he 
immedi resign to him a part of the rich domain, the whole of 
which, as he had no family, would of cours descend to hi brother, on 
hi decease. 

the estates, at thoulouse, were dispos of, and emili purchas of 
mons. quesnel the ancient domain of her late father, where, have 
given annett a marriag portion, she settl her as the housekeeper, 
and ludovico as the steward; but, sinc both valancourt and herself 
prefer the pleasant and long-lov shade of La vallé to the 
magnific of epourville, they continu to resid there, passing, 
however, a few month in the year at the birth-plac of st. aubert, in 
tender respect to hi memory. 

the legacy, which had been bequeath to emili by signora laurentini, 
she beg valancourt would allow her to resign to mons. bonnac; and 
valancourt, when she made the request, felt all the valu of the 
compliment it conveyed. the castl of udolpho, also, descend to the 
wife of mons. bonnac, who wa the nearest surviv relat of the 
hous of that name, and thu affluenc restor hi long-oppress 
spirit to peace, and hi famili to comfort. 

O! how joy it is to tell of happiness, such as that of valancourt 
and emily; to relate, that, after suffer under the oppress of the 
viciou and the disdain of the weak, they were, at length, restor to 
each other—to the belov landscap of their nativ country,—to the 
securest felic of thi life, that of aspir to moral and labour 
for intellectu improvement—to the pleasur of enlighten society, 
and to the exercis of the benevolence, which had alway anim their 
hearts; while the bower of La vallé became, onc more, the retreat of 
goodness, wisdom and domest blessedness! 

O! use may it be to have shown, that, though the viciou can 
sometim pour afflict upon the good, their power is transient and 
their punish certain; and that innocence, though oppress by 
injustice, shall, support by patience, final triumph over 
misfortune! 

and, if the weak hand, that ha record thi tale, has, by it scenes, 
beguil the mourner of one hour of sorrow, or, by it moral, taught 
him to sustain it—th effort, howev humble, ha not been vain, nor is 
the writer unrewarded. 



end of the project gutenberg ebook of the mysteri of udolpho, by ann radcliff 

*** end OF thi project gutenberg ebook the mysteri OF udolpho *** 

***** thi file should be name 3268-0.txt or 3268-0.zip ***** 
thi and all associ file of variou format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/3/2/6/3268/ 

produc by karale coleman, and david widger 

updat edit will replac the previou one--th old edit will 
be renamed. 

creat the work from print edit not protect by u.s. copyright 
law mean that no one own a unit state copyright in these works, 
so the foundat (and you!) can copi and distribut it in the unit 
state without permiss and without pay copyright 
royalties. special rules, set forth in the gener term of use part 
of thi license, appli to copi and distribut project 
gutenberg-tm electron work to protect the project gutenberg-tm 
concept and trademark. project gutenberg is a regist trademark, 
and may not be use if you charg for the ebooks, unless you receiv 
specif permission. If you do not charg anyth for copi of thi 
ebook, compli with the rule is veri easy. you may use thi ebook 
for nearli ani purpos such as creation of deriv works, reports, 
perform and research. they may be modifi and print and given 
away--y may do practic anyth in the unit state with ebook 
not protect by u.s. copyright law. redistribut is subject to the 
trademark license, especi commerci redistribution. 

start: full licens 

the full project gutenberg licens 
pleas read thi befor you distribut OR use thi work 

To protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promot the free 
distribut of electron works, by use or distribut thi work 
(or ani other work associ in ani way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agre to compli with all the term of the full 
project gutenberg-tm licens avail with thi file or onlin at 
www.gutenberg.org/license. 

section 1. gener term of use and redistribut project 
gutenberg-tm electron work 

1.a. By read or use ani part of thi project gutenberg-tm 
electron work, you indic that you have read, understand, agre to 
and accept all the term of thi licens and intellectu properti 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agre to abid by all 
the term of thi agreement, you must ceas use and return or 
destroy all copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in your 
possession. If you paid a fee for obtain a copi of or access to a 
project gutenberg-tm electron work and you do not agre to be bound 
by the term of thi agreement, you may obtain a refund from the 
person or entiti to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 
1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a regist trademark. It may onli be 
use on or associ in ani way with an electron work by peopl who 
agre to be bound by the term of thi agreement. there are a few 
thing that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electron work 
even without compli with the full term of thi agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of thing you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electron work if you follow the term of thi 
agreement and help preserv free futur access to project gutenberg-tm 
electron works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat ("the 
foundation" or pglaf), own a compil copyright in the collect 
of project gutenberg-tm electron works. nearli all the individu 
work in the collect are in the public domain in the unit 
states. If an individu work is unprotect by copyright law in the 
unit state and you are locat in the unit states, we do not 
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing, 
display or creat deriv work base on the work as long as 
all refer to project gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope 
that you will support the project gutenberg-tm mission of promot 
free access to electron work by freeli share project gutenberg-tm 
work in complianc with the term of thi agreement for keep the 
project gutenberg-tm name associ with the work. you can easili 
compli with the term of thi agreement by keep thi work in the 
same format with it attach full project gutenberg-tm licens when 
you share it without charg with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are locat also govern 
what you can do with thi work. copyright law in most countri are 
in a constant state of change. If you are outsid the unit states, 
check the law of your countri in addit to the term of thi 
agreement befor downloading, copying, displaying, performing, 
distribut or creat deriv work base on thi work or ani 
other project gutenberg-tm work. the foundat make no 
represent concern the copyright statu of ani work in ani 
countri outsid the unit states. 

1.e. unless you have remov all refer to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the follow sentence, with activ link to, or other 
immedi access to, the full project gutenberg-tm licens must appear 
promin whenev ani copi of a project gutenberg-tm work (ani work 
on which the phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, 
performed, viewed, copi or distributed: 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher in the unit state and 
most other part of the world at no cost and with almost no 
restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or re-us it 
under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ with thi 
ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not locat in the 
unit states, you'll have to check the law of the countri where you 
are locat befor use thi ebook. 

1.e.2. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is 
deriv from text not protect by u.s. copyright law (doe not 
contain a notic indic that it is post with permiss of the 
copyright holder), the work can be copi and distribut to anyon in 
the unit state without pay ani fee or charges. If you are 
redistribut or provid access to a work with the phrase "project 
gutenberg" associ with or appear on the work, you must compli 
either with the requir of paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 or 
obtain permiss for the use of the work and the project gutenberg-tm 
trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.3. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is post 
with the permiss of the copyright holder, your use and distribut 
must compli with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and ani 
addit term impos by the copyright holder. addit term 
will be link to the project gutenberg-tm licens for all work 
post with the permiss of the copyright holder found at the 
begin of thi work. 

1.e.4. Do not unlink or detach or remov the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens term from thi work, or ani file contain a part of thi 
work or ani other work associ with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribut or redistribut thi 
electron work, or ani part of thi electron work, without 
promin display the sentenc set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
activ link or immedi access to the full term of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribut thi work in ani binary, 
compressed, mark up, nonproprietari or proprietari form, includ 
ani word process or hypertext form. however, if you provid access 
to or distribut copi of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format 
other than "plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the offici 
version post on the offici project gutenberg-tm web site 
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no addit cost, fee or expens 
to the user, provid a copy, a mean of export a copy, or a mean 
of obtain a copi upon request, of the work in it origin "plain 
vanilla ascii" or other form. ani altern format must includ the 
full project gutenberg-tm licens as specifi in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. Do not charg a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copi or distribut ani project gutenberg-tm work 
unless you compli with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charg a reason fee for copi of or provid 
access to or distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work 
provid that 

* you pay a royalti fee of 20% of the gross profit you deriv from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm work calcul use the method 
you alreadi use to calcul your applic taxes. the fee is owe 
to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he ha 
agre to donat royalti under thi paragraph to the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundation. royalti payment must be paid 
within 60 day follow each date on which you prepar (or are 
legal requir to prepare) your period tax returns. royalti 
payment should be clearli mark as such and sent to the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundat at the address specifi in 
section 4, "inform about donat to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundation." 

* you provid a full refund of ani money paid by a user who notifi 
you in write (or by e-mail) within 30 day of receipt that s/he 
doe not agre to the term of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must requir such a user to return or destroy all 
copi of the work possess in a physic medium and discontinu 
all use of and all access to other copi of project gutenberg-tm 
works. 

* you provide, in accord with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of 
ani money paid for a work or a replac copy, if a defect in the 
electron work is discov and report to you within 90 day of 
receipt of the work. 

* you compli with all other term of thi agreement for free 
distribut of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. If you wish to charg a fee or distribut a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work or group of work on differ term than 
are set forth in thi agreement, you must obtain permiss in write 
from both the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat and the 
project gutenberg trademark llc, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm 
trademark. contact the foundat as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunt and employe expend consider 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcrib and proofread 
work not protect by u.s. copyright law in creat the project 
gutenberg-tm collection. despit these efforts, project gutenberg-tm 
electron works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may 
contain "defects," such as, but not limit to, incomplete, inaccur 
or corrupt data, transcript errors, a copyright or other 
intellectu properti infringement, a defect or damag disk or 
other medium, a comput virus, or comput code that damag or 
cannot be read by your equipment. 

1.f.2. limit warranty, disclaim OF damag - except for the "right 
of replac or refund" describ in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and ani other parti distribut a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work under thi agreement, disclaim all 
liabil to you for damages, cost and expenses, includ legal 
fees. you agre that you have NO remedi for negligence, strict 
liability, breach OF warranti OR breach OF contract except those 
provid IN paragraph 1.f.3. you agre that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and ani distributor under thi agreement will not BE 
liabl TO you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punit OR 
incident damag even IF you give notic OF the possibl OF such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limit right OF replac OR refund - If you discov a 
defect in thi electron work within 90 day of receiv it, you can 
receiv a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explan to the person you receiv the work from. If you 
receiv the work on a physic medium, you must return the medium 
with your written explanation. the person or entiti that provid you 
with the defect work may elect to provid a replac copi in 
lieu of a refund. If you receiv the work electronically, the person 
or entiti provid it to you may choos to give you a second 
opportun to receiv the work electron in lieu of a refund. If 
the second copi is also defective, you may demand a refund in write 
without further opportun to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limit right of replac or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, thi work is provid to you 'as-is', with NO 
other warranti OF ani kind, express OR implied, includ but not 
limit TO warranti OF merchant OR fit for ani purpose. 

1.f.5. some state do not allow disclaim of certain impli 
warranti or the exclus or limit of certain type of 
damages. If ani disclaim or limit set forth in thi agreement 
violat the law of the state applic to thi agreement, the 
agreement shall be interpret to make the maximum disclaim or 
limit permit by the applic state law. the invalid or 
unenforc of ani provis of thi agreement shall not void the 
remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemn - you agre to indemnifi and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, ani agent or employe of the foundation, anyon 
provid copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in 
accord with thi agreement, and ani volunt associ with the 
production, promot and distribut of project gutenberg-tm 
electron works, harmless from all liability, cost and expenses, 
includ legal fees, that aris directli or indirectli from ani of 
the follow which you do or caus to occur: (a) distribut of thi 
or ani project gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or 
addit or delet to ani project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) ani 
defect you cause. 

section 2. inform about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonym with the free distribut of 
electron work in format readabl by the widest varieti of 
comput includ obsolete, old, middle-ag and new computers. It 
exist becaus of the effort of hundr of volunt and donat 
from peopl in all walk of life. 

volunt and financi support to provid volunt with the 
assist they need are critic to reach project gutenberg-tm' 
goal and ensur that the project gutenberg-tm collect will 
remain freeli avail for gener to come. In 2001, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundat wa creat to provid a secur 
and perman futur for project gutenberg-tm and futur 
generations. To learn more about the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundat and how your effort and donat can help, see 
section 3 and 4 and the foundat inform page at 
www.gutenberg.org 



section 3. inform about the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat 

the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educ corpor organ under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt statu by the intern 
revenu service. the foundation' ein or feder tax identif 
number is 64-6221541. contribut to the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundat are tax deduct to the full extent permit by 
u.s. feder law and your state' laws. 

the foundation' princip offic is in fairbanks, alaska, with the 
mail address: PO box 750175, fairbanks, AK 99775, but it 
volunt and employe are scatter throughout numer 
locations. it busi offic is locat at 809 north 1500 west, salt 
lake city, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. email contact link and up to 
date contact inform can be found at the foundation' web site and 
offici page at www.gutenberg.org/contact 

for addit contact information: 

dr. gregori B. newbi 
chief execut and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 

section 4. inform about donat to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot surviv without wide 
spread public support and donat to carri out it mission of 
increas the number of public domain and licens work that can be 
freeli distribut in machin readabl form access by the widest 
array of equip includ outdat equipment. mani small donat 
($1 to $5,000) are particularli import to maintain tax exempt 
statu with the irs. 

the foundat is commit to compli with the law regul 
chariti and charit donat in all 50 state of the unit 
states. complianc requir are not uniform and it take a 
consider effort, much paperwork and mani fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. We do not solicit donat in locat 
where we have not receiv written confirm of compliance. To send 
donat or determin the statu of complianc for ani particular 
state visit www.gutenberg.org/don 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribut from state where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibit 
against accept unsolicit donat from donor in such state who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

intern donat are grate accepted, but we cannot make 
ani statement concern tax treatment of donat receiv from 
outsid the unit states. u.s. law alon swamp our small staff. 

pleas check the project gutenberg web page for current donat 
method and addresses. donat are accept in a number of other 
way includ checks, onlin payment and credit card donations. To 
donate, pleas visit: www.gutenberg.org/don 

section 5. gener inform about project gutenberg-tm electron works. 

professor michael S. hart wa the origin of the project 
gutenberg-tm concept of a librari of electron work that could be 
freeli share with anyone. for forti years, he produc and 
distribut project gutenberg-tm ebook with onli a loos network of 
volunt support. 

project gutenberg-tm ebook are often creat from sever print 
editions, all of which are confirm as not protect by copyright in 
the u.s. unless a copyright notic is included. thus, we do not 
necessarili keep ebook in complianc with ani particular paper 
edition. 

most peopl start at our web site which ha the main PG search 
facility: www.gutenberg.org 

thi web site includ inform about project gutenberg-tm, 
includ how to make donat to the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundation, how to help produc our new ebooks, and how to 
subscrib to our email newslett to hear about new ebooks. 



