project gutenberg' the shun house, by howard phillip lovecraft 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.org 


title: the shun hous 

author: howard phillip lovecraft 

releas date: march 2, 2010 [ebook #31469] 

language: english 


*** start OF thi project gutenberg ebook the shun hous *** 




produc by greg weeks, stephen blundel and the onlin 
distribut proofread team at http://www.pgdp.net 









the 
shun hous 

By H. P. lovecraft 


_A posthum stori of immens power, written by a master of weird 
fiction--a tale of a revolt horror in the cellar of an old 
hous in new england_ 


howard phillip lovecraft die last march, at the height of hi 
career. though onli forty-six year of age, he had built up an 
intern reput by the artistri and impecc literari 
craftsmanship of hi weird tales; and he wa regard on both side 
of the atlant as probabl the greatest contemporari master of 
weird fiction. hi abil to creat and sustain a mood of brood 
dread and unnam horror is nowher better shown than in the 
posthum tale present here: "the shun house." 

prefac 
from even the greatest of horror ironi is seldom absent. sometim it 
enter directli into the composit of the events, while sometim it 
relat onli to their fortuit posit among person and places. the 
latter sort is splendidli exemplifi by a case in the ancient citi of 
providence, where in the late forti edgar allan poe use to sojourn 
often dure hi unsuccess woo of the gift poetess, mrs. 
whitman. poe gener stop at the mansion hous in benefit 
street--th renam golden ball inn whose roof ha shelter washington, 
jefferson, and lafayette--and hi favorit walk led northward along the 
same street to mrs. whitman' home and the neighbor hillsid 
churchyard of st. john's, whose hidden expans of eighteenth centuri 
graveston had for him a peculiar fascination. 

now the ironi is this. In thi walk, so mani time repeated, the world' 
greatest master of the terribl and the bizarr wa oblig to pass a 
particular hous on the eastern side of the street; a dingy, antiqu 
structur perch on the abruptli rise side hill, with a great unkempt 
yard date from a time when the region wa partli open country. It doe 
not appear that he ever wrote or spoke of it, nor is there ani evid 
that he even notic it. and yet that house, to the two person in 
possess of certain information, equal or outrank in horror the 
wildest fantasi of the geniu who so often pass it unknowingly, and 
stand starkli leer as a symbol of all that is unutter hideous. 

the hous was--and for that matter still is--of a kind to attract the 
attent of the curious. origin a farm or semi-farm building, it 
follow the averag new england coloni line of the middl eighteenth 
century--th prosper peaked-roof sort, with two stori and 
dormerless attic, and with the georgian doorway and interior panel 
dictat by the progress of tast at that time. It face south, with one 
gabl end buri to the lower window in the eastward rise hill, and 
the other expos to the foundat toward the street. it 
construction, over a centuri and a half ago, had follow the grade 
and straighten of the road in that especi vicinity; for benefit 
street--at first call back street--wa laid out as a lane wind 
amongst the graveyard of the first settlers, and straighten onli when 
the remov of the bodi to the north burial ground made it decent 
possibl to cut through the old famili plots. 

At the start, the western wall had lain some twenti feet up a 
precipit lawn from the roadway; but a widen of the street at about 
the time of the revolut shear off most of the interven space, 
expos the foundat so that a brick basement wall had to be made, 
give the deep cellar a street frontag with door and one window abov 
ground, close to the new line of public travel. when the sidewalk wa 
laid out a centuri ago the last of the interven space wa removed; 
and poe in hi walk must have seen onli a sheer ascent of dull gray 
brick flush with the sidewalk and surmount at a height of ten feet by 
the antiqu shingl bulk of the hous proper. 

[illustration: "that aw door in benefit street which I had left 
ajar."] 

the farm-lik ground extend back veri deepli up the hill, almost to 
wheaton street. the space south of the house, abut on benefit 
street, wa of cours greatli abov the exist sidewalk level, form 
a terrac bound by a high bank wall of damp, mossi stone pierc by a 
steep flight of narrow step which led inward between canyon-lik 
surfac to the upper region of mangi lawn, rheumi brick walks, and 
neglect garden whose dismantl cement urns, rust kettl fallen 
from tripod of knotti sticks, and similar paraphernalia set off the 
weather-beaten front door with it broken fanlight, rot ionic 
pilasters, and wormi triangular pediment. 

* * * * * 

what I heard in my youth about the shun hous wa mere that peopl 
die there in alarmingli great numbers. that, I wa told, wa whi the 
origin owner had move out some twenti year after build the 
place. It wa plainli unhealthy, perhap becaus of the damp and 
fungou growth in the cellar, the gener sickish smell, the draft of 
the hallways, or the qualiti of the well and pump water. these thing 
were bad enough, and these were all that gain belief among the person 
whom I knew. onli the notebook of my antiquarian uncle, doctor elihu 
whipple, reveal to me at length the darker, vaguer surmis which 
form an undercurr of folklor among old-tim servant and humbl 
folk; surmis which never travel far, and which were larg 
forgotten when provid grew to be a metropoli with a shift modern 
population. 

the gener fact is, that the hous wa never regard by the solid part 
of the commun as in ani real sens "haunted." there were no 
widespread tale of rattl chains, cold current of air, extinguish 
lights, or face at the window. extremist sometim said the hous wa 
"unlucky," but that is as far as even they went. what wa realli beyond 
disput is that a fright proport of person die there; or more 
accurately, _had_ die there, sinc after some peculiar happen over 
sixti year ago the build had becom desert through the sheer 
imposs of rent it. these person were not all cut off suddenli 
by ani one cause; rather did it seem that their vital wa insidi 
sapped, so that each one die the sooner from whatev tendenc to 
weak he may have natur had. and those who did not die display 
in vari degre a type of anemia or consumption, and sometim a 
declin of the mental faculties, which spoke ill for the salubri 
of the building. neighbor houses, it must be added, seem entir 
free from the noxiou quality. 

thi much I knew befor my insist question led my uncl to show me 
the note which final embark us both on our hideou investigation. 
In my childhood the shun hous wa vacant, with barren, gnarl and 
terribl old trees, long, queerli pale grass and nightmarishli misshapen 
weed in the high terrac yard where bird never lingered. We boy use 
to overrun the place, and I can still recal my youth terror not onli 
at the morbid strang of thi sinist vegetation, but at the 
eldritch atmospher and odor of the dilapid house, whose unlock 
front door wa often enter in quest of shudders. the small-pan 
window were larg broken, and a nameless air of desol hung round 
the precari panelling, shaki interior shutters, peel wall-paper, 
fall plaster, ricketi staircases, and such fragment of batter 
furnitur as still remained. the dust and cobweb ad their touch of 
the fearful; and brave inde wa the boy who would voluntarili ascend 
the ladder to the attic, a vast rafter length light onli by small 
blink window in the gabl ends, and fill with a mass wreckag 
of chests, chairs, and spinning-wheel which infinit year of deposit 
had shroud and festoon into monstrou and hellish shapes. 

but after all, the attic wa not the most terribl part of the house. It 
wa the dank, humid cellar which somehow exert the strongest repuls 
on us, even though it wa wholli abov ground on the street side, with 
onli a thin door and window-pierc brick wall to separ it from the 
busi sidewalk. We scarc knew whether to haunt it in spectral 
fascination, or to shun it for the sake of our soul and our sanity. for 
one thing, the bad odor of the hous wa strongest there; and for 
anoth thing, we did not like the white fungou growth which 
occasion sprang up in raini summer weather from the hard earth 
floor. those fungi, grotesqu like the veget in the yard outside, 
were truli horribl in their outlines; detest parodi of toadstool 
and indian-pipes, whose like we had never seen in ani other situation. 
they rot quickly, and at one stage becam slightli phosphorescent; so 
that nocturn passers-bi sometim spoke of witch-fir glow behind 
the broken pane of the fetor-spread windows. 

We never--even in our wildest halloween moods--visit thi cellar 
by night, but in some of our daytim visit could detect the 
phosphorescence, especi when the day wa dark and wet. there wa 
also a subtler thing we often thought we detected--a veri strang thing 
which was, however, mere suggest at most. I refer to a sort of 
cloudi whitish pattern on the dirt floor--a vague, shift deposit of 
mold or niter which we sometim thought we could trace amidst the 
spars fungou growth near the huge fireplac of the basement kitchen. 
onc in a while it struck us that thi patch bore an uncanni resembl 
to a doubled-up human figure, though gener no such kinship existed, 
and often there wa no whitish deposit whatever. 

On a certain raini afternoon when thi illus seem phenomen 
strong, and when, in addition, I had fanci I glimps a kind of thin, 
yellowish, shimmer exhal rise from the nitrou pattern toward 
the yawn fireplace, I spoke to my uncl about the matter. He smile 
at thi odd conceit, but it seem that hi smile wa ting with 
reminiscence. later I heard that a similar notion enter into some of 
the wild ancient tale of the common folk--a notion likewis allud to 
ghoulish, wolfish shape taken by smoke from the great chimney, and 
queer contour assum by certain of the sinuou tree-root that thrust 
their way into the cellar through the loos foundation-stones. 


2 

not till my adult year did my uncl set befor me the note and data 
which he had collect concern the shun house. doctor whippl wa 
a sane, conserv physician of the old school, and for all hi 
interest in the place wa not eager to encourag young thought toward 
the abnormal. hi own view, postul simpli a build and locat 
of markedli unsanitari qualities, had noth to do with abnormality; 
but he realiz that the veri picturesqu which arous hi own 
interest would in a boy' fanci mind take on all manner of gruesom 
imagin associations. 

the doctor wa a bachelor; a white-haired, clean-shaven, old-fashion 
gentleman, and a local historian of note, who had often broken a lanc 
with such controversi guardian of tradit as sidney S. rider and 
thoma W. bicknell. He live with one man-serv in a georgian 
homestead with knocker and iron-rail steps, balanc eerili on the 
steep ascent of north court street besid the ancient brick court and 
coloni hous where hi grandfather--a cousin of that celebr 
privateersman, captain whipple, who burnt hi majesty' arm schooner 
_gaspee_ in 1772--had vote in the legislatur on may 4, 1776, for the 
independ of the rhode island colony. around him in the damp, 
low-ceil librari with the musti white panelling, heavi carv 
overmantel and small-paned, vine-shad windows, were the relic and 
record of hi ancient family, among which were mani dubiou allus 
to the shun hous in benefit street. that pest spot lie not far 
distant--for benefit run ledgewis just abov the court hous along the 
precipit hill up which the first settlement climbed. 

when, in the end, my insist pester and matur year evok from 
my uncl the hoard lore I sought, there lay befor me a strang enough 
chronicle. long-winded, statistical, and drearili genealog as some 
of the matter was, there ran through it a continu thread of brooding, 
tenaci horror and preternatur malevol which impress me even 
more than it had impress the good doctor. separ event fit 
togeth uncannily, and seemingli irrelev detail held mine of 
hideou possibilities. A new and burn curios grew in me, compar 
to which my boyish curios wa feebl and inchoate. 

the first revel led to an exhaust research, and final to that 
shudder quest which prove so disastr to myself and mine. for at 
the last my uncl insist on join the search I had commenced, and 
after a certain night in that hous he did not come away with me. I am 
lone without that gentl soul whose long year were fill onli with 
honor, virtue, good taste, benevolence, and learning. I have rear a 
marbl urn to hi memori in st. john' churchyard--th place that poe 
loved--th hidden grove of giant willow on the hill, where tomb and 
headston huddl quietli between the hoari bulk of the church and the 
hous and bank wall of benefit street. 

the histori of the house, open amidst a maze of dates, reveal no 
trace of the sinist either about it construct or about the 
prosper and honor famili who built it. yet from the first a taint 
of calamity, soon increas to bode significance, wa apparent. My 
uncle' care compil record began with the build of the 
structur in 1763, and follow the theme with an unusu amount of 
detail. the shun house, it seems, wa first inhabit by william 
harri and hi wife rhobi dexter, with their children, elkanah, born in 
1755, abigail, born in 1757, william, jr., born in 1759, and ruth, born 
in 1761. harri wa a substanti merchant and seaman in the west india 
trade, connect with the firm of obadiah brown and hi nephews. after 
brown' death in 1761, the new firm of nichola brown & compani made him 
master of the brig _prudence_, providence-built, of 120 tons, thu 
enabl him to erect the new homestead he had desir ever sinc hi 
marriage. 

the site he had chosen--a recent straighten part of the new and 
fashion back street, which ran along the side of the hill abov 
crowd cheapside--wa all that could be wished, and the build did 
justic to the location. It wa the best that moder mean could 
afford, and harri hasten to move in befor the birth of a fifth child 
which the famili expected. that child, a boy, came in december; but wa 
still-born. nor wa ani child to be born aliv in that hous for a 
centuri and a half. 

the next april, sick occur among the children, and abigail and 
ruth die befor the month wa over. doctor job ive diagnos the 
troubl as some infantil fever, though other declar it wa more of a 
mere wasting-away or decline. It seemed, in ani event, to be contagious; 
for hannah bowen, one of the two servants, die of it in the follow 
june. eli lideason, the other servant, constantli complain of 
weakness; and would have return to hi father' farm in rehoboth but 
for a sudden attach for mehitabel pierce, who wa hire to succeed 
hannah. He die the next year--a sad year indeed, sinc it mark the 
death of william harri himself, enfeebl as he wa by the climat of 
martinique, where hi occup had kept him for consider period 
dure the preced decade. 

the widow rhobi harri never recov from the shock of her husband' 
death, and the pass of her first-born elkanah two year later wa the 
final blow to her reason. In 1768 she fell victim to a mild form of 
insanity, and wa thereaft confin to the upper part of the house; 
her elder maiden sister, merci dexter, have move in to take charg of 
the family. merci wa a plain, raw-bon woman of great strength; but 
her health visibl declin from the time of her advent. she wa greatli 
devot to her unfortun sister, and had an especi affect for her 
onli surviv nephew william, who from a sturdi infant had becom a 
sickly, spindl lad. In thi year the servant mehitabel died, and the 
other servant, preserv smith, left without coher explanation--or at 
least, with onli some wild tale and a complaint that he dislik the 
smell of the place. for a time merci could secur no more help, sinc 
the seven death and case of madness, all occur within five years' 
space, had begun to set in motion the bodi of firesid rumor which later 
becam so bizarre. ultimately, however, she obtain new servant from 
out of town; ann white, a moros woman from that part of north kingstown 
now set off as the township of exeter, and a capabl boston man name 
zena low. 

* * * * * 

It wa ann white who first gave definit shape to the sinist idl 
talk. merci should have known better than to hire anyon from the 
nooseneck hill country, for that remot bit of backwood wa then, as 
now, a seat of the most uncomfort superstitions. As late as 1892 
an exet commun exhum a dead bodi and ceremoni burnt it 
heart in order to prevent certain alleg visit injuri to the 
public health and peace, and one may imagin the point of view of the 
same section in 1768. ann' tongu wa pernici active, and within a 
few month merci discharg her, fill her place with a faith and 
amiabl amazon from newport, maria robbins. 

meanwhil poor rhobi harris, in her madness, gave voic to dream and 
imagin of the most hideou sort. At time her scream becam 
insupportable, and for long period she would utter shriek horror 
which necessit her son' temporari resid with hi cousin, peleg 
harris, in presbyterian lane near the new colleg building. the boy 
would seem to improv after these visits, and had merci been as wise as 
she wa well-meaning, she would have let him live perman with 
peleg. just what mrs. harri cri out in her fit of violence, 
tradit hesit to say; or rather, present such extravag 
account that they nullifi themselv through sheer absurdity. certainli 
it sound absurd to hear that a woman educ onli in the rudiment of 
french often shout for hour in a coars and idiomat form of that 
language, or that the same person, alon and guarded, complain wildli 
of a stare thing which bit and chew at her. In 1772 the servant 
zena died, and when mrs. harri heard of it she laugh with a shock 
delight utterli foreign to her. the next year she herself died, and wa 
laid to rest in the north burial ground besid her husband. 

upon the outbreak of troubl with great britain in 1775, william harris, 
despit hi scant sixteen year and feebl constitution, manag to 
enlist in the armi of observ under gener greene; and from that 
time on enjoy a steadi rise in health and prestige. In 1780, as a 
captain in the rhode island forc in new jersey under colonel angell, 
he met and marri phebe hetfield of elizabethtown, whom he brought to 
provid upon hi honor discharg in the follow year. 

the young soldier' return wa not a thing of unmitig happiness. the 
house, it is true, wa still in good condition; and the street had been 
widen and chang in name from back street to benefit street. but 
merci dexter' onc robust frame had undergon a sad and curiou decay, 
so that she wa now a stoop and pathet figur with hollow voic and 
disconcert pallor--qu share to a singular degre by the one 
remain servant maria. In the autumn of 1782 phebe harri gave birth 
to a still-born daughter, and on the fifteenth of the next may merci 
dexter took leav of a useful, austere, and virtuou life. 

william harris, at last thoroughli convinc of the radic 
unhealth natur of hi abode, now took step toward quit it and 
close it for ever. secur temporari quarter for himself and hi 
wife at the newli open golden ball inn, he arrang for the build 
of a new and finer hous in westminst street, in the grow part of 
the town across the great bridge. there, in 1785, hi son dute wa 
born; and there the famili dwelt till the encroach of commerc 
drove them back across the river and over the hill to angel street, in 
the newer east side resid district, where the late archer harri 
built hi sumptuou but hideou french-roof mansion in 1876. william 
and phebe both succumb to the yellow fever epidem of 1797, but dute 
wa brought up by hi cousin rathbon harris, peleg' son. 

rathbon wa a practic man, and rent the benefit street hous 
despit william' wish to keep it vacant. He consid it an oblig 
to hi ward to make the most of all the boy' property, nor did he 
concern himself with the death and ill which caus so mani 
chang of tenants, or the steadili grow avers with which the 
hous wa gener regarded. It is like that he felt onli vexat 
when, in 1804, the town council order him to fumig the place with 
sulfur, tar, and gum camphor on account of the much-discuss death of 
four persons, presum caus by the then diminish fever epidemic. 
they said the place had a febril smell. 

dute himself thought littl of the house, for he grew up to be a 
privateersman, and serv with distinct on the _vigilant_ under 
captain cahoon in the war of 1812. He return unharmed, marri in 
1814, and becam a father on that memor night of septemb 23, 1815, 
when a great gale drove the water of the bay over half the town, and 
float a tall sloop well up westminst street so that it mast almost 
tap the harri window in symbol affirm that the new boy, 
welcome, wa a seaman' son. 

welcom did not surviv hi father, but live to perish glorious at 
fredericksburg in 1862. neither he nor hi son archer knew of the 
shun hous as other than a nuisanc almost imposs to 
rent--perhap on account of the musti and sickli odor of unkempt old 
age. indeed, it never wa rent after a seri of death culmin in 
1861, which the excit of the war tend to throw into obscurity. 
carrington harris, last of the male line, knew it onli as a desert and 
somewhat picturesqu center of legend until I told him my experience. He 
had meant to tear it down and build an apart hous on the site, but 
after my account decid to let it stand, instal plumbing, and rent it. 
nor ha he yet had ani difficulti in obtain tenants. the horror ha 
gone. 


3 

It may well be imagin how power I wa affect by the annal of 
the harrises. In thi continu record there seem to me to brood a 
persist evil beyond anyth in natur as I had known it; an evil 
clearli connect with the hous and not with the family. thi 
impress wa confirm by my uncle' less systemat array of 
miscellan data--legend transcrib from servant gossip, cut 
from the papers, copi of death certif by fellow-physicians, and 
the like. all of thi materi I cannot hope to give, for my uncl wa a 
tireless antiquarian and veri deepli interest in the shun house; 
but I may refer to sever domin point which earn notic by their 
recurr through mani report from divers sources. for example, the 
servant gossip wa practic unanim in attribut to the fungou 
and malodor _cellar_ of the hous a vast supremaci in evil influence. 
there had been servants--ann white especially--who would not use the 
cellar kitchen, and at least three well-defin legend bore upon the 
queer quasi-human or diabol outlin assum by tree-root and patch 
of mold in that region. these latter narr interest me 
profoundly, on account of what I had seen in my boyhood, but I felt that 
most of the signific had in each case been larg obscur by 
addit from the common stock of local ghost lore. 

ann white, with her exet superstition, had promulg the most 
extravag and at the same time most consist tale; alleg that 
there must lie buri beneath the hous one of those vampires--th dead 
who retain their bodili form and live on the blood or breath of the 
living--whos hideou legion send their prey shape or spirit 
abroad by night. To destroy a vampir one must, the grandmoth say, 
exhum it and burn it heart, or at least drive a stake through that 
organ; and ann' dog insist on a search under the cellar had been 
promin in bring about her discharge. 

her tales, however, command a wide audience, and were the more readili 
accept becaus the hous inde stood on land onc use for burial 
purposes. To me their interest depend less on thi circumst than 
on the peculiarli appropri way in which they dovetail with certain 
other things--th complaint of the depart servant preserv smith, 
who had preced ann and never heard of her, that someth "suck hi 
breath" at night; the death-certif of the fever victim of 1804, 
issu by doctor chad hopkins, and show the four deceas person all 
unaccount lack in blood; and the obscur passag of poor rhobi 
harris' ravings, where she complain of the sharp teeth of a 
glassy-eyed, half-vis presence. 

free from unwarr superstit though I am, these thing produc in 
me an odd sensation, which wa intensifi by a pair of wide separ 
newspap cut relat to death in the shun house--on from the 
_provid gazett and country-journal_ of april 12, 1815, and the 
other from the _daili transcript and chronicle_ of octob 27, 
1845--each of which detail an appallingli grisli circumst whose 
duplic wa remarkable. It seem that in both instanc the die 
person, in 1815 a gentl old ladi name stafford and in 1845 a 
schoolteach of middl age name eleazar durfee, becam transfigur in 
a horribl way, glare glassili and attempt to bite the throat of 
the attend physician. even more puzzling, though, wa the final case 
which put an end to the rent of the house--a seri of anemia death 
preced by progress mad wherein the patient would craftili 
attempt the live of hi rel by incis in the neck or wrist. 

thi wa in 1860 and 1861, when my uncl had just begun hi medic 
practise; and befor leav for the front he heard much of it from hi 
elder profession colleagues. the realli inexplic thing wa the way 
in which the victims--ignor people, for the ill-smel and wide 
shun hous could now be rent to no others--would babbl 
maledict in french, a languag they could not possibl have studi 
to ani extent. It made one think of poor rhobi harri nearli a centuri 
before, and so move my uncl that he commenc collect histor 
data on the hous after listening, some time subsequ to hi return 
from the war, to the first-hand account of doctor chase and whitmarsh. 
indeed, I could see that my uncl had thought deepli on the subject, and 
that he wa glad of my own interest--an open-mind and sympathet 
interest which enabl him to discuss with me matter at which other 
would mere have laughed. hi fanci had not gone so far as mine, but he 
felt that the place wa rare in it imagin potentialities, and 
worthi of note as an inspir in the field of the grotesqu and 
macabre. 

for my part, I wa dispos to take the whole subject with profound 
seriousness, and began at onc not onli to review the evidence, but to 
accumul as much more as I could. I talk with the elderli archer 
harris, then owner of the house, mani time befor hi death in 1916; 
and obtain from him and hi still surviv maiden sister alic an 
authent corrobor of all the famili data my uncl had collected. 
when, however, I ask them what connect with franc or it languag 
the hous could have, they confess themselv as frankli baffl and 
ignor as I. archer knew nothing, and all that miss harri could say 
wa that an old allus her grandfather, dute harris, had heard of 
might have shed a littl light. the old seaman, who had surviv hi son 
welcome' death in battl by two years, had not himself known the 
legend, but recal that hi earliest nurse, the ancient maria robbins, 
seem darkli awar of someth that might have lent a weird 
signific to the french rave of rhobi harris, which she had so 
often heard dure the last day of that hapless woman. maria had been 
at the shun hous from 1769 till the remov of the famili in 1783, 
and had seen merci dexter die. onc she hint to the child dute of a 
somewhat peculiar circumst in mercy' last moments, but he had soon 
forgotten all about it save that it wa someth peculiar. the 
granddaughter, moreover, recal even thi much with difficulty. she 
and her brother were not so much interest in the hous as wa archer' 
son carrington, the present owner, with whom I talk after my 
experience. 

* * * * * 

have exhaust the harri famili of all the inform it could 
furnish, I turn my attent to earli town record and deed with a 
zeal more penetr than that which my uncl had occasion shown in 
the same work. what I wish wa a comprehens histori of the site 
from it veri settlement in 1636--or even before, if ani narragansett 
indian legend could be unearth to suppli the data. I found, at the 
start, that the land had been part of the long strip of home lot grant 
origin to john throckmorton; one of mani similar strip begin at 
the town street besid the river and extend up over the hill to a 
line roughli correspond with the modern hope street. the throckmorton 
lot had later, of course, been much subdivided; and I becam veri 
assidu in trace that section through which back or benefit street 
wa later run. It had, as rumor inde said, been the throckmorton 
graveyard; but as I examin the record more carefully, I found that 
the grave had all been transfer at an earli date to the north burial 
ground on the pawtucket west road. 

then suddenli I came--bi a rare piec of chance, sinc it wa not in the 
main bodi of record and might easili have been missed--upon someth 
which arous my keenest eagerness, fit in as it did with sever of 
the queerest phase of the affair. It wa the record of a lease, in 
1697, of a small tract of ground to an etienn roulet and wife. At last 
the french element had appeared--that, and anoth deeper element of 
horror which the name conjur up from the darkest recess of my weird 
and heterogen reading--and I feverishli studi the plat of the 
local as it had been befor the cut through and partial 
straighten of back street between 1747 and 1758. I found what I had 
half expected, that where the shun hous now stood the roulet had 
laid out their graveyard behind a one-stori and attic cottage, and that 
no record of ani transfer of grave existed. the document, indeed, end 
in much confusion; and I wa forc to ransack both the rhode island 
histor societi and shepley librari befor I could find a local door 
which the name of etienn roulet would unlock. In the end I did find 
something; someth of such vagu but monstrou import that I set about 
at onc to examin the cellar of the shun hous itself with a new and 
excit minuteness. 

the roulets, it seemed, had come in 1696 from east greenwich, down the 
west shore of narragansett bay. they were huguenot from caude, and had 
encount much opposit befor the provid selectmen allow them 
to settl in the town. unpopular had dog them in east greenwich, 
whither they had come in 1686, after the revoc of the edict of 
nantes, and rumor said that the caus of dislik extend beyond mere 
racial and nation prejudice, or the land disput which involv other 
french settler with the english in rivalri which not even governor 
andro could quell. but their ardent protestantism--too ardent, some 
whispered--and their evid distress when virtual driven from the 
villag down the bay, had move the sympathi of the town fathers. here 
the stranger had been grant a haven; and the swarthi etienn roulet, 
less apt at agricultur than at read queer book and draw queer 
diagrams, wa given a cleric post in the warehous at pardon 
tillinghast' wharf, far south in town street. there had, however, been 
a riot of some sort later on--perhap forti year later, after old 
roulet' death--and no one seem to hear of the famili after that. 

for a centuri and more, it appeared, the roulet had been well 
rememb and frequent discuss as vivid incid in the quiet 
life of a new england seaport. etienne' son paul, a surli fellow whose 
errat conduct had probabl provok the riot which wipe out the 
family, wa particularli a sourc of speculation; and though provid 
never share the witchcraft panic of her puritan neighbors, it wa 
freeli intim by old wive that hi prayer were neither utter at 
the proper time nor direct toward the proper object. all thi had 
undoubtedli form the basi of the legend known by old maria robbins. 
what relat it had to the french rave of rhobi harri and other 
inhabit of the shun house, imagin or futur discoveri alon 
could determine. I wonder how mani of those who had known the legend 
realiz that addit link with the terribl which my wider read 
had given me; that omin item in the annal of morbid horror which 
tell of the creatur _jacqu roulet, of caude_, who in 1598 wa 
condemn to death as a demoniac but afterward save from the stake by 
the pari parliament and shut in a madhouse. He had been found cover 
with blood and shred of flesh in a wood, shortli after the kill and 
rend of a boy by a pair of wolves. one wolf wa seen to lope away 
unhurt. sure a pretti hearthsid tale, with a queer signific as to 
name and place; but I decid that the provid gossip could not have 
gener known of it. had they known, the coincid of name would 
have brought some drastic and frighten action--indeed, might not it 
limit whisper have precipit the final riot which eras the 
roulet from the town? 

* * * * * 

I now visit the accurs place with increas frequency; studi the 
unwholesom veget of the garden, examin all the wall of the 
building, and pore over everi inch of the earthen cellar floor. 
finally, with carrington harris' permission, I fit a key to the 
disus door open from the cellar directli upon benefit street, 
prefer to have a more immedi access to the outsid world than the 
dark stairs, ground-floor hall, and front door could give. there, where 
morbid lurk most thickly, I search and poke dure long 
afternoon when the sunlight filter in through the cobweb 
above-ground windows, and a sens of secur glow from the unlock 
door which place me onli a few feet from the placid sidewalk outside. 
noth new reward my efforts--onli the same depress musti and 
faint suggest of noxiou odor and nitrou outlin on the 
floor--and I fanci that mani pedestrian must have watch me curious 
through the broken panes. 

At length, upon a suggest of my uncle's, I decid to tri the spot 
nocturnally; and one stormi midnight ran the beam of an electr torch 
over the moldi floor with it uncanni shape and distorted, 
half-phosphoresc fungi. the place had dispirit me curious that 
evening, and I wa almost prepar when I saw--or thought I saw--amidst 
the whitish deposit a particularli sharp definit of the "huddl 
form" I had suspect from boyhood. it clear wa astonish and 
unprecedented--and as I watch I seem to see again the thin, 
yellowish, shimmer exhal which had startl me on that raini 
afternoon so mani year before. 

abov the anthropomorph patch of mold by the fireplac it rose; a 
subtle, sickish, almost lumin vapor which as it hung trembl in the 
damp seem to develop vagu and shock suggest of form, 
gradual trail off into nebul decay and pass up into the 
black of the great chimney with a fetor in it wake. It wa truli 
horrible, and the more so to me becaus of what I knew of the spot. 
refus to flee, I watch it fade--and as I watch I felt that it wa 
in turn watch me greedili with eye more imagin than visible. 
when I told my uncl about it he wa greatli aroused; and after a tens 
hour of reflection, arriv at a definit and drastic decision. weigh 
in hi mind the import of the matter, and the signific of our 
relat to it, he insist that we both test--and if possibl 
destroy--th horror of the hous by a joint night or night of 
aggress vigil in that musti and fungus-curs cellar. 


4 

On wednesday, june 25, 1919, after a proper notif of carrington 
harri which did not includ surmis as to what we expect to find, my 
uncl and I convey to the shun hous two camp chair and a fold 
camp cot, togeth with some scientif mechan of greater weight and 
intricacy. these we place in the cellar dure the day, screen the 
window with paper and plan to return in the even for our first 
vigil. We had lock the door from the cellar to the ground floor; and 
have a key to the outsid cellar door, were prepar to leav our 
expens and delic apparatus--which we had obtain secretli and at 
great cost--a mani day as our vigil might be protracted. It wa our 
design to sit up togeth till veri late, and then watch singli till 
dawn in two-hour stretches, myself first and then my companion; the 
inact member rest on the cot. 

the natur leadership with which my uncl procur the instrument from 
the laboratori of brown univers and the cranston street armory, and 
instinct assum direct of our venture, wa a marvel 
commentari on the potenti vital and resili of a man of 
eighty-one. elihu whippl had live accord to the hygien law he 
had preach as a physician, and but for what happen later would be 
here in full vigor today. onli two person suspect what did 
happen--carrington harri and myself. I had to tell harri becaus he 
own the hous and deserv to know what had gone out of it. then too, 
we had spoken to him in advanc of our quest; and I felt after my 
uncle' go that he would understand and assist me in some vital 
necessari public explanations. He turn veri pale, but agre to help 
me, and decid that it would now be safe to rent the house. 

To declar that we were not nervou on that raini night of watch 
would be an exagger both gross and ridiculous. We were not, as I 
have said, in ani sens childishli superstitious, but scientif studi 
and reflect had taught us that the known univers of three dimens 
embrac the merest fraction of the whole cosmo of substanc and 
energy. In thi case an overwhelm preponder of evid from 
numer authent sourc point to the tenaci exist of certain 
forc of great power and, so far as the human point of view is 
concerned, except malignancy. To say that we actual believ in 
vampir or werewolv would be a carelessli inclus statement. rather 
must it be said that we were not prepar to deni the possibl of 
certain unfamiliar and unclassifi modif of vital forc and 
attenu matter; exist veri infrequ in three-dimension space 
becaus of it more intim connect with other spatial units, yet 
close enough to the boundari of our own to furnish us occasion 
manifest which we, for lack of a proper vantage-point, may never 
hope to understand. 

In short, it seem to my uncl and me that an incontrovert array 
of fact point to some linger influenc in the shun house; 
traceabl to one or anoth of the ill-favor french settler of two 
centuri before, and still oper through rare and unknown law of 
atom and electron motion. that the famili of roulet had possess an 
abnorm affin for outer circl of entity--dark sphere which for 
normal folk hold onli repuls and terror--their record histori 
seem to prove. had not, then, the riot of those bygon 
seventeen-thirti set move certain kinet pattern in the morbid 
brain of one or more of them--not the sinist paul roulet--which 
obscur surviv the bodi murder and buri by the mob, and 
continu to function in some multiple-dimens space along the 
origin line of forc determin by a frantic hatr of the 
encroach community? 

such a thing wa sure not a physic or biochem imposs in 
the light of a newer scienc which includ the theori of rel 
and intra-atom action. one might easili imagin an alien nucleu of 
substanc or energy, formless or otherwise, kept aliv by impercept 
or immateri subtract from the life-forc or bodili tissu and 
fluid of other and more palpabl live thing into which it penetr 
and with whose fabric it sometim complet merg itself. It might be 
activ hostile, or it might be dictat mere by blind motiv of 
self-preservation. In ani case such a monster must of necess be in 
our scheme of thing an anomali and an intruder, whose extirp form 
a primari duti with everi man not an enemi to the world' life, health, 
and sanity. 

what baffl us wa our utter ignor of the aspect in which we might 
encount the thing. No sane person had ever seen it, and few had ever 
felt it definitely. It might be pure energy--a form ether and outsid 
the realm of substance--or it might be partli material; some unknown and 
equivoc mass of plasticity, capabl of chang at will to nebul 
approxim of the solid, liquid, gaseous, or tenuous unparticl 
states. the anthropomorph patch of mold on the floor, the form of the 
yellowish vapor, and the curvatur of the tree-root in some of the old 
tales, all argu at least a remot and reminisc connect with the 
human shape; but how repres or perman that similar might 
be, none could say with ani kind of certainty. 

* * * * * 

We had devis two weapon to fight it; a larg and special fit 
crook tube oper by power storag batteri and provid with 
peculiar screen and reflectors, in case it prove intang and 
oppos onli by vigor destruct ether radiations, and a pair of 
militari flame-throw of the sort use in the world war, in case it 
prove partli materi and suscept of mechan destruction--for 
like the superstiti exet rustics, we were prepar to burn the 
thing' heart out if heart exist to burn. all thi aggress 
mechan we set in the cellar in posit care arrang with 
refer to the cot and chairs, and to the spot befor the fireplac 
where the mold had taken strang shapes. that suggest patch, by the 
way, wa onli faintli visibl when we place our furnitur and 
instruments, and when we return that even for the actual vigil. for 
a moment I half doubt that I had ever seen it in the more definit 
limn form--but then I thought of the legends. 

our cellar vigil began at ten p. m., daylight save time, and as it 
continu we found no promis of pertin developments. A weak, 
filter glow from the rain-harass street-lamp outside, and a feebl 
phosphoresc from the detest fungi within, show the drip 
stone of the walls, from which all trace of whitewash had vanished; the 
dank, fetid and mildew-taint hard earth floor with it obscen fungi; 
the rot remain of what had been stools, chairs, and tables, and 
other more shapeless furniture; the heavi plank and massiv beam of 
the ground floor overhead; the decrepit plank door lead to bin and 
chamber beneath other part of the house; the crumbl stone staircas 
with ruin wooden hand-rail; and the crude and cavern fireplac of 
blacken brick where rust iron fragment reveal the past presenc 
of hooks, andirons, spit, crane, and a door to the dutch oven--thes 
things, and our auster cot and camp chairs, and the heavi and intric 
destruct machineri we had brought. 

We had, as in my own former explorations, left the door to the street 
unlocked; so that a direct and practic path of escap might lie open 
in case of manifest beyond our power to deal with. It wa our idea 
that our continu nocturn presenc would call forth whatev malign 
entiti lurk there; and that be prepared, we could dispos of the 
thing with one or the other of our provid mean as soon as we had 
recogn and observ it sufficiently. how long it might requir to 
evok and extinguish the thing, we had no notion. It occur to us, 
too, that our ventur wa far from safe; for in what strength the thing 
might appear no one could tell. but we deem the game worth the hazard, 
and embark on it alon and unhesitatingly; consciou that the seek 
of outsid aid would onli expos us to ridicul and perhap defeat our 
entir purpose. such wa our frame of mind as we talked--far into the 
night, till my uncle' grow drowsi made me remind him to lie down 
for hi two-hour sleep. 

someth like fear chill me as I sat there in the small hour 
alone--i say alone, for one who sit by a sleeper is inde alone; 
perhap more alon than he can realize. My uncl breath heavily, hi 
deep inhal and exhal accompani by the rain outside, and 
punctuat by anoth nerve-rack sound of distant drip water 
within--for the hous wa repuls damp even in dri weather, and in 
thi storm posit swamp-like. I studi the loose, antiqu masonri 
of the wall in the fungus-light and the feebl ray which stole in from 
the street through the screen window; and once, when the noisom 
atmospher of the place seem about to sicken me, I open the door and 
look up and down the street, feast my eye on familiar sight and 
my nostril on wholesom air. still noth occur to reward my 
watching; and I yawn repeatedly, fatigu get the better of 
apprehension. 

then the stir of my uncl in hi sleep attract my notice. He had 
turn restlessli on the cot sever time dure the latter half of the 
first hour, but now he wa breath with unusu irregularity, 
occasion heav a sigh which held more than a few of the qualiti 
of a choke moan. 

I turn my electr flashlight on him and found hi face averted; so 
rise and cross to the other side of the cot, I again flash the 
light to see if he seem in ani pain. what I saw unnerv me most 
surprisingly, consid it rel triviality. It must have been 
mere the associ of ani odd circumst with the sinist natur 
of our locat and mission, for sure the circumst wa not in 
itself fright or unnatural. It wa mere that my uncle' facial 
expression, disturb no doubt by the strang dream which our 
situat prompted, betray consider agitation, and seem not at 
all characterist of him. hi habitu express wa one of kindli and 
well-br calm, wherea now a varieti of emot seem struggl 
within him. I think, on the whole, that it wa thi _variety_ which 
chiefli disturb me. My uncle, as he gasp and toss in increas 
perturb and with eye that had now start open, seem not one but 
mani men, and suggest a curiou qualiti of alienag from himself. 

* * * * * 

all at onc he commenc to mutter, and I did not like the look of hi 
mouth and teeth as he spoke. the word were at first indistinguishable, 
and then--with a tremend start--i recogn someth about them 
which fill me with ici fear till I recal the breadth of my uncle' 
educ and the intermin translat he had made from 
anthropolog and antiquarian articl in the _revu de deux mondes_. 
for the vener elihu whippl wa mutter _in french_, and the few 
phrase I could distinguish seem connect with the darkest myth he 
had ever adapt from the famou pari magazine. 

suddenli a perspir broke out on the sleeper' forehead, and he 
leap abruptli up, half awake. the jumbl of french chang to a cri in 
english, and the hoars voic shout excitedly, "mi breath, my breath!" 
then the awaken becam complete, and with a subsid of facial 
express to the normal state my uncl seiz my hand and began to 
relat a dream whose nucleu of signific I could onli surmis with a 
kind of awe. 

He had, he said, float off from a veri ordinari seri of 
dream-pictur into a scene whose strang wa relat to noth he 
had ever read. It wa of thi world, and yet not of it--a shadowi 
geometr confus in which could be seen element of familiar thing 
in most unfamiliar and perturb combinations. there wa a suggest 
of queerli disord pictur superimpos one upon another; an 
arrang in which the essenti of time as well as of space seem 
dissolv and mix in the most illog fashion. In thi kaleidoscop 
vortex of phantasm imag were occasion snap-shots, if one might use 
the term, of singular clear but unaccount heterogeneity. 

onc my uncl thought he lay in a carelessli dug open pit, with a crowd 
of angri face frame by straggl lock and three-corn hat 
frown down on him. again he seem to be in the interior of a 
house--an old house, apparently--but the detail and inhabit were 
constantli changing, and he could never be certain of the face or the 
furniture, or even of the room itself, sinc door and window seem in 
just as great a state of flux as the presum more mobil objects. It 
wa queer--damn queer--and my uncl spoke almost sheepishly, as if 
half expect not to be believed, when he declar that of the strang 
face mani had unmistak born the featur of the harri family. and 
all the while there wa a person sensat of choking, as if some 
pervas presenc had spread itself through hi bodi and sought to 
possess itself of hi vital processes. 

I shudder at the thought of those vital processes, worn as they were 
by eighty-on year of continu functioning, in conflict with unknown 
forc of which the youngest and strongest system might well be afraid; 
but in anoth moment reflect that dream are onli dreams, and that 
these uncomfort vision could be, at most, no more than my uncle' 
reaction to the investig and expect which had late fill 
our mind to the exclus of all else. 

conversation, also, soon tend to dispel my sens of strangeness; and 
in time I yield to my yawn and took my turn at slumber. My uncl 
seem now veri wakeful, and welcom hi period of watch even though 
the nightmar had arous him far ahead of hi allot two hours. 

sleep seiz me quickly, and I wa at onc haunt with dream of the 
most disturb kind. I felt, in my visions, a cosmic and abysm 
loneness; with hostil surg from all side upon some prison where I 
lay confined. I seem bound and gagged, and taunt by the echo 
yell of distant multitud who thirst for my blood. My uncle' face 
came to me with less pleasant associ than in wake hours, and I 
recal mani futil struggl and attempt to scream. It wa not a 
pleasant sleep, and for a second I wa not sorri for the echo shriek 
which clove through the barrier of dream and flung me to a sharp and 
startl awak in which everi actual object befor my eye stood out 
with more than natur clear and reality. 


5 

I had been lie with my face away from my uncle' chair, so that in 
thi sudden flash of awaken I saw onli the door to the street, the 
window, and the wall and floor and ceil toward the north of the room, 
all photograph with morbid vivid on my brain in a light brighter 
than the glow of the fungi or the ray from the street outside. It wa 
not a strong or even a fairli strong light; certainli not nearli strong 
enough to read an averag book by. but it cast a shadow of myself and 
the cot on the floor, and had a yellowish, penetr forc that hint 
at thing more potent than luminosity. thi I perceiv with unhealthi 
sharp despit the fact that two of my other sens were violent 
assailed. for on my ear rang the reverber of that shock 
scream, while my nostril revolt at the stench which fill the place. 
My mind, as alert as my senses, recogn the grave unusual; and 
almost automat I leap up and turn about to grasp the 
destruct instrument which we had left train on the moldi spot 
befor the fireplace. As I turned, I dread what I wa to see; for the 
scream had been in my uncle' voice, and I knew not against what menac 
I should have to defend him and myself. 

yet after all, the sight wa wors than I had dreaded. there are horror 
beyond horrors, and thi wa one of those nuclei of all dreamabl 
hideous which the cosmo save to blast an accurs and unhappi few. 
out of the fungus-ridden earth steam up a vapor corpse-light, 
yellow and diseased, which bubbl and lap to a gigant height in 
vagu outlin half human and half monstrous, through which I could see 
the chimney and fireplac beyond. It wa all eyes--wolfish and 
mocking--and the rugos insect-lik head dissolv at the top to a thin 
stream of mist which curl putridli about and final vanish up the 
chimney. I say that I saw thi thing, but it is onli in consciou 
retrospect that I ever definit trace it damnabl approach to 
form. At the time, it wa to me onli a seething, dimli phosphoresc 
cloud of fungou loathsomeness, envelop and dissolv to an 
abhorr plastic the one object on which all my attent wa 
focussed. that object wa my uncle--th vener elihu whipple--who 
with blacken and decay featur leer and gibber at me, and 
reach out drip claw to rend me in the furi which thi horror had 
brought. 

It wa a sens of routin which kept me from go mad. I had drill 
myself in prepar for the crucial moment, and blind train save 
me. recogn the bubbl evil as no substanc reachabl by matter or 
materi chemistry, and therefor ignor the flame-throw which 
loom on my left, I threw on the current of the crook tube apparatus, 
and focuss toward that scene of immort blasphem the strongest 
ether radiat which man' art can arous from the space and fluid 
of nature. there wa a bluish haze and a frenzi sputtering, and the 
yellowish phosphoresc grew dimmer to my eyes. but I saw the dim 
wa onli that of contrast, and that the wave from the machin had no 
effect whatever. 

then, in the midst of that demoniac spectacle, I saw a fresh horror 
which brought cri to my lip and sent me fumbl and stagger 
toward that unlock door to the quiet street, careless of what abnorm 
terror I loos upon the world, or what thought or judgment of men I 
brought down upon my head. In that dim blend of blue and yellow the form 
of my uncl had commenc a nauseou liquefact whose essenc elud 
all description, and in which there play across hi vanish face 
such chang of ident as onli mad can conceive. He wa at onc a 
devil and a multitude, a charnel-hous and a pageant. lit by the mix 
and uncertain beams, that gelatin face assum a dozen--a score--a 
hundred--aspects; grinning, as it sank to the ground on a bodi that 
melt like tallow, in the caricatur like of legion strang and 
yet not strange. 

I saw the featur of the harri line, masculin and feminine, adult and 
infantile, and other featur old and young, coars and refined, 
familiar and unfamiliar. for a second there flash a degrad 
counterfeit of a miniatur of poor mad rhobi harri that I had seen in 
the school of design museum, and anoth time I thought I caught the 
raw-bon imag of merci dexter as I recal her from a paint in 
carrington harris' house. It wa fright beyond conception; toward 
the last, when a curiou blend of servant and babi visag flicker 
close to the fungou floor where a pool of greenish greas wa 
spreading, it seem as though the shift featur fought against 
themselv and strove to form contour like those of my uncle' kindli 
face. I like to think that he exist at that moment, and that he tri 
to bid me farewell. It seem to me I hiccup a farewel from my own 
parch throat as I lurch out into the street; a thin stream of greas 
follow me through the door to the rain-drench sidewalk. 

* * * * * 

the rest is shadowi and monstrous. there wa no one in the soak 
street, and in all the world there wa no one I dare tell. I walk 
aimlessli south past colleg hill and the athenæum, down hopkin street, 
and over the bridg to the busi section where tall build seem 
to guard me as modern materi thing guard the world from ancient and 
unwholesom wonder. then gray dawn unfold wetli from the east, 
silhouet the archaic hill and it vener steeples, and beckon 
me to the place where my terribl work wa still unfinished. and in the 
end I went, wet, hatless, and daze in the morn light, and enter 
that aw door in benefit street which I had left ajar, and which still 
swung cryptic in full sight of the earli household to whom I 
dare not speak. 

the greas wa gone, for the moldi floor wa porous. and in front of the 
fireplac wa no vestig of the giant doubled-up form trace in niter. 
I look at the cot, the chairs, the instruments, my neglect hat, and 
the yellow straw hat of my uncle. dazed wa uppermost, and I could 
scarc recal what wa dream and what wa reality. then thought 
trickl back, and I knew that I had wit thing more horribl than 
I had dreamed. 

sit down, I tri to conjectur as nearli as saniti would let me 
just what had happened, and how I might end the horror, if inde it had 
been real. matter it seem not to be, nor ether, nor anyth els 
conceiv by mortal mind. what, then, but some exot _emanation_; 
some vampirish vapor such as exet rustic tell of as lurk over 
certain churchyards? thi I felt wa the clue, and again I look at the 
floor befor the fireplac where the mold and niter had taken strang 
forms. 

In ten minut my mind wa made up, and take my hat I set out for 
home, where I bathed, ate, and gave by telephon an order for a pickax, 
a spade, a militari gas-mask, and six carboy of sulfur acid, all to 
be deliv the next morn at the cellar door of the shun hous in 
benefit street. after that I tri to sleep; and failing, pass the 
hour in read and in the composit of inan vers to counteract my 
mood. 

At eleven a. m. the next day I commenc digging. It wa sunni weather, 
and I wa glad of that. I wa still alone, for as much as I fear the 
unknown horror I sought, there wa more fear in the thought of tell 
anybody. later I told harri onli through sheer necessity, and becaus 
he had heard odd tale from old peopl which dispos him ever so littl 
toward belief. As I turn up the stink black earth in front of the 
fireplace, my spade caus a viscou yellow ichor to ooz from the 
white fungi which it severed, I trembl at the dubiou thought of what 
I might uncover. some secret of inner earth are not good for mankind, 
and thi seem to me one of them. 

My hand shook perceptibly, but still I delved; after a while stand in 
the larg hole I had made. with the deepen of the hole, which wa 
about six feet square, the evil smell increased; and I lost all doubt of 
my immin contact with the hellish thing whose eman had curs 
the hous for over a centuri and a half. I wonder what it would look 
like--what it form and substanc would be, and how big it might have 
wax through long age of life-sucking. At length I climb out of the 
hole and dispers the heaped-up dirt, then arrang the great carboy 
of acid around and near two sides, so that when necessari I might empti 
them all down the apertur in quick succession. after that I dump 
earth onli along the other two sides; work more slowli and don my 
gas-mask as the smell grew. I wa nearli unnerv at my proxim to a 
nameless thing at the bottom of a pit. 

suddenli my spade struck someth softer than earth. I shuddered, and 
made a motion as if to climb out of the hole, which wa now as deep as 
my neck. then courag returned, and I scrape away more dirt in the 
light of the electr torch I had provided. the surfac I uncov wa 
fishi and glassy--a kind of semi-putrid congeal jelli with suggest 
of translucency. I scrape further, and saw that it had form. there wa 
a rift where a part of the substanc wa fold over. the expos area 
wa huge and roughli cylindrical; like a mammoth soft blue-whit 
stovepip doubl in two, it largest part some two feet in diameter. 
still more I scraped, and then abruptli I leap out of the hole and 
away from the filthi thing; frantic unstop and tilt the heavi 
carboys, and precipit their corros content one after anoth 
down that charnel gulf and upon the unthink abnorm whose titan 
_elbow_ I had seen. 

* * * * * 

the blind maelstrom of greenish-yellow vapor which surg 
tempestu up from that hole as the flood of acid descended, will 
never leav my memory. all along the hill peopl tell of the yellow day, 
when virul and horribl fume aros from the factori wast dump in 
the provid river, but I know how mistaken they are as to the source. 
they tell, too, of the hideou roar which at the same time came from 
some disord water-pip or ga main underground--but again I could 
correct them if I dared. It wa unspeak shocking, and I do not see 
how I live through it. I did faint after empti the fourth carboy, 
which I had to handl after the fume had begun to penetr my mask; 
but when I recov I saw that the hole wa emit no fresh vapors. 

the two remain carboy I empti down without particular result, and 
after a time I felt it safe to shovel the earth back into the pit. It 
wa twilight befor I wa done, but fear had gone out of the place. the 
damp wa less fetid, and all the strang fungi had wither to a 
kind of harmless grayish powder which blew ash-lik along the floor. one 
of earth' nethermost terror had perish for ever; and if there be a 
hell, it had receiv at last the demon soul of an unhallow thing. and 
as I pat down the last spade of mold, I shed the first of the mani 
tear with which I have paid unaffect tribut to my belov uncle' 
memory. 

the next spring no more pale grass and strang weed came up in the 
shun house' terrac garden, and shortli afterward carrington harri 
rent the place. It is still spectral, but it strang fascin 
me, and I shall find mix with my relief a queer regret when it is torn 
down to make way for a tawdri shop or vulgar apart building. the 
barren old tree in the yard have begun to bear small, sweet apples, and 
last year the bird nest in their gnarl boughs. 


[illustration] 




transcriber' note: 

thi etext wa produc from _weird tales_ octob 1937. extens 
research did not uncov ani evid that the u.s. copyright on 
thi public wa renewed. minor spell and typograph 
error have been correct without note. 





end of project gutenberg' the shun house, by howard phillip lovecraft 

*** end OF thi project gutenberg ebook the shun hous *** 

***** thi file should be name 31469-8.txt or 31469-8.zip ***** 
thi and all associ file of variou format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/3/1/4/6/31469/ 

produc by greg weeks, stephen blundel and the onlin 
distribut proofread team at http://www.pgdp.net 


updat edit will replac the previou one--th old edit 
will be renamed. 

creat the work from public domain print edit mean that no 
one own a unit state copyright in these works, so the foundat 
(and you!) can copi and distribut it in the unit state without 
permiss and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the gener term of use part of thi license, appli to 
copi and distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a regist trademark, and may not be use if you 
charg for the ebooks, unless you receiv specif permission. If you 
do not charg anyth for copi of thi ebook, compli with the 
rule is veri easy. you may use thi ebook for nearli ani purpos 
such as creation of deriv works, reports, perform and 
research. they may be modifi and print and given away--y may do 
practic anyth with public domain ebooks. redistribut is 
subject to the trademark license, especi commerci 
redistribution. 



*** start: full licens *** 

the full project gutenberg licens 
pleas read thi befor you distribut OR use thi work 

To protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promot the free 
distribut of electron works, by use or distribut thi work 
(or ani other work associ in ani way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agre to compli with all the term of the full project 
gutenberg-tm licens (avail with thi file or onlin at 
http://gutenberg.org/license). 


section 1. gener term of use and redistribut project gutenberg-tm 
electron work 

1.a. By read or use ani part of thi project gutenberg-tm 
electron work, you indic that you have read, understand, agre to 
and accept all the term of thi licens and intellectu properti 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agre to abid by all 
the term of thi agreement, you must ceas use and return or destroy 
all copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in your possession. 
If you paid a fee for obtain a copi of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work and you do not agre to be bound by the 
term of thi agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entiti to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a regist trademark. It may onli be 
use on or associ in ani way with an electron work by peopl who 
agre to be bound by the term of thi agreement. there are a few 
thing that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electron work 
even without compli with the full term of thi agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of thing you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electron work if you follow the term of thi agreement 
and help preserv free futur access to project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compil copyright in the collect of project 
gutenberg-tm electron works. nearli all the individu work in the 
collect are in the public domain in the unit states. If an 
individu work is in the public domain in the unit state and you are 
locat in the unit states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or creat deriv 
work base on the work as long as all refer to project gutenberg 
are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promot free access to electron work by 
freeli share project gutenberg-tm work in complianc with the term of 
thi agreement for keep the project gutenberg-tm name associ with 
the work. you can easili compli with the term of thi agreement by 
keep thi work in the same format with it attach full project 
gutenberg-tm licens when you share it without charg with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are locat also govern 
what you can do with thi work. copyright law in most countri are in 
a constant state of change. If you are outsid the unit states, check 
the law of your countri in addit to the term of thi agreement 
befor downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribut or 
creat deriv work base on thi work or ani other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundat make no represent concern 
the copyright statu of ani work in ani countri outsid the unit 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remov all refer to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the follow sentence, with activ link to, or other immedi 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm licens must appear promin 
whenev ani copi of a project gutenberg-tm work (ani work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copi or distributed: 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.org 

1.e.2. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is deriv 
from the public domain (doe not contain a notic indic that it is 
post with permiss of the copyright holder), the work can be copi 
and distribut to anyon in the unit state without pay ani fee 
or charges. If you are redistribut or provid access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associ with or appear on the 
work, you must compli either with the requir of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permiss for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is post 
with the permiss of the copyright holder, your use and distribut 
must compli with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and ani addit 
term impos by the copyright holder. addit term will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm licens for all work post with the 
permiss of the copyright holder found at the begin of thi work. 

1.e.4. Do not unlink or detach or remov the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens term from thi work, or ani file contain a part of thi 
work or ani other work associ with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribut or redistribut thi 
electron work, or ani part of thi electron work, without 
promin display the sentenc set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
activ link or immedi access to the full term of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribut thi work in ani binary, 
compressed, mark up, nonproprietari or proprietari form, includ ani 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provid access to or 
distribut copi of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the offici version 
post on the offici project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org), 
you must, at no addit cost, fee or expens to the user, provid a 
copy, a mean of export a copy, or a mean of obtain a copi upon 
request, of the work in it origin "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. ani altern format must includ the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens as specifi in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. Do not charg a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copi or distribut ani project gutenberg-tm work 
unless you compli with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charg a reason fee for copi of or provid 
access to or distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work provid 
that 

- you pay a royalti fee of 20% of the gross profit you deriv from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm work calcul use the method 
you alreadi use to calcul your applic taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
ha agre to donat royalti under thi paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literari archiv foundation. royalti payment 
must be paid within 60 day follow each date on which you 
prepar (or are legal requir to prepare) your period tax 
returns. royalti payment should be clearli mark as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat at the 
address specifi in section 4, "inform about donat to 
the project gutenberg literari archiv foundation." 

- you provid a full refund of ani money paid by a user who notifi 
you in write (or by e-mail) within 30 day of receipt that s/he 
doe not agre to the term of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must requir such a user to return or 
destroy all copi of the work possess in a physic medium 
and discontinu all use of and all access to other copi of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accord with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of ani 
money paid for a work or a replac copy, if a defect in the 
electron work is discov and report to you within 90 day 
of receipt of the work. 

- you compli with all other term of thi agreement for free 
distribut of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. If you wish to charg a fee or distribut a project gutenberg-tm 
electron work or group of work on differ term than are set 
forth in thi agreement, you must obtain permiss in write from 
both the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundat as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunt and employe expend consider 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcrib and proofread 
public domain work in creat the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despit these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electron 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limit to, incomplete, inaccur or 
corrupt data, transcript errors, a copyright or other intellectu 
properti infringement, a defect or damag disk or other medium, a 
comput virus, or comput code that damag or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limit warranty, disclaim OF damag - except for the "right 
of replac or refund" describ in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and ani other parti distribut a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work under thi agreement, disclaim all 
liabil to you for damages, cost and expenses, includ legal 
fees. you agre that you have NO remedi for negligence, strict 
liability, breach OF warranti OR breach OF contract except those 
provid IN paragraph f3. you agre that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and ani distributor under thi agreement will not BE 
liabl TO you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punit OR 
incident damag even IF you give notic OF the possibl OF such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limit right OF replac OR refund - If you discov a 
defect in thi electron work within 90 day of receiv it, you can 
receiv a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explan to the person you receiv the work from. If you 
receiv the work on a physic medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entiti that provid you with 
the defect work may elect to provid a replac copi in lieu of a 
refund. If you receiv the work electronically, the person or entiti 
provid it to you may choos to give you a second opportun to 
receiv the work electron in lieu of a refund. If the second copi 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in write without further 
opportun to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limit right of replac or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, thi work is provid to you 'as-is' with NO other 
warranti OF ani kind, express OR implied, includ but not limit TO 
warranti OF merchant OR fit for ani purpose. 

1.f.5. some state do not allow disclaim of certain impli 
warranti or the exclus or limit of certain type of damages. 
If ani disclaim or limit set forth in thi agreement violat the 
law of the state applic to thi agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaim or limit permit by 
the applic state law. the invalid or unenforc of ani 
provis of thi agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemn - you agre to indemnifi and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, ani agent or employe of the foundation, anyon 
provid copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in accord 
with thi agreement, and ani volunt associ with the production, 
promot and distribut of project gutenberg-tm electron works, 
harmless from all liability, cost and expenses, includ legal fees, 
that aris directli or indirectli from ani of the follow which you do 
or caus to occur: (a) distribut of thi or ani project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addit or delet to ani 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) ani defect you cause. 


section 2. inform about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonym with the free distribut of 
electron work in format readabl by the widest varieti of comput 
includ obsolete, old, middle-ag and new computers. It exist 
becaus of the effort of hundr of volunt and donat from 
peopl in all walk of life. 

volunt and financi support to provid volunt with the 
assist they need, are critic to reach project gutenberg-tm' 
goal and ensur that the project gutenberg-tm collect will 
remain freeli avail for gener to come. In 2001, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundat wa creat to provid a secur 
and perman futur for project gutenberg-tm and futur generations. 
To learn more about the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat 
and how your effort and donat can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundat web page at http://www.pglaf.org. 


section 3. inform about the project gutenberg literari archiv 
foundat 

the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educ corpor organ under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt statu by the intern 
revenu service. the foundation' ein or feder tax identif 
number is 64-6221541. it 501(c)(3) letter is post at 
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contribut to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. feder law and your state' laws. 

the foundation' princip offic is locat at 4557 melan dr. S. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but it volunt and employe are scatter 
throughout numer locations. it busi offic is locat at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact link and up to date contact 
inform can be found at the foundation' web site and offici 
page at http://pglaf.org 

for addit contact information: 
dr. gregori B. newbi 
chief execut and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 


section 4. inform about donat to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot surviv without wide 
spread public support and donat to carri out it mission of 
increas the number of public domain and licens work that can be 
freeli distribut in machin readabl form access by the widest 
array of equip includ outdat equipment. mani small donat 
($1 to $5,000) are particularli import to maintain tax exempt 
statu with the irs. 

the foundat is commit to compli with the law regul 
chariti and charit donat in all 50 state of the unit 
states. complianc requir are not uniform and it take a 
consider effort, much paperwork and mani fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. We do not solicit donat in locat 
where we have not receiv written confirm of compliance. To 
send donat or determin the statu of complianc for ani 
particular state visit http://pglaf.org 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribut from state where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibit 
against accept unsolicit donat from donor in such state who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

intern donat are grate accepted, but we cannot make 
ani statement concern tax treatment of donat receiv from 
outsid the unit states. u.s. law alon swamp our small staff. 

pleas check the project gutenberg web page for current donat 
method and addresses. donat are accept in a number of other 
way includ checks, onlin payment and credit card donations. 
To donate, pleas visit: http://pglaf.org/don 


section 5. gener inform about project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. 

professor michael S. hart is the origin of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a librari of electron work that could be freeli share 
with anyone. for thirti years, he produc and distribut project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with onli a loos network of volunt support. 


project gutenberg-tm ebook are often creat from sever print 
editions, all of which are confirm as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notic is included. thus, we do not necessarili 
keep ebook in complianc with ani particular paper edition. 


most peopl start at our web site which ha the main PG search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.org 

thi web site includ inform about project gutenberg-tm, 
includ how to make donat to the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundation, how to help produc our new ebooks, and how to 
subscrib to our email newslett to hear about new ebooks. 
