the project gutenberg ebook of the willows, by algernon blackwood 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.net 


title: the willow 

author: algernon blackwood 

releas date: march 4, 2004 [ebook #11438] 

language: english 


*** start OF thi project gutenberg ebook the willow *** 




produc by suzann shell, david newman and PG distribut proofread 




the willow 

algernon blackwood 
(1907) 



I 

prefac 
after leav vienna, and long befor you come to budapest, the danub 
enter a region of singular loneli and desolation, where it water 
spread away on all side regardless of a main channel, and the countri 
becom a swamp for mile upon miles, cover by a vast sea of low 
willow-bushes. On the big map thi desert area is paint in a fluffi 
blue, grow fainter in color as it leav the banks, and across it may be 
seen in larg straggl letter the word sumpfe, mean marshes. 

In high flood thi great acreag of sand, shingle-beds, and willow-grown 
island is almost top by the water, but in normal season the bush 
bend and rustl in the free winds, show their silver leav to the 
sunshin in an ever-mov plain of bewild beauty. these willow never 
attain to the digniti of trees; they have no rigid trunks; they remain 
humbl bushes, with round top and soft outline, sway on slender stem 
that answer to the least pressur of the wind; suppl as grasses, and so 
continu shift that they somehow give the impress that the entir 
plain is move and alive. for the wind send wave rise and fall over 
the whole surface, wave of leav instead of wave of water, green swell 
like the sea, too, until the branch turn and lift, and then silveri white 
as their undersid turn to the sun. 

happi to slip beyond the control of the stern banks, the danub here 
wander about at will among the intric network of channel intersect 
the island everywher with broad avenu down which the water pour with a 
shout sound; make whirlpools, eddies, and foam rapids; tear at 
the sandi banks; carri away mass of shore and willow-clumps; and 
form new island innumer which shift daili in size and shape and 
possess at best an imperman life, sinc the flood-tim obliter their 
veri existence. 

properli speaking, thi fascin part of the river' life begin soon 
after leav pressburg, and we, in our canadian canoe, with gipsi tent and 
frying-pan on board, reach it on the crest of a rise flood about 
mid-july. that veri same morning, when the sky wa redden befor 
sunrise, we had slip swiftli through still-sleep vienna, leav it a 
coupl of hour later a mere patch of smoke against the blue hill of the 
wienerwald on the horizon; we had breakfast below fischeramend under a 
grove of birch tree roar in the wind; and had then swept on the tear 
current past orth, hainburg, petronel (the old roman carnuntum of marcu 
aurelius), and so under the frown height of thelsen on a spur of the 
carpathians, where the march steal in quietli from the left and the 
frontier is cross between austria and hungary. 

race along at twelv kilomet an hour soon took us well into hungary, 
and the muddi waters--sur sign of flood--sent us aground on mani a 
shingle-bed, and twist us like a cork in mani a sudden belch whirlpool 
befor the tower of pressburg (hungarian, poszony) show against the sky; 
and then the canoe, leap like a spirit horse, flew at top speed under 
the grey walls, negoti safe the sunken chain of the fliegend bruck 
ferry, turn the corner sharpli to the left, and plung on yellow foam 
into the wilder of islands, sandbanks, and swamp-land beyond--th land 
of the willows. 

the chang came suddenly, as when a seri of bioscop pictur snap down 
on the street of a town and shift without warn into the sceneri of 
lake and forest. We enter the land of desol on wings, and in less 
than half an hour there wa neither boat nor fishing-hut nor red roof, nor 
ani singl sign of human habit and civil within sight. the 
sens of remot from the world of humankind, the utter isolation, the 
fascin of thi singular world of willows, winds, and waters, instantli 
laid it spell upon us both, so that we allow laughingli to one anoth 
that we ought by right to have held some special kind of passport to admit 
us, and that we had, somewhat audaciously, come without ask leav into a 
separ littl kingdom of wonder and magic--a kingdom that wa reserv 
for the use of other who had a right to it, with everywher unwritten 
warn to trespass for those who had the imagin to discov them. 

though still earli in the afternoon, the ceaseless buffet of a most 
tempestu wind made us feel weary, and we at onc began cast about for 
a suitabl camping-ground for the night. but the bewild charact of 
the island made land difficult; the swirl flood carri us in shore 
and then swept us out again; the willow branch tore our hand as we 
seiz them to stop the canoe, and we pull mani a yard of sandi bank into 
the water befor at length we shot with a great sideway blow from the wind 
into a backwat and manag to beach the bow in a cloud of spray. then we 
lay pant and laugh after our exert on the hot yellow sand, 
shelter from the wind, and in the full blaze of a scorch sun, a 
cloudless blue sky above, and an immens armi of dancing, shout willow 
bushes, close in from all sides, shine with spray and clap their 
thousand littl hand as though to applaud the success of our efforts. 

"what a river!" I said to my companion, think of all the way we had 
travel from the sourc in the black forest, and how he had often been 
oblig to wade and push in the upper shallow at the begin of june. 

"won't stand much nonsens now, will it?" he said, pull the cano a 
littl farther into safeti up the sand, and then compos himself for a 
nap. 

I lay by hi side, happi and peac in the bath of the elements--water, 
wind, sand, and the great fire of the sun--think of the long journey 
that lay behind us, and of the great stretch befor us to the black sea, 
and how lucki I wa to have such a delight and charm travel 
companion as my friend, the swede. 

We had made mani similar journey together, but the danube, more than ani 
other river I knew, impress us from the veri begin with it 
aliveness. from it tini bubbl entri into the world among the pinewood 
garden of donaueschingen, until thi moment when it began to play the 
great river-gam of lose itself among the desert swamps, unobserved, 
unrestrained, it had seem to us like follow the grown of some live 
creature. sleepi at first, but later develop violent desir as it 
becam consciou of it deep soul, it rolled, like some huge fluid being, 
through all the countri we had passed, hold our littl craft on it 
mighti shoulders, play roughli with us sometimes, yet alway friendli 
and well-meaning, till at length we had come inevit to regard it as a 
great personage. 

how, indeed, could it be otherwise, sinc it told us so much of it secret 
life? At night we heard it sing to the moon as we lay in our tent, 
utter that odd sibil note peculiar to itself and said to be caus by 
the rapid tear of the pebbl along it bed, so great is it hurri 
speed. We knew, too, the voic of it gurgl whirlpools, suddenli 
bubbl up on a surfac previous quit calm; the roar of it shallow 
and swift rapids; it constant steadi thunder below all mere surfac 
sounds; and that ceaseless tear of it ici water at the banks. how it 
stood up and shout when the rain fell flat upon it face! and how it 
laughter roar out when the wind blew up-stream and tri to stop it 
grow speed! We knew all it sound and voices, it tumbl and 
foamings, it unnecessari splash against the bridges; that 
self-consci chatter when there were hill to look on; the affect 
digniti of it speech when it pass through the littl towns, far too 
import to laugh; and all these faint, sweet whisper when the sun 
caught it fairli in some slow curv and pour down upon it till the steam 
rose. 

It wa full of tricks, too, in it earli life befor the great world knew 
it. there were place in the upper reach among the swabian forests, when 
yet the first whisper of it destini had not reach it, where it elect 
to disappear through hole in the ground, to appear again on the other side 
of the porou limeston hill and start a new river with anoth name; 
leaving, too, so littl water in it own bed that we had to climb out and 
wade and push the cano through mile of shallows. 

and a chief pleasure, in those earli day of it irrespons youth, wa 
to lie low, like brer fox, just befor the littl turbul tributari 
came to join it from the alps, and to refus to acknowledg them when in, 
but to run for mile side by side, the divid line well marked, the veri 
level different, the danub utterli declin to recogn the newcomer. 
below passau, however, it gave up thi particular trick, for there the inn 
come in with a thunder power imposs to ignore, and so push and 
incommod the parent river that there is hardli room for them in the long 
twist gorg that follows, and the danub is shove thi way and that 
against the cliffs, and forc to hurri itself with great wave and much 
dash to and fro in order to get through in time. and dure the fight 
our cano slip down from it shoulder to it breast, and had the time of 
it life among the struggl waves. but the inn taught the old river a 
lesson, and after passau it no longer pretend to ignor new arrivals. 

thi wa mani day back, of course, and sinc then we had come to know 
other aspect of the great creature, and across the bavarian wheat plain of 
straub she wander so slowli under the blaze june sun that we could 
well imagin onli the surfac inch were water, while below there moved, 
conceal as by a silken mantle, a whole armi of undines, pass silent 
and unseen down to the sea, and veri leisur too, lest they be 
discovered. 

much, too, we forgav her becaus of her friendli to the bird and 
anim that haunt the shores. cormor line the bank in lone 
place in row like short black palings; grey crow crowd the 
shingle-beds; stork stood fish in the vista of shallow water that 
open up between the islands, and hawks, swans, and marsh bird of all 
sort fill the air with glint wing and singing, petul cries. It 
wa imposs to feel annoy with the river' vagari after see a 
deer leap with a splash into the water at sunris and swim past the bow of 
the canoe; and often we saw fawn peer at us from the underbrush, or 
look straight into the brown eye of a stag as we charg full tilt round 
a corner and enter anoth reach of the river. foxes, too, everywher 
haunt the banks, trip daintili among the driftwood and disappear 
so suddenli that it wa imposs to see how they manag it. 

but now, after leav pressburg, everyth chang a little, and the 
danub becam more serious. It ceas trifling. It wa half-way to the 
black sea, within seem distanc almost of other, stranger countri 
where no trick would be permit or understood. It becam suddenli 
grown-up, and claim our respect and even our awe. It broke out into three 
arms, for one thing, that onli met again a hundr kilomet farther down, 
and for a cano there were no indic which one wa intend to be 
followed. 

"if you take a side channel," said the hungarian offic we met in the 
pressburg shop while buy provisions, "you may find yourselves, when the 
flood subsides, forti mile from anywhere, high and dry, and you may easili 
starve. there are no people, no farms, no fishermen. I warn you not to 
continue. the river, too, is still rising, and thi wind will increase." 

the rise river did not alarm us in the least, but the matter of be 
left high and dri by a sudden subsid of the water might be serious, 
and we had consequ laid in an extra stock of provisions. for the rest, 
the officer' propheci held true, and the wind, blow down a perfectli 
clear sky, increas steadili till it reach the digniti of a westerli 
gale. 

It wa earlier than usual when we camped, for the sun wa a good hour or 
two from the horizon, and leav my friend still asleep on the hot sand, I 
wander about in desultori examin of our hotel. the island, I found, 
wa less than an acr in extent, a mere sandi bank stand some two or 
three feet abov the level of the river. the far end, point into the 
sunset, wa cover with fli spray which the tremend wind drove off 
the crest of the broken waves. It wa triangular in shape, with the apex 
up stream. 

I stood there for sever minutes, watch the impetu crimson flood 
bear down with a shout roar, dash in wave against the bank as 
though to sweep it bodili away, and then swirl by in two foam stream 
on either side. the ground seem to shake with the shock and rush, while 
the furiou movement of the willow bush as the wind pour over them 
increas the curiou illus that the island itself actual moved. 
above, for a mile or two, I could see the great river descend upon me; 
it wa like look up the slope of a slide hill, white with foam, and 
leap up everywher to show itself to the sun. 

the rest of the island wa too thickli grown with willow to make walk 
pleasant, but I made the tour, nevertheless. from the lower end the light, 
of course, changed, and the river look dark and angry. onli the back of 
the fli wave were visible, streak with foam, and push forcibl by 
the great puff of wind that fell upon them from behind. for a short mile 
it wa visible, pour in and out among the islands, and then disappear 
with a huge sweep into the willows, which close about it like a herd of 
monstrou antediluvian creatur crowd down to drink. they made me think 
of gigant sponge-lik growth that suck the river up into themselves. 
they caus it to vanish from sight. they herd there togeth in such 
overpow numbers. 

altogeth it wa an impress scene, with it utter loneliness, it 
bizarr suggestion; and as I gazed, long and curiously, a singular emot 
began to stir somewher in the depth of me. midway in my delight of the 
wild beauty, there crept, unbidden and unexplained, a curiou feel of 
disquietude, almost of alarm. 

A rise river, perhaps, alway suggest someth of the ominous; mani of 
the littl island I saw befor me would probabl have been swept away by 
the morning; thi resistless, thunder flood of water touch the sens 
of awe. yet I wa awar that my uneasi lay deeper far than the emot 
of awe and wonder. It wa not that I felt. nor had it directli to do with 
the power of the drive wind--thi shout hurrican that might almost 
carri up a few acr of willow into the air and scatter them like so much 
chaff over the landscape. the wind wa simpli enjoy itself, for noth 
rose out of the flat landscap to stop it, and I wa consciou of share 
it great game with a kind of pleasur excitement. yet thi novel 
emot had noth to do with the wind. indeed, so vagu wa the sens of 
distress I experienced, that it wa imposs to trace it to it sourc 
and deal with it accordingly, though I wa awar somehow that it had to do 
with my realiz of our utter insignific befor thi unrestrain 
power of the element about me. the huge-grown river had someth to do 
with it too--a vague, unpleas idea that we had somehow trifl with 
these great element forc in whose power we lay helpless everi hour of 
the day and night. for here, indeed, they were gigant at play 
together, and the sight appeal to the imagination. 

but my emotion, so far as I could understand it, seem to attach itself 
more particularli to the willow bushes, to these acr and acr of 
willows, crowding, so thickli grow there, swarm everywher the eye 
could reach, press upon the river as though to suffoc it, stand in 
dens array mile after mile beneath the sky, watching, waiting, listening. 
and, apart quit from the elements, the willow connect themselv subtli 
with my malaise, attack the mind insidi somehow by reason of their 
vast numbers, and contriv in some way or other to repres to the 
imagin a new and mighti power, a power, moreover, not altogeth 
friendli to us. 

great revel of nature, of course, never fail to impress in one way or 
another, and I wa no stranger to mood of the kind. mountain overaw and 
ocean terrify, while the mysteri of great forest exercis a spell 
peculiarli it own. but all these, at one point or another, somewher link 
on intim with human life and human experience. they stir 
comprehensible, even if alarming, emotions. they tend on the whole to 
exalt. 

with thi multitud of willows, however, it wa someth far different, I 
felt. some essenc eman from them that besieg the heart. A sens of 
awe awakened, true, but of awe touch somewher by a vagu terror. their 
serri ranks, grow everywher darker about me as the shadow deepened, 
move furious yet softli in the wind, woke in me the curiou and 
unwelcom suggest that we had trespass here upon the border of an 
alien world, a world where we were intruders, a world where we were not 
want or invit to remain--wher we ran grave risk perhaps! 

the feeling, however, though it refus to yield it mean entir to 
analysis, did not at the time troubl me by pass into menace. yet it 
never left me quite, even dure the veri practic busi of put up 
the tent in a hurrican of wind and build a fire for the stew-pot. It 
remained, just enough to bother and perplex, and to rob a most delight 
camping-ground of a good portion of it charm. To my companion, however, I 
said nothing, for he wa a man I consid devoid of imagination. In the 
first place, I could never have explain to him what I meant, and in the 
second, he would have laugh stupidli at me if I had. 

there wa a slight depress in the center of the island, and here we 
pitch the tent. the surround willow broke the wind a bit. 

"A poor camp," observ the imperturb swede when at last the tent stood 
upright, "no stone and preciou littl firewood. i'm for move on earli 
tomorrow--eh? thi sand won't hold anything." 

but the experi of a collaps tent at midnight had taught us mani 
devices, and we made the cozi gipsi hous as safe as possible, and then set 
about collect a store of wood to last till bed-time. willow bush drop 
no branches, and driftwood wa our onli sourc of supply. We hunt the 
shore pretti thoroughly. everywher the bank were crumbl as the rise 
flood tore at them and carri away great portion with a splash and a 
gurgle. 

"the island' much smaller than when we landed," said the accur swede. 
"it won't last long at thi rate. we'd better drag the cano close to the 
tent, and be readi to start at a moment' notice. I shall sleep in my 
clothes." 

He wa a littl distanc off, climb along the bank, and I heard hi 
rather jolli laugh as he spoke. 

"bi jove!" I heard him call, a moment later, and turn to see what had 
caus hi exclamation. but for the moment he wa hidden by the willows, 
and I could not find him. 

"what in the world' this?" I heard him cri again, and thi time hi voic 
had becom serious. 

I ran up quickli and join him on the bank. He wa look over the river, 
point at someth in the water. 

"good heavens, it' a man' body!" he cri excitedly. "look!" 

A black thing, turn over and over in the foam waves, swept rapidli 
past. It kept disappear and come up to the surfac again. It wa about 
twenti feet from the shore, and just as it wa opposit to where we stood 
it lurch round and look straight at us. We saw it eye reflect the 
sunset, and gleam an odd yellow as the bodi turn over. then it gave a 
swift, gulp plunge, and dive out of sight in a flash. 

"an otter, by gad!" we exclaim in the same breath, laughing. 

It wa an otter, alive, and out on the hunt; yet it had look exactli like 
the bodi of a drown man turn helplessli in the current. far below it 
came to the surfac onc again, and we saw it black skin, wet and shine 
in the sunlight. 

then, too, just as we turn back, our arm full of driftwood, anoth 
thing happen to recal us to the river bank. thi time it realli wa a 
man, and what wa more, a man in a boat. now a small boat on the danub wa 
an unusu sight at ani time, but here in thi desert region, and at 
flood time, it wa so unexpect as to constitut a real event. We stood 
and stared. 

whether it wa due to the slant sunlight, or the refract from the 
wonder illumin water, I cannot say, but, whatev the cause, I found 
it difficult to focu my sight properli upon the fli apparition. It 
seemed, however, to be a man stand upright in a sort of flat-bottom 
boat, steer with a long oar, and be carri down the opposit shore 
at a tremend pace. He appar wa look across in our direction, 
but the distanc wa too great and the light too uncertain for us to make 
out veri plainli what he wa about. It seem to me that he wa 
gesticul and make sign at us. hi voic came across the water to us 
shout someth furiously, but the wind drown it so that no singl 
word wa audible. there wa someth curiou about the whole 
appearance--man, boat, signs, voice--that made an impress on me out of 
all proport to it cause. 

"he' cross himself!" I cried. "look, he' make the sign of the 
cross!" 

"I believ you'r right," the swede said, shade hi eye with hi hand 
and watch the man out of sight. He seem to be gone in a moment, 
melt away down there into the sea of willow where the sun caught them 
in the bend of the river and turn them into a great crimson wall of 
beauty. mist, too, had begun to ruse, so that the air wa hazy. 

"but what in the world is he do at nightfal on thi flood river?" I 
said, half to myself. "where is he go at such a time, and what did he 
mean by hi sign and shouting? d'you think he wish to warn us about 
something?" 

"he saw our smoke, and thought we were spirit probably," laugh my 
companion. "these hungarian believ in all sort of rubbish; you rememb 
the shopwoman at pressburg warn us that no one ever land here becaus 
it belong to some sort of be outsid man' world! I suppos they 
believ in fairi and elementals, possibl demons, too. that peasant in 
the boat saw peopl on the island for the first time in hi life," he 
added, after a slight pause, "and it scare him, that' all." 

the swede' tone of voic wa not convincing, and hi manner lack 
someth that wa usual there. I note the chang instantli while he 
talked, though without be abl to label it precisely. 

"if they had enough imagination," I laugh loudly--i rememb tri to 
make as much nois as I could--"they might well peopl a place like thi 
with the old god of antiquity. the roman must have haunt all thi 
region more or less with their shrine and sacr grove and element 
deities." 

the subject drop and we return to our stew-pot, for my friend wa not 
given to imagin convers as a rule. moreover, just then I rememb 
feel distinctli glad that he wa not imaginative; hi stolid, practic 
natur suddenli seem to me welcom and comforting. It wa an admir 
temperament, I felt; he could steer down rapid like a red indian, shoot 
danger bridg and whirlpool better than ani white man I ever saw in a 
canoe. He wa a grand fellow for an adventur trip, a tower of strength 
when untoward thing happened. I look at hi strong face and light curli 
hair as he stagger along under hi pile of driftwood (twice the size of 
mine!), and I experienc a feel of relief. yes, I wa distinctli glad 
just then that the swede was--what he was, and that he never made remark 
that suggest more than they said. 

"the river' still rising, though," he added, as if follow out some 
thought of hi own, and drop hi load with a gasp. "thi island will 
be under water in two day if it goe on." 

"I wish the wind would go down," I said. "I don't care a fig for the 
river." 

the flood, indeed, had no terror for us; we could get off at ten minutes' 
notice, and the more water the better we like it. It meant an increas 
current and the obliter of the treacher shingle-b that so often 
threaten to tear the bottom out of our canoe. 

contrari to our expectations, the wind did not go down with the sun. It 
seem to increas with the darkness, howl overhead and shake the 
willow round us like straws. curiou sound accompani it sometimes, like 
the explos of heavi guns, and it fell upon the water and the island in 
great flat blow of immens power. It made me think of the sound a planet 
must make, could we onli hear it, drive along through space. 

but the sky kept wholli clear of clouds, and soon after supper the full 
moon rose up in the east and cover the river and the plain of shout 
willow with a light like the day. 

We lay on the sandi patch besid the fire, smoking, listen to the nois 
of the night round us, and talk happili of the journey we had alreadi 
made, and of our plan ahead. the map lay spread in the door of the tent, 
but the high wind made it hard to study, and present we lower the 
curtain and extinguish the lantern. the firelight wa enough to smoke and 
see each other' face by, and the spark flew about overhead like 
fireworks. A few yard beyond, the river gurgl and hissed, and from time 
to time a heavi splash announc the fall away of further portion of 
the bank. 

our talk, I noticed, had to do with the faraway scene and incid of our 
first camp in the black forest, or of other subject altogeth remot 
from the present setting, for neither of us spoke of the actual moment more 
than wa necessary--almost as though we had agre tacitli to avoid 
discuss of the camp and it incidents. neither the otter nor the 
boatman, for instance, receiv the honor of a singl mention, though 
ordinarili these would have furnish discuss for the greater part of 
the evening. they were, of course, distinct event in such a place. 

the scarciti of wood made it a busi to keep the fire going, for the 
wind, that drove the smoke in our face wherev we sat, help at the same 
time to make a forc draught. We took it in turn to make some forag 
expedit into the darkness, and the quantiti the swede brought back 
alway made me feel that he took an absurdli long time find it; for the 
fact wa I did not care much about be left alone, and yet it alway 
seem to be my turn to grub about among the bush or scrambl along the 
slipperi bank in the moonlight. the long day' battl with wind and 
water--such wind and such water!--had tire us both, and an earli bed wa 
the obviou program. yet neither of us made the move for the tent. We lay 
there, tend the fire, talk in desultori fashion, peer about us 
into the dens willow bushes, and listen to the thunder of wind and 
river. the loneli of the place had enter our veri bones, and silenc 
seem natural, for after a bit the sound of our voic becam a trifl 
unreal and forced; whisper would have been the fit mode of 
communication, I felt, and the human voice, alway rather absurd amid the 
roar of the elements, now carri with it someth almost illegitimate. It 
wa like talk out loud in church, or in some place where it wa not 
lawful, perhap not quit safe, to be overheard. 

the eeri of thi lone island, set among a million willows, swept by a 
hurricane, and surround by hurri deep waters, touch us both, I 
fancy. untrodden by man, almost unknown to man, it lay there beneath the 
moon, remot from human influence, on the frontier of anoth world, an 
alien world, a world tenant by willow onli and the soul of willows. and 
we, in our rashness, had dare to invad it, even to make use of it! 
someth more than the power of it mysteri stir in me as I lay on the 
sand, feet to fire, and peer up through the leav at the stars. for the 
last time I rose to get firewood. 

"when thi ha burnt up," I said firmly, "I shall turn in," and my 
companion watch me lazili as I move off into the surround shadows. 

for an unimagin man I thought he seem unusu recept that 
night, unusu open to suggest of thing other than sensory. He too 
wa touch by the beauti and loneli of the place. I wa not altogeth 
pleased, I remember, to recogn thi slight chang in him, and instead of 
immedi collect sticks, I made my way to the far point of the island 
where the moonlight on plain and river could be seen to better advantage. 
the desir to be alon had come suddenli upon me; my former dread return 
in force; there wa a vagu feel in me I wish to face and probe to the 
bottom. 

when I reach the point of sand jut out among the waves, the spell of 
the place descend upon me with a posit shock. No mere "scenery" could 
have produc such an effect. there wa someth more here, someth to 
alarm. 

I gaze across the wast of wild waters; I watch the whisper willows; 
I heard the ceaseless beat of the tireless wind; and, one and all, each 
in it own way, stir in me thi sensat of a strang distress. but the 
willow especially; for ever they went on chatter and talk among 
themselves, laugh a little, shrilli cri out, sometim sighing--but 
what it wa they made so much to-do about belong to the secret life of 
the great plain they inhabited. and it wa utterli alien to the world I 
knew, or to that of the wild yet kindli elements. they made me think of a 
host of be from anoth plane of life, anoth evolut altogether, 
perhaps, all discuss a mysteri known onli to themselves. I watch them 
move busili together, oddli shake their big bushi heads, twirl their 
myriad leav even when there wa no wind. they move of their own will as 
though alive, and they touched, by some incalcul method, my own keen 
sens of the horrible. 

there they stood in the moonlight, like a vast armi surround our camp, 
shake their innumer silver spear defiantly, form all readi for an 
attack. 

the psycholog of places, for some imagin at least, is veri vivid; 
for the wanderer, especially, camp have their "note" either of welcom or 
rejection. At first it may not alway be apparent, becaus the busi 
prepar of tent and cook prevent, but with the first pause--aft 
supper usually--it come and announc itself. and the note of thi 
willow-camp now becam unmistak plain to me; we were interlopers, 
trespassers; we were not welcomed. the sens of unfamiliar grew upon me 
as I stood there watching. We touch the frontier of a region where our 
presenc wa resented. for a night' lodg we might perhap be tolerated; 
but for a prolong and inquisit stay--no! by all the god of the tree 
and wilderness, no! We were the first human influenc upon thi island, 
and we were not wanted. the willow were against us. 

strang thought like these, bizarr fancies, born I know not whence, 
found lodgment in my mind as I stood listening. what, I thought, if, after 
all, these crouch willow prove to be alive; if suddenli they should 
rise up, like a swarm of live creatures, marshal by the god whose 
territori we had invaded, sweep toward us off the vast swamps, boom 
overhead in the night--and then settl down! As I look it wa so easi to 
imagin they actual moved, crept nearer, retreat a little, huddl 
togeth in masses, hostile, wait for the great wind that should final 
start them a-running. I could have sworn their aspect chang a little, and 
their rank deepen and press more close together. 

the melancholi shrill cri of a night-bird sound overhead, and suddenli I 
nearli lost my balanc as the piec of bank I stood upon fell with a great 
splash into the river, undermin by the flood. I step back just in 
time, and went on hunt for firewood again, half laugh at the odd 
fanci that crowd so thickli into my mind and cast their spell upon me. 
I recal the swede' remark about move on next day, and I wa just 
think that I fulli agre with him, when I turn with a start and saw 
the subject of my thought stand immedi in front of me. He wa 
quit close. the roar of the element had cover hi approach. 




II 


"you'v been gone so long," he shout abov the wind, "I thought someth 
must have happen to you." 

but there wa that in hi tone, and a certain look in hi face as well, 
that convey to me more than hi usual words, and in a flash I understood 
the real reason for hi coming. It wa becaus the spell of the place had 
enter hi soul too, and he did not like be alone. 

"river still rising," he cried, point to the flood in the moonlight, 
"and the wind' simpli awful." 

He alway said the same things, but it wa the cri for companionship that 
gave the real import to hi words. 

"lucky," I cri back, "our tent' in the hollow. I think it'll hold all 
right." I ad someth about the difficulti of find wood, in order to 
explain my absence, but the wind caught my word and flung them across the 
river, so that he did not hear, but just look at me through the branches, 
nod hi head. 

"lucki if we get away without disaster!" he shouted, or word to that 
effect; and I rememb feel half angri with him for put the thought 
into words, for it wa exactli what I felt myself. there wa disast 
impend somewhere, and the sens of presenti lay unpleasantli upon 
me. 

We went back to the fire and made a final blaze, poke it up with our 
feet. We took a last look round. but for the wind the heat would have been 
unpleasant. I put thi thought into words, and I rememb my friend' repli 
struck me oddly: that he would rather have the heat, the ordinari juli 
weather, than thi "diabol wind." 

everyth wa snug for the night; the cano lie turn over besid the 
tent, with both yellow paddl beneath her; the provis sack hang from 
a willow-stem, and the washed-up dish remov to a safe distanc from the 
fire, all readi for the morn meal. 

We smother the ember of the fire with sand, and then turn in. the flap 
of the tent door wa up, and I saw the branch and the star and the white 
moonlight. the shake willow and the heavi buffet of the wind against 
our taut littl hous were the last thing I rememb as sleep came down 
and cover all with it soft and delici forgetfulness. 

suddenli I found myself lie awake, peer from my sandi mattress through 
the door of the tent. I look at my watch pin against the canvas, and 
saw by the bright moonlight that it wa past twelv o'clock--th threshold 
of a new day--and I had therefor slept a coupl of hours. the swede wa 
asleep still besid me; the wind howl as before; someth pluck at my 
heart and made me feel afraid. there wa a sens of disturb in my 
immedi neighborhood. 

I sat up quickli and look out. the tree were sway violent to and 
fro as the gust smote them, but our littl bit of green canva lay snugli 
safe in the hollow, for the wind pass over it without meet enough 
resist to make it vicious. the feel of disquietud did not pass, 
however, and I crawl quietli out of the tent to see if our belong 
were safe. I move care so as not to waken my companion. A curiou 
excit wa on me. 

I wa half-way out, kneel on all fours, when my eye first took in that 
the top of the bush opposite, with their move traceri of leaves, made 
shape against the sky. I sat back on my haunch and stared. It wa 
incredible, surely, but there, opposit and slightli abov me, were shape 
of some indetermin sort among the willows, and as the branch sway in 
the wind they seem to group themselv about these shapes, form a 
seri of monstrou outlin that shift rapidli beneath the moon. close, 
about fifti feet in front of me, I saw these things. 

My first instinct wa to waken my companion, that he too might see them, 
but someth made me hesitate--th sudden realization, probably, that I 
should not welcom corroboration; and meanwhil I crouch there stare in 
amaz with smart eyes. I wa wide awake. I rememb say to myself 
that I wa not dreaming. 

they first becam properli visible, these huge figures, just within the 
top of the bushes--immense, bronze-colored, moving, and wholli independ 
of the sway of the branches. I saw them plainli and noted, now I came to 
examin them more calmly, that they were veri much larger than human, and 
inde that someth in their appear proclaim them to be not human 
at all. certainli they were not mere the move traceri of the branch 
against the moonlight. they shift independently. they rose upward in a 
continu stream from earth to sky, vanish utterli as soon as they 
reach the dark of the sky. they were interlac one with another, make 
a great column, and I saw their limb and huge bodi melt in and out of 
each other, form thi serpentin line that bent and sway and twist 
spiral with the contort of the wind-toss trees. they were nude, 
fluid shapes, pass up the bushes, within the leav almost--ris up in 
a live column into the heavens. their face I never could see. 
unceasingli they pour upwards, sway in great bend curves, with a 
hue of dull bronz upon their skins. 

I stared, tri to forc everi atom of vision from my eyes. for a long 
time I thought they must everi moment disappear and resolv themselv into 
the movement of the branch and prove to be an optic illusion. I 
search everywher for a proof of reality, when all the while I understood 
quit well that the standard of realiti had changed. for the longer I 
look the more certain I becam that these figur were real and living, 
though perhap not accord to the standard that the camera and the 
biologist would insist upon. 

far from feel fear, I wa possess with a sens of awe and wonder such 
as I have never known. I seem to be gaze at the personifi element 
forc of thi haunt and primev region. our intrus had stir the 
power of the place into activity. It wa we who were the caus of the 
disturbance, and my brain fill to burst with stori and legend of 
the spirit and deiti of place that have been acknowledg and 
worship by men in all age of the world' history. but, befor I could 
arriv at ani possibl explanation, someth impel me to go farther 
out, and I crept forward on the sand and stood upright. I felt the ground 
still warm under my bare feet; the wind tore at my hair and face; and the 
sound of the river burst upon my ear with a sudden roar. these things, I 
knew, were real, and prove that my sens were act normally. yet the 
figur still rose from earth to heaven, silent, majestically, in a great 
spiral of grace and strength that overwhelm me at length with a genuin 
deep emot of worship. I felt that I must fall down and 
worship--absolut worship. 

perhap in anoth minut I might have done so, when a gust of wind swept 
against me with such forc that it blew me sideways, and I nearli stumbl 
and fell. It seem to shake the dream violent out of me. At least it 
gave me anoth point of view somehow. the figur still remained, still 
ascend into heaven from the heart of the night, but my reason at last 
began to assert itself. It must be a subject experience, I argued--non 
the less real for that, but still subjective. the moonlight and the 
branch combin to work out these pictur upon the mirror of my 
imagination, and for some reason I project them outward and made them 
appear objective. I knew thi must be the case, of course. I took courage, 
and began to move forward across the open patch of sand. By jove, though, 
wa it all hallucination? wa it mere subjective? did not my reason argu 
in the old futil way from the littl standard of the known? 

I onli know that great column of figur ascend darkli into the sky for 
what seem a veri long period of time, and with a veri complet measur of 
realiti as most men are accustom to gaug reality. then suddenli they 
were gone! 

and, onc they were gone and the immedi wonder of their great presenc 
had passed, fear came down upon me with a cold rush. the esoter mean 
of thi lone and haunt region suddenli flame up within me, and I began 
to trembl dreadfully. I took a quick look round--a look of horror that 
came near to panic--calcul vainli way of escape; and then, realiz 
how helpless I wa to achiev anyth realli effective, I crept back 
silent into the tent and lay down again upon my sandi mattress, first 
lower the door-curtain to shut out the sight of the willow in the 
moonlight, and then buri my head as deepli as possibl beneath the 
blanket to deaden the sound of the terrifi wind. 

As though further to convinc me that I had not been dreaming, I rememb 
that it wa a long time befor I fell again into a troubl and restless 
sleep; and even then onli the upper crust of me slept, and underneath there 
wa someth that never quit lost consciousness, but lay alert and on the 
watch. 

but thi second time I jump up with a genuin start of terror. It wa 
neither the wind nor the river that woke me, but the slow approach of 
someth that caus the sleep portion of me to grow smaller and 
smaller till at last it vanish altogether, and I found myself sit 
bolt upright--listening. 

outsid there wa a sound of multitudin littl patterings. they had been 
coming, I wa aware, for a long time, and in my sleep they had first becom 
audible. I sat there nervous wide awak as though I had not slept at all. 
It seem to me that my breath came with difficulty, and that there wa 
a great weight upon the surfac of my body. In spite of the hot night, I 
felt clammi with cold and shivered. someth sure wa press steadili 
against the side of the tent and weigh down upon it from above. wa it 
the bodi of the wind? wa thi the patter rain, the drip of the 
leaves? the spray blown from the river by the wind and gather in big 
drops? I thought quickli of a dozen things. 

then suddenli the explan leap into my mind: a bough from the poplar, 
the onli larg tree on the island, had fallen with the wind. still half 
caught by the other branches, it would fall with the next gust and crush 
us, and meanwhil it leav brush and tap upon the tight canva 
surfac of the tent. I rais a loos flap and rush out, call to the 
swede to follow. 

but when I got out and stood upright I saw that the tent wa free. there 
wa no hang bough; there wa no rain or spray; noth approached. 

A cold, grey light filter down through the bush and lay on the faintli 
gleam sand. star still crowd the sky directli overhead, and the wind 
howl magnificently, but the fire no longer gave out ani glow, and I saw 
the east redden in streak through the trees. sever hour must have 
pass sinc I stood there befor watch the ascend figures, and the 
memori of it now came back to me horribly, like an evil dream. oh, how 
tire it made me feel, that ceaseless rage wind! yet, though the deep 
lassitud of a sleepless night wa on me, my nerv were tingl with the 
activ of an equal tireless apprehension, and all idea of repos wa 
out of the question. the river I saw had risen further. it thunder fill 
the air, and a fine spray made itself felt through my thin sleep shirt. 

yet nowher did I discov the slightest evid of anyth to caus 
alarm. thi deep, prolong disturb in my heart remain wholli 
unaccount for. 

My companion had not stir when I call him, and there wa no need to 
waken him now. I look about me carefully, note everything; the 
turned-ov canoe; the yellow paddles--two of them, i'm certain; the 
provis sack and the extra lantern hang togeth from the tree; and, 
crowd everywher about me, envelop all, the willows, those endless, 
shake willows. A bird utter it morn cry, and a string of duck 
pass with whir flight overhead in the twilight. the sand whirled, dri 
and stinging, about my bare feet in the wind. 

I walk round the tent and then went out a littl way into the bush, so 
that I could see across the river to the farther landscape, and the same 
profound yet indefin emot of distress seiz upon me again as I saw 
the intermin sea of bush stretch to the horizon, look ghostli 
and unreal in the wan light of dawn. I walk softli here and there, still 
puzzl over that odd sound of infinit pattering, and of that pressur 
upon the tent that had waken me. It must have been the wind, I 
reflected--th wind bear upon the loose, hot sand, drive the dri 
particl smartli against the taut canvas--th wind drop heavili upon 
our fragil roof. 

yet all the time my nervous and malais increas appreciably. 

I cross over to the farther shore and note how the coast-lin had 
alter in the night, and what mass of sand the river had torn away. I 
dip my hand and feet into the cool current, and bath my forehead. 
alreadi there wa a glow of sunris in the sky and the exquisit fresh 
of come day. On my way back I pass purpos beneath the veri bush 
where I had seen the column of figur rise into the air, and midway 
among the clump I suddenli found myself overtaken by a sens of vast 
terror. from the shadow a larg figur went swiftli by. someon pass me, 
as sure as ever man did.... 

It wa a great stagger blow from the wind that help me forward again, 
and onc out in the more open space, the sens of terror diminish 
strangely. the wind were about and walking, I rememb say to myself, 
for the wind often move like great presenc under the trees. and 
altogeth the fear that hover about me wa such an unknown and immens 
kind of fear, so unlik anyth I had ever felt before, that it woke a 
sens of awe and wonder in me that did much to counteract it worst 
effects; and when I reach a high point in the middl of the island from 
which I could see the wide stretch of river, crimson in the sunrise, the 
whole magic beauti of it all wa so overpow that a sort of wild 
yearn woke in me and almost brought a cri up into the throat. 

but thi cri found no expression, for as my eye wander from the plain 
beyond to the island round me and note our littl tent half hidden among 
the willows, a dread discoveri leap out at me, compar to which my 
terror of the walk wind seem as noth at all. 

for a change, I thought, had somehow come about in the arrang of the 
landscape. It wa not that my point of vantag gave me a differ view, 
but that an alter had appar been effect in the relat of the 
tent to the willows, and of the willow to the tent. sure the bush now 
crowd much closer--unnecessarily, unpleasantli close. they had move 
nearer. 

creep with silent feet over the shift sands, draw impercept 
nearer by soft, unhurri movements, the willow had come closer dure the 
night. but had the wind move them, or had they move of themselves? I 
recal the sound of infinit small patter and the pressur upon the 
tent and upon my own heart that caus me to wake in terror. I sway for a 
moment in the wind like a tree, find it hard to keep my upright posit 
on the sandi hillock. there wa a suggest here of person agency, of 
deliber intention, of aggress hostility, and it terrifi me into a 
sort of rigidity. 

then the reaction follow quickly. the idea wa so bizarre, so absurd, 
that I felt inclin to laugh. but the laughter came no more readili than 
the cry, for the knowledg that my mind wa so recept to such danger 
imagin brought the addit terror that it wa through our mind and 
not through our physic bodi that the attack would come, and wa coming. 

the wind buffet me about, and, veri quickli it seemed, the sun came up 
over the horizon, for it wa after four o'clock, and I must have stood on 
that littl pinnacl of sand longer than I knew, afraid to come down to 
close quarter with the willows. I return quietly, creepily, to the tent, 
first take anoth exhaust look round and--yes, I confess it--mak a 
few measurements. I pace out on the warm sand the distanc between the 
willow and the tent, make a note of the shortest distanc particularly. 

I crawl stealthili into my blankets. My companion, to all appearances, 
still slept soundly, and I wa glad that thi wa so. provid my 
experi were not corroborated, I could find strength somehow to deni 
them, perhaps. with the daylight I could persuad myself that it wa all a 
subject hallucination, a fantasi of the night, a project of the 
excit imagination. 

noth further came in to disturb me, and I fell asleep almost at once, 
utterli exhausted, yet still in dread of hear again that weird sound of 
multitudin pattering, or of feel the pressur upon my heart that had 
made it difficult to breathe. 

the sun wa high in the heaven when my companion woke me from a heavi 
sleep and announc that the porridg wa cook and there wa just time to 
bathe. the grate smell of frizzl bacon enter the tent door. 

"river still rising," he said, "and sever island out in mid-stream have 
disappear altogether. our own island' much smaller." 

"ani wood left?" I ask sleepily. 

"the wood and the island will finish tomorrow in a dead heat," he laughed, 
"but there' enough to last us till then." 

I plung in from the point of the island, which had inde alter a lot 
in size and shape dure the night, and wa swept down in a moment to the 
landing-plac opposit the tent. the water wa icy, and the bank flew by 
like the countri from an express train. bath under such condit wa 
an exhilar operation, and the terror of the night seem cleans out 
of me by a process of evapor in the brain. the sun wa blaze hot; 
not a cloud show itself anywhere; the wind, however, had not abat one 
littl jot. 

quit suddenli then the impli mean of the swede' word flash across 
me, show that he no longer wish to leav post-haste, and had chang 
hi mind. "enough to last till tomorrow"--h assum we should stay on the 
island anoth night. It struck me as odd. the night befor he wa so 
posit the other way. how had the chang come about? 

great crumbl of the bank occur at breakfast, with heavi splash 
and cloud of spray which the wind brought into our frying-pan, and my 
fellow-travel talk incessantli about the difficulti the vienna-pesth 
steamer must have to find the channel in flood. but the state of hi mind 
interest and impress me far more than the state of the river or the 
difficulti of the steamers. He had chang somehow sinc the even 
before. hi manner wa different--a trifl excited, a trifl shy, with a 
sort of suspicion about hi voic and gestures. I hardli know how to 
describ it now in cold blood, but at the time I rememb be quit 
certain of one thing--that he had becom frightened? 

He ate veri littl breakfast, and for onc omit to smoke hi pipe. He 
had the map spread open besid him, and kept studi it markings. 

"we'd better get off sharp in an hour," I said presently, feel for an 
open that must bring him indirectli to a partial confess at ani rate. 
and hi answer puzzl me uncomfortably: "rather! If they'll let us." 

"who'll let us? the elements?" I ask quickly, with affect indifference. 

"the power of thi aw place, whoever they are," he replied, keep hi 
eye on the map. "the god are here, if they are anywher at all in the 
world." 

"the element are alway the true immortals," I replied, laugh as 
natur as I could manage, yet know quit well that my face reflect 
my true feel when he look up grave at me and spoke across the 
smoke: 

"we shall be fortun if we get away without further disaster." 

thi wa exactli what I had dreaded, and I screw myself up to the point 
of the direct question. It wa like agre to allow the dentist to 
extract the tooth; it had to come anyhow in the long run, and the rest wa 
all pretence. 

"further disaster! why, what' happened?" 

"for one thing--th steer paddle' gone," he said quietly. 

"the steer paddl gone!" I repeated, greatli excited, for thi wa our 
rudder, and the danub in flood without a rudder wa suicide. "but what--" 

"and there' a tear in the bottom of the canoe," he added, with a genuin 
littl tremor in hi voice. 

I continu stare at him, abl onli to repeat the word in hi face 
somewhat foolishly. there, in the heat of the sun, and on thi burn 
sand, I wa awar of a freez atmospher descend round us. I got up to 
follow him, for he mere nod hi head grave and led the way toward 
the tent a few yard on the other side of the fireplace. the cano still 
lay there as I had last seen her in the night, rib uppermost, the paddles, 
or rather, the paddle, on the sand besid her. 

"there' onli one," he said, stoop to pick it up. "and here' the rent 
in the base-board." 

It wa on the tip of my tongu to tell him that I had clearli notic two 
paddl a few hour before, but a second impuls made me think better of 
it, and I said nothing. I approach to see. 

there wa a long, fine made tear in the bottom of the cano where a 
littl slither of wood had been neatli taken clean out; it look as if the 
tooth of a sharp rock or snag had eaten down her length, and investig 
show that the hole went through. had we launch out in her without 
observ it we must inevit have foundered. At first the water would 
have made the wood swell so as to close the hole, but onc out in 
mid-stream the water must have pour in, and the canoe, never more than 
two inch abov the surface, would have fill and sunk veri rapidly. 

"there, you see an attempt to prepar a victim for the sacrifice," I heard 
him saying, more to himself than to me, "two victim rather," he ad as 
he bent over and ran hi finger along the slit. 

I began to whistle--a thing I alway do unconsci when utterli 
nonplussed--and purpos paid no attent to hi words. I wa determin 
to consid them foolish. 

"it wasn't there last night," he said presently, straighten up from hi 
examin and look anywher but at me. 

"we must have scratch her in landing, of course," I stop whistl to 
say. "the stone are veri sharp." 

I stop abruptly, for at that moment he turn round and met my eye 
squarely. I knew just as well as he did how imposs my explan was. 
there were no stones, to begin with. 

"and then there' thi to explain too," he ad quietly, hand me the 
paddl and point to the blade. 

A new and curiou emot spread freezingli over me as I took and examin 
it. the blade wa scrape down all over, beauti scraped, as though 
someon had sand-pap it with care, make it so thin that the first 
vigor stroke must have snap it off at the elbow. 

"one of us walk in hi sleep and did thi thing," I said feebly, "or--or 
it ha been file by the constant stream of sand particl blown against it 
by the wind, perhaps." 

"ah," said the swede, turn away, laugh a little, "you can explain 
everything." 

"the same wind that caught the steer paddl and flung it so near the 
bank that it fell in with the next lump that crumbled," I call out after 
him, absolut determin to find an explan for everyth he show 
me. 

"I see," he shout back, turn hi head to look at me befor 
disappear among the willow bushes. 

onc alon with these perplex evid of person agency, I think my 
first thought took the form of "one of us must have done thi thing, and 
it certainli wa not i." but my second thought decid how imposs it 
wa to suppose, under all the circumstances, that either of us had done it. 
that my companion, the trust friend of a dozen similar expeditions, could 
have knowingli had a hand in it, wa a suggest not to be entertain for 
a moment. equal absurd seem the explan that thi imperturb and 
dens practic natur had suddenli becom insan and wa busi with 
insan purposes. 

yet the fact remain that what disturb me most, and kept my fear 
activ aliv even in thi blaze of sunshin and wild beauty, wa the 
clear certainti that some curiou alter had come about in hi 
mind--that he wa nervous, timid, suspicious, awar of go on he did not 
speak about, watch a seri of secret and hitherto unmention 
events--waiting, in a word, for a climax that he expected, and, I thought, 
expect veri soon. thi grew up in my mind intuitively--i hardli knew how. 

I made a hurri examin of the tent and it surroundings, but the 
measur of the night remain the same. there were deep hollow form 
in the sand I now notic for the first time, basin-shap and of variou 
depth and sizes, vari from that of a tea-cup to a larg bowl. the wind, 
no doubt, wa respons for these miniatur craters, just as it wa for 
lift the paddl and toss it toward the water. the rent in the cano 
wa the onli thing that seem quit inexplicable; and, after all, it wa 
conceiv that a sharp point had caught it when we landed. the 
examin I made of the shore did not assist thi theory, but all the 
same I clung to it with that diminish portion of my intellig which I 
call my "reason." An explan of some kind wa an absolut necessity, 
just as some work explan of the univers is necessary--howev 
absurd--to the happi of everi individu who seek to do hi duti in 
the world and face the problem of life. the simil seem to me at the 
time an exact parallel. 

I at onc set the pitch melting, and present the swede join me at the 
work, though under the best condit in the world the cano could not be 
safe for travel till the follow day. I drew hi attent casual to 
the hollow in the sand. 

"yes," he said, "I know. they'r all over the island. but you can explain 
them, no doubt!" 

"wind, of course," I answer without hesitation. "have you never watch 
those littl whirlwind in the street that twist and twirl everyth into 
a circle? thi sand' loos enough to yield, that' all." 

He made no reply, and we work on in silenc for a bit. I watch him 
surreptiti all the time, and I had an idea he wa watch me. He 
seemed, too, to be alway listen attent to someth I could not 
hear, or perhap for someth that he expect to hear, for he kept 
turn about and stare into the bushes, and up into the sky, and out 
across the water where it wa visibl through the open among the 
willows. sometim he even put hi hand to hi ear and held it there for 
sever minutes. He said noth to me, however, about it, and I ask no 
questions. and meanwhile, as he mend that torn cano with the skill and 
address of a red indian, I wa glad to notic hi absorpt in the work, 
for there wa a vagu dread in my heart that he would speak of the chang 
aspect of the willows. and, if he had notic that, my imagin could no 
longer be held a suffici explan of it. 




iii 


At length, after a long pause, he began to talk. 

"queer thing," he ad in a hurri sort of voice, as though he want to 
say someth and get it over. "queer thing. I mean, about that otter last 
night." 

I had expect someth so total differ that he caught me with 
surprise, and I look up sharply. 

"show how lone thi place is. otter are aw shi things--" 

"I don't mean that, of course," he interrupted. "I mean--do you think--did 
you think it realli wa an otter?" 

"what else, in the name of heaven, what else?" 

"you know, I saw it befor you did, and at first it seemed--so much bigger 
than an otter." 

"the sunset as you look up-stream magnifi it, or something," I replied. 

He look at me absent a moment, as though hi mind were busi with other 
thoughts. 

"it had such extraordinari yellow eyes," he went on half to himself. 

"that wa the sun too," I laughed, a trifl boisterously. "I suppos you'll 
wonder next if that fellow in the boat--" 

I suddenli decid not to finish the sentence. He wa in the act again of 
listening, turn hi head to the wind, and someth in the express of 
hi face made me halt. the subject dropped, and we went on with our 
caulking. appar he had not notic my unfinish sentence. five 
minut later, however, he look at me across the canoe, the smoke pitch 
in hi hand, hi face exceedingli grave. 

"I did rather wonder, if you want to know," he said slowly, "what that 
thing in the boat was. I rememb think at the time it wa not a man. 
the whole busi seem to rise quit suddenli out of the water." 

I laugh again boister in hi face, but thi time there wa 
impatience, and a strain of anger too, in my feeling. 

"look here now," I cried, "thi place is quit queer enough without go 
out of our way to imagin things! that boat wa an ordinari boat, and the 
man in it wa an ordinari man, and they were both go down-stream as fast 
as they could lick. and that otter wa an otter, so don't let' play the 
fool about it!" 

He look steadili at me with the same grave expression. He wa not in the 
least annoyed. I took courag from hi silence. 

"and, for heaven' sake," I went on, "don't keep pretend you hear 
things, becaus it onli give me the jumps, and there' noth to hear but 
the river and thi curs old thunder wind." 

"you fool!" he answer in a low, shock voice, "you utter fool. that' 
just the way all victim talk. As if you didn't understand just as well as 
I do!" he sneer with scorn in hi voice, and a sort of resignation. "the 
best thing you can do is to keep quiet and tri to hold your mind as firm as 
possible. thi feebl attempt at self-decept onli make the truth harder 
when you'r forc to meet it." 

My littl effort wa over, and I found noth more to say, for I knew 
quit well hi word were true, and that I wa the fool, not he. Up to a 
certain stage in the adventur he kept ahead of me easily, and I think I 
felt annoy to be out of it, to be thu prove less psychic, less 
sensit than himself to these extraordinari happenings, and half ignor 
all the time of what wa go on under my veri nose. He knew from the veri 
beginning, apparently. but at the moment I wholli miss the point of hi 
word about the necess of there be a victim, and that we ourselv 
were destin to satisfi the want. I drop all pretenc thenceforward, 
but thenceforward likewis my fear increas steadili to the climax. 

"but you'r quit right about one thing," he added, befor the subject 
passed, "and that is that we'r wiser not to talk about it, or even to 
think about it, becaus what one think find express in words, and what 
one says, happens." 

that afternoon, while the cano dri and hardened, we spent tri to 
fish, test the leak, collect wood, and watch the enorm flood of 
rise water. mass of driftwood swept near our shore sometimes, and we 
fish for them with long willow branches. the island grew percept 
smaller as the bank were torn away with great gulp and splashes. the 
weather kept brilliantli fine till about four o'clock, and then for the 
first time for three day the wind show sign of abating. cloud began to 
gather in the south-west, spread thenc slowli over the sky. 

thi lessen of the wind came as a great relief, for the incess 
roaring, banging, and thunder had irrit our nerves. yet the silenc 
that came about five o'clock with it sudden cessat wa in a manner 
quit as oppressive. the boom of the river had everyth in it own way 
then; it fill the air with deep murmurs, more music than the wind 
noises, but infinit more monotonous. the wind held mani notes, rising, 
fall alway beat out some sort of great element tune; wherea the 
river' song lay between three note at most--dul pedal notes, that held a 
lugubri qualiti foreign to the wind, and somehow seem to me, in my 
then nervou state, to sound wonder well the music of doom. 

It wa extraordinary, too, how the withdraw suddenli of bright sunlight 
took everyth out of the landscap that made for cheerfulness; and sinc 
thi particular landscap had alreadi manag to convey the suggest of 
someth sinister, the chang of cours wa all the more unwelcom and 
noticeable. for me, I know, the darken outlook becam distinctli more 
alarming, and I found myself more than onc calcul how soon after 
sunset the full moon would get up in the east, and whether the gather 
cloud would greatli interfer with her light of the littl island. 

with thi gener hush of the wind--though it still indulg in occasion 
brief gusts--th river seem to me to grow blacker, the willow to stand 
more dens together. the latter, too, kept up a sort of independ 
movement of their own, rustl among themselv when no wind stirred, and 
shake oddli from the root upwards. when common object in thi way be 
come charg with the suggest of horror, they stimul the imagin 
far more than thing of unusu appearance; and these bushes, crowd 
huddl about us, assum for me in the dark a bizarr grotesqueri of 
appear that lent to them somehow the aspect of purpos and live 
creatures. their veri ordinariness, I felt, mask what wa malign and 
hostil to us. the forc of the region drew nearer with the come of 
night. they were focus upon our island, and more particularli upon 
ourselves. for thus, somehow, in the term of the imagination, did my 
realli indescrib sensat in thi extraordinari place present 
themselves. 

I had slept a good deal in the earli afternoon, and had thu recov 
somewhat from the exhaust of a disturb night, but thi onli serv 
appar to render me more suscept than befor to the obsess spell 
of the haunting. I fought against it, laugh at my feel as absurd and 
childish, with veri obviou physiolog explanations, yet, in spite of 
everi effort, they gain in strength upon me so that I dread the night 
as a child lost in a forest must dread the approach of darkness. 

the cano we had care cover with a waterproof sheet dure the day, 
and the one remain paddl had been secur tie by the swede to the 
base of a tree, lest the wind should rob us of that too. from five o'clock 
onward I busi myself with the stew-pot and prepar for dinner, it 
be my turn to cook that night. We had potatoes, onions, bit of bacon 
fat to add flavor, and a gener thick residu from former stew at the 
bottom of the pot; with black bread broken up into it the result wa most 
excellent, and it wa follow by a stew of plum with sugar and a brew of 
strong tea with dri milk. A good pile of wood lay close at hand, and the 
absenc of wind made my duti easy. My companion sat lazili watch me, 
divid hi attent between clean hi pipe and give useless 
advice--an admit privileg of the off-duti man. He had been veri quiet 
all the afternoon, engag in re-caulk the canoe, strengthen the tent 
ropes, and fish for driftwood while I slept. No more talk about 
undesir thing had pass between us, and I think hi onli remark had 
to do with the gradual destruct of the island, which he declar wa not 
fulli a third smaller than when we first landed. 

the pot had just begun to bubbl when I heard hi voic call to me from 
the bank, where he had wander away without my noticing. I ran up. 

"come and listen," he said, "and see what you make of it." He held hi hand 
cupwis to hi ear, as so often before. 

"now do you hear anything?" he asked, watch me curiously. 

We stood there, listen attent together. At first I heard onli the 
deep note of the water and the hiss rise from it turbul surface. 
the willows, for once, were motionless and silent. then a sound began to 
reach my ear faintly, a peculiar sound--someth like the hum of a 
distant gong. It seem to come across to us in the dark from the wast 
of swamp and willow opposite. It wa repeat at regular intervals, but 
it wa certainli neither the sound of a bell nor the hoot of a distant 
steamer. I can liken it to noth so much as to the sound of an immens 
gong, suspend far up in the sky, repeat incessantli it muffl 
metal note, soft and musical, as it wa repeatedli struck. My heart 
quicken as I listened. 

"i'v heard it all day," said my companion. "while you slept thi afternoon 
it came all round the island. I hunt it down, but could never get near 
enough to see--to local it correctly. sometim it wa overhead, and 
sometim it seem under the water. onc or twice, too, I could have sworn 
it wa not outsid at all, but within myself--y know--th way a sound in 
the fourth dimens is suppos to come." 

I wa too much puzzl to pay much attent to hi words. I listen 
carefully, strive to associ it with ani known familiar sound I could 
think of, but without success. It chang in the direction, too, come 
nearer, and then sink utterli away into remot distance. I cannot say 
that it wa omin in quality, becaus to me it seem distinctli musical, 
yet I must admit it set go a distress feel that made me wish I had 
never heard it. 

"the wind blow in those sand-funnels," I said determin to find an 
explanation, "or the bush rub togeth after the storm perhaps." 

"it come off the whole swamp," my friend answered. "it come from 
everywher at once." He ignor my explanations. "it come from the willow 
bush somehow--" 

"but now the wind ha dropped," I objected. "the willow can hardli make a 
nois by themselves, can they?" 

hi answer frighten me, first becaus I had dread it, and secondly, 
becaus I knew intuit it wa true. 

"it is becaus the wind ha drop we now hear it. It wa drown before. 
It is the cry, I believe, of the--" 

I dash back to my fire, warn by the sound of bubbl that the stew wa 
in danger, but determin at the same time to escap further conversation. 
I wa resolute, if possible, to avoid the exchang of views. I dreaded, 
too, that he would begin about the gods, or the element forces, or 
someth els disquieting, and I want to keep myself well in hand for 
what might happen later. there wa anoth night to be face befor we 
escap from thi distress place, and there wa no know yet what it 
might bring forth. 

"come and cut up bread for the pot," I call to him, vigor stir 
the appet mixture. that stew-pot held saniti for us both, and the 
thought made me laugh. 

He came over slowli and took the provis sack from the tree, fumbl in 
it mysteri depths, and then empti the entir content upon the 
ground-sheet at hi feet. 

"hurri up!" I cried; "it' boiling." 

the swede burst out into a roar of laughter that startl me. It wa forc 
laughter, not artifici exactly, but mirthless. 

"there' noth here!" he shouted, hold hi sides. 

"bread, I mean." 

"it' gone. there is no bread. they'v taken it!" 

I drop the long spoon and ran up. everyth the sack had contain lay 
upon the ground-sheet, but there wa no loaf. 

the whole dead weight of my grow fear fell upon me and shook me. then I 
burst out laugh too. It wa the onli thing to do: and the sound of my 
laughter also made me understand his. the stain of psychic pressur 
caus it--thi explos of unnatur laughter in both of us; it wa an 
effort of repress forc to seek relief; it wa a temporari safety-valve. 
and with both of us it ceas quit suddenly. 

"how crimin stupid of me!" I cried, still determin to be consist 
and find an explanation. "I clean forgot to buy a loaf at pressburg. that 
chatter woman put everyth out of my head, and I must have left it 
lie on the counter or--" 

"the oatmeal, too, is much less than it wa thi morning," the swede 
interrupted. 

whi in the world need he draw attent to it? I thought angrily. 

"there' enough for tomorrow," I said, stir vigorously, "and we can get 
lot more at komorn or gran. In twenty-four hour we shall be mile from 
here." 

"I hope so--to god," he muttered, put the thing back into the sack, 
"unless we'r claim first as victim for the sacrifice," he ad with a 
foolish laugh. He drag the sack into the tent, for safety' sake, I 
suppose, and I heard him mumbl to himself, but so indistinctli that it 
seem quit natur for me to ignor hi words. 

our meal wa beyond question a gloomi one, and we ate it almost in silence, 
avoid one another' eyes, and keep the fire bright. then we wash up 
and prepar for the night, and, onc smoking, our mind unoccupi with 
ani definit duties, the apprehens I had felt all day long becam more 
and more acute. It wa not then activ fear, I think, but the veri 
vagu of it origin distress me far more that if I had been abl to 
ticket and face it squarely. the curiou sound I have liken to the note 
of a gong becam now almost incessant, and fill the still of the 
night with a faint, continu ring rather than a seri of distinct 
notes. At one time it wa behind and at anoth time in front of us. 
sometim I fanci it came from the bush on our left, and then again 
from the clump on our right. more often it hover directli overhead like 
the whir of wings. It wa realli everywher at once, behind, in front, 
at our side and over our heads, complet surround us. the sound 
realli defi description. but noth within my knowledg is like that 
ceaseless muffl hum rise off the desert world of swamp and 
willows. 

We sat smoke in compar silence, the strain grow everi minut 
greater. the worst featur of the situat seem to me that we did not 
know what to expect, and could therefor make no sort of prepar by way 
of defense. We could anticip nothing. My explan made in the 
sunshine, moreover, now came to haunt me with their foolish and wholli 
unsatisfactori nature, and it wa more and more clear to us that some kind 
of plain talk with my companion wa inevitable, whether I like it or not. 
after all, we had to spend the night together, and to sleep in the same 
tent side by side. I saw that I could not get along much longer without the 
support of hi mind, and for that, of course, plain talk wa imperative. As 
long as possible, however, I postpon thi littl climax, and tri to 
ignor or laugh at the occasion sentenc he flung into the emptiness. 

some of these sentences, moreover, were confoundedli disquiet to me, 
come as they did to corrobor much that I felt myself; corroboration, 
too--which made it so much more convincing--from a total differ point 
of view. He compos such curiou sentences, and hurl them at me in such 
an inconsequenti sort of way, as though hi main line of thought wa 
secret to himself, and these fragment were mere bit he found it 
imposs to digest. He got rid of them by utter them. speech reliev 
him. It wa like be sick. 

"there are thing about us, i'm sure, that make for disorder, 
disintegration, destruction, our destruction," he said once, while the fire 
blaze between us. "we'v stray out of a safe line somewhere." 

and, anoth time, when the gong sound had come nearer, ring much 
louder than before, and directli over our heads, he said as though talk 
to himself: 

"I don't think a gramophon would show ani record of that. the sound 
doesn't come to me by the ear at all. the vibrat reach me in anoth 
manner altogether, and seem to be within me, which is precis how a 
fourth dimension sound might be suppos to make itself heard." 

I purpos made no repli to this, but I sat up a littl closer to the fire 
and peer about me into the darkness. the cloud were mass all over the 
sky, and no trace of moonlight came through. veri still, too, everyth 
was, so that the river and the frog had thing all their own way. 

"it ha that about it," he went on, "which is utterli out of common 
experience. It is unknown. onli one thing describ it really; it is a 
non-human sound; I mean a sound outsid humanity." 

have rid himself of thi indigest morsel, he lay quiet for a time, 
but he had so admir express my own feel that it wa a relief to 
have the thought out, and to have confin it by the limit of word 
from danger wander to and fro in the mind. 

the solitud of that danub camping-place, can I ever forget it? the 
feel of be utterli alon on an empti planet! My thought ran 
incessantli upon citi and the haunt of men. I would have given my soul, 
as the say is, for the "feel" of those bavarian villag we had pass 
through by the score; for the normal, human commonplaces; peasant drink 
beer, tabl beneath the trees, hot sunshine, and a ruin castl on the 
rock behind the red-roof church. even the tourist would have been 
welcome. 

yet what I felt of dread wa no ordinari ghostli fear. It wa infinit 
greater, stranger, and seem to aris from some dim ancestr sens of 
terror more profoundli disturb than anyth I had known or dream of. 
We had "strayed," as the swede put it, into some region or some set of 
condit where the risk were great, yet unintellig to us; where the 
frontier of some unknown world lay close about us. It wa a spot held by 
the dweller in some outer space, a sort of peep-hol whenc they could spi 
upon the earth, themselv unseen, a point where the veil between had worn 
a littl thin. As the final result of too long a sojourn here, we should be 
carri over the border and depriv of what we call "our lives," yet by 
mental, not physical, processes. In that sense, as he said, we should be 
the victim of our adventure--a sacrifice. 

It took us in differ fashion, each accord to the measur of hi 
sensit and power of resistance. I translat it vagu into a 
personif of the mightili disturb elements, invest them with the 
horror of a deliber and malef purpose, resent of our audaci 
intrus into their breeding-place; wherea my friend threw it into the 
unorigin form at first of a trespass on some ancient shrine, some place 
where the old god still held sway, where the emot forc of former 
worshipp still clung, and the ancestr portion of him yield to the 
old pagan spell. 

At ani rate, here wa a place unpollut by men, kept clean by the wind 
from coarsen human influences, a place where spiritu agenc were 
within reach and aggressive. never, befor or since, have I been so 
attack by indescrib suggest of a "beyond region," of anoth 
scheme of life, anoth revolut not parallel to the human. and in the 
end our mind would succumb under the weight of the aw spell, and we 
should be drawn across the frontier into their world. 

small thing testifi to the amaz influenc of the place, and now in 
the silenc round the fire they allow themselv to be note by the mind. 
the veri atmospher had prove itself a magnifi medium to distort everi 
indication: the otter roll in the current, the hurri boatman make 
signs, the shift willows, one and all had been rob of it natur 
character, and reveal in someth of it other aspect--a it exist 
across the border to that other region. and thi chang aspect I felt wa 
now not mere to me, but to the race. the whole experi whose verg we 
touch wa unknown to human at all. It wa a new order of experience, 
and in the true sens of the word unearthly. 

"it' the deliberate, calcul purpos that reduc one' courag to 
zero," the swede said suddenly, as if he had been actual follow my 
thoughts. "otherwis imagin might count for much. but the paddle, the 
canoe, the lessen food--" 

"haven't I explain all that once?" I interrupt viciously. 

"you have," he answer dryly; "you have indeed." 

He made other remark too, as usual, about what he call the "plain 
determin to provid a victim"; but, have now arrang my thought 
better, I recogn that thi wa simpli the cri of hi frighten soul 
against the knowledg that he wa be attack in a vital part, and that 
he would be somehow taken or destroyed. the situat call for a courag 
and calm of reason that neither of us could compass, and I have 
never befor been so clearli consciou of two person in me--th one that 
explain everything, and the other that laugh at such foolish 
explanations, yet wa horribl afraid. 

meanwhile, in the pitchi night the fire die down and the wood pile grew 
small. neither of us move to replenish the stock, and the dark 
consequ came up veri close to our faces. A few feet beyond the circl 
of firelight it wa inki black. occasion a stray puff of wind set the 
willow shiver about us, but apart from thi not veri welcom sound a 
deep and depress silenc reigned, broken onli by the gurgl of the 
river and the hum in the air overhead. 

We both missed, I think, the shout compani of the winds. 

At length, at a moment when a stray puff prolong itself as though the 
wind were about to rise again, I reach the point for me of saturation, 
the point where it wa absolut necessari to find relief in plain speech, 
or els to betray myself by some hyster extravag that must have 
been far wors in it effect upon both of us. I kick the fire into a 
blaze, and turn to my companion abruptly. He look up with a start. 

"I can't disguis it ani longer," I said; "I don't like thi place, and the 
darkness, and the noises, and the aw feel I get. there' someth 
here that beat me utterly. i'm in a blue funk, and that' the plain truth. 
If the other shore was--different, I swear i'd be inclin to swim for it!" 

the swede' face turn veri white beneath the deep tan of sun and wind. He 
stare straight at me and answer quietly, but hi voic betray hi huge 
excit by it unnatur calmness. for the moment, at ani rate, he wa 
the strong man of the two. He wa more phlegmatic, for one thing. 

"it' not a physic condit we can escap from by run away," he 
replied, in the tone of a doctor diagnos some grave disease; "we must 
sit tight and wait. there are forc close here that could kill a herd of 
eleph in a second as easili as you or I could squash a fly. our onli 
chanc is to keep perfectli still. our insignific perhap may save us." 

I put a dozen question into my express of face, but found no words. It 
wa precis like listen to an accur descript of a diseas whose 
symptom had puzzl me. 

"I mean that so far, although awar of our disturb presence, they have 
not found us--not 'located' us, as the american say," he went on. "they'r 
blunder about like men hunt for a leak of gas. the paddl and cano 
and provis prove that. I think they feel us, but cannot actual see 
us. We must keep our mind quiet--it' our mind they feel. We must control 
our thoughts, or it' all up with us." 

"death, you mean?" I stammered, ici with the horror of hi suggestion. 

"worse--bi far," he said. "death, accord to one' belief, mean either 
annihil or releas from the limit of the senses, but it involv 
no chang of character. you don't suddenli alter just becaus the body' 
gone. but thi mean a radic alteration, a complet change, a horribl 
loss of oneself by substitution--far wors than death, and not even 
annihilation. We happen to have camp in a spot where their region touch 
ours, where the veil between ha worn thin"--horrors! he wa use my veri 
own phrase, my actual words--"so that they are awar of our be in their 
neighborhood." 

"but who are aware?" I asked. 

I forgot the shake of the willow in the windless calm, the hum 
overhead, everyth except that I wa wait for an answer that I dread 
more than I can possibl explain. 

He lower hi voic at onc to reply, lean forward a littl over the 
fire, an indefin chang in hi face that made me avoid hi eye and 
look down upon the ground. 

"all my life," he said, "I have been strangely, vividli consciou of 
anoth region--not far remov from our own world in one sense, yet wholli 
differ in kind--wher great thing go on unceasingly, where immens and 
terribl person hurri by, intent on vast purpos compar to which 
earthli affairs, the rise and fall of nations, the destini of empires, 
the fate of armi and continents, are all as dust in the balance; vast 
purposes, I mean, that deal directli with the soul, and not indirectli with 
more express of the soul--" 

"I suggest just now--" I began, seek to stop him, feel as though I 
wa face to face with a madman. but he instantli overbor me with hi 
torrent that had to come. 

"you think," he said, "it is the spirit of the elements, and I thought 
perhap it wa the old gods. but I tell you now it is--neither. these would 
be comprehens entities, for they have relat with men, depend 
upon them for worship or sacrifice, wherea these be who are now about 
us have absolut noth to do with mankind, and it is mere chanc that 
their space happen just at thi spot to touch our own." 

the mere conception, which hi word somehow made so convincing, as I 
listen to them there in the dark still of that lone island, set me 
shake a littl all over. I found it imposs to control my movements. 

"and what do you propose?" I began again. 

"A sacrifice, a victim, might save us by distract them until we could 
get away," he went on, "just as the wolv stop to devour the dog and give 
the sleigh anoth start. but--i see no chanc of ani other victim now." 

I stare blankli at him. the gleam in hi eye wa dreadful. present he 
continued. 




IV 


"it' the willows, of course. the willow mask the others, but the other 
are feel about for us. If we let our mind betray our fear, we'r lost, 
lost utterly." He look at me with an express so calm, so determined, 
so sincere, that I no longer had ani doubt as to hi sanity. He wa as 
sane as ani man ever was. "if we can hold out through the night," he added, 
"we may get off in the daylight unnoticed, or rather, undiscovered." 

"but you realli think a sacrific would--" 

that gong-lik hum came down veri close over our head as I spoke, but 
it wa my friend' scare face that realli stop my mouth. 

"hush!" he whispered, hold up hi hand. "do not mention them more than 
you can help. Do not refer to them by name. To name is to reveal; it is the 
inevit clue, and our onli hope lie in ignor them, in order that 
they may ignor us." 

"even in thought?" He wa extraordinarili agitated. 

"especi in thought. our thought make spiral in their world. We must 
keep them out of our mind at all cost if possible." 

I rake the fire togeth to prevent the dark have everyth it own 
way. I never long for the sun as I long for it then in the aw 
black of that summer night. 

"were you awak all last night?" he went on suddenly. 

"I slept badli a littl after dawn," I repli evasively, tri to follow 
hi instructions, which I knew instinct were true, "but the wind, of 
course--" 

"I know. but the wind won't account for all the noises." 

"then you heard it too?" 

"the multipli countless littl footstep I heard," he said, adding, 
after a moment' hesitation, "and that other sound--" 

"you mean abov the tent, and the press down upon us of someth 
tremendous, gigantic?" 

He nod significantly. 

"it wa like the begin of a sort of inner suffocation?" I said. 

"partly, yes. It seem to me that the weight of the atmospher had been 
altered--had increas enormously, so that we should have been crushed." 

"and that," I went on, determin to have it all out, point upward 
where the gong-lik note hum ceaselessly, rise and fall like wind. 
"what do you make of that?" 

"it' their sound," he whisper gravely. "it' the sound of their world, 
the hum in their region. the divis here is so thin that it leak 
through somehow. but, if you listen carefully, you'll find it' not abov 
so much as around us. it' in the willows. it' the willow themselv 
humming, becaus here the willow have been made symbol of the forc that 
are against us." 

I could not follow exactli what he meant by this, yet the thought and idea 
in my mind were beyond question the thought and idea in his. I realiz 
what he realized, onli with less power of analysi than his. It wa on the 
tip of my tongu to tell him at last about my hallucin of the 
ascend figur and the move bushes, when he suddenli thrust hi face 
again close into mine across the firelight and began to speak in a veri 
earnest whisper. He amaz me by hi calm and pluck, hi appar 
control of the situation. thi man I had for year deem unimaginative, 
stolid! 

"now listen," he said. "the onli thing for us to do is to go on as though 
noth had happened, follow our usual habits, go to bed, and so forth; 
pretend we feel noth and notic nothing. It is a question wholli of the 
mind, and the less we think about them the better our chanc of escape. 
abov all, don't think, for what you think happens!" 

"all right," I manag to reply, simpli breathless with hi word and the 
strang of it all; "all right, i'll try, but tell me one more thing 
first. tell me what you make of those hollow in the ground all about us, 
those sand-funnels?" 

"no!" he cried, forget to whisper in hi excitement. "I dare not, 
simpli dare not, put the thought into words. If you have not guess I am 
glad. don't tri to. they have put it into my mind; tri your hardest to 
prevent their put it into yours." 

He sank hi voic again to a whisper befor he finished, and I did not 
press him to explain. there wa alreadi just about as much horror in me as 
I could hold. the convers came to an end, and we smoke our pipe 
busili in silence. 

then someth happened, someth unimport apparently, as the way is 
when the nerv are in a veri great state of tension, and thi small thing 
for a brief space gave me an entir differ point of view. I chanc to 
look down at my sand-shoe--th sort we use for the canoe--and someth to 
do with the hole at the toe suddenli recal to me the london shop where I 
had bought them, the difficulti the man had in fit me, and other 
detail of the uninterest but practic operation. At once, in it 
train, follow a wholesom view of the modern skeptic world I wa 
accustom to move in at home. I thought of roast beef, and ale, 
motor-cars, policemen, brass bands, and a dozen other thing that 
proclaim the soul of ordinari or utility. the effect wa immedi 
and astonish even to myself. psychologically, I suppose, it wa simpli a 
sudden and violent reaction after the strain of live in an atmospher of 
thing that to the normal conscious must seem imposs and 
incredible. but, whatev the cause, it momentarili lift the spell from 
my heart, and left me for the short space of a minut feel free and 
utterli unafraid. I look up at my friend opposite. 

"you damn old pagan!" I cried, laugh aloud in hi face. "you 
imagin idiot! you superstiti idolater! you--" 

I stop in the middle, seiz anew by the old horror. I tri to smother 
the sound of my voic as someth sacrilegious. the swede, of course, 
heard it too--th strang cri overhead in the darkness--and that sudden 
drop in the air as though someth had come nearer. 

He had turn ashen white under the tan. He stood bolt upright in front of 
the fire, stiff as a rod, stare at me. 

"after that," he said in a sort of helpless, frantic way, "we must go! We 
can't stay now; we must strike camp thi veri instant and go on--down the 
river." 

He wa talking, I saw, quit wildly, hi word dictat by abject 
terror--th terror he had resist so long, but which had caught him at 
last. 

"in the dark?" I exclaimed, shake with fear after my hyster outburst, 
but still realiz our posit better than he did. "sheer madness! the 
river' in flood, and we'v onli got a singl paddle. besides, we onli go 
deeper into their country! there' noth ahead for fifti mile but 
willows, willows, willows!" 

He sat down again in a state of semi-collapse. the positions, by one of 
those kaleidoscop chang natur loves, were suddenli reversed, and the 
control of our forc pass over into my hands. hi mind at last had 
reach the point where it wa begin to weaken. 

"what on earth possess you to do such a thing?" he whisper with the awe 
of genuin terror in hi voic and face. 

I cross round to hi side of the fire. I took both hi hand in mine, 
kneel down besid him and look straight into hi frighten eyes. 

"we'll make one more blaze," I said firmly, "and then turn in for the 
night. At sunris we'll be off full speed for komorn. now, pull yourself 
togeth a bit, and rememb your own advic about not think fear!" 

He said no more, and I saw that he would agre and obey. In some measure, 
too, it wa a sort of relief to get up and make an excurs into the 
dark for more wood. We kept close together, almost touching, grope 
among the bush and along the bank. the hum overhead never ceased, but 
seem to me to grow louder as we increas our distanc from the fire. It 
wa shiveri work! 

We were grub away in the middl of a thickish clump of willow where 
some driftwood from a former flood had caught high among the branches, when 
my bodi wa seiz in a grip that made me half drop upon the sand. It wa 
the swede. He had fallen against me, and wa clutch me for support. I 
heard hi breath come and go in short gasps. 

"look! By my soul!" he whispered, and for the first time in my experi I 
knew what it wa to hear tear of terror in a human voice. He wa point 
to the fire, some fifti feet away. I follow the direct of hi finger, 
and I swear my heart miss a beat. 

there, in front of the dim glow, someth wa moving. 

I saw it through a veil that hung befor my eye like the gauz 
drop-curtain use at the back of a theater--hazili a little. It wa neither 
a human figur nor an animal. To me it gave the strang impress of be 
as larg as sever anim group together, like horses, two or three, 
move slowly. the swede, too, got a similar result, though express it 
differently, for he thought it wa shape and size like a clump of willow 
bushes, round at the top, and move all over upon it surface--"coil 
upon itself like smoke," he said afterwards. 

"I watch it settl downward through the bushes," he sob at me. "look, 
by god! it' come thi way! oh, oh!"--h gave a kind of whistl cry. 
"they'v found us." 

I gave one terrifi glance, which just enabl me to see that the shadowi 
form wa swing toward us through the bushes, and then I collaps 
backward with a crash into the branches. these failed, of course, to 
support my weight, so that with the swede on top of me we fell in a 
struggl heap upon the sand. I realli hardli knew what wa happening. I 
wa consciou onli of a sort of envelop sensat of ici fear that 
pluck the nerv out of their fleshli covering, twist them thi way and 
that, and replac them quivering. My eye were tightli shut; someth in 
my throat choke me; a feel that my conscious wa expanding, 
extend out into space, swiftli gave way to anoth feel that I wa 
lose it altogether, and about to die. 

An acut spasm of pain pass through me, and I wa awar that the swede 
had hold of me in such a way that he hurt me abominably. It wa the way he 
caught at me in falling. 

but it wa the pain, he declar afterwards, that save me; it caus me to 
forget them and think of someth els at the veri instant when they were 
about to find me. It conceal my mind from them at the moment of 
discovery, yet just in time to evad their terribl seiz of me. He 
himself, he says, actual swoon at the same moment, and that wa what 
save him. 

I onli know that at a later date, how long or short is imposs to say, I 
found myself scrambl up out of the slipperi network of willow branches, 
and saw my companion stand in front of me hold out a hand to assist 
me. I stare at him in a daze way, rub the arm he had twist for me. 
noth came to me to say, somehow. 

"I lost conscious for a moment or two," I heard him say. "that' what 
save me. It made me stop think about them." 

"you nearli broke my arm in two," I said, utter my onli connect 
thought at the moment. A numb came over me. 

"that' what save you!" he replied. "between us, we'v manag to set them 
off on a fals tack somewhere. the hum ha ceased. it' gone--for the 
moment at ani rate!" 

A wave of hyster laughter seiz me again, and thi time spread to my 
friend too--great heal gust of shake laughter that brought a 
tremend sens of relief in their train. We made our way back to the fire 
and put the wood on so that it blaze at once. then we saw that the tent 
had fallen over and lay in a tangl heap upon the ground. 

We pick it up, and dure the process trip more than onc and caught 
our feet in sand. 

"it' those sand-funnels," exclaim the swede, when the tent wa up again 
and the firelight lit up the ground for sever yard about us. "and look 
at the size of them!" 

all round the tent and about the fireplac where we had seen the move 
shadow there were deep funnel-shap hollow in the sand, exactli similar 
to the one we had alreadi found over the island, onli far bigger and 
deeper, beauti formed, and wide enough in some instanc to admit the 
whole of my foot and leg. 

neither of us said a word. We both knew that sleep wa the safest thing we 
could do, and to bed we went accordingli without further delay, have 
first thrown sand on the fire and taken the provis sack and the paddl 
insid the tent with us. the canoe, too, we prop in such a way at the 
end of the tent that our feet touch it, and the least motion would 
disturb and wake us. 

In case of emergency, too, we again went to bed in our clothes, readi for a 
sudden start. 

It wa my firm intent to lie awak all night and watch, but the 
exhaust of nerv and bodi decre otherwise, and sleep after a while 
came over me with a welcom blanket of oblivion. the fact that my companion 
also slept quicken it approach. At first he fidget and constantli sat 
up, ask me if I "heard this" or "heard that." He toss about on hi 
cork mattress, and said the tent wa move and the river had risen over 
the point of the island, but each time I went out to look I return with 
the report that all wa well, and final he grew calmer and lay still. 
then at length hi breath becam regular and I heard unmistak sound 
of snoring--th first and onli time in my life when snore ha been a 
welcom and calm influence. 

this, I remember, wa the last thought in my mind befor doze off. 

A difficulti in breath woke me, and I found the blanket over my face. 
but someth els besid the blanket wa press upon me, and my first 
thought wa that my companion had roll off hi mattress on to my own in 
hi sleep. I call to him and sat up, and at the same moment it came to me 
that the tent wa surrounded. that sound of multitudin soft patter 
wa again audibl outside, fill the night with horror. 

I call again to him, louder than before. He did not answer, but I miss 
the sound of hi snoring, and also notic that the flap of the tent wa 
down. thi wa the unpardon sin. I crawl out in the dark to hook 
it back securely, and it wa then for the first time I realiz posit 
that the swede wa not here. He had gone. 

I dash out in a mad run, seiz by a dread agitation, and the moment I 
wa out I plung into a sort of torrent of hum that surround me 
complet and came out of everi quarter of the heaven at once. It wa 
that same familiar humming--gon mad! A swarm of great invis bee might 
have been about me in the air. the sound seem to thicken the veri 
atmosphere, and I felt that my lung work with difficulty. 

but my friend wa in danger, and I could not hesitate. 

the dawn wa just about to break, and a faint whitish light spread upward 
over the cloud from a thin strip of clear horizon. No wind stirred. I 
could just make out the bush and river beyond, and the pale sandi 
patches. In my excit I ran frantic to and fro about the island, 
call him by name, shout at the top of my voic the first word that 
came into my head. but the willow smother my voice, and the hum 
muffl it, so that the sound onli travel a few feet round me. I plung 
among the bushes, trip headlong, tumbl over roots, and scrape my 
face as I tore thi way and that among the prevent branches. 

then, quit unexpectedly, I came out upon the island' point and saw a dark 
figur outlin between the water and the sky. It wa the swede. and 
alreadi he had one foot in the river! A moment more and he would have taken 
the plunge. 

I threw myself upon him, fling my arm about hi waist and drag him 
shoreward with all my strength. Of cours he struggl furiously, make a 
nois all the time just like that curs humming, and use the most 
outlandish phrase in hi anger about "go insid to them," and "take 
the way of the water and the wind," and god onli know what more besides, 
that I tri in vain to recal afterwards, but which turn me sick with 
horror and amaz as I listened. but in the end I manag to get him 
into the compar safeti of the tent, and flung him breathless and 
curs upon the mattress where I held him until the fit had passed. 

I think the sudden with which it all went and he grew calm, coincid 
as it did with the equal abrupt cessat of the hum and patter 
outside--i think thi wa almost the strangest part of the whole busi 
perhaps. for he had just open hi eye and turn hi tire face up to me 
so that the dawn threw a pale light upon it through the doorway, and said, 
for all the world just like a frighten child: 

"mi life, old man--it' my life I owe you. but it' all over now anyhow. 
they'v found a victim in our place!" 

then he drop back upon hi blanket and went to sleep liter under my 
eyes. He simpli collapsed, and began to snore again as healthili as though 
noth had happen and he had never tri to offer hi own life as a 
sacrific by drowning. and when the sunlight woke him three hour 
later--hour of ceaseless vigil for me--it becam so clear to me that he 
rememb absolut noth of what he had attempt to do, that I deem 
it wise to hold my peac and ask no danger questions. 

He woke natur and easily, as I have said, when the sun wa alreadi high 
in a windless hot sky, and he at onc got up and set about the prepar 
of the fire for breakfast. I follow him anxious at bathing, but he did 
not attempt to plung in, mere dip hi head and make some remark 
about the extra cold of the water. 

"river' fall at last," he said, "and i'm glad of it." 

"the hum ha stop too," I said. 

He look up at me quietli with hi normal expression. evid he 
rememb everyth except hi own attempt at suicide. 

"everyth ha stopped," he said, "because--" 

He hesitated. but I knew some refer to that remark he had made just 
befor he faint wa in hi mind, and I wa determin to know it. 

"becaus 'they'v found anoth victim'?" I said, forc a littl laugh. 

"exactly," he answered, "exactly! I feel as posit of it as though--a 
though--i feel quit safe again, I mean," he finished. 

He began to look curious about him. the sunlight lay in hot patch on 
the sand. there wa no wind. the willow were motionless. He slowli rose to 
feet. 

"come," he said; "I think if we look, we shall find it." 

He start off on a run, and I follow him. He kept to the banks, poke 
with a stick among the sandi bay and cave and littl back-waters, myself 
alway close on hi heels. 

"ah!" he exclaim presently, "ah!" 

the tone of hi voic somehow brought back to me a vivid sens of the 
horror of the last twenty-four hours, and I hurri up to join him. He wa 
point with hi stick at a larg black object that lay half in the water 
and half on the sand. It appear to be caught by some twist willow root 
so that the river could not sweep it away. A few hour befor the spot must 
have been under water. 

"see," he said quietly, "the victim that made our escap possible!" 

and when I peer across hi shoulder I saw that hi stick rest on the 
bodi of a man. He turn it over. It wa the corps of a peasant, and the 
face wa hidden in the sand. clearli the man had been drowned, but a few 
hour before, and hi bodi must have been swept down upon our island 
somewher about the hour of the dawn--at the veri time the fit had passed. 

"we must give it a decent burial, you know." 

"I suppos so," I replied. I shudder a littl in spite of myself, for 
there wa someth about the appear of that poor drown man that 
turn me cold. 

the swede glanc up sharpli at me, an undecipher express on hi 
face, and began clamber down the bank. I follow him more leisurely. 
the current, I noticed, had torn away much of the cloth from the body, 
so that the neck and part of the chest lay bare. 

halfway down the bank my companion suddenli stop and held up hi hand in 
warning; but either my foot slipped, or I had gain too much momentum to 
bring myself quickli to a halt, for I bump into him and sent him forward 
with a sort of leap to save himself. We tumbl togeth on to the hard 
sand so that our feet splash into the water. and, befor anyth could 
be done, we had collid a littl heavili against the corpse. 

the swede utter a sharp cry. and I sprang back as if I had been shot. 

At the moment we touch the bodi there rose from it surfac the loud 
sound of humming--th sound of sever hummings--which pass with a vast 
commot as of wing thing in the air about us and disappear upward 
into the sky, grow fainter and fainter till they final ceas in the 
distance. It wa exactli as though we had disturb some live yet 
invis creatur at work. 

My companion clutch me, and I think I clutch him, but befor either of 
us had time properli to recov from the unexpect shock, we saw that a 
movement of the current wa turn the corps round so that it becam 
releas from the grip of the willow roots. A moment later it had turn 
complet over, the dead face uppermost, stare at the sky. It lay on the 
edg of the main stream. In anoth moment it would be swept away. 

the swede start to save it, shout again someth I did not catch 
about a "proper burial"--and then abruptli drop upon hi knee on the 
sand and cover hi eye with hi hands. I wa besid him in an instant. 

I saw what he had seen. 

for just as the bodi swung round to the current the face and the expos 
chest turn full toward us, and show plainli how the skin and flesh 
were indent with small hollows, beauti formed, and exactli similar 
in shape and kind to the sand-funnel that we had found all over the 
island. 

"their mark!" I heard my companion mutter under hi breath. "their aw 
mark!" 

and when I turn my eye again from hi ghastli face to the river, the 
current had done it work, and the bodi had been swept away into mid-stream 
and wa alreadi beyond our reach and almost out of sight, turn over and 
over on the wave like an otter. 





end of the project gutenberg ebook of the willows, by algernon blackwood 

*** end OF thi project gutenberg ebook the willow *** 

***** thi file should be name 11438.txt or 11438.zip ***** 
thi and all associ file of variou format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.net/1/1/4/3/11438/ 

produc by suzann shell, david newman and PG distribut proofread 

updat edit will replac the previou one--th old edit 
will be renamed. 

creat the work from public domain print edit mean that no 
one own a unit state copyright in these works, so the foundat 
(and you!) can copi and distribut it in the unit state without 
permiss and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the gener term of use part of thi license, appli to 
copi and distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a regist trademark, and may not be use if you 
charg for the ebooks, unless you receiv specif permission. If you 
do not charg anyth for copi of thi ebook, compli with the 
rule is veri easy. you may use thi ebook for nearli ani purpos 
such as creation of deriv works, reports, perform and 
research. they may be modifi and print and given away--y may do 
practic anyth with public domain ebooks. redistribut is 
subject to the trademark license, especi commerci 
redistribution. 



*** start: full licens *** 

the full project gutenberg licens 
pleas read thi befor you distribut OR use thi work 

To protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promot the free 
distribut of electron works, by use or distribut thi work 
(or ani other work associ in ani way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agre to compli with all the term of the full project 
gutenberg-tm licens (avail with thi file or onlin at 
http://gutenberg.net/license). 


section 1. gener term of use and redistribut project gutenberg-tm 
electron work 

1.a. By read or use ani part of thi project gutenberg-tm 
electron work, you indic that you have read, understand, agre to 
and accept all the term of thi licens and intellectu properti 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agre to abid by all 
the term of thi agreement, you must ceas use and return or destroy 
all copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in your possession. 
If you paid a fee for obtain a copi of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work and you do not agre to be bound by the 
term of thi agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entiti to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a regist trademark. It may onli be 
use on or associ in ani way with an electron work by peopl who 
agre to be bound by the term of thi agreement. there are a few 
thing that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electron work 
even without compli with the full term of thi agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of thing you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electron work if you follow the term of thi agreement 
and help preserv free futur access to project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compil copyright in the collect of project 
gutenberg-tm electron works. nearli all the individu work in the 
collect are in the public domain in the unit states. If an 
individu work is in the public domain in the unit state and you are 
locat in the unit states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or creat deriv 
work base on the work as long as all refer to project gutenberg 
are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promot free access to electron work by 
freeli share project gutenberg-tm work in complianc with the term of 
thi agreement for keep the project gutenberg-tm name associ with 
the work. you can easili compli with the term of thi agreement by 
keep thi work in the same format with it attach full project 
gutenberg-tm licens when you share it without charg with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are locat also govern 
what you can do with thi work. copyright law in most countri are in 
a constant state of change. If you are outsid the unit states, check 
the law of your countri in addit to the term of thi agreement 
befor downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribut or 
creat deriv work base on thi work or ani other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundat make no represent concern 
the copyright statu of ani work in ani countri outsid the unit 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remov all refer to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the follow sentence, with activ link to, or other immedi 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm licens must appear promin 
whenev ani copi of a project gutenberg-tm work (ani work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copi or distributed: 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.net 

1.e.2. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is deriv 
from the public domain (doe not contain a notic indic that it is 
post with permiss of the copyright holder), the work can be copi 
and distribut to anyon in the unit state without pay ani fee 
or charges. If you are redistribut or provid access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associ with or appear on the 
work, you must compli either with the requir of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permiss for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is post 
with the permiss of the copyright holder, your use and distribut 
must compli with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and ani addit 
term impos by the copyright holder. addit term will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm licens for all work post with the 
permiss of the copyright holder found at the begin of thi work. 

1.e.4. Do not unlink or detach or remov the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens term from thi work, or ani file contain a part of thi 
work or ani other work associ with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribut or redistribut thi 
electron work, or ani part of thi electron work, without 
promin display the sentenc set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
activ link or immedi access to the full term of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribut thi work in ani binary, 
compressed, mark up, nonproprietari or proprietari form, includ ani 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provid access to or 
distribut copi of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the offici version 
post on the offici project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net), 
you must, at no addit cost, fee or expens to the user, provid a 
copy, a mean of export a copy, or a mean of obtain a copi upon 
request, of the work in it origin "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. ani altern format must includ the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens as specifi in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. Do not charg a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copi or distribut ani project gutenberg-tm work 
unless you compli with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charg a reason fee for copi of or provid 
access to or distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work provid 
that 

- you pay a royalti fee of 20% of the gross profit you deriv from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm work calcul use the method 
you alreadi use to calcul your applic taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
ha agre to donat royalti under thi paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literari archiv foundation. royalti payment 
must be paid within 60 day follow each date on which you 
prepar (or are legal requir to prepare) your period tax 
returns. royalti payment should be clearli mark as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat at the 
address specifi in section 4, "inform about donat to 
the project gutenberg literari archiv foundation." 

- you provid a full refund of ani money paid by a user who notifi 
you in write (or by e-mail) within 30 day of receipt that s/he 
doe not agre to the term of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must requir such a user to return or 
destroy all copi of the work possess in a physic medium 
and discontinu all use of and all access to other copi of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accord with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of ani 
money paid for a work or a replac copy, if a defect in the 
electron work is discov and report to you within 90 day 
of receipt of the work. 

- you compli with all other term of thi agreement for free 
distribut of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. If you wish to charg a fee or distribut a project gutenberg-tm 
electron work or group of work on differ term than are set 
forth in thi agreement, you must obtain permiss in write from 
both the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundat as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunt and employe expend consider 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcrib and proofread 
public domain work in creat the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despit these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electron 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limit to, incomplete, inaccur or 
corrupt data, transcript errors, a copyright or other intellectu 
properti infringement, a defect or damag disk or other medium, a 
comput virus, or comput code that damag or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limit warranty, disclaim OF damag - except for the "right 
of replac or refund" describ in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and ani other parti distribut a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work under thi agreement, disclaim all 
liabil to you for damages, cost and expenses, includ legal 
fees. you agre that you have NO remedi for negligence, strict 
liability, breach OF warranti OR breach OF contract except those 
provid IN paragraph f3. you agre that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and ani distributor under thi agreement will not BE 
liabl TO you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punit OR 
incident damag even IF you give notic OF the possibl OF such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limit right OF replac OR refund - If you discov a 
defect in thi electron work within 90 day of receiv it, you can 
receiv a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explan to the person you receiv the work from. If you 
receiv the work on a physic medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entiti that provid you with 
the defect work may elect to provid a replac copi in lieu of a 
refund. If you receiv the work electronically, the person or entiti 
provid it to you may choos to give you a second opportun to 
receiv the work electron in lieu of a refund. If the second copi 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in write without further 
opportun to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limit right of replac or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, thi work is provid to you 'as-is' with NO other 
warranti OF ani kind, express OR implied, includ but not limit TO 
warranti OF merchant OR fit for ani purpose. 

1.f.5. some state do not allow disclaim of certain impli 
warranti or the exclus or limit of certain type of damages. 
If ani disclaim or limit set forth in thi agreement violat the 
law of the state applic to thi agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaim or limit permit by 
the applic state law. the invalid or unenforc of ani 
provis of thi agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemn - you agre to indemnifi and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, ani agent or employe of the foundation, anyon 
provid copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in accord 
with thi agreement, and ani volunt associ with the production, 
promot and distribut of project gutenberg-tm electron works, 
harmless from all liability, cost and expenses, includ legal fees, 
that aris directli or indirectli from ani of the follow which you do 
or caus to occur: (a) distribut of thi or ani project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addit or delet to ani 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) ani defect you cause. 


section 2. inform about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonym with the free distribut of 
electron work in format readabl by the widest varieti of comput 
includ obsolete, old, middle-ag and new computers. It exist 
becaus of the effort of hundr of volunt and donat from 
peopl in all walk of life. 

volunt and financi support to provid volunt with the 
assist they need, is critic to reach project gutenberg-tm' 
goal and ensur that the project gutenberg-tm collect will 
remain freeli avail for gener to come. In 2001, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundat wa creat to provid a secur 
and perman futur for project gutenberg-tm and futur generations. 
To learn more about the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat 
and how your effort and donat can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundat web page at http://www.pglaf.org. 


section 3. inform about the project gutenberg literari archiv 
foundat 

the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educ corpor organ under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt statu by the intern 
revenu service. the foundation' ein or feder tax identif 
number is 64-6221541. it 501(c)(3) letter is post at 
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contribut to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. feder law and your state' laws. 

the foundation' princip offic is locat at 4557 melan dr. S. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but it volunt and employe are scatter 
throughout numer locations. it busi offic is locat at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact link and up to date contact 
inform can be found at the foundation' web site and offici 
page at http://pglaf.org 

for addit contact information: 
dr. gregori B. newbi 
chief execut and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 

section 4. inform about donat to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot surviv without wide 
spread public support and donat to carri out it mission of 
increas the number of public domain and licens work that can be 
freeli distribut in machin readabl form access by the widest 
array of equip includ outdat equipment. mani small donat 
($1 to $5,000) are particularli import to maintain tax exempt 
statu with the irs. 

the foundat is commit to compli with the law regul 
chariti and charit donat in all 50 state of the unit 
states. complianc requir are not uniform and it take a 
consider effort, much paperwork and mani fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. We do not solicit donat in locat 
where we have not receiv written confirm of compliance. To 
send donat or determin the statu of complianc for ani 
particular state visit http://pglaf.org 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribut from state where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibit 
against accept unsolicit donat from donor in such state who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

intern donat are grate accepted, but we cannot make 
ani statement concern tax treatment of donat receiv from 
outsid the unit states. u.s. law alon swamp our small staff. 

pleas check the project gutenberg web page for current donat 
method and addresses. donat are accept in a number of other 
way includ includ checks, onlin payment and credit card 
donations. To donate, pleas visit: http://pglaf.org/don 


section 5. gener inform about project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. 

professor michael S. hart is the origin of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a librari of electron work that could be freeli share 
with anyone. for thirti years, he produc and distribut project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with onli a loos network of volunt support. 

project gutenberg-tm ebook are often creat from sever print 
editions, all of which are confirm as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notic is included. thus, we do not necessarili 
keep ebook in complianc with ani particular paper edition. 

each ebook is in a subdirectori of the same number as the ebook' 
ebook number, often in sever format includ plain vanilla ascii, 
compress (zipped), html and others. 

correct edit of our ebook replac the old file and take over 
the old filenam and etext number. the replac older file is renamed. 
version base on separ sourc are treat as new ebook receiv 
new filenam and etext numbers. 

most peopl start at our web site which ha the main PG search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.net 

thi web site includ inform about project gutenberg-tm, 
includ how to make donat to the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundation, how to help produc our new ebooks, and how to 
subscrib to our email newslett to hear about new ebooks. 

ebook post prior to novemb 2003, with ebook number below #10000, 
are file in directori base on their releas date. If you want to 
download ani of these ebook directly, rather than use the regular 
search system you may util the follow address and just 
download by the etext year. 

http://www.gutenberg.net/etext06 

(or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99, 
98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90) 

ebook post sinc novemb 2003, with etext number over #10000, are 
file in a differ way. the year of a releas date is no longer part 
of the directori path. the path is base on the etext number (which is 
ident to the filename). the path to the file is made up of singl 
digit correspond to all but the last digit in the filename. for 
exampl an ebook of filenam 10234 would be found at: 

http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/2/3/10234 

or filenam 24689 would be found at: 
http://www.gutenberg.net/2/4/6/8/24689 

An altern method of locat ebooks: 
http://www.gutenberg.net/gutindex.al 

