project gutenberg' the hous on the borderland, by william hope hodgson 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.net 


title: the hous on the borderland 

author: william hope hodgson 

releas date: novemb 10, 2003 [ebook #10002] 
last updated: januari 19, 2009 

language: english 


*** start OF thi project gutenberg ebook the hous ON the borderland *** 




produc by suzann shell, sjaani and PG distribut proofread 




the hous ON the borderland 

william hope hodgson 


_from the manuscript discov in 1877 by messrs. tonnison and 
berreggnog in the ruin that lie to the south of the villag of 
kraighten, in the west of ireland. set out here, with notes_. 


TO MY father 
_(whose feet tread the lost aeons)_ 

open the door, 
and listen! 
onli the wind' muffl roar, 
and the glisten 
Of tear 'round the moon. 
and, in fancy, the tread 
Of vanish shoon-- 
out in the night with the dead. 

"hush! and hark 
To the sorrow cri 
Of the wind in the dark. 
hush and hark, without murmur or sigh, 
To shoon that tread the lost aeons: 
To the sound that bid you to die. 
hush and hark! hush and hark!" 
_shoon of the dead_ 




author' introduct TO the manuscript 

mani are the hour in which I have ponder upon the stori that is set 
forth in the follow pages. I trust that my instinct are not awri 
when they prompt me to leav the account, in simplicity, as it wa 
hand to me. 

and the ms. itself--y must pictur me, when first it wa given into my 
care, turn it over, curiously, and make a swift, jerki examination. 
A small book it is; but thick, and all, save the last few pages, fill 
with a quaint but legibl handwriting, and writ veri close. I have the 
queer, faint, pit-wat smell of it in my nostril now as I write, and 
my finger have subconsci memori of the soft, "cloggy" feel of the 
long-damp pages. 

I read, and, in reading, lift the curtain of the imposs that 
blind the mind, and look out into the unknown. amid stiff, abrupt 
sentenc I wandered; and, presently, I had no fault to charg against 
their abrupt tellings; for, better far than my own ambiti phrasing, 
is thi mutil stori capabl of bring home all that the old 
recluse, of the vanish house, had striven to tell. 

Of the simple, stiffli given account of weird and extraordinari matters, 
I will say little. It lie befor you. the inner stori must be uncovered, 
personally, by each reader, accord to abil and desire. and even 
should ani fail to see, as now I see, the shadow pictur and concept 
of that to which one may well give the accept titl of heaven and hell; 
yet can I promis certain thrills, mere take the stori as a story. 

william hope hodgson decemb 17, 1907 



_i_ 

the find OF the manuscript 

right away in the west of ireland lie a tini hamlet call kraighten. 
It is situated, alone, at the base of a low hill. far around there 
spread a wast of bleak and total inhospit country; where, here 
and there at great intervals, one may come upon the ruin of some long 
desol cottage--unthatch and stark. the whole land is bare and 
unpeopled, the veri earth scarc cover the rock that lie beneath 
it, and with which the countri abounds, in place rise out of the soil 
in wave-shap ridges. 

yet, in spite of it desolation, my friend tonnison and I had elect to 
spend our vacat there. He had stumbl on the place by mere chanc 
the year previously, dure the cours of a long walk tour, and 
discov the possibl for the angler in a small and unnam river 
that run past the outskirt of the littl village. 

I have said that the river is without name; I may add that no map that I 
have hitherto consult ha shown either villag or stream. they seem 
to have entir escap observation: indeed, they might never exist for 
all that the averag guid tell one. possibl thi can be partli 
account for by the fact that the nearest railway station (ardrahan) is 
some forti mile distant. 

It wa earli one warm even when my friend and I arriv in kraighten. 
We had reach ardrahan the previou night, sleep there in room 
hire at the villag post office, and leav in good time on the 
follow morning, cling insecur to one of the typic 
jaunt cars. 

It had taken us all day to accomplish our journey over some of the 
roughest track imaginable, with the result that we were thoroughli 
tire and somewhat bad tempered. however, the tent had to be erect and 
our good stow away befor we could think of food or rest. and so we 
set to work, with the aid of our driver, and soon had the tent up upon a 
small patch of ground just outsid the littl village, and quit near to 
the river. 

then, have store all our belongings, we dismiss the driver, as he 
had to make hi way back as speedili as possible, and told him to come 
across to us at the end of a fortnight. We had brought suffici 
provis to last us for that space of time, and water we could get 
from the stream. fuel we did not need, as we had includ a small 
oil-stov among our outfit, and the weather wa fine and warm. 

It wa tonnison' idea to camp out instead of get lodg in one of 
the cottages. As he put it, there wa no joke in sleep in a room with 
a numer famili of healthi irish in one corner and the pigsti in the 
other, while overhead a rag coloni of roost fowl distribut 
their bless impartially, and the whole place so full of peat smoke 
that it made a fellow sneez hi head off just to put it insid 
the doorway. 

tonnison had got the stove lit now and wa busi cut slice of bacon 
into the fri pan; so I took the kettl and walk down to the river 
for water. On the way, I had to pass close to a littl group of the 
villag people, who eye me curiously, but not in ani unfriendli manner, 
though none of them ventur a word. 

As I return with my kettl filled, I went up to them and, after a 
friendli nod, to which they repli in like manner, I ask them 
casual about the fishing; but, instead of answering, they just shook 
their head silently, and stare at me. I repeat the question, 
address more particularli a great, gaunt fellow at my elbow; yet 
again I receiv no answer. then the man turn to a comrad and said 
someth rapidli in a languag that I did not understand; and, at once, 
the whole crowd of them fell to jabber in what, after a few moments, 
I guess to be pure irish. At the same time they cast mani glanc in 
my direction. for a minute, perhaps, they spoke among themselv thus; 
then the man I had address face 'round at me and said something. By 
the express of hi face I guess that he, in turn, wa question 
me; but now I had to shake my head, and indic that I did not 
comprehend what it wa they want to know; and so we stood look at 
one another, until I heard tonnison call to me to hurri up with the 
kettle. then, with a smile and a nod, I left them, and all in the littl 
crowd smile and nod in return, though their face still betray 
their puzzlement. 

It wa evident, I reflect as I went toward the tent, that the 
inhabit of these few hut in the wilder did not know a word of 
english; and when I told tonnison, he remark that he wa awar of the 
fact, and, more, that it wa not at all uncommon in that part of the 
country, where the peopl often live and die in their isol hamlet 
without ever come in contact with the outsid world. 

"I wish we had got the driver to interpret for us befor he left," I 
remarked, as we sat down to our meal. "it seem so strang for the 
peopl of thi place not even to know what we'v come for." 

tonnison grunt an assent, and thereaft wa silent for a while. 

later, have satisfi our appetit somewhat, we began to talk, lay 
our plan for the morrow; then, after a smoke, we close the flap of the 
tent, and prepar to turn in. 

"I suppos there' no chanc of those fellow outsid take anything?" 
I asked, as we roll ourselv in our blankets. 

tonnison said that he did not think so, at least while we were about; 
and, as he went on to explain, we could lock up everything, except the 
tent, in the big chest that we had brought to hold our provisions. I 
agre to this, and soon we were both asleep. 

next morning, early, we rose and went for a swim in the river; after 
which we dress and had breakfast. then we rous out our fish 
tackl and overhaul it, by which time, our breakfast have settl 
somewhat, we made all secur within the tent and strode off in the 
direct my friend had explor on hi previou visit. 

dure the day we fish happily, work steadili upstream, and by 
even we had one of the prettiest creel of fish that I had seen for a 
long while. return to the village, we made a good feed off our day' 
spoil, after which, have select a few of the finer fish for our 
breakfast, we present the remaind to the group of villag who had 
assembl at a respect distanc to watch our doings. they seem 
wonder grateful, and heap mountain of what I presum to be 
irish bless upon our heads. 

thu we spent sever days, have splendid sport, and first-rat 
appetit to do justic upon our prey. We were pleas to find how 
friendli the villag were inclin to be, and that there wa no 
evid of their have ventur to meddl with our belong dure 
our absences. 

It wa on a tuesday that we arriv in kraighten, and it would be on the 
sunday follow that we made a great discovery. hitherto we had alway 
gone up-stream; on that day, however, we laid asid our rods, and, 
take some provisions, set off for a long rambl in the opposit 
direction. the day wa warm, and we trudg along leisur enough, 
stop about mid-day to eat our lunch upon a great flat rock near the 
riverbank. afterward we sat and smoke awhile, resum our walk onli 
when we were tire of inaction. 

for perhap anoth hour we wander onward, chat quietli and 
comfort on thi and that matter, and on sever occas stop 
while my companion--who is someth of an artist--mad rough sketch 
of strike bit of the wild scenery. 

and then, without ani warn whatsoever, the river we had follow so 
confidently, came to an abrupt end--vanish into the earth. 

"good lord!" I said, "who ever would have thought of this?" 

and I stare in amazement; then I turn to tonnison. He wa looking, 
with a blank express upon hi face, at the place where the river 
disappeared. 

In a moment he spoke. 

"let us go on a bit; it may reappear again--anyhow, it is worth 
investigating." 

I agreed, and we went forward onc more, though rather aimlessly; for we 
were not at all certain in which direct to prosecut our search. for 
perhap a mile we move onward; then tonnison, who had been gaze about 
curiously, stop and shade hi eyes. 

"see!" he said, after a moment, "isn't that mist or something, over 
there to the right--away in a line with that great piec of rock?" and 
he indic with hi hand. 

I stared, and, after a minute, seem to see something, but could not be 
certain, and said so. 

"anyway," my friend replied, "we'll just go across and have a glance." 
and he start off in the direct he had suggested, I following. 
presently, we came among bushes, and, after a time, out upon the top of 
a high, boulder-strewn bank, from which we look down into a wilder 
of bush and trees. 

"seem as though we had come upon an oasi in thi desert of stone," 
mutter tonnison, as he gaze interestedly. then he wa silent, hi 
eye fixed; and I look also; for up from somewher about the center of 
the wood lowland there rose high into the quiet air a great column of 
hazelik spray, upon which the sun shone, caus innumer rainbows. 

"how beautiful!" I exclaimed. 

"yes," answer tonnison, thoughtfully. "there must be a waterfall, or 
something, over there. perhap it' our river come to light again. let' 
go and see." 

down the slope bank we made our way, and enter among the tree and 
shrubberies. the bush were matted, and the tree overhung us, so that 
the place wa disagre gloomy; though not dark enough to hide from 
me the fact that mani of the tree were fruit trees, and that, here and 
there, one could trace indistinctly, sign of a long depart 
cultivation. thu it came to me that we were make our way through the 
riot of a great and ancient garden. I said as much to tonnison, and he 
agre that there certainli seem reason ground for my belief. 

what a wild place it was, so dismal and somber! somehow, as we went 
forward, a sens of the silent loneli and desert of the old 
garden grew upon me, and I felt shivery. one could imagin thing 
lurk among the tangl bushes; while, in the veri air of the place, 
there seem someth uncanny. I think tonnison wa consciou of thi 
also, though he said nothing. 

suddenly, we came to a halt. through the tree there had grown upon our 
ear a distant sound. tonnison bent forward, listening. I could hear it 
more plainli now; it wa continu and harsh--a sort of drone roar, 
seem to come from far away. I experienc a queer, indescribable, 
littl feel of nervousness. what sort of place wa it into which we 
had got? I look at my companion, to see what he thought of the matter; 
and note that there wa onli puzzlement in hi face; and then, as I 
watch hi features, an express of comprehens crept over them, 
and he nod hi head. 

"that' a waterfall," he exclaimed, with conviction. "I know the sound 
now." and he began to push vigor through the bushes, in the 
direct of the noise. 

As we went forward, the sound becam plainer continually, show that 
we were head straight toward it. steadily, the roar grew louder 
and nearer, until it appeared, as I remark to tonnison, almost to come 
from under our feet--and still we were surround by the tree 
and shrubs. 

"take care!" tonnison call to me. "look where you'r going." and then, 
suddenly, we came out from among the trees, on to a great open space, 
where, not six pace in front of us, yawn the mouth of a tremend 
chasm, from the depth of which the nois appear to rise, along with 
the continuous, mistlik spray that we had wit from the top of the 
distant bank. 

for quit a minut we stood in silence, stare in bewilder at the 
sight; then my friend went forward cautious to the edg of the abyss. 
I followed, and, together, we look down through a boil of spray at a 
monster cataract of froth water that burst, spouting, from the side 
of the chasm, nearli a hundr feet below. 

"good lord!" said tonnison. 

I wa silent, and rather awed. the sight wa so unexpectedli grand and 
eerie; though thi latter qualiti came more upon me later. 

presently, I look up and across to the further side of the chasm. 
there, I saw someth tower up among the spray: it look like a 
fragment of a great ruin, and I touch tonnison on the shoulder. He 
glanc 'round, with a start, and I point toward the thing. hi gaze 
follow my finger, and hi eye light up with a sudden flash of 
excitement, as the object came within hi field of view. 

"come along," he shout abov the uproar. "we'll have a look at it. 
there' someth queer about thi place; I feel it in my bones." and he 
start off, 'round the edg of the craterlik abyss. As we near thi 
new thing, I saw that I had not been mistaken in my first impression. It 
wa undoubtedli a portion of some ruin building; yet now I made out 
that it wa not built upon the edg of the chasm itself, as I had at 
first supposed; but perch almost at the extrem end of a huge spur of 
rock that jut out some fifti or sixti feet over the abyss. In fact, 
the jag mass of ruin wa liter suspend in midair. 

arriv opposit it, we walk out on to the project arm of rock, 
and I must confess to have felt an intoler sens of terror as I 
look down from that dizzi perch into the unknown depth below us--into 
the deep from which there rose ever the thunder of the fall water 
and the shroud of rise spray. 

reach the ruin, we clamber 'round it cautiously, and, on the 
further side, came upon a mass of fallen stone and rubble. the ruin 
itself seem to me, as I proceed now to examin it minutely, to be a 
portion of the outer wall of some prodigi structure, it wa so thick 
and substanti built; yet what it wa do in such a posit I 
could by no mean conjecture. where wa the rest of the house, or 
castle, or whatev there had been? 

I went back to the outer side of the wall, and thenc to the edg of the 
chasm, leav tonnison root systemat among the heap of stone 
and rubbish on the outer side. then I commenc to examin the surfac 
of the ground, near the edg of the abyss, to see whether there were not 
left other remnant of the build to which the fragment of ruin 
evid belonged. but though I scrutin the earth with the greatest 
care, I could see no sign of anyth to show that there had ever been 
a build erect on the spot, and I grew more puzzl than ever. 

then, I heard a cri from tonnison; he wa shout my name, excitedly, 
and without delay I hurri along the rocki promontori to the ruin. I 
wonder whether he had hurt himself, and then the thought came, that 
perhap he had found something. 

I reach the crumbl wall and climb 'round. there I found tonnison 
stand within a small excav that he had made among the _débris_: 
he wa brush the dirt from someth that look like a book, much 
crumpl and dilapidated; and open hi mouth, everi second or two, to 
bellow my name. As soon as he saw that I had come, he hand hi prize 
to me, tell me to put it into my satchel so as to protect it from the 
damp, while he continu hi explorations. thi I did, first, however, 
run the page through my fingers, and note that they were close 
fill with neat, old-fashion write which wa quit legible, save in 
one portion, where mani of the page were almost destroyed, be 
muddi and crumpled, as though the book had been doubl back at that 
part. this, I found out from tonnison, wa actual as he had discov 
it, and the damag wa due, probably, to the fall of masonri upon the 
open part. curious enough, the book wa fairli dry, which I 
attribut to it have been so secur buri among the ruins. 

have put the volum away safely, I turned-to and gave tonnison a hand 
with hi self-impos task of excavating; yet, though we put in over an 
hour' hard work, turn over the whole of the upheap stone and 
rubbish, we came upon noth more than some fragment of broken wood, 
that might have been part of a desk or table; and so we gave up 
searching, and went back along the rock, onc more to the safeti of 
the land. 

the next thing we did wa to make a complet tour of the tremend 
chasm, which we were abl to observ wa in the form of an almost 
perfect circle, save for where the ruin-crown spur of rock jut out, 
spoil it symmetry. 

the abyss was, as tonnison put it, like noth so much as a gigant 
well or pit go sheer down into the bowel of the earth. 

for some time longer, we continu to stare about us, and then, notic 
that there wa a clear space away to the north of the chasm, we bent our 
step in that direction. 

here, distant from the mouth of the mighti pit by some hundr of 
yards, we came upon a great lake of silent water--silent, that is, save 
in one place where there wa a continu bubbl and gurgling. 

now, be away from the nois of the spout cataract, we were abl to 
hear one anoth speak, without have to shout at the top of our 
voices, and I ask tonnison what he thought of the place--i told him 
that I didn't like it, and that the sooner we were out of it the better 
I should be pleased. 

He nod in reply, and glanc at the wood behind furtively. I ask 
him if he had seen or heard anything. He made no answer; but stood 
silent, as though listening, and I kept quiet also. 

suddenly, he spoke. 

"hark!" he said, sharply. I look at him, and then away among the tree 
and bushes, hold my breath involuntarily. A minut came and went in 
strain silence; yet I could hear nothing, and I turn to tonnison to 
say as much; and then, even as I open my lip to speak, there came a 
strang wail nois out of the wood on our left.... It appear to 
float through the trees, and there wa a rustl of stir leaves, and 
then silence. 

all at once, tonnison spoke, and put hi hand on my shoulder. "let us 
get out of here," he said, and began to move slowli toward where the 
surround tree and bush seem thinnest. As I follow him, it came 
to me suddenli that the sun wa low, and that there wa a raw sens of 
chilli in the air. 

tonnison said noth further, but kept on steadily. We were among the 
tree now, and I glanc around, nervously; but saw nothing, save the 
quiet branch and trunk and the tangl bushes. onward we went, and no 
sound broke the silence, except the occasion snap of a twig under 
our feet, as we move forward. yet, in spite of the quietness, I had a 
horribl feel that we were not alone; and I kept so close to tonnison 
that twice I kick hi heel clumsily, though he said nothing. A 
minute, and then another, and we reach the confin of the wood come 
out at last upon the bare rocki of the countryside. onli then wa I 
abl to shake off the haunt dread that had follow me among 
the trees. 

once, as we move away, there seem to come again a distant sound of 
wailing, and I said to myself that it wa the wind--yet the even wa 
breathless. 

presently, tonnison began to talk. 

"look you," he said with decision, "I would not spend the night in 
_that_ place for all the wealth that the world holds. there is someth 
unholy--diabolical--about it. It came to me all in a moment, just after 
you spoke. It seem to me that the wood were full of vile 
things--you know!" 

"yes," I answered, and look back toward the place; but it wa hidden 
from us by a rise in the ground. 

"there' the book," I said, and I put my hand into the satchel. 

"you'v got it safely?" he questioned, with a sudden access of anxiety. 

"yes," I replied. 

"perhaps," he continued, "we shall learn someth from it when we get 
back to the tent. We had better hurry, too; we'r a long way off still, 
and I don't fancy, now, be caught out here in the dark." 

It wa two hour later when we reach the tent; and, without delay, we 
set to work to prepar a meal; for we had eaten noth sinc our lunch 
at midday. 

supper over, we clear the thing out of the way, and lit our pipes. 
then tonnison ask me to get the manuscript out of my satchel. thi I 
did, and then, as we could not both read from it at the same time, he 
suggest that I should read the thing out loud. "and mind," he 
cautioned, know my propensities, "don't go skip half the book." 

yet, had he but known what it contained, he would have realiz how 
needless such advic was, for onc at least. and there seat in the 
open of our littl tent, I began the strang tale of _the hous on 
the borderland_ (for such wa the titl of the ms.); thi is told in the 
follow pages. 



_ii_ 

the plain OF silenc 

I am an old man. I live here in thi ancient house, surround by huge, 
unkempt gardens. 

the peasantry, who inhabit the wilder beyond, say that I am mad. 
that is becaus I will have noth to do with them. I live here alon 
with my old sister, who is also my housekeeper. We keep no servants--i 
hate them. I have one friend, a dog; yes, I would sooner have old pepper 
than the rest of creation together. he, at least, understand me--and 
ha sens enough to leav me alon when I am in my dark moods. 

I have decid to start a kind of diary; it may enabl me to record 
some of the thought and feel that I cannot express to anyone; but, 
beyond this, I am anxiou to make some record of the strang thing that 
I have heard and seen, dure mani year of loneliness, in thi weird 
old building. 

for a coupl of centuries, thi hous ha had a reputation, a bad one, 
and, until I bought it, for more than eighti year no one had live 
here; consequently, I got the old place at a ridicul low figure. 

I am not superstitious; but I have ceas to deni that thing happen 
in thi old house--th that I cannot explain; and, therefore, I must 
need eas my mind, by write down an account of them, to the best of 
my ability; though, should this, my diary, ever be read when I am gone, 
the reader will but shake their heads, and be the more convinc that 
I wa mad. 

thi house, how ancient it is! though it age strike one less, 
perhaps, than the quaint of it structure, which is curiou and 
fantast to the last degree. littl curv tower and pinnacles, with 
outlin suggest of leap flames, predominate; while the bodi of 
the build is in the form of a circle. 

I have heard that there is an old story, told amongst the countri 
people, to the effect that the devil built the place. however, that is 
as may be. true or not, I neither know nor care, save as it may have 
help to cheapen it, ere I came. 

I must have been here some ten year befor I saw suffici to warrant 
ani belief in the stories, current in the neighborhood, about thi 
house. It is true that I had, on at least a dozen occasions, seen, 
vaguely, thing that puzzl me, and, perhaps, had felt more than I had 
seen. then, as the year passed, bring age upon me, I becam often 
awar of someth unseen, yet unmistak present, in the empti room 
and corridors. still, it wa as I have said mani year befor I saw ani 
real manifest of the so-cal supernatural. 

It wa not halloween. If I were tell a stori for amusement' sake, I 
should probabl place it on that night of nights; but thi is a true 
record of my own experiences, and I would not put pen to paper to amus 
anyone. no. It wa after midnight on the morn of the twenty-first day 
of january. I wa sit reading, as is often my custom, in my study. 
pepper lay, sleeping, near my chair. 

without warning, the flame of the two candl went low, and then 
shone with a ghastli green effulgence. I look up, quickly, and as I 
did so I saw the light sink into a dull, ruddi tint; so that the room 
glow with a strange, heavy, crimson twilight that gave the shadow 
behind the chair and tabl a doubl depth of blackness; and wherev 
the light struck, it wa as though lumin blood had been splash 
over the room. 

down on the floor, I heard a faint, frighten whimper, and someth 
press itself in between my two feet. It wa pepper, cower under my 
dress gown. pepper, usual as brave as a lion! 

It wa thi movement of the dog's, I think, that gave me the first 
twing of _real_ fear. I had been consider startl when the light 
burnt first green and then red; but had been momentarili under the 
impress that the chang wa due to some influx of noxiou ga into 
the room. now, however, I saw that it wa not so; for the candl burn 
with a steadi flame, and show no sign of go out, as would have 
been the case had the chang been due to fume in the atmosphere. 

I did not move. I felt distinctli frightened; but could think of 
noth better to do than wait. for perhap a minute, I kept my glanc 
about the room, nervously. then I notic that the light had commenc 
to sink, veri slowly; until present they show minut speck of red 
fire, like the gleam of rubi in the darkness. still, I sat 
watching; while a sort of dreami indiffer seem to steal over me; 
banish altogeth the fear that had begun to grip me. 

away in the far end of the huge old-fashion room, I becam consciou 
of a faint glow. steadili it grew, fill the room with gleam of 
quiver green light; then they sank quickly, and changed--even as the 
candl flame had done--into a deep, somber crimson that strengthened, 
and lit up the room with a flood of aw glory. 

the light came from the end wall, and grew ever brighter until it 
intoler glare caus my eye acut pain, and involuntarili I close 
them. It may have been a few second befor I wa abl to open them. the 
first thing I notic wa that the light had decreased, greatly; so that 
it no longer tri my eyes. then, as it grew still duller, I wa aware, 
all at once, that, instead of look at the redness, I wa stare 
through it, and through the wall beyond. 

gradually, as I becam more accustom to the idea, I realiz that I 
wa look out on to a vast plain, lit with the same gloomi twilight 
that pervad the room. the immens of thi plain scarc can be 
conceived. In no part could I perceiv it confines. It seem to 
broaden and spread out, so that the eye fail to perceiv ani 
limitations. slowly, the detail of the nearer portion began to grow 
clear; then, in a moment almost, the light die away, and the vision--if 
vision it were--fad and wa gone. 

suddenly, I becam consciou that I wa no longer in the chair. 
instead, I seem to be hover abov it, and look down at a dim 
something, huddl and silent. In a littl while, a cold blast struck 
me, and I wa outsid in the night, floating, like a bubble, up through 
the darkness. As I moved, an ici cold seem to enfold me, so that 
I shivered. 

after a time, I look to right and left, and saw the intoler 
black of the night, pierc by remot gleam of fire. onward, 
outward, I drove. once, I glanc behind, and saw the earth, a small 
crescent of blue light, reced away to my left. further off, the sun, 
a splash of white flame, burn vividli against the dark. 

An indefinit period passed. then, for the last time, I saw the 
earth--an endur globul of radiant blue, swim in an etern of 
ether. and there I, a fragil flake of soul dust, flicker silent 
across the void, from the distant blue, into the expans of the unknown. 

A great while seem to pass over me, and now I could nowher see 
anything. I had pass beyond the fix star and plung into the huge 
black that wait beyond. all thi time I had experienc little, 
save a sens of light and cold discomfort. now howev the atroci 
dark seem to creep into my soul, and I becam fill with fear and 
despair. what wa go to becom of me? where wa I going? even as the 
thought were formed, there grew against the impalp black that 
wrap me a faint ting of blood. It seem extraordinarili remote, and 
mistlike; yet, at once, the feel of oppress wa lightened, and I 
no longer despaired. 

slowly, the distant red becam plainer and larger; until, as I drew 
nearer, it spread out into a great, somber glare--dul and tremendous. 
still, I fled onward, and, presently, I had come so close, that it 
seem to stretch beneath me, like a great ocean of somber red. I could 
see little, save that it appear to spread out intermin in all 
directions. 

In a further space, I found that I wa descend upon it; and, soon, I 
sank into a great sea of sullen, red-hu clouds. slowly, I emerg from 
these, and there, below me, I saw the stupend plain that I had seen 
from my room in thi hous that stand upon the border of the silences. 

presently, I landed, and stood, surround by a great wast of 
loneliness. the place wa lit with a gloomi twilight that gave an 
impress of indescrib desolation. 

afar to my right, within the sky, there burnt a gigant ring of 
dull-r fire, from the outer edg of which were project huge, 
writh flames, dart and jagged. the interior of thi ring wa 
black, black as the gloom of the outer night. I comprehended, at once, 
that it wa from thi extraordinari sun that the place deriv it 
dole light. 

from that strang sourc of light, I glanc down again to my 
surroundings. everywher I looked, I saw noth but the same flat 
weari of intermin plain. nowher could I descri ani sign of 
life; not even the ruin of some ancient habitation. 

gradually, I found that I wa be born forward, float across the 
flat waste. for what seem an eternity, I move onward. I wa unawar 
of ani great sens of impatience; though some curios and a vast 
wonder were with me continually. always, I saw around me the breadth of 
that enorm plain; and, always, I search for some new thing to break 
it monotony; but there wa no change--onli loneliness, silence, 
and desert. 

presently, in a half-consci manner, I notic that there wa a faint 
mistiness, ruddi in hue, lie over it surface. still, when I look 
more intently, I wa unabl to say that it wa realli mist; for it 
appear to blend with the plain, give it a peculiar unrealness, and 
convey to the sens the idea of unsubstantiality. 

gradually, I began to weari with the same of the thing. yet, it wa 
a great time befor I perceiv ani sign of the place, toward which I 
wa be conveyed. 

"at first, I saw it, far ahead, like a long hillock on the surfac of 
the plain. then, as I drew nearer, I perceiv that I had been mistaken; 
for, instead of a low hill, I made out, now, a chain of great mountains, 
whose distant peak tower up into the red gloom, until they were 
almost lost to sight." 



_iii_ 

the hous IN the arena 

and so, after a time, I came to the mountains. then, the cours of my 
journey wa altered, and I began to move along their bases, until, all 
at once, I saw that I had come opposit to a vast rift, open into the 
mountains. through this, I wa borne, move at no great speed. On 
either side of me, huge, scarp wall of rocklik substanc rose sheer. 
far overhead, I discern a thin ribbon of red, where the mouth of the 
chasm opened, among inaccess peaks. within, wa gloom, deep and 
somber, and chilli silence. for a while, I went onward steadily, and 
then, at last, I saw, ahead, a deep, red glow, that told me I wa near 
upon the further open of the gorge. 

A minut came and went, and I wa at the exit of the chasm, stare out 
upon an enorm amphitheatr of mountains. yet, of the mountains, and 
the terribl grandeur of the place, I reck nothing; for I wa 
confound with amaz to behold, at a distanc of sever mile and 
occupi the center of the arena, a stupend structur built 
appar of green jade. yet, in itself, it wa not the discoveri of 
the build that had so astonish me; but the fact, which becam everi 
moment more apparent, that in no particular, save in color and it 
enorm size, did the lone structur vari from thi hous in which 
I live. 

for a while, I continu to stare, fixedly. even then, I could scarc 
believ that I saw aright. In my mind, a question formed, reiter 
incessantly: 'what doe it mean?' 'what doe it mean?' and I wa unabl 
to make answer, even out of the depth of my imagination. I seem 
capabl onli of wonder and fear. for a time longer, I gazed, note 
continu some fresh point of resembl that attract me. At last, 
weari and sore puzzled, I turn from it, to view the rest of the 
strang place on to which I had intruded. 

hitherto, I had been so engross in my scrutini of the house, that I 
had given onli a cursori glanc 'round. now, as I looked, I began to 
realiz upon what sort of a place I had come. the arena, for so I have 
term it, appear a perfect circl of about ten to twelv mile in 
diameter, the house, as I have mention before, stand in the center. 
the surfac of the place, like to that of the plain, had a peculiar, 
misti appearance, that wa yet not mist. 

from a rapid survey, my glanc pass quickli upward along the slope 
of the circl mountains. how silent they were. I think that thi same 
abomin still wa more tri to me than anyth that I had so 
far seen or imagined. I wa look up, now, at the great crags, 
tower so loftily. Up there, the impalp red gave a blur 
appear to everything. 

and then, as I peered, curiously, a new terror came to me; for away up 
among the dim peak to my right, I had descri a vast shape of 
blackness, giantlike. It grew upon my sight. It had an enorm equin 
head, with gigant ears, and seem to peer steadfastli down into the 
arena. there wa that about the pose that gave me the impress of an 
etern watchfulness--of have ward that dismal place, through 
unknown eternities. slowly, the monster becam plainer to me; and then, 
suddenly, my gaze sprang from it to someth further off and higher 
among the crags. for a long minute, I gazed, fearfully. I wa strang 
consciou of someth not altogeth unfamiliar--a though someth 
stir in the back of my mind. the thing wa black, and had four 
grotesqu arms. the featur show indistinctly, 'round the neck, I 
made out sever light-color objects. slowly, the detail came to me, 
and I realized, coldly, that they were skulls. further down the bodi wa 
anoth circl belt, show less dark against the black trunk. then, 
even as I puzzl to know what the thing was, a memori slid into my 
mind, and straightway, I knew that I wa look at a monstrou 
represent of kali, the hindu goddess of death. 

other remembr of my old student day drift into my thoughts. My 
glanc fell back upon the huge beast-head thing. simultaneously, I 
recogn it for the ancient egyptian god set, or seth, the destroy 
of souls. with the knowledge, there came a great sweep of 
questioning--'two of the--!' I stopped, and endeavor to think. thing 
beyond my imagin peer into my frighten mind. I saw, obscurely. 
'the old god of mythology!' I tri to comprehend to what it wa all 
pointing. My gaze dwelt, flickeringly, between the two. 'if--' 

An idea came swiftly, and I turned, and glanc rapidli upward, 
search the gloomi crags, away to my left. someth loom out under 
a great peak, a shape of greyness. I wonder I had not seen it earlier, 
and then rememb I had not yet view that portion. I saw it more 
plainli now. It was, as I have said, grey. It had a tremend head; but 
no eyes. that part of it face wa blank. 

now, I saw that there were other thing up among the mountains. further 
off, reclin on a lofti ledge, I made out a livid mass, irregular and 
ghoulish. It seem without form, save for an unclean, half-anim face, 
that look out, vilely, from somewher about it middle. and then I saw 
others--ther were hundr of them. they seem to grow out of the 
shadows. sever I recogn almost immedi as mytholog 
deities; other were strang to me, utterli strange, beyond the power of 
a human mind to conceive. 

On each side, I looked, and saw more, continually. the mountain were 
full of strang things--beast-gods, and horror so atroci and bestial 
that possibl and decenc deni ani further attempt to describ them. 
and i--i wa fill with a terribl sens of overwhelm horror and 
fear and repugnance; yet, spite of these, I wonder exceedingly. wa 
there then, after all, someth in the old heathen worship, someth 
more than the mere deifi of men, animals, and elements? the thought 
grip me--wa there? 

later, a question repeat itself. what were they, those beast-gods, 
and the others? At first, they had appear to me just sculptur 
monster place indiscrimin among the inaccess peak and 
precipic of the surround mountains. now, as I scrutin them with 
greater intentness, my mind began to reach out to fresh conclusions. 
there wa someth about them, an indescrib sort of silent vital 
that suggested, to my broaden consciousness, a state of 
life-in-death--a someth that wa by no mean life, as we understand 
it; but rather an inhuman form of existence, that well might be liken 
to a deathless trance--a condit in which it wa possibl to imagin 
their continuing, eternally. 'immortal!' the word rose in my thought 
unbidden; and, straightway, I grew to wonder whether thi might be 
the immort of the gods. 

and then, in the midst of my wonder and musing, someth happened. 
until then, I had been stay just within the shadow of the exit of the 
great rift. now, without volit on my part, I drift out of the 
semi-dark and began to move slowli across the arena--toward the 
house. At this, I gave up all thought of those prodigi shape abov 
me--and could onli stare, frightenedly, at the tremend structur 
toward which I wa be convey so remorselessly. yet, though I 
search earnestly, I could discov noth that I had not alreadi 
seen, and so becam gradual calmer. 

presently, I had reach a point more than halfway between the hous 
and the gorge. all around wa spread the stark loneli of the place, 
and the unbroken silence. steadily, I near the great building. then, 
all at once, someth caught my vision, someth that came 'round one 
of the huge buttress of the house, and so into full view. It wa a 
gigant thing, and move with a curiou lope, go almost upright, 
after the manner of a man. It wa quit unclothed, and had a remark 
lumin appearance. yet it wa the face that attract and frighten 
me the most. It wa the face of a swine. 

silently, intently, I watch thi horribl creature, and forgot my 
fear, momentarily, in my interest in it movements. It wa make it 
way, cumbrous 'round the building, stop as it came to each window 
to peer in and shake at the bars, with which--a in thi house--they 
were protected; and whenev it came to a door, it would push at it, 
finger the fasten stealthily. evidently, it wa search for an 
ingress into the house. 

I had come now to within less than a quarter of a mile of the great 
structure, and still I wa compel forward. abruptly, the thing turn 
and gaze hideous in my direction. It open it mouth, and, for the 
first time, the still of that abomin place wa broken, by a 
deep, boom note that sent an ad thrill of apprehens through me. 
then, immediately, I becam awar that it wa come toward me, swiftli 
and silently. In an instant, it had cover half the distanc that lay 
between. and still, I wa born helplessli to meet it. onli a hundr 
yards, and the brutish feroc of the giant face numb me with a 
feel of unmitig horror. I could have screamed, in the suprem 
of my fear; and then, in the veri moment of my extrem and despair, I 
becam consciou that I wa look down upon the arena, from a rapidli 
increas height. I wa rising, rising. In an inconceiv short 
while, I had reach an altitud of mani hundr feet. beneath me, the 
spot that I had just left, wa occupi by the foul swine-creature. It 
had gone down on all four and wa snuf and rooting, like a 
verit hog, at the surfac of the arena. A moment and it rose to it 
feet, clutch upward, with an express of desir upon it face such 
as I have never seen in thi world. 

continually, I mount higher. A few minutes, it seemed, and I had 
risen abov the great mountains--floating, alone, afar in the redness. 
At a tremend distanc below, the arena showed, dimly; with the mighti 
hous look no larger than a tini spot of green. the swine-th wa 
no longer visible. 

presently, I pass over the mountains, out abov the huge breadth of 
the plain. far away, on it surface, in the direct of the ring-shap 
sun, there show a confus blur. I look toward it, indifferently. It 
remind me, somewhat, of the first glimps I had caught of the 
mountain-amphitheatre. 

with a sens of weariness, I glanc upward at the immens ring of 
fire. what a strang thing it was! then, as I stared, out from the dark 
center, there spurt a sudden flare of extraordinari vivid fire. 
compar with the size of the black center, it wa as naught; yet, in 
itself, stupendous. with awaken interest, I watch it carefully, 
note it strang boil and glowing. then, in a moment, the whole 
thing grew dim and unreal, and so pass out of sight. much amazed, I 
glanc down to the plain from which I wa still rising. thus, I 
receiv a fresh surprise. the plain--everyth had vanished, and onli 
a sea of red mist wa spread far below me. gradual as I stare thi 
grew remote, and die away into a dim far mysteri of red against an 
unfathom night. A while, and even thi had gone, and I wa wrap 
in an impalpable, lightless gloom. 



_iv_ 

the earth 

thu I was, and onli the memori that I had live through the dark, onc 
before, serv to sustain my thoughts. A great time passed--ages. and 
then a singl star broke it way through the darkness. It wa the first 
of one of the outli cluster of thi universe. presently, it wa far 
behind, and all about me shone the splendor of the countless stars. 
later, year it seemed, I saw the sun, a clot of flame. around it, I 
made out present sever remot speck of light--th planet of the 
solar system. and so I saw the earth again, blue and unbeliev 
minute. It grew larger, and becam defined. 

A long space of time came and went, and then at last I enter into the 
shadow of the world--plung headlong into the dim and holi earth 
night. overhead were the old constellations, and there wa a crescent 
moon. then, as I near the earth' surface, a dim swept over me, 
and I appear to sink into a black mist. 

for a while, I knew nothing. I wa unconscious. gradually, I becam 
awar of a faint, distant whining. It becam plainer. A desper 
feel of agoni possess me. I struggl madli for breath, and tri 
to shout. A moment, and I got my breath more easily. I wa consciou 
that someth wa lick my hand. someth damp swept across my face. 
I heard a panting, and then again the whining. It seem to come to my 
ears, now, with a sens of familiarity, and I open my eyes. all wa 
dark; but the feel of oppress had left me. I wa seated, and 
someth wa whine piteously, and lick me. I felt strang 
confused, and, instinctively, tri to ward off the thing that licked. 
My head wa curious vacant, and, for the moment, I seem incap of 
action or thought. then, thing came back to me, and I call 'pepper,' 
faintly. I wa answer by a joy bark, and renew and 
frantic caresses. 

In a littl while, I felt stronger, and put out my hand for the 
matches. I grope about, for a few moments, blindly; then my hand lit 
upon them, and I struck a light, and look confusedli around. all about 
me, I saw the old, familiar things. and there I sat, full of daze 
wonders, until the flame of the match burnt my finger, and I drop it; 
while a hasti express of pain and anger, escap my lips, surpris 
me with the sound of my own voice. 

after a moment, I struck anoth match, and, stumbl across the room, 
lit the candles. As I did so, I observ that they had not burn away, 
but had been put out. 

As the flame shot up, I turned, and stare about the study; yet there 
wa noth unusu to see; and, suddenly, a gust of irrit took me. 
what had happened? I held my head, with both hands, and tri to 
remember. ah! the great, silent plain, and the ring-shap sun of red 
fire. where were they? where had I seen them? how long ago? I felt daze 
and muddled. onc or twice, I walk up and down the room, unsteadily. 
My memori seem dulled, and, already, the thing I had wit came 
back to me with an effort. 

I have a remembr of cursing, peevishly, in my bewilderment. 
suddenly, I turn faint and giddy, and had to grasp at the tabl for 
support. dure a few moments, I held on, weakly; and then manag to 
totter sideway into a chair. after a littl time, I felt somewhat 
better, and succeed in reach the cupboard where, usually, I keep 
brandi and biscuits. I pour myself out a littl of the stimulant, and 
drank it off. then, take a hand of biscuits, I return to my 
chair, and began to devour them, ravenously. I wa vagu surpris at 
my hunger. I felt as though I had eaten noth for an uncount 
long while. 

As I ate, my glanc rove about the room, take in it variou 
details, and still searching, though almost unconsciously, for someth 
tangibl upon which to take hold, among the invis mysteri that 
encompass me. 'surely,' I thought, 'there must be something--' and, in 
the same instant, my gaze dwelt upon the face of the clock in the 
opposit corner. therewith, I stop eating, and just stared. for, 
though it tick indic most certainli that it wa still going, the 
hand were point to a littl _before_ the hour of midnight; wherea 
it was, as well I knew, consider _after_ that time when I had 
wit the first of the strang happen I have just described. 

for perhap a moment I wa astound and puzzled. had the hour been the 
same as when I had last seen the clock, I should have conclud that the 
hand had stuck in one place, while the intern mechan went on as 
usual; but that would, in no way, account for the hand have travel 
backward. then, even as I turn the matter over in my weari brain, 
the thought flash upon me that it wa now close upon the morn of 
the twenty-second, and that I had been unconsci to the visibl world 
through the greater portion of the last twenty-four hours. the thought 
occupi my attent for a full minute; then I commenc to eat again. 
I wa still veri hungry. 

dure breakfast, next morning, I inquir casual of my sister 
regard the date, and found my surmis correct. I had, indeed, been 
absent--at least in spirit--for nearli a day and a night. 

My sister ask me no questions; for it is not by ani mean the first 
time that I have kept to my studi for a whole day, and sometim a 
coupl of day at a time, when I have been particularli engross in my 
book or work. 

and so the day pass on, and I am still fill with a wonder to know 
the mean of all that I saw on that memor night. yet, well I know 
that my curios is littl like to be satisfied. 



_v_ 

the thing IN the pit 

thi hous is, as I have said before, surround by a huge estate, and 
wild and uncultiv gardens. 

away at the back, distant some three hundr yards, is a dark, deep 
ravine--spoken of as the 'pit,' by the peasantry. At the bottom run a 
sluggish stream so overhung by tree as scarc to be seen from above. 

In passing, I must explain that thi river ha a subterranean origin, 
emerg suddenli at the east end of the ravine, and disappearing, as 
abruptly, beneath the cliff that form it western extremity. 

It wa some month after my vision (if vision it were) of the great 
plain that my attent wa particularli attract to the pit. 

I happened, one day, to be walk along it southern edge, when, 
suddenly, sever piec of rock and shale were dislodg from the face 
of the cliff immedi beneath me, and fell with a sullen crash 
through the trees. I heard them splash in the river at the bottom; and 
then silence. I should not have given thi incid more than a pass 
thought, had not pepper at onc begun to bark savagely; nor would he be 
silent when I bade him, which is most unusu behavior on hi part. 

feel that there must be someon or someth in the pit, I went back 
to the house, quickly, for a stick. when I returned, pepper had ceas 
hi bark and wa growl and smelling, uneasily, along the top. 

whistl to him to follow me, I start to descend cautiously. the 
depth to the bottom of the pit must be about a hundr and fifti feet, 
and some time as well as consider care wa expend befor we 
reach the bottom in safety. 

onc down, pepper and I start to explor along the bank of the 
river. It wa veri dark there due to the overhang trees, and I move 
warily, keep my glanc about me and my stick ready. 

pepper wa quiet now and kept close to me all the time. thus, we 
search right up one side of the river, without hear or see 
anything. then, we cross over--bi the simpl method of jumping--and 
commenc to beat our way back through the underbrush. 

We had accomplish perhap half the distance, when I heard again the 
sound of fall stone on the other side--th side from which we had 
just come. one larg rock came thunder down through the treetops, 
struck the opposit bank, and bound into the river, drive a great 
jet of water right over us. At this, pepper gave out a deep growl; then 
stopped, and prick up hi ears. I listened, also. 

A second later, a loud, half-human, half-piglik squeal sound from 
among the trees, appar about halfway up the south cliff. It wa 
answer by a similar note from the bottom of the pit. At this, pepper 
gave a short, sharp bark, and, spring across the littl river, 
disappear into the bushes. 

immedi afterward, I heard hi bark increas in depth and number, 
and in between there sound a nois of confus jabbering. thi ceased, 
and, in the succeed silence, there rose a semi-human yell of agony. 
almost immediately, pepper gave a long-drawn howl of pain, and then the 
shrub were violent agitated, and he came run out with hi tail 
down, and glanc as he ran over hi shoulder. As he reach me, I saw 
that he wa bleed from what appear to be a great claw wound in the 
side that had almost laid bare hi ribs. 

see pepper thu mutilated, a furiou feel of anger seiz me, 
and, whirl my staff, I sprang across, and into the bush from which 
pepper had emerged. As I forc my way through, I thought I heard a 
sound of breathing. next instant, I had burst into a littl clear space, 
just in time to see something, livid white in color, disappear among the 
bush on the opposit side. with a shout, I ran toward it; but, though 
I struck and probe among the bush with my stick, I neither saw nor 
heard anyth further; and so return to pepper. there, after bath 
hi wound in the river, I bound my wet handkerchief 'round hi body; 
have done which, we retreat up the ravin and into the 
daylight again. 

On reach the house, my sister inquir what had happen to pepper, 
and I told her he had been fight with a wildcat, of which I had heard 
there were sever about. 

I felt it would be better not to tell her how it had realli happened; 
though, to be sure, I scarc knew myself; but thi I did know, that 
the thing I had seen run into the bush wa no wildcat. It wa much too 
big, and had, so far as I had observed, a skin like a hog's, onli of a 
dead, unhealthi white color. and then--it had run upright, or nearli so, 
upon it hind feet, with a motion somewhat resembl that of a human 
being. thi much I had notic in my brief glimpse, and, truth to tell, 
I felt a good deal of uneasiness, besid curios as I turn the 
matter over in my mind. 

It wa in the morn that the abov incid had occurred. 

then, it would be after dinner, as I sat reading, that, happen to 
look up suddenly, I saw someth peer in over the window ledg the 
eye and ear alon showing. 

'A pig, by jove!' I said, and rose to my feet. thus, I saw the thing 
more completely; but it wa no pig--god alon know what it was. It 
remind me, vaguely, of the hideou thing that had haunt the great 
arena. It had a grotesqu human mouth and jaw; but with no chin of 
which to speak. the nose wa prolong into a snout; thu it wa that 
with the littl eye and queer ears, gave it such an extraordinarili 
swinelik appearance. Of forehead there wa little, and the whole face 
wa of an unwholesom white color. 

for perhap a minute, I stood look at the thing with an ever grow 
feel of disgust, and some fear. the mouth kept jabbering, inanely, 
and onc emit a half-swinish grunt. I think it wa the eye that 
attract me the most; they seem to glow, at times, with a horribl 
human intelligence, and kept flicker away from my face, over the 
detail of the room, as though my stare disturb it. 

It appear to be support itself by two clawlik hand upon the 
windowsill. these claws, unlik the face, were of a clayey brown hue, 
and bore an indistinct resembl to human hands, in that they had four 
finger and a thumb; though these were web up to the first joint, 
much as are a duck's. nail it had also, but so long and power that 
they were more like the talon of an eagl than aught else. 

As I have said, before, I felt some fear; though almost of an 
imperson kind. I may explain my feel better by say that it wa 
more a sensat of abhorrence; such as one might expect to feel, if 
brought in contact with someth superhumanli foul; someth 
unholy--belong to some hitherto undreamt of state of existence. 

I cannot say that I grasp these variou detail of the brute at the 
time. I think they seem to come back to me, afterward, as though 
imprint upon my brain. I imagin more than I saw as I look at the 
thing, and the materi detail grew upon me later. 

for perhap a minut I stare at the creature; then as my nerv 
steadi a littl I shook off the vagu alarm that held me, and took a 
step toward the window. even as I did so, the thing duck and vanished. 
I rush to the door and look 'round hurriedly; but onli the tangl 
bush and shrub met my gaze. 

I ran back into the house, and, get my gun, salli out to search 
through the gardens. As I went, I ask myself whether the thing I had 
just seen wa like to be the same of which I had caught a glimps in 
the morning. I inclin to think it was. 

I would have taken pepper with me; but judg it better to give hi 
wound a chanc to heal. besides, if the creatur I had just seen was, as 
I imagined, hi antagonist of the morning, it wa not like that he 
would be of much use. 

I began my search, systematically. I wa determined, if it were 
possible, to find and put an end to that swine-thing. thi was, at 
least, a materi horror! 

At first, I searched, cautiously; with the thought of pepper' wound in 
my mind; but, as the hour passed, and not a sign of anyth living, 
show in the great, lone gardens, I becam less apprehensive. I felt 
almost as though I would welcom the sight of it. anyth seem better 
than thi silence, with the ever-pres feel that the creatur might 
be lurk in everi bush I passed. later, I grew careless of danger, to 
the extent of plung right through the bushes, probe with my gun 
barrel as I went. 

At times, I shouted; but onli the echo answer back. I thought thu 
perhap to frighten or stir the creatur to show itself; but onli 
succeed in bring my sister mari out, to know what wa the matter. I 
told her, that I had seen the wildcat that had wound pepper, and that 
I wa tri to hunt it out of the bushes. she seem onli half 
satisfied, and went back into the house, with an express of doubt 
upon her face. I wonder whether she had seen or guess anything. for 
the rest of the afternoon, I prosecut the search anxiously. I felt 
that I should be unabl to sleep, with that bestial thing haunt the 
shrubberies, and yet, when even fell, I had seen nothing. then, as I 
turn homeward, I heard a short, unintellig noise, among the bush 
to my right. instantly, I turned, and, aim quickly, fire in the 
direct of the sound. immedi afterward, I heard someth 
scuttl away among the bushes. It move rapidly, and in a minut had 
gone out of hearing. after a few step I ceas my pursuit, realiz 
how futil it must be in the fast gather gloom; and so, with a 
curiou feel of depression, I enter the house. 

that night, after my sister had gone to bed, I went 'round to all the 
window and door on the ground floor; and saw to it that they were 
secur fastened. thi precaut wa scarc necessari as regard the 
windows, as all of those on the lower storey are strongli barred; but 
with the doors--of which there are five--it wa wise thought, as not 
one wa locked. 

have secur these, I went to my study, yet, somehow, for once, the 
place jar upon me; it seem so huge and echoey. for some time I 
tri to read; but at last find it imposs I carri my book down 
to the kitchen where a larg fire wa burning, and sat there. 

I dare say, I had read for a coupl of hours, when, suddenly, I heard a 
sound that made me lower my book, and listen, intently. It wa a nois 
of someth rub and fumbl against the back door. onc the door 
creaked, loudly; as though forc were be appli to it. dure those 
few, short moments, I experienc an indescrib feel of terror, 
such as I should have believ impossible. My hand shook; a cold sweat 
broke out on me, and I shiver violently. 

gradually, I calmed. the stealthi movement outsid had ceased. 

then for an hour I sat silent and watchful. all at onc the feel of 
fear took me again. I felt as I imagin an anim must, under the eye of 
a snake. yet now I could hear nothing. still, there wa no doubt that 
some unexplain influenc wa at work. 

gradually, impercept almost, someth stole on my ear--a sound 
that resolv itself into a faint murmur. quickli it develop and grew 
into a muffl but hideou choru of bestial shrieks. It appear to 
rise from the bowel of the earth. 

I heard a thud, and realiz in a dull, half comprehend way that I 
had drop my book. after that, I just sat; and thu the daylight found 
me, when it crept wanli in through the barred, high window of the 
great kitchen. 

with the dawn light, the feel of stupor and fear left me; and I 
came more into possess of my senses. 

thereupon I pick up my book, and crept to the door to listen. not a 
sound broke the chilli silence. for some minut I stood there; then, 
veri gradual and cautiously, I drew back the bolt and open the door 
peep out. 

My caution wa unneeded. noth wa to be seen, save the grey vista of 
dreary, tangl bush and trees, extend to the distant plantation. 

with a shiver, I close the door, and made my way, quietly, up to bed. 



_vi_ 

the swine-th 

It wa evening, a week later. My sister sat in the garden, knitting. I 
wa walk up and down, reading. My gun leant up against the wall of 
the house; for, sinc the advent of that strang thing in the gardens, I 
had deem it wise to take precautions. yet, through the whole week, 
there had been noth to alarm me, either by sight or sound; so that I 
wa abl to look back, calmly, to the incident; though still with a 
sens of unmitig wonder and curiosity. 

I was, as I have just said, walk up and down, and somewhat engross 
in my book. suddenly, I heard a crash, away in the direct of the pit. 
with a quick movement, I turn and saw a tremend column of dust 
rise high into the even air. 

My sister had risen to her feet, with a sharp exclam of surpris 
and fright. 

tell her to stay where she was, I snatch up my gun, and ran toward 
the pit. As I near it, I heard a dull, rumbl sound, that grew 
quickli into a roar, split with deeper crashes, and up from the pit 
drove a fresh volum of dust. 

the nois ceased, though the dust still rose, tumultuously. 

I reach the edge, and look down; but could see noth save a boil 
of dust cloud swirl hither and thither. the air wa so full of the 
small particles, that they blind and choke me; and, finally, I had to 
run out from the smother, to breathe. 

gradually, the suspend matter sank, and hung in a panopli over the 
mouth of the pit. 

I could onli guess at what had happened. 

that there had been a land-slip of some kind, I had littl doubt; but 
the caus wa beyond my knowledge; and yet, even then, I had half 
imaginings; for, already, the thought had come to me, of those fall 
rocks, and that thing in the bottom of the pit; but, in the first 
minut of confusion, I fail to reach the natur conclusion, to which 
the catastroph pointed. 

slowly, the dust subsided, until, presently, I wa abl to approach the 
edge, and look down. 

for a while, I peer impotently, tri to see through the reek. At 
first, it wa imposs to make out anything. then, as I stared, I saw 
someth below, to my left, that moved. I look intent toward it, 
and, presently, made out another, and then another--thre dim shape 
that appear to be climb up the side of the pit. I could see them 
onli indistinctly. even as I stare and wondered, I heard a rattl of 
stones, somewher to my right. I glanc across; but could see nothing. 
I leant forward, and peer over, and down into the pit, just beneath 
where I stood; and saw no further than a hideous, white swine-face, that 
had risen to within a coupl of yard of my feet. below it, I could make 
out sever others. As the thing saw me, it gave a sudden, uncouth 
squeal, which wa answer from all part of the pit. At that, a gust of 
horror and fear took me, and, bend down, I discharg my gun right 
into it face. straightway, the creatur disappeared, with a clatter of 
loos earth and stones. 

there wa a momentari silence, to which, probably, I owe my life; for, 
dure it, I heard a quick patter of mani feet, and, turn sharply, 
saw a troop of the creatur come toward me, at a run. instantly, I 
rais my gun and fire at the foremost, who plung head-long, with a 
hideou howling. then, I turn to run. more than halfway from the hous 
to the pit, I saw my sister--sh wa come toward me. I could not see 
her face, distinctly, as the dusk had fallen; but there wa fear in her 
voic as she call to know whi I wa shooting. 

'run!' I shout in reply. 'run for your life!' 

without more ado, she turn and fled--pick up her skirt with both 
hands. As I followed, I gave a glanc behind. the brute were run on 
their hind legs--at time drop on all fours. 

I think it must have been the terror in my voice, that spur mari to 
run so; for I feel convinc that she had not, as yet, seen those hell 
creatur that pursued. 

On we went, my sister leading. 

each moment, the near sound of the footsteps, told me that the 
brute were gain on us, rapidly. fortunately, I am accustom to 
live, in some ways, an activ life. As it was, the strain of the race 
wa begin to tell sever upon me. 

ahead, I could see the back door--luckili it wa open. I wa some 
half-dozen yard behind mary, now, and my breath wa sob in my 
throat. then, someth touch my shoulder. I wrench my head 'round, 
quickly, and saw one of those monstrous, pallid face close to mine. one 
of the creatures, have outrun it companions, had almost overtaken me. 
even as I turned, it made a fresh grab. with a sudden effort, I sprang 
to one side, and, swing my gun by the barrel, brought it crash 
down upon the foul creature' head. the thing dropped, with an almost 
human groan. 

even thi short delay had been nearli suffici to bring the rest of 
the brute down upon me; so that, without an instant' wast of time, I 
turn and ran for the door. 

reach it, I burst into the passage; then, turn quickly, slam 
and bolt the door, just as the first of the creatur rush against 
it, with a sudden shock. 

My sister sat, gasping, in a chair. she seem in a faint condition; 
but I had no time then to spend on her. I had to make sure that all the 
door were fastened. fortunately, they were. the one lead from my 
studi into the gardens, wa the last to which I went. I had just had 
time to note that it wa secured, when I thought I heard a nois 
outside. I stood perfectli silent, and listened. yes! now I could 
distinctli hear a sound of whispering, and someth slither over the 
panels, with a rasping, scratchi noise. evidently, some of the brute 
were feel with their claw-hands, about the door, to discov whether 
there were ani mean of ingress. 

that the creatur should so soon have found the door was--to me--a 
proof of their reason capabilities. It assur me that they must not 
be regarded, by ani means, as mere animals. I had felt someth of thi 
before, when that first thing peer in through my window. then I had 
appli the term superhuman to it, with an almost instinct knowledg 
that the creatur wa someth differ from the brute-beast. 
someth beyond human; yet in no good sense; but rather as someth 
foul and hostil to the _great_ and _good_ in humanity. In a word, as 
someth intelligent, and yet inhuman. the veri thought of the 
creatur fill me with revulsion. 

now, I bethought me of my sister, and, go to the cupboard, I got 
out a flask of brandy, and a wine-glass. take these, I went down to 
the kitchen, carri a light candl with me. she wa not sit in 
the chair, but had fallen out, and wa lie upon the floor, 
face downward. 

veri gently, I turn her over, and rais her head somewhat. then, I 
pour a littl of the brandi between her lips. after a while, she 
shiver slightly. A littl later, she gave sever gasps, and open 
her eyes. In a dreamy, unreal way, she look at me. then her eye 
closed, slowly, and I gave her a littl more of the brandy. for, perhap 
a minut longer, she lay silent, breath quickly. all at once, her 
eye open again, and it seem to me, as I looked, that the pupil 
were dilated, as though fear had come with return consciousness. 
then, with a movement so unexpect that I start backward, she sat up. 
notic that she seem giddy, I put out my hand to steadi her. At 
that, she gave a loud scream, and, scrambl to her feet, ran from 
the room. 

for a moment, I stay there--kneel and hold the brandi flask. I 
wa utterli puzzl and astonished. 

could she be afraid of me? but no! whi should she? I could onli 
conclud that her nerv were badli shaken, and that she wa temporarili 
unhinged. upstairs, I heard a door bang, loudly, and I knew that she had 
taken refug in her room. I put the flask down on the table. My 
attent wa distract by a nois in the direct of the back door. I 
went toward it, and listened. It appear to be shaken, as though some 
of the creatur struggl with it, silently; but it wa far too 
strongli construct and hung to be easili moved. 

out in the garden rose a continu sound. It might have been 
mistaken, by a casual listener, for the grunt and squeal of a herd 
of pigs. but, as I stood there, it came to me that there wa sens and 
mean to all those swinish noises. gradually, I seem abl to trace 
a semblanc in it to human speech--glutin and sticky, as though each 
articul were made with difficulty: yet, nevertheless, I wa 
becom convinc that it wa no mere medley of sounds; but a rapid 
interchang of ideas. 

By thi time, it had grown quit dark in the passages, and from these 
came all the vari cri and groan of which an old hous is so full 
after nightfall. It is, no doubt, becaus thing are then quieter, and 
one ha more leisur to hear. also, there may be someth in the theori 
that the sudden chang of temperature, at sundown, affect the structur 
of the house, somewhat--caus it to contract and settle, as it were, 
for the night. however, thi is as may be; but, on that night in 
particular, I would gladli have been quit of so mani eeri noises. It 
seem to me, that each crack and creak wa the come of one of those 
thing along the dark corridors; though I knew in my heart that thi 
could not be, for I had seen, myself, that all the door were secure. 

gradually, however, these sound grew on my nerv to such an extent 
that, were it onli to punish my cowardice, I felt I must make the 'round 
of the basement again, and, if anyth were there, face it. and then, I 
would go up to my study, for I knew sleep wa out of the question, with 
the hous surround by creatures, half beasts, half someth else, and 
entir unholy. 

take the kitchen lamp down from it hook, I made my way from cellar 
to cellar, and room to room; through pantri and coal-hole--along 
passages, and into the hundred-and-on littl blind alley and hidden 
nook that form the basement of the old house. then, when I knew I had 
been in everi corner and cranni larg enough to conceal aught of ani 
size, I made my way to the stairs. 

with my foot on the first step, I paused. It seem to me, I heard a 
movement, appar from the buttery, which is to the left of the 
staircase. It had been one of the first place I searched, and yet, I 
felt certain my ear had not deceiv me. My nerv were strung now, 
and, with hardli ani hesitation, I step up to the door, hold the 
lamp abov my head. In a glance, I saw that the place wa empty, save 
for the heavy, stone slabs, support by brick pillars; and I wa about 
to leav it, convinc that I had been mistaken; when, in turning, my 
light wa flash back from two bright spot outsid the window, and 
high up. for a few moments, I stood there, staring. then they 
moved--revolv slowly, and throw out altern scintil of 
green and red; at least, so it appear to me. I knew then that they 
were eyes. 

slowly, I trace the shadowi outlin of one of the things. It appear 
to be hold on to the bar of the window, and it attitud suggest 
climbing. I went nearer to the window, and held the light higher. there 
wa no need to be afraid of the creature; the bar were strong, and 
there wa littl danger of it be abl to move them. and then, 
suddenly, in spite of the knowledg that the brute could not reach to 
harm me, I had a return of the horribl sensat of fear, that had 
assail me on that night, a week previously. It wa the same feel of 
helpless, shudder fright. I realized, dimly, that the creature' eye 
were look into mine with a steady, compel stare. I tri to turn 
away; but could not. I seemed, now, to see the window through a mist. 
then, I thought other eye came and peered, and yet others; until a 
whole galaxi of malignant, stare orb seem to hold me in thrall. 

My head began to swim, and throb violently. then, I wa awar of a 
feel of acut physic pain in my left hand. It grew more severe, and 
forced, liter forced, my attention. with a tremend effort, I 
glanc down; and, with that, the spell that had held me wa broken. I 
realized, then, that I had, in my agitation, unconsci caught hold 
of the hot lamp-glass, and burnt my hand, badly. I look up to the 
window, again. the misti appear had gone, and, now, I saw that it 
wa crowd with dozen of bestial faces. with a sudden access of rage, 
I rais the lamp, and hurl it, full at the window. It struck the 
glass (smash a pane), and pass between two of the bars, out into 
the garden, scatter burn oil as it went. I heard sever loud 
cri of pain, and, as my sight becam accustom to the dark, I 
discov that the creatur had left the window. 

pull myself together, I grope for the door, and, have found it, 
made my way upstairs, stumbl at each step. I felt dazed, as though I 
had receiv a blow on the head. At the same time, my hand smart 
badly, and I wa full of a nervous, dull rage against those things. 

reach my study, I lit the candles. As they burnt up, their ray were 
reflect from the rack of firearm on the sidewall. At the sight, I 
rememb that I had there a power, which, as I had prove earlier, 
seem as fatal to those monster as to more ordinari animals; and I 
determin I would take the offensive. 

first of all, I bound up my hand; for the pain wa fast becom 
intolerable. after that, it seem easier, and I cross the room, to 
the rifl stand. there, I select a heavi rifle--an old and tri 
weapon; and, have procur ammunition, I made my way up into one of 
the small towers, with which the hous is crowned. 

from there, I found that I could see nothing. the garden present a 
dim blur of shadows--a littl blacker, perhaps, where the tree stood. 
that wa all, and I knew that it wa useless to shoot down into all that 
darkness. the onli thing to be done, wa to wait for the moon to rise; 
then, I might be abl to do a littl execution. 

In the meantime, I sat still, and kept my ear open. the garden were 
compar quiet now, and onli an occasion grunt or squeal came up 
to me. I did not like thi silence; it made me wonder on what devilri 
the creatur were bent. twice, I left the tower, and took a walk 
through the house; but everyth wa silent. 

once, I heard a noise, from the direct of the pit, as though more 
earth had fallen. follow this, and last for some fifteen minutes, 
there wa a commot among the denizen of the gardens. thi die away, 
and, after that all wa again quiet. 

about an hour later, the moon' light show abov the distant horizon. 
from where I sat, I could see it over the trees; but it wa not until it 
rose clear of them, that I could make out ani of the detail in the 
garden below. even then, I could see none of the brutes; until, 
happen to crane forward, I saw sever of them lie prone, up 
against the wall of the house. what they were doing, I could not make 
out. It was, however, a chanc too good to be ignored; and, take aim, 
I fire at the one directli beneath. there wa a shrill scream, and, as 
the smoke clear away, I saw that it had turn on it back, and wa 
writhing, feebly. then, it wa quiet. the other had disappeared. 

immedi after this, I heard a loud squeal, in the direct of the 
pit. It wa answered, a hundr times, from everi part of the garden. 
thi gave me some notion of the number of the creatures, and I began to 
feel that the whole affair wa becom even more seriou than I 
had imagined. 

As I sat there, silent and watchful, the thought came to me--whi wa 
all this? what were these things? what did it mean? then my thought 
flew back to that vision (though, even now, I doubt whether it wa a 
vision) of the plain of silence. what did that mean? I wondered--and 
that thing in the arena? ugh! lastly, I thought of the hous I had seen 
in that far-away place. that house, so like thi in everi detail of 
extern structure, that it might have been model from it; or thi 
from that. I had never thought of that-- 

At thi moment, there came anoth long squeal, from the pit, followed, 
a second later, by a coupl of shorter ones. At once, the garden wa 
fill with answer cries. I stood up, quickly, and look over the 
parapet. In the moonlight, it seem as though the shrubberi were 
alive. they toss hither and thither, as though shaken by a strong, 
irregular wind; while a continu rustling, and a nois of scamper 
feet, rose up to me. sever times, I saw the moonlight gleam on 
running, white figur among the bushes, and, twice, I fired. the second 
time, my shot wa answer by a short squeal of pain. 

A minut later, the garden lay silent. from the pit, came a deep, 
hoars babel of swine-talk. At times, angri cri smote the air, and 
they would be answer by multitudin gruntings. It occur to me, 
that they were hold some kind of a council, perhap to discuss the 
problem of enter the house. also, I thought that they seem much 
enraged, probabl by my success shots. 

It occur to me, that now would be a good time to make a final survey 
of our defenses. this, I proceed to do at once; visit the whole of 
the basement again, and examin each of the doors. luckily, they are 
all, like the back one, built of solid, iron-stud oak. then, I went 
upstair to the study. I wa more anxiou about thi door. It is, 
palpably, of a more modern make than the others, and, though a stout 
piec of work, it ha littl of their ponder strength. 

I must explain here, that there is a small, rais lawn on thi side of 
the house, upon which thi door opens--th window of the studi be 
bar on thi account. all the other entrances--except the great 
gateway which is never opened--ar in the lower storey. 



_vii_ 

the attack 

I spent some time, puzzl how to strengthen the studi door. finally, 
I went down to the kitchen, and with some trouble, brought up sever 
heavi piec of timber. these, I wedg up, slantwise, against it, from 
the floor, nail them top and bottom. for half-an-hour, I work hard, 
and, at last, got it shore to my mind. 

then, feel easier, I resum my coat, which I had laid aside, and 
proceed to attend to one or two matter befor return to the tower. 
It wa whilst thu employed, that I heard a fumbl at the door, and 
the latch wa tried. keep silence, I waited. soon, I heard sever of 
the creatur outside. they were grunt to one another, softly. then, 
for a minute, there wa quietness. suddenly, there sound a quick, low 
grunt, and the door creak under a tremend pressure. It would have 
burst inward; but for the support I had placed. the strain ceased, as 
quickli as it had begun, and there wa more talk. 

presently, one of the thing squealed, softly, and I heard the sound 
of other approaching. there wa a short confabulation; then again, 
silence; and I realiz that they had call sever more to assist. 
feel that now wa the suprem moment, I stood ready, with my rifl 
presented. If the door gave, I would, at least, slay as mani 
as possible. 

again came the low signal; and, onc more, the door cracked, under a 
huge force. for, a minut perhaps, the pressur wa kept up; and I 
waited, nervously; expect each moment to see the door come down with 
a crash. but no; the strut held, and the attempt prove abortive. then 
follow more of their horrible, grunt talk, and, whilst it lasted, I 
thought I distinguish the nois of fresh arrivals. 

after a long discussion, dure which the door wa sever time 
shaken, they becam quiet onc more, and I knew that they were go to 
make a third attempt to break it down. I wa almost in despair. the 
prop had been sever tri in the two previou attacks, and I wa 
sore afraid that thi would prove too much for them. 

At that moment, like an inspiration, a thought flash into my troubl 
brain. instantly, for it wa no time to hesitate, I ran from the room, 
and up stair after stair. thi time, it wa not to one of the towers, 
that I went; but out on to the flat, lead roof itself. onc there, I 
race across to the parapet, that wall it 'round, and look down. As I 
did so, I heard the short, grunt signal, and, even up there, caught 
the cri of the door under the assault. 

there wa not a moment to lose, and, lean over, I aimed, quickly, 
and fired. the report rang sharply, and, almost blend with it, came 
the loud splud of the bullet strike it mark. from below, rose a 
shrill wail; and the door ceas it groaning. then, as I took my weight 
from off the parapet, a huge piec of the stone cope slid from under 
me, and fell with a crash among the disorgan throng beneath. 
sever horribl shriek quaver through the night air, and then I 
heard a sound of scamper feet. cautiously, I look over. In the 
moonlight, I could see the great copingstone, lie right across the 
threshold of the door. I thought I saw someth under it--sever 
things, white; but I could not be sure. 

and so a few minut passed. 

As I stared, I saw someth come 'round, out of the shadow of the 
house. It wa one of the things. It went up to the stone, silently, and 
bent down. I wa unabl to see what it did. In a minut it stood up. It 
had someth in it talons, which it put to it mouth and tore at.... 

for the moment, I did not realize. then, slowly, I comprehended. the 
thing wa stoop again. It wa horrible. I start to load my rifle. 
when I look again, the monster wa tug at the stone--mov it to 
one side. I leant the rifl on the coping, and pull the trigger. the 
brute collapsed, on it face, and kicked, slightly. 

simultaneously, almost, with the report, I heard anoth sound--that of 
break glass. waiting, onli to recharg my weapon, I ran from the 
roof, and down the first two flight of stairs. 

here, I paus to listen. As I did so, there came anoth tinkl of 
fall glass. It appear to come from the floor below. excitedly, I 
sprang down the steps, and, guid by the rattl of the window-sash, 
reach the door of one of the empti bedrooms, at the back of the house. 
I thrust it open. the room wa but dimli illumin by the moonlight; 
most of the light be blot out by move figur at the window. 
even as I stood, one crawl through, into the room. level my weapon, 
I fire point-blank at it--fil the room with a deafen bang. when 
the smoke cleared, I saw that the room wa empty, and the window free. 
the room wa much lighter. the night air blew in, coldly, through the 
shatter panes. down below, in the night, I could hear a soft moaning, 
and a confus murmur of swine-voices. 

step to one side of the window, I reloaded, and then stood there, 
waiting. presently, I heard a scuffl noise. from where I stood in the 
shadow, I could see, without be seen. 

nearer came the sounds, and then I saw someth come up abov the 
sill, and clutch at the broken window-frame. It caught a piec of the 
woodwork; and, now, I could make out that it wa a hand and arm. A 
moment later, the face of one of the swine-creatur rose into view. 
then, befor I could use my rifle, or do anything, there came a sharp 
crack--cr-ac-k; and the window-fram gave way under the weight of the 
thing. next instant, a squash thud, and a loud outcry, told me that 
it had fallen to the ground. with a savag hope that it had been killed, 
I went to the window. the moon had gone behind a cloud, so that I could 
see nothing; though a steadi hum of jabbering, just beneath where I 
stood, indic that there were sever more of the brute close 
at hand. 

As I stood there, look down, I marvel how it had been possibl for 
the creatur to climb so far; for the wall is compar smooth, 
while the distanc to the ground must be, at least, eighti feet. 

all at once, as I bent, peering, I saw something, indistinctly, that 
cut the grey shadow of the house-side, with a black line. It pass the 
window, to the left, at a distanc of about two feet. then, I rememb 
that it wa a gutter-pipe, that had been put there some year ago, to 
carri off the rainwater. I had forgotten about it. I could see, now, how 
the creatur had manag to reach the window. even as the solut came 
to me, I heard a faint slithering, scratch noise, and knew that 
anoth of the brute wa coming. I wait some odd moments; then leant 
out of the window and felt the pipe. To my delight, I found that it wa 
quit loose, and I managed, use the rifle-barrel as a crowbar, to 
lever it out from the wall. I work quickly. then, take hold with 
both bands, I wrench the whole concern away, and hurl it down--with 
the thing still cling to it--into the garden. 

for a few minut longer, I wait there, listening; but, after the 
first gener outcry, I heard nothing. I knew, now, that there wa no 
more reason to fear an attack from thi quarter. I had remov the onli 
mean of reach the window, and, as none of the other window had ani 
adjac water pipes, to tempt the climb power of the monsters, I 
began to feel more confid of escap their clutches. 

leav the room, I made my way down to the study. I wa anxiou to see 
how the door had withstood the test of that last assault. entering, I 
lit two of the candles, and then turn to the door. one of the larg 
prop had been displaced, and, on that side, the door had been forc 
inward some six inches. 

It wa providenti that I had manag to drive the brute away just 
when I did! and that copingstone! I wondered, vaguely, how I had manag 
to dislodg it. I had not notic it loose, as I took my shot; and then, 
as I stood up, it had slip away from beneath me ... I felt that I 
owe the dismiss of the attack force, more to it time fall than 
to my rifle. then the thought came, that I had better seiz thi chanc 
to shore up the door, again. It wa evid that the creatur had not 
return sinc the fall of the copingstone; but who wa to say how long 
they would keep away? 

there and then, I set-to, at repair the door--work hard and 
anxiously. first, I went down to the basement, and, rummag 'round, 
found sever piec of heavi oak planking. with these, I return to 
the study, and, have remov the props, place the plank up against 
the door. then, I nail the head of the strut to these, and, drive 
them well home at the bottoms, nail them again there. 

thus, I made the door stronger than ever; for now it wa solid with the 
back of boards, and would, I felt convinced, stand a heavier pressur 
than hitherto, without give way. 

after that, I lit the lamp which I had brought from the kitchen, and 
went down to have a look at the lower windows. 

now that I had seen an instanc of the strength the creatur 
possessed, I felt consider anxieti about the window on the ground 
floor--in spite of the fact that they were so strongli barred. 

I went first to the buttery, have a vivid remembr of my late 
adventur there. the place wa chilly, and the wind, sough in through 
the broken glass, produc an eeri note. apart from the gener air of 
dismalness, the place wa as I had left it the night before. go up to 
the window, I examin the bars, closely; noting, as I did so, their 
comfort thickness. still, as I look more intently, it seem to 
me, that the middl bar wa bent slightli from the straight; yet it wa 
but trifling, and it might have been so for years. I had never, before, 
notic them particularly. 

I put my hand through the broken window, and shook the bar. It wa as 
firm as a rock. perhap the creatur had tri to 'start' it, and, 
find it beyond their power, ceas from the effort. after that, I 
went 'round to each of the windows, in turn; examin them with care 
attention; but nowher els could I trace anyth to show that there 
had been ani tampering. have finish my survey, I went back to the 
study, and pour myself out a littl brandy. then to the tower 
to watch. 



_viii_ 

after the attack 

It wa now about three a.m., and, presently, the eastern sky began to 
pale with the come of dawn. gradually, the day came, and, by it 
light, I scan the gardens, earnestly; but nowher could I see ani 
sign of the brutes. I leant over, and glanc down to the foot of the 
wall, to see whether the bodi of the thing I had shot the night befor 
wa still there. It wa gone. I suppos that other of the monster had 
remov it dure the night. 

then, I went down on to the roof, and cross over to the gap from 
which the cope stone had fallen. reach it, I look over. yes, 
there wa the stone, as I had seen it last; but there wa no appear 
of anyth beneath it; nor could I see the creatur I had killed, 
after it fall. evidently, they also had been taken away. I turned, and 
went down to my study. there, I sat down, wearily. I wa thoroughli 
tired. It wa quit light now; though the sun' ray were not, as yet, 
percept hot. A clock chime the hour of four. 

I awoke, with a start, and look 'round, hurriedly. the clock in the 
corner, indic that it wa three o'clock. It wa alreadi afternoon. I 
must have slept for nearli eleven hours. 

with a jerki movement, I sat forward in the chair, and listened. the 
hous wa perfectli silent. slowly, I stood up, and yawned. I felt 
desper tired, still, and sat down again; wonder what it wa that 
had wake me. 

It must have been the clock striking, I concluded, presently; and wa 
commenc to doze off, when a sudden nois brought me back, onc more, 
to life. It wa the sound of a step, as of a person move cautious 
down the corridor, toward my study. In an instant, I wa on my feet, and 
grasp my rifle. noiselessly, I waited. had the creatur broken in, 
whilst I slept? even as I questioned, the step reach my door, halt 
momentarily, and then continu down the passage. silently, I tipto to 
the doorway, and peep out. then, I experienc such a feel of 
relief, as must a repriev criminal--it wa my sister. she wa go 
toward the stairs. 

I step into the hall, and wa about to call to her, when it occur 
to me, that it wa veri queer she should have crept past my door, in 
that stealthi manner. I wa puzzled, and, for one brief moment, the 
thought occupi my mind, that it wa not she, but some fresh mysteri of 
the house. then, as I caught a glimps of her old petticoat, the thought 
pass as quickli as it had come, and I half laughed. there could be no 
mistak that ancient garment. yet, I wonder what she wa doing; and, 
rememb her condit of mind, on the previou day, I felt that it 
might be best to follow, quietly--tak care not to alarm her--and see 
what she wa go to do. If she behav rationally, well and good; if 
not, I should have to take step to restrain her. I could run no 
unnecessari risks, under the danger that threaten us. 

quickly, I reach the head of the stairs, and paus a moment. then, 
I heard a sound that sent me leap down, at a mad rate--it wa the 
rattl of bolt be unshot. that foolish sister of mine wa actual 
unbar the back door. 

just as her hand wa on the last bolt, I reach her. she had not seen 
me, and, the first thing she knew, I had hold of her arm. she glanc up 
quickly, like a frighten animal, and scream aloud. 

'come, mary!' I said, sternly, 'what' the mean of thi nonsense? Do 
you mean to tell me you don't understand the danger, that you tri to 
throw our two live away in thi fashion!' 

To this, she repli nothing; onli trembled, violently, gasp and 
sobbing, as though in the last extrem of fear. 

through some minutes, I reason with her; point out the need for 
caution, and ask her to be brave. there wa littl to be afraid of 
now, I explained--and, I tri to believ that I spoke the truth--but 
she must be sensible, and not attempt to leav the hous for a few days. 

At last, I ceased, in despair. It wa no use talk to her; she was, 
obviously, not quit herself for the time being. finally, I told her she 
had better go to her room, if she could not behav rationally. 

still, she took not ani notice. so, without more ado, I pick her up 
in my arms, and carri her there. At first, she screamed, wildly; but 
had relaps into silent trembling, by the time I reach the stairs. 

arriv at her room, I laid her upon the bed. she lay there quietli 
enough, neither speak nor sobbing--just shake in a veri agu of 
fear. I took a rug from a chair near by, and spread it over her. I could 
do noth more for her, and so, cross to where pepper lay in a big 
basket. My sister had taken charg of him sinc hi wound, to nurs him, 
for it had prove more sever than I had thought, and I wa pleas to 
note that, in spite of her state of mind, she had look after the old 
dog, carefully. stooping, I spoke to him, and, in reply, he lick my 
hand, feebly. He wa too ill to do more. 

then, go to the bed, I bent over my sister, and ask her how she 
felt; but she onli shook the more, and, much as it pain me, I had to 
admit that my presenc seem to make her worse. 

and so, I left her--lock the door, and pocket the key. It seem 
to be the onli cours to take. 

the rest of the day, I spent between the tower and my study. for food, 
I brought up a loaf from the pantry, and on this, and some claret, I 
live for that day. 

what a long, weari day it was. If onli I could have gone out into the 
gardens, as is my wont, I should have been content enough; but to be 
coop in thi silent house, with no companion, save a mad woman and a 
sick dog, wa enough to prey upon the nerv of the hardiest. and out in 
the tangl shrubberi that surround the house, lurked--for all I 
could tell--thos infern swine-creatur wait their chance. wa 
ever a man in such straits? 

once, in the afternoon, and again, later, I went to visit my sister. 
the second time, I found her tend pepper; but, at my approach, she 
slid over, unobtrusively, to the far corner, with a gestur that 
sadden me beyond belief. poor girl! her fear cut me intolerably, and I 
would not intrud on her, unnecessarily. she would be better, I trusted, 
in a few days; meanwhile, I could do nothing; and I judg it still 
needful--hard as it seemed--to keep her confin to her room. one thing 
there wa that I took for encouragement: she had eaten some of the food 
I had taken to her, on my first visit. 

and so the day passed. 

As the even drew on, the air grew chilly, and I began to make 
prepar for pass a second night in the tower--tak up two 
addit rifles, and a heavi ulster. the rifl I loaded, and laid 
alongsid my other; as I intend to make thing warm for ani of the 
creatur who might show, dure the night. I had plenti of ammunition, 
and I thought to give the brute such a lesson, as should show them the 
useless of attempt to forc an entrance. 

after that, I made the 'round of the hous again; pay particular 
attent to the prop that support the studi door. then, feel that 
I had done all that lay in my power to insur our safety, I return to 
the tower; call in on my sister and pepper, for a final visit, on the 
way. pepper wa asleep; but woke, as I entered, and wag hi tail, in 
recognition. I thought he seem slightli better. My sister wa lie on 
the bed; though whether asleep or not, I wa unabl to tell; and thu I 
left them. 

reach the tower, I made myself as comfort as circumst would 
permit, and settl down to watch through the night. gradually, dark 
fell, and soon the detail of the garden were merg into shadows. 
dure the first few hours, I sat, alert, listen for ani sound that 
might help to tell me if anyth were stir down below. It wa far 
too dark for my eye to be of much use. 

slowly, the hour passed; without anyth unusu happening. and the 
moon rose, show the gardens, appar empty, and silent. and so, 
through the night, without disturb or sound. 

toward morning, I began to grow stiff and cold, with my long vigil; 
also, I wa get veri uneasy, concern the continu quiet on 
the part of the creatures. I mistrust it, and would sooner, far, have 
had them attack the house, openly. then, at least, I should have known 
my danger, and been abl to meet it; but to wait like this, through a 
whole night, pictur all kind of unknown devilment, wa to jeopard 
one' sanity. onc or twice, the thought came to me, that, perhaps, they 
had gone; but, in my heart, I found it imposs to believ that it 
wa so. 



_ix_ 

IN the cellar 

At last, what with be tire and cold, and the uneasi that 
possess me, I resolv to take a walk through the house; first call 
in at the study, for a glass of brandi to warm me. this, I did, and, 
while there, I examin the door, carefully; but found all as I had left 
it the night before. 

the day wa just breaking, as I left the tower; though it wa still too 
dark in the hous to be abl to see without a light, and I took one of 
the studi candl with me on my 'round. By the time I had finish the 
ground floor, the daylight wa creep in, wanly, through the bar 
windows. My search had shown me noth fresh. everyth appear to be 
in order, and I wa on the point of extinguish my candle, when the 
thought suggest itself to me to have anoth glanc 'round the 
cellars. I had not, if I rememb rightly, been into them sinc my hasti 
search on the even of the attack. 

for, perhaps, the half of a minute, I hesitated. I would have been veri 
will to forego the task--as, indeed, I am inclin to think ani man 
well might--for of all the great, awe-inspir room in thi house, the 
cellar are the hugest and weirdest. great, gloomi cavern of places, 
unlit by ani ray of daylight. yet, I would not shirk the work. I felt 
that to do so would smack of sheer cowardice. besides, as I reassur 
myself, the cellar were realli the most unlik place in which to 
come across anyth dangerous; consid that they can be entered, 
onli through a heavi oaken door, the key of which, I carri alway on 
my person. 

It is in the smallest of these place that I keep my wine; a gloomi 
hole close to the foot of the cellar stairs; and beyond which, I have 
seldom proceeded. indeed, save for the rummag 'round, alreadi 
mentioned, I doubt whether I had ever, before, been right through 
the cellars. 

As I unlock the great door, at the top of the steps, I paused, 
nervously, a moment, at the strange, desol smell that assail my 
nostrils. then, throw the barrel of my weapon forward, I descended, 
slowly, into the dark of the underground regions. 

reach the bottom of the stairs, I stood for a minute, and listened. 
all wa silent, save for a faint drip, drip of water, falling, 
drop-by-drop, somewher to my left. As I stood, I notic how quietli 
the candl burnt; never a flicker nor flare, so utterli windless wa 
the place. 

quietly, I move from cellar to cellar. I had but a veri dim memori of 
their arrangement. the impress left by my first search were blurred. 
I had recollect of a success of great cellars, and of one, 
greater than the rest, the roof of which wa upheld by pillars; beyond 
that my mind wa hazy, and predomin by a sens of cold and dark 
and shadows. now, however, it wa different; for, although nervous, I 
wa suffici collect to be abl to look about me, and note the 
structur and size of the differ vault I entered. 

Of course, with the amount of light given by my candle, it wa not 
possibl to examin each place, minutely, but I wa enabl to notice, 
as I went along, that the wall appear to be built with wonder 
precis and finish; while here and there, an occasional, massiv 
pillar shot up to support the vault roof. 

thus, I came, at last, to the great cellar that I remembered. It is 
reached, through a huge, arch entrance, on which I observ strange, 
fantast carvings, which threw queer shadow under the light of my 
candle. As I stood, and examin these, thoughtfully, it occur to me 
how strang it was, that I should be so littl acquaint with my own 
house. yet, thi may be easili understood, when one realiz the size of 
thi ancient pile, and the fact that onli my old sister and I live in 
it, occupi a few of the rooms, such as our want decide. 

hold the light high, I pass on into the cellar, and, keep to 
the right, pace slowli up, until I reach the further end. I walk 
quietly, and look cautious about, as I went. but, so far as the 
light showed, I saw noth unusual. 

At the top, I turn to the left, still keep to the wall, and so 
continued, until I had travers the whole of the vast chamber. As I 
move along, I notic that the floor wa compos of solid rock, in 
place cover with a damp mould, in other bare, or almost so, save for 
a thin coat of light-grey dust. 

I had halt at the doorway. now, however, I turned, and made my way up 
the center of the place; pass among the pillars, and glanc to 
right and left, as I moved. about halfway up the cellar, I stub my 
foot against someth that gave out a metal sound. stoop quickly, 
I held the candle, and saw that the object I had kicked, wa a large, 
metal ring. bend lower, I clear the dust from around it, and, 
presently, discov that it wa attach to a ponder trap door, 
black with age. 

feel excited, and wonder to where it could lead, I laid my gun on 
the floor, and, stick the candl in the trigger guard, took the ring 
in both hands, and pulled. the trap creak loudly--th sound echoing, 
vaguely, through the huge place--and opened, heavily. 

prop the edg on my knee, I reach for the candle, and held it in 
the opening, move it to right and left; but could see nothing. I wa 
puzzl and surprised. there were no sign of steps, nor even the 
appear of there ever have been any. nothing; save an empti 
blackness. I might have been look down into a bottomless, sideless 
well. then, even as I stared, full of perplexity, I seem to hear, far 
down, as though from untold depths, a faint whisper of sound. I bent my 
head, quickly, more into the opening, and listened, intently. It may 
have been fancy; but I could have sworn to hear a soft titter, that 
grew into a hideous, chuckling, faint and distant. startled, I leapt 
backward, let the trap fall, with a hollow clang, that fill the 
place with echoes. even then, I seem to hear that mocking, suggest 
laughter; but this, I knew, must be my imagination. the sound, I had 
heard, wa far too slight to penetr through the cumbrou trap. 

for a full minute, I stood there, quivering--glancing, nervously, 
behind and before; but the great cellar wa silent as a grave, and, 
gradually, I shook off the frighten sensation. with a calmer mind, I 
becam again curiou to know into what that trap opened; but could not, 
then, summon suffici courag to make a further investigation. one 
thing I felt, however, wa that the trap ought to be secured. this, I 
accomplish by place upon it sever larg piec of 'dressed' 
stone, which I had notic in my tour along the east wall. 

then, after a final scrutini of the rest of the place, I retrac my 
way through the cellars, to the stairs, and so reach the daylight, 
with an infinit feel of relief, that the uncomfort task wa 
accomplished. 



_x_ 

the time OF wait 

the sun wa now warm, and shine brightly, form a wondrou contrast 
to the dark and dismal cellars; and it wa with compar light 
feelings, that I made my way up to the tower, to survey the gardens. 
there, I found everyth quiet, and, after a few minutes, went down to 
mary' room. 

here, have knocked, and receiv a reply, I unlock the door. My 
sister wa sitting, quietly, on the bed; as though waiting. she seem 
quit herself again, and made no attempt to move away, as I approached; 
yet, I observ that she scan my face, anxiously, as though in doubt, 
and but half assur in her mind that there wa noth to fear from me. 

To my questions, as to how she felt, she replied, sane enough, that 
she wa hungry, and would like to go down to prepar breakfast, if I did 
not mind. for a minute, I medit whether it would be safe to let her 
out. finally, I told her she might go, on condit that she promis 
not to attempt to leav the house, or meddl with ani of the outer 
doors. At my mention of the doors, a sudden look of fright cross her 
face; but she said nothing, save to give the requir promise, and then 
left the room, silently. 

cross the floor, I approach pepper. He had wake as I entered; 
but, beyond a slight yelp of pleasure, and a soft rap with hi tail, 
had kept quiet. now, as I pat him, he made an attempt to stand up, 
and succeeded, onli to fall back on hi side, with a littl yowl 
of pain. 

I spoke to him, and bade him lie still. I wa greatli delight with 
hi improvement, and also with the natur kind of my sister' 
heart, in take such good care of him, in spite of her condit of 
mind. after a while, I left him, and went downstairs, to my study. 

In a littl time, mari appeared, carri a tray on which smoke a hot 
breakfast. As she enter the room, I saw her gaze fasten on the prop 
that support the studi door; her lip tightened, and I thought she 
paled, slightly; but that wa all. put the tray down at my elbow, 
she wa leav the room, quietly, when I call her back. she came, it 
seemed, a littl timidly, as though startled; and I note that her hand 
clutch at her apron, nervously. 

'come, mary,' I said. 'cheer up! thing look brighter. i'v seen none 
of the creatur sinc yesterday morning, early.' 

she look at me, in a curious puzzl manner; as though not 
comprehending. then, intellig swept into her eyes, and fear; but she 
said nothing, beyond an unintellig murmur of acquiescence. after 
that, I kept silence; it wa evid that ani refer to the 
swine-things, wa more than her shaken nerv could bear. 

breakfast over, I went up to the tower. here, dure the greater part 
of the day, I maintain a strict watch over the gardens. onc or twice, 
I went down to the basement, to see how my sister wa get along. 
each time, I found her quiet, and curious submissive. indeed, on the 
last occasion, she even ventur to address me, on her own account, with 
regard to some household matter that need attention. though thi wa 
done with an almost extraordinari timidity, I hail it with happiness, 
as be the first word, voluntarili spoken, sinc the critic moment, 
when I had caught her unbar the back door, to go out among those 
wait brutes. I wonder whether she wa awar of her attempt, and how 
near a thing it had been; but refrain from question her, think 
it best to let well alone. 

that night, I slept in a bed; the first time for two nights. In the 
morning, I rose early, and took a walk through the house. all wa as it 
should be, and I went up to the tower, to have a look at the gardens. 
here, again, I found perfect quietness. 

At breakfast, when I met mary, I wa greatli pleas to see that she 
had suffici regain command over herself, to be abl to greet me 
in a perfectli natur manner. she talk sensibl and quietly; onli 
keep care from ani mention of the past coupl of days. In this, 
I humor her, to the extent of not attempt to lead the convers 
in that direction. 

earlier in the morning, I had been to see pepper. He wa mending, 
rapidly; and bade fair to be on hi legs, in earnest, in anoth day or 
two. befor leav the breakfast table, I made some refer to hi 
improvement. In the short discuss that followed, I wa surpris to 
gather, from my sister' remarks, that she wa still under the 
impress that hi wound had been given by the wildcat, of my 
invention. It made me feel almost asham of myself for deceiv her. 
yet, the lie had been told to prevent her from be frightened. and 
then, I had been sure that she must have known the truth, later, when 
those brute had attack the house. 

dure the day, I kept on the alert; spend much of my time, as on 
the previou day, in the tower; but not a sign could I see of the 
swine-creatures, nor hear ani sound. sever times, the thought had come 
to me, that the thing had, at last, left us; but, up to thi time, I 
had refus to entertain the idea, seriously; now, however, I began to 
feel that there wa reason for hope. It would soon be three day sinc I 
had seen ani of the things; but still, I intend to use the utmost 
caution. for all that I could tell, thi protract silenc might be a 
ruse to tempt me from the house--perhap right into their arms. the 
thought of such a contingency, was, alone, suffici to make me 
circumspect. 

So it was, that the fourth, fifth and sixth day went by, quietly, 
without my make ani attempt to leav the house. 

On the sixth day, I had the pleasur of see pepper, onc more, upon 
hi feet; and, though still veri weak, he manag to keep me compani 
dure the whole of that day. 



_xi_ 

the search OF the garden 

how slowli the time went; and never a thing to indic that ani of the 
brute still infest the gardens. 

It wa on the ninth day that, finally, I decid to run the risk, if 
ani there were, and salli out. with thi purpos in view, I load one 
of the shotguns, carefully--choos it, as be more deadli than a 
rifle, at close quarters; and then, after a final scrutini of the 
grounds, from the tower, I call pepper to follow me, and made my way 
down to the basement. 

At the door, I must confess to hesit a moment. the thought of what 
might be await me among the dark shrubberies, wa by no mean 
calcul to encourag my resolution. It wa but a second, though, and 
then I had drawn the bolts, and wa stand on the path outsid 
the door. 

pepper followed, stop at the doorstep to sniff, suspiciously; and 
carri hi nose up and down the jambs, as though follow a scent. 
then, suddenly, he turned, sharply, and start to run here and there, 
in semicircl and circles, all around the door; final return to 
the threshold. here, he began again to nose about. 

hitherto, I had stood, watch the dog; yet, all the time, with half 
my gaze on the wild tangl of gardens, stretch 'round me. now, I went 
toward him, and, bend down, examin the surfac of the door, where 
he wa smelling. I found that the wood wa cover with a network of 
scratches, cross and recross one another, in inextric 
confusion. In addit to this, I notic that the doorposts, 
themselves, were gnaw in places. beyond these, I could find nothing; 
and so, stand up, I began to make the tour of the hous wall. 

pepper, as soon as I walk away, left the door, and ran ahead, still 
nose and snif as he went along. At times, he stop to 
investigate. here, it would be a bullet-hol in the pathway, or, 
perhaps, a powder stain wad. anon, it might be a piec of torn sod, or 
a disturb patch of weedi path; but, save for such trifles, he found 
nothing. I observ him, critically, as he went along, and could 
discov noth of uneasiness, in hi demeanor, to indic that he 
felt the near of ani of the creatures. By this, I wa assur that 
the garden were empty, at least for the present, of those hate 
things. pepper could not be easili deceived, and it wa a relief to feel 
that he would know, and give me time warning, if there were 
ani danger. 

reach the place where I had shot that first creature, I stopped, and 
made a care scrutiny; but could see nothing. from there, I went on to 
where the great copingston had fallen. It lay on it side, appar 
just as it had been left when I shot the brute that wa move it. A 
coupl of feet to the right of the nearer end, wa a great dent in the 
ground; show where it had struck. the other end wa still within the 
indentation--half in, and half out. go nearer, I look at the stone, 
more closely. what a huge piec of masonri it was! and that creatur had 
move it, single-handed, in it attempt to reach what lay below. 

I went 'round to the further end of the stone. here, I found that it 
wa possibl to see under it, for a distanc of nearli a coupl of feet. 
still, I could see noth of the stricken creatures, and I felt much 
surprised. I had, as I have befor said, guess that the remain had 
been removed; yet, I could not conceiv that it had been done so 
thoroughli as not to leav some certain sign, beneath the stone, 
indic of their fate. I had seen sever of the brute struck down 
beneath it, with such forc that they must have been liter driven 
into the earth; and now, not a vestig of them wa to be seen--not even 
a bloodstain. 

I felt more puzzled, than ever, as I turn the matter over in my mind; 
but could think of no plausibl explanation; and so, finally, gave it 
up, as one of the mani thing that were unexplainable. 

from there, I transfer my attent to the studi door. I could see, 
now, even more plainly, the effect of the tremend strain, to which 
it had been subjected; and I marvel how, even with the support 
afford by the props, it had withstood the attacks, so well. there were 
no mark of blows--indeed, none had been given--but the door had been 
liter riven from it hinges, by the applic of enormous, silent 
force. one thing that I observ affect me profoundly--th head of one 
of the prop had been driven right through a panel. thi was, of itself, 
suffici to show how huge an effort the creatur had made to break 
down the door, and how nearli they had succeeded. 

leaving, I continu my tour 'round the house, find littl els of 
interest; save at the back, where I came across the piec of pipe I 
had torn from the wall, lie among the long grass underneath the 
broken window. 

then, I return to the house, and, have re-bolt the back door, 
went up to the tower. here, I spent the afternoon, reading, and 
occasion glanc down into the gardens. I had determined, if the 
night pass quietly, to go as far as the pit, on the morrow. perhaps, I 
should be abl to learn, then, someth of what had happened. the day 
slip away, and the night came, and went much as the last few 
night had gone. 

when I rose the morn had broken, fine and clear; and I determin to 
put my project into action. dure breakfast, I consid the matter, 
carefully; after which, I went to the studi for my shotgun. In addition, 
I loaded, and slip into my pocket, a small, but heavy, pistol. I 
quit understood that, if there were ani danger, it lay in the direct 
of the pit and I intend to be prepared. 

leav the study, I went down to the back door, follow by pepper. 
onc outside, I took a quick survey of the surround gardens, and then 
set off toward the pit. On the way, I kept a sharp outlook, hold my 
gun, handily. pepper wa run ahead, I noticed, without ani appar 
hesitation. from this, I augur that there wa no immin danger to be 
apprehended, and I step out more quickli in hi wake. He had reach 
the top of the pit, now, and wa nose hi way along the edge. 

A minut later, I wa besid him, look down into the pit. for a 
moment, I could scarc believ that it wa the same place, so greatli 
wa it changed. the dark, wood ravin of a fortnight ago, with a 
foliage-hidden stream, run sluggishly, at the bottom, exist no 
longer. instead, my eye show me a rag chasm, partli fill with a 
gloomi lake of turbid water. all one side of the ravin wa strip of 
underwood, show the bare rock. 

A littl to my left, the side of the pit appear to have collaps 
altogether, form a deep v-shape cleft in the face of the rocki 
cliff. thi rift ran, from the upper edg of the ravine, nearli down to 
the water, and penetr into the pit side, to a distanc of some forti 
feet. it open was, at least, six yard across; and, from this, it 
seem to taper into about two. but, what attract my attention, more 
than even the stupend split itself, wa a great hole, some distanc 
down the cleft, and right in the angl of the V. It wa clearli defined, 
and not unlik an arch doorway in shape; though, lie as it did in 
the shadow, I could not see it veri distinctly. 

the opposit side of the pit, still retain it verdure; but so torn 
in places, and everywher cover with dust and rubbish, that it wa 
hardli distinguish as such. 

My first impression, that there had been a land slip, was, I began to 
see, not sufficient, of itself, to account for all the chang I 
witnessed. and the water--? I turned, suddenly; for I had becom awar 
that, somewher to my right, there wa a nois of run water. I could 
see nothing; but, now that my attent had been caught, I 
distinguished, easily, that it came from somewher at the east end 
of the pit. 

slowly, I made my way in that direction; the sound grow plainer as I 
advanced, until in a little, I stood right abov it. even then, I could 
not perceiv the cause, until I knelt down, and thrust my head over the 
cliff. here, the nois came up to me, plainly; and I saw, below me, a 
torrent of clear water, issu from a small fissur in the pit side, 
and rush down the rocks, into the lake beneath. A littl further 
along the cliff, I saw another, and, beyond that again, two smaller 
ones. these, then, would help to account for the quantiti of water in 
the pit; and, if the fall of rock and earth had block the outlet of 
the stream at the bottom, there wa littl doubt but that it wa 
contribut a veri larg share. 

yet, I puzzl my head to account for the gener _shaken_ appear 
of the place--thes streamlets, and that huge cleft, further up the 
ravine! It seem to me, that more than the landslip wa necessari to 
account for these. I could imagin an earthquake, or a great 
_explosion_, creat some such condit of affair as existed; but, of 
these, there had been neither. then, I stood up, quickly, rememb 
that crash, and the cloud of dust that had followed, directly, rush 
high into the air. but I shook my head, unbelievingly. no! It must have 
been the nois of the fall rock and earth, I had heard; of course, 
the dust would fly, naturally. still, in spite of my reasoning, I had an 
uneasi feeling, that thi theori did not satisfi my sens of the 
probable; and yet, wa ani other, that I could suggest, like to be 
half so plausible? pepper had been sit on the grass, while I 
conduct my examination. now, as I turn up the north side of the 
ravine, he rose and followed. 

slowly, and keep a care watch in all directions, I made the 
circuit of the pit; but found littl else, that I had not alreadi seen. 
from the west end, I could see the four waterfalls, uninterruptedly. 
they were some consider distanc up from the surfac of the 
lake--about fifti feet, I calculated. 

for a littl while longer, I loiter about; keep my eye and ear 
open, but still, without see or hear anyth suspicious. the 
whole place wa wonder quiet; indeed, save for the continu 
murmur of the water, at the top end, no sound, of ani description, broke 
the silence. 

all thi while, pepper had shown no sign of uneasiness. thi seemed, 
to me, to indic that, for the time being, at least, there wa none of 
the swine-creatur in the vicinity. So far as I could see, hi 
attent appear to have been taken, chiefly, with scratch and 
snif among the grass at the edg of the pit. At times, he would 
leav the edge, and run along toward the house, as though follow 
invis tracks; but, in all cases, return after a few minutes. I 
had littl doubt but that he wa realli trace out the footstep of the 
swine-things; and the veri fact that each one seem to lead him back to 
the pit, appear to me, a proof that the brute had all return whenc 
they came. 

At noon, I went home, for dinner. dure the afternoon, I made a 
partial search of the gardens, accompani by pepper; but, without 
come upon anyth to indic the presenc of the creatures. 

once, as we made our way through the shrubberies, pepper rush in 
among some bushes, with a fierc yelp. At that, I jump back, in sudden 
fright, and threw my gun forward, in readiness; onli to laugh, 
nervously, as pepper reappeared, chase an unfortun cat. toward 
evening, I gave up the search, and return to the house. all at once, 
as we were pass a great clump of bushes, on our right, pepper 
disappeared, and I could hear him snif and growl among them, in a 
suspici manner. with my gun barrel, I part the interven 
shrubbery, and look inside. there wa noth to be seen, save that 
mani of the branch were bent down, and broken; as though some anim 
had made a lair there, at no veri previou date. It wa probably, I 
thought, one of the place occupi by some of the swine-creatures, on 
the night of the attack. 

next day, I resum my search through the gardens; but without result. 
By evening, I had been right through them, and now, I knew, beyond the 
possibl of doubt, that there were no longer ani of the thing 
conceal about the place. indeed, I have often thought since, that I 
wa correct in my earlier surmise, that they had left soon after 
the attack. 



_xii_ 

the subterranean pit 

anoth week came and went, dure which I spent a great deal of my time 
about the pit mouth. I had come to the conclus a few day earlier, 
that the arch hole, in the angl of the great rift, wa the place 
through which the swine-th had made their exit, from some unholi 
place in the bowel of the world. how near the probabl truth thi went, 
I wa to learn later. 

It may be easili understood, that I wa tremend curious, though in 
a frighten way, to know to what infern place that hole led; though, 
so far, the idea had not struck me, seriously, of make an 
investigation. I wa far too much imbu with a sens of horror of the 
swine-creatures, to think of venturing, willingly, where there wa ani 
chanc of come into contact with them. 

gradually, however, as time passed, thi feel grew insens less; 
so that when, a few day later, the thought occur to me that it might 
be possibl to clamber down and have a look into the hole, I wa not so 
exceedingli avers to it, as might have been imagined. still, I do not 
think, even then, that I realli intend to tri ani such foolhardi 
adventure. for all that I could tell, it might be certain death, to 
enter that dole look opening. and yet, such is the pertinac of 
human curiosity, that, at last, my chief desir wa but to discov what 
lay beyond that gloomi entrance. 

slowly, as the day slid by, my fear of the swine-th becam an 
emot of the past--mor an unpleasant, incred memory, than 
aught else. 

thus, a day came, when, throw thought and fanci adrift, I 
procur a rope from the house, and, have made it fast to a stout 
tree, at the top of the rift, and some littl distanc back from the pit 
edge, let the other end down into the cleft, until it dangl right 
across the mouth of the dark hole. 

then, cautiously, and with mani misgiv as to whether it wa not a 
mad act that I wa attempting, I climb slowli down, use the rope as 
a support, until I reach the hole. here, still hold on to the rope, 
I stood, and peer in. all wa perfectli dark, and not a sound came to 
me. yet, a moment later, it seem that I could hear something. I held 
my breath, and listened; but all wa silent as the grave, and I breath 
freeli onc more. At the same instant, I heard the sound again. It wa 
like a nois of labor breathing--deep and sharp-drawn. for a short 
second, I stood, petrified; not abl to move. but now the sound had 
ceas again, and I could hear nothing. 

As I stood there, anxiously, my foot dislodg a pebble, which fell 
inward, into the dark, with a hollow chink. At once, the nois wa taken 
up and repeat a score of times; each succeed echo be fainter, 
and seem to travel away from me, as though into remot distance. 
then, as the silenc fell again, I heard that stealthi breathing. for 
each respir I made, I could hear an answer breath. the sound 
appear to be come nearer; and then, I heard sever others; but 
fainter and more distant. whi I did not grip the rope, and spring up out 
of danger, I cannot say. It wa as though I had been paralyzed. I broke 
out into a profus sweat, and tri to moisten my lip with my tongue. 
My throat had gone suddenli dry, and I coughed, huskily. It came back to 
me, in a dozen, horrible, throati tones, mockingly. I peered, 
helplessly, into the gloom; but still noth showed. I had a strange, 
choki sensation, and again I coughed, dryly. again the echo took it up, 
rise and falling, grotesquely, and die slowli into a 
muffl silence. 

then, suddenly, a thought came to me, and I held my breath. the other 
breath stopped. I breath again, and, onc more, it re-commenced. 
but now, I no longer feared. I knew that the strang sound were not 
made by ani lurk swine-creature; but were simpli the echo of my own 
respirations. 

yet, I had receiv such a fright, that I wa glad to scrambl up the 
rift, and haul up the rope. I wa far too shaken and nervou to think of 
enter that dark hole then, and so return to the house. I felt more 
myself next morning; but even then, I could not summon up suffici 
courag to explor the place. 

all thi time, the water in the pit had been creep slowli up, and 
now stood but a littl below the opening. At the rate at which it wa 
rising, it would be level with the floor in less than anoth week; and 
I realiz that, unless I carri out my investig soon, I should 
probabl never do so at all; as the water would rise and rise, until the 
opening, itself, wa submerged. 

It may have been that thi thought stir me to act; but, whatev it 
was, a coupl of day later, saw me stand at the top of the cleft, 
fulli equip for the task. 

thi time, I wa resolv to conquer my shirking, and go right through 
with the matter. with thi intention, I had brought, in addit to the 
rope, a bundl of candles, mean to use them as a torch; also my 
double-barrel shotgun. In my belt, I had a heavi horse-pistol, load 
with buckshot. 

As before, I fasten the rope to the tree. then, have tie my gun 
across my shoulders, with a piec of stout cord, I lower myself over 
the edg of the pit. At thi movement, pepper, who had been eye my 
actions, watchfully, rose to hi feet, and ran to me, with a half bark, 
half wail, it seem to me, of warning. but I wa resolv on my 
enterprise, and bade him lie down. I would much have like to take him 
with me; but thi wa next to impossible, in the exist circumstances. 
As my face drop level with the pit edge, he lick me, right across 
the mouth; and then, seiz my sleev between hi teeth, began to pull 
back, strongly. It wa veri evid that he did not want me to go. yet, 
have made up my mind, I had no intent of give up the attempt; 
and, with a sharp word to pepper, to releas me, I continu my descent, 
leav the poor old fellow at the top, bark and cri like a 
forsaken pup. 

carefully, I lower myself from project to projection. I knew that 
a slip might mean a wetting. 

reach the entrance, I let go the rope, and unti the gun from my 
shoulders. then, with a last look at the sky--which I notic wa 
cloud over, rapidly--i went forward a coupl of paces, so as to be 
shield from the wind, and lit one of the candles. hold it abov my 
head, and grasp my gun, firmly, I began to move on, slowly, throw 
my glanc in all directions. 

for the first minute, I could hear the melancholi sound of pepper' 
howling, come down to me. gradually, as I penetr further into the 
darkness, it grew fainter; until, in a littl while, I could hear 
nothing. the path tend downward somewhat, and to the left. thenc it 
kept on, still run to the left, until I found that it wa lead me 
right in the direct of the house. 

veri cautiously, I move onward, stopping, everi few steps, to listen. 
I had gone, perhaps, a hundr yards, when, suddenly, it seem to me 
that I caught a faint sound, somewher along the passag behind. with my 
heart thud heavily, I listened. the nois grew plainer, and appear 
to be approaching, rapidly. I could hear it distinctly, now. It wa the 
soft pad of run feet. In the first moment of fright, I stood, 
irresolute; not know whether to go forward or backward. then, with a 
sudden realiz of the best thing to do, I back up to the rocki 
wall on my right, and, hold the candl abov my head, waited--gun in 
hand--curs my foolhardi curiosity, for bring me into such 
a strait. 

I had not long to wait, but a few seconds, befor two eye reflect 
back from the gloom, the ray of my candle. I rais my gun, use my 
right hand only, and aim quickly. even as I did so, someth leapt 
out of the darkness, with a bluster bark of joy that woke the echoes, 
like thunder. It wa pepper. how he had contriv to scrambl down the 
cleft, I could not conceive. As I brush my hand, nervously, over hi 
coat, I notic that he wa dripping; and conclud that he must have 
tri to follow me, and fallen into the water; from which he would not 
find it veri difficult to climb. 

have wait a minute, or so, to steadi myself, I proceed along the 
way, pepper following, quietly. I wa curious glad to have the old 
fellow with me. He wa company, and, somehow, with him at my heels, I 
wa less afraid. also, I knew how quickli hi keen ear would detect the 
presenc of ani unwelcom creature, should there be such, amid the 
dark that wrap us. 

for some minut we went slowli along; the path still lead straight 
toward the house. soon, I concluded, we should be stand right beneath 
it, did the path but carri far enough. I led the way, cautiously, for 
anoth fifti yards, or so. then, I stopped, and held the light high; 
and reason enough I had to be thank that I did so; for there, not 
three pace forward, the path vanished, and, in place, show a hollow 
blackness, that sent sudden fear through me. 

veri cautiously, I crept forward, and peer down; but could see 
nothing. then, I cross to the left of the passage, to see whether 
there might be ani continu of the path. here, right against the 
wall, I found that a narrow track, some three feet wide, led onward. 
carefully, I step on to it; but had not gone far, befor I regret 
ventur thereon. for, after a few paces, the alreadi narrow way, 
resolv itself into a mere ledge, with, on the one side the solid, 
unyield rock, tower up, in a great wall, to the unseen roof, and, 
on the other, that yawn chasm. I could not help reflect how 
helpless I was, should I be attack there, with no room to turn, and 
where even the recoil of my weapon might be suffici to drive me 
headlong into the depth below. 

To my great relief, a littl further on, the track suddenli broaden 
out again to it origin breadth. gradually, as I went onward, I 
notic that the path trend steadili to the right, and so, after some 
minutes, I discov that I wa not go forward; but simpli circl 
the huge abyss. I had, evidently, come to the end of the great passage. 

five minut later, I stood on the spot from which I had started; 
have been complet 'round, what I guess now to be a vast pit, the 
mouth of which must be at least a hundr yard across. 

for some littl time, I stood there, lost in perplex thought. 'what 
doe it all mean?' wa the cri that had begun to reiter through 
my brain. 

A sudden idea struck me, and I search 'round for a piec of stone. 
presently, I found a bit of rock, about the size of a small loaf. 
stick the candl upright in a crevic of the floor, I went back from 
the edge, somewhat, and, take a short run, launch the stone forward 
into the chasm--mi idea be to throw it far enough to keep it clear of 
the sides. then, I stoop forward, and listened; but, though I kept 
perfectli quiet, for at least a full minute, no sound came back to me 
from out of the dark. 

I knew, then, that the depth of the hole must be immense; for the 
stone, had it struck anything, wa larg enough to have set the echo 
of that weird place, whisper for an indefinit period. even as it 
was, the cavern had given back the sound of my footfalls, 
multitudinously. the place wa awesome, and I would willingli have 
retrac my steps, and left the mysteri of it solitud unsolved; 
only, to do so, meant admit defeat. 

then, a thought came, to tri to get a view of the abyss. It occur to 
me that, if I place my candl 'round the edg of the hole, I should be 
abl to get, at least, some dim sight of the place. 

I found, on counting, that I had brought fifteen candles, in the 
bundle--mi first intent have been, as I have alreadi said, to make 
a torch of the lot. these, I proceed to place 'round the pit mouth, 
with an interv of about twenti yard between each. 

have complet the circle, I stood in the passage, and endeavor to 
get an idea of how the place looked. but I discovered, immediately, that 
they were total insuffici for my purpose. they did littl more than 
make the gloom visible. one thing they did, however, and that was, they 
confirm my opinion of the size of the opening; and, although they 
show me noth that I want to see; yet the contrast they afford 
to the heavi darkness, pleas me, curiously. It wa as though fifteen 
tini star shone through the subterranean night. 

then, even as I stood, pepper gave a sudden howl, that wa taken up by 
the echoes, and repeat with ghastli variations, die away, slowly. 
with a quick movement, I held aloft the one candl that I had kept, and 
glanc down at the dog; at the same moment, I seem to hear a noise, 
like a diabol chuckle, rise up from the hitherto, silent depth of 
the pit. I started; then, I recollect that it was, probably, the echo 
of pepper' howl. 

pepper had move away from me, up the passage, a few steps; he wa 
nose along the rocki floor; and I thought I heard him lapping. I went 
toward him, hold the candl low. As I moved, I heard my boot go sop, 
sop; and the light wa reflect from someth that glistened, and 
crept past my feet, swiftli toward the pit. I bent lower, and looked; 
then gave vent to an express of surprise. from somewhere, higher up 
the path, a stream of water wa run quickli in the direct of the 
great opening, and grow in size everi second. 

again, pepper gave vent to that deep-drawn howl, and, run at me, 
seiz my coat, and attempt to drag me up the path toward the 
entrance. with a nervou gesture, I shook him off, and cross quickli 
over to the left-hand wall. If anyth were coming, I wa go to have 
the wall at my back. 

then, as I stare anxious up the pathway, my candl caught a gleam, 
far up the passage. At the same moment, I becam consciou of a 
murmur roar, that grew louder, and fill the whole cavern with 
deafen sound. from the pit, came a deep, hollow echo, like the sob of 
a giant. then, I had sprung to one side, on to the narrow ledg that ran 
'round the abyss, and, turning, saw a great wall of foam sweep past me, 
and leap tumultu into the wait chasm. A cloud of spray burst 
over me, extinguish my candle, and wet me to the skin. I still 
held my gun. the three nearest candl went out; but the further one 
gave onli a short flicker. after the first rush, the flow of water eas 
down to a steadi stream, mayb a foot in depth; though I could not see 
this, until I had procur one of the light candles, and, with it, 
start to reconnoiter. pepper had, fortunately, follow me as I leapt 
for the ledge, and now, veri much subdued, kept close behind. 

A short examin show me that the water reach right across the 
passage, and wa run at a tremend rate. already, even as I stood 
there, it had deepened. I could make onli a guess at what had happened. 
evidently, the water in the ravin had broken into the passage, by some 
means. If that were the case, it would go on increas in volume, until 
I should find it imposs to leav the place. the thought wa 
frightening. It wa evid that I must make my exit as hurriedli 
as possible. 

take my gun by the stock, I sound the water. It wa a littl under 
knee-deep. the nois it made, plung down into the pit, wa deafening. 
then, with a call to pepper, I step out into the flood, use the gun 
as a staff. instantly, the water boil up over my knees, and nearli to 
the top of my thighs, with the speed at which it wa racing. for one 
short moment, I nearli lost my footing; but the thought of what lay 
behind, stimul me to a fierc endeavor, and, step-by-step, I 
made headway. 

Of pepper, I knew noth at first. I had all I could do to keep on my 
legs; and wa overjoyed, when he appear besid me. He wa wade 
man along. He is a big dog, with longish thin legs, and I suppos 
the water had less grasp on them, than upon mine. anyway, he manag a 
great deal better than I did; go ahead of me, like a guide, and 
wittingly--or otherwise--helping, somewhat, to break the forc of the 
water. On we went, step by step, struggl and gasping, until somewher 
about a hundr yard had been safe traversed. then, whether it wa 
becaus I wa take less care, or that there wa a slipperi place on 
the rocki floor, I cannot say; but, suddenly, I slipped, and fell on my 
face. instantly, the water leapt over me in a cataract, hurl me down, 
toward that bottomless hole, at a fright speed. frantic I 
struggled; but it wa imposs to get a footing. I wa helpless, 
gasp and drowning. all at once, someth grip my coat, and 
brought me to a standstill. It wa pepper. miss me, he must have 
race back, through the dark turmoil, to find me, and then caught, and 
held me, until I wa abl to get to my feet. 

I have a dim recollect of have seen, momentarily, the gleam of 
sever lights; but, of this, I have never been quit sure. If my 
impress are correct, I must have been wash down to the veri brink 
of that aw chasm, befor pepper manag to bring me to a standstill. 
and the lights, of course, could onli have been the distant flame of 
the candles, I had left burning. but, as I have said, I am not by ani 
mean sure. My eye were full of water, and I had been badli shaken. 

and there wa I, without my help gun, without light, and sadli 
confused, with the water deepening; depend sole upon my old friend 
pepper, to help me out of that hellish place. 

I wa face the torrent. naturally, it wa the onli way in which I 
could have sustain my posit a moment; for even old pepper could not 
have held me long against that terrif strain, without assistance, 
howev blind, from me. 

perhap a minut passed, dure which it wa touch and go with me; 
then, gradual I re-commenc my tortuou way up the passage. and so 
began the grimmest fight with death, from which ever I hope to emerg 
victorious. slowly, furiously, almost hopelessly, I strove; and that 
faith pepper led me, drag me, upward and onward, until, at last, 
ahead I saw a gleam of bless light. It wa the entrance. onli a few 
yard further, and I reach the opening, with the water surg and 
boil hungrili around my loins. 

and now I understood the caus of the catastrophe. It wa rain 
heavily, liter in torrents. the surfac of the lake wa level with 
the bottom of the opening--nay! more than level, it wa abov it. 
evidently, the rain had swollen the lake, and caus thi prematur 
rise; for, at the rate the ravin had been filling, it would not have 
reach the entranc for a coupl more days. 

luckily, the rope by which I had descended, wa stream into the 
opening, upon the inrush waters. seiz the end, I knot it 
secur 'round pepper' body, then, summon up the last remnant of my 
strength, I commenc to swarm up the side of the cliff. I reach the 
pit edge, in the last stage of exhaustion. yet, I had to make one more 
effort, and haul pepper into safety. 

slowli and wearily, I haul on the rope. onc or twice, it seem that 
I should have to give up; for pepper is a weighti dog, and I wa utterli 
done. yet, to let go, would have meant certain death to the old fellow, 
and the thought spur me to greater exertions. I have but a veri hazi 
remembr of the end. I recal pulling, through moment that lag 
strangely. I have also some recollect of see pepper' muzzle, 
appear over the pit edge, after what seem an indefinit period of 
time. then, all grew suddenli dark. 



_xiii_ 

the trap IN the great cellar 

I suppos I must have swooned; for, the next thing I remember, I open 
my eyes, and all wa dusk. I wa lie on my back, with one leg doubl 
under the other, and pepper wa lick my ears. I felt horribl stiff, 
and my leg wa numb, from the knee, downward. for a few minutes, I lay 
thus, in a daze condition; then, slowly, I struggl to a sit 
position, and look about me. 

It had stop raining, but the tree still dripped, dismally. from the 
pit, came a continu murmur of run water. I felt cold and shivery. 
My cloth were sodden, and I ach all over. veri slowly, the life came 
back into my numb leg, and, after a little, I essay to stand up. 
this, I managed, at the second attempt; but I wa veri tottery, and 
peculiarli weak. It seem to me, that I wa go to be ill, and I made 
shift to stumbl my way toward the house. My step were erratic, and my 
head confused. At each step that I took, sharp pain shot through 
my limbs. 

I had gone, perhaps, some thirti paces, when a cri from pepper, drew 
my attention, and I turned, stiffly, toward him. the old dog wa tri 
to follow me; but could come no further, owe to the rope, with which I 
had haul him up, be still tie 'round hi body, the other end not 
have been unfasten from the tree. for a moment, I fumbl with the 
knots, weakly; but they were wet and hard, and I could do nothing. then, 
I rememb my knife, and, in a minute, the rope wa cut. 

how I reach the house, I scarc know, and, of the day that 
followed, I rememb still less. Of one thing, I am certain, that, had 
it not been for my sister' untir love and nursing, I had not been 
write at thi moment. 

when I recov my senses, it wa to find that I had been in bed for 
nearli two weeks. yet anoth week passed, befor I wa strong enough to 
totter out into the gardens. even then, I wa not abl to walk so far as 
the pit. I would have like to ask my sister, how high the water had 
risen; but felt it wa wiser not to mention the subject to her. indeed, 
sinc then, I have made a rule never to speak to her about the strang 
things, that happen in thi great, old house. 

It wa not until a coupl of day later, that I manag to get across 
to the pit. there, I found that, in my few weeks' absence, there had 
been wrought a wondrou change. instead of the three-part fill 
ravine, I look out upon a great lake, whose placid surface, reflect 
the light, coldly. the water had risen to within half a dozen feet of 
the pit edge. onli in one part wa the lake disturbed, and that wa 
abov the place where, far down under the silent waters, yawn the 
entranc to the vast, underground pit. here, there wa a continu 
bubbling; and, occasionally, a curiou sort of sob gurgl would find 
it way up from the depth. beyond these, there wa noth to tell of 
the thing that were hidden beneath. As I stood there, it came to me 
how wonder thing had work out. the entranc to the place whenc 
the swine-creatur had come, wa seal up, by a power that made me 
feel there wa noth more to fear from them. and yet, with the 
feeling, there wa a sensat that, now, I should never learn anyth 
further, of the place from which those dread thing had come. It wa 
complet shut off and conceal from human curios forever. 

strange--in the knowledg of that underground hell-hole--how apposit 
ha been the name of the pit. one wonder how it originated, and when. 
naturally, one conclud that the shape and depth of the ravin would 
suggest the name 'pit.' yet, is it not possibl that it has, all along, 
held a deeper significance, a hint--could one but have guessed--of the 
greater, more stupend pit that lie far down in the earth, beneath 
thi old house? under thi house! even now, the idea is strang and 
terribl to me. for I have proved, beyond doubt, that the pit yawn 
right below the house, which is evid supported, somewher abov the 
center of it, upon a tremendous, arch roof, of solid rock. 

It happen in thi wise, that, have occas to go down to the 
cellars, the thought occur to me to pay a visit to the great vault, 
where the trap is situated; and see whether everyth wa as I had 
left it. 

reach the place, I walk slowli up the center, until I came to the 
trap. there it was, with the stone pile upon it, just as I had seen it 
last. I had a lantern with me, and the idea came to me, that now would 
be a good time to investig whatev lay under the great, oak slab. 
place the lantern on the floor, I tumbl the stone off the trap, 
and, grasp the ring, pull the door open. As I did so, the cellar 
becam fill with the sound of a murmur thunder, that rose from far 
below. At the same time, a damp wind blew up into my face, bring 
with it a load of fine spray. therewith, I drop the trap, hurriedly, 
with a half frighten feel of wonder. 

for a moment, I stood puzzled. I wa not particularli afraid. the 
haunt fear of the swine-th had left me, long ago; but I wa 
certainli nervou and astonished. then, a sudden thought possess me, 
and I rais the ponder door, with a feel of excitement. leav 
it stand upon it end, I seiz the lantern, and, kneel down, 
thrust it into the opening. As I did so, the moist wind and spray drove 
in my eyes, make me unabl to see, for a few moments. even when my 
eye were clear, I could distinguish noth below me, save darkness, 
and whirl spray. 

see that it wa useless to expect to make out anything, with the 
light so high, I felt in my pocket for a piec of twine, with which to 
lower it further into the opening. even as I fumbled, the lantern 
slip from my fingers, and hurtl down into the darkness. for a brief 
instant, I watch it fall, and saw the light shine on a tumult of 
white foam, some eighti or a hundr feet below me. then it wa gone. My 
sudden surmis wa correct, and now, I knew the caus of the wet and 
noise. the great cellar wa connect with the pit, by mean of the 
trap, which open right abov it; and the moisture, wa the spray, 
rise from the water, fall into the depths. 

In an instant, I had an explan of certain things, that had 
hitherto puzzl me. now, I could understand whi the noises--on the 
first night of the invasion--had seem to rise directli from under my 
feet. and the chuckl that had sound when first I open the trap! 
evidently, some of the swine-th must have been right beneath me. 

anoth thought struck me. were the creatur all drowned? would they 
drown? I rememb how unabl I had been to find ani trace to show 
that my shoot had been realli fatal. had they life, as we understand 
life, or were they ghouls? these thought flash through my brain, as I 
stood in the dark, search my pocket for matches. I had the box in my 
hand now, and, strike a light, I step to the trap door, and close 
it. then, I pile the stone back upon it; after which, I made my way 
out from the cellars. 

and so, I suppos the water goe on, thunder down into that 
bottomless hell-pit. sometimes, I have an inexplic desir to go down 
to the great cellar, open the trap, and gaze into the impenetrable, 
spray-damp darkness. At times, the desir becom almost overpowering, 
in it intensity. It is not mere curiosity, that prompt me; but more as 
though some unexplain influenc were at work. still, I never go; and 
intend to fight down the strang longing, and crush it; even as I would 
the unholi thought of self-destruction. 

thi idea of some intang forc be exerted, may seem reasonless. 
yet, my instinct warn me, that it is not so. In these things, reason 
seem to me less to be trust than instinct. 

one thought there is, in closing, that impress itself upon me, with 
ever grow insistence. It is, that I live in a veri strang house; a 
veri aw house. and I have begun to wonder whether I am do wise 
in stay here. yet, if I left, where could I go, and still obtain the 
solitude, and the sens of her presence,[1] that alon make my old 
life bearable? 



_xiv_ 

the sea OF sleep 

for a consider period after the last incid which I have narrat 
in my diary, I had seriou thought of leav thi house, and might 
have done so; but for the great and wonder thing, of which I am 
about to write. 

how well I wa advised, in my heart, when I stay on here--spit of 
those vision and sight of unknown and unexplain things; for, had I 
not stayed, then I had not seen again the face of her I loved. yes, 
though few know it, none now save my sister mary, I have love and, 
ah! me--lost. 

I would write down the stori of those sweet, old days; but it would be 
like the tear of old wounds; yet, after that which ha happened, what 
need have I to care? for she ha come to me out of the unknown. 
strangely, she warn me; warn me passion against thi house; 
beg me to leav it; but admitted, when I question her, that she 
could not have come to me, had I been elsewhere. yet, in spite of this, 
still she warn me, earnestly; tell me that it wa a place, long 
ago given over to evil, and under the power of grim laws, of which none 
here have knowledge. and i--i just ask her, again, whether she would 
come to me elsewhere, and she could onli stand, silent. 

It wa thus, that I came to the place of the sea of sleep--so she 
term it, in her dear speech with me. I had stay up, in my study, 
reading; and must have doze over the book. suddenly, I awok and sat 
upright, with a start. for a moment, I look 'round, with a puzzl 
sens of someth unusual. there wa a misti look about the room, 
give a curiou soft to each tabl and chair and furnishing. 

gradually, the misti increased; growing, as it were, out of 
nothing. then, slowly, a soft, white light began to glow in the room. 
the flame of the candl shone through it, palely. I look from side 
to side, and found that I could still see each piec of furniture; but 
in a strang unreal way, more as though the ghost of each tabl and 
chair had taken the place of the solid article. 

gradually, as I looked, I saw them fade and fade; until, slowly, they 
resolv into nothingness. now, I look again at the candles. they 
shone wanly, and, even as I watched, grew more unreal, and so vanished. 
the room wa filled, now, with a soft, yet luminous, white twilight, 
like a gentl mist of light. beyond this, I could see nothing. even the 
wall had vanished. 

presently, I becam consciou that a faint, continu sound, puls 
through the silenc that wrap me. I listen intently. It grew more 
distinct, until it appear to me that I hark to the breath of 
some great sea. I cannot tell how long a space pass thus; but, after a 
while, it seem that I could see through the mistiness; and, slowly, I 
becam awar that I wa stand upon the shore of an immens and silent 
sea. thi shore wa smooth and long, vanish to right and left of me, 
in extrem distances. In front, swam a still immens of sleep 
ocean. At times, it seem to me that I caught a faint glimmer of light, 
under it surface; but of this, I could not be sure. behind me, rose up, 
to an extraordinari height, gaunt, black cliffs. 

overhead, the sky wa of a uniform cold grey color--th whole place 
be lit by a stupend globe of pale fire, that swam a littl abov 
the far horizon, and shed a foamlik light abov the quiet waters. 

beyond the gentl murmur of the sea, an intens still prevailed. 
for a long while, I stay there, look out across it strangeness. 
then, as I stared, it seem that a bubbl of white foam float up out 
of the depths, and then, even now I know not how it was, I wa look 
upon, nay, look _into_ the face of her--aye! into her face--into her 
soul; and she look back at me, with such a commingl of joy and 
sadness, that I ran toward her, blindly; cri strang to her, in a 
veri agoni of remembrance, of terror, and of hope, to come to me. yet, 
spite of my crying, she stay out there upon the sea, and onli shook 
her head, sorrowfully; but, in her eye wa the old earth-light of 
tenderness, that I had come to know, befor all things, ere we 
were parted. 

"at her perverseness, I grew desperate, and essay to wade out to her; 
yet, though I would, I could not. something, some invis barrier, 
held me back, and I wa fain to stay where I was, and cri out to her in 
the full of my soul, 'o, my darling, my darling--' but could say no 
more, for veri intensity. and, at that, she came over, swiftly, and 
touch me, and it wa as though heaven had opened. yet, when I reach 
out my hand to her, she put me from her with tenderli stern hands, and 
I wa abashed--" 



the fragments[2] 

(_the legibl portion of the mutil leaves_.) 

... through tear ... nois of etern in my ears, we part ... she 
whom I love. O, my god ...! 

I wa a great time dazed, and then I wa alon in the black of the 
night. I knew that I journey back, onc more, to the known universe. 
presently, I emerg from that enorm darkness. I had come among the 
star ... vast time ... the sun, far and remote. 

I enter into the gulf that separ our system from the outer suns. 
As I sped across the divid dark, I watched, steadily, the 
ever-grow bright and size of our sun. once, I glanc back to the 
stars, and saw them shift, as it were, in my wake, against the mighti 
background of night, so vast wa the speed of my pass spirit. 

I drew nigher to our system, and now I could see the shine of jupiter. 
later, I distinguish the cold, blue gleam of the earthlight.... I had 
a moment of bewilderment. all about the sun there seem to be bright, 
objects, move in rapid orbits. inward, nigh to the savag glori of the 
sun, there circl two dart point of light, and, further off, there 
flew a blue, shine speck, that I knew to be the earth. It circl the 
sun in a space that seem to be no more than an earth-minute. 

... nearer with great speed. I saw the radianc of jupit and 
saturn, spinning, with incred swiftness, in huge orbits. and ever I 
drew more nigh, and look out upon thi strang sight--th visibl 
circl of the planet about the mother sun. It wa as though time had 
been annihil for me; so that a year wa no more to my unflesh 
spirit, than is a moment to an earth-bound soul. 

the speed of the planets, appear to increase; and, presently, I wa 
watch the sun, all ring about with hair-lik circl of differ 
color fire--th path of the planets, hurtl at mighti speed, about 
the central flame.... 

"... the sun grew vast, as though it leapt to meet me.... and now I wa 
within the circl of the outer planets, and flit swiftly, toward 
the place where the earth, glimmer through the blue splendor of it 
orbit, as though a fieri mist, circl the sun at a monstrou 
speed...." [3] 



_xv_ 

the nois IN the night 

and now, I come to the strangest of all the strang happen that 
have befallen me in thi hous of mysteries. It occur quit 
lately--within the month; and I have littl doubt but that what I saw 
wa in realiti the end of all things. however, to my story. 

I do not know how it is; but, up to the present, I have never been abl 
to write these thing down, directli they happened. It is as though I 
have to wait a time, recov my just balance, and digesting--a it 
were--th thing I have heard or seen. No doubt, thi is as it should 
be; for, by waiting, I see the incid more truly, and write of them 
in a calmer and more judici frame of mind. thi by the way. 

It is now the end of november. My stori relat to what happen in the 
first week of the month. 

It wa night, about eleven o'clock. pepper and I kept one anoth 
compani in the study--that great, old room of mine, where I read and 
work. I wa reading, curious enough, the bible. I have begun, in these 
later days, to take a grow interest in that great and ancient book. 
suddenly, a distinct tremor shook the house, and there came a faint and 
distant, whir buzz, that grew rapidli into a far, muffl screaming. 
It remind me, in a queer, gigant way, of the nois that a clock 
makes, when the catch is released, and it is allow to run down. the 
sound appear to come from some remot height--somewher up in the 
night. there wa no repetit of the shock. I look across at pepper. 
He wa sleep peacefully. 

gradually, the whir nois decreased, and there came a long silence. 

all at once, a glow lit up the end window, which protrud far out from 
the side of the house, so that, from it, one may look both east and 
west. I felt puzzled, and, after a moment' hesitation, walk across 
the room, and pull asid the blind. As I did so, I saw the sun rise, 
from behind the horizon. It rose with a steady, percept movement. I 
could see it travel upward. In a minute, it seemed, it had reach the 
top of the trees, through which I had watch it. up, up--it wa broad 
daylight now. behind me, I wa consciou of a sharp, mosquito-lik 
buzzing. I glanc 'round, and knew that it came from the clock. even as 
I looked, it mark off an hour. the minut hand wa move 'round the 
dial, faster than an ordinari second-hand. the hour hand move quickli 
from space to space. I had a numb sens of astonishment. A moment later, 
so it seemed, the two candl went out, almost together. I turn 
swiftli back to the window; for I had seen the shadow of the 
window-frames, travel along the floor toward me, as though a great 
lamp had been carri up past the window. 

I saw now, that the sun had risen high into the heavens, and wa still 
visibl moving. It pass abov the house, with an extraordinari sail 
kind of motion. As the window came into shadow, I saw anoth 
extraordinari thing. the fine-weath cloud were not passing, easily, 
across the sky--they were scampering, as though a hundred-mile-an-hour 
wind blew. As they passed, they chang their shape a thousand time a 
minute, as though writh with a strang life; and so were gone. and, 
presently, other came, and whisk away likewise. 

To the west, I saw the sun, drop with an incredible, smooth, swift 
motion. eastward, the shadow of everi seen thing crept toward the 
come greyness. and the movement of the shadow wa visibl to me--a 
stealthy, writh creep of the shadow of the wind-stir trees. It 
wa a strang sight. 

quickly, the room began to darken. the sun slid down to the horizon, 
and seemed, as it were, to disappear from my sight, almost with a jerk. 
through the grey of the swift evening, I saw the silver crescent of 
the moon, fall out of the southern sky, toward the west. the even 
seem to merg into an almost instant night. abov me, the mani 
constel pass in a strange, 'noiseless' circling, westward. the 
moon fell through that last thousand fathom of the night-gulf, and 
there wa onli the starlight.... 

about thi time, the buzz in the corner ceased; tell me that the 
clock had run down. A few minut passed, and I saw the eastward sky 
lighten. A grey, sullen morn spread through all the darkness, and hid 
the march of the stars. overhead, there moved, with a heavy, everlast 
rolling, a vast, seamless sky of grey clouds--a cloud-ski that would 
have seem motionless, through all the length of an ordinari earth-day. 
the sun wa hidden from me; but, from moment to moment, the world would 
brighten and darken, brighten and darken, beneath wave of subtl light 
and shadow.... 

the light shift ever westward, and the night fell upon the earth. A 
vast rain seem to come with it, and a wind of a most extraordinari 
loudness--a though the howl of a nightlong gale, were pack into 
the space of no more than a minute. 

thi nois passed, almost immediately, and the cloud broke; so that, 
onc more, I could see the sky. the star were fli westward, with 
astound speed. It came to me now, for the first time, that, though 
the nois of the wind had passed, yet a constant 'blurred' sound wa in 
my ears. now that I notic it, I wa awar that it had been with me all 
the time. It wa the world-noise. 

and then, even as I grasp at so much comprehension, there came the 
eastward light. No more than a few heartbeats, and the sun rose, 
swiftly. through the trees, I saw it, and then it wa abov the trees. 
up--up, it soar and all the world wa light. It passed, with a swift, 
steadi swing to it highest altitude, and fell thence, westward. I saw 
the day roll visibl over my head. A few light cloud flitter 
northward, and vanished. the sun went down with one swift, clear plunge, 
and there wa about me, for a few seconds, the darker grow grey of 
the gloaming. 

southward and westward, the moon wa sink rapidly. the night had 
come, already. A minut it seemed, and the moon fell those remain 
fathom of dark sky. anoth minute, or so, and the eastward sky glow 
with the come dawn. the sun leapt upon me with a frighten 
abruptness, and soar ever more swiftli toward the zenith. then, 
suddenly, a fresh thing came to my sight. A black thundercloud rush up 
out of the south, and seem to leap all the arc of the sky, in a singl 
instant. As it came, I saw that it advanc edg flapped, like a 
monstrou black cloth in the heaven, twirl and undul rapidly, 
with a horrid suggestiveness. In an instant, all the air wa full of 
rain, and a hundr lightn flash seem to flood downward, as it 
were in one great shower. In the same second of time, the world-nois 
wa drown in the roar of the wind, and then my ear ached, under the 
stun impact of the thunder. 

and, in the midst of thi storm, the night came; and then, within the 
space of anoth minute, the storm had passed, and there wa onli the 
constant 'blur' of the world-nois on my hearing. overhead, the star 
were slide quickli westward; and something, mayhap the particular 
speed to which they had attained, brought home to me, for the first 
time, a keen realiz of the knowledg that it wa the world that 
revolved. I seem to see, suddenly, the world--a vast, dark 
mass--revolv visibl against the stars. 

the dawn and the sun seem to come together, so greatli had the speed 
of the world-revolut increased. the sun drove up, in one long, steadi 
curve; pass it highest point, and swept down into the western sky, 
and disappeared. I wa scarc consciou of evening, so brief wa it. 
then I wa watch the fli constellations, and the westward 
hasten moon. In but a space of seconds, so it seemed, it wa slide 
swiftli downward through the night-blue, and then wa gone. and, almost 
directly, came the morning. 

and now there seem to come a strang acceleration. the sun made one 
clean, clear sweep through the sky, and disappear behind the westward 
horizon, and the night came and went with a like haste. 

As the succeed day, open and close upon the world, I wa awar of 
a sweat of snow, suddenli upon the earth. the night came, and, almost 
immediately, the day. In the brief leap of the sun, I saw that the snow 
had vanished; and then, onc more, it wa night. 

thu matter were; and, even after the mani incred thing that I 
have seen, I experienc all the time a most profound awe. To see the 
sun rise and set, within a space of time to be measur by seconds; to 
watch (after a little) the moon leap--a pale, and ever grow orb--up 
into the night sky, and glide, with a strang swiftness, through the 
vast arc of blue; and, presently, to see the sun follow, spring out 
of the eastern sky, as though in chase; and then again the night, with 
the swift and ghostli pass of starri constellations, wa all too much 
to view believingly. yet, so it was--th day slip from dawn to dusk, 
and the night slide swiftli into day, ever rapidli and more rapidly. 

the last three passag of the sun had shown me a snow-cov earth, 
which, at night, had seemed, for a few seconds, incred weird under 
the fast-shift light of the soar and fall moon. now, however, 
for a littl space, the sky wa hidden, by a sea of swaying, 
leaden-whit clouds, which lighten and blackened, alternately, with 
the passag of day and night. 

the cloud rippl and vanished, and there wa onc more befor me, the 
vision of the swiftli leap sun, and night that came and went 
like shadows. 

faster and faster, spun the world. and now each day and night wa 
complet within the space of but a few seconds; and still the speed 
increased. 

It wa a littl later, that I notic that the sun had begun to have 
the suspicion of a trail of fire behind it. thi wa due, evidently, to 
the speed at which it, apparently, travers the heavens. and, as the 
day sped, each one quicker than the last, the sun began to assum the 
appear of a vast, flame comet[4] flare across the sky at short, 
period intervals. At night, the moon presented, with much greater 
truth, a comet-lik aspect; a pale, and singularli clear, fast travel 
shape of fire, trail streak of cold flame. the star show now, 
mere as fine hair of fire against the dark. 

once, I turn from the window, and glanc at pepper. In the flash of 
a day, I saw that he slept, quietly, and I move onc more to 
my watching. 

the sun wa now burst up from the eastern horizon, like a stupend 
rocket, seem to occupi no more than a second or two in hurl from 
east to west. I could no longer perceiv the passag of cloud across 
the sky, which seem to have darken somewhat. the brief nights, 
appear to have lost the proper dark of night; so that the hair-lik 
fire of the fli stars, show but dimly. As the speed increased, the 
sun began to sway veri slowli in the sky, from south to north, and then, 
slowli again, from north to south. 

so, amid a strang confus of mind, the hour passed. 

all thi while had pepper slept. presently, feel lone and 
distraught, I call to him, softly; but he took no notice. again, I 
called, rais my voic slightly; still he move not. I walk over to 
where he lay, and touch him with my foot, to rous him. At the action, 
gentl though it was, he fell to pieces. that is what happened; he 
liter and actual crumbl into a moulder heap of bone 
and dust. 

for the space of, perhap a minute, I stare down at the shapeless 
heap, that had onc been pepper. I stood, feel stunned. what can have 
happened? I ask myself; not at onc grasp the grim signific of 
that littl hill of ash. then, as I stir the heap with my foot, it 
occur to me that thi could onli happen in a great space of time. 
years--and years. 

outside, the weaving, flutter light held the world. inside, I stood, 
tri to understand what it meant--what that littl pile of dust and 
dri bones, on the carpet, meant. but I could not think, coherently. 

I glanc away, 'round the room, and now, for the first time, notic 
how dusti and old the place looked. dust and dirt everywhere; pile in 
littl heap in the corners, and spread about upon the furniture. the 
veri carpet, itself, wa invis beneath a coat of the same, all 
pervading, material. As I walked, littl cloud of the stuff rose up 
from under my footsteps, and assail my nostrils, with a dry, bitter 
odor that made me wheeze, huskily. 

suddenly, as my glanc fell again upon pepper' remains, I stood still, 
and gave voic to my confusion--questioning, aloud, whether the year 
were, indeed, passing; whether this, which I had taken to be a form of 
vision, was, in truth, a reality. I paused. A new thought had struck me. 
quickly, but with step which, for the first time, I noticed, tottered, 
I went across the room to the great pier-glass, and look in. It wa 
too cover with grime, to give back ani reflection, and, with trembl 
hands, I began to rub off the dirt. presently, I could see myself. the 
thought that had come to me, wa confirmed. instead of the great, hale 
man, who scarc look fifty, I wa look at a bent, decrepit man, 
whose shoulder stooped, and whose face wa wrinkl with the year of a 
century. the hair--which a few short hour ago had been nearli coal 
black--wa now silveri white. onli the eye were bright. gradually, I 
traced, in that ancient man, a faint resembl to my self of 
other days. 

I turn away, and totter to the window. I knew, now, that I wa old, 
and the knowledg seem to confirm my trembl walk. for a littl 
space, I stare moodili out into the blur vista of chang 
landscape. even in that short time, a year passed, and, with a petul 
gesture, I left the window. As I did so, I notic that my hand shook 
with the palsi of old age; and a short sob choke it way through 
my lips. 

for a littl while, I paced, tremulously, between the window and the 
table; my gaze wander hither and thither, uneasily. how dilapid 
the room was. everywher lay the thick dust--thick, sleepy, and black. 
the fender wa a shape of rust. the chain that held the brass 
clock-weights, had rust through long ago, and now the weight lay on 
the floor beneath; themselv two cone of verdigris. 

As I glanc about, it seem to me that I could see the veri furnitur 
of the room rot and decay befor my eyes. nor wa thi fancy, on 
my part; for, all at once, the bookshelf, along the sidewall, collapsed, 
with a crack and rend of rotten wood, precipit it content 
upon the floor, and fill the room with a smother of dusti atoms. 

how tire I felt. As I walked, it seem that I could hear my dri 
joints, creak and crack at everi step. I wonder about my sister. wa 
she dead, as well as pepper? all had happen so quickli and suddenly. 
thi must be, indeed, the begin of the end of all things! It 
occur to me, to go to look for her; but I felt too weary. and then, 
she had been so queer about these happenings, of late. Of late! I 
repeat the words, and laughed, feebly--mirthlessly, as the realiz 
wa born in upon me that I spoke of a time, half a centuri gone. half a 
century! It might have been twice as long! 

I move slowli to the window, and look out onc more across the 
world. I can best describ the passag of day and night, at thi period, 
as a sort of gigantic, ponder flicker. moment by moment, the 
acceler of time continued; so that, at night now, I saw the moon, 
onli as a sway trail of palish fire, that vari from a mere line of 
light to a nebul path, and then dwindl again, disappear 
periodically. 

the flicker of the day and night quickened. the day had grown 
percept darker, and a queer qualiti of dusk lay, as it were, in the 
atmosphere. the night were so much lighter, that the star were 
scarc to be seen, save here and there an occasion hair-lik line 
of fire, that seem to sway a little, with the moon. 

quicker, and ever quicker, ran the flicker of day and night; and, 
suddenli it seemed, I wa awar that the flicker had die out, and, 
instead, there reign a compar steadi light, which wa shed upon 
all the world, from an etern river of flame that swung up and down, 
north and south, in stupendous, mighti swings. 

the sky wa now grown veri much darker, and there wa in the blue of it 
a heavi gloom, as though a vast black peer through it upon the 
earth. yet, there wa in it, also, a strang and aw clearness, and 
emptiness. periodically, I had glimps of a ghostli track of fire that 
sway thin and darkli toward the sun-stream; vanish and reappeared. 
It wa the scarc visibl moon-stream. 

look out at the landscape, I wa consciou again, of a blur sort 
of 'flitter,' that came either from the light of the ponderous-swing 
sun-stream, or wa the result of the incred rapid chang of the 
earth' surface. and everi few moments, so it seemed, the snow would lie 
suddenli upon the world, and vanish as abruptly, as though an invis 
giant 'flitted' a white sheet off and on the earth. 

time fled, and the weari that wa mine, grew insupportable. I 
turn from the window, and walk onc across the room, the heavi dust 
deaden the sound of my footsteps. each step that I took, seem a 
greater effort than the one before. An intoler ache, knew me in 
everi joint and limb, as I trod my way, with a weari uncertainty. 

By the opposit wall, I came to a weak pause, and wondered, dimly, what 
wa my intent. I look to my left, and saw my old chair. the thought of 
sit in it brought a faint sens of comfort to my bewild 
wretchedness. yet, becaus I wa so weari and old and tired, I would 
scarc brace my mind to do anyth but stand, and wish myself past 
those few yards. I rocked, as I stood. the floor, even, seem a place 
for rest; but the dust lay so thick and sleepi and black. I turned, with 
a great effort of will, and made toward my chair. I reach it, with a 
groan of thankfulness. I sat down. 

everyth about me appear to be grow dim. It wa all so strang 
and unthought of. last night, I wa a compar strong, though 
elderli man; and now, onli a few hour later--! I look at the littl 
dust-heap that had onc been pepper. hours! and I laughed, a feeble, 
bitter laugh; a shrill, cackl laugh, that shock my dim senses. 

for a while, I must have dozed. then I open my eyes, with a start. 
somewher across the room, there had been a muffl nois of someth 
falling. I looked, and saw, vaguely, a cloud of dust hover abov a 
pile of _débris_. nearer the door, someth els tumbled, with a crash. 
It wa one of the cupboards; but I wa tired, and took littl notice. I 
close my eyes, and sat there in a state of drowsy, semi-unconsciousness. 
onc or twice--a though come through thick mists--i heard noises, 
faintly. then I must have slept. 



_xvi_ 

the awaken 

I awoke, with a start. for a moment, I wonder where I was. then 
memori came to me.... 

the room wa still lit with that strang light--half-sun, half-moon, 
light. I felt refreshed, and the tired, weari ach had left me. I went 
slowli across to the window, and look out. overhead, the river of 
flame drove up and down, north and south, in a danc semi-circl of 
fire. As a mighti sleigh in the loom of time it seemed--in a sudden 
fanci of mine--to be beat home the pick of the years. for, so vastli 
had the passag of time been accelerated, that there wa no longer ani 
sens of the sun pass from east to west. the onli appar movement 
wa the north and south beat of the sun-stream, that had becom so swift 
now, as to be better describ as a _quiver_. 

As I peer out, there came to me a sudden, inconsequ memori of that 
last journey among the outer worlds. I rememb the sudden vision that 
had come to me, as I near the solar system, of the fast whirl 
planet about the sun--a though the govern qualiti of time had been 
held in abeyance, and the machin of a univers allow to run down an 
eternity, in a few moment or hours. the memori passed, along with a, 
but partial comprehended, suggest that I had been permit a 
glimps into further time spaces. I stare out again, seemingly, at the 
quak of the sun-stream. the speed seem to increase, even as I looked. 
sever lifetim came and went, as I watched. 

suddenly, it struck me, with a sort of grotesqu seriousness, that I 
wa still alive. I thought of pepper, and wonder how it wa that I had 
not follow hi fate. He had reach the time of hi dying, and had 
passed, probabl through sheer length of years. and here wa I, alive, 
hundr of thousand of centuri after my right period of years. 

for, a time, I mused, absently. 'yesterday--' I stopped, suddenly. 
yesterday! there wa no yesterday. the yesterday of which I spoke had 
been swallow up in the abyss of years, age gone. I grew daze with 
much thinking. 

presently, I turn from the window, and glanc 'round the room. It 
seem different--strangely, utterli different. then, I knew what it wa 
that made it appear so strange. It wa bare: there wa not a piec of 
furnitur in the room; not even a solitari fit of ani sort. 
gradually, my amaz went, as I remembered, that thi wa but the 
inevit end of that process of decay, which I had wit 
commencing, befor my sleep. thousand of years! million of years! 

over the floor wa spread a deep layer of dust, that reach half way 
up to the window-seat. It had grown immeasurably, whilst I slept; and 
repres the dust of untold ages. undoubtedly, atom of the old, 
decay furnitur help to swell it bulk; and, somewher among it all, 
moulder the long-ago-dead pepper. 

all at once, it occur to me, that I had no recollect of wade 
knee-deep through all that dust, after I awoke. true, an incred age 
of year had passed, sinc I approach the window; but that wa 
evid as nothing, compar with the countless space of time that, I 
conceived, had vanish whilst I wa sleeping. I rememb now, that I 
had fallen asleep, sit in my old chair. had it gone ...? I glanc 
toward where it had stood. Of course, there wa no chair to be seen. I 
could not satisfi myself, whether it had disappeared, after my waking, 
or before. If it had moulder under me, surely, I should have been 
wake by the collapse. then I rememb that the thick dust, which 
cover the floor, would have been suffici to soften my fall; so that 
it wa quit possible, I had slept upon the dust for a million year 
or more. 

As these thought wander through my brain, I glanc again, casually, 
to where the chair had stood. then, for the first time, I notic that 
there were no marks, in the dust, of my footprints, between it and the 
window. but then, age of year had passed, sinc I had awaked--ten of 
thousand of years! 

My look rest thoughtfully, again upon the place where onc had stood 
my chair. suddenly, I pass from abstract to intentness; for there, 
in it stand place, I made out a long undulation, round off with 
the heavi dust. yet it wa not so much hidden, but that I could tell 
what had caus it. I knew--and shiver at the knowledge--that it wa a 
human body, ages-dead, lie there, beneath the place where I had slept. 
It wa lie on it right side, it back turn toward me. I could make 
out and trace each curv and outline, softened, and moulded, as it were, 
in the black dust. In a vagu sort of way, I tri to account for it 
presenc there. slowly, I began to grow bewildered, as the thought came 
to me that it lay just about where I must have fallen when the chair 
collapsed. 

gradually, an idea began to form itself within my brain; a thought that 
shook my spirit. It seem hideou and insupportable; yet it grew upon 
me, steadily, until it becam a conviction. the bodi under that coating, 
that shroud of dust, wa neither more nor less than my own dead shell. I 
did not attempt to prove it. I knew it now, and wonder I had not known 
it all along. I wa a bodiless thing. 

awhile, I stood, tri to adjust my thought to thi new problem. In 
time--how mani thousand of years, I know not--i attain to some degre 
of quietude--suffici to enabl me to pay attent to what wa 
transpir around me. 

now, I saw that the elong mound had sunk, collapsed, level with the 
rest of the spread dust. and fresh atoms, impalpable, had settl 
abov that mixtur of grave-powder, which the aeon had ground. A long 
while, I stood, turn from the window. gradually, I grew more 
collected, while the world slip across the centuri into the future. 

presently, I began a survey of the room. now, I saw that time wa 
begin it destruct work, even on thi strang old building. that 
it had stood through all the year was, it seem to me, proof that it 
wa someth differ from ani other house. I do not think, somehow, 
that I had thought of it decaying. though, why, I could not have said. 
It wa not until I had medit upon the matter, for some consider 
time, that I fulli realiz that the extraordinari space of time through 
which it had stood, wa suffici to have utterli pulver the veri 
stone of which it wa built, had they been taken from ani earthli 
quarry. yes, it wa undoubtedli moulder now. all the plaster had gone 
from the walls; even as the woodwork of the room had gone, mani 
age before. 

while I stood, in contemplation, a piec of glass, from one of the 
small, diamond-shap panes, dropped, with a dull tap, amid the dust 
upon the sill behind me, and crumbl into a littl heap of powder. As I 
turn from contempl it, I saw light between a coupl of the stone 
that form the outer wall. evidently, the mortar wa fall away.... 

after awhile, I turn onc more to the window, and peer out. I 
discovered, now, that the speed of time had becom enormous. the later 
quiver of the sun-stream, had grown so swift as to caus the danc 
semi-circl of flame to merg into, and disappear in, a sheet of fire 
that cover half the southern sky from east to west. 

from the sky, I glanc down to the gardens. they were just a blur of a 
palish, dirti green. I had a feel that they stood higher, than in the 
old days; a feel that they were nearer my window, as though they had 
risen, bodily. yet, they were still a long way below me; for the rock, 
over the mouth of the pit, on which thi hous stands, arch up to a 
great height. 

It wa later, that I notic a chang in the constant color of the 
gardens. the pale, dirti green wa grow ever paler and paler, toward 
white. At last, after a great space, they becam greyish-white, and 
stay thu for a veri long time. finally, however, the grey began 
to fade, even as had the green, into a dead white. and thi remained, 
constant and unchanged. and by thi I knew that, at last, snow lay upon 
all the northern world. 

and so, by million of years, time wing onward through eternity, to 
the end--th end, of which, in the old-earth days, I had thought 
remotely, and in hazili specul fashion. and now, it wa approach 
in a manner of which none had ever dreamed. 

I recollect that, about thi time, I began to have a lively, though 
morbid, curiosity, as to what would happen when the end came--but I 
seem strang without imaginings. 

all thi while, the steadi process of decay wa continuing. the few 
remain piec of glass, had long ago vanished; and, everi now and 
then, a soft thud, and a littl cloud of rise dust, would tell of some 
fragment of fallen mortar or stone. 

I look up again, to the fieri sheet that quak in the heaven abov 
me and far down into the southern sky. As I looked, the impress wa 
born in upon me, that it had lost some of it first brilliancy--that it 
wa duller, deeper hued. 

I glanc down, onc more, to the blur white of the worldscape. 
sometimes, my look return to the burn sheet of dull flame, that 
was, and yet hid, the sun. At times, I glanc behind me, into the 
grow dusk of the great, silent room, with it aeon-carpet of 
sleep dust.... 

so, I watch through the fleet ages, lost in soul-wear thought 
and wonderings, and possess with a new weariness. 



_xvii_ 

the slow rotat 

It might have been a million year later, that I perceived, beyond 
possibl of doubt, that the fieri sheet that lit the world, wa 
inde darkening. 

anoth vast space went by, and the whole enorm flame had sunk to a 
deep, copper color. gradually, it darkened, from copper to copper-red, 
and from this, at times, to a deep, heavy, purplish tint, with, in it, a 
strang loom of blood. 

although the light wa decreasing, I could perceiv no diminish in 
the appar speed of the sun. It still spread itself in that dazzl 
veil of speed. 

the world, so much of it as I could see, had assum a dread shade 
of gloom, as though, in veri deed, the last day of the world 
approached. 

the sun wa dying; of that there could be littl doubt; and still the 
earth whirl onward, through space and all the aeons. At thi time, I 
remember, an extraordinari sens of bewilder took me. I found 
myself, later, wandering, mentally, amid an odd chao of fragmentari 
modern theori and the old biblic stori of the world' ending. 

then, for the first time, there flash across me, the memori that the 
sun, with it system of planets, was, and had been, travel through 
space at an incred speed. abruptly, the question rose--_where?_ for 
a veri great time, I ponder thi matter; but, finally, with a certain 
sens of the futil of my puzzlings, I let my thought wander to other 
things. I grew to wondering, how much longer the hous would stand. 
also, I queried, to myself, whether I should be doom to stay, 
bodiless, upon the earth, through the dark-tim that I knew wa coming. 
from these thoughts, I fell again to specul upon the possibl 
direct of the sun' journey through space.... and so anoth great 
while passed. 

gradually, as time fled, I began to feel the chill of a great winter. 
then, I rememb that, with the sun dying, the cold must be, 
necessarily, extraordinarili intense. slowly, slowly, as the aeon 
slip into eternity, the earth sank into a heavier and redder gloom. 
the dull flame in the firmament took on a deeper tint, veri somber 
and turbid. 

then, at last, it wa born upon me that there wa a change. the fiery, 
gloomi curtain of flame that hung quak overhead, and down away into 
the southern sky, began to thin and contract; and, in it, as one see 
the fast vibrat of a jar harp-string, I saw onc more the 
sun-stream quivering, giddily, north and south. 

slowly, the like to a sheet of fire, disappeared, and I saw, 
plainly, the slow beat of the sun-stream. yet, even then, the speed 
of it swing wa inconceiv swift. and all the time, the bright 
of the fieri arc grew ever duller. underneath, the world loom 
dimly--an indistinct, ghostli region. 

overhead, the river of flame sway slower, and even slower; until, at 
last, it swung to the north and south in great, ponder beats, that 
last through seconds. A long space went by, and now each sway of the 
great belt last nigh a minute; so that, after a great while, I ceas 
to distinguish it as a visibl movement; and the stream fire ran in a 
steadi river of dull flame, across the deadly-look sky. 

An indefinit period passed, and it seem that the arc of fire becam 
less sharpli defined. It appear to me to grow more attenuated, and I 
thought blackish streak showed, occasionally. presently, as I watched, 
the smooth onward-flow ceased; and I wa abl to perceiv that there 
came a momentary, but regular, darken of the world. thi grew until, 
onc more, night descended, in short, but periodic, interv upon the 
weari earth. 

longer and longer becam the nights, and the day equal them; so 
that, at last, the day and the night grew to the durat of second in 
length, and the sun showed, onc more, like an almost invisible, 
coppery-r color ball, within the glow misti of it flight. 
correspond to the dark lines, show at time in it trail, there 
were now distinctli to be seen on the half-vis sun itself, great, 
dark belts. 

year after year flash into the past, and the day and night spread 
into minutes. the sun had ceas to have the appear of a tail; and 
now rose and set--a tremend globe of a glow copper-bronz hue; in 
part ring with blood-r bands; in others, with the duski ones, that 
I have alreadi mentioned. these circles--both red and black--wer of 
vari thicknesses. for a time, I wa at a loss to account for their 
presence. then it occur to me, that it wa scarc like that the 
sun would cool evenli all over; and that these mark were due, 
probably, to differ in temperatur of the variou areas; the red 
repres those part where the heat wa still fervent, and the black 
those portion which were alreadi compar cool. 

It struck me, as a peculiar thing, that the sun should cool in evenli 
defin rings; until I rememb that, possibly, they were but isol 
patches, to which the enorm rotatori speed of the sun had impart a 
belt-lik appearance. the sun, itself, wa veri much greater than the sun 
I had known in the old-world days; and, from this, I argu that it wa 
consider nearer. 

At nights, the moon[6] still showed; but small and remote; and the 
light she reflect wa so dull and weak that she seem littl more 
than the small, dim ghost of the olden moon, that I had known. 

gradually, the day and night lengthen out, until they equal a 
space somewhat less than one of the old-earth hours; the sun rise and 
set like a great, ruddi bronz disk, cross with ink-black bars. 
about thi time, I found myself, abl onc more, to see the gardens, 
with clearness. for the world had now grown veri still, and changeless. 
yet, I am not correct in saying, 'gardens'; for there were no 
gardens--noth that I knew or recognized. In place thereof, I look 
out upon a vast plain, stretch away into distance. A littl to my 
left, there wa a low rang of hills. everywhere, there wa a uniform, 
white cover of snow, in place rise into hummock and ridges. 

It wa onli now, that I recogn how realli great had been the 
snowfall. In place it wa vastli deep, as wa wit by a great, 
upleaping, wave-shap hill, away to my right; though it is not 
impossible, that thi wa due, in part, to some rise in the surfac of 
the ground. strang enough, the rang of low hill to my 
left--alreadi mentioned--wa not entir cover with the univers 
snow; instead, I could see their bare, dark side show in sever 
places. and everywher and alway there reign an incred 
death-sil and desolation. the immutable, aw quiet of a 
die world. 

all thi time, the day and night were lengthening, perceptibly. 
already, each day occupied, maybe, some two hour from dawn to dusk. At 
night, I had been surpris to find that there were veri few star 
overhead, and these small, though of an extraordinari brightness; which 
I attribut to the peculiar, but clear, black of the nighttime. 

away to the north, I could discern a nebul sort of mistiness; not 
unlike, in appearance, a small portion of the milki way. It might have 
been an extrem remot star-cluster; or--th thought came to me 
suddenly--perhap it wa the sider univers that I had known, and now 
left far behind, forever--a small, dimli glow mist of stars, far in 
the depth of space. 

still, the day and night lengthened, slowly. each time, the sun rose 
duller than it had set. and the dark belt increas in breadth. 

about thi time, there happen a fresh thing. the sun, earth, and sky 
were suddenli darkened, and, apparently, blot out for a brief space. 
I had a sense, a certain awar (I could learn littl by sight), that 
the earth wa endur a veri great fall of snow. then, in an instant, 
the veil that had obscur everything, vanished, and I look out, onc 
more. A marvel sight met my gaze. the hollow in which thi house, 
with it gardens, stands, wa brim with snow.[7] It lip over the 
sill of my window. everywhere, it lay, a great level stretch of white, 
which caught and reflected, gloomily, the somber copperi glow of the 
die sun. the world had becom a shadowless plain, from horizon 
to horizon. 

I glanc up at the sun. It shone with an extraordinary, dull 
clearness. I saw it, now, as one who, until then, had seen it, onli 
through a partial obscur medium. all about it, the sky had becom 
black, with a clear, deep blackness, fright in it nearness, and it 
unmeasur deep, and it utter unfriendliness. for a great time, I 
look into it, newly, and shaken and fearful. It wa so near. had I 
been a child, I might have express some of my sensat and distress, 
by say that the sky had lost it roof. 

later, I turned, and peer about me, into the room. everywhere, it wa 
cover with a thin shroud of the all-pervad white. I could see it 
but dimly, by reason of the somber light that now lit the world. It 
appear to cling to the ruin walls; and the thick, soft dust of the 
years, that cover the floor knee-deep, wa nowher visible. the snow 
must have blown in through the open framework of the windows. yet, in no 
place had it drifted; but lay everywher about the great, old room, 
smooth and level. moreover, there had been no wind these mani thousand 
years. but there wa the snow,[8] as I have told. 

and all the earth wa silent. and there wa a cold, such as no live 
man can ever have known. 

the earth wa now illuminated, by day, with a most dole light, 
beyond my power to describe. It seem as though I look at the great 
plain, through the medium of a bronze-tint sea. 

It wa evid that the earth' rotatori movement wa departing, 
steadily. 

the end came, all at once. the night had been the longest yet; and 
when the die sun showed, at last, abov the world' edge, I had grown 
so weari of the dark, that I greet it as a friend. It rose steadily, 
until about twenti degre abov the horizon. then, it stop suddenly, 
and, after a strang retrograd movement, hung motionless--a great 
shield in the sky[9]. onli the circular rim of the sun show 
bright--onli this, and one thin streak of light near the equator. 

gradually, even thi thread of light die out; and now, all that wa 
left of our great and gloriou sun, wa a vast dead disk, rim with a 
thin circl of bronze-r light. 



_xviii_ 

the green star 

the world wa held in a savag gloom--cold and intolerable. outside, 
all wa quiet--quiet! from the dark room behind me, came the occasional, 
soft thud[10] of fall matter--frag of rot stone. So time 
passed, and night grasp the world, wrap it in wrap of 
impenetr blackness. 

there wa no night-sky, as we know it. even the few straggl star 
had vanished, conclusively. I might have been in a shutter room, 
without a light; for all that I could see. only, in the impalp 
of gloom, opposite, burnt that vast, encircl hair of dull fire. 
beyond this, there wa no ray in all the vastitud of night that 
surround me; save that, far in the north, that soft, mistlik glow 
still shone. 

silently, year move on. what period of time passed, I shall never 
know. It seem to me, wait there, that etern came and went, 
stealthily; and still I watched. I could see onli the glow of the sun' 
edge, at times; for now, it had commenc to come and go--light up a 
while, and again becom extinguished. 

all at once, dure one of these period of life, a sudden flame cut 
across the night--a quick glare that lit up the dead earth, shortly; 
give me a glimps of it flat lonesomeness. the light appear to come 
from the sun--shoot out from somewher near it center, diagonally. A 
moment, I gazed, startled. then the leap flame sank, and the gloom 
fell again. but now it wa not so dark; and the sun wa belt by a thin 
line of vivid, white light. I stared, intently. had a volcano broken out 
on the sun? yet, I negativ the thought, as soon as formed. I felt that 
the light had been far too intens white, and large, for such a cause. 

anoth idea there was, that suggest itself to me. It was, that one 
of the inner planet had fallen into the sun--becom incandescent, 
under that impact. thi theori appeal to me, as be more plausible, 
and account more satisfactorili for the extraordinari size and 
brillianc of the blaze, that had lit up the dead world, so 
unexpectedly. 

full of interest and emotion, I stared, across the darkness, at that 
line of white fire, cut the night. one thing it told to me, 
unmistakably: the sun wa yet rotat at an enorm speed.[11] thus, I 
knew that the year were still fleet at an incalcul rate; though 
so far as the earth wa concerned, life, and light, and time, were 
thing belong to a period lost in the long gone ages. 

after that one burst of flame, the light had shown, onli as an 
encircl band of bright fire. now, however, as I watched, it began 
slowli to sink into a ruddi tint, and, later, to a dark, copper-r 
color; much as the sun had done. presently, it sank to a deeper hue; 
and, in a still further space of time, it began to fluctuate; have 
period of glowing, and anon, dying. thus, after a great while, it 
disappeared. 

long befor this, the smolder edg of the sun had deaden into 
blackness. and so, in that suprem futur time, the world, dark and 
intens silent, rode on it gloomi orbit around the ponder mass of 
the dead sun. 

My thoughts, at thi period, can be scarc described. At first, they 
were chaotic and want in coherence. but, later, as the age came and 
went, my soul seem to imbib the veri essenc of the oppress 
solitud and dreariness, that held the earth. 

with thi feeling, there came a wonder clear of thought, and I 
realized, despairingly, that the world might wander for ever, through 
that enorm night. for a while, the unwholesom idea fill me, with a 
sensat of overbear desolation; so that I could have cri like a 
child. In time, however, thi feel grew, almost insensibly, less, and 
an unreason hope possess me. patiently, I waited. 

from time to time, the nois of drop particles, behind in the room, 
came dulli to my ears. once, I heard a loud crash, and turned, 
instinctively, to look; forgetting, for the moment, the impenetr 
night in which everi detail wa submerged. In a while, my gaze sought 
the heavens; turning, unconsciously, toward the north. yes, the nebul 
glow still showed. indeed, I could have almost imagin that it look 
somewhat plainer. for a long time, I kept my gaze fix upon it; 
feeling, in my lone soul, that it soft haze was, in some way, a tie 
with the past. strange, the trifl from which one can suck comfort! and 
yet, had I but known--but I shall come to that in it proper time. 

for a veri long space, I watched, without experienc ani of the 
desir for sleep, that would so soon have visit me in the old-earth 
days. how I should have welcom it; if onli to have pass the time, 
away from my perplex and thoughts. 

sever times, the comfortless sound of some great piec of masonri 
falling, disturb my meditations; and, once, it seem I could hear 
whisper in the room, behind me. yet it wa utterli useless to tri to 
see anything. such blackness, as existed, scarc can be conceived. It 
wa palpable, and hideous brutal to the sense; as though someth 
dead, press up against me--someth soft, and icili cold. 

under all this, there grew up within my mind, a great and overwhelm 
distress of uneasiness, that left me, but to drop me into an 
uncomfort brooding. I felt that I must fight against it; and, 
presently, hope to distract my thoughts, I turn to the window, and 
look up toward the north, in search of the nebul whiteness, which, 
still, I believ to be the far and misti glow of the univers we had 
left. even as I rais my eyes, I wa thrill with a feel of wonder; 
for, now, the hazi light had resolv into a single, great star, of 
vivid green. 

As I stared, astonished, the thought flash into my mind; that the 
earth must be travel toward the star; not away, as I had imagined. 
next, that it could not be the univers the earth had left; but, 
possibly, an outli star, belong to some vast star-cluster, hidden 
in the enorm depth of space. with a sens of commingl awe and 
curiosity, I watch it, wonder what new thing wa to be reveal 
to me. 

for a while, vagu thought and specul occupi me, dure which 
my gaze dwelt insati upon that one spot of light, in the otherwis 
pitlik darkness. hope grew up within me, banish the oppress of 
despair, that had seem to stifl me. wherev the earth wa traveling, 
it was, at least, go onc more toward the realm of light. light! one 
must spend an etern wrap in soundless night, to understand the 
full horror of be without it. 

slowly, but surely, the star grew upon my vision, until, in time, it 
shone as brightli as had the planet jupiter, in the old-earth days. with 
increas size, it color becam more impressive; remind me of a huge 
emerald, scintil ray of fire across the world. 

year fled away in silence, and the green star grew into a great splash 
of flame in the sky. A littl later, I saw a thing that fill me with 
amazement. It wa the ghostli outlin of a vast crescent, in the night; 
a gigant new moon, seem to be grow out of the surround gloom. 
utterli bemused, I stare at it. It appear to be quit 
close--comparatively; and I puzzl to understand how the earth had come 
so near to it, without my have seen it before. 

the light, thrown by the star, grew stronger; and, presently, I wa 
awar that it wa possibl to see the earthscap again; though 
indistinctly. awhile, I stared, tri to make out whether I could 
distinguish ani detail of the world' surface, but I found the light 
insufficient. In a little, I gave up the attempt, and glanc onc more 
toward the star. even in the short space, that my attent had been 
diverted, it had increas considerably, and seem now, to my 
bewild sight, about a quarter of the size of the full moon. the 
light it threw, wa extraordinarili powerful; yet it color wa so 
abomin unfamiliar, that such of the world as I could see, show 
unreal; more as though I look out upon a landscap of shadow, than 
aught else. 

all thi time, the great crescent wa increas in brightness, and 
began, now, to shine with a percept shade of green. steadily, the 
star increas in size and brilliancy, until it showed, fulli as larg 
as half a full moon; and, as it grew greater and brighter, so did the 
vast crescent throw out more and more light, though of an ever deepen 
hue of green. under the combin blaze of their radiances, the 
wilder that stretch befor me, becam steadili more visible. soon, 
I seem abl to stare across the whole world, which now appeared, 
beneath the strang light, terribl in it cold and awful, flat 
dreariness. 

It wa a littl later, that my attent wa drawn to the fact, that 
the great star of green flame, wa slowli sink out of the north, 
toward the east. At first, I could scarc believ that I saw aright; 
but soon there could be no doubt that it wa so. gradually, it sank, 
and, as it fell, the vast crescent of glow green, began to dwindl 
and dwindle, until it becam a mere arc of light, against the livid 
color sky. later it vanished, disappear in the self-sam spot from 
which I had seen it slowli emerge. 

By thi time, the star had come to within some thirti degre of the 
hidden horizon. In size it could now have rival the moon at it full; 
though, even yet, I could not distinguish it disk. thi fact led me to 
conceiv that it was, still, an extraordinari distanc away; and, thi 
be so, I knew that it size must be huge, beyond the concept of 
man to understand or imagine. 

suddenly, as I watched, the lower edg of the star vanished--cut by a 
straight, dark line. A minute--or a century--passed, and it dip 
lower, until the half of it had disappear from sight. far away out on 
the great plain, I saw a monstrou shadow blot it out, and advanc 
swiftly. onli a third of the star wa visibl now. then, like a flash, 
the solut of thi extraordinari phenomenon reveal itself to me. the 
star wa sink behind the enorm mass of the dead sun. Or rather, 
the sun--obedi to it attraction--wa rise toward it,[12] with the 
earth follow in it trail. As these thought expand in my mind, the 
star vanished; be complet hidden by the tremend bulk of the 
sun. over the earth there fell, onc more, the brood night. 

with the darkness, came an intoler feel of loneli and dread. 
for the first time, I thought of the pit, and it inmates. after that, 
there rose in my memori the still more terribl thing, that had haunt 
the shore of the sea of sleep, and lurk in the shadow of thi old 
building. where were they? I wondered--and shiver with miser 
thoughts. for a time, fear held me, and I prayed, wildli and 
incoherently, for some ray of light with which to dispel the cold 
black that envelop the world. 

how long I waited, it is imposs to say--certainli for a veri great 
period. then, all at once, I saw a loom of light shine out ahead. 
gradually, it becam more distinct. suddenly, a ray of vivid green, 
flash across the darkness. At the same moment, I saw a thin line of 
livid flame, far in the night. An instant, it seemed, and it had grown 
into a great clot of fire; beneath which, the world lay bath in a 
blaze of emerald green light. steadili it grew, until, presently, the 
whole of the green star had come into sight again. but now, it could be 
scarc call a star; for it had increas to vast proportions, be 
incompar greater than the sun had been in the olden time. 

"then, as I stared, I becam awar that I could see the edg of the 
lifeless sun, glow like a great crescent-moon. slowly, it light 
surface, broaden out to me, until half of it diamet wa visible; 
and the star began to drop away on my right. time passed, and the earth 
move on, slowli travers the tremend face of the dead sun." [13] 

gradually, as the earth travel forward, the star fell still more to 
the right; until, at last, it shone on the back of the house, send a 
flood of broken rays, in through the skeleton-lik walls. glanc 
upward, I saw that much of the ceil had vanished, enabl me to see 
that the upper storey were even more decayed. the roof had, evidently, 
gone entirely; and I could see the green effulg of the starlight 
shine in, slantingly. 



_xix_ 

the end OF the solar system 

from the abutment, where onc had been the windows, through which I had 
watch that first, fatal dawn, I could see that the sun wa huge 
greater, than it had been, when first the star lit the world. So great 
wa it, that it lower edg seem almost to touch the far horizon. even 
as I watched, I imagin that it drew closer. the radianc of green that 
lit the frozen earth, grew steadili brighter. 

thus, for a long space, thing were. then, on a sudden, I saw that the 
sun wa chang shape, and grow smaller, just as the moon would have 
done in past time. In a while, onli a third of the illumin part wa 
turn toward the earth. the star bore away on the left. 

gradually, as the world move on, the star shone upon the front of the 
house, onc more; while the sun showed, onli as a great bow of green 
fire. An instant, it seemed, and the sun had vanished. the star wa 
still fulli visible. then the earth move into the black shadow of the 
sun, and all wa night--night, black, starless, and intolerable. 

fill with tumultu thoughts, I watch across the night--waiting. 
years, it may have been, and then, in the dark hous behind me, the 
clot still of the world wa broken. I seem to hear a soft 
pad of mani feet, and a faint, inarticul whisper of sound, grew 
on my sense. I look 'round into the blackness, and saw a multitud of 
eyes. As I stared, they increased, and appear to come toward me. for 
an instant, I stood, unabl to move. then a hideou swine-noise[14] rose 
up into the night; and, at that, I leapt from the window, out on to the 
frozen world. I have a confus notion of have run awhile; and, after 
that, I just waited--waited. sever times, I heard shrieks; but alway 
as though from a distance. except for these sounds, I had no idea of the 
whereabout of the house. time move onward. I wa consciou of little, 
save a sensat of cold and hopeless and fear. 

An age, it seemed, and there came a glow, that told of the come 
light. It grew, tardily. then--with a loom of unearthli glory--th first 
ray from the green star, struck over the edg of the dark sun, and lit 
the world. It fell upon a great, ruin structure, some two hundr 
yard away. It wa the house. staring, I saw a fearsom sight--ov it 
wall crawl a legion of unholi things, almost cover the old 
building, from totter tower to base. I could see them, plainly; they 
were the swine-creatures. 

the world move out into the light of the star, and I saw that, now, it 
seem to stretch across a quarter of the heavens. the glori of it 
livid light wa so tremendous, that it appear to fill the sky with 
quiver flames. then, I saw the sun. It wa so close that half of it 
diamet lay below the horizon; and, as the world circl across it 
face, it seem to tower right up into the sky, a stupend dome of 
emerald color fire. from time to time, I glanc toward the house; but 
the swine-th seem unawar of my proximity. 

year appear to pass, slowly. the earth had almost reach the center 
of the sun' disk. the light from the green _sun_--a now it must be 
called--shon through the interstices, that gap the moulder wall 
of the old house, give them the appear of be wrap in green 
flames. the swine-creatur still crawl about the walls. 

suddenly, there rose a loud roar of swine-voices, and, up from the 
center of the roofless house, shot a vast column of blood-r flame. I 
saw the little, twist tower and turret flash into fire; yet still 
preserv their twist crookedness. the beam of the green sun, beat 
upon the house, and intermingl with it lurid glows; so that it 
appear a blaze furnac of red and green fire. 

fascinated, I watched, until an overwhelm sens of come danger, 
drew my attention. I glanc up, and, at once, it wa born upon me, 
that the sun wa closer; so close, in fact, that it seem to overhang 
the world. then--i know not how--i wa caught up into strang 
heights--float like a bubbl in the aw effulgence. 

far below me, I saw the earth, with the burn hous leap into an 
ever grow mountain of flame, 'round about it, the ground appear to 
be glowing; and, in places, heavi wreath of yellow smoke ascend from 
the earth. It seem as though the world were becom ignit from that 
one plague-spot of fire. faintly, I could see the swine-things. they 
appear quit unharmed. then the ground seem to cave in, suddenly, 
and the house, with it load of foul creatures, disappear into the 
depth of the earth, send a strange, blood color cloud into the 
heights. I rememb the hell pit under the house. 

In a while, I look 'round. the huge bulk of the sun, rose high abov 
me. the distanc between it and the earth, grew rapidli less. suddenly, 
the earth appear to shoot forward. In a moment, it had travers the 
space between it and the sun. I heard no sound; but, out from the sun' 
face, gush an ever-grow tongu of dazzl flame. It seem to 
leap, almost to the distant green sun--shear through the emerald 
light, a veri cataract of blind fire. It reach it limit, and sank; 
and, on the sun, glow a vast splash of burn white--th grave of 
the earth. 

the sun wa veri close to me, now. presently, I found that I wa rise 
higher; until, at last, I rode abov it, in the emptiness. the green sun 
wa now so huge that it breadth seem to fill up all the sky, ahead. I 
look down, and note that the sun wa pass directli beneath me. 

A year may have gone by--or a century--and I wa left, suspended, 
alone. the sun show far in front--a black, circular mass, against the 
molten splendor of the great, green orb. near one edge, I observ that 
a lurid glow had appeared, mark the place where the earth had fallen. 
By this, I knew that the long-dead sun wa still revolving, though with 
great slowness. 

afar to my right, I seem to catch, at times, a faint glow of whitish 
light. for a great time, I wa uncertain whether to put thi down to 
fanci or not. thus, for a while, I stared, with fresh wonderings; until, 
at last, I knew that it wa no imaginari thing; but a reality. It grew 
brighter; and, presently, there slid out of the green, a pale globe of 
softest white. It came nearer, and I saw that it wa appar 
surround by a robe of gentli glow clouds. time passed.... 

I glanc toward the diminish sun. It showed, onli as a dark blot on 
the face of the green sun. As I watched, I saw it grow smaller, 
steadily, as though rush toward the superior orb, at an immens 
speed. intently, I stared. what would happen? I wa consciou of 
extraordinari emotions, as I realiz that it would strike the green 
sun. It grew no bigger than a pea, and I looked, with my whole soul, to 
wit the final end of our system--that system which had born the 
world through so mani aeons, with it multitudin sorrow and 
joys; and now-- 

suddenly, someth cross my vision, cut from sight all vestig 
of the spectacl I watch with such soul-interest. what happen to the 
dead sun, I did not see; but I have no reason--in the light of that 
which I saw afterward--to disbeliev that it fell into the strang fire 
of the green sun, and so perished. 

and then, suddenly, an extraordinari question rose in my mind, whether 
thi stupend globe of green fire might not be the vast central 
sun--th great sun, 'round which our univers and countless other 
revolve. I felt confused. I thought of the probabl end of the dead sun, 
and anoth suggest came, dumbly--do the dead star make the green 
sun their grave? the idea appeal to me with no sens of grotesqueness; 
but rather as someth both possibl and probable. 



_xx_ 

the celesti globe 

for a while, mani thought crowd my mind, so that I wa unabl to do 
aught, save stare, blindly, befor me. I seem whelm in a sea of 
doubt and wonder and sorrow remembrance. 

It wa later, that I came out of my bewilderment. I look about, 
dazedly. thus, I saw so extraordinari a sight that, for a while, I could 
scarc believ I wa not still wrap in the visionari tumult of my 
own thoughts. out of the reign green, had grown a boundless river of 
softli shimmer globes--each one enfold in a wondrou fleec of pure 
cloud. they reached, both abov and below me, to an unknown distance; 
and, not onli hid the shine of the green sun; but supplied, in place 
thereof, a tender glow of light, that suffus itself around me, like 
unto noth I have ever seen, befor or since. 

In a little, I notic that there wa about these spheres, a sort of 
transparency, almost as though they were form of cloud crystal, 
within which burn a radiance--gentl and subdued. they move on, past 
me, continually, float onward at no great speed; but rather as 
though they had etern befor them. A great while, I watched, and 
could perceiv no end to them. At times, I seem to distinguish faces, 
amid the cloudiness; but strang indistinct, as though partli real, 
and partli form of the misti through which they showed. 

for a long time, I waited, passively, with a sens of grow content. 
I had no longer that feel of unutter loneliness; but felt, 
rather, that I wa less alone, than I had been for kalpa of years. thi 
feel of contentment, increased, so that I would have been satisfi 
to float in compani with those celesti globules, forever. 

age slip by, and I saw the shadowi faces, with increas frequency, 
also with greater plainness. whether thi wa due to my soul have 
becom more attun to it surroundings, I cannot tell--prob it wa 
so. but, howev thi may be, I am assur now, onli of the fact that I 
becam steadili more consciou of a new mysteri about me, tell me 
that I had, indeed, penetr within the borderland of some 
unthought-of region--som subtle, intang place, or form, of 
existence. 

the enorm stream of lumin sphere continu to pass me, at an 
unvari rate--countless millions; and still they came, show no 
sign of ending, nor even diminishing. 

then, as I wa borne, silently, upon the unbuoy ether, I felt a 
sudden, irresistible, forward movement, toward one of the pass 
globes. An instant, and I wa besid it. then, I slid through, into the 
interior, without experienc the least resistance, of ani description. 
for a short while, I could see nothing; and waited, curiously. 

all at once, I becam awar that a sound broke the inconceiv 
stillness. It wa like the murmur of a great sea at calm--a sea 
breath in it sleep. gradually, the mist that obscur my sight, 
began to thin away; and so, in time, my vision dwelt onc again upon the 
silent surfac of the sea of sleep. 

for a little, I gazed, and could scarc believ I saw aright. I 
glanc 'round. there wa the great globe of pale fire, swimming, as I 
had seen it before, a short distanc abov the dim horizon. To my left, 
far across the sea, I discovered, presently, a faint line, as of thin 
haze, which I guess to be the shore, where my love and I had met, 
dure those wonder period of soul-wandering, that had been grant 
to me in the old earth days. 

another, a troubled, memori came to me--of the formless thing that had 
haunt the shore of the sea of sleep. the guardian of that silent, 
echoless place. these, and other, details, I remembered, and knew, 
without doubt that I wa look out upon that same sea. with the 
assurance, I wa fill with an overwhelm feel of surprise, and 
joy, and shaken expectancy, conceiv it possibl that I wa about to 
see my love, again. intently, I gaze around; but could catch no sight 
of her. At that, for a little, I felt hopeless. fervently, I prayed, and 
ever peered, anxiously.... how still wa the sea! 

down, far beneath me, I could see the mani trail of chang fire, 
that had drawn my attention, formerly. vaguely, I wonder what caus 
them; also, I rememb that I had intend to ask my dear one about 
them, as well as mani other matters--and I had been forc to leav her, 
befor the half that I had wish to say, wa said. 

My thought came back with a leap. I wa consciou that someth had 
touch me. I turn quickly. god, thou wert inde gracious--it wa 
she! she look up into my eyes, with an eager longing, and I look 
down to her, with all my soul. I should like to have held her; but the 
gloriou puriti of her face, kept me afar. then, out of the wind 
mist, she put her dear arms. her whisper came to me, soft as the rustl 
of a pass cloud. 'dearest!' she said. that wa all; but I had heard, 
and, in a moment I held her to me--a I prayed--forever. 

In a little, she spoke of mani things, and I listened. willingly, would 
I have done so through all the age that are to come. At times, I 
whisper back, and my whisper brought to her spirit face, onc more, 
an indescrib delic tint--th bloom of love. later, I spoke more 
freely, and to each word she listened, and made answer, delightfully; so 
that, already, I wa in paradise. 

she and I; and nothing, save the silent, spaciou void to see us; and 
onli the quiet water of the sea of sleep to hear us. 

long before, the float multitud of cloud-enfold sphere had 
vanish into nothingness. thus, we look upon the face of the 
slumber deeps, and were alone. alone, god, I would be thu alon in 
the hereafter, and yet be never lonely! I had her, and, greater than 
this, she had me. aye, aeon-ag me; and on thi thought, and some 
others, I hope to exist through the few remain year that may yet lie 
between us. 



_xxi_ 

the dark sun 

how long our soul lay in the arm of joy, I cannot say; but, all at 
once, I wa wake from my happiness, by a diminut of the pale and 
gentl light that lit the sea of sleep. I turn toward the huge, white 
orb, with a premonit of come trouble. one side of it wa curv 
inward, as though a convex, black shadow were sweep across it. My 
memori went back. It wa thus, that the dark had come, befor our 
last parting. I turn toward my love, inquiringly. with a sudden 
knowledg of woe, I notic how wan and unreal she had grown, even in 
that brief space. her voic seem to come to me from a distance. the 
touch of her hand wa no more than the gentl pressur of a summer 
wind, and grew less perceptible. 

already, quit half of the immens globe wa shrouded. A feel of 
desper seiz me. wa she about to leav me? would she have to go, 
as she had gone before? I question her, anxiously, frightenedly; and 
she, nestl closer, explained, in that strange, faraway voice, that it 
wa imper she should leav me, befor the sun of darkness--a she 
term it--blot out the light. At thi confirm of my fears, I 
wa overcom with despair; and could onli look, voicelessly, across the 
quiet plain of the silent sea. 

how swiftli the dark spread across the face of the white orb. yet, 
in reality, the time must have been long, beyond human comprehension. 

At last, onli a crescent of pale fire, lit the, now dim, sea of sleep. 
all thi while, she had held me; but, with so soft a caress, that I had 
been scarc consciou of it. We wait there, together, she and I; 
speechless, for veri sorrow. In the dim light, her face showed, 
shadowy--blend into the duski misti that encircl us. 

then, when a thin, curv line of soft light wa all that lit the sea, 
she releas me--push me from her, tenderly. her voic sound in my 
ears, 'I may not stay longer, dear one.' It end in a sob. 

she seem to float away from me, and becam invisible. her voic came 
to me, out of the shadows, faintly; appar from a great distance:-- 

'A littl while--' It die away, remotely. In a breath, the sea of 
sleep darken into night. far to my left, I seem to see, for a brief 
instant, a soft glow. It vanished, and, in the same moment, I becam 
awar that I wa no longer abov the still sea; but onc more suspend 
in infinit space, with the green sun--now eclips by a vast, dark 
sphere--befor me. 

utterli bewildered, I stared, almost unseeingly, at the ring of green 
flames, leap abov the dark edge. even in the chao of my thoughts, I 
wondered, dully, at their extraordinari shapes. A multitud of question 
assail me. I thought more of her, I had so late seen, than of the 
sight befor me. My grief, and thought of the future, fill me. wa I 
doom to be separ from her, always? even in the old earth-days, she 
had been mine, onli for a littl while; then she had left me, as I 
thought, forever. sinc then, I had seen her but these times, upon the 
sea of sleep. 

A feel of fierc resent fill me, and miser questionings. 
whi could I not have gone with my love? what reason to keep us apart? 
whi had I to wait alone, while she slumber through the years, on the 
still bosom of the sea of sleep? the sea of sleep! My thought turned, 
inconsequently, out of their channel of bitterness, to fresh, desper 
questionings. where wa it? where wa it? I seem to have but just 
part from my love, upon it quiet surface, and it had gone, utterly. 
It could not be far away! and the white orb which I had seen hidden in 
the shadow of the sun of darkness! My sight dwelt upon the green 
sun--eclipsed. what had eclips it? wa there a vast, dead star 
circl it? wa the _central_ sun--a I had come to regard it--a doubl 
star? the thought had come, almost unbidden; yet whi should it not 
be so? 

My thought went back to the white orb. strange, that it should have 
been--i stopped. An idea had come, suddenly. the white orb and the green 
sun! were they one and the same? My imagin wander backward, and I 
rememb the lumin globe to which I had been so unaccount 
attracted. It wa curiou that I should have forgotten it, even 
momentarily. where were the others? I revert again to the globe I had 
entered. I thought, for a time, and matter becam clearer. I conceiv 
that, by enter that impalp globule, I had passed, at once, into 
some further, and, until then, invis dimension; there, the green sun 
wa still visible; but as a stupend sphere of pale, white 
light--almost as though it ghost showed, and not it materi part. 

A long time, I muse on the subject. I rememb how, on enter the 
sphere, I had, immediately, lost all sight of the others. for a still 
further period, I continu to revolv the differ detail in my mind. 

In a while, my thought turn to other things. I came more into the 
present, and began to look about me, seeingly. for the first time, I 
perceiv that innumer rays, of a subtle, violet hue, pierc the 
strang semi-darkness, in all directions. they radiat from the fieri 
rim of the green sun. they seem to grow upon my vision, so that, in a 
little, I saw that they were countless. the night wa fill with 
them--spread outward from the green sun, fan-wise. I conclud that I 
wa enabl to see them, by reason of the sun' glori be cut off by 
the eclipse. they reach right out into space, and vanished. 

gradually, as I looked, I becam awar that fine point of intens 
brilliant light, travers the rays. mani of them seem to travel from 
the green sun, into distance. other came out of the void, toward the 
sun; but one and all, each kept strictli to the ray in which it 
traveled. their speed wa inconceiv great; and it wa onli when they 
near the green sun, or as they left it, that I could see them as 
separ speck of light. further from the sun, they becam thin line 
of vivid fire within the violet. 

the discoveri of these rays, and the move sparks, interest me, 
extraordinarily. To where did they lead, in such countless profusion? I 
thought of the world in space.... and those sparks! messengers! 
possibly, the idea wa fantastic; but I wa not consciou of it be 
so. messengers! messeng from the central sun! 

An idea evolv itself, slowly. wa the green sun the abod of some 
vast intelligence? the thought wa bewildering. vision of the unnam 
rose, vaguely. had I, indeed, come upon the dwelling-plac of the 
eternal? for a time, I repel the thought, dumbly. It wa too 
stupendous. yet.... 

huge, vagu thought had birth within me. I felt, suddenly, terribl 
naked. and an aw nearness, shook me. 

and heaven ...! wa that an illusion? 

My thought came and went, erratically. the sea of sleep--and she! 
heaven.... I came back, with a bound, to the present. somewhere, out of 
the void behind me, there rush an immense, dark body--hug and silent. 
It wa a dead star, hurl onward to the buri place of the stars. It 
drove between me and the central suns--blot them out from my vision, 
and plung me into an impenetr night. 

An age, and I saw again the violet rays. A great while later--aeon it 
must have been--a circular glow grew in the sky, ahead, and I saw the 
edg of the reced star, show darkli against it. thus, I knew that it 
wa near the central suns. presently, I saw the bright ring of the 
green sun, show plainli against the night the star had pass into the 
shadow of the dead sun. after that, I just waited. the strang year 
went slowly, and ever, I watched, intently. 

'the thing I had expected, came at last--suddenly, awfully. A vast 
flare of dazzl light. A stream burst of white flame across the 
dark void. for an indefinit while, it soar outward--a gigant 
mushroom of fire. It ceas to grow. then, as time went by, it began to 
sink backward, slowly. I saw, now, that it came from a huge, glow 
spot near the center of the dark sun. mighti flames, still soar 
outward from this. yet, spite of it size, the grave of the star wa no 
more than the shine of jupit upon the face of an ocean, when 
compar with the inconceiv mass of the dead sun. 

I may remark here, onc more, that no word will ever convey to the 
imagination, the enorm bulk of the two central suns. 



_xxii_ 

the dark nebula 

year melt into the past, centuries, aeons. the light of the 
incandesc star, sank to a furiou red. 

It wa later, that I saw the dark nebula--at first, an impalp 
cloud, away to my right. It grew, steadily, to a clot of black in 
the night. how long I watched, it is imposs to say; for time, as we 
count it, wa a thing of the past. It came closer, a shapeless 
monstros of darkness--tremendous. It seem to slip across the night, 
sleepily--a veri hell-fog. slowly, it slid nearer, and pass into the 
void, between me and the central suns. It wa as though a curtain had 
been drawn befor my vision. A strang tremor of fear took me, and a 
fresh sens of wonder. 

the green twilight that had reign for so mani million of years, had 
now given place to impenetr gloom. motionless, I peer about me. A 
centuri fled, and it seem to me that I detect occasion dull glow 
of red, pass me at intervals. 

earnestly, I gazed, and, presently, seem to see circular masses, that 
show muddili red, within the cloud blackness. they appear to be 
grow out of the nebul murk. awhile, and they becam plainer to my 
accustom vision. I could see them, now, with a fair amount of 
distinctness--ruddy-ting spheres, similar, in size, to the lumin 
globe that I had seen, so long previously. 

they float past me, continually. gradually, a peculiar uneasi 
seiz me. I becam awar of a grow feel of repugn and dread. 
It wa direct against those pass orbs, and seem born of intuit 
knowledge, rather than of ani real caus or reason. 

some of the pass globe were brighter than others; and, it wa from 
one of these, that a face looked, suddenly. A face, human in it 
outline; but so tortur with woe, that I stared, aghast. I had not 
thought there wa such sorrow, as I saw there. I wa consciou of an 
ad sens of pain, on perceiv that the eyes, which glare so 
wildly, were sightless. A while longer, I saw it; then it had pass on, 
into the surround gloom. after this, I saw others--al wear that 
look of hopeless sorrow; and blind. 

A long time went by, and I becam awar that I wa nearer to the orbs, 
than I had been. At this, I grew uneasy; though I wa less in fear of 
those strang globules, than I had been, befor see their sorrow 
inhabitants; for sympathi had temper my fear. 

later, there wa no doubt but that I wa be carri closer to the 
red spheres, and, presently, I float among them. In awhile, I 
perceiv one bear down upon me. I wa helpless to move from it 
path. In a minute, it seemed, it wa upon me, and I wa submerg in a 
deep red mist. thi cleared, and I stared, confusedly, across the 
immens breadth of the plain of silence. It appear just as I had first 
seen it. I wa move forward, steadily, across it surface. away ahead, 
shone the vast, blood-r ring [15] that lit the place. all around, wa 
spread the extraordinari desol of stillness, that had so impress 
me dure my previou wander across it starkness. 

presently, I saw, rise up into the ruddi gloom, the distant peak of 
the mighti amphitheatr of mountains, where, untold age before, I had 
been shown my first glimps of the terror that underli mani things; 
and where, vast and silent, watch by a thousand mute gods, stand the 
replica of thi hous of mysteries--thi hous that I had seen swallow 
up in that hell-fire, ere the earth had kiss the sun, and vanish 
for ever. 

though I could see the crest of the mountain-amphitheatre, yet it wa 
a great while befor their lower portion becam visible. possibly, thi 
wa due to the strange, ruddi haze, that seem to cling to the surfac 
of the plain. however, be thi as it may, I saw them at last. 

In a still further space of time, I had come so close to the mountains, 
that they appear to overhang me. presently, I saw the great rift, open 
befor me, and I drift into it; without volit on my part. 

later, I came out upon the breadth of the enorm arena. there, at an 
appar distanc of some five miles, stood the house, huge, monstrou 
and silent--li in the veri center of that stupend amphitheatre. So 
far as I could see, it had not alter in ani way; but look as though 
it were onli yesterday that I had seen it. around, the grim, dark 
mountain frown down upon me from their lofti silences. 

far to my right, away up among inaccess peaks, loom the enorm 
bulk of the great beast-god. higher, I saw the hideou form of the dread 
goddess, rise up through the red gloom, thousand of fathom abov 
me. To the left, I made out the monstrou eyeless-thing, grey and 
inscrutable. further off, reclin on it lofti ledge, the livid 
ghoul-shap showed--a splash of sinist color, among the dark 
mountains. 

slowly, I move out across the great arena--floating. As I went, I made 
out the dim form of mani of the other lurk horror that peopl 
those suprem heights. 

gradually, I near the house, and my thought flash back across the 
abyss of years. I rememb the dread specter of the place. A short 
while passed, and I saw that I wa be waft directli toward the 
enorm mass of that silent building. 

about thi time, I becam aware, in an indiffer sort of way, of a 
grow sens of numbness, that rob me of the fear, which I should 
otherwis have felt, on approach that awesom pile. As it was, I 
view it, calmly--much as a man view calam through the haze of hi 
tobacco smoke. 

In a littl while, I had come so close to the house, as to be abl to 
distinguish mani of the detail about it. the longer I looked, the more 
wa I confirm in my long-ago impress of it entir similitud to 
thi strang house. save in it enorm size, I could find 
noth unlike. 

suddenly, as I stared, a great feel of amaz fill me. I had 
come opposit to that part, where the outer door, lead into the 
study, is situated. there, lie right across the threshold, lay a great 
length of cope stone, identical--sav in size and color--with the 
piec I had dislodg in my fight with the pit-creatures. 

I float nearer, and my astonish increased, as I note that the 
door wa broken partli from it hinges, precis in the manner that my 
studi door had been forc inward, by the assault of the swine-things. 
the sight start a train of thoughts, and I began to trace, dimly, 
that the attack on thi house, might have a far deeper signific than 
I had, hitherto, imagined. I rememb how, long ago, in the old 
earth-days, I had half suspect that, in some unexplain manner, 
thi house, in which I live, wa _en rapport_--to use a recogn 
term--with that other tremend structure, away in the midst of that 
incompar plain. 

now, however, it began to be born upon me, that I had but vagu 
conceiv what the realiz of my suspicion meant. I began to 
understand, with a more than human clearness, that the attack I had 
repelled, was, in some extraordinari manner, connect with an attack 
upon that strang edifice. 

with a curiou inconsequence, my thought abruptli left the matter; to 
dwell, wonderingly, upon the peculiar material, out of which the hous 
wa constructed. It was--a I have mentioned, earlier--of a deep, green 
color. yet, now that I had come so close to it, I perceiv that it 
fluctuat at times, though slightly--glow and fading, much as do the 
fume of phosphorus, when rub upon the hand, in the dark. 

presently, my attent wa distract from this, by come to the 
great entrance. here, for the first time, I wa afraid; for, all in a 
moment, the huge door swung back, and I drift in between them, 
helplessly. inside, all wa blackness, impalpable. In an instant, I had 
cross the threshold, and the great door closed, silently, shut me 
in that lightless place. 

for a while, I seem to hang, motionless; suspend amid the darkness. 
then, I becam consciou that I wa move again; where, I could not 
tell. suddenly, far down beneath me, I seem to hear a murmur nois 
of swine-laughter. It sank away, and the succeed silenc appear 
clog with horror. 

then a door open somewher ahead; a white haze of light filter 
through, and I float slowli into a room, that seem strang 
familiar. all at once, there came a bewildering, scream noise, that 
deafen me. I saw a blur vista of visions, flame befor my sight. 
My sens were dazed, through the space of an etern moment. then, my 
power of seeing, came back to me. the dizzy, hazi feel passed, and I 
saw, clearly. 



_xxiii_ 

pepper 

I wa seat in my chair, back again in thi old study. My glanc 
wander 'round the room. for a minute, it had a strange, quiveri 
appearance--unr and unsubstantial. thi disappeared, and I saw that 
noth wa alter in ani way. I look toward the end window--th 
blind wa up. 

I rose to my feet, shakily. As I did so, a slight noise, in the 
direct of the door, attract my attention. I glanc toward it. for 
a short instant, it appear to me that it wa be closed, gently. I 
stared, and saw that I must have been mistaken--it seem close shut. 

with a success of efforts, I trod my way to the window, and look 
out. the sun wa just rising, light up the tangl wilder of 
gardens. for, perhaps, a minute, I stood, and stared. I pass my hand, 
confusedly, across my forehead. 

presently, amid the chao of my senses, a sudden thought came to me; I 
turned, quickly, and call to pepper. there wa no answer, and I 
stumbl across the room, in a quick access of fear. As I went, I tri 
to frame hi name; but my lip were numb. I reach the table, and 
stoop down to him, with a catch at my heart. He wa lie in the 
shadow of the table, and I had not been abl to see him, distinctly, 
from the window. now, as I stooped, I took my breath, shortly. there wa 
no pepper; instead, I wa reach toward an elongated, littl heap of 
grey, ashlik dust.... 

I must have remained, in that half-stoop position, for some minutes. 
I wa dazed--stunned. pepper had realli pass into the land of shadows. 



_xxiv_ 

the footstep IN the garden 

pepper is dead! even now, at times, I seem scarc abl to realiz 
that thi is so. It is mani weeks, sinc I came back from that strang 
and terribl journey through space and time. sometimes, in my sleep, I 
dream about it, and go through, in imagination, the whole of that 
fearsom happening. when I wake, my thought dwell upon it. that 
sun--thos suns, were they inde the great central suns, 'round which 
the whole universe, of the unknown heavens, revolves? who shall say? and 
the bright globules, float forev in the light of the green sun! and 
the sea of sleep on which they float! how unbeliev it all is. If it 
were not for pepper, I should, even after the mani extraordinari thing 
that I have witnessed, be inclin to imagin that it wa but a gigant 
dream. then, there is that dreadful, dark nebula (with it multitud of 
red spheres) move alway within the shadow of the dark sun, sweep 
along on it stupend orbit, wrap etern in gloom. and the face 
that peer out at me! god, do they, and doe such a thing realli 
exist? ... there is still that littl heap of grey ash, on my studi 
floor. I will not have it touched. 

At times, when I am calmer, I have wonder what becam of the outer 
planet of the solar system. It ha occur to me, that they may have 
broken loos from the sun' attraction, and whirl away into space. 
thi is, of course, onli a surmise. there are so mani things, about 
which I wonder. 

now that I am writing, let me record that I am certain, there is 
someth horribl about to happen. last night, a thing occurred, which 
ha fill me with an even greater terror, than did the pit fear. I will 
write it down now, and, if anyth more happens, endeavor to make a 
note of it, at once. I have a feeling, that there is more in thi last 
affair, than in all those others. I am shaki and nervous, even now, as I 
write. somehow, I think death is not veri far away. not that I fear 
death--a death is understood. yet, there is that in the air, which bid 
me fear--an intangible, cold horror. I felt it last night. It 
wa thus:-- 

last night, I wa sit here in my study, writing. the door, lead 
into the garden, wa half open. At times, the metal rattl of a dog' 
chain, sound faintly. It belong to the dog I have bought, sinc 
pepper' death. I will not have him in the house--not after pepper. 
still, I have felt it better to have a dog about the place. they are 
wonder creatures. 

I wa much engross in my work, and the time passed, quickly. 
suddenly, I heard a soft nois on the path, outsid in the garden--pad, 
pad, pad, it went, with a stealthy, curiou sound. I sat upright, with a 
quick movement, and look out through the open door. again the nois 
came--pad, pad, pad. It appear to be approaching. with a slight 
feel of nervousness, I stare into the gardens; but the night hid 
everything. 

then the dog gave a long howl, and I started. for a minute, perhaps, I 
peered, intently; but could hear nothing. after a little, I pick up 
the pen, which I had laid down, and recommenc my work. the nervou 
feel had gone; for I imagin that the sound I had heard, wa noth 
more than the dog walk 'round hi kennel, at the length of hi chain. 

A quarter of an hour may have passed; then, all at once, the dog howl 
again, and with such a plaintiv sorrow note, that I jump to my 
feet, drop my pen, and ink the page on which I wa at work. 

'curs that dog!' I muttered, note what I had done. then, even as I 
said the words, there sound again that queer--pad, pad, pad. It wa 
horribl close--almost by the door, I thought. I knew, now, that it 
could not be the dog; hi chain would not allow him to come so near. 

the dog' growl came again, and I noted, subconsciously, the taint of 
fear in it. 

outside, on the windowsill, I could see tip, my sister' pet cat. As I 
looked, it sprang to it feet, it tail swelling, visibly. for an 
instant it stood thus; seem to stare, fixedly, at something, in the 
direct of the door. then, quickly, it began to back along the sill; 
until, reach the wall at the end, it could go no further. there it 
stood, rigid, as though frozen in an attitud of extraordinari terror. 

frightened, and puzzled, I seiz a stick from the corner, and went 
toward the door, silently; take one of the candl with me. I had come 
to within a few pace of it, when, suddenly, a peculiar sens of fear 
thrill through me--a fear, palpit and real; whence, I knew not, nor 
why. So great wa the feel of terror, that I wast no time; but 
retreat straight-way--walk backward, and keep my gaze, 
fearfully, on the door. I would have given much, to rush at it, fling it 
to, and shoot the bolts; for I have had it repair and strengthened, 
so that, now, it is far stronger than ever it ha been. like tip, I 
continu my, almost unconscious, progress backward, until the wall 
brought me up. At that, I started, nervously, and glanc 'round, 
apprehensively. As I did so, my eye dwelt, momentarily, on the rack of 
firearms, and I took a step toward them; but stopped, with a curiou 
feel that they would be needless. outside, in the gardens, the dog 
moaned, strangely. 

suddenly, from the cat, there came a fierce, long screech. I glanced, 
jerkily, in it direction--something, lumin and ghostly, encircl 
it, and grew upon my vision. It resolv into a glow hand, 
transparent, with a lambent, greenish flame flicker over it. the cat 
gave a last, aw caterwaul, and I saw it smoke and blaze. My breath 
came with a gasp, and I leant against the wall. over that part of the 
window there spread a smudge, green and fantastic. It hid the thing from 
me, though the glare of fire shone through, dully. A stench of burning, 
stole into the room. 

pad, pad, pad--someth pass down the garden path, and a faint, 
mouldi odor seem to come in through the open door, and mingl with the 
burnt smell. 

the dog had been silent for a few moments. now, I heard him yowl, 
sharply, as though in pain. then, he wa quiet, save for an occasional, 
subdu whimper of fear. 

A minut went by; then the gate on the west side of the gardens, 
slammed, distantly. after that, nothing; not even the dog' whine. 

I must have stood there some minutes. then a fragment of courag stole 
into my heart, and I made a frighten rush at the door, dash it to, 
and bolt it. after that, for a full half-hour, I sat, 
helpless--star befor me, rigidly. 

slowly, my life came back into me, and I made my way, shakily, 
up-stair to bed. 

that is all. 



_xxv_ 

the thing from the arena 

thi morning, early, I went through the gardens; but found everyth 
as usual. near the door, I examin the path, for footprints; yet, here 
again, there wa noth to tell me whether, or not, I dream 
last night. 

It wa onli when I came to speak to the dog, that I discov tangibl 
proof, that someth did happen. when I went to hi kennel, he kept 
inside, crouch up in one corner, and I had to coax him, to get him 
out. when, finally, he consent to come, it wa in a strang cow 
and subdu manner. As I pat him, my attent wa attract to a 
greenish patch, on hi left flank. On examin it, I found, that the 
fur and skin had been apparently, burnt off; for the flesh showed, raw 
and scorched. the shape of the mark wa curious, remind me of the 
imprint of a larg talon or hand. 

I stood up, thoughtful. My gaze wander toward the studi window. the 
ray of the rise sun, shimmer on the smoki patch in the lower 
corner, caus it to fluctuat from green to red, oddly. ah! that wa 
undoubtedli anoth proof; and, suddenly, the horribl thing I saw last 
night, rose in my mind. I look at the dog, again. I knew the cause, 
now, of that hate look wound on hi side--i knew, also, that, what 
I had seen last night, had been a real happening. and a great discomfort 
fill me. pepper! tip! and now thi poor anim ...! I glanc at the 
dog again, and notic that he wa lick at hi wound. 

'poor brute!' I muttered, and bent to pat hi head. At that, he got 
upon hi feet, nose and lick my hand, wistfully. 

presently, I left him, have other matter to which to attend. 

after dinner, I went to see him, again. He seem quiet, and 
disinclin to leav hi kennel. from my sister, I have learnt that he 
ha refus all food today. she appear a littl puzzled, when she told 
me; though quit unsuspici of anyth of which to be afraid. 

the day ha passed, unev enough. after tea, I went, again, to 
have a look at the dog. He seem moody, and somewhat restless; yet 
persist in remain in hi kennel. befor lock up, for the night, 
I move hi kennel out, away from the wall, so that I shall be abl to 
watch it from the small window, tonight. the thought came to me, to 
bring him into the hous for the night; but consider ha decid 
me, to let him remain out. I cannot say that the hous is, in ani 
degree, less to be fear than the gardens. pepper wa in the house, 
and yet.... 

It is now two o'clock. sinc eight, I have watch the kennel, from the 
small, side window in my study. yet, noth ha occurred, and I am too 
tire to watch longer. I will go to bed.... 

dure the night, I wa restless. thi is unusu for me; but, toward 
morning, I obtain a few hours' sleep. 

I rose early, and, after breakfast, visit the dog. He wa quiet; but 
morose, and refus to leav hi kennel. I wish there wa some hors 
doctor near here; I would have the poor brute look to. all day, he ha 
taken no food; but ha shown an evid desir for water--lap it up, 
greedily. I wa reliev to observ this. 

the even ha come, and I am in my study. I intend to follow my plan 
of last night, and watch the kennel. the door, lead into the garden, 
is bolted, securely. I am conscious glad there are bar to the 
windows.... 

night:--midnight ha gone. the dog ha been silent, up to the present. 
through the side window, on my left, I can make out, dimly, the outlin 
of the kennel. for the first time, the dog moves, and I hear the rattl 
of hi chain. I look out, quickly. As I stare, the dog move again, 
restlessly, and I see a small patch of lumin light, shine from the 
interior of the kennel. It vanishes; then the dog stir again, and, onc 
more, the gleam comes. I am puzzled. the dog is quiet, and I can see the 
lumin thing, plainly. It show distinctly. there is someth 
familiar about the shape of it. for a moment, I wonder; then it come to 
me, that it is not unlik the four finger and thumb of a hand. like a 
hand! and I rememb the contour of that fearsom wound on the dog' 
side. It must be the wound I see. It is lumin at night--why? the 
minut pass. My mind is fill with thi fresh thing.... 

suddenly, I hear a sound, out in the gardens. how it thrill through 
me. It is approaching. pad, pad, pad. A prickli sensat travers my 
spine, and seem to creep across my scalp. the dog move in hi kennel, 
and whimpers, frightenedly. He must have turn 'round; for, now, I can 
no longer see the outlin of hi shine wound. 

outside, the garden are silent, onc more, and I listen, fearfully. A 
minut passes, and another; then I hear the pad sound, again. It is 
quit close, and appear to be come down the gravel path. the nois 
is curious measur and deliberate. It ceas outsid the door; and I 
rise to my feet, and stand motionless. from the door, come a slight 
sound--th latch is be slowli raised. A sing nois is in my ears, 
and I have a sens of pressur about the head-- 

the latch drops, with a sharp click, into the catch. the nois startl 
me afresh; jarring, horribly, on my tens nerves. after that, I stand, 
for a long while, amid an ever-grow quietness. all at once, my knee 
begin to tremble, and I have to sit, quickly. 

An uncertain period of time passes, and, gradually, I begin to shake 
off the feel of terror, that ha possess me. yet, still I sit. I 
seem to have lost the power of movement. I am strang tired, and 
inclin to doze. My eye open and close, and, presently, I find myself 
fall asleep, and waking, in fit and starts. 

It is some time later, that I am sleepili awar that one of the candl 
is guttering. when I wake again, it ha gone out, and the room is veri 
dim, under the light of the one remain flame. the semi-dark 
troubl me little. I have lost that aw sens of dread, and my onli 
desir seem to be to sleep--sleep. 

suddenly, although there is no noise, I am awake--wid awake. I am 
acut consciou of the near of some mystery, of some overwhelm 
presence. the veri air seem pregnant with terror. I sit huddled, and 
just listen, intently. still, there is no sound. nature, herself, seem 
dead. then, the oppress still is broken by a littl eldritch 
scream of wind, that sweep 'round the house, and die away, remotely. 

I let my gaze wander across the half-light room. By the great clock 
in the far corner, is a dark, tall shadow. for a short instant, I stare, 
frightenedly. then, I see that it is nothing, and am, momentarily, 
relieved. 

In the time that follows, the thought flash through my brain, whi 
not leav thi house--thi hous of mysteri and terror? then, as though 
in answer, there sweep up, across my sight, a vision of the wondrou 
sea of sleep,--th sea of sleep where she and I have been allow to 
meet, after the year of separ and sorrow; and I know that I shall 
stay on here, whatev happens. 

through the side window, I note the somber black of the night. My 
glanc wander away, and 'round the room; rest on one shadowi object 
and another. suddenly, I turn, and look at the window on my right; as I 
do so, I breath quickly, and bend forward, with a frighten gaze at 
someth outsid the window, but close to the bars. I am look at a 
vast, misti swine-face, over which fluctuat a flamboy flame, of a 
greenish hue. It is the thing from the arena. the quiver mouth seem 
to drip with a continual, phosphoresc slaver. the eye are stare 
straight into the room, with an inscrut expression. thus, I sit 
rigidly--frozen. 

the thing ha begun to move. It is turning, slowly, in my direction. 
it face is come 'round toward me. It see me. two huge, inhumanli 
human, eye are look through the dim at me. I am cold with fear; 
yet, even now, I am keenli conscious, and note, in an irrelev way, 
that the distant star are blot out by the mass of the giant face. 

A fresh horror ha come to me. I am rise from my chair, without the 
least intention. I am on my feet, and someth is impel me toward 
the door that lead out into the gardens. I wish to stop; but cannot. 
some immut power is oppos to my will, and I go slowli forward, 
unwil and resistant. My glanc fli 'round the room, helplessly, 
and stop at the window. the great swine-fac ha disappeared, and I 
hear, again, that stealthi pad, pad, pad. It stop outsid the 
door--th door toward which I am be compelled.... 

there succe a short, intens silence; then there come a sound. It 
is the rattl of the latch, be slowli lifted. At that, I am fill 
with desperation. I will not go forward anoth step. I make a vast 
effort to return; but it is, as though I press back, upon an invis 
wall. I groan out loud, in the agoni of my fear, and the sound of my 
voic is frightening. again come that rattle, and I shiver, clammily. I 
try--aye, fight and struggle, to hold back, _back_; but it is no use.... 

I am at the door, and, in a mechan way, I watch my hand go forward, 
to undo the topmost bolt. It doe so, entir without my volition. even 
as I reach up toward the bolt, the door is violent shaken, and I get a 
sickli whiff of mouldi air, which seem to drive in through the 
interstic of the doorway. I draw the bolt back, slowly, fighting, 
dumbly, the while. It come out of it socket, with a click, and I begin 
to shake, aguishly. there are two more; one at the bottom of the door; 
the other, a massiv affair, is place about the middle. 

for, perhap a minute, I stand, with my arm hang slackly, by my 
sides. the influenc to meddl with the fasten of the door, seem to 
have gone. all at once, there come the sudden rattl of iron, at my 
feet. I glanc down, quickly, and realize, with an unspeak terror, 
that my foot is push back the lower bolt. An aw sens of 
helpless assail me.... the bolt come out of it hold, with a 
slight, ring sound and I stagger on my feet, grasp at the great, 
central bolt, for support. A minut passes, an eternity; then 
another----mi god, help me! I am be forc to work upon the last 
fastening. _I will not!_ better to die, than open to the terror, that is 
on the other side of the door. Is there no escap ...? god help me, I 
have jerk the bolt half out of it socket! My lip emit a hoars 
scream of terror, the bolt is three part drawn, now, and still my 
unconsci hand work toward my doom. onli a fraction of steel, between 
my soul and that. twice, I scream out in the suprem agoni of my fear; 
then, with a mad effort, I tear my hand away. My eye seem blinded. A 
great black is fall upon me. natur ha come to my rescue. I feel 
my knee giving. there is a loud, quick thud upon the door, and I am 
falling, falling.... 

I must have lain there, at least a coupl of hours. As I recover, I am 
awar that the other candl ha burnt out, and the room is in an almost 
total darkness. I cannot rise to my feet, for I am cold, and fill with 
a terribl cramp. yet my brain is clear, and there is no longer the 
strain of that unholi influence. 

cautiously, I get upon my knees, and feel for the central bolt. I find 
it, and push it secur back into it socket; then the one at the 
bottom of the door. By thi time, I am abl to rise to my feet, and so 
manag to secur the fasten at the top. after that, I go down upon my 
knees, again, and creep away among the furniture, in the direct of 
the stairs. By do this, I am safe from observ from the window. 

I reach the opposit door, and, as I leav the study, cast one nervou 
glanc over my shoulder, toward the window. out in the night, I seem to 
catch a glimps of someth impalpable; but it may be onli a fancy. 
then, I am in the passage, and on the stairs. 

reach my bedroom, I clamber into bed, all cloth as I am, and pull 
the bedcloth over me. there, after awhile, I begin to regain a littl 
confidence. It is imposs to sleep; but I am grate for the ad 
warmth of the bedclothes. presently, I tri to think over the happen 
of the past night; but, though I cannot sleep, I find that it is 
useless, to attempt consecut thought. My brain seem curious blank. 

toward morning, I begin to toss, uneasily. I cannot rest, and, after 
awhile, I get out of bed, and pace the floor. the wintri dawn is 
begin to creep through the windows, and show the bare discomfort of 
the old room. strange, that, through all these years, it ha never 
occur to me how dismal the place realli is. and so a time passes. 

from somewher down stairs, a sound come up to me. I go to the bedroom 
door, and listen. It is mary, bustl about the great, old kitchen, 
get the breakfast ready. I feel littl interest. I am not hungry. My 
thoughts, however; continu to dwell upon her. how littl the weird 
happen in thi hous seem to troubl her. except in the incid of 
the pit creatures, she ha seem unconsci of anyth unusu 
occurring. she is old, like myself; yet how littl we have to do with 
one another. Is it becaus we have noth in common; or onli that, 
be old, we care less for society, than quietness? these and other 
matter pass through my mind, as I meditate; and help to distract my 
attention, for a while, from the oppress thought of the night. 

after a time, I go to the window, and, open it, look out. the sun is 
now abov the horizon, and the air, though cold, is sweet and crisp. 
gradually, my brain clears, and a sens of security, for the time being, 
come to me. somewhat happier, I go down stairs, and out into the 
garden, to have a look at the dog. 

As I approach the kennel, I am greet by the same mouldi stench that 
assail me at the door last night. shake off a momentari sens of 
fear, I call to the dog; but he take no heed, and, after call onc 
more, I throw a small stone into the kennel. At this, he moves, 
uneasily, and I shout hi name, again; but do not go closer. presently, 
my sister come out, and join me, in tri to coax him from 
the kennel. 

In a littl the poor beast rises, and shambl out lurch queerly. In 
the daylight he stand sway from side to side, and blink stupidly. 
I look and note that the horrid wound is larger, much larger, and seem 
to have a whitish, fungoid appearance. My sister move to fondl him; 
but I detain her, and explain that I think it will be better not to go 
too near him for a few days; as it is imposs to tell what may be the 
matter with him; and it is well to be cautious. 

A minut later, she leav me; come back with a basin of odd scrap 
of food. thi she place on the ground, near the dog, and I push it into 
hi reach, with the aid of a branch, broken from one of the shrubs. yet, 
though the meat should be tempting, he take no notic of it; but 
retir to hi kennel. there is still water in hi drink vessel, so, 
after a few moments' talk, we go back to the house. I can see that my 
sister is much puzzl as to what is the matter with the animal; yet it 
would be madness, even to hint the truth to her. 

the day slip away, uneventfully; and night come on. I have determin 
to repeat my experi of last night. I cannot say that it is wisdom; 
yet my mind is made up. still, however, I have taken precautions; for I 
have driven stout nail in at the back of each of the three bolts, that 
secur the door, open from the studi into the gardens. thi will, at 
least, prevent a recurr of the danger I ran last night. 

from ten to about two-thirty, I watch; but noth occurs; and, 
finally, I stumbl off to bed, where I am soon asleep. 



_xxvi_ 

the lumin speck 

I awak suddenly. It is still dark. I turn over, onc or twice, in my 
endeavor to sleep again; but I cannot sleep. My head is aching, 
slightly; and, by turn I am hot and cold. In a little, I give up the 
attempt, and stretch out my hand, for the matches. I will light my 
candle, and read, awhile; perhaps, I shall be abl to sleep, after a 
time. for a few moments, I grope; then my hand touch the box; but, as 
I open it, I am startled, to see a phosphoresc speck of fire, shine 
amid the darkness. I put out my other hand, and touch it. It is on my 
wrist. with a feel of vagu alarm, I strike a light, hurriedly, and 
look; but can see nothing, save a tini scratch. 

'fancy!' I mutter, with a half sigh of relief. then the match burn my 
finger, and I drop it, quickly. As I fumbl for another, the thing 
shine out again. I know, now, that it is no fancy. thi time, I light 
the candle, and examin the place, more closely. there is a slight, 
greenish discolor 'round the scratch. I am puzzl and worried. 
then a thought come to me. I rememb the morn after the thing 
appeared. I rememb that the dog lick my hand. It wa thi one, with 
the scratch on it; though I have not been even consciou of the 
abasement, until now. A horribl fear ha come to me. It creep into my 
brain--th dog' wound, shine at night. with a daze feeling, I sit 
down on the side of the bed, and tri to think; but cannot. My brain 
seem numb with the sheer horror of thi new fear. 

time move on, unheeded. once, I rous up, and tri to persuad myself 
that I am mistaken; but it is no use. In my heart, I have no doubt. 

hour after hour, I sit in the dark and silence, and shiver, 
hopelessly.... 

the day ha come and gone, and it is night again. 

thi morning, early, I shot the dog, and buri it, away among the 
bushes. My sister is startl and frightened; but I am desperate. 
besides, it is better so. the foul growth had almost hidden it left 
side. and i--th place on my wrist ha enlarged, perceptibly. sever 
times, I have caught myself mutter prayers--littl thing learnt as a 
child. god, almighti god, help me! I shall go mad. 

six days, and I have eaten nothing. It is night. I am sit in my 
chair. ah, god! I wonder have ani ever felt the horror of life that I 
have come to know? I am swath in terror. I feel ever the burn of 
thi dread growth. It ha cover all my right arm and side, and is 
begin to creep up my neck. tomorrow, it will eat into my face. I 
shall becom a terribl mass of live corruption. there is no escape. 
yet, a thought ha come to me, born of a sight of the gun-rack, on the 
other side of the room. I have look again--with the strangest of 
feelings. the thought grow upon me. god, thou knowest, thou must know, 
that death is better, aye, better a thousand time than this. this! 
jesus, forgiv me, but I cannot live, cannot, cannot! I dare not! I am 
beyond all help--ther is noth els left. It will, at least, spare 
me that final horror.... 

I think I must have been dozing. I am veri weak, and oh! so miserable, 
so miser and tired--tired. the rustl of the paper, tri my brain. 
My hear seem preternatur sharp. I will sit awhil and think.... 

"hush! I hear something, down--down in the cellars. It is a creak 
sound. My god, it is the open of the great, oak trap. what can be 
do that? the scratch of my pen deafen me ... I must listen.... 
there are step on the stairs; strang pad steps, that come up and 
nearer.... jesus, be merci to me, an old man. there is someth 
fumbl at the door-handle. O god, help me now! jesus--th door is 
opening--slowly. somethi--" 

that is all[16] 



_xxvii_ 

conclus 

I put down the manuscript, and glanc across at tonnison: he wa 
sitting, stare out into the dark. I wait a minute; then I spoke. 

"well?" I said. 

He turned, slowly, and look at me. hi thought seem to have gone 
out of him into a great distance. 

"wa he mad?" I asked, and indic the ms., with a half nod. 

tonnison stare at me, unseeingly, a moment; then, hi wit came back to 
him, and, suddenly, he comprehend my question. 

"no!" he said. 

I open my lips, to offer a contradictori opinion; for my sens of the 
sane of things, would not allow me to take the stori literally; then 
I shut them again, without say anything. somehow, the certainti in 
tonnison' voic affect my doubts. I felt, all at once, less assured; 
though I wa by no mean convinc as yet. 

after a few moments' silence, tonnison rose, stiffly, and began to 
undress. He seem disinclin to talk; so I said nothing; but follow 
hi example. I wa weary; though still full of the stori I had 
just read. 

somehow, as I roll into my blankets, there crept into my mind a memori 
of the old gardens, as we had seen them. I rememb the odd fear that 
the place had conjur up in our hearts; and it grew upon me, with 
conviction, that tonnison wa right. 

It wa veri late when we rose--nearli midday; for the greater part of 
the night had been spent in read the ms. 

tonnison wa grumpy, and I felt out of sorts. It wa a somewhat dismal 
day, and there wa a touch of chilli in the air. there wa no 
mention of go out fish on either of our parts. We got dinner, and, 
after that, just sat and smoke in silence. 

presently, tonnison ask for the manuscript: I hand it to him, and he 
spent most of the afternoon in read it through by himself. 

It wa while he wa thu employed, that a thought came to me:-- 

"what do you say to have anoth look at--?" I nod my head down 
stream. 

tonnison look up. "nothing!" he said, abruptly; and, somehow, I wa 
less annoyed, than relieved, at hi answer. 

after that, I left him alone. 

A littl befor teatime, he look up at me, curiously. 

"sorry, old chap, if I wa a bit short with you just now;" (just now, 
indeed! he had not spoken for the last three hours) "but I would not go 
there again," and he indic with hi head, "for anyth that you 
could offer me. ugh!" and he put down that histori of a man' terror and 
hope and despair. 

the next morning, we rose early, and went for our accustom swim: we 
had partli shaken off the depress of the previou day; and so, took 
our rod when we had finish breakfast, and spent the day at our 
favorit sport. 

after that day, we enjoy our holiday to the utmost; though both of us 
look forward to the time when our driver should come; for we were 
tremend anxiou to inquir of him, and through him among the peopl 
of the tini hamlet, whether ani of them could give us inform about 
that strang garden, lie away by itself in the heart of an almost 
unknown tract of country. 

At last, the day came, on which we expect the driver to come across 
for us. He arriv early, while we were still abed; and, the first thing 
we knew, he wa at the open of the tent, inquir whether we had had 
good sport. We repli in the affirmative; and then, both together, 
almost in the same breath, we ask the question that wa uppermost in 
our minds:--did he know anyth about an old garden, and a great pit, 
and a lake, situat some mile away, down the river; also, had he ever 
heard of a great hous thereabouts? 

no, he did not, and had not; yet, stay, he had heard a rumor, onc upon 
a time, of a great, old hous stand alon out in the wilderness; but, 
if he rememb rightli it wa a place given over to the fairies; or, 
if that had not been so, he wa certain that there had been someth 
"quare" about it; and, anyway, he had heard noth of it for a veri 
long while--not sinc he wa quit a gossoon. no, he could not rememb 
anyth particular about it; indeed, he did not know he rememb 
anyth "at all, at all" until we question him. 

"look here," said tonnison, find that thi wa about all that he 
could tell us, "just take a walk 'round the village, while we dress, and 
find out something, if you can." 

with a nondescript salute, the man depart on hi errand; while we made 
hast to get into our clothes; after which, we began to prepar 
breakfast. 

We were just sit down to it, when he returned. 

"it' all in bed the lazi divvil is, sor," he said, with a repetit 
of the salute, and an appreci eye to the good thing spread out on 
our provis chest, which we util as a table. 

"oh, well, sit down," repli my friend, "and have someth to eat with 
us." which the man did without delay. 

after breakfast, tonnison sent him off again on the same errand, while 
we sat and smoked. He wa away some three-quart of an hour, and, when 
he returned, it wa evid that he had found out something. It appear 
that he had got into convers with an ancient man of the village, 
who, probably, knew more--though it wa littl enough--of the strang 
house, than ani other person living. 

the substanc of thi knowledg was, that, in the "ancient man's" 
youth--and good know how long back that was--ther had stood a 
great hous in the center of the gardens, where now wa left onli that 
fragment of ruin. thi hous had been empti for a great while; year 
befor his--th ancient man's--birth. It wa a place shun by the 
peopl of the village, as it had been shun by their father befor 
them. there were mani thing said about it, and all were of evil. No one 
ever went near it, either by day or night. In the villag it wa a 
synonym of all that is unholi and dreadful. 

and then, one day, a man, a stranger, had ridden through the village, 
and turn off down the river, in the direct of the house, as it wa 
alway term by the villagers. some hour afterward, he had ridden 
back, take the track by which he had come, toward ardrahan. then, for 
three month or so, noth wa heard. At the end of that time, he 
reappeared; but now, he wa accompani by an elderli woman, and a larg 
number of donkeys, laden with variou articles. they had pass through 
the villag without stopping, and gone straight down the bank of the 
river, in the direct of the house. 

sinc that time, no one, save the man whom they had charter to bring 
over monthli suppli of necessari from ardrahan, had ever seen either 
of them: and him, none had ever induc to talk; evidently, he had been 
well paid for hi trouble. 

the year had move onward, unev enough, in that littl hamlet; 
the man make hi monthli journeys, regularly. 

one day, he had appear as usual on hi customari errand. He had pass 
through the villag without exchang more than a surli nod with the 
inhabit and gone on toward the house. usually, it wa even befor 
he made the return journey. On thi occasion, however, he had reappear 
in the village, a few hour later, in an extraordinari state of 
excitement, and with the astound information, that the hous had 
disappear bodily, and that a stupend pit now yawn in the place 
where it had stood. 

thi news, it appears, so excit the curios of the villagers, that 
they overcam their fears, and march _en masse_ to the place. there, 
they found everything, just as describ by the carrier. 

thi wa all that we could learn. Of the author of the ms., who he was, 
and whenc he came, we shall never know. 

hi ident is, as he seem to have desired, buri forever. 

that same day, we left the lone villag of kraighten. We have never 
been there since. 

sometimes, in my dreams, I see that enorm pit, surrounded, as it is, 
on all side by wild tree and bushes. and the nois of the water rise 
upward, and blends--in my sleep--with other and lower noises; while, 
over all, hang the etern shroud of spray. 



grief[17] 

fierc hunger reign within my breast, 
I had not dreamt that thi whole world, 
crush in the hand of god, could yield 
such bitter essenc of unrest, 
such pain as sorrow now hath hurl 
out of it dread heart, unsealed! 

each sob breath is but a cry, 
My heart-strok knell of agony, 
and my whole brain ha but one thought 
that nevermor through life shall I 
(save in the ach of memory) 
touch hand with thee, who now art naught! 

through the whole void of night I search, 
So dumbl cri out to thee; 
but thou are _not_; and night' vast throne 
becom an all stupend church 
with star-bel knell unto me 
who in all space am most alone! 

An hungered, to the shore I creep, 
perchanc some comfort wait on me 
from the old sea' etern heart; 
but lo! from all the solemn deep, 
far voic out of mysteri 
seem question whi we are apart! 

"where' I go I am alon 
who once, through thee, had all the world. 
My breast is one whole rage pain 
for that which _was_, and now is flown 
into the blank where life is hurl 
where all is not, nor is again!" 



footnotes: 

[1] An appar unmean interpolation. I can find no previou 
refer in the ms. to thi matter. It becom clearer, however, in the 
light of succeed incidents.--ed. 

[2] here, the write becom undecipherable, owe to the damag 
condit of thi part of the ms. below I print such fragment as are 
legible.--ed. 

[3] note.--th severest scrutini ha not enabl me to deciph more of 
the damag portion of the ms. It commenc to be legibl again with the 
chapter entitl "the nois in the night."--ed. 

[4] the reclus use thi as an illustration, evid in the sens of 
the popular concept of a comet.--ed. 

[5] evid refer to someth set forth in the miss and 
mutil pages. see _fragments, chapter 14_--ed. 

[6] No further mention is made of the moon. from what is said here, it 
is evid that our satellit had greatli increas it distanc from 
the earth. possibly, at a later age it may even have broken loos from 
our attraction. I cannot but regret that no light is shed on thi 
point.--ed. 

[7] conceivably, frozen air.--ed. 

[8] see previou footnote. thi would explain the snow (?) within the 
room.--ed. 

[9] I am confound that neither here, nor later on, doe the reclus 
make ani further mention of the continu north and south movement 
(apparent, of course,) of the sun from solstic to solstice.--ed. 

[10] At thi time the sound-carri atmospher must have been either 
incred attenuated, or--mor probably--nonexistent. In the light of 
this, it cannot be suppos that these, or ani other, nois would have 
been appar to live ears--to hearing, as we, in the materi body, 
understand that sense.--ed. 

[11] I can onli suppos that the time of the earth' yearli journey had 
ceas to bear it present _relative_ proport to the period of the 
sun' rotation.--ed. 

[12] A care read of the ms. suggest that, either the sun is 
travel on an orbit of great eccentricity, or els that it wa 
approach the green star on a lessen orbit. and at thi moment, I 
conceiv it to be final torn directli from it obliqu course, by the 
gravit pull of the immens star.--ed. 

[13] It will be notic here that the earth wa "_slowly_ travers the 
tremend face of the dead sun." No explan is given of this, and 
we must conclude, either that the speed of time had slowed, or els that 
the earth wa actual progress on it orbit at a rate, slow, when 
measur by exist standards. A care studi of the ms. however, 
lead me to conclud that the speed of time had been steadili decreas 
for a veri consider period.--ed. 

[14] see _first footnote, chapter 18_. 

[15] without doubt, the flame-edg mass of the dead central sun, seen 
from anoth dimension.--ed. 

[16] note.--from the unfinish word, it is possible, on the ms., to 
trace a faint line of ink, which suggest that the pen ha trail away 
over the paper; possibly, through fright and weakness.--ed. 





end of the project gutenberg ebook of the hous on the borderland 
by william hope hodgson 

*** end OF thi project gutenberg ebook the hous ON the borderland *** 

***** thi file should be name 10002-8.txt or 10002-8.zip ***** 
thi and all associ file of variou format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/0/0/10002/ 

produc by suzann shell, sjaani and PG distribut proofread 

updat edit will replac the previou one--th old edit 
will be renamed. 

creat the work from public domain print edit mean that no 
one own a unit state copyright in these works, so the foundat 
(and you!) can copi and distribut it in the unit state without 
permiss and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the gener term of use part of thi license, appli to 
copi and distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a regist trademark, and may not be use if you 
charg for the ebooks, unless you receiv specif permission. If you 
do not charg anyth for copi of thi ebook, compli with the 
rule is veri easy. you may use thi ebook for nearli ani purpos 
such as creation of deriv works, reports, perform and 
research. they may be modifi and print and given away--y may do 
practic anyth with public domain ebooks. redistribut is 
subject to the trademark license, especi commerci 
redistribution. 



*** start: full licens *** 

the full project gutenberg licens 
pleas read thi befor you distribut OR use thi work 

To protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promot the free 
distribut of electron works, by use or distribut thi work 
(or ani other work associ in ani way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agre to compli with all the term of the full project 
gutenberg-tm licens (avail with thi file or onlin at 
http://gutenberg.net/license). 


section 1. gener term of use and redistribut project gutenberg-tm 
electron work 

1.a. By read or use ani part of thi project gutenberg-tm 
electron work, you indic that you have read, understand, agre to 
and accept all the term of thi licens and intellectu properti 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agre to abid by all 
the term of thi agreement, you must ceas use and return or destroy 
all copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in your possession. 
If you paid a fee for obtain a copi of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work and you do not agre to be bound by the 
term of thi agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entiti to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a regist trademark. It may onli be 
use on or associ in ani way with an electron work by peopl who 
agre to be bound by the term of thi agreement. there are a few 
thing that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electron work 
even without compli with the full term of thi agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of thing you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electron work if you follow the term of thi agreement 
and help preserv free futur access to project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compil copyright in the collect of project 
gutenberg-tm electron works. nearli all the individu work in the 
collect are in the public domain in the unit states. If an 
individu work is in the public domain in the unit state and you are 
locat in the unit states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or creat deriv 
work base on the work as long as all refer to project gutenberg 
are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promot free access to electron work by 
freeli share project gutenberg-tm work in complianc with the term of 
thi agreement for keep the project gutenberg-tm name associ with 
the work. you can easili compli with the term of thi agreement by 
keep thi work in the same format with it attach full project 
gutenberg-tm licens when you share it without charg with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are locat also govern 
what you can do with thi work. copyright law in most countri are in 
a constant state of change. If you are outsid the unit states, check 
the law of your countri in addit to the term of thi agreement 
befor downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribut or 
creat deriv work base on thi work or ani other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundat make no represent concern 
the copyright statu of ani work in ani countri outsid the unit 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remov all refer to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the follow sentence, with activ link to, or other immedi 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm licens must appear promin 
whenev ani copi of a project gutenberg-tm work (ani work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copi or distributed: 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.net 

1.e.2. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is deriv 
from the public domain (doe not contain a notic indic that it is 
post with permiss of the copyright holder), the work can be copi 
and distribut to anyon in the unit state without pay ani fee 
or charges. If you are redistribut or provid access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associ with or appear on the 
work, you must compli either with the requir of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permiss for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is post 
with the permiss of the copyright holder, your use and distribut 
must compli with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and ani addit 
term impos by the copyright holder. addit term will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm licens for all work post with the 
permiss of the copyright holder found at the begin of thi work. 

1.e.4. Do not unlink or detach or remov the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens term from thi work, or ani file contain a part of thi 
work or ani other work associ with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribut or redistribut thi 
electron work, or ani part of thi electron work, without 
promin display the sentenc set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
activ link or immedi access to the full term of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribut thi work in ani binary, 
compressed, mark up, nonproprietari or proprietari form, includ ani 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provid access to or 
distribut copi of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the offici version 
post on the offici project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net), 
you must, at no addit cost, fee or expens to the user, provid a 
copy, a mean of export a copy, or a mean of obtain a copi upon 
request, of the work in it origin "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. ani altern format must includ the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens as specifi in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. Do not charg a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copi or distribut ani project gutenberg-tm work 
unless you compli with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charg a reason fee for copi of or provid 
access to or distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work provid 
that 

- you pay a royalti fee of 20% of the gross profit you deriv from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm work calcul use the method 
you alreadi use to calcul your applic taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
ha agre to donat royalti under thi paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literari archiv foundation. royalti payment 
must be paid within 60 day follow each date on which you 
prepar (or are legal requir to prepare) your period tax 
returns. royalti payment should be clearli mark as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat at the 
address specifi in section 4, "inform about donat to 
the project gutenberg literari archiv foundation." 

- you provid a full refund of ani money paid by a user who notifi 
you in write (or by e-mail) within 30 day of receipt that s/he 
doe not agre to the term of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must requir such a user to return or 
destroy all copi of the work possess in a physic medium 
and discontinu all use of and all access to other copi of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accord with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of ani 
money paid for a work or a replac copy, if a defect in the 
electron work is discov and report to you within 90 day 
of receipt of the work. 

- you compli with all other term of thi agreement for free 
distribut of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. If you wish to charg a fee or distribut a project gutenberg-tm 
electron work or group of work on differ term than are set 
forth in thi agreement, you must obtain permiss in write from 
both the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundat as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunt and employe expend consider 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcrib and proofread 
public domain work in creat the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despit these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electron 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limit to, incomplete, inaccur or 
corrupt data, transcript errors, a copyright or other intellectu 
properti infringement, a defect or damag disk or other medium, a 
comput virus, or comput code that damag or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limit warranty, disclaim OF damag - except for the "right 
of replac or refund" describ in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and ani other parti distribut a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work under thi agreement, disclaim all 
liabil to you for damages, cost and expenses, includ legal 
fees. you agre that you have NO remedi for negligence, strict 
liability, breach OF warranti OR breach OF contract except those 
provid IN paragraph f3. you agre that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and ani distributor under thi agreement will not BE 
liabl TO you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punit OR 
incident damag even IF you give notic OF the possibl OF such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limit right OF replac OR refund - If you discov a 
defect in thi electron work within 90 day of receiv it, you can 
receiv a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explan to the person you receiv the work from. If you 
receiv the work on a physic medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entiti that provid you with 
the defect work may elect to provid a replac copi in lieu of a 
refund. If you receiv the work electronically, the person or entiti 
provid it to you may choos to give you a second opportun to 
receiv the work electron in lieu of a refund. If the second copi 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in write without further 
opportun to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limit right of replac or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, thi work is provid to you 'as-is," with NO other 
warranti OF ani kind, express OR implied, includ but not limit TO 
warranti OF merchant OR fit for ani purpose. 

1.f.5. some state do not allow disclaim of certain impli 
warranti or the exclus or limit of certain type of damages. 
If ani disclaim or limit set forth in thi agreement violat the 
law of the state applic to thi agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaim or limit permit by 
the applic state law. the invalid or unenforc of ani 
provis of thi agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemn - you agre to indemnifi and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, ani agent or employe of the foundation, anyon 
provid copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in accord 
with thi agreement, and ani volunt associ with the production, 
promot and distribut of project gutenberg-tm electron works, 
harmless from all liability, cost and expenses, includ legal fees, 
that aris directli or indirectli from ani of the follow which you do 
or caus to occur: (a) distribut of thi or ani project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addit or delet to ani 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) ani defect you cause. 


section 2. inform about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonym with the free distribut of 
electron work in format readabl by the widest varieti of comput 
includ obsolete, old, middle-ag and new computers. It exist 
becaus of the effort of hundr of volunt and donat from 
peopl in all walk of life. 

volunt and financi support to provid volunt with the 
assist they need, is critic to reach project gutenberg-tm' 
goal and ensur that the project gutenberg-tm collect will 
remain freeli avail for gener to come. In 2001, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundat wa creat to provid a secur 
and perman futur for project gutenberg-tm and futur generations. 
To learn more about the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat 
and how your effort and donat can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundat web page at http://www.pglaf.org. 


section 3. inform about the project gutenberg literari archiv 
foundat 

the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educ corpor organ under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt statu by the intern 
revenu service. the foundation' ein or feder tax identif 
number is 64-6221541. it 501(c)(3) letter is post at 
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contribut to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. feder law and your state' laws. 

the foundation' princip offic is locat at 4557 melan dr. S. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but it volunt and employe are scatter 
throughout numer locations. it busi offic is locat at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact link and up to date contact 
inform can be found at the foundation' web site and offici 
page at http://pglaf.org 

for addit contact information: 
dr. gregori B. newbi 
chief execut and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 

section 4. inform about donat to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot surviv without wide 
spread public support and donat to carri out it mission of 
increas the number of public domain and licens work that can be 
freeli distribut in machin readabl form access by the widest 
array of equip includ outdat equipment. mani small donat 
($1 to $5,000) are particularli import to maintain tax exempt 
statu with the irs. 

the foundat is commit to compli with the law regul 
chariti and charit donat in all 50 state of the unit 
states. complianc requir are not uniform and it take a 
consider effort, much paperwork and mani fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. We do not solicit donat in locat 
where we have not receiv written confirm of compliance. To 
send donat or determin the statu of complianc for ani 
particular state visit http://pglaf.org 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribut from state where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibit 
against accept unsolicit donat from donor in such state who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

intern donat are grate accepted, but we cannot make 
ani statement concern tax treatment of donat receiv from 
outsid the unit states. u.s. law alon swamp our small staff. 

pleas check the project gutenberg web page for current donat 
method and addresses. donat are accept in a number of other 
way includ includ checks, onlin payment and credit card 
donations. To donate, pleas visit: http://pglaf.org/don 


section 5. gener inform about project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. 

professor michael S. hart is the origin of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a librari of electron work that could be freeli share 
with anyone. for thirti years, he produc and distribut project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with onli a loos network of volunt support. 

project gutenberg-tm ebook are often creat from sever print 
editions, all of which are confirm as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notic is included. thus, we do not necessarili 
keep ebook in complianc with ani particular paper edition. 

each ebook is in a subdirectori of the same number as the ebook' 
ebook number, often in sever format includ plain vanilla ascii, 
compress (zipped), html and others. 

correct edit of our ebook replac the old file and take over 
the old filenam and etext number. the replac older file is renamed. 
version base on separ sourc are treat as new ebook receiv 
new filenam and etext numbers. 

most peopl start at our web site which ha the main PG search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.net 

thi web site includ inform about project gutenberg-tm, 
includ how to make donat to the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundation, how to help produc our new ebooks, and how to 
subscrib to our email newslett to hear about new ebooks. 

ebook post prior to novemb 2003, with ebook number below #10000, 
are file in directori base on their releas date. If you want to 
download ani of these ebook directly, rather than use the regular 
search system you may util the follow address and just 
download by the etext year. 

http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/etext06 

(or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99, 
98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90) 

ebook post sinc novemb 2003, with etext number over #10000, are 
file in a differ way. the year of a releas date is no longer part 
of the directori path. the path is base on the etext number (which is 
ident to the filename). the path to the file is made up of singl 
digit correspond to all but the last digit in the filename. for 
exampl an ebook of filenam 10234 would be found at: 

http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/2/3/10234 

or filenam 24689 would be found at: 
http://www.gutenberg.net/2/4/6/8/24689 

An altern method of locat ebooks: 
http://www.gutenberg.net/gutindex.al 

