the project gutenberg ebook of the hous of souls, by arthur machen 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.net 


title: the hous of soul 

author: arthur machen 

releas date: april 7, 2008 [ebook #25016] 

language: english 


*** start OF thi project gutenberg ebook the hous OF soul *** 




produc by suzann shell, stephen blundel and the onlin 
distribut proofread team at http://www.pgdp.net 









the 
hous of soul 

By arthur machen 


_short stori index reprint series_ 


ayer compani publishers, inc. 
north stratford, NH 03590 




first publish 1922 

reprint edition, 1999 
ayer compani publishers, inc. 
lower mill road 
north stratford, NH 03590 


intern standard book number: 
0-8369-3806-2 

librari OF congress catalog card number: 
72-152947 

print IN the unit state OF america 




transcriber' note: 

minor typograph error have been correct without note. the 
oe ligatur is shown as [oe]. 




content 


A fragment of life 1 

the white peopl 111 

the great god pan 167 

the inmost light 245 




introduct 


_it wa somewhere, I think, toward the autumn of the year 1889 that the 
thought occur to me that I might perhap tri to write a littl in the 
modern way. for, hitherto, I had been, as it were, wear costum in 
literature. the rich, figur english of the earlier part of the 
seventeenth centuri had alway had a peculiar attract for me. I 
accustom myself to write in it, to think in it; I kept a diari in that 
manner, and half-unconsci dress up my everi day thought and 
common experi in the habit of the cavali or of the carolin 
divine. thus, when in 1884 I got a commiss to translat the 
heptameron, I wrote quit natur in the languag of my favourit 
period, and, as some critic declare, made my english version somewhat 
more antiqu and stiff than the original. and so "the anatomi of 
tobacco" wa an exercis in the antiqu of a differ kind; and "the 
chronicl of clemendy" wa a volum of tale that tri their hardest to 
be mediæval; and the translat of the "moyen de parvenir" wa still a 
thing in the ancient mode._ 

_it seemed, in fine, to be settl that in literatur I wa to be a 
hanger on of the past ages; and I don't quit know how I manag to get 
away from them. I had finish translat "casanova"--mor modern, but 
not thoroughli up to date--and I had noth particular on hand, and, 
somehow or other, it struck me that I might tri a littl write for the 
papers. I began with a "turnover" as it wa called, for the old vanish 
globe, a harmless littl articl on old english proverbs; and I shall 
never forget my pride and delight when one day, be at dover, with a 
fresh autumn wind blow from the sea, I bought a chanc copi of the 
paper and saw my essay on the front page. naturally, I wa encourag to 
persevere, and I wrote more turnov for the globe and then tri the 
st. james' gazett and found that they paid two pound instead of the 
guinea of the globe, and again, natur enough, devot most of my 
attent to the st. james' gazette. from the essay or literari paper, 
I somehow got into the habit of the short story, and did a good mani of 
these, still for the st. james's, till in the autumn of 1890, I wrote a 
tale call "the doubl return." well, oscar wild asked: "are you the 
author of that stori that flutter the dovecotes? I thought it wa veri 
good." but: it did flutter the dovecotes, and the st. james' gazett 
and I parted._ 

_but I still wrote short stories, now chiefli for what were call 
"society" papers, which have becom extinct. and one of these appear 
in a paper, the name of which I have long forgotten. I had call the 
tale "resurrectio mortuorum," and the editor had veri sensibl render 
the titl into "the resurrect of the dead."_ 

_I do not clearli rememb how the stori began. I am inclin to think 
someth in thi way:_ 

_"old mr. llewellyn, the welsh antiquary, threw hi copi of the morn 
paper on the floor and bang the breakfast-table, exclaiming: 'good 
god! here' the last of the caradoc of the garth, ha been marri in 
a baptist chapel by a dissent preacher; somewher in peckham.'" or, 
did I take up the tale a few year after thi happi event and shew the 
perfectli cheer content young commerci clerk run somewhat too 
fast to catch the bu one morning, and feel daze all day long over 
the offic work, and go home in a sort of dimness, and then at hi 
veri doorstep, recov as it were, hi ancestr consciousness. I 
think it wa the sight of hi wife and the tone of her voic that 
suddenli announc to him with the sound of a trumpet that he had 
noth to do with thi woman with the cockney accent, or the pastor who 
wa come to supper, or the red brick villa, or peckham or the citi of 
london. though the old place on the bank of the usk had been sold fifti 
year before, still, he wa caradoc of the garth. I forget how I end 
the story: but here wa one of the sourc of "A fragment of life."_ 

_and somehow, though the tale wa written and print and paid for; it 
stay with me as a tale half told in the year from 1890 to 1899. I wa 
in love with the notion: thi contrast between the raw london suburb and 
it mean limit life and it daili journey to the city; it utter 
banal and lack of significance; between all thi and the old, grey 
mullion hous under the forest near the river, the armori bear 
on the jacobean porch, and nobl old traditions: all thi captiv me 
and I thought of my mistold tale at intervals, while I wa write "the 
great god pan," "the red hand," "the three impostors," "the hill of 
dreams," "the white people," and "hieroglyphics." It wa at the back of 
my head, I suppose, all the time, and at last in '99 I began to write 
it all over again from a somewhat differ standpoint._ 

_the fact wa that one grey sunday afternoon in the march of that year, 
I went for a long walk with a friend. I wa live in gray' inn in 
those days, and we stravag up gray' inn road on one of those queer, 
unscientif explor of the odd corner of london in which I have 
alway delighted. I don't think that there wa ani definit scheme laid 
down; but we resist manifold temptations. for on the right of gray' 
inn road is one of the oddest quarter of london--to those, that is, 
with the unseal eyes. here are street of 1800-1820 that go down into 
a valley--flora in "littl dorrit" live in one of them--and then 
cross king' cross road climb veri steepli up to height which alway 
suggest to me that I am in the hinder and poorer quarter of some big 
seasid place, and that there is a fine view of the sea from the attic 
windows. thi place wa onc call spa fields, and ha veri properli an 
old meet hous of the countess of huntingdon' connect as one of 
it attractions. It is one of the part of london which would attract me 
if I wish to hide; not to escap arrest, perhaps, but rather to escap 
the possibl of ever meet anybodi who had ever seen me before._ 

_but: my friend and I resist it all. We stroll along to the part 
of mani way at king' cross station, and struck boldli up pentonville. 
again: on our left wa barnsbury, which is like africa. In barnsburi 
semper aliquid novi, but our cours wa laid for us by some occult 
influence, and we came to islington and chose the right hand side of the 
way. So far, we were toler in the region of the known, sinc everi 
year there is the great cattl show at islington, and mani men go there. 
but, trend to the right, we got into canonbury, of which there are 
onli travellers' tales. now and then, perhaps, as one sit about the 
winter fire, while the storm howl without and the snow fall fast, the 
silent man in the corner ha told how he had a great aunt who live in 
canonburi in 1860; so in the fourteenth centuri you might meet men who 
had talk with those who had been in cathay and had seen the splendour 
of the grand cham. such is canonbury; I hardli dare speak of it dim 
squares, of the deep, leafi back-garden behind the houses, run down 
into obscur alleyway with discreet, mysteri postern doors: as I 
say, "travellers' tales"; thing not much credited._ 

_but, he who adventur in london ha a foretast of infinity. there is 
a region beyond ultima thule. I know not how it was, but on thi famou 
sunday afternoon, my friend and I, pass through canonburi came into 
someth call the ball pond road--mr. perch, the messeng of dombey 
& son, live somewher in thi region--and so I think by dalston down 
into hackney where caravans, or trams, or, as I think you say in 
america, trolley car set out at state interv to the limit of the 
western world._ 

_but in the cours of that walk which had becom an explor of the 
unknown, I had seen two common thing which had made a profound 
impress upon me. one of these thing wa a street, the other a small 
famili party. the street wa somewher in that vague, uncharted, ball 
pond-dalston region. It wa a long street and a grey street. each hous 
wa exactli like everi other house. each hous had a basement, the sort 
of stori which house-ag have grown to call of late a "lower ground 
floor." the front window of these basement were half abov the patch 
of black, soot-smear soil and coars grass that name itself a garden, 
and so, pass along at the hour of four o'clock or four-thirty, I 
could see that in everyon of these "breakfast rooms"--their technic 
name--th tea tray and the tea cup were set out in readiness. I 
receiv from thi trivial and natur circumst an impress of a 
dull life, laid out in dread line of pattern uniformity, of a life 
without adventur of bodi or soul._ 

_then, the famili party. It got into the tram down hackney way. there 
were father, mother and baby; and I should think that they came from a 
small shop, probabl from a small draper' shop. the parent were young 
peopl of twenty-f to thirty-five. He wore a black shini frock 
coat--an "albert" in america?--a high hat, littl side whisker and dark 
moustach and a look of amiabl vacuity. hi wife wa oddli bedizen in 
black satin, with a wide spread hat, not ill-looking, simpli 
unmeaning. I fanci that she had at times, not too often, "a temper of 
her own." and the veri small babi sat upon her knee. the parti wa 
probabl go forth to spend the sunday even with relat or 
friends._ 

_and yet, I said to myself, these two have partaken togeth of the 
great mystery, of the great sacrament of nature, of the sourc of all 
that is magic in the wide world. but have they discern the 
mysteries? Do they know that they have been in that place which is 
call syon and jerusalem?--i am quot from an old book and a strang 
book._ 

_it wa thu that, rememb the old stori of the "resurrect of the 
dead," I wa furnish with the sourc of "A fragment of life." I wa 
write "hieroglyphics" at the time, have just finish "the white 
people"; or rather, have just decid that what now appear in print 
under that head wa all that would ever be written, that the great 
romanc that should have been written--in manifest of the 
idea--would never be written at all. and so, when hieroglyph wa 
finished, somewher about may 1899, I set about "A fragment of life" and 
wrote the first chapter with the greatest relish and the utmost ease. 
and then my own life wa dash into fragments. I ceas to write. I 
travelled. I saw syon and bagdad and other strang places--se "thing 
near and far" for an explan of thi obscur passage--and found 
myself in the light world of float and battens, enter L. U. e., 
cross R and exit R 3; and do all sort of queer things._ 

_but still, in spite of all these shock and changes, the "notion" would 
not leav me. I went at it again, I suppos in 1904; consum with a 
bitter determin to finish what I had begun. everyth now had 
becom difficult. I tri thi way and that way and the other way. they 
all fail and I broke down on everi one of them; and I tri and tri 
again. At last I cobbl up some sort of an end, an utterli bad one, as 
I realiz as I wrote everi singl line and word of it, and the stori 
appeared, in 1904 or 1905, in horlick' magazin under the editorship of 
my old and dear friend, A. E. waite._ 

_still; I wa not satisfied. that end wa intoler and I knew it. 
again, I sat down to the work, night after night I wrestl with it. and 
I rememb an odd circumst which may or may not be of some 
physiolog interest. I wa then live in a circumscrib "upper 
part" of a hous in cosway street, marylebon road. that I might 
struggl by myself, I wrote in the littl kitchen; and night after night 
as I fought grimly, savagely, all but hopelessli for some fit close for 
"A fragment of life," I wa astonish and almost alarm to find that 
my feet develop a sensat of most deadli cold. the room wa not 
cold; I had lit the oven burner of the littl ga cook stove. I wa 
not cold; but my feet were chill in a quit extraordinari manner, as 
if they had been pack in ice. At last I took off my slipper with a 
view of poke my toe into the oven of the stove, and feel my feet 
with my hand, I perceiv that, in fact, they were not cold at all! but 
the sensat remained; there, I suppose, you have an odd case of a 
transfer of someth that wa happen in the brain to the 
extremities. My feet were quit warm to the palm of my hand, but to my 
sens they were frozen. but what a testimoni to the fit of the 
american idiom, "cold feet," as signifi a depress and despond 
mood! but, somehow or other, the tale wa finish and the "notion" wa 
at last out of my head. I have gone into all thi detail about "A 
fragment of life" becaus I have been assur in mani quarter that it 
is the best thing that I have ever done, and student of the crook 
way of literatur may be interest to hear of the abomin labour 
of do it._ 

_"the white people" belong to the same year as the first chapter of "A 
fragment of life," 1899, which wa also the year of "hieroglyphics." the 
fact wa I wa in high literari spirits, just then. I had been harass 
and worri for a whole year in the offic of literature, a weekli paper 
publish by the times, and get free again, I felt like a prison 
releas from chains; readi to danc in letter to ani extent. forthwith 
I thought of "A great romance," a highli elabor and elabor piec 
of work, full of the strangest and rarest things. I have forgotten how 
it wa that thi design broke down; but I found by experi that the 
great romanc wa to go on that brave shelf of the unwritten books, the 
shelf where all the splendid book are to be found in their golden 
bindings. "the white people" is a small piec of salvag from the wreck. 
oddli enough, as is insinu in the prologue, the mainspr of the 
stori is to be sought in a medic textbook. In the prologu refer 
is made to a review articl by dr. coryn. but I have sinc found out 
that dr. coryn wa mere quot from a scientif treatis that case 
of the ladi whose finger becam violent inflam becaus she saw a 
heavi window sash descend on the finger of her child. with thi 
instance, of course, are to be consid all case of stigmata, both 
ancient and modern: and then the question is obviou enough: what limit 
can we place to the power of the imagination? ha not the imagin 
the potenti at least of perform ani miracle, howev marvelous, 
howev incredible, accord to our ordinari standards? As to the 
decor of the story, that is a mingl which I ventur to think 
somewhat ingeni of odd and end of folk lore and witch lore with 
pure invent of my own. some year later I wa amus to receiv a 
letter from a gentleman who was, if I remember, a schoolmast somewher 
in malaya. thi gentleman, an earnest student of folklore, wa write 
an articl on some singular thing he had observ amongst the malayans, 
and chiefli a kind of were-wolf state into which some of them were abl 
to conjur themselves. He had found, as he said, startl resembl 
between the magic ritual of malaya and some of the ceremoni and 
practic hint at in "the white people." He presum that all thi wa 
not fanci but fact; that is that I wa describ practic actual in 
use among superstiti peopl on the welsh border; he wa go to 
quot from me in the articl for the journal of the folk lore society, 
or whatev it wa called, and he just want to let me know. I wrote in 
a hurri to the folklor journal to bid them beware: for the instanc 
select by the student were all fiction of my own brain!_ 

_"the great god pan" and "the inmost light" are tale of an earlier 
date, go back to 1890, '91, '92. I have written a good deal about 
them in "far off things," and in a prefac to an edit of "the great 
god pan," publish by messrs. simpkin, marshal in 1916, I have 
describ at length the origin of the book. but I must quot anew some 
extract from the review which welcom "the great god pan" to my 
extraordinari entertainment, hilar and refreshment. here are a few of 
the best:_ 

_"it is not mr. machen' fault but hi misfortune, that one shake with 
laughter rather than with dread over the contempl of hi 
psycholog bogey."--observer._ 

_"hi horror, we regret to say, leav us quit cold ... and our flesh 
obstin refus to creep."--chronicle._ 

_"hi bogi don't scare."--sketch._ 

_"we are afraid he onli succe in be ridiculous."--manchest 
guardian._ 

_"gruesome, ghastli and dull."--lady' pictorial._ 

_"incoher nightmar of sex ... which would soon lead to insan if 
unrestrain ... innocu from it absurdity."--westminst gazette._ 

_and so on, and so on. sever papers, I remember, declar that "the 
great god pan" wa simpli a stupid and incompet rehash of huysmans' 
"là-bas" and "À rebours." I had not read these book so I got them both. 
thereon, I perceiv that my critic had not read them either._ 




A fragment of life 


I 

edward darnel awok from a dream of an ancient wood, and of a clear 
well rise into grey film and vapour beneath a misty, glimmer heat; 
and as hi eye open he saw the sunlight bright in the room, sparkl 
on the varnish of the new furniture. He turn and found hi wife' 
place vacant, and with some confus and wonder of the dream still 
linger in hi mind, he rose also, and began hurriedli to set about 
hi dressing, for he had overslept a little, and the 'bu pass the 
corner at 9.15. He wa a tall, thin man, dark-hair and dark-eyed, and 
in spite of the routin of the city, the count of coupons, and all 
the mechan drudgeri that had last for ten years, there still 
remain about him the curiou hint of a wild grace, as if he had been 
born a creatur of the antiqu wood, and had seen the fountain rise 
from the green moss and the grey rocks. 

the breakfast wa laid in the room on the ground floor, the back room 
with the french window look on the garden, and befor he sat down to 
hi fri bacon he kiss hi wife serious and dutifully. she had 
brown hair and brown eyes, and though her love face wa grave and 
quiet, one would have said that she might have await her husband under 
the old trees, and bath in the pool hollow out of the rocks. 

they had a good deal to talk over while the coffe wa pour out and 
the bacon eaten, and darnell' egg brought in by the stupid, stare 
servant-girl of the dusti face. they had been marri for a year, and 
they had got on excellently, rare sit silent for more than an 
hour, but for the past few week aunt marian' present had afford a 
subject for convers which seem inexhaustible. mrs. darnel had 
been miss mari reynolds, the daughter of an auction and estat agent 
in not hill, and aunt marian wa her mother' sister, who wa 
suppos rather to have lower herself by marri a coal merchant, in 
a small way, at turnham green. marian had felt the famili attitud a 
good deal, and the reynolds were sorri for mani thing that had been 
said, when the coal merchant save money and took up land on build 
leas in the neighbourhood of crouch end, greatli to hi advantage, as 
it appeared. nobodi had thought that nixon could ever do veri much; but 
he and hi wife had been live for year in a beauti hous at 
barnet, with bow-windows, shrubs, and a paddock, and the two famili 
saw but littl of each other, for mr. reynold wa not veri prosperous. 
Of course, aunt marian and her husband had been ask to mary' wedding, 
but they had sent excus with a nice littl set of silver apostl 
spoons, and it wa fear that noth more wa to be look for. 
however, on mary' birthday her aunt had written a most affection 
letter, enclos a chequ for a hundr pound from 'robert' and 
herself, and ever sinc the receipt of the money the darnel had 
discuss the question of it judici disposal. mrs. darnel had 
wish to invest the whole sum in govern securities, but mr. darnel 
had point out that the rate of interest wa absurdli low, and after a 
good deal of talk he had persuad hi wife to put nineti pound of the 
money in a safe mine, which wa pay five per cent. thi wa veri 
well, but the remain ten pounds, which mrs. darnel had insist on 
reserving, gave rise to legend and discours as intermin as the 
disput of the schools. 

At first mr. darnel had propos that they should furnish the 'spare' 
room. there were four bedroom in the house: their own room, the small 
one for the servant, and two other overlook the garden, one of which 
had been use for store boxes, end of rope, and odd number of 'quiet 
days' and 'sunday evenings,' besid some worn suit belong to mr. 
darnel which had been care wrap up and laid by, as he scarc 
knew what to do with them. the other room wa frankli wast and vacant, 
and one saturday afternoon, as he wa come home in the 'bus, and while 
he revolv that difficult question of the ten pounds, the unseemli 
empti of the spare room suddenli came into hi mind, and he glow 
with the idea that now, thank to aunt marian, it could be furnished. He 
wa busi with thi delight thought all the way home, but when he 
let himself in, he said noth to hi wife, sinc he felt that hi idea 
must be matured. He told mrs. darnel that, have import business, 
he wa oblig to go out again directly, but that he should be back 
without fail for tea at half-past six; and mary, on her side, wa not 
sorri to be alone, as she wa a littl behindhand with the household 
books. the fact was, that darnell, full of the design of furnish the 
spare bedroom, wish to consult hi friend wilson, who live at 
fulham, and had often given him judici advic as to the lay out of 
money to the veri best advantage. wilson wa connect with the bordeaux 
wine trade, and darnell' onli anxieti wa lest he should not be at 
home. 

however, it wa all right; darnel took a tram along the goldhawk road, 
and walk the rest of the way, and wa delight to see wilson in the 
front garden of hi house, busi amongst hi flower-beds. 

'haven't seen you for an age,' he said cheerily, when he heard darnell' 
hand on the gate; 'come in. oh, I forgot,' he added, as darnel still 
fumbl with the handle, and vainli attempt to enter. 'of cours you 
can't get in; I haven't shown it you.' 

It wa a hot day in june, and wilson appear in a costum which he had 
put on in hast as soon as he arriv from the city. He wore a straw hat 
with a neat pugare protect the back of hi neck, and hi dress wa a 
norfolk jacket and knicker in heather mixture. 

'see,' he said, as he let darnel in; 'see the dodge. you don't _turn_ 
the handl at all. first of all push hard, and then pull. it' a trick 
of my own, and I shall have it patented. you see, it keep undesir 
charact at a distance--such a great thing in the suburbs. I feel I 
can leav mrs. wilson alon now; and, formerly, you have no idea how she 
use to be pestered.' 

'but how about visitors?' said darnell. 'how do they get in?' 

'oh, we put them up to it. besides,' he said vaguely, 'there is sure to 
be somebodi look out. mrs. wilson is nearli alway at the window. 
she' out now; gone to call on some friends. the bennetts' At home day, 
I think it is. thi is the first saturday, isn't it? you know J. W. 
bennett, don't you? ah, he' in the house; do veri well, I believe. 
He put me on to a veri good thing the other day.' 

'but, I say,' said wilson, as they turn and stroll toward the front 
door, 'what do you wear those black thing for? you look hot. look at 
me. well, i'v been gardening, you know, but I feel as cool as a 
cucumber. I dare say you don't know where to get these things? veri few 
men do. where do you suppos I got 'em?' 

'in the west end, I suppose,' said darnell, wish to be polite. 

'yes, that' what everybodi says. and it is a good cut. well, i'll tell 
you, but you needn't pass it on to everybody. I got the tip from 
jameson--y know him, "jim-jams," in the china trade, 39 eastbrook--and 
he said he didn't want everybodi in the citi to know about it. but just 
go to jennings, in old wall, and mention my name, and you'll be all 
right. and what d'you think they cost?' 

'I haven't a notion,' said darnell, who had never bought such a suit in 
hi life. 

'well, have a guess.' 

darnel regard wilson gravely. 

the jacket hung about hi bodi like a sack, the knickerbock droop 
lament over hi calves, and in promin posit the bloom of the 
heather seem about to fade and disappear. 

'three pounds, I suppose, at least,' he said at length. 

'well, I ask dench, in our place, the other day, and he guess four 
ten, and hi father' got someth to do with a big busi in conduit 
street. but I onli gave thirty-f and six. To measure? Of course; look 
at the cut, man.' 

darnel wa astonish at so low a price. 

'and, by the way,' wilson went on, point to hi new brown boots, 'you 
know where to go for shoe-leather? oh, I thought everybodi wa up to 
that! there' onli one place. "mr. bill," in gun street,--nin and 
six.' 

they were walk round and round the garden, and wilson point out the 
flower in the bed and borders. there were hardli ani blossoms, but 
everyth wa neatli arranged. 

'here are the tuberous-root glasgownias,' he said, show a rigid row 
of stunt plants; 'those are squintaceæ; thi is a new introduction, 
moldavia semperflorida andersonii; and thi is prattsia.' 

'when do they come out?' said darnell. 

'most of them in the end of august or begin of september,' said 
wilson briefly. He wa slightli annoy with himself for have talk 
so much about hi plants, sinc he saw that darnel care noth for 
flowers; and, indeed, the visitor could hardli dissembl vagu 
recollect that came to him; thought of an old, wild garden, full of 
odours, beneath grey walls, of the fragranc of the meadowsweet besid 
the brook. 

'I want to consult you about some furniture,' darnel said at last. 
'you know we'v got a spare room, and i'm think of put a few 
thing into it. I haven't exactli made up my mind, but I thought you 
might advis me.' 

'come into my den,' said wilson. 'no; thi way, by the back'; and he 
show darnel anoth ingeni arrang at the side door wherebi a 
violent high-ton bell wa set peal in the hous if one did but 
touch the latch. indeed, wilson handl it so briskli that the bell rang 
a wild alarm, and the servant, who wa tri on her mistress' thing 
in the bedroom, jump madli to the window and then danc a hyster 
dance. there wa plaster found on the drawing-room tabl on sunday 
afternoon, and wilson wrote a letter to the 'fulham chronicle,' 
ascrib the phenomenon 'to some disturb of a seismic nature.' 

for the moment he knew noth of the great result of hi contrivance, 
and solemnli led the way toward the back of the house. here there wa a 
patch of turf, begin to look a littl brown, with a background of 
shrubs. In the middl of the turf, a boy of nine or ten wa stand all 
alone, with someth of an air. 

'the eldest,' said wilson. 'havelock. well, lockie, what are ye do 
now? and where are your brother and sister?' 

the boy wa not at all shy. indeed, he seem eager to explain the 
cours of events. 

'i'm play at be gawd,' he said, with an engag frankness. 'and 
i'v sent fergu and janet to the bad place. that' in the shrubbery. 
and they'r never to come out ani more. and they'r burn for ever and 
ever.' 

'what d'you think of that?' said wilson admiringly. 'not bad for a 
youngster of nine, is it? they think a lot of him at the sunday-school. 
but come into my den.' 

the den wa an apart project from the back of the house. It had 
been design as a back kitchen and washhouse, but wilson had drape the 
'copper' in art muslin and had board over the sink, so that it serv 
as a workman' bench. 

'snug, isn't it?' he said, as he push forward one of the two wicker 
chairs. 'I think out thing here, you know; it' quiet. and what about 
thi furnishing? Do you want to do the thing on a grand scale?' 

'oh, not at all. quit the reverse. In fact, I don't know whether the 
sum at our dispos will be sufficient. you see the spare room is ten 
feet by twelve, with a western exposure, and I thought if we _could_ 
manag it, that it would seem more cheer furnished. besides, it' 
pleasant to be abl to ask a visitor; our aunt, mrs. nixon, for example. 
but she is accustom to have everyth veri nice.' 

'and how much do you want to spend?' 

'well, I hardli think we should be justifi in go much beyond ten 
pounds. that isn't enough, eh?' 

wilson got up and shut the door of the back kitchen impressively. 

'look here,' he said, 'i'm glad you came to me in the first place. now 
you'll just tell me where you thought of go yourself.' 

'well, I had thought of the hampstead road,' said darnel in a 
hesit manner. 

'I just thought you'd say that. but i'll ask you, what is the good of 
go to those expens shop in the west end? you don't get a better 
articl for your money. you'r mere pay for fashion.' 

'i'v seen some nice thing in samuel's, though. they get a brilliant 
polish on their good in those superior shops. We went there when we 
were married.' 

'exactly, and paid ten per cent more than you need have paid. it' 
throw money away. and how much did you say you had to spend? ten 
pounds. well, I can tell you where to get a beauti bedroom suite, in 
the veri highest finish, for six pound ten. what d'you think of that? 
china included, mind you; and a squar of carpet, brilliant colours, 
will onli cost you fifteen and six. look here, go ani saturday afternoon 
to dick's, in the seven sister road, mention my name, and ask for mr. 
johnston. the suite' in ash, "elizabethan" they call it. six pound ten, 
includ the china, with one of their "orient" carpets, nine by nine, 
for fifteen and six. dick's.' 

wilson spoke with some eloqu on the subject of furnishing. He 
point out that the time were changed, and that the old heavi style 
wa quit out of date. 

'you know,' he said, 'it isn't like it wa in the old days, when peopl 
use to buy thing to last hundr of years. why, just befor the wife 
and I were married, an uncl of mine die up in the north and left me 
hi furniture. I wa think of furnish at the time, and I thought 
the thing might come in handy; but I assur you there wasn't a singl 
articl that I care to give house-room to. all dingy, old mahogany; big 
bookcas and bureaus, and claw-leg chair and tables. As I said to 
the wife (a she wa soon afterwards), "we don't exactli want to set up 
a chamber of horrors, do we?" So I sold off the lot for what I could 
get. I must confess I like a cheer room.' 

darnel said he had heard that artist like the old-fashion 
furniture. 

'oh, I dare say. the "unclean cult of the sunflower," eh? you saw that 
piec in the "daili post"? I hate all that rot myself. It isn't healthy, 
you know, and I don't believ the english peopl will stand it. but 
talk of curiosities, i'v got someth here that' worth a bit of 
money.' 

He dive into some dusti receptacl in a corner of the room, and show 
darnel a small, worm-eaten bible, want the first five chapter of 
genesi and the last leaf of the apocalypse. It bore the date of 1753. 

'it' my belief that' worth a lot,' said wilson. 'look at the 
worm-holes. and you see it' "imperfect," as they call it. you'v 
notic that some of the most valuabl book are "imperfect" at the 
sales?' 

the interview came to an end soon after, and darnel went home to hi 
tea. He thought serious of take wilson' advice, and after tea he 
told mari of hi idea and of what wilson had said about dick's. 

mari wa a good deal taken by the plan when she had heard all the 
details. the price struck her as veri moderate. they were sit one 
on each side of the grate (which wa conceal by a pretti cardboard 
screen, paint with landscapes), and she rest her cheek on her hand, 
and her beauti dark eye seem to dream and behold strang visions. 
In realiti she wa think of darnell' plan. 

'it would be veri nice in some ways,' she said at last. 'but we must 
talk it over. what I am afraid of is that it will come to much more than 
ten pound in the long run. there are so mani thing to be considered. 
there' the bed. It would look shabbi if we got a common bed without 
brass mounts. then the bedding, the mattress, and blankets, and sheets, 
and counterpan would all cost something.' 

she dream again, calcul the cost of all the necessaries, and 
darnel stare anxiously; reckon with her, and wonder what her 
conclus would be. for a moment the delic colour of her face, 
the grace of her form, and the brown hair, droop over her ear and 
cluster in littl curl about her neck, seem to hint at a languag 
which he had not yet learned; but she spoke again. 

'the bed would come to a great deal, I am afraid. even if dick' are 
consider cheaper than boon' or samuel's. and, my dear, we must have 
some ornament on the mantelpiece. I saw some veri nice vase at 
eleven-thre the other day at wilkin and dodd's. We should want six at 
least, and there ought to be a centre-piece. you see how it mount up.' 

darnel wa silent. He saw that hi wife wa sum up against hi 
scheme, and though he had set hi heart on it, he could not resist her 
arguments. 

'it would be nearer twelv pound than ten,' she said. 

'the floor would have to be stain round the carpet (nine by nine, you 
said?), and we should want a piec of linoleum to go under the 
washstand. and the wall would look veri bare without ani pictures.' 

'I thought about the pictures,' said darnell; and he spoke quit 
eagerly. He felt that here, at least, he wa unassailable. 'you know 
there' the "derbi day" and the "railway station," readi framed, 
stand in the corner of the box-room already. they'r a bit 
old-fashioned, perhaps, but that doesn't matter in a bedroom. and 
couldn't we use some photographs? I saw a veri neat frame in natur oak 
in the city, to hold half a dozen, for one and six. We might put in your 
father, and your brother james, and aunt marian, and your grandmother, 
in her widow' cap--and ani of the other in the album. and then there' 
that old famili pictur in the hair-trunk--that might do over the 
mantelpiece.' 

'you mean your great-grandfath in the gilt frame? but that' _very_ 
old-fashioned, isn't it? He look so queer in hi wig. I don't think it 
would quit go with the room, somehow.' 

darnel thought a moment. the portrait wa a 'kitcat' of a young 
gentleman, brave dress in the fashion of 1750, and he veri faintli 
rememb some old tale that hi father had told him about thi 
ancestor--tal of the wood and fields, of the deep sunken lanes, and 
the forgotten countri in the west. 

'no,' he said, 'I suppos it is rather out of date. but I saw some veri 
nice print in the city, frame and quit cheap.' 

'yes, but everyth counts. well, we will talk it over, as you say. you 
know we must be careful.' 

the servant came in with the supper, a tin of biscuits, a glass of milk 
for the mistress, and a modest pint of beer for the master, with a 
littl chees and butter. afterward edward smoke two pipe of 
honeydew, and they went quietli to bed; mari go first, and her 
husband follow a quarter of an hour later, accord to the ritual 
establish from the first day of their marriage. front and back door 
were locked, the ga wa turn off at the meter, and when darnel got 
upstair he found hi wife alreadi in bed, her face turn round on the 
pillow. 

she spoke softli to him as he came into the room. 

'it would be imposs to buy a present bed at anyth under one 
pound eleven, and good sheet are dear, anywhere.' 

He slip off hi cloth and slid gentli into bed, put out the 
candl on the table. the blind were all evenli and duli drawn, but it 
wa a june night, and beyond the walls, beyond that desol world and 
wilder of grey shepherd' bush, a great golden moon had float up 
through magic film of cloud, abov the hill, and the earth wa fill 
with a wonder light between red sunset linger over the mountain 
and that marvel glori that shone into the wood from the summit of 
the hill. darnel seem to see some reflect of that wizard 
bright in the room; the pale wall and the white bed and hi wife' 
face lie amidst brown hair upon the pillow were illuminated, and 
listen he could almost hear the corncrak in the fields, the fern-owl 
sound hi strang note from the quiet of the rug place where the 
bracken grew, and, like the echo of a magic song, the melodi of the 
nightingal that sang all night in the alder by the littl brook. there 
wa noth that he could say, but he slowli stole hi arm under hi 
wife' neck, and play with the ringlet of brown hair. she never 
moved, she lay there gentli breathing, look up to the blank ceil 
of the room with her beauti eyes, think also, no doubt, thought 
that she could not utter, kiss her husband obedi when he ask 
her to do so, and he stammer and hesit as he spoke. 

they were nearli asleep, inde darnel wa on the veri eve of dreaming, 
when she said veri softly-- 

'I am afraid, darling, that we could never afford it.' and he heard her 
word through the murmur of the water, drip from the grey rock, and 
fall into the clear pool beneath. 

sunday morn wa alway an occas of idleness. indeed, they would 
never have got breakfast if mrs. darnell, who had the instinct of the 
housewife, had not awok and seen the bright sunshine, and felt that the 
hous wa too still. she lay quiet for five minutes, while her husband 
slept besid her, and listen intently, wait for the sound of alic 
stir down below. A golden tube of sunlight shone through some 
open in the venetian blinds, and it shone on the brown hair that lay 
about her head on the pillow, and she look steadili into the room at 
the 'duchesse' toilet-table, the colour ware of the washstand, and the 
two photogravur in oak frames, 'the meeting' and 'the parting,' that 
hung upon the wall. she wa half dream as she listen for the 
servant' footsteps, and the faint shadow of a shade of a thought came 
over her, and she imagin dimly, for the quick moment of a dream, 
anoth world where raptur wa wine, where one wander in a deep and 
happi valley, and the moon wa alway rise red abov the trees. she 
wa think of hampstead, which repres to her the vision of the 
world beyond the walls, and the thought of the heath led her away to 
bank holidays, and then to alice. there wa not a sound in the house; it 
might have been midnight for the still if the drawl cri of the 
sunday paper had not suddenli echo round the corner of edna road, and 
with it came the warn clank and shriek of the milkman with hi pails. 

mrs. darnel sat up, and wide awake, listen more intently. the girl 
wa evid fast asleep, and must be roused, or all the work of the 
day would be out of joint, and she rememb how edward hate ani fuss 
or discuss about household matters, more especi on a sunday, 
after hi long week' work in the city. she gave her husband an 
affection glanc as he slept on, for she wa veri fond of him, and so 
she gentli rose from the bed and went in her nightgown to call the maid. 

the servant' room wa small and stuffy, the night had been veri hot, 
and mrs. darnel paus for a moment at the door, wonder whether the 
girl on the bed wa realli the dusty-fac servant who bustl day by 
day about the house, or even the strang bedizen creature, dress 
in purple, with a shini face, who would appear on the sunday afternoon, 
bring in an earli tea, becaus it wa her 'even out.' alice' hair 
wa black and her skin wa pale, almost of the oliv tinge, and she lay 
asleep, her head rest on one arm, remind mrs. darnel of a queer 
print of a 'tire bacchante' that she had seen long ago in a shop window 
in upper street, islington. and a crack bell wa ringing; that meant 
five minut to eight, and noth done. 

she touch the girl gentli on the shoulder, and onli smile when her 
eye opened, and wake with a start, she got up in sudden confusion. 
mrs. darnel went back to her room and dress slowli while her husband 
still slept, and it wa onli at the last moment, as she fasten her 
cherry-colour bodice, that she rous him, tell him that the bacon 
would be overdon unless he hurri over hi dressing. 

over the breakfast they discuss the question of the spare room all 
over again. mrs. darnel still admit that the plan of furnish it 
attract her, but she could not see how it could be done for the ten 
pounds, and as they were prudent peopl they did not care to encroach on 
their savings. edward wa highli paid, have (with allow for extra 
work in busi weeks) a hundr and forti pound a year, and mari had 
inherit from an old uncle, her godfather, three hundr pounds, which 
had been judici laid out in mortgag at 4-1/2 per cent. their total 
income, then, count in aunt marian' present, wa a hundr and 
fifty-eight pound a year, and they were clear of debt, sinc darnel 
had bought the furnitur for the hous out of money which he had save 
for five or six year before. In the first few year of hi life in the 
citi hi incom had, of course, been smaller, and at first he had live 
veri freely, without a thought of lay by. the theatr and 
music-hal had attract him, and scarc a week pass without hi 
go (in the pit) to one or the other; and he had occasion bought 
photograph of actress who pleas him. these he had solemnli burnt 
when he becam engag to mary; he rememb the even well; hi 
heart had been so full of joy and wonder, and the landladi had 
complain bitterli of the mess in the grate when he came home from the 
citi the next night. still, the money wa lost, as far as he could 
recollect, ten or twelv shillings; and it annoy him all the more to 
reflect that if he had put it by, it would have gone far toward the 
purchas of an 'orient' carpet in brilliant colours. then there had been 
other expens of hi youth: he had purchas threepenni and even 
fourpenni cigars, the latter rarely, but the former frequently, 
sometim singly, and sometim in bundl of twelv for half-a-crown. 
onc a meerschaum pipe had haunt him for six weeks; the tobacconist 
had drawn it out of a drawer with some air of secreci as he wa buy a 
packet of 'lone star.' here wa anoth useless expense, these 
american-manufactur tobaccos; hi 'lone star,' 'long judge,' 'old 
hank,' 'sultri clime,' and the rest of them cost from a shill to one 
and six the two-ounc packet; wherea now he got excel loos 
honeydew for threepenc halfpenni an ounce. but the crafti tradesman, 
who had mark him down as a buyer of expens fanci goods, nod with 
hi air of mystery, and, snap open the case, display the 
meerschaum befor the dazzl eye of darnell. the bowl wa carv in 
the like of a femal figure, show the head and _torso_, and the 
mouthpiec wa of the veri best amber--onli twelv and six, the man 
said, and the amber alone, he declared, wa worth more than that. He 
explain that he felt some delicaci about show the pipe to ani but a 
regular customer, and wa will to take a littl under cost price and 
'cut the loss.' darnel resist for the time, but the pipe troubl 
him, and at last he bought it. He wa pleas to show it to the younger 
men in the offic for a while, but it never smoke veri well, and he 
gave it away just befor hi marriage, as from the natur of the carv 
it would have been imposs to use it in hi wife' presence. once, 
while he wa take hi holiday at hastings, he had purchas a malacca 
cane--a useless thing that had cost seven shillings--and he reflect 
with sorrow on the innumer even on which he had reject hi 
landlady' plain fri chop, and had gone out to _flaner_ among the 
italian restaur in upper street, islington (he lodg in holloway), 
pamper himself with expens delicacies: cutlet and green peas, 
brais beef with tomato sauce, fillet steak and chip potatoes, 
end the banquet veri often with a small wedg of gruyère, which cost 
twopence. one night, after receiv a rise in hi salary, he had 
actual drunk a quarter-flask of chianti and had ad the enorm 
of benedictine, coffee, and cigarett to an expenditur alreadi 
disgraceful, and sixpenc to the waiter made the bill amount to four 
shill instead of the shill that would have provid him with a 
wholesom and suffici repast at home. oh, there were mani other item 
in thi account of extravagance, and darnel had often regret hi way 
of life, think that if he had been more careful, five or six pound a 
year might have been ad to their income. 

and the question of the spare room brought back these regret in an 
exagger degree. He persuad himself that the extra five pound 
would have given a suffici margin for the outlay that he desir to 
make; though thi was, no doubt, a mistak on hi part. but he saw 
quit clearli that, under the present conditions, there must be no 
levi made on the veri small sum of money that they had saved. the rent 
of the hous wa thirty-five, and rate and tax ad anoth ten 
pounds--nearli a quarter of their incom for house-room. mari kept down 
the housekeep bill to the veri best of her ability, but meat wa 
alway dear, and she suspect the maid of cut surreptiti slice 
from the joint and eat them in her bedroom with bread and treacl in 
the dead of night, for the girl had disord and eccentr appetites. 
mr. darnel thought no more of restaurants, cheap or dear; he took hi 
lunch with him to the city, and join hi wife in the even at high 
tea--chops, a bit of steak, or cold meat from the sunday' dinner. mrs. 
darnel ate bread and jam and drank a littl milk in the middl of the 
day; but, with the utmost economy, the effort to live within their mean 
and to save for futur conting wa a veri hard one. they had 
determin to do without chang of air for at least three years, as the 
honeymoon at walton-on-the-naz had cost a good deal; and it wa on thi 
ground that they had, somewhat illogically, reserv the ten pounds, 
declar that as they were not to have ani holiday they would spend the 
money on someth useful. 

and it wa thi consider of util that wa final fatal to 
darnell' scheme. they had calcul and recalcul the expens of 
the bed and bedding, the linoleum, and the ornaments, and by a great 
deal of exert the total expenditur had been made to assum the shape 
of 'someth veri littl over ten pounds,' when mari said quit 
suddenly-- 

'but, after all, edward, we don't realli _want_ to furnish the room at 
all. I mean it isn't necessary. and if we did so it might lead to no end 
of expense. peopl would hear of it and be sure to fish for invitations. 
you know we have rel in the country, and they would be almost 
certain, the mallings, at ani rate, to give hints.' 

darnel saw the forc of the argument and gave way. but he wa bitterli 
disappointed. 

'it would have been veri nice, wouldn't it?' he said with a sigh. 

'never mind, dear,' said mary, who saw that he wa a good deal cast 
down. 'we must think of some other plan that will be nice and use 
too.' 

she often spoke to him in that tone of a kind mother, though she wa by 
three year the younger. 

'and now,' she said, 'I must get readi for church. are you coming?' 

darnel said that he thought not. He usual accompani hi wife to 
morn service, but that day he felt some bitter in hi heart, and 
prefer to loung under the shade of the big mulberri tree that stood 
in the middl of their patch of garden--rel of the spaciou lawn that 
had onc lain smooth and green and sweet, where the dismal street now 
swarm in a hopeless labyrinth. 

So mari went quietli and alon to church. st. paul' stood in a 
neighbour street, and it gothic design would have interest a 
curiou inquir into the histori of a strang revival. obviously, 
mechanically, there wa noth amiss. the style chosen wa 'geometr 
decorated,' and the traceri of the window seem correct. the nave, the 
aisles, the spaciou chancel, were reason proportioned; and, to be 
quit serious, the onli featur obvious wrong wa the substitut of 
a low 'chancel wall' with iron gate for the rood screen with the loft 
and rood. but this, it might plausibl be contended, wa mere an 
adapt of the old idea to modern requirements, and it would have 
been quit difficult to explain whi the whole building, from the mere 
mortar set between the stone to the gothic ga standards, wa a 
mysteri and elabor blasphemy. the canticl were sung to joll in B 
flat, the chant were 'anglican,' and the sermon wa the gospel for the 
day, amplifi and render into the more modern and grace english of 
the preacher. and mari came away. 

after their dinner (an excel piec of australian mutton, bought in 
the 'world wide' stores, in hammersmith), they sat for some time in the 
garden, partli shelter by the big mulberri tree from the observ 
of their neighbours. edward smoke hi honeydew, and mari look at him 
with placid affection. 

'you never tell me about the men in your office,' she said at length. 
'some of them are nice fellows, aren't they?' 

'oh, yes, they'r veri decent. I must bring some of them round, one of 
these days.' 

He rememb with a pang that it would be necessari to provid whisky. 
one couldn't ask the guest to drink tabl beer at tenpenc the gallon. 

'who are they, though?' said mary. 'I think they might have given you a 
wed present.' 

'well, I don't know. We never have gone in for that sort of thing. but 
they'r veri decent chaps. well, there' harvey; "sauce" they call him 
behind hi back. he' mad on bicycling. He went in last year for the 
two mile amateur record. he'd have made it, too, if he could have got 
into better training. 

'then there' james, a sport man. you wouldn't care for him. I alway 
think he smell of the stable.' 

'how horrid!' said mrs. darnell, find her husband a littl frank, 
lower her eye as she spoke. 

'dickenson might amus you,' darnel went on. 'he' alway got a joke. A 
terribl liar, though. when he tell a tale we never know how much to 
believe. He swore the other day he'd seen one of the governor buy 
cockl off a barrow near london bridge, and jones, who' just come, 
believ everi word of it.' 

darnel laugh at the humor recollect of the jest. 

'and that wasn't a bad yarn about salter' wife,' he went on. 'salter is 
the manager, you know. dickenson live close by, in not hill, and he 
said one morn that he had seen mrs. salter, in the portobello road, 
in red stockings, danc to a piano organ.' 

'he' a littl coarse, isn't he?' said mrs. darnell. 'I don't see much 
fun in that.' 

'well, you know, amongst men it' different. you might like wallis; he' 
a tremend photographer. He often show us photo he' taken of hi 
children--one, a littl girl of three, in her bath. I ask him how he 
thought she'd like it when she wa twenty-three.' 

mrs. darnel look down and made no answer. 

there wa silenc for some minut while darnel smoke hi pipe. 'I 
say, mary,' he said at length, 'what do you say to our take a pay 
guest?' 

'A pay guest! I never thought of it. where should we put him?' 

'why, I wa think of the spare room. the plan would obviat your 
objection, wouldn't it? lot of men in the citi take them, and make 
money of it too. I dare say it would add ten pound a year to our 
income. redgrave, the cashier, find it worth hi while to take a larg 
hous on purpose. they have a regular lawn for tenni and a 
billiard-room.' 

mari consid gravely, alway with the dream in her eyes. 'I don't 
think we could manag it, edward,' she said; 'it would be inconveni 
in mani ways.' she hesit for a moment. 'and I don't think I should 
care to have a young man in the house. It is so veri small, and our 
accommodation, as you know, is so limited.' 

she blush slightly, and edward, a littl disappoint as he was, 
look at her with a singular longing, as if he were a scholar 
confront with a doubt hieroglyph, either wholli wonder or 
altogeth commonplace. next door children were play in the garden, 
play shrilly, laughing, crying, quarrelling, race to and fro. 
suddenli a clear, pleasant voic sound from an upper window. 

'enid! charles! come up to my room at once!' 

there wa an instant sudden hush. the children' voic die away. 

'mrs. parker is suppos to keep her children in great order,' said 
mary. 'alic wa tell me about it the other day. she had been talk 
to mrs. parker' servant. I listen to her without ani remark, as I 
don't think it right to encourag servants' gossip; they alway 
exagger everything. and I dare say children often requir to be 
corrected.' 

the children were struck silent as if some ghastli terror had seiz 
them. 

darnel fanci that he heard a queer sort of cri from the house, but 
could not be quit sure. He turn to the other side, where an elderly, 
ordinari man with a grey moustach wa stroll up and down on the 
further side of hi garden. He caught darnell' eye, and mrs. darnel 
look toward him at the same moment, he veri polit rais hi 
tweed cap. darnel wa surpris to see hi wife blush fiercely. 

'sayc and I often go into the citi by the same 'bus,' he said, 'and as 
it happen we'v sat next to each other two or three time lately. I 
believ he' a travel for a leather firm in bermondsey. He struck me 
as a pleasant man. haven't they got rather a good-look servant?' 

'alic ha spoken to me about her--and the sayces,' said mrs. darnell. 
'I understand that they are not veri well thought of in the 
neighbourhood. but I must go in and see whether the tea is ready. alic 
will be want to go out directly.' 

darnel look after hi wife as she walk quickli away. He onli dimli 
understood, but he could see the charm of her figure, the delight of the 
brown curl cluster about her neck, and he again felt that sens of 
the scholar confront by the hieroglyphic. He could not have express 
hi emotion, but he wonder whether he would ever find the key, and 
someth told him that befor she could speak to him hi own lip must 
be unclosed. she had gone into the hous by the back kitchen door, 
leav it open, and he heard her speak to the girl about the water 
be 'realli boiling.' He wa amazed, almost indign with himself; 
but the sound of the word came to hi ear as strange, heart-pierc 
music, tone from another, wonder sphere. and yet he wa her husband, 
and they had been marri nearli a year; and yet, whenev she spoke, he 
had to listen to the sens of what she said, constrain himself, lest 
he should believ she wa a magic creature, know the secret of 
immeasur delight. 

He look out through the leav of the mulberri tree. mr. sayc had 
disappear from hi view, but he saw the light-blu fume of the cigar 
that he wa smoke float slowli across the shadow air. He wa 
wonder at hi wife' manner when sayce' name wa mentioned, puzzl 
hi head as to what could be amiss in the household of a most 
respect personage, when hi wife appear at the dining-room window 
and call him in to tea. she smile as he look up, and he rose 
hastili and walk in, wonder whether he were not a littl 'queer,' 
so strang were the dim emot and the dimmer impuls that rose 
within him. 

alic wa all shine purpl and strong scent, as she brought in the 
teapot and the jug of hot water. It seem that a visit to the kitchen 
had inspir mrs. darnel in her turn with a novel plan for dispos of 
the famou ten pounds. the rang had alway been a troubl to her, and 
when sometim she went into the kitchen, and found, as she said, the 
fire 'roar halfway up the chimney,' it wa in vain that she reprov 
the maid on the ground of extravag and wast of coal. alic wa 
readi to admit the absurd of make up such an enorm fire mere 
to bake (they call it 'roast') a bit of beef or mutton, and to boil 
the potato and the cabbage; but she wa abl to show mrs. darnel that 
the fault lay in the defect contriv of the range, in an oven 
which 'would not get hot.' even with a chop or a steak it wa almost as 
bad; the heat seem to escap up the chimney or into the room, and mari 
had spoken sever time to her husband on the shock wast of coal, 
and the cheapest coal procur wa never less than eighteen shill 
the ton. mr. darnel had written to the landlord, a builder, who had 
repli in an illiter but offens communication, maintain the 
excel of the stove and charg all the fault to the account of 
'your good lady,' which realli impli that the darnel kept no 
servant, and that mrs. darnel did everything. the range, then, 
remained, a stand annoy and expense. everi morning, alic said, 
she had the greatest difficulti in get the fire to light at all, and 
onc light it 'seem as if it fled right up the chimney.' onli a few 
night befor mrs. darnel had spoken serious to her husband about it; 
she had got alic to weigh the coal expend in cook a cottag pie, 
the dish of the evening, and deduct what remain in the scuttl 
after the pie wa done, it appear that the wretch thing had consum 
nearli twice the proper quantiti of fuel. 

'you rememb what I said the other night about the range?' said mrs. 
darnell, as she pour out the tea and water the leaves. she thought 
the introduct a good one, for though her husband wa a most amiabl 
man, she guess that he had been just a littl hurt by her decis 
against hi furnish scheme. 

'the range?' said darnell. He paus as he help himself to the 
marmalad and consid for a moment. 'no, I don't recollect. what 
night wa it?' 

'tuesday. don't you remember? you had "overtime," and didn't get home 
till quit late.' 

she paus for a moment, blush slightly; and then began to 
recapitul the misde of the range, and the outrag outlay of 
coal in the prepar of the cottag pie. 

'oh, I recollect now. that wa the night I thought I heard the 
nightingal (peopl say there are nightingal in bedford park), and the 
sky wa such a wonder deep blue.' 

He rememb how he had walk from uxbridg road station, where the 
green 'bu stopped, and in spite of the fume kiln under acton, a 
delic odour of the wood and summer field wa mysteri in the 
air, and he had fanci that he smelt the red wild roses, droop from 
the hedge. As he came to hi gate he saw hi wife stand in the 
doorway, with a light in her hand, and he threw hi arm violent about 
her as she welcom him, and whisper someth in her ear, kiss her 
scent hair. He had felt quit abash a moment afterwards, and he wa 
afraid that he had frighten her by hi nonsense; she seem trembl 
and confused. and then she had told him how they had weigh the coal. 

'yes, I rememb now,' he said. 'it is a great nuisance, isn't it? I 
hate to throw away money like that.' 

'well, what do you think? suppos we bought a realli good rang with 
aunt' money? It would save us a lot, and I expect the thing would 
tast much nicer.' 

darnel pass the marmalade, and confess that the idea wa brilliant. 

'it' much better than mine, mary,' he said quit frankly. 'I am so glad 
you thought of it. but we must talk it over; it doesn't do to buy in a 
hurry. there are so mani makes.' 

each had seen rang which look miracul inventions; he in the 
neighbourhood of the city; she in oxford street and regent street, on 
visit to the dentist. they discuss the matter at tea, and afterward 
they discuss it walk round and round the garden, in the sweet cool 
of the evening. 

'they say the "newcastle" will burn anything, coke even,' said mary. 

'but the "glow" got the gold medal at the pari exhibition,' said 
edward. 

'but what about the "eutopia" kitchener? have you seen it at work in 
oxford street?' said mary. 'they say their plan of ventil the oven 
is quit unique.' 

'I wa in fleet street the other day,' answer edward, 'and I wa 
look at the "bliss" patent stoves. they burn less fuel than ani in 
the market--so the maker declare.' 

He put hi arm gentli round her waist. she did not repel him; she 
whisper quit softly-- 

'I think mrs. parker is at her window,' and he drew hi arm back slowly. 

'but we will talk it over,' he said. 'there is no hurry. I might call at 
some of the place near the city, and you might do the same thing in 
oxford street and regent street and piccadilly, and we could compar 
notes.' 

mari wa quit pleas with her husband' good temper. It wa so nice of 
him not to find fault with her plan; 'he' so good to me,' she thought, 
and that wa what she often said to her brother, who did not care much 
for darnell. they sat down on the seat under the mulberry, close 
together, and she let darnel take her hand, and as she felt hi shy, 
hesit finger touch her in the shadow, she press them ever so 
softly, and as he fondl her hand, hi breath wa on her neck, and she 
heard hi passionate, hesit voic whisper, 'mi dear, my dear,' as 
hi lip touch her cheek. she trembl a little, and waited. darnel 
kiss her gentli on the cheek and drew away hi hand, and when he spoke 
he wa almost breathless. 

'we had better go in now,' he said. 'there is a heavi dew, and you might 
catch cold.' 

A warm, scent gale came to them from beyond the walls. He long to 
ask her to stay out with him all night beneath the tree, that they might 
whisper to one another, that the scent of her hair might inebri him, 
that he might feel her dress still brush against hi ankles. but he 
could not find the words, and it wa absurd, and she wa so gentl that 
she would do whatev he asked, howev foolish it might be, just 
becaus he ask her. He wa not worthi to kiss her lips; he bent down 
and kiss her silk bodice, and again he felt that she trembled, and he 
wa ashamed, fear that he had frighten her. 

they went slowli into the house, side by side, and darnel lit the ga 
in the drawing-room, where they alway sat on sunday evenings. mrs. 
darnel felt a littl tire and lay down on the sofa, and darnel took 
the arm-chair opposite. for a while they were silent, and then darnel 
said suddenly-- 

'what' wrong with the sayces? you seem to think there wa someth a 
littl strang about them. their maid look quit quiet.' 

'oh, I don't know that one ought to pay ani attent to servants' 
gossip. they'r not alway veri truthful.' 

'it wa alic told you, wasn't it?' 

'yes. she wa speak to me the other day, when I wa in the kitchen in 
the afternoon.' 

'but what wa it?' 

'oh, i'd rather not tell you, edward. it' not pleasant. I scold alic 
for repeat it to me.' 

darnel got up and took a small, frail chair near the sofa. 

'tell me,' he said again, with an odd perversity. He did not realli care 
to hear about the household next door, but he rememb how hi wife' 
cheek flush in the afternoon, and now he wa look at her eyes. 

'oh, I realli couldn't tell you, dear. I should feel ashamed.' 

'but you'r my wife.' 

'yes, but it doesn't make ani difference. A woman doesn't like to talk 
about such things.' 

darnel bent hi head down. hi heart wa beating; he put hi ear to her 
mouth and said, 'whisper.' 

mari drew hi head down still lower with her gentl hand, and her cheek 
burn as she whispered-- 

'alic say that--upstairs--they have only--on room furnished. the maid 
told her--herself.' 

with an unconsci gestur she press hi head to her breast, and he 
in turn wa bend her red lip to hi own, when a violent jangl 
clamour through the silent house. they sat up, and mrs. darnel went 
hurriedli to the door. 

'that' alice,' she said. 'she is alway in in time. It ha onli just 
struck ten.' 

darnel shiver with annoyance. hi lips, he knew, had almost been 
opened. mary' pretti handkerchief, delic scent from a littl 
flagon that a school friend had given her, lay on the floor, and he 
pick it up, and kiss it, and hid it away. 

the question of the rang occupi them all through june and far into 
july. mrs. darnel took everi opportun of go to the west end and 
investig the capac of the latest makes, grave view the new 
improv and hear what the shopmen had to say; while darnell, as 
he said, 'kept hi eye open' about the city. they accumul quit a 
literatur of the subject, bring away illustr pamphlets, and in 
the even it wa an amus to look at the pictures. they view 
with rever and interest the draw of great rang for hotel and 
public institutions, mighti contriv furnish with a seri of 
oven each for a differ use, with wonder apparatu for grilling, 
with batteri of accessori which seem to invest the cook almost 
with the digniti of a chief engineer. but when, in one of the lists, 
they encount the imag of littl toy 'cottage' ranges, for four 
pounds, and even for three pound ten, they grew scornful, on the 
strength of the eight or ten pound articl which they meant to 
purchase--when the merit of the diver patent had been thoroughli 
thrash out. 

the 'raven' wa for a long time mary' favourite. It promis the utmost 
economi with the highest efficiency, and mani time they were on the 
point of give the order. but the 'glow' seem equal seductive, and 
it wa onli £8. 5s. as compar with £9. 7s. 6d., and though the 'raven' 
wa suppli to the royal kitchen, the 'glow' could show more fervent 
testimoni from continent potentates. 

It seem a debat without end, and it endur day after day till that 
morning, when darnel woke from the dream of the ancient wood, of the 
fountain rise into grey vapour beneath the heat of the sun. As he 
dressed, an idea struck him, and he brought it as a shock to the hurri 
breakfast, disturb by the thought of the citi 'bu which pass the 
corner of the street at 9.15. 

'i'v got an improv on your plan, mary,' he said, with triumph. 
'look at that,' and he flung a littl book on the table. 

He laughed. 'it beat your notion all to fits. after all, the great 
expens is the coal. it' not the stove--at least that' not the real 
mischief. it' the coal is so dear. and here you are. look at those oil 
stoves. they don't burn ani coal, but the cheapest fuel in the 
world--oil; and for two pound ten you can get a rang that will do 
everyth you want.' 

'give me the book,' said mary, 'and we will talk it over in the evening, 
when you come home. must you be going?' 

darnel cast an anxiou glanc at the clock. 

'good-bye,' and they kiss each other serious and dutifully, and 
mary' eye made darnel think of those lone water-pools, hidden in 
the shadow of the ancient woods. 

so, day after day, he live in the grey phantasm world, akin to death, 
that has, somehow, with most of us, made good it claim to be call 
life. To darnel the true life would have seem madness, and when, now 
and again, the shadow and vagu imag reflect from it splendour 
fell across hi path, he wa afraid, and took refug in what he would 
have call the sane 'reality' of common and usual incid and 
interests. hi absurd was, perhaps, the more evident, inasmuch as 
'reality' for him wa a matter of kitchen ranges, of save a few 
shillings; but in truth the folli would have been greater if it had been 
concern with race stables, steam yachts, and the spend of mani 
thousand pounds. 

but so went forth darnell, day by day, strang mistak death for 
life, mad for sanity, and purposeless and wander phantom for 
true beings. He wa sincer of opinion that he wa a citi clerk, 
live in shepherd' bush--hav forgotten the mysteri and the 
far-shin glori of the kingdom which wa hi by legitim 
inheritance. 


II 

all day long a fierc and heavi heat had brood over the city, and as 
darnel near home he saw the mist lie on all the damp lowlands, 
wreath in coil about bedford park to the south, and mount to the 
west, so that the tower of acton church loom out of a grey lake. the 
grass in the squar and on the lawn which he overlook as the 'bu 
lumber wearili along wa burnt to the colour of dust. shepherd' bush 
green wa a wretch desert, trampl brown, border with monoton 
poplars, whose leav hung motionless in air that wa still, hot smoke. 
the foot passeng struggl wearili along the pavements, and the reek 
of the summer' end mingl with the breath of the brickfield made 
darnel gasp, as if he were inhal the poison of some foul sick-room. 

He made but a slight inroad into the cold mutton that adorn the 
tea-table, and confess that he felt rather 'done up' by the weather 
and the day' work. 

'I have had a tri day, too,' said mary. 'alic ha been veri queer 
and troublesom all day, and I have had to speak to her quit seriously. 
you know I think her sunday even out have a rather unsettl 
influenc on the girl. but what is one to do?' 

'ha she got a young man?' 

'of course: a grocer' assist from the goldhawk road--wilkin's, you 
know. I tri them when we settl here, but they were not veri 
satisfactory.' 

'what do they do with themselv all the evening? they have from five to 
ten, haven't they?' 

'yes; five, or sometim half-past, when the water won't boil. well, I 
believ they go for walk usually. onc or twice he ha taken her to the 
citi temple, and the sunday befor last they walk up and down oxford 
street, and then sat in the park. but it seem that last sunday they 
went to tea with hi mother at putney. I should like to tell the old 
woman what I realli think of her.' 

'why? what happened? wa she nasti to the girl?' 

'no; that' just it. befor this, she ha been veri unpleas on 
sever occasions. when the young man first took alic to see her--that 
wa in march--th girl came away crying; she told me so herself. indeed, 
she said she never want to see old mrs. murri again; and I told alic 
that, if she had not exagger things, I could hardli blame her for 
feel like that.' 

'why? what did she cri for?' 

'well, it seem that the old lady--sh live in quit a small cottag in 
some putney back street--wa so state that she would hardli speak. she 
had borrow a littl girl from some neighbour' family, and had manag 
to dress her up to imit a servant, and alic said noth could be 
sillier than to see that mite open the door, with her black dress and 
her white cap and apron, and she hardli abl to turn the handle, as 
alic said. georg (that' the young man' name) had told alic that it 
wa a littl bit of a house; but he said the kitchen wa comfortable, 
though veri plain and old-fashioned. but, instead of go straight to 
the back, and sit by a big fire on the old settl that they had 
brought up from the country, that child ask for their name (did you 
ever hear such nonsense?) and show them into a littl poki parlour, 
where old mrs. murri wa sit "like a duchess," by a fireplac full 
of colour paper, and the room as cold as ice. and she wa so grand 
that she would hardli speak to alice.' 

'that must have been veri unpleasant.' 

'oh, the poor girl had a dread time. she began with: "veri pleas to 
make your acquaintance, miss dill. I know so veri few person in 
service." alic imit her minc way of talking, but I can't do it. 
and then she went on to talk about her family, how they had farm their 
own land for five hundr years--such stuff! georg had told alic all 
about it: they had had an old cottag with a good strip of garden and 
two field somewher in essex, and that old woman talk almost as if 
they had been countri gentry, and boast about the rector, dr. 
somebody, come to see them so often, and of squir somebodi els 
alway look them up, as if they didn't visit them out of kindness. 
alic told me it wa as much as she could do to keep from laugh in 
mrs. murry' face, her young man have told her all about the place, 
and how small it was, and how the squir had been so kind about buy 
it when old murri die and georg wa a littl boy, and hi mother not 
abl to keep thing going. however, that silli old woman "laid it on 
thick," as you say, and the young man got more and more uncomfortable, 
especi when she went on to speak about marri in one' own class, 
and how unhappi she had known young men to be who had marri beneath 
them, give some veri point look at alic as she talked. and then 
such an amus thing happened: alic had notic georg look about 
him in a puzzl sort of way, as if he couldn't make out someth or 
other, and at last he burst out and ask hi mother if she had been 
buy up the neighbours' ornaments, as he rememb the two green 
cut-glass vase on the mantelpiec at mrs. ellis's, and the wax flower 
at miss turvey's. He wa go on, but hi mother scowl at him, and 
upset some books, which he had to pick up; but alic quit understood 
she had been borrow thing from her neighbours, just as she had 
borrow the littl girl, so as to look grander. and then they had 
tea--wat bewitched, alic call it--and veri thin bread and butter, 
and rubbishi foreign pastri from the swiss shop in the high street--al 
sour froth and rancid fat, alic declares. and then mrs. murri began 
boast again about her family, and snub alic and talk at her, 
till the girl came away quit furious, and veri unhappy, too. I don't 
wonder at it, do you?' 

'it doesn't sound veri enjoyable, certainly,' said darnell, look 
dreamili at hi wife. He had not been attend veri care to the 
subject-matt of her story, but he love to hear a voic that wa 
incant in hi ears, tone that summon befor him the vision of a 
magic world. 

'and ha the young man' mother alway been like this?' he said after a 
long pause, desir that the music should continue. 

'always, till quit lately, till last sunday in fact. Of cours alic 
spoke to georg murri at once, and said, like a sensibl girl, that she 
didn't think it ever answer for a marri coupl to live with the 
man' mother, "especially," she went on, "a I can see your mother 
hasn't taken much of a fanci to me." He told her, in the usual style, it 
wa onli hi mother' way, that she didn't realli mean anything, and so 
on; but alic kept away for a long time, and rather hinted, I think, 
that it might come to have to choos between her and hi mother. and 
so affair went on all through the spring and summer, and then, just 
befor the august bank holiday, georg spoke to alic again about it, 
and told her how sorri the thought of ani unpleas made him, and 
how he want hi mother and her to get on with each other, and how she 
wa onli a bit old-fashion and queer in her ways, and had spoken veri 
nice to him about her when there wa nobodi by. So the long and the 
short of it wa that alic said she might come with them on the monday, 
when they had settl to go to hampton court--th girl wa alway 
talk about hampton court, and want to see it. you rememb what a 
beauti day it was, don't you?' 

'let me see,' said darnel dreamily. 'oh yes, of course--i sat out under 
the mulberri tree all day, and we had our meal there: it wa quit a 
picnic. the caterpillar were a nuisance, but I enjoy the day veri 
much.' hi ear were charmed, ravish with the grave, supern melody, 
as of antiqu song, rather of the first made world in which all speech 
wa descant, and all word were sacrament of might, speak not to the 
mind but to the soul. He lay back in hi chair, and said-- 

'well, what happen to them?' 

'mi dear, would you believ it; but that wretch old woman behav 
wors than ever. they met as had been arranged, at kew bridge, and got 
places, with a good deal of difficulty, in one of those char-à-banc 
things, and alic thought she wa go to enjoy herself tremendously. 
noth of the kind. they had hardli said "good morning," when old mrs. 
murri began to talk about kew gardens, and how beauti it must be 
there, and how much more conveni it wa than hampton, and no expens 
at all; just the troubl of walk over the bridge. then she went on 
to say, as they were wait for the char-à-banc, that she had alway 
heard there wa noth to see at hampton, except a lot of nasty, grimi 
old pictures, and some of them not fit for ani decent woman, let alon 
girl, to look at, and she wonder whi the queen allow such thing to 
be shown, put all kind of notion into girls' head that were light 
enough already; and as she said that she look at alic so 
nastily--horrid old thing--that, as she told me afterwards, alic would 
have slap her face if she hadn't been an elderli woman, and george' 
mother. then she talk about kew again, say how wonder the 
hot-hous were, with palm and all sort of wonder things, and a 
lili as big as a parlour table, and the view over the river. georg wa 
veri good, alic told me. He wa quit taken aback at first, as the old 
woman had promis faith to be as nice as ever she could be; but 
then he said, gentli but firmly, "well, mother, we must go to kew some 
other day, as alic ha set her heart on hampton for to-day, and I want 
to see it myself!" all mrs. murri did wa to snort, and look at the girl 
like vinegar, and just then the char-à-banc came up, and they had to 
scrambl for their seats. mrs. murri grumbl to herself in an 
indistinct sort of voic all the way to hampton court. alic couldn't 
veri well make out what she said, but now and then she seem to hear 
bit of sentences, like: _piti to grow old, if son grow bold_; and 
_honour thi father and mother_; and _lie on the shelf, said the 
housewif to the old shoe, and the wick son to hi mother_; and _I 
gave you milk and you give me the go-by_. alic thought they must be 
proverb (except the commandment, of course), as georg wa alway 
say how old-fashion hi mother is; but she say there were so mani 
of them, and all point at her and george, that she think now mrs. 
murri must have made them up as they drove along. she say it would be 
just like her to do it, be old-fashioned, and ill-natur too, and 
fuller of talk than a butcher on saturday night. well, they got to 
hampton at last, and alic thought the place would pleas her, perhaps, 
and they might have some enjoyment. but she did noth but grumble, and 
out loud too, so that peopl look at them, and a woman said, so that 
they could hear, "ah well, they'll be old themselv some day," which 
made alic veri angry, for, as she said, they weren't do anything. 
when they show her the chestnut avenu in bushey park, she said it wa 
so long and straight that it made her quit dull to look at it, and she 
thought the deer (you know how pretti they are, really) look thin and 
miserable, as if they would be all the better for a good feed of 
hog-wash, with plenti of meal in it. she said she knew they weren't 
happi by the look in their eyes, which seem to tell her that their 
keeper beat them. It wa the same with everything; she said she 
rememb market-garden in hammersmith and gunnersburi that had a 
better show of flowers, and when they took her to the place where the 
water is, under the trees, she burst out with it be rather hard to 
tramp her off her leg to show her a common canal, with not so much as a 
barg on it to liven it up a bit. she went on like that the whole day, 
and alic told me she wa onli too thank to get home and get rid of 
her. wasn't it wretch for the girl?' 

'it must have been, indeed. but what happen last sunday?' 

'that' the most extraordinari thing of all. I notic that alic wa 
rather queer in her manner thi morning; she wa a longer time wash 
up the breakfast things, and she answer me quit sharpli when I call 
to her to ask when she would be readi to help me with the wash; and when 
I went into the kitchen to see about something, I notic that she wa 
go about her work in a sulki sort of way. So I ask her what wa the 
matter, and then it all came out. I could scarc believ my own ear 
when she mumbl out someth about mrs. murri think she could do 
veri much better for herself; but I ask her one question after anoth 
till I had it all out of her. It just show one how foolish and 
empty-head these girl are. I told her she wa no better than a 
weather-cock. If you will believ me, that horrid old woman wa quit 
anoth person when alic went to see her the other night. why, I can't 
think, but so she was. she told the girl how pretti she was; what a neat 
figur she had; how well she walked; and how she'd known mani a girl not 
half so clever or well-look earn her twenty-f or thirti pound 
a year, and with good families. she seem to have gone into all sort of 
details, and made elabor calcul as to what she would be abl to 
save, "with decent folks, who don't screw, and pinch, and lock up 
everyth in the house," and then she went off into a lot of 
hypocrit nonsens about how fond she wa of alice, and how she 
could go to her grave in peace, know how happi her dear georg would 
be with such a good wife, and about her save from good wage help 
to set up a littl home, end up with "and, if you take an old woman' 
advice, deary, it won't be long befor you hear the marriag bells."' 

'I see,' said darnell; 'and the upshot of it all is, I suppose, that the 
girl is thoroughli dissatisfied?' 

'yes, she is so young and silly. I talk to her, and remind her of 
how nasti old mrs. murri had been, and told her that she might chang 
her place and chang for the worse. I think I have persuad her to 
think it over quietly, at all events. Do you know what it is, edward? I 
have an idea. I believ that wick old woman is tri to get alic to 
leav us, that she may tell her son how changeabl she is; and I suppos 
she would make up some of her stupid old proverbs: "A changeabl wife, a 
troublesom life," or some nonsens of the kind. horrid old thing!' 

'well, well,' said darnell, 'I hope she won't go, for your sake. It 
would be such a bother for you, hunt for a fresh servant.' 

He refil hi pipe and smoke placidly, refresh somewhat after the 
empti and the burden of the day. the french window wa wide open, 
and now at last there came a breath of quicken air, distil by the 
night from such tree as still wore green in that arid valley. the song 
to which darnel had listen in rapture, and now the breeze, which even 
in that dry, grim suburb still bore the word of the woodland, had 
summon the dream to hi eyes, and he medit over matter that hi 
lip could not express. 

'she must, indeed, be a villain old woman,' he said at length. 

'old mrs. murry? Of cours she is; the mischiev old thing! tri to 
take the girl from a comfort place where she is happy.' 

'yes; and not to like hampton court! that show how bad she must be, 
more than anything.' 

'it is beautiful, isn't it?' 

'I shall never forget the first time I saw it. It wa soon after I went 
into the city; the first year. I had my holiday in july, and I wa 
get such a small salari that I couldn't think of go away to the 
seaside, or anyth like that. I rememb one of the other men want 
me to come with him on a walk tour in kent. I should have like that, 
but the money wouldn't run to it. and do you know what I did? I live in 
great colleg street then, and the first day I wa off, I stay in bed 
till past dinner-time, and loung about in an arm-chair with a pipe all 
the afternoon. I had got a new kind of tobacco--on and four for the 
two-ounc packet--much dearer than I could afford to smoke, and I wa 
enjoy it immensely. It wa aw hot, and when I shut the window 
and drew down the red blind it grew hotter; at five o'clock the room wa 
like an oven. but I wa so pleas at not have to go into the city, 
that I didn't mind anything, and now and again I read bit from a queer 
old book that had belong to my poor dad. I couldn't make out what a 
lot of it meant, but it fit in somehow, and I read and smoke till 
tea-time. then I went out for a walk, think I should be better for a 
littl fresh air befor I went to bed; and I went wander away, not 
much notic where I wa going, turn here and there as the fanci 
took me. I must have gone mile and miles, and a good mani of them round 
and round, as they say they do in australia if they lose their way in 
the bush; and I am sure I couldn't have gone exactli the same way all 
over again for ani money. anyhow, I wa still in the street when the 
twilight came on, and the lamp-light were trot round from one 
lamp to another. It wa a wonder night: I wish you had been there, my 
dear.' 

'I wa quit a littl girl then.' 

'yes, I suppos you were. well, it wa a wonder night. I remember, I 
wa walk in a littl street of littl grey hous all alike, with 
stucco cope and stucco door-posts; there were brass plate on a lot 
of the doors, and one had "maker of shell boxes" on it, and I wa quit 
pleased, as I had often wonder where those box and thing that you 
buy at the seasid came from. A few children were play about in the 
road with some rubbish or other, and men were sing in a small 
public-hous at the corner, and I happen to look up, and I notic 
what a wonder colour the sky had turned. I have seen it since, but I 
don't think it ha ever been quit what it wa that night, a dark blue, 
glow like a violet, just as they say the sky look in foreign 
countries. I don't know why, but the sky or someth made me feel quit 
queer; everyth seem chang in a way I couldn't understand. I 
remember, I told an old gentleman I knew then--a friend of my poor 
father's, he' been dead for five years, if not more--about how I felt, 
and he look at me and said someth about fairyland; I don't know 
what he meant, and I dare say I didn't explain myself properly. but, do 
you know, for a moment or two I felt as if that littl back street wa 
beautiful, and the nois of the children and the men in the public-hous 
seem to fit in with the sky and becom part of it. you know that old 
say about "tread on air" when one is glad! well, I realli felt 
like that as I walked, not exactli like air, you know, but as if the 
pavement wa velvet or some veri soft carpet. and then--i suppos it wa 
all my fancy--th air seem to smell sweet, like the incens in 
cathol churches, and my breath came queer and catchy, as it doe when 
one get veri excit about anything. I felt altogeth stranger than 
i'v ever felt befor or since.' 

darnel stop suddenli and look up at hi wife. she wa watch him 
with part lips, with eager, wonder eyes. 

'I hope i'm not tire you, dear, with all thi stori about nothing. you 
have had a worri day with that stupid girl; hadn't you better go to 
bed?' 

'oh, no, please, edward. i'm not a bit tire now. I love to hear you 
talk like that. pleas go on.' 

'well, after I had walk a bit further, that queer sort of feel 
seem to fade away. I said a bit further, and I realli thought I had 
been walk about five minutes, but I had look at my watch just 
befor I got into that littl street, and when I look at it again it 
wa eleven o'clock. I must have done about eight miles. I could scarc 
believ my own eyes, and I thought my watch must have gone mad; but I 
found out afterward it wa perfectli right. I couldn't make it out, and 
I can't now; I assur you the time pass as if I walk up one side of 
edna road and down the other. but there I was, right in the open 
country, with a cool wind blow on me from a wood, and the air full of 
soft rustl sounds, and note of bird from the bushes, and the 
sing nois of a littl brook that ran under the road. I wa stand 
on the bridg when I took out my watch and struck a wax light to see the 
time; and it came upon me suddenli what a strang even it had been. 
It wa all so different, you see, to what I had been do all my life, 
particularli for the year before, and it almost seem as if I couldn't 
be the man who had been go into the citi everi day in the morn and 
come back from it everi even after write a lot of uninterest 
letters. It wa like be pitch all of a sudden from one world into 
another. well, I found my way back somehow or other, and as I went along 
I made up my mind how i'd spend my holiday. I said to myself, "i'll have 
a walk tour as well as ferrars, onli mine is to be a tour of london 
and it environs," and I had got it all settl when I let myself into 
the hous about four o'clock in the morning, and the sun wa shining, 
and the street almost as still as the wood at midnight!' 

'I think that wa a capit idea of yours. did you have your tour? did 
you buy a map of london?' 

'I had the tour all right. I didn't buy a map; that would have spoilt 
it, somehow; to see everyth plot out, and named, and measured. 
what I want wa to feel that I wa go where nobodi had been before. 
that' nonsense, isn't it? as if there could be ani such place in 
london, or england either, for the matter of that.' 

'I know what you mean; you want to feel as if you were go on a sort 
of voyag of discovery. isn't that it?' 

'exactly, that' what I wa tri to tell you. besides, I didn't want 
to buy a map. I made a map.' 

'how do you mean? did you make a map out of your head?' 

'i'll tell you about it afterwards. but do you realli want to hear about 
my grand tour?' 

'of cours I do; it must have been delightful. I call it a most origin 
idea.' 

'well, I wa quit full of it, and what you said just now about a voyag 
of discoveri remind me of how I felt then. when I wa a boy I wa 
aw fond of read of great travellers--i suppos all boy are--and 
of sailor who were driven out of their cours and found themselv in 
latitud where no ship had ever sail before, and of peopl who 
discov wonder citi in strang countries; and all the second day 
of my holiday I wa feel just as I use to when I read these books. 
I didn't get up till pretti late. I wa tire to death after all those 
mile I had walked; but when I had finish my breakfast and fill my 
pipe, I had a grand time of it. It wa such nonsense, you know; as if 
there could be anyth strang or wonder in london.' 

'whi shouldn't there be?' 

'well, I don't know; but I have thought afterward what a silli lad I 
must have been. anyhow, I had a great day of it, plan what I would 
do, half making-believe--just like a kid--that I didn't know where I 
might find myself, or what might happen to me. and I wa enorm 
pleas to think it wa all my secret, that nobodi els knew anyth 
about it, and that, whatev I might see, I would keep to myself. I had 
alway felt like that about the books. Of course, I love read them, 
but it seem to me that, if I had been a discoverer, I would have kept 
my discoveri a secret. If I had been columbus, and, if it could 
possibl have been managed, I would have found america all by myself, 
and never have said a word about it to anybody. fancy! how beauti it 
would be to be walk about in one' own town, and talk to people, 
and all the while to have the thought that one knew of a great world 
beyond the seas, that nobodi els dream of. I should have love that! 

'and that is exactli what I felt about the tour I wa go to make. I 
made up my mind that nobodi should know; and so, from that day to this, 
nobodi ha heard a word of it.' 

'but you are go to tell me?' 

'you are different. but I don't think even you will hear everything; not 
becaus I won't, but becaus I can't tell mani of the thing I saw.' 

'thing you saw? then you realli did see wonderful, strang thing in 
london?' 

'well, I did and I didn't. everything, or pretti nearli everything, that 
I saw is stand still, and hundr of thousand of peopl have look 
at the same sights--ther were mani place that the fellow in the 
offic knew quit well, I found out afterwards. and then I read a book 
call "london and it surroundings." but (I don't know how it is) 
neither the men at the offic nor the writer of the book seem to have 
seen the thing that I did. that' whi I stop read the book; it 
seem to take the life, the real heart, out of everything, make it as 
dri and stupid as the stuf bird in a museum. 

'I thought about what I wa go to do all that day, and went to bed 
early, so as to be fresh. I knew wonder littl about london, 
really; though, except for an odd week now and then, I had spent all my 
life in town. Of cours I knew the main streets--th strand, regent 
street, oxford street, and so on--and I knew the way to the school I 
use to go to when I wa a boy, and the way into the city. but I had 
just kept to a few tracks, as they say the sheep do on the mountains; 
and that made it all the easier for me to imagin that I wa go to 
discov a new world.' 

darnel paus in the stream of hi talk. He look keenli at hi wife 
to see if he were weari her, but her eye gaze at him with unab 
interest--on would have almost said that they were the eye of one who 
long and half expect to be initi into the mysteries, who knew 
not what great wonder wa to be revealed. she sat with her back to the 
open window, frame in the sweet dusk of the night, as if a painter had 
made a curtain of heavi velvet behind her; and the work that she had 
been do had fallen to the floor. she support her head with her two 
hand place on each side of her brow, and her eye were as the well in 
the wood of which darnel dream in the night-tim and in the day. 

'and all the strang tale I had ever heard were in my head that 
morning,' he went on, as if continu the thought that had fill hi 
mind while hi lip were silent. 'I had gone to bed early, as I told 
you, to get a thorough rest, and I had set my alarum clock to wake me 
at three, so that I might set out at an hour that wa quit strang for 
the begin of a journey. there wa a hush in the world when I awoke, 
befor the clock had rung to arous me, and then a bird began to sing 
and twitter in the elm tree that grew in the next garden, and I look 
out of the window, and everyth wa still, and the morn air 
breath in pure and sweet, as I had never known it before. My room wa 
at the back of the house, and most of the garden had tree in them, and 
beyond these tree I could see the back of the hous of the next 
street rise like the wall of an old city; and as I look the sun 
rose, and the great light came in at my window, and the day began. 

'and I found that when I wa onc out of the street just about me that 
I knew, some of the queer feel that had come to me two day befor 
came back again. It wa not nearli so strong, the street no longer 
smelt of incense, but still there wa enough of it to show me what a 
strang world I pass by. there were thing that one may see again and 
again in mani london streets: a vine or a fig tree on a wall, a lark 
sing in a cage, a curiou shrub blossom in a garden, an odd shape 
of a roof, or a balconi with an uncommon-look trellis-work in iron. 
there' scarc a street, perhaps, where you won't see one or other of 
such thing as these; but that morn they rose to my eye in a new 
light, as if I had on the magic spectacl in the fairi tale, and just 
like the man in the fairi tale, I went on and on in the new light. I 
rememb go through wild land on a high place; there were pool of 
water shine in the sun, and great white hous in the middl of dark, 
rock pines, and then on the turn of the height I came to a littl 
lane that went asid from the main road, a lane that led to a wood, and 
in the lane wa a littl old shadow house, with a bell turret in the 
roof, and a porch of trellis-work all dim and fade into the colour of 
the sea; and in the garden there were grow tall, white lilies, just 
as we saw them that day we went to look at the old pictures; they were 
shine like silver, and they fill the air with their sweet scent. It 
wa from near that hous I saw the valley and high place far away in 
the sun. so, as I say, I went "on and on," by wood and fields, till I 
came to a littl town on the top of a hill, a town full of old hous 
bow to the ground beneath their years, and the morn wa so still 
that the blue smoke rose up straight into the sky from all the 
roof-tops, so still that I heard far down in the valley the song of a 
boy who wa sing an old song through the street as he went to 
school, and as I pass through the awaken town, beneath the old, 
grave houses, the church bell began to ring. 

'it wa soon after I had left thi town behind me that I found the 
strang road. I saw it branch off from the dusti high road, and it 
look so green that I turn asid into it, and soon I felt as if I had 
realli come into a new country. I don't know whether it wa one of the 
road the old roman made that my father use to tell me about; but it 
wa cover with deep, soft turf, and the great tall hedg on each side 
look as if they had not been touch for a hundr years; they had 
grown so broad and high and wild that they met overhead, and I could 
onli get glimps here and there of the countri through which I wa 
passing, as one pass in a dream. the strang road led me on and on, 
up and down hill; sometim the rose bush had grown so thick that I 
could scarc make my way between them, and sometim the road 
broaden out into a green, and in one valley a brook, span by an old 
wooden bridge, ran across it. I wa tired, and I found a soft and shadi 
place beneath an ash tree, where I must have slept for mani hours, for 
when I woke up it wa late in the afternoon. So I went on again, and at 
last the green road came out into the highway, and I look up and saw 
anoth town on a high place with a great church in the middl of it, 
and when I went up to it there wa a great organ sound from within, 
and the choir wa singing.' 

there wa a raptur in darnell' voic as he spoke, that made hi stori 
well-nigh swell into a song, and he drew a long breath as the word 
ended, fill with the thought of that far-off summer day, when some 
enchant had inform all common things, transmut them into a 
great sacrament, caus earthli work to glow with the fire and the 
glori of the everlast light. 

and some splendour of that light shone on the face of mari as she sat 
still against the sweet gloom of the night, her dark hair make her 
face more radiant. she wa silent for a littl while, and then she 
spoke-- 

'oh, my dear, whi have you wait so long to tell me these wonder 
things? I think it is beautiful. pleas go on.' 

'I have alway been afraid it wa all nonsense,' said darnell. 'and I 
don't know how to explain what I feel. I didn't think I could say so 
much as I have to-night.' 

'and did you find it the same day after day?' 

'all through the tour? yes, I think everi journey wa a success. Of 
course, I didn't go so far afield everi day; I wa too tired. often I 
rest all day long, and went out in the evening, after the lamp were 
lit, and then onli for a mile or two. I would roam about old, dim 
squares, and hear the wind from the hill whisper in the trees; and 
when I knew I wa within call of some great glitter street, I wa 
sunk in the silenc of way where I wa almost the onli passenger, and 
the lamp were so few and faint that they seem to give out shadow 
instead of light. and I would walk slowly, to and fro, perhap for an 
hour at a time, in such dark streets, and all the time I felt what I 
told you about it be my secret--that the shadow, and the dim lights, 
and the cool of the evening, and tree that were like dark low cloud 
were all mine, and mine alone, that I wa live in a world that nobodi 
els knew of, into which no one could enter. 

'I rememb one night I had gone farther. It wa somewher in the far 
west, where there are orchard and gardens, and great broad lawn that 
slope down to tree by the river. A great red moon rose that night 
through mist of sunset, and thin, filmi clouds, and I wander by a 
road that pass through the orchards, till I came to a littl hill, 
with the moon show abov it glow like a great rose. then I saw 
figur pass between me and the moon, one by one, in a long line, each 
bent double, with great pack upon their shoulders. one of them wa 
singing, and then in the middl of the song I heard a horribl shrill 
laugh, in the thin crack voic of a veri old woman, and they 
disappear into the shadow of the trees. I suppos they were peopl 
go to work, or come from work in the gardens; but how like it wa 
to a nightmare! 

'I can't tell you about hampton; I should never finish talking. I wa 
there one evening, not long befor they close the gates, and there were 
veri few peopl about. but the grey-red, silent, echo courts, and the 
flower fall into dreamland as the night came on, and the dark yew 
and shadowy-look statues, and the far, still stretch of water 
beneath the avenues; and all melt into a blue mist, all be hidden 
from one' eyes, slowly, surely, as if veil were dropped, one by one, 
on a great ceremony! oh! my dear, what could it mean? far away, across 
the river, I heard a soft bell ring three times, and three times, and 
again three times, and I turn away, and my eye were full of tears. 

'I didn't know what it wa when I came to it; I onli found out 
afterward that it must have been hampton court. one of the men in the 
offic told me he had taken an A. B. C. girl there, and they had great 
fun. they got into the maze and couldn't get out again, and then they 
went on the river and were nearli drowned. He told me there were some 
spici pictur in the galleries; hi girl shriek with laughter, so he 
said.' 

mari quit disregard thi interlude. 

'but you told me you had made a map. what wa it like?' 

'i'll show it you some day, if you want to see it. I mark down all the 
place I had gone to, and made signs--th like queer letters--to 
remind me of what I had seen. nobodi but myself could understand it. I 
want to draw pictures, but I never learnt how to draw, so when I tri 
noth wa like what I want it to be. I tri to draw a pictur of 
that town on the hill that I came to on the even of the first day; I 
want to make a steep hill with hous on top, and in the middle, but 
high abov them, the great church, all spire and pinnacles, and abov 
it, in the air, a cup with ray come from it. but it wasn't a success. 
I made a veri strang sign for hampton court, and gave it a name that I 
made up out of my head.' 

the darnel avoid one another' eye as they sat at breakfast the 
next morning. the air had lighten in the night, for rain had fallen at 
dawn; and there wa a bright blue sky, with vast white cloud roll 
across it from the south-west, and a fresh and joyou wind blew in at 
the open window; the mist had vanished. and with the mist there seem 
to have vanish also the sens of strang thing that had possess 
mari and her husband the night before; and as they look out into the 
clear light they could scarc believ that the one had spoken and the 
other had listen a few hour befor to histori veri far remov from 
the usual current of their thought and of their lives. they glanc 
shyli at one another, and spoke of common things, of the question 
whether alic would be corrupt by the insidi mrs. murry, or whether 
mrs. darnel would be abl to persuad the girl that the old woman must 
be actuat by the worst motives. 

'and I think, if I were you,' said darnell, as he went out, 'I should 
step over to the store and complain of their meat. that last piec of 
beef wa veri far from be up to the mark--ful of sinew.' 


iii 

It might have been differ in the evening, and darnel had matur a 
plan by which he hope to gain much. He intend to ask hi wife if she 
would mind have onli one gas, and that a good deal lowered, on the 
pretext that hi eye were tire with work; he thought mani thing might 
happen if the room were dimli lit, and the window opened, so that they 
could sit and watch the night, and listen to the rustl murmur of the 
tree on the lawn. but hi plan were made in vain, for when he got to 
the garden gate hi wife, in tears, came forth to meet him. 

'oh, edward,' she began, 'such a dread thing ha happened! I never 
like him much, but I didn't think he would ever do such aw things.' 

'what do you mean? who are you talk about? what ha happened? Is it 
alice' young man?' 

'no, no. but come in, dear. I can see that woman opposit watch us: 
she' alway on the look out.' 

'now, what is it?' said darnell, as they sat down to tea. 'tell me, 
quick! you'v quit frighten me.' 

'I don't know how to begin, or where to start. aunt marian ha thought 
that there wa someth queer for weeks. and then she found--oh, well, 
the long and short of it is that uncl robert ha been carri on 
dread with some horrid girl, and aunt ha found out everything!' 

'lord! you don't say so! the old rascal! why, he must be nearer seventi 
than sixty!' 

'he' just sixty-five; and the money he ha given her----' 

the first shock of surpris over, darnel turn resolut to hi 
mince. 

'we'll have it all out after tea,' he said; 'I am not go to have my 
meal spoilt by that old fool of a nixon. fill up my cup, will you, 
dear?' 

'excel minc this,' he went on, calmly. 'A littl lemon juic and a 
bit of ham in it? I thought there wa someth extra. alic all right 
to-day? that' good. I expect she' get over all that nonsense.' 

He went on calmli chatter in a manner that astonish mrs. darnell, 
who felt that by the fall of uncl robert the natur order had been 
inverted, and had scarc touch food sinc the intellig had 
arriv by the second post. she had start out to keep the appoint 
her aunt had made earli in the morning, and had spent most of the day in 
a first-class waiting-room at victoria station, where she had heard all 
the story. 

'now,' said darnell, when the tabl had been cleared, 'tell us all about 
it. how long ha it been go on?' 

'aunt think now, from littl thing she remembers, that it must have 
been go on for a year at least. she say there ha been a horrid kind 
of mysteri about uncle' behaviour for a long time, and her nerv were 
quit shaken, as she thought he must be involv with anarchists, or 
someth dread of the sort.' 

'what on earth made her think that?' 

'well, you see, onc or twice when she wa out walk with her husband, 
she ha been startl by whistles, which seem to follow them 
everywhere. you know there are some nice countri walk at barnet, and 
one in particular, in the field near totteridge, that uncl and aunt 
rather made a point of go to on fine sunday evenings. Of course, thi 
wa not the first thing she noticed, but, at the time, it made a great 
impress on her mind; she could hardli get a wink of sleep for week 
and weeks.' 

'whistling?' said darnell. 'I don't quit understand. whi should she be 
frighten by whistling?' 

'i'll tell you. the first time it happen wa one sunday in last may. 
aunt had a fanci they were be follow a sunday or two before, but 
she didn't see or hear anything, except a sort of crackl nois in the 
hedge. but thi particular sunday they had hardli got through the stile 
into the fields, when she heard a peculiar kind of low whistle. she took 
no notice, think it wa no concern of her or her husband's, but as 
they went on she heard it again, and then again, and it follow them 
the whole walk, and it made her so uncomfortable, becaus she didn't 
know where it wa come from or who wa do it, or why. then, just as 
they got out of the field into the lane, uncl said he felt quit 
faint, and he thought he would tri a littl brandi at the "turpin' 
head," a small public-hous there is there. and she look at him and 
saw hi face wa quit purple--mor like apoplexy, as she says, than 
faint fits, which make peopl look a sort of greenish-white. but she 
said nothing, and thought perhap uncl had a peculiar way of faint 
of hi own, as he alway wa a man to have hi own way of do 
everything. So she just wait in the road, and he went ahead and 
slip into the public, and aunt say she thought she saw a littl 
figur rise out of the dusk and slip in after him, but she couldn't be 
sure. and when uncl came out he look red instead of purple, and said 
he felt much better; and so they went home quietli together, and noth 
more wa said. you see, uncl had said noth about the whistling, and 
aunt had been so frighten that she didn't dare speak, for fear they 
might be both shot. 

'she wasn't think anyth more about it, when two sunday afterward 
the veri same thing happen just as it had before. thi time aunt 
pluck up a spirit, and ask uncl what it could be. and what do you 
think he said? "birds, my dear, birds." Of cours aunt said to him that 
no bird that ever flew with wing made a nois like that: sly, and low, 
with paus in between; and then he said that mani rare sort of bird 
live in north middlesex and hertfordshire. "nonsense, robert," said 
aunt, "how can you talk so, consid it ha follow us all the way, 
for a mile or more?" and then uncl told her that some bird were so 
attach to man that they would follow one about for mile sometimes; he 
said he had just been read about a bird like that in a book of 
travels. and do you know that when they got home he actual show her 
a piec in the "hertfordshir naturalist" which they took in to oblig a 
friend of theirs, all about rare bird found in the neighbourhood, all 
the most outlandish names, aunt says, that she had never heard or 
thought of, and uncl had the impud to say that it must have been a 
purpl sandpiper, which, the paper said, had "a low shrill note, 
constantli repeated." and then he took down a book of siberian travel 
from the bookcas and show her a page which told how a man wa 
follow by a bird all day long through a forest. and that' what aunt 
marian say vex her more than anyth almost; to think that he should 
be so art and readi with those books, twist them to hi own wick 
ends. but, at the time, when she wa out walking, she simpli couldn't 
make out what he meant by talk about bird in that random, silli sort 
of way, so unlik him, and they went on, that horribl whistl 
follow them, she look straight ahead and walk fast, realli 
feel more huffi and put out than frightened. and when they got to the 
next stile, she got over and turn round, and "lo and behold," as she 
says, there wa no uncl robert to be seen! she felt herself go quit 
white with alarm, think of that whistle, and make sure he'd been 
spirit away or snatch in some way or another, and she had just 
scream out "robert" like a mad woman, when he came quit slowli round 
the corner, as cool as a cucumber, hold someth in hi hand. He 
said there were some flower he could never pass, and when aunt saw that 
he had got a dandelion torn up by the roots, she felt as if her head 
were go round.' 

mary' stori wa suddenli interrupted. for ten minut darnel had been 
writh in hi chair, suffer tortur in hi anxieti to avoid 
wound hi wife' feelings, but the episod of the dandelion wa too 
much for him, and he burst into a long, wild shriek of laughter, 
aggrav by suppress into the semblanc of a red indian' 
war-whoop. alice, who wa washing-up in the scullery, drop some three 
shillings' worth of china, and the neighbour ran out into their garden 
wonder if it were murder. mari gaze reproach at her husband. 

'how can you be so unfeeling, edward?' she said, at length, when 
darnel had pass into the feebl of exhaustion. 'if you had seen 
the tear roll down poor aunt marian' cheek as she told me, I don't 
think you would have laughed. I didn't think you were so hard-hearted.' 

'mi dear mary,' said darnell, faintly, through sob and catch of the 
breath, 'I am aw sorry. I know it' veri sad, really, and i'm not 
unfeeling; but it is such an odd tale, now, isn't it? the sandpiper, you 
know, and then the dandelion!' 

hi face twitch and he ground hi teeth together. mari look grave 
at him for a moment, and then she put her hand to her face, and darnel 
could see that she also shook with merriment. 

'I am as bad as you,' she said, at last. 'I never thought of it in that 
way. i'm glad I didn't, or I should have laugh in aunt marian' face, 
and I wouldn't have done that for the world. poor old thing; she cri 
as if her heart would break. I met her at victoria, as she ask me, and 
we had some soup at a confectioner's. I could scarc touch it; her 
tear kept drop into the plate all the time; and then we went to the 
waiting-room at the station, and she cri there terribly.' 

'well,' said darnell, 'what happen next? I won't laugh ani more.' 

'no, we mustn't; it' much too horribl for a joke. well, of cours aunt 
went home and wonder and wonder what could be the matter, and tri 
to think it out, but, as she says, she could make noth of it. she 
began to be afraid that uncle' brain wa give way through overwork, 
as he had stop in the citi (a he said) up to all hour lately, and 
he had to go to yorkshir (wick old story-teller!), about some veri 
tiresom busi connect with hi leases. but then she reflect that 
howev queer he might be getting, even hi queer couldn't make 
whistl in the air, though, as she said, he wa alway a wonder man. 
So she had to give that up; and then she wonder if there were anyth 
the matter with her, as she had read about peopl who heard nois when 
there wa realli noth at all. but that wouldn't do either, becaus 
though it might account for the whistling, it wouldn't account for the 
dandelion or the sandpiper, or for faint fit that turn purple, or 
ani of uncle' queerness. So aunt said she could think of noth but to 
read the bibl everi day from the beginning, and by the time she got 
into chronicl she felt rather better, especi as noth had 
happen for three or four sundays. she notic uncl seem 
absent-minded, and not as nice to her as he might be, but she put that 
down to too much work, as he never came home befor the last train, and 
had a hansom twice all the way, get there between three and four in 
the morning. still, she felt it wa no good bother her head over what 
couldn't be made out or explain anyway, and she wa just settl 
down, when one sunday even it began all over again, and wors thing 
happened. the whistl follow them just as it did before, and poor 
aunt set her teeth and said noth to uncle, as she knew he would onli 
tell her stories, and they were walk on, not say a word, when 
someth made her look back, and there wa a horribl boy with red 
hair, peep through the hedg just behind, and grinning. she said it 
wa a dread face, with someth unnatur about it, as if it had 
been a dwarf, and befor she had time to have a good look, it pop 
back like lightning, and aunt all but faint away.' 

'A red-head _boy_?' said darnell. 'I thought----what an extraordinari 
stori thi is. i'v never heard of anyth so queer. who wa the boy?' 

'you will know in good time,' said mrs. darnell. 'it _is_ veri strange, 
isn't it?' 

'strange!' darnel rumin for a while. 

'I know what I think, mary,' he said at length. 'I don't believ a word 
of it. I believ your aunt is go mad, or ha gone mad, and that she 
ha delusions. the whole thing sound to me like the invent of a 
lunatic.' 

'you are quit wrong. everi word is true, and if you will let me go on, 
you will understand how it all happened.' 

'veri good, go ahead.' 

'let me see, where wa I? oh, I know, aunt saw the boy grin in the 
hedge. yes, well, she wa dread frighten for a minut or two; 
there wa someth so queer about the face, but then she pluck up a 
spirit and said to herself, "after all, better a boy with red hair than 
a big man with a gun," and she made up her mind to watch uncl robert 
closely, as she could see by hi look he knew all about it; he seem as 
if he were think hard and puzzl over something, as if he didn't 
know what to do next, and hi mouth kept open and shutting, like a 
fish's. So she kept her face straight, and didn't say a word, and when 
he said someth to her about the fine sunset, she took no notice. 
"don't you hear what I say, marian?" he said, speak quit crossly, 
and bellow as if it were to somebodi in the next field. So aunt said 
she wa veri sorry, but her cold made her so deaf, she couldn't hear 
much. she notic uncl look quit pleased, and reliev too, and she 
knew he thought she hadn't heard the whistling. suddenli uncl pretend 
to see a beauti spray of honeysuckl high up in the hedge, and he 
said he must get it for aunt, onli she must go on ahead, as it made him 
nervou to be watched. she said she would, but she just step asid 
behind a bush where there wa a sort of cover in the hedge, and found 
she could see him quit well, though she scratch her face terribl 
with poke it into a rose bush. and in a minut or two out came the boy 
from behind the hedge, and she saw uncl and him talking, and she knew 
it wa the same boy, as it wasn't dark enough to hide hi flame red 
head. and uncl put out hi hand as if to catch him, but he just dart 
into the bush and vanished. aunt never said a word at the time, but 
that night when they got home she charg uncl with what she'd seen and 
ask him what it all meant. He wa quit taken aback at first, and 
stammer and stutter and said a spi wasn't hi notion of a good wife, 
but at last he made her swear secrecy, and told her that he wa a veri 
high freemason, and that the boy wa an emissari of the order who 
brought him messag of the greatest importance. but aunt didn't believ 
a word of it, as an uncl of her wa a mason, and he never behav like 
that. It wa then she began to be afraid that it wa realli anarchists, 
or someth of the kind, and everi time the bell rang she thought that 
uncl had been found out, and the polic had come for him.' 

'what nonsense! As if a man with hous properti would be an anarchist.' 

'well, she could see there must be some horribl secret, and she didn't 
know what els to think. and then she began to have the thing through 
the post.' 

'thing through the post! what do you mean by that?' 

'all sort of things; bit of broken bottle-glass, pack care as 
if it were jewellery; parcel that unrol and unrol wors than 
chines boxes, and then had "cat" in larg letter when you came to the 
middle; old artifici teeth, a cake of red paint, and at last 
cockroaches.' 

'cockroach by post! stuff and nonsense; your aunt' mad.' 

'edward, she show me the box; it wa made to hold cigarettes, and 
there were three dead cockroach inside. and when she found a box of 
exactli the same kind, half-ful of cigarettes, in uncle' great-coat 
pocket, then her head began to turn again.' 

darnel groaned, and stir uneasili in hi chair, feel that the 
tale of aunt marian' domest troubl wa put on the semblanc of 
an evil dream. 

'anyth else?' he asked. 

'mi dear, I haven't repeat half the thing poor aunt told me thi 
afternoon. there wa the night she thought she saw a ghost in the 
shrubbery. she wa anxiou about some chicken that were just due to 
hatch out, so she went out after dark with some egg and bread-crumbs, in 
case they might be out. and just befor her she saw a figur glide by 
the rhododendrons. It look like a short, slim man dress as they 
use to be hundr of year ago; she saw the sword by hi side, and 
the feather in hi cap. she thought she should have died, she said, and 
though it wa gone in a minute, and she tri to make out it wa all her 
fancy, she faint when she got into the house. uncl wa at home that 
night, and when she came to and told him he ran out, and stay out for 
half-an-hour or more, and then came in and said he could find nothing; 
and the next minut aunt heard that low whistl just outsid the window, 
and uncl ran out again.' 

'mi dear mary, do let us come to the point. what on earth doe it all 
lead to?' 

'haven't you guessed? why, of cours it wa that girl all the time.' 

'girl? I thought you said it wa a boy with a red head?' 

'don't you see? she' an actress, and she dress up. she won't leav 
uncl alone. It wasn't enough that he wa with her nearli everi even 
in the week, but she must be after him on sunday too. aunt found a 
letter the horrid thing had written, and so it ha all come out. enid 
vivian she call herself, though I don't suppos she ha ani right to 
one name or the other. and the question is, what is to be done?' 

'let us talk of that again. i'll have a pipe, and then we'll go to bed.' 

they were almost asleep when mari said suddenly-- 

'doesn't it seem queer, edward? last night you were tell me such 
beauti things, and to-night I have been talk about that 
disgrac old man and hi go on.' 

'I don't know,' answer darnell, dreamily. 'on the wall of that great 
church upon the hill I saw all kind of strang grin monsters, 
carv in stone.' 

the misdemeanour of mr. robert nixon brought in their train 
consequ strang beyond imagination. It wa not that they continu 
to develop on the somewhat fantast line of these first adventur 
which mrs. darnel had related; indeed, when 'aunt marian' came over to 
shepherd' bush, one sunday afternoon, darnel wonder how he had had 
the heart to laugh at the misfortun of a broken-heart woman. 

He had never seen hi wife' aunt before, and he wa strang surpris 
when alic show her into the garden where they were sit on the 
warm and misti sunday in september. To him, save dure these latter 
days, she had alway been associ with idea of splendour and 
success: hi wife had alway mention the nixon with a ting of 
reverence; he had heard, mani times, the epic of mr. nixon' struggl 
and of hi slow but triumphant rise. mari had told the stori as she had 
receiv it from her parents, begin with the flight to london from 
some small, dull, and unprosper town in the flattest of the midlands, 
long ago, when a young man from the countri had great chanc of 
fortune. robert nixon' father had been a grocer in the high street, and 
in after day the success coal merchant and builder love to tell of 
that dull provinci life, and while he glorifi hi own victories, he 
gave hi hearer to understand that he came of a race which had also 
known how to achieve. that had been long ago, he would explain: in the 
day when that rare citizen who desir to go to london or to york wa 
forc to rise in the dead of night, and make hi way, somehow or other, 
by ten mile of quagmirish, wander lane to the great north road, 
there to meet the 'lightning' coach, a vehicl which stood to all the 
countrysid as the visibl and tangibl embodi of tremend 
speed--'and indeed,' as nixon would add, 'it wa alway up to time, 
which is more than can be said of the dunham branch line nowadays!' It 
wa in thi ancient dunham that the nixon had wage success trade 
for perhap a hundr years, in a shop with bulg bay window look 
on the market-place. there wa no competition, and the townsfolk, and 
well-to-do farmers, the clergi and the countri families, look upon the 
hous of nixon as an institut fix as the town hall (which stood on 
roman pillars) and the parish church. but the chang came: the railway 
crept nearer and nearer, the farmer and the countri gentri becam less 
well-to-do; the tanning, which wa the local industry, suffer from a 
great busi which had been establish in a larger town, some twenti 
mile away, and the profit of the nixon grew less and less. henc the 
hegira of robert, and he would dilat on the poor of hi beginnings, 
how he saved, by littl and little, from hi sorri wage of citi clerk, 
and how he and a fellow clerk, 'who had come into a hundr pounds,' saw 
an open in the coal trade--and fill it. It wa at thi stage of 
robert' fortunes, still far from magnificent, that miss marian reynold 
had encount him, she be on a visit to friend in gunnersbury. 
afterwards, victori follow victory; nixon' wharf becam a landmark to 
bargemen; hi power stretch abroad, hi duski fleet went outward to 
the sea, and inward by all the far reach of canals. lime, cement, and 
brick were ad to hi merchandise, and at last he hit upon the great 
stroke--that extens take up of land in the north of london. nixon 
himself ascrib thi _coup_ to nativ sagacity, and the possess of 
capital; and there were also obscur rumour to the effect that some one 
or other had been 'done' in the cours of the transaction. howev that 
might be, the nixon grew wealthi to excess, and mari had often told her 
husband of the state in which they dwelt, of their liveri servants, of 
the glori of their drawing-room, of their broad lawn, shadow by a 
splendid and ancient cedar. and so darnel had somehow been led into 
conceiv the ladi of thi demesn as a personag of no small pomp. He 
saw her, tall, of dignifi port and presence, inclining, it might be, 
to some measur of obesity, such a measur as wa not unbefit in an 
elderli ladi of position, who live well and live at ease. He even 
imagin a slight ruddi of complexion, which went veri well with 
hair that wa begin to turn grey, and when he heard the door-bel 
ring, as he sat under the mulberri on the sunday afternoon, he bent 
forward to catch sight of thi state figure, clad, of course, in the 
richest, blackest silk, girt about with heavi chain of gold. 

He start with amaz when he saw the strang presenc that follow 
the servant into the garden. mrs. nixon wa a little, thin old woman, 
who bent as she feebli trot after alice; her eye were on the ground, 
and she did not lift them when the darnel rose to greet her. she 
glanc to the right, uneasily, as she shook hand with darnell, to the 
left when mari kiss her, and when she wa place on the garden seat 
with a cushion at her back, she look away at the back of the hous in 
the next street. she wa dress in black, it wa true, but even darnel 
could see that her gown wa old and shabby, that the fur trim of her 
cape and the fur boa which wa twist about her neck were dingi and 
disconsolate, and had all the melancholi air which fur wear when it is 
seen in a second-hand clothes-shop in a back street. and her 
gloves--they were black kid, wrinkl with much wear, fade to a bluish 
hue at the finger-tips, which show sign of pain mending. her hair, 
plaster over her forehead, look dull and colourless, though some 
greasi matter had evid been use with a view of produc a 
becom gloss, and on it perch an antiqu bonnet, adorn with black 
pendant that rattl paralyt one against the other. 

and there wa noth in mrs. nixon' face to correspond with the 
imaginari pictur that darnel had made of her. she wa sallow, 
wrinkled, pinched; her nose ran to a sharp point, and her red-rim 
eye were a queer water-grey, that seem to shrink alik from the light 
and from encount with the eye of others. As she sat besid hi wife 
on the green garden-seat, darnell, who occupi a wicker-chair brought 
out from the drawing-room, could not help feel that thi shadowi and 
evas figure, mutter repli to mary' polit questions, wa almost 
imposs remot from hi concept of the rich and power aunt, 
who could give away a hundr pound as a mere birthday gift. she would 
say littl at first; yes, she wa feel rather tired, it had been so 
hot all the way, and she had been afraid to put on lighter thing as 
one never knew at thi time of year what it might be like in the 
evenings; there were apt to be cold mist when the sun went down, and 
she didn't care to risk bronchitis. 

'I thought I should never get here,' she went on, rais her voic to 
an odd querul pipe. 'i'd no notion it wa such an out-of-the-way 
place, it' so mani year sinc I wa in thi neighbourhood.' 

she wipe her eyes, no doubt think of the earli day at turnham 
green, when she marri nixon; and when the pocket-handkerchief had done 
it offic she replac it in a shabbi black bag which she clutch 
rather than carried. darnel noticed, as he watch her, that the bag 
seem full, almost to bursting, and he specul idli as to the natur 
of it contents: correspondence, perhaps, he thought, further proof of 
uncl robert' treacher and wick dealings. He grew quit 
uncomfortable, as he sat and saw her glanc all the while furtiv 
away from hi wife and himself, and present he got up and stroll 
away to the other end of the garden, where he lit hi pipe and walk to 
and fro on the gravel walk, still astound at the gulf between the real 
and the imagin woman. 

present he heard a hiss whisper, and he saw mrs. nixon' head 
inclin to hi wife's. mari rose and came toward him. 

'would you mind sit in the drawing-room, edward?' she murmured. 
'aunt say she can't bring herself to discuss such a delic matter 
befor you. I dare say it' quit natural.' 

'veri well, but I don't think i'll go into the drawing-room. I feel as 
if a walk would do me good. you mustn't be frighten if I am a littl 
late,' he said; 'if I don't get back befor your aunt goes, say good-by 
to her for me.' 

He stroll into the main road, where the tram were hum to and fro. 
He wa still confus and perplexed, and he tri to account for a 
certain relief he felt in remov himself from the presenc of mrs. 
nixon. He told himself that her grief at her husband' ruffianli conduct 
wa worthi of all piti respect, but at the same time, to hi shame, 
he had felt a certain physic avers from her as she sat in hi 
garden in her dingi black, dab her red-rim eye with a damp 
pocket-handkerchief. He had been to the zoo when he wa a lad, and he 
still rememb how he had shrunk with horror at the sight of certain 
reptil slowli crawl over one anoth in their slimi pond. but he 
wa enrag at the similar between the two sensations, and he walk 
briskli on that level and monoton road, look about him at the 
unhandsom spectacl of suburban london keep sunday. 

there wa someth in the ting of antiqu which still exist in 
acton that sooth hi mind and drew it away from those unpleas 
contemplations, and when at last he had penetr rampart after rampart 
of brick, and heard no more the harsh shriek and laughter of the peopl 
who were enjoy themselves, he found a way into a littl shelter 
field, and sat down in peac beneath a tree, whenc he could look out on 
a pleasant valley. the sun sank down beneath the hills, the cloud 
chang into the like of blossom rose-gardens; and he still sat 
there in the gather dark till a cool breez blew upon him, and 
he rose with a sigh, and turn back to the brick rampart and the 
glimmer streets, and the noisi idler saunter to and fro in the 
process of their dismal festival. but he wa murmur to himself 
some word that seem a magic song, and it wa with uplift heart that 
he let himself into hi house. 

mrs. nixon had gone an hour and a half befor hi return, mari told him. 
darnel sigh with relief, and he and hi wife stroll out into the 
garden and sat down side by side. 

they kept silenc for a time, and at last mari spoke, not without a 
nervou tremor in her voice. 

'I must tell you, edward,' she began, 'that aunt ha made a propos 
which you ought to hear. I think we should consid it.' 

'A proposal? but how about the whole affair? Is it still go on?' 

'oh, yes! she told me all about it. uncl is quit unrepentant. It seem 
he ha taken a flat somewher in town for that woman, and furnish it 
in the most costli manner. He simpli laugh at aunt' reproaches, and 
say he mean to have some fun at last. you saw how broken she was?' 

'yes; veri sad. but won't he give her ani money? wasn't she veri badli 
dress for a woman in her position?' 

'aunt ha no end of beauti things, but I fanci she like to hoard 
them; she ha a horror of spoil her dresses. It isn't for want of 
money, I assur you, as uncl settl a veri larg sum on her two year 
ago, when he wa everyth that could be desir as a husband. and that 
bring me to what I want to say. aunt would like to live with us. she 
would pay veri liberally. what do you say?' 

'would like to live with us?' exclaim darnell, and hi pipe drop 
from hi hand on to the grass. He wa stupefi by the thought of aunt 
marian as a boarder, and sat stare vacantli befor him, wonder what 
new monster the night would next produce. 

'I knew you wouldn't much like the idea,' hi wife went on. 'but I do 
think, dearest, that we ought not to refus without veri seriou 
consideration. I am afraid you did not take to poor aunt veri much.' 

darnel shook hi head dumbly. 

'I thought you didn't; she wa so upset, poor thing, and you didn't see 
her at her best. she is realli so good. but listen to me, dear. Do you 
think we have the right to refus her offer? I told you she ha money of 
her own, and I am sure she would be dread offend if we said we 
wouldn't have her. and what would becom of me if anyth happen to 
you? you know we have veri littl saved.' 

darnel groaned. 

'it seem to me,' he said, 'that it would spoil everything. We are so 
happy, mari dear, by ourselves. Of cours I am extrem sorri for your 
aunt. I think she is veri much to be pitied. but when it come to have 
her alway here----' 

'I know, dear. don't think I am look forward to the prospect; you 
know I don't want anybodi but you. still, we ought to think of the 
future, and besid we shall be abl to live so veri much better. I 
shall be abl to give you all sort of nice thing that I know you ought 
to have after all that hard work in the city. our incom would be 
doubled.' 

'do you mean she would pay us £150 a year?' 

'certainly. and she would pay for the spare room be furnished, and 
ani extra she might want. she told me, specially, that if a friend or 
two came now and again to see her, she would gladli bear the cost of a 
fire in the drawing-room, and give someth toward the ga bill, with 
a few shill for the girl for ani addit trouble. We should 
certainli be more than twice as well off as we are now. you see, edward, 
dear, it' not the sort of offer we are like to have again. besides, 
we must think of the future, as I said. Do you know aunt took a great 
fanci to you?' 

He shudder and said nothing, and hi wife went on with her argument. 

'and, you see, it isn't as if we should see so veri much of her. she 
will have her breakfast in bed, and she told me she would often go up to 
her room in the even directli after dinner. I thought that veri nice 
and considerate. she quit understand that we shouldn't like to have a 
third person alway with us. don't you think, edward, that, consid 
everything, we ought to say we will have her?' 

'oh, I suppos so,' he groaned. 'a you say, it' a veri good offer, 
financially, and I am afraid it would be veri imprud to refuse. but I 
don't like the notion, I confess.' 

'I am so glad you agre with me, dear. depend upon it, it won't be half 
so bad as you think. and put our own advantag on one side, we shall 
realli be do poor aunt a veri great kindness. poor old dear, she 
cri bitterli after you were gone; she said she had made up her mind 
not to stay ani longer in uncl robert' house, and she didn't know 
where to go, or what would becom of her, if we refus to take her in. 
she quit broke down.' 

'well, well; we will tri it for a year, anyhow. It may be as you say; we 
shan't find it quit so bad as it seem now. shall we go in?' 

He stoop for hi pipe, which lay as it had fallen, on the grass. He 
could not find it, and lit a wax match which show him the pipe, and 
close besid it, under the seat, someth that look like a page torn 
from a book. He wonder what it could be, and pick it up. 

the ga wa lit in the drawing-room, and mrs. darnell, who wa arrang 
some notepaper, wish to write at onc to mrs. nixon, cordial 
accept her proposal, when she wa startl by an exclam from her 
husband. 

'what is the matter?' she said, startl by the tone of hi voice. 'you 
haven't hurt yourself?' 

'look at this,' he replied, hand her a small leaflet; 'I found it 
under the garden seat just now.' 

mari glanc with bewilder at her husband and read as follows:-- 

the new and chosen seed OF abraham 

propheci TO BE fulfil IN the present year 

1. the sail of a fleet of one hundr and forti and four vessel 
for tarshish and the isles. 

2. destruct of the power of the dog, includ all the 
instrument of anti-abraham legislation. 

3. return of the fleet from tarshish, bear with it the gold of 
arabia, destin to be the foundat of the new citi of abraham. 

4. the search for the bride, and the bestow of the seal on the 
seventi and seven. 

5. the counten of father to becom luminous, but with a greater 
glori than the face of moses. 

6. the pope of rome to be stone with stone in the valley call 
berek-zittor. 

7. father to be acknowledg by three great rulers. two great ruler 
will deni father, and will immedi perish in the effluvia of 
father' indignation. 

8. bind of the beast with the littl horn, and all judg cast 
down. 

9. find of the bride in the land of egypt, which ha been 
reveal to father as now exist in the western part of london. 

10. bestow of the new tongu on the seventi and seven, and on the 
one hundr and forti and four. father proce to the bridal 
chamber. 

11. destruct of london and rebuild of the citi call no, 
which is the new citi of abraham. 

12. father unit to the bride, and the present earth remov to the 
sun for the space of half an hour. 

mrs. darnell' brow clear as she read matter which seem to her 
harmless if incoherent. from her husband' voic she had been led to 
fear someth more tangibl unpleas than a vagu catena of 
prophecies. 

'well,' she said, 'what about it?' 

'what about it? don't you see that your aunt drop it, and that she 
must be a rage lunatic?' 

'oh, edward! don't say that. In the first place, how do you know that 
aunt drop it at all? It might easili have blown over from ani of the 
other gardens. and, if it were hers, I don't think you should call her a 
lunatic. I don't believe, myself, that there are ani real prophet now; 
but there are mani good peopl who think quit differently. I knew an 
old ladi onc who, I am sure, wa veri good, and she took in a paper 
everi week that wa full of propheci and thing veri like this. nobodi 
call her mad, and I have heard father say that she had one of the 
sharpest head for busi he had ever come across.' 

'veri good; have it as you like. but I believ we shall both be sorry.' 

they sat in silenc for some time. alic came in after her 'even 
out,' and they sat on, till mrs. darnel said she wa tire and want 
to go to bed. 

her husband kiss her. 'I don't think I will come up just yet,' he 
said; 'you go to sleep, dearest. I want to think thing over. no, no; I 
am not go to chang my mind: your aunt shall come, as I said. but 
there are one or two thing I should like to get settl in my mind.' 

He medit for a long while, pace up and down the room. light after 
light wa extinguish in edna road, and the peopl of the suburb slept 
all around him, but still the ga wa alight in darnell' drawing-room, 
and he walk softli up and down the floor. He wa think that about 
the life of mari and himself, which had been so quiet, there seem to 
be gather on all side grotesqu and fantast shapes, omen of 
confus and disorder, threat of madness; a strang compani from 
anoth world. It wa as if into the quiet, sleep street of some 
littl ancient town among the hill there had come from afar the sound 
of drum and pipe, snatch of wild song, and there had burst into the 
market-plac the mad compani of the players, strang bedizened, 
danc a furiou measur to their hurri music, draw forth the 
citizen from their shelter home and peac lives, and allur 
them to mingl in the signific figur of their dance. 

yet afar and near (for it wa hidden in hi heart) he beheld the glimmer 
of a sure and constant star. beneath, dark came on, and mist and 
shadow close about the town. the red, flicker flame of torch wa 
kindl in the midst of it. the song grew louder, with more insistent, 
magic tones, surg and fall in unearthli modulations, the veri 
speech of incantation; and the drum beat madly, and the pipe shrill to 
a scream, summon all to issu forth, to leav their peac hearths; 
for a strang rite wa precon in their midst. the street that were 
wont to be so still, so hush with the cool and tranquil veil of 
darkness, asleep beneath the patronag of the even star, now danc 
with glimmer lanterns, resound with the cri of those who hurri 
forth, drawn as by a magistr spell; and the song swell and 
triumphed, the reverber beat of the drum grew louder, and in the 
midst of the awaken town the players, fantast arrayed, perform 
their interlud under the red blaze of torches. He knew not whether they 
were players, men that would vanish suddenli as they came, disappear 
by the track that climb the hill; or whether they were inde 
magicians, worker of great and efficaci spells, who knew the secret 
word by which the earth may be transform into the hall of gehenna, so 
that they that gaze and listened, as at a pass spectacle, should be 
entrap by the sound and the sight present to them, should be drawn 
into the elabor figur of that mystic dance, and so should be 
whirl away into those unend maze on the wild hill that were 
abhorred, there to wander for evermore. 

but darnel wa not afraid, becaus of the daystar that had risen in hi 
heart. It had dwelt there all hi life, and had slowli shone forth with 
clearer and clearer light, and he began to see that though hi earthli 
step might be in the way of the ancient town that wa beset by the 
enchanters, and resound with their song and their processions, yet he 
dwelt also in that seren and secur world of brightness, and from a 
great and unutter height look on the confus of the mortal 
pageant, behold mysteri in which he wa no true actor, hear 
magic song that could by no mean draw him down from the battlement of 
the high and holi city. 

hi heart wa fill with a great joy and a great peac as he lay down 
besid hi wife and fell asleep, and in the morning, when he woke up, he 
wa glad. 


IV 

In a haze as of a dream darnell' thought seem to move through the 
open day of the next week. perhap natur had not intend that he 
should be practic or much given to that which is usual call 'sound 
common sense,' but hi train had made him desir of good, plain 
qualiti of the mind, and he uneasili strove to account to himself for 
hi strang mood of the sunday night, as he had often endeavour to 
interpret the fanci of hi boyhood and earli manhood. At first he wa 
annoy by hi want of success; the morn paper, which he alway 
secur as the 'bu delay at uxbridg road station, fell from hi 
hand unread, while he vainli reasoned, assur himself that the 
threaten incurs of a whimsic old woman, though tiresom enough, 
wa no ration excus for those curiou hour of medit in which 
hi thought seem to have dress themselv in unfamiliar, fantast 
habits, and to parley with him in a strang speech, and yet a speech 
that he had understood. 

with such argument he perplex hi mind on the long, accustom ride 
up the steep ascent of holland park, past the incongru hustl of 
not hill gate, where in one direct a road show the way to the 
snug, somewhat fade bower and retreat of bayswater, and in anoth 
one see the portal of the murki region of the slums. the customari 
companion of hi morning' journey were in the seat about him; he 
heard the hum of their talk, as they disput concern politics, and 
the man next to him, who came from acton, ask him what he thought of 
the govern now. there wa a discussion, and a loud and excit one, 
just in front, as to whether rhubarb wa a fruit or vegetable, and in 
hi ear he heard redman, who wa a near neighbour, prais the economi 
of 'the wife.' 

'I don't know how she doe it. look here; what do you think we had 
yesterday? breakfast: fish-cakes, beauti fried--rich, you know, 
lot of herbs, it' a receipt of her aunt's; you should just tast 'em. 
coffee, bread, butter, marmalade, and, of course, all the usual 
etceteras. dinner: roast beef, yorkshire, potatoes, greens, and 
horse-radish sauce, plum tart, cheese. and where will you get a better 
dinner than that? well, I call it wonderful, I realli do.' 

but in spite of these distract he fell into a dream as the 'bu 
roll and toss on it way citywards, and still he strove to solv the 
enigma of hi vigil of the night before, and as the shape of tree and 
green lawn and hous pass befor hi eyes, and as he saw the 
process move on the pavement, and while the murmur of the street 
sound in hi ears, all wa to him strang and unaccustomed, as if he 
move through the avenu of some citi in a foreign land. It was, 
perhaps, on these mornings, as he rode to hi mechan work, that 
vagu and float fanci that must have long haunt hi brain began 
to shape themselves, and to put on the form of definit conclusions, 
from which he could no longer escape, even if he had wish it. darnel 
had receiv what is call a sound commerci education, and would 
therefor have found veri great difficulti in put into articul 
speech ani thought that wa worth thinking; but he grew certain on these 
morn that the 'common sense' which he had alway heard exalt as 
man' supremest faculti was, in all probability, the smallest and 
least-consid item in the equip of an ant of averag 
intelligence. and with this, as an almost necessari corollary, came a 
firm belief that the whole fabric of life in which he move wa sunken, 
past all thinking, in the grossest absurdity; that he and all hi 
friend and acquaint and fellow-work were interest in matter 
in which men were never meant to be interested, were pursu aim which 
they were never meant to pursue, were, indeed, much like fair stone of 
an altar serv as a pigsti wall. life, it seem to him, wa a great 
search for--h knew not what; and in the process of the age one by one 
the true mark upon the way had been shattered, or buried, or the 
mean of the word had been slowli forgotten; one by one the sign had 
been turn awry, the true entranc had been thickli overgrown, the 
veri way itself had been divert from the height to the depths, till 
at last the race of pilgrim had becom hereditari stone-break and 
ditch-scour on a track that led to destruction--if it led anywher at 
all. darnell' heart thrill with a strang and trembl joy, with a 
sens that wa all new, when it came to hi mind that thi great loss 
might not be a hopeless one, that perhap the difficulti were by no 
mean insuperable. It might be, he considered, that the stone-break 
had mere to throw down hi hammer and set out, and the way would be 
plain befor him; and a singl step would free the delver in rubbish 
from the foul slime of the ditch. 

It was, of course, with difficulti and slowli that these thing becam 
clear to him. He wa an english citi clerk, 'flourishing' toward the 
end of the nineteenth century, and the rubbish heap that had been 
accumul for some centuri could not be clear away in an instant. 
again and again the spirit of nonsens that had been implant in him as 
in hi fellow assur him that the true world wa the visibl and 
tangibl world, the world in which good and faith letter-copi wa 
exchang for a certain quantum of bread, beef, and house-room, and 
that the man who copi letter well, did not beat hi wife, nor lose 
money foolishly, wa a good man, fulfil the end for which he had 
been made. but in spite of these arguments, in spite of their accept 
by all who were about him, he had the grace to perceiv the utter 
falsiti and absurd of the whole position. He wa fortun in hi 
entir ignor of sixpenni 'science,' but if the whole librari had 
been project into hi brain it would not have move him to 'deni in 
the dark that which he had known in the light.' darnel knew by 
experi that man is made a mysteri for mysteri and visions, for the 
realiz in hi conscious of ineff bliss, for a great joy 
that transmut the whole world, for a joy that surpass all joy and 
overcom all sorrows. He knew thi certainly, though he knew it dimly; 
and he wa apart from other men, prepar himself for a great 
experiment. 

with such thought as these for hi secret and conceal treasure, he 
wa abl to bear the threaten invas of mrs. nixon with someth 
approach indifference. He knew, indeed, that her presenc between 
hi wife and himself would be unwelcom to him, and he wa not without 
grave doubt as to the woman' sanity; but after all, what did it 
matter? besides, alreadi a faint glimmer light had risen within him 
that show the profit of self-negation, and in thi matter he had 
prefer hi wife' will to hi own. _et non sua poma_; to hi 
astonish he found a delight in deni himself hi own wish, a 
process that he had alway regard as thoroughli detestable. thi wa a 
state of thing which he could not in the least understand; but, again, 
though a member of a most hopeless class, live in the most hopeless 
surround that the world ha ever seen, though he knew as much of the 
_askesis_ as of chines metaphysics; again, he had the grace not to deni 
the light that had begun to glimmer in hi soul. 

and he found a present reward in the eye of mary, when she welcom him 
home after hi foolish labour in the cool of the evening. they sat 
together, hand in hand, under the mulberri tree, at the come of the 
dusk, and as the ugli wall about them becam obscur and vanish into 
the formless world of shadows, they seem to be freed from the bondag 
of shepherd' bush, freed to wander in that undisfigured, undefil 
world that lie beyond the walls. Of thi region mari knew littl or 
noth by experience, sinc her relat had alway been of one mind 
with the modern world, which ha for the true countri an instinct and 
most signific horror and dread. mr. reynold had also share in 
anoth odd superstit of these later days--that it is necessari to 
leav london at least onc a year; consequ mari had some knowledg 
of variou seasid resort on the south and east coasts, where 
london gather in hordes, turn the sand into one vast, bad 
music-hall, and derive, as they say, enorm benefit from the change. 
but experi such as these give but littl knowledg of the countri 
in it true and occult sense; and yet mary, as she sat in the dusk 
beneath the whisper tree, knew someth of the secret of the wood, 
of the valley shut in by high hills, where the sound of pour water 
alway echo from the clear brook. and to darnel these were night of 
great dreams; for it wa the hour of the work, the time of 
transmutation, and he who could not understand the miracle, who could 
scarc believ in it, yet knew, secretli and half consciously, that 
the water wa be chang into the wine of a new life. thi wa ever 
the inner music of hi dreams, and to it he ad on these still and 
sacr night the far-off memori of that time long ago when, a child, 
befor the world had overwhelm him, he journey down to the old grey 
hous in the west, and for a whole month heard the murmur of the forest 
through hi bedroom window, and when the wind wa hushed, the wash of 
the tide about the reeds; and sometim awak veri earli he had heard 
the strang cri of a bird as it rose from it nest among the reeds, and 
had look out and had seen the valley whiten to the dawn, and the 
wind river whiten as it swam down to the sea. the memori of all thi 
had fade and becom shadowi as he grew older and the chain of common 
life were rivet firmli about hi soul; all the atmospher by which he 
wa surround wa well-nigh fatal to such thoughts, and onli now and 
again in half-consci moment or in sleep he had revisit that valley 
in the far-off west, where the breath of the wind wa an incantation, 
and everi leaf and stream and hill spoke of great and ineff 
mysteries. but now the broken vision wa in great part restor to him, 
and look with love in hi wife' eye he saw the gleam of water-pool 
in the still forest, saw the mist rise in the evening, and heard the 
music of the wind river. 

they were sit thu togeth on the friday even of the week that 
had begun with that odd and half-forgotten visit of mrs. nixon, when, to 
darnell' annoyance, the door-bel gave a discord peal, and alic 
with some disturb of manner came out and announc that a gentleman 
wish to see the master. darnel went into the drawing-room, where 
alic had lit one ga so that it flare and burnt with a rush sound, 
and in thi distort light there wait a stout, elderli gentleman, 
whose counten wa altogeth unknown to him. He stare blankly, and 
hesitated, about to speak, but the visitor began. 

'you don't know who I am, but I expect you'll know my name. it' nixon.' 

He did not wait to be interrupted. He sat down and plung into 
narrative, and after the first few words, darnell, whose mind wa not 
altogeth unprepared, listen without much astonishment. 

'and the long and the short of it is,' mr. nixon said at last, 'she' 
gone stark, stare mad, and we had to put her away to-day--poor thing.' 

hi voic broke a little, and he wipe hi eye hastily, for though 
stout and success he wa not unfeeling, and he wa fond of hi wife. 
He had spoken quickly, and had gone lightli over mani detail which 
might have interest specialist in certain kind of mania, and 
darnel wa sorri for hi evid distress. 

'I came here,' he went on after a brief pause, 'becaus I found out she 
had been to see you last sunday, and I knew the sort of stori she must 
have told.' 

darnel show him the prophet leaflet which mrs. nixon had drop in 
the garden. 'did you know about this?' he said. 

'oh, _him_,' said the old man, with some approach to cheerfulness; 'oh 
yes, I thrash _him_ black and blue the day befor yesterday.' 

'isn't he mad? who is the man?' 

'he' not mad, he' bad. he' a littl welsh skunk name richards. he' 
been run some sort of chapel over at new barnet for the last few 
years, and my poor wife--sh never could find the parish church good 
enough for her--had been go to hi damn schism shop for the last 
twelve-month. It wa all that finish her off. yes; I thrash _him_ 
the day befor yesterday, and i'm not afraid of a summon either. I know 
him, and he know I know him.' 

old nixon whisper someth in darnell' ear, and chuckl faintli as 
he repeat for the third time hi formula-- 

'I thrash _him_ black and blue the day befor yesterday.' 

darnel could onli murmur condol and express hi hope that mrs. 
nixon might recover. 

the old man shook hi head. 

'i'm afraid there' no hope of that,' he said. 'i'v had the best 
advice, but they couldn't do anything, and told me so.' 

present he ask to see hi niece, and darnel went out and prepar 
mari as well as he could. she could scarc take in the news that her 
aunt wa a hopeless maniac, for mrs. nixon, have been extrem stupid 
all her days, had natur succeed in pass with her relat as 
typic sensible. with the reynold family, as with the great major 
of us, want of imagin is alway equat with sanity, and though 
mani of us have never heard of lombroso we are hi ready-mad converts. 
We have alway believ that poet are mad, and if statist 
unfortun show that few poet have realli been inhabit of 
lunat asylums, it is sooth to learn that nearli all poet have had 
whooping-cough, which is doubtless, like intoxication, a minor madness. 

'but is it realli true?' she ask at length. 'are you certain uncl is 
not deceiv you? aunt seem so sensibl always.' 

she wa help at last by recollect that aunt marian use to get up 
veri earli of mornings, and then they went into the drawing-room and 
talk to the old man. hi evid kindli and honesti grew upon 
mary, in spite of a linger belief in her aunt' fables, and when he 
left, it wa with a promis to come to see them again. 

mrs. darnel said she felt tired, and went to bed; and darnel return 
to the garden and began to pace to and fro, collect hi thoughts. hi 
immeasur relief at the intellig that, after all, mrs. nixon wa 
not come to live with them taught him that, despit hi submission, 
hi dread of the event had been veri great. the weight wa removed, and 
now he wa free to consid hi life without refer to the grotesqu 
intrus that he had feared. He sigh for joy, and as he pace to and 
fro he savour the scent of the night, which, though it came faintli 
to him in that brick-bound suburb, summon to hi mind across mani 
year the odour of the world at night as he had known it in that short 
sojourn of hi boyhood; the odour that rose from the earth when the 
flame of the sun had gone down beyond the mountain, and the afterglow 
had pale in the sky and on the fields. and as he recov as best he 
could these lost dream of an enchant land, there came to him other 
imag of hi childhood, forgotten and yet not forgotten, dwell 
unheed in dark place of the memory, but readi to be summon forth. 
He rememb one fantasi that had long haunt him. As he lay half 
asleep in the forest on one hot afternoon of that memor visit to the 
country, he had 'made believe' that a littl companion had come to him 
out of the blue mist and the green light beneath the leaves--a white 
girl with long black hair, who had play with him and whisper her 
secret in hi ear, as hi father lay sleep under a tree; and from 
that summer afternoon, day by day, she had been besid him; she had 
visit him in the wilder of london, and even in recent year there 
had come to him now and again the sens of her presence, in the midst of 
the heat and turmoil of the city. the last visit he rememb well; it 
wa a few week befor he married, and from the depth of some futil 
task he had look up with puzzl eyes, wonder whi the close air 
suddenli grew scent with green leaves, whi the murmur of the tree and 
the wash of the river on the reed came to hi ears; and then that 
sudden raptur to which he had given a name and an individu 
possess him utterly. He knew then how the dull flesh of man can be 
like fire; and now, look back from a new standpoint on thi and 
other experiences, he realiz how all that wa real in hi life had 
been unwelcomed, uncherish by him, had come to him, perhaps, in virtu 
of mere neg qualiti on hi part. and yet, as he reflected, he 
saw that there had been a chain of wit all through hi life: again 
and again voic had whisper in hi ear word in a strang languag 
that he now recogn as hi nativ tongue; the common street had not 
been lack in vision of the true land of hi birth; and in all the 
pass and repass of the world he saw that there had been emissari 
readi to guid hi feet on the way of the great journey. 

A week or two after the visit of mr. nixon, darnel took hi annual 
holiday. 

there wa no question of walton-on-the-naze, or of anyth of the kind, 
as he quit agre with hi wife' long for some substanti sum put 
by against the evil day. but the weather wa still fine, and he loung 
away the time in hi garden beneath the tree, or he saunter out on 
long aimless walk in the western purlieu of london, not unvisit by 
that old sens of some great ineff beauty, conceal by the dim and 
dingi veil of grey intermin streets. once, on a day of heavi rain 
he went to the 'box-room,' and began to turn over the paper in the old 
hair trunk--scrap and odd and end of famili history, some of them in 
hi father' handwriting, other in fade ink, and there were a few 
ancient pocket-books, fill with manuscript of a still earlier time, 
and in these the ink wa glossier and blacker than ani write fluid 
suppli by station of later days. darnel had hung up the portrait 
of the ancestor in thi room, and had bought a solid kitchen tabl and 
a chair; so that mrs. darnell, see him look over hi old 
documents, half thought of name the room 'mr. darnell' study.' He had 
not glanc at these relic of hi famili for mani years, but from the 
hour when the raini morn sent him to them, he remain constant to 
research till the end of the holidays. It wa a new interest, and he 
began to fashion in hi mind a faint pictur of hi forefathers, and of 
their life in that grey old hous in the river valley, in the western 
land of well and stream and dark and ancient woods. and there were 
stranger thing than mere note on famili histori amongst that odd 
litter of old disregard papers, and when he went back to hi work in 
the citi some of the men fanci that he wa in some vagu manner 
chang in appearance; but he onli laugh when they ask him where he 
had been and what he had been do with himself. but mari notic that 
everi even he spent at least an hour in the box-room; she wa rather 
sorri at the wast of time involv in read old paper about dead 
people. and one afternoon, as they were out togeth on a somewhat 
dreari walk toward acton, darnel stop at a hopeless second-hand 
bookshop, and after scan the row of shabbi book in the window, 
went in and purchas two volumes. they prove to be a latin dictionari 
and grammar, and she wa surpris to hear her husband declar hi 
intent of acquir the latin language. 

but, indeed, all hi conduct impress her as indefin altered; and 
she began to be a littl alarmed, though she could scarc have form 
her fear in words. but she knew that in some way that wa all 
indefin and beyond the grasp of her thought their live had alter 
sinc the summer, and no singl thing wore quit the same aspect as 
before. If she look out into the dull street with it rare loiterers, 
it wa the same and yet it had altered, and if she open the window in 
the earli morn the wind that enter came with a chang breath that 
spoke some messag that she could not understand. and day by day pass 
by in the old course, and not even the four wall were altogeth 
familiar, and the voic of men and women sound with strang notes, 
with the echo, rather, of a music that came over unknown hills. and day 
by day as she went about her household work, pass from shop to shop 
in those dull street that were a network, a fatal labyrinth of grey 
desol on everi side, there came to her sens half-seen imag of 
some other world, as if she walk in a dream, and everi moment must 
bring her to light and to awakening, when the grey should fade, and 
region long desir should appear in glory. again and again it seem 
as if that which wa hidden would be shown even to the sluggish 
testimoni of sense; and as she went to and fro from street to street of 
that dim and weari suburb, and look on those grey materi walls, they 
seem as if a light glow behind them, and again and again the mystic 
fragranc of incens wa blown to her nostril from across the verg of 
that world which is not so much impenetr as ineffable, and to her 
ear came the dream of a chant that spoke of hidden choir about all her 
ways. she struggl against these impressions, refus her assent to 
the testimoni of them, sinc all the pressur of credit opinion for 
three hundr year ha been direct toward stamp out real 
knowledge, and so effectu ha thi been accomplish that we can 
onli recov the truth through much anguish. and so mari pass the day 
in a strang perturbation, cling to common thing and common 
thoughts, as if she fear that one morn she would wake up in an 
unknown world to a chang life. and edward darnel went day by day to 
hi labour and return in the evening, alway with that shine of 
light within hi eye and upon hi face, with the gaze of wonder that 
wa greater day by day, as if for him the veil grew thin and soon would 
disappear. 

from these great matter both in herself and in her husband mari shrank 
back, afraid, perhaps, that if she began the question the answer might 
be too wonderful. she rather taught herself to be troubl over littl 
things; she ask herself what attract there could be in the old 
record over which she suppos edward to be pore night after night in 
the cold room upstairs. she had glanc over the paper at darnell' 
invitation, and could see but littl interest in them; there were one or 
two sketches, roughli done in pen and ink, of the old hous in the west: 
it look a shapeless and fantast place, furnish with strang 
pillar and stranger ornament on the project porch; and on one side 
a roof dip down almost to the earth, and in the centr there wa 
someth that might almost be a tower rise abov the rest of the 
building. then there were document that seem all name and dates, 
with here and there a coat of arm done in the margin, and she came upon 
a string of uncouth welsh name link togeth by the word 'ap' in a 
chain that look endless. there wa a paper cover with sign and 
figur that meant noth to her, and then there were the pocket-books, 
full of old-fashion writing, and much of it in latin, as her husband 
told her--it wa a collect as void of signific as a treatis on 
conic sections, so far as mari wa concerned. but night after night 
darnel shut himself up with the musti rolls, and more than ever when he 
rejoin her he bore upon hi face the blazonri of some great adventure. 
and one night she ask him what interest him so much in the paper he 
had shown her. 

He wa delight with the question. somehow they had not talk much 
togeth for the last few weeks, and he began to tell her of the record 
of the old race from which he came, of the old strang hous of grey 
stone between the forest and the river. the famili went back and back, 
he said, far into the dim past, beyond the normans, beyond the saxons, 
far into the roman days, and for mani hundr year they had been petti 
kings, with a strong fortress high up on the hill, in the heart of the 
forest; and even now the great mound remained, whenc one could look 
through the tree toward the mountain on one side and across the yellow 
sea on the other. the real name of the famili wa not darnell; that wa 
assum by one iolo ap taliesin ap iorwerth in the sixteenth 
century--why, darnel did not seem to understand. and then he told her 
how the race had dwindl in prosperity, centuri by century, till at 
last there wa noth left but the grey hous and a few acr of land 
border the river. 

'and do you know, mary,' he said, 'I suppos we shall go and live there 
some day or other. My great-uncle, who ha the place now, made money in 
busi when he wa a young man, and I believ he will leav it all to 
me. I know I am the onli relat he has. how strang it would be. what 
a chang from the life here.' 

'you never told me that. don't you think your great-uncl might leav 
hi hous and hi money to somebodi he know realli well? you haven't 
seen him sinc you were a littl boy, have you?' 

'no; but we write onc a year. and from what I have heard my father say, 
I am sure the old man would never leav the hous out of the family. Do 
you think you would like it?' 

'I don't know. isn't it veri lonely?' 

'I suppos it is. I forget whether there are ani other hous in sight, 
but I don't think there are ani at all near. but what a change! No city, 
no streets, no peopl pass to and fro; onli the sound of the wind and 
the sight of the green leav and the green hills, and the song of the 
voic of the earth.'... He check himself suddenly, as if he fear 
that he wa about to tell some secret that must not yet be uttered; and 
indeed, as he spoke of the chang from the littl street in shepherd' 
bush to that ancient hous in the wood of the far west, a chang seem 
alreadi to possess himself, and hi voic put on the modul of an 
antiqu chant. mari look at him steadili and touch hi arm, and he 
drew a long breath befor he spoke again. 

'it is the old blood call to the old land,' he said. 'I wa 
forget that I am a clerk in the city.' 

It was, doubtless, the old blood that had suddenli stir in him; the 
resurrect of the old spirit that for mani centuri had been 
faith to secret that are now disregard by most of us, that now day 
by day wa quicken more and more in hi heart, and grew so strong that 
it wa hard to conceal. He wa inde almost in the posit of the man 
in the tale, who, by a sudden electr shock, lost the vision of the 
thing about him in the london streets, and gaze instead upon the sea 
and shore of an island in the antipodes; for darnel onli clung with an 
effort to the interest and the atmospher which, till lately, had 
seem all the world to him; and the grey hous and the wood and the 
river, symbol of the other sphere, intrud as it were into the 
landscap of the london suburb. 

but he went on, with more restraint, tell hi stori of far-off 
ancestors, how one of them, the most remot of all, wa call a saint, 
and wa suppos to possess certain mysteri secret often allud to 
in the paper as the 'hidden song of iolo sant.' and then with an 
abrupt transit he recal memori of hi father and of the strange, 
shiftless life in dingi lodg in the backwat of london, of the dim 
stucco street that were hi first recollections, of forgotten squar 
in north london, and of the figur of hi father, a grave beard man 
who seem alway in a dream, as if he too sought for the vision of a 
land beyond the strong walls, a land where there were deep orchard and 
mani shine hills, and fountain and water-pool gleam under the 
leav of the wood. 

'I believ my father earn hi living,' he went on, 'such a live as 
he did earn, at the record offic and the british museum. He use to 
hunt up thing for lawyer and countri parson who want old deed 
inspected. He never made much, and we were alway move from one 
lodg to another--alway to out-of-the-way place where everyth 
seem to have run to seed. We never knew our neighbours--w move too 
often for that--but my father had about half a dozen friends, elderli 
men like himself, who use to come to see us pretti often; and then, if 
there wa ani money, the lodging-hous servant would go out for beer, 
and they would sit and smoke far into the night. 

'I never knew much about these friend of his, but they all had the same 
look, the look of long for someth hidden. they talk of mysteri 
that I never understood, veri littl of their own lives, and when they 
did speak of ordinari affair one could tell that they thought such 
matter as money and the want of it were unimport trifles. when I 
grew up and went into the city, and met other young fellow and heard 
their way of talking, I wonder whether my father and hi friend were 
not a littl queer in their heads; but I know better now.' 

So night after night darnel talk to hi wife, seem to wander 
aimlessli from the dingi lodging-houses, where he had spent hi boyhood 
in the compani of hi father and the other seekers, to the old hous 
hidden in that far western valley, and the old race that had so long 
look at the set of the sun over the mountain. but in truth there 
wa one end in all that he spoke, and mari felt that beneath hi words, 
howev indiffer they might seem, there wa hidden a purpose, that 
they were to embark on a great and marvel adventure. 

So day by day the world becam more magical; day by day the work of 
separ wa be performed, the gross accid were be refin 
away. darnel neglect no instrument that might be use in the work; 
and now he neither loung at home on sunday mornings, nor did he 
accompani hi wife to the gothic blasphemi which pretend to be a 
church. they had discov a littl church of anoth fashion in a back 
street, and darnell, who had found in one of the old notebook the maxim 
_incredibilia sola credenda_, soon perceiv how high and gloriou a 
thing wa that servic at which he assisted. our stupid ancestor taught 
us that we could becom wise by studi book on 'science,' by meddl 
with test-tubes, geolog specimens, microscop preparations, and the 
like; but they who have cast off these folli know that they must read 
not 'science' books, but mass-books, and that the soul is made wise by 
the contempl of mystic ceremoni and elabor and curiou rites. 
In such thing darnel found a wonder mysteri language, which spoke 
at onc more secretli and more directli than the formal creeds; and he 
saw that, in a sense, the whole world is but a great ceremoni or 
sacrament, which teach under visibl form a hidden and transcend 
doctrine. It wa thu that he found in the ritual of the church a 
perfect imag of the world; an imag purged, exalted, and illuminate, a 
holi hous built up of shine and transluc stones, in which the 
burn torch were more signific than the wheel stars, and the 
fume incens wa a more certain token than the rise of the mist. hi 
soul went forth with the alb process in it white and solemn order, 
the mystic danc that signifi raptur and a joy abov all joys, and 
when he beheld love slain and rise again victori he knew that he 
witnessed, in a figure, the consumm of all things, the bridal of 
all bridals, the mysteri that is beyond all mysteries, accomplish from 
the foundat of the world. So day by day the hous of hi life becam 
more magical. 

and at the same time he began to guess that if in the new life there are 
new and unheard-of joys, there are also new and unheard-of dangers. In 
hi manuscript book which profess to deliv the outer sens of those 
mysteri 'hidden song of iolo sant' there wa a littl chapter that 
bore the heading: _fon sacer non in communem vsum convertendu est_, 
and by diligence, with much use of the grammar and dictionary, darnel 
wa abl to constru the by no mean complex latin of hi ancestor. the 
special book which contain the chapter in question wa one of the most 
singular in the collection, sinc it bore the titl _terra de iolo_, and 
on the surface, with an ingeni conceal of it real symbolism, it 
affect to give an account of the orchards, fields, woods, roads, 
tenements, and waterway in the possess of darnell' ancestors. here, 
then, he read of the holi well, hidden in the wistman' wood--_sylva 
sapientum_--'a fountain of abund water, which no heat of summer can 
ever dry, which no flood can ever defile, which is as a water of life, 
to them that thirst for life, a stream of cleans to them that would 
be pure, and a medicin of such heal virtu that by it, through the 
might of god and the intercess of hi saints, the most grievou 
wound are made whole.' but the water of thi well wa to be kept 
sacr perpetually, it wa not to be use for ani common purpose, nor to 
satisfi ani bodili thirst; but ever to be esteem as holy, 'even as the 
water which the priest hath hallowed.' and in the margin a comment in a 
later hand taught darnel someth of the mean of these 
prohibitions. He wa warn not to use the well of life as a mere luxuri 
of mortal life, as a new sensation, as a mean of make the insipid cup 
of everyday exist more palatable. 'for,' said the commentator, 'we 
are not call to sit as the spectat in a theatre, there to watch the 
play perform befor us, but we are rather summon to stand in the 
veri scene itself, and there fervent to enact our part in a great and 
wonder mystery.' 

darnel could quit understand the temptat that wa thu indicated. 
though he had gone but a littl way on the path, and had bare test 
the over-run of that mystic well, he wa alreadi awar of the 
enchant that wa transmut all the world about him, inform hi 
life with a strang signific and romance. london seem a citi of 
the arabian nights, and it labyrinth of street an enchant maze; it 
long avenu of light lamp were as starri systems, and it immens 
becam for him an imag of the endless universe. He could well imagin 
how pleasant it might be to linger in such a world as this, to sit apart 
and dream, behold the strang pageant play befor him; but the 
sacr well wa not for common use, it wa for the cleans of the 
soul, and the heal of the grievou wound of the spirit. there must 
be yet anoth transformation: london had becom bagdad; it must at 
last be transmut to syon, or in the phrase of one of hi old 
documents, the citi of the cup. 

and there were yet darker peril which the iolo mss. (a hi father had 
name the collection) hint at more or less obscurely. there were 
suggest of an aw region which the soul might enter, of a 
transmut that wa unto death, of evoc which could summon the 
utmost forc of evil from their dark places--in a word, of that sphere 
which is repres to most of us under the crude and somewhat childish 
symbol of black magic. and here again he wa not altogeth without a 
dim comprehens of what wa meant. He found himself recal an odd 
incid that had happen long ago, which had remain all the year in 
hi mind unheeded, amongst the mani insignific recollect of hi 
childhood, and now rose befor him, clear and distinct and full of 
meaning. It wa on that memor visit to the old hous in the west, 
and the whole scene returned, with it smallest events, and the voic 
seem to sound in hi ears. It wa a grey, still day of heavi heat that 
he remembered: he had stood on the lawn after breakfast, and wonder at 
the great peac and silenc of the world. not a leaf stir in the 
tree on the lawn, not a whisper came from the myriad leav of the 
wood; the flower gave out sweet and heavi odour as if they breath 
the dream of the summer night; and far down the valley, the wind 
river wa like dim silver under that dim and silveri sky, and the far 
hill and wood and field vanish in the mist. the still of the 
air held him as with a charm; he leant all the morn against the rail 
that part the lawn from the meadow, breath the mystic breath of 
summer, and watch the field brighten as with a sudden blossom of 
shine flower as the high mist grew thin for a moment befor the 
hidden sun. As he watch thus, a man weari with heat, with some glanc 
of horror in hi eyes, pass him on hi way to the house; but he stay 
at hi post till the old bell in the turret rang, and they dine all 
together, master and servants, in the dark cool room that look 
toward the still leav of the wood. He could see that hi uncl wa 
upset about something, and when they had finish dinner he heard him 
tell hi father that there wa troubl at a farm; and it wa settl 
that they should all drive over in the afternoon to some place with a 
strang name. but when the time came mr. darnel wa too deep in old 
book and tobacco smoke to be stir from hi corner, and edward and 
hi uncl went alon in the dog-cart. they drove swiftli down the narrow 
lane, into the road that follow the wind river, and cross the 
bridg at caermaen by the moulder roman walls, and then, skirt the 
deserted, echo village, they came out on a broad white turnpik road, 
and the limeston dust follow them like a cloud. then, suddenly, they 
turn to the north by such a road as edward had never seen before. It 
wa so narrow that there wa bare room for the cart to pass, and the 
footway wa of rock, and the bank rose high abov them as they slowli 
climb the long, steep way, and the untrim hedg on either side 
shut out the light. and the fern grew thick and green upon the banks, 
and hidden well drip down upon them; and the old man told him how 
the lane in winter wa a torrent of swirl water, so that no one 
could pass by it. On they went, ascend and then again descending, 
alway in that deep hollow under the wild woven boughs, and the boy 
wonder vainli what the countri wa like on either side. and now the 
air grew darker, and the hedg on one bank wa but the verg of a dark 
and rustl wood, and the grey limeston rock had chang to dark-r 
earth fleck with green patch and vein of marl, and suddenli in the 
still from the depth of the wood a bird began to sing a melodi that 
charm the heart into anoth world, that sang to the child' soul of 
the bless faeri realm beyond the wood of the earth, where the wound 
of man are healed. and so at last, after mani turn and windings, 
they came to a high bare land where the lane broaden out into a kind 
of common, and along the edg of thi place there were scatter three 
or four old cottages, and one of them wa a littl tavern. here they 
stopped, and a man came out and tether the tire hors to a post and 
gave him water; and old mr. darnel took the child' hand and led him by 
a path across the fields. the boy could see the countri now, but it wa 
all a strange, undiscov land; they were in the heart of a wilder 
of hill and valley that he had never look upon, and they were go 
down a wild, steep hillside, where the narrow path wound in and out 
amidst gors and tower bracken, and the sun gleam out for a 
moment, there wa a gleam of white water far below in a narrow valley, 
where a littl brook pour and rippl from stone to stone. they went 
down the hill, and through a brake, and then, hidden in dark-green 
orchards, they came upon a long, low whitewash house, with a stone 
roof strang colour by the growth of moss and lichens. mr. darnel 
knock at a heavi oaken door, and they came into a dim room where but 
littl light enter through the thick glass in the deep-set window. 
there were heavi beam in the ceiling, and a great fireplac sent out an 
odour of burn wood that darnel never forgot, and the room seem to 
him full of women who talk all togeth in frighten tones. mr. 
darnel beckon to a tall, grey old man, who wore corduroy 
knee-breeches, and the boy, sit on a high straight-back chair, 
could see the old man and hi uncl pass to and fro across the 
window-panes, as they walk togeth on the garden path. the women 
stop their talk for a moment, and one of them brought him a glass of 
milk and an appl from some cold inner chamber; and then, suddenly, from 
a room abov there rang out a shrill and terribl shriek, and then, in a 
young girl' voice, a more terribl song. It wa not like anyth the 
child had ever heard, but as the man recal it to hi memory, he knew 
to what song it might be compared--to a certain chant inde that 
summon the angel and archangel to assist in the great sacrifice. but 
as thi song chant of the heavenli army, so did that seem to summon all 
the hierarchi of evil, the host of lilith and samael; and the word 
that rang out with such aw modulations--_neumata inferorum_--wer in 
some unknown tongu that few men have ever heard on earth. 

the women glare at one anoth with horror in their eyes, and he saw 
one or two of the oldest of them clumsili make an old sign upon their 
breasts. then they began to speak again, and he rememb fragment of 
their talk. 

'she ha been up there,' said one, point vagu over her shoulder. 

'she'd never know the way,' answer another. 'they be all gone that 
went there.' 

'there be nought there in these days.' 

'how can you tell that, gwenllian? 'ti not for us to say that.' 

'mi great-grandmoth did know some that had been there,' said a veri 
old woman. 'she told me how they wa taken afterwards.' 

and then hi uncl appear at the door, and they went their way as they 
had come. edward darnel never heard ani more of it, nor whether the 
girl die or recov from her strang attack; but the scene had 
haunt hi mind in boyhood, and now the recollect of it came to him 
with a certain note of warning, as a symbol of danger that might be in 
the way. 

* * * * * 

It would be imposs to carri on the histori of edward darnel and of 
mari hi wife to a greater length, sinc from thi point their legend is 
full of imposs events, and seem to put on the semblanc of the 
stori of the graal. It is certain, indeed, that in thi world they 
chang their lives, like king arthur, but thi is a work which no 
chronicl ha care to describ with ani amplitud of detail. darnell, 
it is true, made a littl book, partli consist of queer vers which 
might have been written by an inspir infant, and partli made up of 
'note and exclamations' in an odd dog-latin which he had pick up 
from the 'iolo mss.', but it is to be fear that thi work, even if 
publish in it entirety, would cast but littl light on a perplex 
story. He call thi piec of literatur 'in exitu israel,' and wrote 
on the titl page the motto, doubtless of hi own composition, '_nunc 
cert scio quod omnia legenda; omn historiæ, omn fabulæ, omni 
scriptura sint de ME narrata_.' It is onli too evid that hi latin 
wa not learnt at the feet of cicero; but in thi dialect he relat the 
great histori of the 'new life' as it wa manifest to him. the 'poems' 
are even stranger. one, head (with an odd reminisc of 
old-fashion books) 'line written on look down from a height in 
london on a board school suddenli lit up by the sun' begin thus:-- 

one day when I wa all alon 
I found a wondrou littl stone, 
It lay forgotten on the road 
far from the way of man' abode. 
when on thi stone mine eye I cast 
I saw my treasur found at last. 
I press it hard against my face, 
I cover it with my embrace, 
I hid it in a secret place. 
and everi day I went to see 
thi stone that wa my ecstasy; 
and worship it with flower rare, 
and secret word and say fair. 
O stone, so rare and red and wise 
O fragment of far paradise, 
O star, whose light is life! O sea, 
whose ocean is infinity! 
thou art a fire that ever burns, 
and all the world to wonder turns; 
and all the dust of the dull day 
By thee is chang and purg away, 
So that, where' I look, I see 
A world of a great majesty. 
the sullen river roll all gold, 
the desert park' a faeri wold, 
when on the tree the wind is born 
I hear the sound of arthur' horn 
I see no town of grim grey ways, 
but a great citi all ablaz 
with burn torches, to light up 
the pinnacl that shrine the cup. 
ever the magic wine is poured, 
ever the feast shine on the board, 
ever the song is born on high 
that chant the holi magistry-- 
etc. etc. etc. 

from such document as these it is clearli imposs to gather ani veri 
definit information. but on the last page darnel ha written-- 

'so I awok from a dream of a london suburb, of daili labour, of weary, 
useless littl things; and as my eye were open I saw that I wa in an 
ancient wood, where a clear well rose into grey film and vapour beneath 
a misty, glimmer heat. and a form came toward me from the hidden 
place of the wood, and my love and I were unit by the well.' 




the white peopl 


prologu 

'sorceri and sanctity,' said ambrose, 'these are the onli realities. 
each is an ecstasy, a withdraw from the common life.' 

cotgrav listened, interested. He had been brought by a friend to thi 
moulder hous in a northern suburb, through an old garden to the room 
where ambros the reclus doze and dream over hi books. 

'yes,' he went on, 'magic is justifi of her children. there are many, 
I think, who eat dri crust and drink water, with a joy infinit 
sharper than anyth within the experi of the "practical" epicure.' 

'you are speak of the saints?' 

'yes, and of the sinners, too. I think you are fall into the veri 
gener error of confin the spiritu world to the suprem good; 
but the suprem wicked, necessarily, have their portion in it. the 
mere carnal, sensual man can no more be a great sinner than he can be 
a great saint. most of us are just indifferent, mixed-up creatures; we 
muddl through the world without realiz the mean and the inner 
sens of things, and, consequently, our wicked and our good are 
alik second-rate, unimportant.' 

'and you think the great sinner, then, will be an ascetic, as well as 
the great saint?' 

'great peopl of all kind forsak the imperfect copi and go to the 
perfect originals. I have no doubt but that mani of the veri highest 
among the saint have never done a "good action" (use the word in 
their ordinari sense). and, on the other hand, there have been those who 
have sound the veri depth of sin, who all their live have never done 
an "ill deed."' 

He went out of the room for a moment, and cotgrave, in high delight, 
turn to hi friend and thank him for the introduction. 

'he' grand,' he said. 'I never saw that kind of lunat before.' 

ambros return with more whiski and help the two men in a liber 
manner. He abus the teetot sect with ferocity, as he hand the 
seltzer, and pour out a glass of water for himself, wa about to 
resum hi monologue, when cotgrav broke in-- 

'I can't stand it, you know,' he said, 'your paradox are too 
monstrous. A man may be a great sinner and yet never do anyth sinful! 
come!' 

'you'r quit wrong,' said ambrose. 'I never make paradoxes; I wish I 
could. I mere said that a man may have an exquisit tast in romané 
conti, and yet never have even smelt four ale. that' all, and it' more 
like a truism than a paradox, isn't it? your surpris at my remark is 
due to the fact that you haven't realiz what sin is. oh, yes, there is 
a sort of connexion between sin with the capit letter, and action 
which are commonli call sinful: with murder, theft, adultery, and so 
forth. much the same connexion that there is between the A, B, C and 
fine literature. but I believ that the misconception--it is all but 
universal--aris in great measur from our look at the matter 
through social spectacles. We think that a man who doe evil to _us_ and 
to hi neighbour must be veri evil. So he is, from a social standpoint; 
but can't you realiz that evil in it essenc is a lone thing, a 
passion of the solitary, individu soul? really, the averag murderer, 
_quâ_ murderer, is not by ani mean a sinner in the true sens of the 
word. He is simpli a wild beast that we have to get rid of to save our 
own neck from hi knife. I should class him rather with tiger than 
with sinners.' 

'it seem a littl strange.' 

'I think not. the murder murder not from posit qualities, but from 
neg ones; he lack someth which non-murder possess. evil, of 
course, is wholli positive--onli it is on the wrong side. you may 
believ me that sin in it proper sens is veri rare; it is probabl 
that there have been far fewer sinner than saints. yes, your standpoint 
is all veri well for practical, social purposes; we are natur 
inclin to think that a person who is veri disagre to us must be a 
veri great sinner! It is veri disagre to have one' pocket picked, 
and we pronounc the thief to be a veri great sinner. In truth, he is 
mere an undevelop man. He cannot be a saint, of course; but he may 
be, and often is, an infinit better creatur than thousand who have 
never broken a singl commandment. He is a great nuisanc to _us_, I 
admit, and we veri properli lock him up if we catch him; but between hi 
troublesom and unsoci action and evil--oh, the connexion is of the 
weakest.' 

It wa get veri late. the man who had brought cotgrav had probabl 
heard all thi before, sinc he assist with a bland and judici 
smile, but cotgrav began to think that hi 'lunatic' wa turn into a 
sage. 

'do you know,' he said, 'you interest me immensely? you think, then, 
that we do not understand the real natur of evil?' 

'no, I don't think we do. We over-estim it and we under-estim it. 
We take the veri numer infract of our social "bye-laws"--th veri 
necessari and veri proper regul which keep the human compani 
together--and we get frighten at the preval of "sin" and "evil." 
but thi is realli nonsense. take theft, for example. have you ani 
_horror_ at the thought of robin hood, of the highland cateran of the 
seventeenth century, of the moss-troopers, of the compani promot of 
our day? 

'then, on the other hand, we underr evil. We attach such an enorm 
import to the "sin" of meddl with our pocket (and our wives) 
that we have quit forgotten the aw of real sin.' 

'and what is sin?' said cotgrave. 

'I think I must repli to your question by another. what would your 
feel be, seriously, if your cat or your dog began to talk to you, 
and to disput with you in human accents? you would be overwhelm with 
horror. I am sure of it. and if the rose in your garden sang a weird 
song, you would go mad. and suppos the stone in the road began to 
swell and grow befor your eyes, and if the pebbl that you notic at 
night had shot out stoni blossom in the morning? 

'well, these exampl may give you some notion of what sin realli is.' 

'look here,' said the third man, hitherto placid, 'you two seem pretti 
well wound up. but i'm go home. i'v miss my tram, and I shall have 
to walk.' 

ambros and cotgrav seem to settl down more profoundli when the 
other had gone out into the earli misti morn and the pale light of 
the lamps. 

'you astonish me,' said cotgrave. 'I had never thought of that. If that 
is realli so, one must turn everyth upsid down. then the essenc of 
sin realli is----' 

'in the take of heaven by storm, it seem to me,' said ambrose. 'it 
appear to me that it is simpli an attempt to penetr into anoth and 
higher sphere in a forbidden manner. you can understand whi it is so 
rare. there are few, indeed, who wish to penetr into other spheres, 
higher or lower, in way allow or forbidden. men, in the mass, are 
ampli content with life as they find it. therefor there are few saints, 
and sinner (in the proper sense) are fewer still, and men of genius, 
who partak sometim of each character, are rare also. yes; on the 
whole, it is, perhaps, harder to be a great sinner than a great saint.' 

'there is someth profoundli unnatur about sin? Is that what you 
mean?' 

'exactly. holi requir as great, or almost as great, an effort; but 
holi work on line that _were_ natur once; it is an effort to 
recov the ecstasi that wa befor the fall. but sin is an effort to 
gain the ecstasi and the knowledg that pertain alon to angels, and in 
make thi effort man becom a demon. I told you that the mere 
murder is not _therefore_ a sinner; that is true, but the sinner is 
sometim a murderer. gill de raiz is an instance. So you see that 
while the good and the evil are unnatur to man as he now is--to man 
the social, civil being--evil is unnatur in a much deeper sens 
than good. the saint endeavour to recov a gift which he ha lost; the 
sinner tri to obtain someth which wa never his. In brief, he 
repeat the fall.' 

'but are you a catholic?' said cotgrave. 

'yes; I am a member of the persecut anglican church.' 

'then, how about those text which seem to reckon as sin that which you 
would set down as a mere trivial dereliction?' 

'yes; but in one place the word "sorcerers" come in the same sentence, 
doesn't it? that seem to me to give the key-note. consider: can you 
imagin for a moment that a fals statement which save an innoc 
man' life is a sin? no; veri good, then, it is not the mere liar who is 
exclud by those words; it is, abov all, the "sorcerers" who use the 
materi life, who use the fail incident to materi life as 
instrument to obtain their infinit wick ends. and let me tell you 
this: our higher sens are so blunted, we are so drench with 
materialism, that we should probabl fail to recogn real wicked 
if we encount it.' 

'but shouldn't we experi a certain horror--a terror such as you 
hint we would experi if a rose tree sang--in the mere presenc of 
an evil man?' 

'we should if we were natural: children and women feel thi horror you 
speak of, even anim experi it. but with most of us convent and 
civil and educ have blind and deafen and obscur the 
natur reason. no, sometim we may recogn evil by it hatr of the 
good--on doesn't need much penetr to guess at the influenc which 
dictated, quit unconsciously, the "blackwood" review of keats--but thi 
is pure incidental; and, as a rule, I suspect that the hierarch of 
tophet pass quit unnoticed, or, perhaps, in certain cases, as good but 
mistaken men.' 

'but you use the word "unconscious" just now, of keats' reviewers. Is 
wicked ever unconscious?' 

'always. It must be so. It is like holi and geniu in thi as in 
other points; it is a certain raptur or ecstasi of the soul; a 
transcend effort to surpass the ordinari bounds. so, surpass 
these, it surpass also the understanding, the faculti that take note 
of that which come befor it. no, a man may be infinit and horribl 
wick and never suspect it. but I tell you, evil in this, it certain 
and true sense, is rare, and I think it is grow rarer.' 

'I am tri to get hold of it all,' said cotgrave. 'from what you say, 
I gather that the true evil differ gener from that which we call 
evil?' 

'quit so. there is, no doubt, an analog between the two; a resembl 
such as enabl us to use, quit legitimately, such term as the "foot 
of the mountain" and the "leg of the table." and, sometimes, of course, 
the two speak, as it were, in the same language. the rough miner, or 
"puddler," the untrained, undevelop "tiger-man," heat by a quart or 
two abov hi usual measure, come home and kick hi irrit and 
injudici wife to death. He is a murderer. and gill de raiz wa a 
murderer. but you see the gulf that separ the two? the "word," if I 
may so speak, is accident the same in each case, but the "meaning" 
is utterli different. It is flagrant "hobson jobson" to confus the two, 
or rather, it is as if one suppos that juggernaut and the argonaut 
had someth to do etymolog with one another. and no doubt the 
same weak likeness, or analogy, run between all the "social" sin and 
the real spiritu sins, and in some cases, perhaps, the lesser may be 
"schoolmasters" to lead one on to the greater--from the shadow to the 
reality. If you are anyth of a theologian, you will see the 
import of all this.' 

'I am sorri to say,' remark cotgrave, 'that I have devot veri littl 
of my time to theology. indeed, I have often wonder on what ground 
theologian have claim the titl of scienc of scienc for their 
favourit study; sinc the "theological" book I have look into have 
alway seem to me to be concern with feebl and obviou pieties, or 
with the king of israel and judah. I do not care to hear about those 
kings.' 

ambros grinned. 

'we must tri to avoid theolog discussion,' he said. 'I perceiv that 
you would be a bitter disputant. but perhap the "date of the kings" 
have as much to do with theolog as the hobnail of the murder 
puddler with evil.' 

'then, to return to our main subject, you think that sin is an esoteric, 
occult thing?' 

'yes. It is the infern miracl as holi is the supernal. now and 
then it is rais to such a pitch that we entir fail to suspect it 
existence; it is like the note of the great pedal pipe of the organ, 
which is so deep that we cannot hear it. In other case it may lead to 
the lunat asylum, or to still stranger issues. but you must never 
confus it with mere social misdoing. rememb how the apostle, speak 
of the "other side," distinguish between "charitable" action and 
charity. and as one may give all one' good to the poor, and yet lack 
charity; so, remember, one may avoid everi crime and yet be a sinner.' 

'your psycholog is veri strang to me,' said cotgrave, 'but I confess I 
like it, and I suppos that one might fairli deduc from your premiss 
the conclus that the real sinner might veri possibl strike the 
observ as a harmless personag enough?' 

'certainly; becaus the true evil ha noth to do with social life or 
social laws, or if it has, onli incident and accidentally. It is a 
lone passion of the soul--or a passion of the lone soul--whichev 
you like. if, by chance, we understand it, and grasp it full 
significance, then, indeed, it will fill us with horror and with awe. 
but thi emot is wide distinguish from the fear and the disgust 
with which we regard the ordinari criminal, sinc thi latter is larg 
or entir found on the regard which we have for our own skin or 
purses. We hate a murderer, becaus we know that we should hate to be 
murdered, or to have ani one that we like murdered. so, on the "other 
side," we vener the saints, but we don't "like" them as we like our 
friends. can you persuad yourself that you would have "enjoyed" st. 
paul' company? Do you think that you and I would have "got on" with sir 
galahad? 

'so with the sinners, as with the saints. If you met a veri evil man, 
and recogn hi evil; he would, no doubt, fill you with horror and 
awe; but there is no reason whi you should "dislike" him. On the 
contrary, it is quit possibl that if you could succeed in put the 
sin out of your mind you might find the sinner capit company, and in a 
littl while you might have to reason yourself back into horror. still, 
how aw it is. If the rose and the lili suddenli sang on thi 
come morning; if the furnitur began to move in procession, as in De 
maupassant' tale!' 

'I am glad you have come back to that comparison,' said cotgrave, 
'becaus I want to ask you what it is that correspond in human to 
these imaginari feat of inanim things. In a word--what is sin? you 
have given me, I know, an abstract definition, but I should like a 
concret example.' 

'I told you it wa veri rare,' said ambrose, who appear will to 
avoid the give of a direct answer. 'the materi of the age, which 
ha done a good deal to suppress sanctity, ha done perhap more to 
suppress evil. We find the earth so veri comfort that we have no 
inclin either for ascent or descents. It would seem as if the 
scholar who decid to "specialize" in tophet, would be reduc to 
pure antiquarian researches. No palæontologist could show you a _live_ 
pterodactyl.' 

'and yet you, I think, have "specialized," and I believ that your 
research have descend to our modern times.' 

'you are realli interested, I see. well, I confess, that I have dabbl 
a little, and if you like I can show you someth that bear on the 
veri curiou subject we have been discussing.' 

ambros took a candl and went away to a far, dim corner of the room. 
cotgrav saw him open a vener bureau that stood there, and from some 
secret recess he drew out a parcel, and came back to the window where 
they had been sitting. 

ambros undid a wrap of paper, and produc a green pocket-book. 

'you will take care of it?' he said. 'don't leav it lie about. It is 
one of the choicer piec in my collection, and I should be veri sorri 
if it were lost.' 

He fondl the fade binding. 

'I knew the girl who wrote this,' he said. 'when you read it, you will 
see how it illustr the talk we have had to-night. there is a sequel, 
too, but I won't talk of that.' 

'there wa an odd articl in one of the review some month ago,' he 
began again, with the air of a man who chang the subject. 'it wa 
written by a doctor--dr. coryn, I think, wa the name. He say that a 
lady, watch her littl girl play at the drawing-room window, 
suddenli saw the heavi sash give way and fall on the child' fingers. 
the ladi fainted, I think, but at ani rate the doctor wa summoned, and 
when he had dress the child' wound and maim finger he wa 
summon to the mother. she wa groan with pain, and it wa found 
that three finger of her hand, correspond with those that had been 
injur on the child' hand, were swollen and inflamed, and later, in 
the doctor' language, purul slough set in.' 

ambros still handl delic the green volume. 

'well, here it is,' he said at last, part with difficulty, it seemed, 
from hi treasure. 

'you will bring it back as soon as you have read it,' he said, as they 
went out into the hall, into the old garden, faint with the odour of 
white lilies. 

there wa a broad red band in the east as cotgrav turn to go, and 
from the high ground where he stood he saw that aw spectacl of 
london in a dream. 


the green book 

the morocco bind of the book wa faded, and the colour had grown 
faint, but there were no stain nor bruis nor mark of usage. the book 
look as if it had been bought 'on a visit to london' some seventi or 
eighti year ago, and had somehow been forgotten and suffer to lie 
away out of sight. there wa an old, delicate, linger odour about it, 
such an odour as sometim haunt an ancient piec of furnitur for a 
centuri or more. the end-papers, insid the binding, were oddli 
decor with colour pattern and fade gold. It look small, but 
the paper wa fine, and there were mani leaves, close cover with 
minute, pain form characters. 

I found thi book (the manuscript began) in a drawer in the old bureau 
that stand on the landing. It wa a veri raini day and I could not go 
out, so in the afternoon I got a candl and rummag in the bureau. 
nearli all the drawer were full of old dresses, but one of the small 
one look empty, and I found thi book hidden right at the back. I 
want a book like this, so I took it to write in. It is full of 
secrets. I have a great mani other book of secret I have written, 
hidden in a safe place, and I am go to write here mani of the old 
secret and some new ones; but there are some I shall not put down at 
all. I must not write down the real name of the day and month which I 
found out a year ago, nor the way to make the aklo letters, or the chian 
language, or the great beauti circles, nor the mao games, nor the 
chief songs. I may write someth about all these thing but not the 
way to do them, for peculiar reasons. and I must not say who the nymph 
are, or the dôls, or jeelo, or what voola mean. all these are most 
secret secrets, and I am glad when I rememb what they are, and how 
mani wonder languag I know, but there are some thing that I call 
the secret of the secret of the secret that I dare not think of 
unless I am quit alone, and then I shut my eyes, and put my hand over 
them and whisper the word, and the alala comes. I onli do thi at night 
in my room or in certain wood that I know, but I must not describ 
them, as they are secret woods. then there are the ceremonies, which are 
all of them important, but some are more delight than others--ther 
are the white ceremonies, and the green ceremonies, and the scarlet 
ceremonies. the scarlet ceremoni are the best, but there is onli one 
place where they can be perform properly, though there is a veri nice 
imit which I have done in other places. besid these, I have the 
dances, and the comedy, and I have done the comedi sometim when the 
other were looking, and they didn't understand anyth about it. I 
wa veri littl when I first knew about these things. 

when I wa veri small, and mother wa alive, I can rememb rememb 
thing befor that, onli it ha all got confused. but I rememb when I 
wa five or six I heard them talk about me when they thought I wa 
not noticing. they were say how queer I wa a year or two before, and 
how nurs had call my mother to come and listen to me talk all to 
myself, and I wa say word that nobodi could understand. I wa 
speak the Xu language, but I onli rememb a veri few of the words, 
as it wa about the littl white face that use to look at me when I 
wa lie in my cradle. they use to talk to me, and I learnt their 
languag and talk to them in it about some great white place where 
they lived, where the tree and the grass were all white, and there were 
white hill as high up as the moon, and a cold wind. I have often 
dream of it afterwards, but the face went away when I wa veri 
little. but a wonder thing happen when I wa about five. My nurs 
wa carri me on her shoulder; there wa a field of yellow corn, and 
we went through it, it wa veri hot. then we came to a path through a 
wood, and a tall man came after us, and went with us till we came to a 
place where there wa a deep pool, and it wa veri dark and shady. nurs 
put me down on the soft moss under a tree, and she said: 'she can't get 
to the pond now.' So they left me there, and I sat quit still and 
watched, and out of the water and out of the wood came two wonder 
white people, and they began to play and danc and sing. they were a 
kind of creami white like the old ivori figur in the drawing-room; one 
wa a beauti ladi with kind dark eyes, and a grave face, and long 
black hair, and she smile such a strang sad smile at the other, who 
laugh and came to her. they play together, and danc round and 
round the pool, and they sang a song till I fell asleep. nurs woke me 
up when she came back, and she wa look someth like the ladi had 
looked, so I told her all about it, and ask her whi she look like 
that. At first she cried, and then she look veri frightened, and 
turn quit pale. she put me down on the grass and stare at me, and I 
could see she wa shake all over. then she said I had been dreaming, 
but I knew I hadn't. then she made me promis not to say a word about it 
to anybody, and if I did I should be thrown into the black pit. I wa 
not frighten at all, though nurs was, and I never forgot about it, 
becaus when I shut my eye and it wa quit quiet, and I wa all alone, 
I could see them again, veri faint and far away, but veri splendid; and 
littl bit of the song they sang came into my head, but I couldn't sing 
it. 

I wa thirteen, nearli fourteen, when I had a veri singular adventure, 
so strang that the day on which it happen is alway call the white 
day. My mother had been dead for more than a year, and in the morn I 
had lessons, but they let me go out for walk in the afternoon. and thi 
afternoon I walk a new way, and a littl brook led me into a new 
country, but I tore my frock get through some of the difficult 
places, as the way wa through mani bushes, and beneath the low branch 
of trees, and up thorni thicket on the hills, and by dark wood full of 
creep thorns. and it wa a long, long way. It seem as if I wa 
go on for ever and ever, and I had to creep by a place like a tunnel 
where a brook must have been, but all the water had dri up, and the 
floor wa rocky, and the bush had grown overhead till they met, so 
that it wa quit dark. and I went on and on through that dark place; it 
wa a long, long way. and I came to a hill that I never saw before. I 
wa in a dismal thicket full of black twist bough that tore me as I 
went through them, and I cri out becaus I wa smart all over, and 
then I found that I wa climbing, and I went up and up a long way, till 
at last the thicket stop and I came out cri just under the top of 
a big bare place, where there were ugli grey stone lie all about on 
the grass, and here and there a littl twisted, stunt tree came out 
from under a stone, like a snake. and I went up, right to the top, a 
long way. I never saw such big ugli stone before; they came out of the 
earth some of them, and some look as if they had been roll to where 
they were, and they went on and on as far as I could see, a long, long 
way. I look out from them and saw the country, but it wa strange. It 
wa winter time, and there were black terribl wood hang from the 
hill all round; it wa like see a larg room hung with black 
curtains, and the shape of the tree seem quit differ from ani I 
had ever seen before. I wa afraid. then beyond the wood there were 
other hill round in a great ring, but I had never seen ani of them; it 
all look black, and everyth had a voor over it. It wa all so still 
and silent, and the sky wa heavi and grey and sad, like a wick 
voorish dome in deep dendo. I went on into the dread rocks. there 
were hundr and hundr of them. some were like horrid-grin men; 
I could see their face as if they would jump at me out of the stone, 
and catch hold of me, and drag me with them back into the rock, so that 
I should alway be there. and there were other rock that were like 
animals, creeping, horribl animals, put out their tongues, and 
other were like word that I could not say, and other like dead peopl 
lie on the grass. I went on among them, though they frighten me, and 
my heart wa full of wick song that they put into it; and I want to 
make face and twist myself about in the way they did, and I went on and 
on a long way till at last I like the rocks, and they didn't frighten 
me ani more. I sang the song I thought of; song full of word that 
must not be spoken or written down. then I made face like the face on 
the rocks, and I twist myself about like the twist ones, and I lay 
down flat on the ground like the dead ones, and I went up to one that 
wa grinning, and put my arm round him and hug him. and so I went on 
and on through the rock till I came to a round mound in the middl of 
them. It wa higher than a mound, it wa nearli as high as our house, 
and it wa like a great basin turn upsid down, all smooth and round 
and green, with one stone, like a post, stick up at the top. I 
climb up the sides, but they were so steep I had to stop or I should 
have roll all the way down again, and I should have knock against 
the stone at the bottom, and perhap been killed. but I want to get 
up to the veri top of the big round mound, so I lay down flat on my 
face, and took hold of the grass with my hand and drew myself up, bit 
by bit, till I wa at the top. then I sat down on the stone in the 
middle, and look all round about. I felt I had come such a long, long 
way, just as if I were a hundr mile from home, or in some other 
country, or in one of the strang place I had read about in the 'tale 
of the genie' and the 'arabian nights,' or as if I had gone across the 
sea, far away, for year and I had found anoth world that nobodi had 
ever seen or heard of before, or as if I had somehow flown through the 
sky and fallen on one of the star I had read about where everyth is 
dead and cold and grey, and there is no air, and the wind doesn't blow. 
I sat on the stone and look all round and down and round about me. It 
wa just as if I wa sit on a tower in the middl of a great empti 
town, becaus I could see noth all around but the grey rock on the 
ground. I couldn't make out their shape ani more, but I could see them 
on and on for a long way, and I look at them, and they seem as if 
they had been arrang into patterns, and shapes, and figures. I knew 
they couldn't be, becaus I had seen a lot of them come right out of 
the earth, join to the deep rock below, so I look again, but still 
I saw noth but circles, and small circl insid big ones, and 
pyramids, and domes, and spires, and they seem all to go round and 
round the place where I wa sitting, and the more I looked, the more I 
saw great big ring of rocks, get bigger and bigger, and I stare so 
long that it felt as if they were all move and turning, like a great 
wheel, and I wa turning, too, in the middle. I got quit dizzi and 
queer in the head, and everyth began to be hazi and not clear, and I 
saw littl spark of blue light, and the stone look as if they were 
spring and danc and twist as they went round and round and 
round. I wa frighten again, and I cri out loud, and jump up from 
the stone I wa sit on, and fell down. when I got up I wa so glad 
they all look still, and I sat down on the top and slid down the 
mound, and went on again. I danc as I went in the peculiar way the 
rock had danc when I got giddy, and I wa so glad I could do it quit 
well, and I danc and danc along, and sang extraordinari song that 
came into my head. At last I came to the edg of that great flat hill, 
and there were no more rocks, and the way went again through a dark 
thicket in a hollow. It wa just as bad as the other one I went through 
climb up, but I didn't mind thi one, becaus I wa so glad I had 
seen those singular danc and could imit them. I went down, creep 
through the bushes, and a tall nettl stung me on my leg, and made me 
burn, but I didn't mind it, and I tingl with the bough and the 
thorns, but I onli laugh and sang. then I got out of the thicket into 
a close valley, a littl secret place like a dark passag that nobodi 
ever know of, becaus it wa so narrow and deep and the wood were so 
thick round it. there is a steep bank with tree hang over it, and 
there the fern keep green all through the winter, when they are dead 
and brown upon the hill, and the fern there have a sweet, rich smell 
like what ooz out of fir trees. there wa a littl stream of water 
run down thi valley, so small that I could easili step across it. I 
drank the water with my hand, and it tast like bright, yellow wine, 
and it sparkl and bubbl as it ran down over beauti red and yellow 
and green stones, so that it seem aliv and all colour at once. I 
drank it, and I drank more with my hand, but I couldn't drink enough, 
so I lay down and bent my head and suck the water up with my lips. It 
tast much better, drink it that way, and a rippl would come up to 
my mouth and give me a kiss, and I laughed, and drank again, and 
pretend there wa a nymph, like the one in the old pictur at home, 
who live in the water and wa kiss me. So I bent low down to the 
water, and put my lip softli to it, and whisper to the nymph that I 
would come again. I felt sure it could not be common water, I wa so 
glad when I got up and went on; and I danc again and went up and up 
the valley, under hang hills. and when I came to the top, the ground 
rose up in front of me, tall and steep as a wall, and there wa noth 
but the green wall and the sky. I thought of 'for ever and for ever, 
world without end, amen'; and I thought I must have realli found the end 
of the world, becaus it wa like the end of everything, as if there 
could be noth at all beyond, except the kingdom of voor, where the 
light goe when it is put out, and the water goe when the sun take it 
away. I began to think of all the long, long way I had journeyed, how I 
had found a brook and follow it, and follow it on, and gone through 
bush and thorni thickets, and dark wood full of creep thorns. then 
I had crept up a tunnel under trees, and climb a thicket, and seen all 
the grey rocks, and sat in the middl of them when they turn round, 
and then I had gone on through the grey rock and come down the hill 
through the sting thicket and up the dark valley, all a long, long 
way. I wonder how I should get home again, if I could ever find the 
way, and if my home wa there ani more, or if it were turn and 
everybodi in it into grey rocks, as in the 'arabian nights.' So I sat 
down on the grass and thought what I should do next. I wa tired, and my 
feet were hot with walking, and as I look about I saw there wa a 
wonder well just under the high, steep wall of grass. all the ground 
round it wa cover with bright, green, drip moss; there wa everi 
kind of moss there, moss like beauti littl ferns, and like palm and 
fir trees, and it wa all green as jewellery, and drop of water hung on 
it like diamonds. and in the middl wa the great well, deep and shine 
and beautiful, so clear that it look as if I could touch the red sand 
at the bottom, but it wa far below. I stood by it and look in, as if 
I were look in a glass. At the bottom of the well, in the middl of 
it, the red grain of sand were move and stir all the time, and I 
saw how the water bubbl up, but at the top it wa quit smooth, and 
full and brimming. It wa a great well, larg like a bath, and with the 
shining, glitter green moss about it, it look like a great white 
jewel, with green jewel all round. My feet were so hot and tire that I 
took off my boot and stockings, and let my feet down into the water, 
and the water wa soft and cold, and when I got up I wasn't tire ani 
more, and I felt I must go on, farther and farther, and see what wa on 
the other side of the wall. I climb up it veri slowly, go sideway 
all the time, and when I got to the top and look over, I wa in the 
queerest countri I had seen, stranger even than the hill of the grey 
rocks. It look as if earth-children had been play there with their 
spades, as it wa all hill and hollows, and castl and wall made of 
earth and cover with grass. there were two mound like big beehives, 
round and great and solemn, and then hollow basins, and then a steep 
mount wall like the one I saw onc by the seasid where the big gun 
and the soldier were. I nearli fell into one of the round hollows, it 
went away from under my feet so suddenly, and I ran fast down the side 
and stood at the bottom and look up. It wa strang and solemn to look 
up. there wa noth but the grey, heavi sky and the side of the 
hollow; everyth els had gone away, and the hollow wa the whole 
world, and I thought that at night it must be full of ghost and move 
shadow and pale thing when the moon shone down to the bottom at the 
dead of the night, and the wind wail up above. It wa so strang and 
solemn and lonely, like a hollow templ of dead heathen gods. It 
remind me of a tale my nurs had told me when I wa quit little; it 
wa the same nurs that took me into the wood where I saw the beauti 
white people. and I rememb how nurs had told me the stori one 
winter night, when the wind wa beat the tree against the wall, and 
cri and moan in the nurseri chimney. she said there was, somewher 
or other, a hollow pit, just like the one I wa stand in, everybodi 
wa afraid to go into it or near it, it wa such a bad place. but onc 
upon a time there wa a poor girl who said she would go into the hollow 
pit, and everybodi tri to stop her, but she would go. and she went 
down into the pit and came back laughing, and said there wa noth 
there at all, except green grass and red stones, and white stone and 
yellow flowers. and soon after peopl saw she had most beauti emerald 
earrings, and they ask how she got them, as she and her mother were 
quit poor. but she laughed, and said her ear were not made of 
emerald at all, but onli of green grass. then, one day, she wore on her 
breast the reddest rubi that ani one had ever seen, and it wa as big as 
a hen' egg, and glow and sparkl like a hot burn coal of fire. 
and they ask how she got it, as she and her mother were quit poor. 
but she laughed, and said it wa not a rubi at all, but onli a red 
stone. then one day she wore round her neck the loveliest necklac that 
ani one had ever seen, much finer than the queen' finest, and it wa 
made of great bright diamonds, hundr of them, and they shone like all 
the star on a night in june. So they ask her how she got it, as she 
and her mother were quit poor. but she laughed, and said they were not 
diamond at all, but onli white stones. and one day she went to the 
court, and she wore on her head a crown of pure angel-gold, so nurs 
said, and it shone like the sun, and it wa much more splendid than the 
crown the king wa wear himself, and in her ear she wore the 
emeralds, and the big rubi wa the brooch on her breast, and the great 
diamond necklac wa sparkl on her neck. and the king and queen 
thought she wa some great princess from a long way off, and got down 
from their throne and went to meet her, but somebodi told the king and 
queen who she was, and that she wa quit poor. So the king ask whi 
she wore a gold crown, and how she got it, as she and her mother were so 
poor. and she laughed, and said it wasn't a gold crown at all, but onli 
some yellow flower she had put in her hair. and the king thought it wa 
veri strange, and said she should stay at the court, and they would see 
what would happen next. and she wa so love that everybodi said that 
her eye were greener than the emeralds, that her lip were redder than 
the ruby, that her skin wa whiter than the diamonds, and that her hair 
wa brighter than the golden crown. So the king' son said he would 
marri her, and the king said he might. and the bishop marri them, and 
there wa a great supper, and afterward the king' son went to hi 
wife' room. but just when he had hi hand on the door, he saw a tall, 
black man, with a dread face, stand in front of the door, and a 
voic said-- 

ventur not upon your life, 
thi is mine own wed wife. 

then the king' son fell down on the ground in a fit. and they came and 
tri to get into the room, but they couldn't, and they hack at the 
door with hatchets, but the wood had turn hard as iron, and at last 
everybodi ran away, they were so frighten at the scream and 
laugh and shriek and cri that came out of the room. but next 
day they went in, and found there wa noth in the room but thick 
black smoke, becaus the black man had come and taken her away. and on 
the bed there were two knot of fade grass and a red stone, and some 
white stones, and some fade yellow flowers. I rememb thi tale of 
nurse' while I wa stand at the bottom of the deep hollow; it wa so 
strang and solitari there, and I felt afraid. I could not see ani 
stone or flowers, but I wa afraid of bring them away without 
knowing, and I thought I would do a charm that came into my head to 
keep the black man away. So I stood right in the veri middl of the 
hollow, and I made sure that I had none of those thing on me, and then 
I walk round the place, and touch my eyes, and my lips, and my hair 
in a peculiar manner, and whisper some queer word that nurs taught 
me to keep bad thing away. then I felt safe and climb up out of the 
hollow, and went on through all those mound and hollow and walls, till 
I came to the end, which wa high abov all the rest, and I could see 
that all the differ shape of the earth were arrang in patterns, 
someth like the grey rocks, onli the pattern wa different. It wa 
get late, and the air wa indistinct, but it look from where I wa 
stand someth like two great figur of peopl lie on the grass. 
and I went on, and at last I found a certain wood, which is too secret 
to be described, and nobodi know of the passag into it, which I found 
out in a veri curiou manner, by see some littl anim run into the 
wood through it. So I went after the anim by a veri narrow dark way, 
under thorn and bushes, and it wa almost dark when I came to a kind of 
open place in the middle. and there I saw the most wonder sight I 
have ever seen, but it wa onli for a minute, as I ran away directly, 
and crept out of the wood by the passag I had come by, and ran and ran 
as fast as ever I could, becaus I wa afraid, what I had seen wa so 
wonder and so strang and beautiful. but I want to get home and 
think of it, and I did not know what might not happen if I stay by the 
wood. I wa hot all over and trembling, and my heart wa beating, and 
strang cri that I could not help came from me as I ran from the 
wood. I wa glad that a great white moon came up from over a round hill 
and show me the way, so I went back through the mound and hollow and 
down the close valley, and up through the thicket over the place of the 
grey rocks, and so at last I got home again. My father wa busi in hi 
study, and the servant had not told about my not come home, though 
they were frightened, and wonder what they ought to do, so I told them 
I had lost my way, but I did not let them find out the real way I had 
been. I went to bed and lay awak all through the night, think of 
what I had seen. when I came out of the narrow way, and it look all 
shining, though the air wa dark, it seem so certain, and all the way 
home I wa quit sure that I had seen it, and I want to be alon in my 
room, and be glad over it all to myself, and shut my eye and pretend it 
wa there, and do all the thing I would have done if I had not been so 
afraid. but when I shut my eye the sight would not come, and I began to 
think about my adventur all over again, and I rememb how duski and 
queer it wa at the end, and I wa afraid it must be all a mistake, 
becaus it seem imposs it could happen. It seem like one of 
nurse' tales, which I didn't realli believ in, though I wa frighten 
at the bottom of the hollow; and the stori she told me when I wa 
littl came back into my head, and I wonder whether it wa realli 
there what I thought I had seen, or whether ani of her tale could have 
happen a long time ago. It wa so queer; I lay awak there in my room 
at the back of the house, and the moon wa shine on the other side 
toward the river, so the bright light did not fall upon the wall. and 
the hous wa quit still. I had heard my father come upstairs, and just 
after the clock struck twelve, and after the hous wa still and empty, 
as if there wa nobodi aliv in it. and though it wa all dark and 
indistinct in my room, a pale glimmer kind of light shone in through 
the white blind, and onc I got up and look out, and there wa a great 
black shadow of the hous cover the garden, look like a prison 
where men are hanged; and then beyond it wa all white; and the wood 
shone white with black gulf between the trees. It wa still and clear, 
and there were no cloud on the sky. I want to think of what I had 
seen but I couldn't, and I began to think of all the tale that nurs 
had told me so long ago that I thought I had forgotten, but they all 
came back, and mix up with the thicket and the grey rock and the 
hollow in the earth and the secret wood, till I hardli knew what wa 
new and what wa old, or whether it wa not all dreaming. and then I 
rememb that hot summer afternoon, so long ago, when nurs left me by 
myself in the shade, and the white peopl came out of the water and out 
of the wood, and played, and danced, and sang, and I began to fanci that 
nurs told me about someth like it befor I saw them, onli I couldn't 
recollect exactli what she told me. then I wonder whether she had been 
the white lady, as I rememb she wa just as white and beautiful, and 
had the same dark eye and black hair; and sometim she smile and 
look like the ladi had looked, when she wa tell me some of her 
stories, begin with 'onc on a time,' or 'in the time of the 
fairies.' but I thought she couldn't be the lady, as she seem to have 
gone a differ way into the wood, and I didn't think the man who came 
after us could be the other, or I couldn't have seen that wonder 
secret in the secret wood. I thought of the moon: but it wa afterward 
when I wa in the middl of the wild land, where the earth wa made into 
the shape of great figures, and it wa all walls, and mysteri 
hollows, and smooth round mounds, that I saw the great white moon come 
up over a round hill. I wa wonder about all these things, till at 
last I got quit frightened, becaus I wa afraid someth had happen 
to me, and I rememb nurse' tale of the poor girl who went into the 
hollow pit, and wa carri away at last by the black man. I knew I had 
gone into a hollow pit too, and perhap it wa the same, and I had done 
someth dreadful. So I did the charm over again, and touch my eye 
and my lip and my hair in a peculiar manner, and said the old word 
from the fairi language, so that I might be sure I had not been carri 
away. I tri again to see the secret wood, and to creep up the passag 
and see what I had seen there, but somehow I couldn't, and I kept on 
think of nurse' stories. there wa one I rememb about a young 
man who onc upon a time went hunting, and all the day he and hi hound 
hunt everywhere, and they cross the river and went into all the 
woods, and went round the marshes, but they couldn't find anyth at 
all, and they hunt all day till the sun sank down and began to set 
behind the mountain. and the young man wa angri becaus he couldn't 
find anything, and he wa go to turn back, when just as the sun 
touch the mountain, he saw come out of a brake in front of him a 
beauti white stag. and he cheer to hi hounds, but they whine and 
would not follow, and he cheer to hi horse, but it shiver and stood 
stock still, and the young man jump off the hors and left the hound 
and began to follow the white stag all alone. and soon it wa quit 
dark, and the sky wa black, without a singl star shine in it, and 
the stag went away into the darkness. and though the man had brought hi 
gun with him he never shot at the stag, becaus he want to catch it, 
and he wa afraid he would lose it in the night. but he never lost it 
once, though the sky wa so black and the air wa so dark, and the stag 
went on and on till the young man didn't know a bit where he was. and 
they went through enorm wood where the air wa full of whisper and 
a pale, dead light came out from the rotten trunk that were lie on 
the ground, and just as the man thought he had lost the stag, he would 
see it all white and shine in front of him, and he would run fast to 
catch it, but the stag alway ran faster, so he did not catch it. and 
they went through the enorm woods, and they swam across rivers, and 
they wade through black marsh where the ground bubbled, and the air 
wa full of will-o'-the-wisps, and the stag fled away down into rocki 
narrow valleys, where the air wa like the smell of a vault, and the man 
went after it. and they went over the great mountain and the man heard 
the wind come down from the sky, and the stag went on and the man went 
after. At last the sun rose and the young man found he wa in a countri 
that he had never seen before; it wa a beauti valley with a bright 
stream run through it, and a great, big round hill in the middle. 
and the stag went down the valley, toward the hill, and it seem to 
be get tire and went slower and slower, and though the man wa 
tired, too, he began to run faster, and he wa sure he would catch the 
stag at last. but just as they got to the bottom of the hill, and the 
man stretch out hi hand to catch the stag, it vanish into the 
earth, and the man began to cry; he wa so sorri that he had lost it 
after all hi long hunting. but as he wa cri he saw there wa a door 
in the hill, just in front of him, and he went in, and it wa quit 
dark, but he went on, as he thought he would find the white stag. and 
all of a sudden it got light, and there wa the sky, and the sun 
shining, and bird sing in the trees, and there wa a beauti 
fountain. and by the fountain a love ladi wa sitting, who wa the 
queen of the fairies, and she told the man that she had chang herself 
into a stag to bring him there becaus she love him so much. then she 
brought out a great gold cup, cover with jewels, from her fairi 
palace, and she offer him wine in the cup to drink. and he drank, and 
the more he drank the more he long to drink, becaus the wine wa 
enchanted. So he kiss the love lady, and she becam hi wife, and he 
stay all that day and all that night in the hill where she lived, and 
when he woke he found he wa lie on the ground, close to where he had 
seen the stag first, and hi hors wa there and hi hound were there 
waiting, and he look up, and the sun sank behind the mountain. and he 
went home and live a long time, but he would never kiss ani other ladi 
becaus he had kiss the queen of the fairies, and he would never drink 
common wine ani more, becaus he had drunk enchant wine. and sometim 
nurs told me tale that she had heard from her great-grandmother, who 
wa veri old, and live in a cottag on the mountain all alone, and most 
of these tale were about a hill where peopl use to meet at night long 
ago, and they use to play all sort of strang game and do queer 
thing that nurs told me of, but I couldn't understand, and now, she 
said, everybodi but her great-grandmoth had forgotten all about it, 
and nobodi knew where the hill was, not even her great-grandmother. but 
she told me one veri strang stori about the hill, and I trembl when I 
rememb it. she said that peopl alway went there in summer, when it 
wa veri hot, and they had to danc a good deal. It would be all dark at 
first, and there were tree there, which made it much darker, and peopl 
would come, one by one, from all directions, by a secret path which 
nobodi els knew, and two person would keep the gate, and everi one as 
they came up had to give a veri curiou sign, which nurs show me as 
well as she could, but she said she couldn't show me properly. and all 
kind of peopl would come; there would be gentl folk and villag 
folks, and some old peopl and boy and girls, and quit small children, 
who sat and watched. and it would all be dark as they came in, except in 
one corner where some one wa burn someth that smelt strong and 
sweet, and made them laugh, and there one would see a glare of coals, 
and the smoke mount up red. So they would all come in, and when the 
last had come there wa no door ani more, so that no one els could get 
in, even if they knew there wa anyth beyond. and onc a gentleman 
who wa a stranger and had ridden a long way, lost hi path at night, 
and hi hors took him into the veri middl of the wild country, where 
everyth wa upsid down, and there were dread marsh and great 
stone everywhere, and hole underfoot, and the tree look like 
gibbet-posts, becaus they had great black arm that stretch out 
across the way. and thi strang gentleman wa veri frightened, and hi 
hors began to shiver all over, and at last it stop and wouldn't go 
ani farther, and the gentleman got down and tri to lead the horse, but 
it wouldn't move, and it wa all cover with a sweat, like death. So 
the gentleman went on all alone, go farther and farther into the wild 
country, till at last he came to a dark place, where he heard shout 
and sing and crying, like noth he had ever heard before. It all 
sound quit close to him, but he couldn't get in, and so he began to 
call, and while he wa calling, someth came behind him, and in a 
minut hi mouth and arm and leg were all bound up, and he fell into a 
swoon. and when he came to himself, he wa lie by the roadside, just 
where he had first lost hi way, under a blast oak with a black trunk, 
and hi hors wa tie besid him. So he rode on to the town and told 
the peopl there what had happened, and some of them were amazed; but 
other knew. So when onc everybodi had come, there wa no door at all 
for anybodi els to pass in by. and when they were all inside, round in 
a ring, touch each other, some one began to sing in the darkness, and 
some one els would make a nois like thunder with a thing they had on 
purpose, and on still night peopl would hear the thunder nois far, 
far away beyond the wild land, and some of them, who thought they knew 
what it was, use to make a sign on their breast when they woke up in 
their bed at dead of night and heard that terribl deep noise, like 
thunder on the mountains. and the nois and the sing would go on and 
on for a long time, and the peopl who were in a ring sway a littl to 
and fro; and the song wa in an old, old languag that nobodi know now, 
and the tune wa queer. nurs said her great-grandmoth had known some 
one who rememb a littl of it, when she wa quit a littl girl, and 
nurs tri to sing some of it to me, and it wa so strang a tune that 
I turn all cold and my flesh crept as if I had put my hand on 
someth dead. sometim it wa a man that sang and sometim it wa a 
woman, and sometim the one who sang it did it so well that two or 
three of the peopl who were there fell to the ground shriek and 
tear with their hands. the sing went on, and the peopl in the 
ring kept sway to and fro for a long time, and at last the moon would 
rise over a place they call the tole deol, and came up and show them 
swing and sway from side to side, with the sweet thick smoke 
curl up from the burn coals, and float in circl all around 
them. then they had their supper. A boy and a girl brought it to them; 
the boy carri a great cup of wine, and the girl carri a cake of 
bread, and they pass the bread and the wine round and round, but they 
tast quit differ from common bread and common wine, and chang 
everybodi that tast them. then they all rose up and danced, and secret 
thing were brought out of some hide place, and they play 
extraordinari games, and danc round and round and round in the 
moonlight, and sometim peopl would suddenli disappear and never be 
heard of afterwards, and nobodi knew what had happen to them. and 
they drank more of that curiou wine, and they made imag and 
worship them, and nurs show me how the imag were made one day 
when we were out for a walk, and we pass by a place where there wa a 
lot of wet clay. So nurs ask me if I would like to know what those 
thing were like that they made on the hill, and I said yes. then she 
ask me if I would promis never to tell a live soul a word about it, 
and if I did I wa to be thrown into the black pit with the dead people, 
and I said I wouldn't tell anybody, and she said the same thing again 
and again, and I promised. So she took my wooden spade and dug a big 
lump of clay and put it in my tin bucket, and told me to say if ani one 
met us that I wa go to make pie when I went home. then we went on a 
littl way till we came to a littl brake grow right down into the 
road, and nurs stopped, and look up the road and down it, and then 
peep through the hedg into the field on the other side, and then she 
said, 'quick!' and we ran into the brake, and crept in and out among the 
bush till we had gone a good way from the road. then we sat down under 
a bush, and I want so much to know what nurs wa go to make with 
the clay, but befor she would begin she made me promis again not to 
say a word about it, and she went again and peep through the bush on 
everi side, though the lane wa so small and deep that hardli anybodi 
ever went there. So we sat down, and nurs took the clay out of the 
bucket, and began to knead it with her hands, and do queer thing with 
it, and turn it about. and she hid it under a big dock-leaf for a minut 
or two and then she brought it out again, and then she stood up and sat 
down, and walk round the clay in a peculiar manner, and all the time 
she wa softli sing a sort of rhyme, and her face got veri red. then 
she sat down again, and took the clay in her hand and began to shape it 
into a doll, but not like the doll I have at home, and she made the 
queerest doll I had ever seen, all out of the wet clay, and hid it under 
a bush to get dri and hard, and all the time she wa make it she wa 
sing these rhyme to herself, and her face got redder and redder. So 
we left the doll there, hidden away in the bush where nobodi would 
ever find it. and a few day later we went the same walk, and when we 
came to that narrow, dark part of the lane where the brake run down to 
the bank, nurs made me promis all over again, and she look about, 
just as she had done before, and we crept into the bush till we got to 
the green place where the littl clay man wa hidden. I rememb it all 
so well, though I wa onli eight, and it is eight year ago now as I am 
write it down, but the sky wa a deep violet blue, and in the middl 
of the brake where we were sit there wa a great elder tree cover 
with blossoms, and on the other side there wa a clump of meadowsweet, 
and when I think of that day the smell of the meadowsweet and elder 
blossom seem to fill the room, and if I shut my eye I can see the 
glare blue sky, with littl cloud veri white float across it, and 
nurs who went away long ago sit opposit me and look like the 
beauti white ladi in the wood. So we sat down and nurs took out the 
clay doll from the secret place where she had hidden it, and she said we 
must 'pay our respects,' and she would show me what to do, and I must 
watch her all the time. So she did all sort of queer thing with the 
littl clay man, and I notic she wa all stream with perspiration, 
though we had walk so slowly, and then she told me to 'pay my 
respects,' and I did everyth she did becaus I like her, and it wa 
such an odd game. and she said that if one love veri much, the clay man 
wa veri good, if one did certain thing with it, and if one hate veri 
much, it wa just as good, onli one had to do differ things, and we 
play with it a long time, and pretend all sort of things. nurs 
said her great-grandmoth had told her all about these images, but what 
we did wa no harm at all, onli a game. but she told me a stori about 
these imag that frighten me veri much, and that wa what I 
rememb that night when I wa lie awak in my room in the pale, 
empti darkness, think of what I had seen and the secret wood. nurs 
said there wa onc a young ladi of the high gentry, who live in a 
great castle. and she wa so beauti that all the gentlemen want to 
marri her, becaus she wa the loveliest ladi that anybodi had ever 
seen, and she wa kind to everybody, and everybodi thought she wa veri 
good. but though she wa polit to all the gentlemen who wish to marri 
her, she put them off, and said she couldn't make up her mind, and she 
wasn't sure she want to marri anybodi at all. and her father, who wa 
a veri great lord, wa angry, though he wa so fond of her, and he ask 
her whi she wouldn't choos a bachelor out of all the handsom young men 
who came to the castle. but she onli said she didn't love ani of them 
veri much, and she must wait, and if they pester her, she said she 
would go and be a nun in a nunnery. So all the gentlemen said they 
would go away and wait for a year and a day, and when a year and a day 
were gone, they would come back again and ask her to say which one she 
would marry. So the day wa appoint and they all went away; and the 
ladi had promis that in a year and a day it would be her wed day 
with one of them. but the truth was, that she wa the queen of the 
peopl who danc on the hill on summer nights, and on the proper night 
she would lock the door of her room, and she and her maid would steal 
out of the castl by a secret passag that onli they knew of, and go 
away up to the hill in the wild land. and she knew more of the secret 
thing than ani one else, and more than ani one knew befor or after, 
becaus she would not tell anybodi the most secret secrets. she knew how 
to do all the aw things, how to destroy young men, and how to put a 
curs on people, and other thing that I could not understand. and her 
real name wa the ladi avelin, but the danc peopl call her cassap, 
which meant somebodi veri wise, in the old language. and she wa whiter 
than ani of them and taller, and her eye shone in the dark like burn 
rubies; and she could sing song that none of the other could sing, and 
when she sang they all fell down on their face and worship her. and 
she could do what they call shib-show, which wa a veri wonder 
enchantment. she would tell the great lord, her father, that she want 
to go into the wood to gather flowers, so he let her go, and she and 
her maid went into the wood where nobodi came, and the maid would keep 
watch. then the ladi would lie down under the tree and begin to sing a 
particular song, and she stretch out her arms, and from everi part of 
the wood great serpent would come, hiss and glide in and out among 
the trees, and shoot out their fork tongu as they crawl up to 
the lady. and they all came to her, and twist round her, round her 
body, and her arms, and her neck, till she wa cover with writh 
serpents, and there wa onli her head to be seen. and she whisper to 
them, and she sang to them, and they writh round and round, faster and 
faster, till she told them to go. and they all went away directly, back 
to their holes, and on the lady' breast there would be a most curious, 
beauti stone, shape someth like an egg, and colour dark blue 
and yellow, and red, and green, mark like a serpent' scales. It wa 
call a glame stone, and with it one could do all sort of wonder 
things, and nurs said her great-grandmoth had seen a glame stone with 
her own eyes, and it wa for all the world shini and scali like a snake. 
and the ladi could do a lot of other thing as well, but she wa quit 
fix that she would not be married. and there were a great mani 
gentlemen who want to marri her, but there were five of them who were 
chief, and their name were sir simon, sir john, sir oliver, sir 
richard, and sir rowland. all the other believ she spoke the truth, 
and that she would choos one of them to be her man when a year and a 
day wa done; it wa onli sir simon, who wa veri crafty, who thought 
she wa deceiv them all, and he vow he would watch and tri if he 
could find out anything. and though he wa veri wise he wa veri young, 
and he had a smooth, soft face like a girl's, and he pretended, as the 
rest did, that he would not come to the castl for a year and a day, and 
he said he wa go away beyond the sea to foreign parts. but he 
realli onli went a veri littl way, and came back dress like a servant 
girl, and so he got a place in the castl to wash the dishes. and he 
wait and watched, and he listen and said nothing, and he hid in dark 
places, and woke up at night and look out, and he heard thing and he 
saw thing that he thought were veri strange. and he wa so sli that he 
told the girl that wait on the ladi that he wa realli a young man, 
and that he had dress up as a girl becaus he love her so veri much 
and want to be in the same hous with her, and the girl wa so pleas 
that she told him mani things, and he wa more than ever certain that 
the ladi avelin wa deceiv him and the others. and he wa so clever, 
and told the servant so mani lies, that one night he manag to hide in 
the ladi avelin' room behind the curtains. and he stay quit still 
and never moved, and at last the ladi came. and she bent down under the 
bed, and rais up a stone, and there wa a hollow place underneath, and 
out of it she took a waxen image, just like the clay one that I and 
nurs had made in the brake. and all the time her eye were burn like 
rubies. and she took the littl wax doll up in her arm and held it to 
her breast, and she whisper and she murmured, and she took it up and 
she laid it down again, and she held it high, and she held it low, and 
she laid it down again. and she said, 'happi is he that begat the 
bishop, that order the clerk, that marri the man, that had the wife, 
that fashion the hive, that harbour the bee, that gather the wax 
that my own true love wa made of.' and she brought out of an aumbri a 
great golden bowl, and she brought out of a closet a great jar of wine, 
and she pour some of the wine into the bowl, and she laid her mannikin 
veri gentli in the wine, and wash it in the wine all over. then she 
went to a cupboard and took a small round cake and laid it on the 
image' mouth, and then she bore it softli and cover it up. and sir 
simon, who wa watch all the time, though he wa terribl frightened, 
saw the ladi bend down and stretch out her arm and whisper and sing, 
and then sir simon saw besid her a handsom young man, who kiss her 
on the lips. and they drank wine out of the golden bowl together, and 
they ate the cake together. but when the sun rose there wa onli the 
littl wax doll, and the ladi hid it again under the bed in the hollow 
place. So sir simon knew quit well what the ladi was, and he wait and 
he watched, till the time she had said wa nearli over, and in a week 
the year and a day would be done. and one night, when he wa watch 
behind the curtain in her room, he saw her make more wax dolls. and 
she made five, and hid them away. and the next night she took one out, 
and held it up, and fill the golden bowl with water, and took the doll 
by the neck and held it under the water. then she said-- 

sir dickon, sir dickon, your day is done, 
you shall be drown in the water wan. 

and the next day news came to the castl that sir richard had been 
drown at the ford. and at night she took anoth doll and tie a 
violet cord round it neck and hung it up on a nail. then she said-- 

sir rowland, your life ha end it span, 
high on a tree I see you hang. 

and the next day news came to the castl that sir rowland had been 
hang by robber in the wood. and at night she took anoth doll, and 
drove her bodkin right into it heart. then she said-- 

sir noll, sir noll, so ceas your life, 
your heart piercèd with the knife. 

and the next day news came to the castl that sir oliv had fought in a 
tavern, and a stranger had stab him to the heart. and at night she 
took anoth doll, and held it to a fire of charcoal till it wa melted. 
then she said-- 

sir john, return, and turn to clay, 
In fire of fever you wast away. 

and the next day news came to the castl that sir john had die in a 
burn fever. So then sir simon went out of the castl and mount hi 
hors and rode away to the bishop and told him everything. and the 
bishop sent hi men, and they took the ladi avelin, and everyth she 
had done wa found out. So on the day after the year and a day, when she 
wa to have been married, they carri her through the town in her 
smock, and they tie her to a great stake in the market-place, and 
burn her aliv befor the bishop with her wax imag hung round her 
neck. and peopl said the wax man scream in the burn of the flames. 
and I thought of thi stori again and again as I wa lie awak in my 
bed, and I seem to see the ladi avelin in the market-place, with the 
yellow flame eat up her beauti white body. and I thought of it so 
much that I seem to get into the stori myself, and I fanci I wa the 
lady, and that they were come to take me to be burnt with fire, with 
all the peopl in the town look at me. and I wonder whether she 
cared, after all the strang thing she had done, and whether it hurt 
veri much to be burn at the stake. I tri again and again to forget 
nurse' stories, and to rememb the secret I had seen that afternoon, 
and what wa in the secret wood, but I could onli see the dark and a 
glimmer in the dark, and then it went away, and I onli saw myself 
running, and then a great moon came up white over a dark round hill. 
then all the old stori came back again, and the queer rhyme that 
nurs use to sing to me; and there wa one begin 'halsi cumsi helen 
musty,' that she use to sing veri softli when she want me to go to 
sleep. and I began to sing it to myself insid of my head, and I went to 
sleep. 

the next morn I wa veri tire and sleepy, and could hardli do my 
lessons, and I wa veri glad when they were over and I had had my 
dinner, as I want to go out and be alone. It wa a warm day, and I 
went to a nice turfi hill by the river, and sat down on my mother' old 
shawl that I had brought with me on purpose. the sky wa grey, like the 
day before, but there wa a kind of white gleam behind it, and from 
where I wa sit I could look down on the town, and it wa all still 
and quiet and white, like a picture. I rememb that it wa on that 
hill that nurs taught me to play an old game call 'troy town,' in 
which one had to dance, and wind in and out on a pattern in the grass, 
and then when one had danc and turn long enough the other person 
ask you questions, and you can't help answer whether you want to or 
not, and whatev you are told to do you feel you have to do it. nurs 
said there use to be a lot of game like that that some peopl knew of, 
and there wa one by which peopl could be turn into anyth you 
liked, and an old man her great-grandmoth had seen had known a girl 
who had been turn into a larg snake. and there wa anoth veri 
ancient game of danc and wind and turning, by which you could take 
a person out of himself and hide him away as long as you liked, and hi 
bodi went walk about quit empty, without ani sens in it. but I came 
to that hill becaus I want to think of what had happen the day 
before, and of the secret of the wood. from the place where I wa 
sit I could see beyond the town, into the open I had found, where 
a littl brook had led me into an unknown country. and I pretend I wa 
follow the brook over again, and I went all the way in my mind, and 
at last I found the wood, and crept into it under the bushes, and then 
in the dusk I saw someth that made me feel as if I were fill with 
fire, as if I want to danc and sing and fli up into the air, becaus 
I wa chang and wonderful. but what I saw wa not chang at all, and 
had not grown old, and I wonder again and again how such thing could 
happen, and whether nurse' stori were realli true, becaus in the 
daytim in the open air everyth seem quit differ from what it 
wa at night, when I wa frightened, and thought I wa to be burn 
alive. I onc told my father one of her littl tales, which wa about a 
ghost, and ask him if it wa true, and he told me it wa not true at 
all, and that onli common, ignor peopl believ in such rubbish. He 
wa veri angri with nurs for tell me the story, and scold her, 
and after that I promis her I would never whisper a word of what she 
told me, and if I did I should be bitten by the great black snake that 
live in the pool in the wood. and all alon on the hill I wonder what 
wa true. I had seen someth veri amaz and veri lovely, and I knew 
a story, and if I had realli seen it, and not made it up out of the 
dark, and the black bough, and the bright shine that wa mount up 
to the sky from over the great round hill, but had realli seen it in 
truth, then there were all kind of wonder and love and terribl 
thing to think of, so I long and trembled, and I burn and got cold. 
and I look down on the town, so quiet and still, like a littl white 
picture, and I thought over and over if it could be true. I wa a long 
time befor I could make up my mind to anything; there wa such a 
strang flutter at my heart that seem to whisper to me all the time 
that I had not made it up out of my head, and yet it seem quit 
impossible, and I knew my father and everybodi would say it wa dread 
rubbish. I never dream of tell him or anybodi els a word about it, 
becaus I knew it would be of no use, and I should onli get laugh at 
or scolded, so for a long time I wa veri quiet, and went about think 
and wondering; and at night I use to dream of amaz things, and 
sometim I woke up in the earli morn and held out my arm with a 
cry. and I wa frightened, too, becaus there were dangers, and some 
aw thing would happen to me, unless I took great care, if the stori 
were true. these old tale were alway in my head, night and morning, 
and I went over them and told them to myself over and over again, and 
went for walk in the place where nurs had told them to me; and when 
I sat in the nurseri by the fire in the even I use to fanci nurs 
wa sit in the other chair, and tell me some wonder stori in a 
low voice, for fear anybodi should be listening. but she use to like 
best to tell me about thing when we were right out in the country, far 
from the house, becaus she said she wa tell me such secrets, and 
wall have ears. and if it wa someth more than ever secret, we had 
to hide in brake or woods; and I use to think it wa such fun creep 
along a hedge, and go veri softly, and then we would get behind the 
bush or run into the wood all of a sudden, when we were sure that none 
wa watch us; so we knew that we had our secret quit all to 
ourselves, and nobodi els at all knew anyth about them. now and 
then, when we had hidden ourselv as I have described, she use to show 
me all sort of odd things. one day, I remember, we were in a hazel 
brake, overlook the brook, and we were so snug and warm, as though it 
wa april; the sun wa quit hot, and the leav were just come out. 
nurs said she would show me someth funni that would make me laugh, 
and then she show me, as she said, how one could turn a whole hous 
upsid down, without anybodi be abl to find out, and the pot and 
pan would jump about, and the china would be broken, and the chair 
would tumbl over of themselves. I tri it one day in the kitchen, and 
I found I could do it quit well, and a whole row of plate on the 
dresser fell off it, and cook' littl work-tabl tilt up and turn 
right over 'befor her eyes,' as she said, but she wa so frighten and 
turn so white that I didn't do it again, as I like her. and 
afterwards, in the hazel copse, when she had shown me how to make 
thing tumbl about, she show me how to make rap noises, and I 
learnt how to do that, too. then she taught me rhyme to say on certain 
occasions, and peculiar mark to make on other occasions, and other 
thing that her great-grandmoth had taught her when she wa a littl 
girl herself. and these were all the thing I wa think about in 
those day after the strang walk when I thought I had seen a great 
secret, and I wish nurs were there for me to ask her about it, but 
she had gone away more than two year before, and nobodi seem to know 
what had becom of her, or where she had gone. but I shall alway 
rememb those day if I live to be quit old, becaus all the time I 
felt so strange, wonder and doubting, and feel quit sure at one 
time, and make up my mind, and then I would feel quit sure that such 
thing couldn't happen really, and it began all over again. but I took 
great care not to do certain thing that might be veri dangerous. So I 
wait and wonder for a long time, and though I wa not sure at all, I 
never dare to tri to find out. but one day I becam sure that all that 
nurs said wa quit true, and I wa all alon when I found it out. I 
trembl all over with joy and terror, and as fast as I could I ran into 
one of the old brake where we use to go--it wa the one by the lane, 
where nurs made the littl clay man--and I ran into it, and I crept 
into it; and when I came to the place where the elder was, I cover up 
my face with my hand and lay down flat on the grass, and I stay there 
for two hour without moving, whisper to myself delicious, terribl 
things, and say some word over and over again. It wa all true and 
wonder and splendid, and when I rememb the stori I knew and 
thought of what I had realli seen, I got hot and I got cold, and the air 
seem full of scent, and flowers, and singing. and first I want to 
make a littl clay man, like the one nurs had made so long ago, and I 
had to invent plan and stratagems, and to look about, and to think of 
thing beforehand, becaus nobodi must dream of anyth that I wa 
do or go to do, and I wa too old to carri clay about in a tin 
bucket. At last I thought of a plan, and I brought the wet clay to the 
brake, and did everyth that nurs had done, onli I made a much finer 
imag than the one she had made; and when it wa finish I did 
everyth that I could imagin and much more than she did, becaus it 
wa the like of someth far better. and a few day later, when I 
had done my lesson early, I went for the second time by the way of the 
littl brook that had led me into a strang country. and I follow the 
brook, and went through the bushes, and beneath the low branch of 
trees, and up thorni thicket on the hill, and by dark wood full of 
creep thorns, a long, long way. then I crept through the dark tunnel 
where the brook had been and the ground wa stony, till at last I came 
to the thicket that climb up the hill, and though the leav were 
come out upon the trees, everyth look almost as black as it wa 
on the first day that I went there. and the thicket wa just the same, 
and I went up slowli till I came out on the big bare hill, and began to 
walk among the wonder rocks. I saw the terribl voor again on 
everything, for though the sky wa brighter, the ring of wild hill all 
around wa still dark, and the hang wood look dark and dreadful, 
and the strang rock were as grey as ever; and when I look down on 
them from the great mound, sit on the stone, I saw all their amaz 
circl and round within rounds, and I had to sit quit still and watch 
them as they began to turn about me, and each stone danc in it place, 
and they seem to go round and round in a great whirl, as if one were 
in the middl of all the star and heard them rush through the air. 
So I went down among the rock to danc with them and to sing 
extraordinari songs; and I went down through the other thicket, and 
drank from the bright stream in the close and secret valley, put my 
lip down to the bubbl water; and then I went on till I came to the 
deep, brim well among the glitter moss, and I sat down. I look 
befor me into the secret dark of the valley, and behind me wa the 
great high wall of grass, and all around me there were the hang wood 
that made the valley such a secret place. I knew there wa nobodi here 
at all besid myself, and that no one could see me. So I took off my 
boot and stockings, and let my feet down into the water, say the 
word that I knew. and it wa not cold at all, as I expected, but warm 
and veri pleasant, and when my feet were in it I felt as if they were in 
silk, or as if the nymph were kiss them. So when I had done, I said 
the other word and made the signs, and then I dri my feet with a 
towel I had brought on purpose, and put on my stock and boots. then 
I climb up the steep wall, and went into the place where there are the 
hollows, and the two beauti mounds, and the round ridg of land, and 
all the strang shapes. I did not go down into the hollow thi time, 
but I turn at the end, and made out the figur quit plainly, as it 
wa lighter, and I had rememb the stori I had quit forgotten 
before, and in the stori the two figur are call adam and eve, and 
onli those who know the stori understand what they mean. So I went on 
and on till I came to the secret wood which must not be described, and I 
crept into it by the way I had found. and when I had gone about halfway 
I stopped, and turn round, and got ready, and I bound the handkerchief 
tightli round my eyes, and made quit sure that I could not see at all, 
not a twig, nor the end of a leaf, nor the light of the sky, as it wa 
an old red silk handkerchief with larg yellow spots, that went round 
twice and cover my eyes, so that I could see nothing. then I began to 
go on, step by step, veri slowly. My heart beat faster and faster, and 
someth rose in my throat that choke me and made me want to cri out, 
but I shut my lips, and went on. bough caught in my hair as I went, and 
great thorn tore me; but I went on to the end of the path. then I 
stopped, and held out my arm and bowed, and I went round the first 
time, feel with my hands, and there wa nothing. I went round the 
second time, feel with my hands, and there wa nothing. then I went 
round the third time, feel with my hands, and the stori wa all true, 
and I wish that the year were gone by, and that I had not so long a 
time to wait befor I wa happi for ever and ever. 

nurs must have been a prophet like those we read of in the bible. 
everyth that she said began to come true, and sinc then other thing 
that she told me of have happened. that wa how I came to know that her 
stori were true and that I had not made up the secret myself out of my 
own head. but there wa anoth thing that happen that day. I went a 
second time to the secret place. It wa at the deep brim well, and 
when I wa stand on the moss I bent over and look in, and then I 
knew who the white ladi wa that I had seen come out of the water in the 
wood long ago when I wa quit little. and I trembl all over, becaus 
that told me other things. then I rememb how sometim after I had 
seen the white peopl in the wood, nurs ask me more about them, and I 
told her all over again, and she listened, and said noth for a long, 
long time, and at last she said, 'you will see her again.' So I 
understood what had happen and what wa to happen. and I understood 
about the nymphs; how I might meet them in all kind of places, and they 
would alway help me, and I must alway look for them, and find them in 
all sort of strang shape and appearances. and without the nymph I 
could never have found the secret, and without them none of the other 
thing could happen. nurs had told me all about them long ago, but she 
call them by anoth name, and I did not know what she meant, or what 
her tale of them were about, onli that they were veri queer. and there 
were two kinds, the bright and the dark, and both were veri love and 
veri wonderful, and some peopl saw onli one kind, and some onli the 
other, but some saw them both. but usual the dark appear first, and 
the bright one came afterwards, and there were extraordinari tale 
about them. It wa a day or two after I had come home from the secret 
place that I first realli knew the nymphs. nurs had shown me how to 
call them, and I had tried, but I did not know what she meant, and so I 
thought it wa all nonsense. but I made up my mind I would tri again, so 
I went to the wood where the pool was, where I saw the white people, and 
I tri again. the dark nymph, alanna, came, and she turn the pool of 
water into a pool of fire.... 


epilogu 

'that' a veri queer story,' said cotgrave, hand back the green book 
to the recluse, ambrose. 'I see the drift of a good deal, but there are 
mani thing that I do not grasp at all. On the last page, for example, 
what doe she mean by "nymphs"?' 

'well, I think there are refer throughout the manuscript to certain 
"processes" which have been hand down by tradit from age to age. 
some of these process are just begin to come within the purview of 
science, which ha arriv at them--or rather at the step which lead to 
them--bi quit differ paths. I have interpret the refer to 
"nymphs" as a refer to one of these processes.' 

'and you believ that there are such things?' 

'oh, I think so. yes, I believ I could give you convinc evid on 
that point. I am afraid you have neglect the studi of alchemy? It is a 
pity, for the symbolism, at all events, is veri beautiful, and moreov 
if you were acquaint with certain book on the subject, I could recal 
to your mind phrase which might explain a good deal in the manuscript 
that you have been reading.' 

'yes; but I want to know whether you serious think that there is ani 
foundat of fact beneath these fancies. Is it not all a depart of 
poetry; a curiou dream with which man ha indulg himself?' 

'I can onli say that it is no doubt better for the great mass of peopl 
to dismiss it all as a dream. but if you ask my verit belief--that 
goe quit the other way. no; I should not say belief, but rather 
knowledge. I may tell you that I have known case in which men have 
stumbl quit by accid on certain of these "processes," and have 
been astonish by wholli unexpect results. In the case I am think 
of there could have been no possibl of "suggestion" or sub-consci 
action of ani kind. one might as well suppos a schoolboy "suggesting" 
the exist of æschylu to himself, while he plod mechan 
through the declensions. 

'but you have notic the obscurity,' ambros went on, 'and in thi 
particular case it must have been dictat by instinct, sinc the writer 
never thought that her manuscript would fall into other hands. but the 
practic is universal, and for most excel reasons. power and 
sovereign medicines, which are, of necessity, virul poison also, are 
kept in a lock cabinet. the child may find the key by chance, and 
drink herself dead; but in most case the search is educational, and the 
phial contain preciou elixir for him who ha patient fashion the 
key for himself.' 

'you do not care to go into details?' 

'no, frankly, I do not. no, you must remain unconvinced. but you saw how 
the manuscript illustr the talk we had last week?' 

'i thi girl still alive?' 

'no. I wa one of those who found her. I knew the father well; he wa a 
lawyer, and had alway left her veri much to herself. He thought of 
noth but deed and leases, and the news came to him as an aw 
surprise. she wa miss one morning; I suppos it wa about a year 
after she had written what you have read. the servant were called, and 
they told things, and put the onli natur interpret on them--a 
perfectli erron one. 

'they discov that green book somewher in her room, and I found her 
in the place that she describ with so much dread, lie on the ground 
befor the image.' 

'it wa an image?' 

'yes, it wa hidden by the thorn and the thick undergrowth that had 
surround it. It wa a wild, lone country; but you know what it wa 
like by her description, though of cours you will understand that the 
colour have been heightened. A child' imagin alway make the 
height higher and the depth deeper than they realli are; and she had, 
unfortun for herself, someth more than imagination. one might 
say, perhaps, that the pictur in her mind which she succeed in a 
measur in put into words, wa the scene as it would have appear 
to an imagin artist. but it is a strange, desol land.' 

'and she wa dead?' 

'yes. she had poison herself--in time. no; there wa not a word to be 
said against her in the ordinari sense. you may recollect a stori I told 
you the other night about a ladi who saw her child' finger crush by 
a window?' 

'and what wa thi statue?' 

'well, it wa of roman workmanship, of a stone that with the centuri 
had not blackened, but had becom white and luminous. the thicket had 
grown up about it and conceal it, and in the middl age the follow 
of a veri old tradit had known how to use it for their own purposes. 
In fact it had been incorpor into the monstrou mytholog of the 
sabbath. you will have note that those to whom a sight of that shine 
white had been vouchsaf by chance, or rather, perhaps, by appar 
chance, were requir to blindfold themselv on their second approach. 
that is veri significant.' 

'and is it there still?' 

'I sent for tools, and we hammer it into dust and fragments.' 

'the persist of tradit never surpris me,' ambros went on after 
a pause. 'I could name mani an english parish where such tradit as 
that girl had listen to in her childhood are still exist in occult 
but unab vigour. no, for me, it is the "story" not the "sequel," 
which is strang and awful, for I have alway believ that wonder is of 
the soul.' 




the great god pan 


I 

the experi 

'I am glad you came, clarke; veri glad indeed. I wa not sure you could 
spare the time.' 

'I wa abl to make arrang for a few days; thing are not veri 
live just now. but have you no misgivings, raymond? Is it absolut 
safe?' 

the two men were slowli pace the terrac in front of dr. raymond' 
house. the sun still hung abov the western mountain-line, but it shone 
with a dull red glow that cast no shadows, and all the air wa quiet; a 
sweet breath came from the great wood on the hillsid above, and with 
it, at intervals, the soft murmur call of the wild doves. below, in 
the long love valley, the river wound in and out between the lone 
hills, and, as the sun hover and vanish into the west, a faint mist, 
pure white, began to rise from the banks. dr. raymond turn sharpli to 
hi friend. 

'safe? Of cours it is. In itself the oper is a perfectli simpl 
one; ani surgeon could do it.' 

'and there is no danger at ani other stage?' 

'none; absolut no physic danger whatever, I give you my word. you 
are alway timid, clarke, always; but you know my history. I have 
devot myself to transcendent medicin for the last twenti years. I 
have heard myself call quack and charlatan and impostor, but all the 
while I knew I wa on the right path. five year ago I reach the goal, 
and sinc then everi day ha been a prepar for what we shall do 
to-night.' 

'I should like to believ it is all true.' clark knit hi brows, and 
look doubt at dr. raymond. 'are you perfectli sure, raymond, that 
your theori is not a phantasmagoria--a splendid vision, certainly, but a 
mere vision after all?' 

dr. raymond stop in hi walk and turn sharply. He wa a middle-ag 
man, gaunt and thin, of a pale yellow complexion, but as he answer 
clark and face him, there wa a flush on hi cheek. 

'look about you, clarke. you see the mountain, and hill follow after 
hill, as wave on wave, you see the wood and orchards, the field of 
ripe corn, and the meadow reach to the reed-b by the river. you 
see me stand here besid you, and hear my voice; but I tell you that 
all these things--yes, from that star that ha just shone out in the sky 
to the solid ground beneath our feet--i say that all these are but 
dream and shadows: the shadow that hide the real world from our eyes. 
there _is_ a real world, but it is beyond thi glamour and thi vision, 
beyond these "chase in arras, dream in a career," beyond them all as 
beyond a veil. I do not know whether ani human be ha ever lift 
that veil; but I do know, clarke, that you and I shall see it lift 
thi veri night from befor another' eyes. you may think all thi 
strang nonsense; it may be strange, but it is true, and the ancient 
knew what lift the veil means. they call it see the god pan.' 

clark shivered; the white mist gather over the river wa chilly. 

'it is wonder indeed,' he said. 'we are stand on the brink of a 
strang world, raymond, if what you say is true. I suppos the knife is 
absolut necessary?' 

'yes; a slight lesion in the grey matter, that is all; a trifl 
rearrang of certain cells, a microscop alter that would 
escap the attent of ninety-nin brain specialist out of a hundred. 
I don't want to bother you with "shop," clarke; I might give you a mass 
of technic detail which would sound veri imposing, and would leav you 
as enlighten as you are now. but I suppos you have read, casually, in 
out-of-the-way corner of your paper, that immens stride have been 
made recent in the physiolog of the brain. I saw a paragraph the 
other day about digby' theory, and brown faber' discoveries. theori 
and discoveries! where they are stand now, I stood fifteen year ago, 
and I need not tell you that I have not been stand still for the last 
fifteen years. It will be enough if I say that five year ago I made the 
discoveri to which I allud when I said that then I reach the goal. 
after year of labour, after year of toil and grope in the dark, 
after day and night of disappoint and sometim of despair, in 
which I use now and then to trembl and grow cold with the thought that 
perhap there were other seek for what I sought, at last, after so 
long, a pang of sudden joy thrill my soul, and I knew the long journey 
wa at an end. By what seem then and still seem a chance, the 
suggest of a moment' idl thought follow up upon familiar line 
and path that I had track a hundr time already, the great truth 
burst upon me, and I saw, map out in line of light, a whole world, a 
sphere unknown; contin and islands, and great ocean in which no 
ship ha sail (to my belief) sinc a man first lift up hi eye and 
beheld the sun, and the star of heaven, and the quiet earth beneath. 
you will think all thi high-flown language, clarke, but it is hard to 
be literal. and yet; I do not know whether what I am hint at cannot 
be set forth in plain and home terms. for instance, thi world of our 
is pretti well gird now with the telegraph wire and cables; thought, 
with someth less than the speed of thought, flash from sunris to 
sunset, from north to south, across the flood and the desert places. 
suppos that an electrician of to-day were suddenli to perceiv that he 
and hi friend have mere been play with pebbl and mistak them 
for the foundat of the world; suppos that such a man saw uttermost 
space lie open befor the current, and word of men flash forth to the 
sun and beyond the sun into the system beyond, and the voic of 
articulate-speak men echo in the wast void that bound our thought. 
As analog go, that is a pretti good analog of what I have done; you 
can understand now a littl of what I felt as I stood here one evening; 
it wa a summer evening, and the valley look much as it doe now; I 
stood here, and saw befor me the unutterable, the unthink gulf that 
yawn profound between two worlds, the world of matter and the world of 
spirit; I saw the great empti deep stretch dim befor me, and in that 
instant a bridg of light leapt from the earth to the unknown shore, 
and the abyss wa spanned. you may look in brown faber' book, if you 
like, and you will find that to the present day men of scienc are 
unabl to account for the presence, or to specifi the function of a 
certain group of nerve-cel in the brain. that group is, as it were, 
land to let, a mere wast place for fanci theories. I am not in the 
posit of brown faber and the specialists, I am perfectli instruct 
as to the possibl function of those nerve-cent in the scheme of 
things. with a touch I can bring them into play, with a touch, I say, I 
can set free the current, with a touch I can complet the commun 
between thi world of sens and----w shall be abl to finish the 
sentenc later on. yes, the knife is necessary; but think what that 
knife will effect. It will level utterli the solid wall of sense, and 
probably, for the first time sinc man wa made, a spirit will gaze on a 
spirit-world. clarke, mari will see the god pan!' 

'but you rememb what you wrote to me? I thought it would be requisit 
that she----' 

He whisper the rest into the doctor' ear. 

'not at all, not at all. that is nonsense, I assur you. indeed, it is 
better as it is; I am quit certain of that.' 

'consid the matter well, raymond. it' a great responsibility. 
someth might go wrong; you would be a miser man for the rest of 
your days.' 

'no, I think not, even if the worst happened. As you know, I rescu 
mari from the gutter, and from almost certain starvation, when she wa a 
child; I think her life is mine, to use as I see fit. come, it is 
get late; we had better go in.' 

dr. raymond led the way into the house, through the hall, and down a 
long dark passage. He took a key from hi pocket and open a heavi 
door, and motion clark into hi laboratory. It had onc been a 
billiard-room, and wa light by a glass dome in the centr of the 
ceiling, whenc there still shone a sad grey light on the figur of the 
doctor as he lit a lamp with a heavi shade and place it on a tabl in 
the middl of the room. 

clark look about him. scarc a foot of wall remain bare; there 
were shelv all around laden with bottl and phial of all shape and 
colours, and at one end stood a littl chippendal bookcase. raymond 
point to this. 

'you see that parchment oswald crollius? He wa one of the first to show 
me the way, though I don't think he ever found it himself. that is a 
strang say of his: "in everi grain of wheat there lie hidden the 
soul of a star."' 

there wa not much of furnitur in the laboratory. the tabl in the 
centre, a stone slab with a drain in one corner, the two armchair on 
which raymond and clark were sitting; that wa all, except an 
odd-look chair at the furthest end of the room. clark look at it, 
and rais hi eyebrows. 

'yes, that is the chair,' said raymond. 'we may as well place it in 
position,' He got up and wheel the chair to the light, and began 
rais and lower it, let down the seat, set the back at 
variou angles, and adjust the foot-rest. It look comfort 
enough, and clark pass hi hand over the soft green velvet, as the 
doctor manipul the levers. 

'now, clarke, make yourself quit comfortable. I have a coupl of 
hours' work befor me; I wa oblig to leav certain matter to the 
last.' 

raymond went to the stone slab, and clark watch him drearili as he 
bent over a row of phial and lit the flame under the crucible. the 
doctor had a small hand-lamp, shade as the larger one, on a ledg abov 
hi apparatus, and clarke, who sat in the shadows, look down the great 
dreari room, wonder at the bizarr effect of brilliant light and 
undefin dark contrast with one another. soon he becam 
consciou of an odd odour, at first the merest suggest of odour, in 
the room; and as it grew more decid he felt surpris that he wa not 
remind of the chemist' shop or the surgery. clark found himself idli 
endeavour to analys the sensation, and, half conscious, he began to 
think of a day, fifteen year ago, that he had spent in roam through 
the wood and meadow near hi old home. It wa a burn day at the 
begin of august, the heat had dim the outlin of all thing and 
all distanc with a faint mist, and peopl who observ the thermomet 
spoke of an abnorm register, of a temperatur that wa almost 
tropical. strang that wonder hot day of the 'fifti rose up in 
clarke' imagination; the sens of dazzl all-pervad sunlight 
seem to blot out the shadow and the light of the laboratory, and he 
felt again the heat air beat in gust about hi face, saw the 
shimmer rise from the turf, and heard the myriad murmur of the summer. 

'I hope the smell doesn't annoy you, clarke; there' noth unwholesom 
about it. It may make you a bit sleepy, that' all.' 

clark heard the word quit distinctly, and knew that raymond wa 
speak to him, but for the life of him he could not rous himself from 
hi lethargy. He could onli think of the lone walk he had taken 
fifteen year ago; it wa hi last look at the field and wood he had 
known sinc he wa a child, and now it all stood out in brilliant light, 
as a picture, befor him. abov all there came to hi nostril the scent 
of summer, the smell of flower mingled, and the odour of the woods, of 
cool shade places, deep in the green depths, drawn forth by the sun' 
heat; and the scent of the good earth, lie as it were with arm 
stretch forth, and smile lips, overpow all. hi fanci made him 
wander, as he had wander long ago, from the field into the wood, 
track a littl path between the shine undergrowth of beech-trees; 
and the trickl of water drop from the limeston rock sound as a 
clear melodi in the dream. thought began to go astray and to mingl 
with other recollections; the beech alley wa transform to a path 
beneath ilex-trees, and here and there a vine climb from bough to 
bough, and sent up wave tendril and droop with purpl grapes, and 
the spars grey-green leav of a wild olive-tre stood out against the 
dark shadow of the ilex. clarke, in the deep fold of dream, wa 
consciou that the path from hi father' hous had led him into an 
undiscov country, and he wa wonder at the strang of it all, 
when suddenly, in place of the hum and murmur of the summer, an infinit 
silenc seem to fall on all things, and the wood wa hushed, and for a 
moment of time he stood face to face there with a presence, that wa 
neither man nor beast, neither the live nor the dead, but all thing 
mingled, the form of all thing but devoid of all form. and in that 
moment, the sacrament of bodi and soul wa dissolved, and a voic seem 
to cri 'let us go hence,' and then the dark of dark beyond the 
stars, the dark of everlasting. 

when clark woke up with a start he saw raymond pour a few drop of 
some oili fluid into a green phial, which he stopper tightly. 

'you have been dozing,' he said; 'the journey must have tire you out. 
It is done now. I am go to fetch mary; I shall be back in ten 
minutes.' 

clark lay back in hi chair and wondered. It seem as if he had but 
pass from one dream into another. He half expect to see the wall of 
the laboratori melt and disappear, and to awak in london, shudder at 
hi own sleep fancies. but at last the door opened, and the doctor 
returned, and behind him came a girl of about seventeen, dress all in 
white. she wa so beauti that clark did not wonder at what the 
doctor had written to him. she wa blush now over face and neck and 
arms, but raymond seem unmoved. 

'mary,' he said, 'the time ha come. you are quit free. are you will 
to trust yourself to me entirely?' 

'yes, dear.' 

'you hear that, clarke? you are my witness. here is the chair, mary. It 
is quit easy. just sit in it and lean back. are you ready?' 

'yes, dear, quit ready. give me a kiss befor you begin.' 

the doctor stoop and kiss her mouth, kindli enough. 'now shut your 
eyes,' he said. the girl close her eyelids, as if she were tired, and 
long for sleep, and raymond held the green phial to her nostrils. her 
face grew white, whiter than her dress; she struggl faintly, and then 
with the feel of submiss strong within her, cross her arm upon 
her breast as a littl child about to say her prayers. the bright light 
of the lamp beat full upon her, and clark watch chang fleet over 
that face as the chang of the hill when the summer cloud float 
across the sun. and then she lay all white and still, and the doctor 
turn up one of her eyelids. she wa quit unconscious. raymond press 
hard on one of the lever and the chair instantli sank back. clark saw 
him cut away a circle, like a tonsure, from her hair, and the lamp 
wa move nearer. raymond took a small glitter instrument from a 
littl case, and clark turn away shuddering. when he look again the 
doctor wa bind up the wound he had made. 

'she will awak in five minutes.' raymond wa still perfectli cool. 
'there is noth more to be done; we can onli wait.' 

the minut pass slowly; they could hear a slow, heavi ticking. there 
wa an old clock in the passage. clark felt sick and faint; hi knee 
shook beneath him, he could hardli stand. 

suddenly, as they watched, they heard a long-drawn sigh, and suddenli 
did the colour that had vanish return to the girl' cheeks, and 
suddenli her eye opened. clark quail befor them. they shone with an 
aw light, look far away, and a great wonder fell upon her face, 
and her hand stretch out as if to touch what wa invisible; but in an 
instant the wonder faded, and gave place to the most aw terror. the 
muscl of her face were hideous convulsed, she shook from head to 
foot; the soul seem struggl and shudder within the hous of 
flesh. It wa a horribl sight, and clark rush forward, as she fell 
shriek to the floor. 

three day later raymond took clark to mary' bedside. she wa lie 
wide-awake, roll her head from side to side, and grin vacantly. 

'yes,' said the doctor, still quit cool, 'it is a great pity; she is a 
hopeless idiot. however, it could not be helped; and, after all, she ha 
seen the great god pan.' 


II 

mr. clarke' memoir 

mr. clarke, the gentleman chosen by dr. raymond to wit the strang 
experi of the god pan, wa a person in whose charact caution and 
curios were oddli mingled; in hi sober moment he thought of the 
unusu and the eccentr with undisguis aversion, and yet, deep in 
hi heart, there wa a wide-ey inquisit with respect to all the 
more recondit and esoter element in the natur of men. the latter 
tendenc had prevail when he accept raymond' invitation, for though 
hi consid judgment had alway repudi the doctor' theori as 
the wildest nonsense, yet he secretli hug a belief in fantasy, and 
would have rejoic to see that belief confirmed. the horror that he 
wit in the dreari laboratori were to a certain extent salutary; he 
wa consciou of be involv in an affair not altogeth reputable, 
and for mani year afterward he clung brave to the commonplace, and 
reject all occas of occult investigation. indeed, on some 
hom[oe]opath principle, he for some time attend the seanc of 
distinguish mediums, hope that the clumsi trick of these gentlemen 
would make him altogeth disgust with mystic of everi kind, but 
the remedy, though caustic, wa not efficacious. clark knew that he 
still pine for the unseen, and littl by little, the old passion began 
to reassert itself, as the face of mary, shudder and convuls with 
an unknow terror, fade slowli from hi memory. occupi all day in 
pursuit both seriou and lucrative, the temptat to relax in the 
even wa too great, especi in the winter months, when the fire 
cast a warm glow over hi snug bachelor apartment, and a bottl of some 
choic claret stood readi by hi elbow. hi dinner digested, he would 
make a brief pretenc of read the even paper, but the mere 
catalogu of news soon pall upon him, and clark would find himself 
cast glanc of warm desir in the direct of an old japanes 
bureau, which stood at a pleasant distanc from the hearth. like a boy 
befor a jam-closet, for a few minut he would hover indecisive, but 
lust alway prevailed, and clark end by draw up hi chair, 
light a candle, and sit down befor the bureau. it pigeonhol 
and drawer teem with document on the most morbid subjects, and in 
the well repos a larg manuscript volume, in which he had pain 
enter the gem of hi collection. clark had a fine contempt for 
publish literature; the most ghostli stori ceas to interest him if 
it happen to be printed; hi sole pleasur wa in the reading, 
compiling, and rearrang what he call hi 'memoir to prove the 
exist of the devil,' and engag in thi pursuit the even seem 
to fli and the night appear too short. 

On one particular evening, an ugli decemb night, black with fog, and 
raw with frost, clark hurri over hi dinner, and scarc deign to 
observ hi customari ritual of take up the paper and lay it down 
again. He pace two or three time up and down the room, and open the 
bureau, stood still a moment, and sat down. He leant back, absorb in 
one of those dream to which he wa subject, and at length drew out hi 
book, and open it at the last entry. there were three or four page 
dens cover with clarke' round, set penmanship, and at the 
begin he had written in a somewhat larger hand: 

singular narr told me by my friend, dr. phillips. He assur me 
that all the fact relat therein are strictli and wholli true, but 
refus to give either the surnam of the person concerned, or the 
place where these extraordinari event occurred. 

mr. clark began to read over the account for the tenth time, glanc 
now and then at the pencil note he had made when it wa told him by hi 
friend. It wa one of hi humour to pride himself on a certain literari 
ability; he thought well of hi style, and took pain in arrang the 
circumst in dramat order. He read the follow story:-- 

the person concern in thi statement are helen v., who, if she is 
still alive, must now be a woman of twenty-three, rachel m., sinc 
deceased, who wa a year younger than the above, and trevor w., an 
imbecile, age eighteen. these person were at the period of the stori 
inhabit of a villag on the border of wales, a place of some 
import in the time of the roman occupation, but now a scatter 
hamlet, of not more than five hundr souls. It is situat on rise 
ground, about six mile from the sea, and is shelter by a larg and 
picturesqu forest. 

some eleven year ago, helen V. came to the villag under rather 
peculiar circumstances. It is understood that she, be an orphan, wa 
adopt in her infanc by a distant relative, who brought her up in hi 
own hous till she wa twelv year old. thinking, however, that it 
would be better for the child to have playmat of her own age, he 
advertis in sever local paper for a good home in a comfort 
farmhous for a girl of twelve, and thi advertis wa answer by 
mr. r., a well-to-do farmer in the above-ment village. hi 
refer prove satisfactory, the gentleman sent hi adopt daughter 
to mr. r., with a letter, in which he stipul that the girl should 
have a room to herself, and state that her guardian need be at no 
troubl in the matter of education, as she wa alreadi suffici 
educ for the posit in life which she would occupy. In fact, mr. 
R. wa given to understand that the girl wa to be allow to find her 
own occupations, and to spend her time almost as she liked. mr. R. duli 
met her at the nearest station, a town some seven mile away from hi 
house, and seem to have remark noth extraordinari about the 
child, except that she wa retic as to her former life and her 
adopt father. she was, however, of a veri differ type from the 
inhabit of the village; her skin wa a pale, clear olive, and her 
featur were strongli marked, and of a somewhat foreign character. she 
appear to have settl down easili enough into farmhous life, and 
becam a favourit with the children, who sometim went with her on her 
rambl in the forest, for thi wa her amusement. mr. R. state that he 
ha known her go out by herself directli after their earli breakfast, 
and not return till after dusk, and that, feel uneasi at a young girl 
be out alon for so mani hours, he commun with her adopt 
father, who repli in a brief note that helen must do as she chose. In 
the winter, when the forest path are impassable, she spent most of her 
time in her bedroom, where she slept alone, accord to the 
instruct of her relative. It wa on one of these expedit to the 
forest that the first of the singular incid with which thi girl is 
connect occurred, the date be about a year after her arriv at the 
village. the preced winter had been remark severe, the snow 
drift to a great depth, and the frost continu for an unexampl 
period, and the summer follow wa as noteworthi for it extrem heat. 
On one of the veri hottest day in thi summer, helen V. left the 
farmhous for one of her long rambl in the forest, take with her, as 
usual, some bread and meat for lunch. she wa seen by some men in the 
field make for the old roman road, a green causeway which travers 
the highest part of the wood, and they were astonish to observ that 
the girl had taken off her hat, though the heat of the sun wa alreadi 
almost tropical. As it happened, a labourer, joseph W. by name, wa 
work in the forest near the roman road, and at twelv o'clock hi 
littl son, trevor, brought the man hi dinner of bread and cheese. 
after the meal, the boy, who wa about seven year old at the time, left 
hi father at work, and, as he said, went to look for flower in the 
wood, and the man, who could hear him shout with delight over hi 
discoveries, felt no uneasiness. suddenly, however, he wa horrifi at 
hear the most dread screams, evid the result of great terror, 
proceed from the direct in which hi son had gone, and he hastili 
threw down hi tool and ran to see what had happened. trace hi path 
by the sound, he met the littl boy, who wa run headlong, and wa 
evid terribl frightened, and on question him the man at last 
elicit that after pick a posi of flower he felt tired, and lay 
down on the grass and fell asleep. He wa suddenli awakened, as he 
stated, by a peculiar noise, a sort of sing he call it, and on 
peep through the branch he saw helen V. play on the grass with a 
'strang nake man,' whom he seem unabl to describ more fully. He 
said he felt dread frightened, and ran away cri for hi father. 
joseph W. proceed in the direct indic by hi son, and found 
helen V. sit on the grass in the middl of a glade or open space 
left by charcoal burners. He angrili charg her with frighten hi 
littl boy, but she entir deni the accus and laugh at the 
child' stori of a 'strang man,' to which he himself did not attach 
much credence. joseph W. came to the conclus that the boy had woke up 
with a sudden fright, as children sometim do, but trevor persist in 
hi story, and continu in such evid distress that at last hi 
father took him home, hope that hi mother would be abl to sooth 
him. for mani weeks, however, the boy gave hi parent much anxiety; he 
becam nervou and strang in hi manner, refus to leav the cottag 
by himself, and constantli alarm the household by wake in the night 
with cri of 'the man in the wood! father! father!' 

In cours of time, however, the impress seem to have worn off, and 
about three month later he accompani hi father to the hous of a 
gentleman in the neighbourhood, for whom joseph W. occasion did 
work. the man wa shown into the study, and the littl boy wa left 
sit in the hall, and a few minut later, while the gentleman wa 
give W. hi instructions, they were both horrifi by a pierc 
shriek and the sound of a fall, and rush out they found the child 
lie senseless on the floor, hi face contort with terror. the doctor 
wa immedi summoned, and after some examin he pronounc the 
child to be suffer from a kind of fit, appar produc by a 
sudden shock. the boy wa taken to one of the bedrooms, and after some 
time recov consciousness, but onli to pass into a condit 
describ by the medic man as one of violent hysteria. the doctor 
exhibit a strong sedative, and in the cours of two hour pronounc 
him fit to walk home, but in pass through the hall the paroxysm of 
fright return and with addit violence. the father perceiv that 
the child wa point at some object, and heard the old cry, 'the man 
in the wood,' and look in the direct indic saw a stone head of 
grotesqu appearance, which had been built into the wall abov one of 
the doors. It seem that the owner of the hous had recent made 
alter in hi premises, and on dig the foundat for some 
offices, the men had found a curiou head, evid of the roman 
period, which had been place in the hall in the manner described. the 
head is pronounc by the most experienc archaeologist of the 
district to be that of a faun or satyr.[1] 

[1] dr. phillip tell me that he ha seen the head in question, and 
assur me that he ha never receiv such a vivid present of 
intens evil. 

from whatev caus arising, thi second shock seem too sever for the 
boy trevor, and at the present date he suffer from a weak of 
intellect, which give but littl promis of amending. the matter caus 
a good deal of sensat at the time, and the girl helen wa close 
question by mr. r., but to no purpose, she steadfastli deni that 
she had frighten or in ani way molest trevor. 

the second event with which thi girl' name is connect took place 
about six year ago, and is of a still more extraordinari character. 

At the begin of the summer of 1882 helen contract a friendship of 
a peculiarli intim charact with rachel m., the daughter of a 
prosper farmer in the neighbourhood. thi girl, who wa a year 
younger than helen, wa consid by most peopl to be the prettier of 
the two, though helen' featur had to a great extent soften as she 
becam older. the two girls, who were togeth on everi avail 
opportunity, present a singular contrast, the one with her clear, 
oliv skin and almost italian appearance, and the other of the 
proverbi red and white of our rural districts. It must be state that 
the payment made to mr. R. for the mainten of helen were known in 
the villag for their excess liberality, and the impress wa 
gener that she would one day inherit a larg sum of money from her 
relative. the parent of rachel were therefor not avers from their 
daughter' friendship with the girl, and even encourag the intimacy, 
though they now bitterli regret have done so. helen still retain her 
extraordinari fond for the forest, and on sever occas rachel 
accompani her, the two friend set out earli in the morning, and 
remain in the wood till dusk. onc or twice after these excurs 
mrs. M. thought her daughter' manner rather peculiar; she seem 
languid and dreamy, and as it ha been expressed, 'differ from 
herself,' but these peculiar seem to have been thought too trifl 
for remark. one evening, however, after rachel had come home, her mother 
heard a nois which sound like suppress weep in the girl' room, 
and on go in found her lying, half undressed, upon the bed, evid 
in the greatest distress. As soon as she saw her mother, she exclaimed, 
'ah, mother, mother, whi did you let me go to the forest with helen?' 
mrs. M. wa astonish at so strang a question, and proceed to make 
inquiries. rachel told her a wild story. she said-- 

clark close the book with a snap, and turn hi chair toward the 
fire. when hi friend sat one even in that veri chair, and told hi 
story, clark had interrupt him at a point a littl subsequ to 
this, had cut short hi word in a paroxysm of horror. 'mi god!' he had 
exclaimed, 'think, think what you are saying. It is too incredible, too 
monstrous; such thing can never be in thi quiet world, where men and 
women live and die, and struggle, and conquer, or mayb fail, and fall 
down under sorrow, and griev and suffer strang fortun for mani a 
year; but not this, phillips, not such thing as this. there must be 
some explanation, some way out of the terror. why, man, if such a case 
were possible, our earth would be a nightmare.' 

but phillip had told hi stori to the end, concluding: 

'her flight remain a mysteri to thi day; she vanish in broad 
sunlight; they saw her walk in a meadow, and a few moment later she 
wa not there.' 

clark tri to conceiv the thing again, as he sat by the fire, and 
again hi mind shudder and shrank back, appal befor the sight of 
such awful, unspeak element enthron as it were, and triumphant in 
human flesh. befor him stretch the long dim vista of the green 
causeway in the forest, as hi friend had describ it; he saw the 
sway leav and the quiver shadow on the grass, he saw the 
sunlight and the flowers, and far away, far in the long distance, the 
two figur move toward him. one wa rachel, but the other? 

clark had tri hi best to disbeliev it all, but at the end of the 
account, as he had written it in hi book, he had place the 
inscription: 

ET diabolu incarnatu est. ET homo factu est. 


iii 

the citi OF resurrect 

'herbert! good god! Is it possible?' 

'yes, my name' herbert. I think I know your face too, but I don't 
rememb your name. My memori is veri queer.' 

'don't you recollect villier of wadham?' 

'so it is, so it is. I beg your pardon, villiers, I didn't think I wa 
beg of an old colleg friend. good-night.' 

'mi dear fellow, thi hast is unnecessary. My room are close by, but 
we won't go there just yet. suppos we walk up shaftesburi avenu a 
littl way? but how in heaven' name have you come to thi pass, 
herbert?' 

'it' a long story, villiers, and a strang one too, but you can hear it 
if you like.' 

'come on, then. take my arm, you don't seem veri strong.' 

the ill-assort pair move slowli up rupert street; the one in dirty, 
evil-look rags, and the other attir in the regul uniform of a 
man about town, trim, glossy, and emin well-to-do. villier had 
emerg from hi restaur after an excel dinner of mani courses, 
assist by an ingrati littl flask of chianti, and, in that frame 
of mind which wa with him almost chronic, had delay a moment by the 
door, peer round in the dimly-light street in search of those 
mysteri incid and person with which the street of london teem 
in everi quarter and at everi hour. villier pride himself as a 
practis explor of such obscur maze and byway of london life, and 
in thi unprofit pursuit he display an assidu which wa worthi 
of more seriou employment. thu he stood besid the lamp-post survey 
the passers-bi with undisguis curiosity, and with that graviti onli 
known to the systemat diner, had just enunci in hi mind the 
formula: 'london ha been call the citi of encounters; it is more than 
that, it is the citi of resurrections,' when these reflect were 
suddenli interrupt by a piteou whine at hi elbow, and a deplor 
appeal for alms. He look around in some irritation, and with a sudden 
shock found himself confront with the embodi proof of hi somewhat 
stilt fancies. there, close besid him, hi face alter and 
disfigur by poverti and disgrace, hi bodi bare cover by greasi 
ill-fit rags, stood hi old friend charl herbert, who had 
matricul on the same day as himself, with whom he had been merri and 
wise for twelv revolv terms. differ occup and vari 
interest had interrupt the friendship, and it wa six year sinc 
villier had seen herbert; and now he look upon thi wreck of a man 
with grief and dismay, mingl with a certain inquisit as to what 
dreari chain of circumst had drag him down to such a dole 
pass. villier felt togeth with compass all the relish of the 
amateur in mysteries, and congratul himself on hi leisur 
specul outsid the restaurant. 

they walk on in silenc for some time, and more than one passer-bi 
stare in astonish at the unaccustom spectacl of a well-dress 
man with an unmistak beggar hang on to hi arm, and, observ 
this, villier led the way to an obscur street in soho. here he 
repeat hi question. 

'how on earth ha it happened, herbert? I alway understood you would 
succeed to an excel posit in dorsetshire. did your father 
disinherit you? sure not?' 

'no, villiers; I came into all the properti at my poor father' death; 
he die a year after I left oxford. He wa a veri good father to me, and 
I mourn hi death sincer enough. but you know what young men are; a 
few month later I came up to town and went a good deal into society. Of 
cours I had excel introductions, and I manag to enjoy myself veri 
much in a harmless sort of way. I play a little, certainly, but never 
for heavi stakes, and the few bet I made on race brought me in 
money--onli a few pounds, you know, but enough to pay for cigar and 
such petti pleasures. It wa in my second season that the tide turned. 
Of cours you have heard of my marriage?' 

'no, I never heard anyth about it.' 

'yes, I married, villiers. I met a girl, a girl of the most wonder 
and most strang beauty, at the hous of some peopl whom I knew. I 
cannot tell you her age; I never knew it, but, so far as I can guess, I 
should think she must have been about nineteen when I made her 
acquaintance. My friend had come to know her at florence; she told 
them she wa an orphan, the child of an english father and an italian 
mother, and she charm them as she charm me. the first time I saw her 
wa at an even party. I wa stand by the door talk to a friend, 
when suddenli abov the hum and babbl of convers I heard a voic 
which seem to thrill to my heart. she wa sing an italian song. I 
wa introduc to her that evening, and in three month I marri helen. 
villiers, that woman, if I can call her woman, corrupt my soul. the 
night of the wed I found myself sit in her bedroom in the hotel, 
listen to her talk. she wa sit up in bed, and I listen to her 
as she spoke in her beauti voice, spoke of thing which even now I 
would not dare whisper in blackest night, though I stood in the midst of 
a wilderness. you, villiers, you may think you know life, and london, 
and what goe on day and night in thi dread city; for all I can say 
you may have heard the talk of the vilest, but I tell you you can have 
no concept of what I know, not in your most fantastic, hideou dream 
can you have imag forth the faintest shadow of what I have heard--and 
seen. yes, seen. I have seen the incredible, such horror that even I 
myself sometim stop in the middl of the street, and ask whether it is 
possibl for a man to behold such thing and live. In a year, villiers, 
I wa a ruin man, in bodi and soul--in bodi and soul.' 

'but your property, herbert? you had land in dorset.' 

'I sold it all; the field and woods, the dear old house--everything.' 

'and the money?' 

'she took it all from me.' 

'and then left you?' 

'yes; she disappear one night. I don't know where she went, but I am 
sure if I saw her again it would kill me. the rest of my stori is of no 
interest; sordid misery, that is all. you may think, villiers, that I 
have exagger and talk for effect; but I have not told you half. I 
could tell you certain thing which would convinc you, but you would 
never know a happi day again. you would pass the rest of your life, as I 
pass mine, a haunt man, a man who ha seen hell.' 

villier took the unfortun man to hi rooms, and gave him a meal. 
herbert could eat little, and scarc touch the glass of wine set 
befor him. He sat moodi and silent by the fire, and seem reliev 
when villier sent him away with a small present of money. 

'bi the way, herbert,' said villiers, as they part at the door, 'what 
wa your wife' name? you said helen, I think? helen what?' 

'the name she pass under when I met her wa helen vaughan, but what 
her real name wa I can't say. I don't think she had a name. no, no, not 
in that sense. onli human be have names, villiers; I can't say ani 
more. good-bye; yes, I will not fail to call if I see ani way in which 
you can help me. good-night.' 

the man went out into the bitter night, and villier return to hi 
fireside. there wa someth about herbert which shock him 
inexpressibly; not hi poor rag nor the mark which poverti had set 
upon hi face, but rather an indefinit terror which hung about him 
like a mist. He had acknowledg that he himself wa not devoid of 
blame; the woman, he had avowed, had corrupt him bodi and soul, and 
villier felt that thi man, onc hi friend, had been an actor in 
scene evil beyond the power of words. hi stori need no confirmation: 
he himself wa the embodi proof of it. villier muse curious over 
the stori he had heard, and wonder whether he had heard both the first 
and the last of it. 'no,' he thought, 'certainli not the last, probabl 
onli the beginning. A case like thi is like a nest of chines boxes; 
you open one after anoth and find a quainter workmanship in everi box. 
most like poor herbert is mere one of the outsid boxes; there are 
stranger one to follow.' 

villier could not take hi mind away from herbert and hi story, which 
seem to grow wilder as the night wore on. the fire began to burn low, 
and the chilli air of the morn crept into the room; villier got up 
with a glanc over hi shoulder, and shiver slightly, went to bed. 

A few day later he saw at hi club a gentleman of hi acquaintance, 
name austin, who wa famou for hi intim knowledg of london life, 
both in it tenebr and lumin phases. villiers, still full of hi 
encount in soho and it consequences, thought austin might possibl be 
abl to shed some light on herbert' history, and so after some casual 
talk he suddenli put the question: 

'do you happen to know anyth of a man name herbert--charl 
herbert?' 

austin turn round sharpli and stare at villier with some 
astonishment. 

'charl herbert? weren't you in town three year ago? no; then you have 
not heard of the paul street case? It caus a good deal of sensat at 
the time.' 

'what wa the case?' 

'well, a gentleman, a man of veri good position, wa found dead, stark 
dead, in the area of a certain hous in paul street, off tottenham court 
road. Of cours the polic did not make the discovery; if you happen to 
be sit up all night and have a light in your window, the constabl 
will ring the bell, but if you happen to be lie dead in somebody' 
area, you will be left alone. In thi instanc as in mani other the 
alarm wa rais by some kind of vagabond; I don't mean a common tramp, 
or a public-hous loafer, but a gentleman, whose busi or pleasure, 
or both, made him a spectat of the london street at five o'clock in 
the morning. thi individu was, as he said, "go home," it did not 
appear whenc or whither, and had occas to pass through paul street 
between four and five a. m. someth or other caught hi eye at number 
20; he said, absurdli enough, that the hous had the most unpleas 
physiognomi he had ever observed, but, at ani rate, he glanc down the 
area, and wa a good deal astonish to see a man lie on the stones, 
hi limb all huddl together, and hi face turn up. our gentleman 
thought hi face look peculiarli ghastly, and so set off at a run in 
search of the nearest policeman. the constabl wa at first inclin to 
treat the matter lightly, suspect common drunkenness; however, he 
came, and after look at the man' face, chang hi tone, quickli 
enough. the earli bird, who had pick up thi fine worm, wa sent off 
for a doctor, and the policeman rang and knock at the door till a 
slatternli servant girl came down look more than half asleep. the 
constabl point out the content of the area to the maid, who scream 
loudli enough to wake up the street, but she knew noth of the man; 
had never seen him at the house, and so forth. meanwhil the origin 
discover had come back with a medic man, and the next thing wa to 
get into the area. the gate wa open, so the whole quartet stump down 
the steps. the doctor hardli need a moment' examination; he said the 
poor fellow had been dead for sever hours, and it wa then the case 
began to get interesting. the dead man had not been robbed, and in one 
of hi pocket were paper identifi him as--well, as a man of good 
famili and means, a favourit in society, and nobody' enemy, so far as 
could be known. I don't give hi name, villiers, becaus it ha noth 
to do with the story, and becaus it' no good rake up these affair 
about the dead when there are no relat living. the next curiou 
point wa that the medic men couldn't agre as to how he met hi 
death. there were some slight bruis on hi shoulders, but they were so 
slight that it look as if he had been push roughli out of the 
kitchen door, and not thrown over the rail from the street or even 
drag down the steps. but there were posit no other mark of 
violenc about him, certainli none that would account for hi death; and 
when they came to the autopsi there wasn't a trace of poison of ani 
kind. Of cours the polic want to know all about the peopl at number 
20, and here again, so I have heard from privat sources, one or two 
other veri curiou point came out. It appear that the occup of the 
hous were a mr. and mrs. charl herbert; he wa said to be a land 
proprietor, though it struck most peopl that paul street wa not 
exactli the place to look for counti gentry. As for mrs. herbert, nobodi 
seem to know who or what she was, and, between ourselves, I fanci the 
diver after her histori found themselv in rather strang waters. Of 
cours they both deni know anyth about the deceased, and in 
default of ani evid against them they were discharged. but some veri 
odd thing came out about them. though it wa between five and six in 
the morn when the dead man wa removed, a larg crowd had collected, 
and sever of the neighbour ran to see what wa go on. they were 
pretti free with their comments, by all accounts, and from these it 
appear that number 20 wa in veri bad odour in paul street. the 
detect tri to trace down these rumour to some solid foundat of 
fact, but could not get hold of anything. peopl shook their head and 
rais their eyebrow and thought the herbert rather "queer," "would 
rather not be seen go into their house," and so on, but there wa 
noth tangible. the author were moral certain that the man met 
hi death in some way or anoth in the hous and wa thrown out by the 
kitchen door, but they couldn't prove it, and the absenc of ani 
indic of violenc or poison left them helpless. An odd case, 
wasn't it? but curious enough, there' someth more that I haven't 
told you. I happen to know one of the doctor who wa consult as to 
the caus of death, and some time after the inquest I met him, and ask 
him about it. "do you realli mean to tell me," I said, "that you were 
baffl by the case, that you actual don't know what the man die of?" 
"pardon me," he replied, "I know perfectli well what caus death. blank 
die of fright, of sheer, aw terror; I never saw featur so 
hideous contort in the entir cours of my practice, and I have seen 
the face of a whole host of dead." the doctor wa usual a cool 
custom enough, and a certain vehem in hi manner struck me, but I 
couldn't get anyth more out of him. I suppos the treasuri didn't see 
their way to prosecut the herbert for frighten a man to death; at 
ani rate, noth wa done, and the case drop out of men' minds. Do 
you happen to know anyth of herbert?' 

'well,' repli villiers, 'he wa an old colleg friend of mine.' 

'you don't say so? have you ever seen hi wife?' 

'no, I haven't. I have lost sight of herbert for mani years.' 

'it' queer, isn't it, part with a man at the colleg gate or at 
paddington, see noth of him for years, and then find him pop up 
hi head in such an odd place. but I should like to have seen mrs. 
herbert; peopl said extraordinari thing about her.' 

'what sort of things?' 

'well, I hardli know how to tell you. everi one who saw her at the 
polic court said she wa at onc the most beauti woman and the most 
repuls they had ever set eye on. I have spoken to a man who saw her, 
and I assur you he posit shudder as he tri to describ the 
woman, but he couldn't tell why. she seem to have been a sort of 
enigma; and I expect if that one dead man could have told tales, he 
would have told some uncommonli queer ones. and there you are again in 
anoth puzzle; what could a respect countri gentleman like mr. 
blank (we'll call him that if you don't mind) want in such a veri queer 
hous as number 20? it' altogeth a veri odd case, isn't it?' 

'it is indeed, austin; an extraordinari case. I didn't think, when I 
ask you about my old friend, I should strike on such strang metal. 
well, I must be off; good-day.' 

villier went away, think of hi own conceit of the chines boxes; 
here wa quaint workmanship indeed. 


IV 

the discoveri IN paul street 

A few month after villiers' meet with herbert, mr. clark wa 
sitting, as usual, by hi after-dinn hearth, resolut guard hi 
fanci from wander in the direct of the bureau. for more than a 
week he had succeed in keep away from the 'memoirs,' and he 
cherish hope of a complet self-reformation; but, in spite of hi 
endeavours, he could not hush the wonder and the strang curios that 
that last case he had written down had excit within him. He had put 
the case, or rather the outlin of it, conjectur to a scientif 
friend, who shook hi head, and thought clark get queer, and on 
thi particular even clark wa make an effort to ration the 
story, when a sudden knock at hi door rous him from hi meditations. 

'mr. villier to see you, sir.' 

'dear me, villiers, it is veri kind of you to look me up; I have not 
seen you for mani months; I should think nearli a year. come in, come 
in. and how are you, villiers? want ani advic about investments?' 

'no, thanks, I fanci everyth I have in that way is pretti safe. no, 
clarke, I have realli come to consult you about a rather curiou matter 
that ha been brought under my notic of late. I am afraid you will 
think it all rather absurd when I tell my tale. I sometim think so 
myself, and that' just whi I made up my mind to come to you, as I know 
you'r a practic man.' 

mr. villier wa ignor of the 'memoir to prove the exist of the 
devil.' 

'well, villiers, I shall be happi to give you my advice, to the best of 
my ability. what is the natur of the case?' 

'it' an extraordinari thing altogether. you know my ways; I alway keep 
my eye open in the streets, and in my time I have chanc upon some 
queer customers, and queer case too, but this, I think, beat all. I 
wa come out of a restaur one nasti winter night about three month 
ago; I had had a capit dinner and a good bottl of chianti, and I 
stood for a moment on the pavement, think what a mysteri there is 
about london street and the compani that pass along them. A bottl of 
red wine encourag these fancies, clarke, and I dare say I should have 
thought a page of small type, but I wa cut short by a beggar who had 
come behind me, and wa make the usual appeals. Of cours I look 
round, and thi beggar turn out to be what wa left of an old friend 
of mine, a man name herbert. I ask him how he had come to such a 
wretch pass, and he told me. We walk up and down one of those long 
dark soho streets, and there I listen to hi story. He said he had 
marri a beauti girl, some year younger than himself, and, as he 
put it, she had corrupt him bodi and soul. He wouldn't go into 
details; he said he dare not, that what he had seen and heard haunt 
him by night and day, and when I look in hi face I knew he wa 
speak the truth. there wa someth about the man that made me 
shiver. I don't know why, but it wa there. I gave him a littl money 
and sent him away, and I assur you that when he wa gone I gasp for 
breath. hi presenc seem to chill one' blood.' 

'isn't all thi just a littl fanciful, villiers? I suppos the poor 
fellow had made an imprud marriage, and, in plain english, gone to 
the bad.' 

'well, listen to this.' villier told clark the stori he had heard from 
austin. 

'you see,' he concluded, 'there can be but littl doubt that thi mr. 
blank, whoever he was, die of sheer terror; he saw someth so awful, 
so terrible, that it cut short hi life. and what he saw, he most 
certainli saw in that house, which, somehow or other, had got a bad name 
in the neighbourhood. I had the curios to go and look at the place 
for myself. it' a sadden kind of street; the hous are old enough 
to be mean and dreary, but not old enough to be quaint. As far as I 
could see most of them are let in lodgings, furnish and unfurnished, 
and almost everi door ha three bell to it. here and there the ground 
floor have been made into shop of the commonest kind; it' a dismal 
street in everi way. I found number 20 wa to let, and I went to the 
agent' and got the key. Of cours I should have heard noth of the 
herbert in that quarter, but I ask the man, fair and square, how long 
they had left the house, and whether there had been other tenant in the 
meanwhile. He look at me queerli for a minute, and told me the 
herbert had left immedi after the unpleasantness, as he call it, 
and sinc then the hous had been empty.' 

mr. villier paus for a moment. 

'I have alway been rather fond of go over empti houses; there' a 
sort of fascin about the desol empti rooms, with the nail 
stick in the walls, and the dust thick upon the window-sills. but I 
didn't enjoy go over number 20, paul street. I had hardli put my foot 
insid the passag befor I notic a queer, heavi feel about the air 
of the house. Of cours all empti hous are stuffy, and so forth, but 
thi wa someth quit different; I can't describ it to you, but it 
seem to stop the breath. I went into the front room and the back room, 
and the kitchen downstairs; they were all dirti and dusti enough, as 
you would expect, but there wa someth strang about them all. I 
couldn't defin it to you, I onli know I felt queer. It wa one of the 
room on the first floor, though, that wa the worst. It wa a largish 
room, and onc on a time the paper must have been cheer enough, but 
when I saw it, paint, paper, and everyth were most doleful. but the 
room wa full of horror; I felt my teeth grind as I put my hand on 
the door, and when I went in, I thought I should have fallen faint to 
the floor. however, I pull myself together, and stood against the end 
wall, wonder what on earth there could be about the room to make my 
limb tremble, and my heart beat as if I were at the hour of death. In 
one corner there wa a pile of newspap litter about on the floor, 
and I began look at them; they were paper of three or four year 
ago, some of them half torn, and some crumpl as if they had been use 
for packing. I turn the whole pile over, and amongst them I found a 
curiou drawing; I will show it you presently. but I couldn't stay in 
the room; I felt it wa overpow me. I wa thank to come out, 
safe and sound, into the open air. peopl stare at me as I walk along 
the street, and one man said I wa drunk. I wa stagger about from 
one side of the pavement to the other, and it wa as much as I could do 
to take the key back to the agent and get home. I wa in bed for a week, 
suffer from what my doctor call nervou shock and exhaustion. one 
of those day I wa read the even paper, and happen to notic a 
paragraph headed: "starv to death." It wa the usual style of thing; a 
model lodging-hous in marylebone, a door lock for sever days, and a 
dead man in hi chair when they broke in. "the deceased," said the 
paragraph, "wa known as charl herbert, and is believ to have been 
onc a prosper countri gentleman. hi name wa familiar to the public 
three year ago in connect with the mysteri death in paul street, 
tottenham court road, the deceas be the tenant of the hous number 
20, in the area of which a gentleman of good posit wa found dead 
under circumst not devoid of suspicion." A tragic ending, wasn't 
it? but after all, if what he told me were true, which I am sure it 
was, the man' life wa all a tragedy, and a tragedi of a stranger sort 
than they put on the boards.' 

'and that is the story, is it?' said clark musingly. 

'yes, that is the story.' 

'well, really, villiers, I scarc know what to say about it. there 
are, no doubt, circumst in the case which seem peculiar, the 
find of the dead man in the area of herbert' house, for instance, 
and the extraordinari opinion of the physician as to the caus of death; 
but, after all, it is conceiv that the fact may be explain in a 
straightforward manner. As to your own sensations, when you went to see 
the house, I would suggest that they were due to a vivid imagination; 
you must have been brooding, in a semiconsci way, over what you had 
heard. I don't exactli see what more can be said or done in the matter; 
you evid think there is a mysteri of some kind, but herbert is 
dead; where then do you propos to look?' 

'I propos to look for the woman; the woman whom he married. _she_ is 
the mystery.' 

the two men sat silent by the fireside; clark secretli congratul 
himself on have success kept up the charact of advoc of the 
commonplace, and villier wrapt in hi gloomi fancies. 

'I think I will have a cigarette,' he said at last, and put hi hand in 
hi pocket to feel for the cigarette-case. 

'ah!' he said, start slightly, 'I forgot I had someth to show you. 
you rememb my say that I had found a rather curiou sketch amongst 
the pile of old newspap at the hous in paul street? here it is.' 

villier drew out a small thin parcel from hi pocket. It wa cover 
with brown paper, and secur with string, and the knot were 
troublesome. In spite of himself clark felt inquisitive; he bent 
forward on hi chair as villier pain undid the string, and 
unfold the outer covering. insid wa a second wrap of tissue, and 
villier took it off and hand the small piec of paper to clark 
without a word. 

there wa dead silenc in the room for five minut or more; the two men 
sat so still that they could hear the tick of the tall old-fashion 
clock that stood outsid in the hall, and in the mind of one of them the 
slow monotoni of sound woke up a far, far memory. He wa look 
intent at the small pen-and-ink sketch of the woman' head; it had 
evid been drawn with great care, and by a true artist, for the 
woman' soul look out of the eyes, and the lip were part with a 
strang smile. clark gaze still at the face; it brought to hi memori 
one summer even long ago; he saw again the long love valley, the 
river wind between the hills, the meadow and the cornfields, the 
dull red sun, and the cold white mist rise from the water. He heard a 
voic speak to him across the wave of mani years, and saying, 
'clarke, mari will see the god pan!' and then he wa stand in the 
grim room besid the doctor, listen to the heavi tick of the 
clock, wait and watching, watch the figur lie on the green 
chair beneath the lamplight. mari rose up, and he look into her eyes, 
and hi heart grew cold within him. 

'who is thi woman?' he said at last. hi voic wa dri and hoarse. 

'that is the woman whom herbert married.' 

clark look again at the sketch; it wa not mari after all. there 
certainli wa mary' face, but there wa someth else, someth he 
had not seen on mary' featur when the white-clad girl enter the 
laboratori with the doctor, nor at her terribl awakening, nor when she 
lay grin on the bed. whatev it was, the glanc that came from 
those eyes, the smile on the full lips, or the express of the whole 
face, clark shudder befor it in hi inmost soul, and thought, 
unconsciously, of dr. phillips' words, 'the most vivid present of 
evil I have ever seen.' He turn the paper over mechan in hi 
hand and glanc at the back. 

'good god! clarke, what is the matter? you are as white as death.' 

villier had start wildli from hi chair, as clark fell back with a 
groan, and let the paper drop from hi hands. 

'I don't feel veri well, villiers, I am subject to these attacks. pour 
me out a littl wine; thanks, that will do. I shall feel better in a few 
minutes.' 

villier pick up the fallen sketch and turn it over as clark had 
done. 

'you saw that?' he said. 'that' how I identifi it as be a portrait 
of herbert' wife, or I should say hi widow. how do you feel now?' 

'better, thanks, it wa onli a pass faintness. I don't think I quit 
catch your meaning. what did you say enabl you to identifi the 
picture?' 

'thi word--"helen"--written on the back. didn't I tell you her name wa 
helen? yes; helen vaughan.' 

clark groaned; there could be no shadow of doubt. 

'now, don't you agre with me,' said villiers, 'that in the stori I have 
told you to-night, and in the part thi woman play in it, there are 
some veri strang points?' 

'yes, villiers,' clark muttered, 'it is a strang stori indeed; a 
strang stori indeed. you must give me time to think it over; I may be 
abl to help you or I may not. must you be go now? well, good-night, 
villiers, good-night. come and see me in the cours of a week.' 


V 

the letter OF advic 

'do you know, austin,' said villiers, as the two friend were pace 
sedat along piccadilli one pleasant morn in may, 'do you know I am 
convinc that what you told me about paul street and the herbert is a 
mere episod in an extraordinari history? I may as well confess to you 
that when I ask you about herbert a few month ago I had just seen 
him.' 

'you had seen him? where?' 

'he beg of me in the street one night. He wa in the most pitiabl 
plight, but I recogn the man, and I got him to tell me hi history, 
or at least the outlin of it. In brief, it amount to this--h had 
been ruin by hi wife.' 

'in what manner?' 

'he would not tell me; he would onli say that she had destroy him, 
bodi and soul. the man is dead now.' 

'and what ha becom of hi wife?' 

'ah, that' what I should like to know, and I mean to find her sooner or 
later. I know a man name clarke, a dri fellow, in fact a man of 
business, but shrewd enough. you understand my meaning; not shrewd in 
the mere busi sens of the word, but a man who realli know 
someth about men and life. well, I laid the case befor him, and he 
wa evid impressed. He said it need consideration, and ask me 
to come again in the cours of a week. A few day later I receiv thi 
extraordinari letter.' 

austin took the envelope, drew out the letter, and read it curiously. It 
ran as follows:-- 

'mi dear villiers,--i have thought over the matter on which you 
consult me the other night, and my advic to you is this. throw 
the portrait into the fire, blot out the stori from your mind. never 
give it anoth thought, villiers, or you will be sorry. you will 
think, no doubt, that I am in possess of some secret information, 
and to a certain extent that is the case. but I onli know a little; 
I am like a travel who ha peer over an abyss, and ha drawn 
back in terror. what I know is strang enough and horribl enough, 
but beyond my knowledg there are depth and horror more fright 
still, more incred than ani tale told of winter night about the 
fire. I have resolved, and noth shall shake that resolve, to 
explor no whit farther, and if you valu your happi you will 
make the same determination. 

'come and see me by all means; but we will talk on more cheer 
topic than this.' 

austin fold the letter methodically, and return it to villiers. 

'it is certainli an extraordinari letter,' he said; 'what doe he mean 
by the portrait?' 

'ah! I forgot to tell you I have been to paul street and have made a 
discovery.' 

villier told hi stori as he had told it to clarke, and austin listen 
in silence. He seem puzzled. 

'how veri curiou that you should experi such an unpleas 
sensat in that room!' he said at length. 'I hardli gather that it wa 
a mere matter of the imagination; a feel of repulsion, in short.' 

'no, it wa more physic than mental. It wa as if I were inhal at 
everi breath some deadli fume, which seem to penetr to everi nerv 
and bone and sinew of my body. I felt rack from head to foot, my eye 
began to grow dim; it wa like the entranc of death.' 

'yes, yes, veri strange, certainly. you see, your friend confess that 
there is some veri black stori connect with thi woman. did you notic 
ani particular emot in him when you were tell your tale?' 

'yes, I did. He becam veri faint, but he assur me that it wa a mere 
pass attack to which he wa subject.' 

'did you believ him?' 

'I did at the time, but I don't now. He heard what I had to say with a 
good deal of indifference, till I show him the portrait. It wa then 
he wa seiz with the attack of which I spoke. He look ghastly, I 
assur you.' 

'then he must have seen the woman before. but there might be anoth 
explanation; it might have been the name, and not the face, which wa 
familiar to him. what do you think?' 

'I couldn't say. To the best of my belief it wa after turn the 
portrait in hi hand that he nearli drop from hi chair. the name, 
you know, wa written on the back.' 

'quit so. after all, it is imposs to come to ani resolut in a 
case like this. I hate melodrama, and noth strike me as more 
commonplac and tediou than the ordinari ghost stori of commerce; but 
really, villiers, it look as if there were someth veri queer at the 
bottom of all this.' 

the two men had, without notic it, turn up ashley street, lead 
northward from piccadilly. It wa a long street, and rather a gloomi 
one, but here and there a brighter tast had illumin the dark hous 
with flowers, and gay curtains, and a cheer paint on the doors. 
villier glanc up as austin stop speaking, and look at one of 
these houses; geraniums, red and white, droop from everi sill, and 
daffodil-colour curtain were drape back from each window. 

'it look cheerful, doesn't it?' he said. 

'yes, and the insid is still more cheery. one of the pleasantest hous 
of the season, so I have heard. I haven't been there myself, but i'v 
met sever men who have, and they tell me it' uncommonli jovial.' 

'whose hous is it?' 

'A mrs. beaumont's.' 

'and who is she?' 

'I couldn't tell you. I have heard she come from south america, but, 
after all, who she is is of littl consequence. she is a veri wealthi 
woman, there' no doubt of that, and some of the best peopl have taken 
her up. I hear she ha some wonder claret, realli marvel wine, 
which must have cost a fabul sum. lord argentin wa tell me about 
it; he wa there last sunday evening. He assur me he ha never tast 
such a wine, and argentine, as you know, is an expert. By the way, that 
remind me, she must be an oddish sort of woman, thi mrs. beaumont. 
argentin ask her how old the wine was, and what do you think she 
said? "about a thousand years, I believe." lord argentin thought she 
wa chaf him, you know, but when he laugh she said she wa 
speak quit seriously, and offer to show him the jar. Of course, he 
couldn't say anyth more after that; but it seem rather antiqu 
for a beverage, doesn't it? why, here we are at my rooms. come in, won't 
you?' 

'thanks, I think I will. I haven't seen the curiosity-shop for some 
time.' 

It wa a room furnish richly, yet oddly, where everi chair and 
bookcas and table, and everi rug and jar and ornament seem to be a 
thing apart, preserv each it own individuality. 

'anyth fresh lately?' said villier after a while. 

'no; I think not; you saw those queer jugs, didn't you? I thought so. I 
don't think I have come across anyth for the last few weeks.' 

austin glanc round the room from cupboard to cupboard, from shelf to 
shelf, in search of some new oddity. hi eye fell at last on an old 
chest, pleasantli and quaintli carved, which stood in a dark corner of 
the room. 

'ah,' he said, 'I wa forgetting, I have got someth to show you.' 
austin unlock the chest, drew out a thick quarto volume, laid it on 
the table, and resum the cigar he had put down. 

'did you know arthur meyrick the painter, villiers?' 

'A little; I met him two or three time at the hous of a friend of 
mine. what ha becom of him? I haven't heard hi name mention for 
some time.' 

'he' dead.' 

'you don't say so! quit young, wasn't he?' 

'yes; onli thirti when he died.' 

'what did he die of?' 

'I don't know. He wa an intim friend of mine, and a thoroughli good 
fellow. He use to come here and talk to me for hours, and he wa one of 
the best talker I have met. He could even talk about painting, and 
that' more than can be said of most painters. about eighteen month ago 
he wa feel rather overworked, and partli at my suggest he went 
off on a sort of rove expedition, with no veri definit end or aim 
about it. I believ new york wa to be hi first port, but I never heard 
from him. three month ago I got thi book, with a veri civil letter 
from an english doctor practis at bueno ayres, state that he had 
attend the late mr. meyrick dure hi illness, and that the deceas 
had express an earnest wish that the enclos packet should be sent to 
me after hi death. that wa all.' 

'and haven't you written for further particulars?' 

'I have been think of do so. you would advis me to write to the 
doctor?' 

'certainly. and what about the book?' 

'it wa seal up when I got it. I don't think the doctor had seen it.' 

'it is someth veri rare? meyrick wa a collector, perhaps?' 

'no, I think not, hardli a collector. now, what do you think of those 
ainu jugs?' 

'they are peculiar, but I like them. but aren't you go to show me 
poor meyrick' legacy?' 

'yes, yes, to be sure. the fact is, it' rather a peculiar sort of 
thing, and I haven't shown it to ani one. I wouldn't say anyth about 
it if I were you. there it is.' 

villier took the book, and open it at haphazard. 

'it isn't a print volum then?' he said. 

'no. It is a collect of draw in black and white by my poor friend 
meyrick.' 

villier turn to the first page, it wa blank; the second bore a brief 
inscription, which he read: 

_silet per diem universus, nec sine horror secretu est; lucet 
nocturni ignibus, choru ægipanum undiqu personatur: audiuntur et 
cantu tibiarum, et tinnitu cymbalorum per oram maritimam._ 

On the third page wa a design which made villier start and look up at 
austin; he wa gaze abstractedli out of the window. villier turn 
page after page, absorbed, in spite of himself, in the fright 
walpurgi night of evil, strang monstrou evil, that the dead artist 
had set forth in hard black and white. the figur of faun and satyr 
and ægipan danc befor hi eyes, the dark of the thicket, the 
danc on the mountain-top, the scene by lone shores, in green 
vineyards, by rock and desert places, pass befor him: a world befor 
which the human soul seem to shrink back and shudder. villier whirl 
over the remain pages; he had seen enough, but the pictur on the 
last leaf caught hi eye, as he almost close the book. 

'austin!' 

'well, what is it?' 

'do you know who that is?' 

It wa a woman' face, alon on the white page. 

'know who it is? no, of cours not.' 

'I do.' 

'who is it?' 

'it is mrs. herbert.' 

'are you sure?' 

'I am perfectli certain of it. poor meyrick! He is one more chapter in 
her history.' 

'but what do you think of the designs?' 

'they are frightful. lock the book up again, austin. If I were you I 
would burn it; it must be a terribl companion even though it be in a 
chest.' 

'yes, they are singular drawings. but I wonder what connect there 
could be between meyrick and mrs. herbert, or what link between her and 
these designs?' 

'ah, who can say? It is possibl that the matter may end here, and we 
shall never know, but in my own opinion thi helen vaughan, or mrs. 
herbert, is onli the beginning. she will come back to london, austin; 
depend upon it, she will come back, and we shall hear more about her 
then. I don't think it will be veri pleasant news.' 


VI 

the suicid 

lord argentin wa a great favourit in london society. At twenti he had 
been a poor man, deck with the surnam of an illustri family, but 
forc to earn a livelihood as best he could, and the most specul 
of money-lend would not have entrust him with fifti pound on the 
chanc of hi ever chang hi name for a title, and hi poverti for a 
great fortune. hi father had been near enough to the fountain of good 
thing to secur one of the famili livings, but the son, even if he had 
taken orders, would scarc have obtain so much as this, and moreov 
felt no vocat for the ecclesiast estate. thu he front the 
world with no better armour than the bachelor' gown and the wit of a 
younger son' grandson, with which equip he contriv in some way to 
make a veri toler fight of it. At twenty-f mr. charl aubernoun 
saw himself still a man of struggl and of warfar with the world, but 
out of the seven who stood between him and the high place of hi famili 
three onli remained. these three, however, were 'good lives,' but yet 
not proof against the zulu assegai and typhoid fever, and so one 
morn aubernoun woke up and found himself lord argentine, a man of 
thirti who had face the difficulti of existence, and had conquered. 
the situat amus him immensely, and he resolv that rich should 
be as pleasant to him as poverti had alway been. argentine, after some 
littl consideration, came to the conclus that dining, regard as a 
fine art, wa perhap the most amus pursuit open to fallen humanity, 
and thu hi dinner becam famou in london, and an invit to hi 
tabl a thing covet desired. after ten year of lordship and 
dinner argentin still declin to be jaded, still persist in 
enjoy life, and by a kind of infect had becom recogn as the 
caus of joy in others, in short, as the best of company. hi sudden and 
tragic death therefor caus a wide and deep sensation. peopl could 
scarc believ it, even though the newspap wa befor their eyes, and 
the cri of 'mysteri death of a nobleman' came ring up from the 
street. but there stood the brief paragraph: 'lord argentin wa found 
dead thi morn by hi valet under distress circumstances. It is 
state that there can be no doubt that hi lordship commit suicide, 
though no motiv can be assign for the act. the deceas nobleman wa 
wide known in society, and much like for hi genial manner and 
sumptuou hospitality. He is succeed by,' etc., etc. 

By slow degre the detail came to light, but the case still remain a 
mystery. the chief wit at the inquest wa the dead nobleman' valet, 
who said that the night befor hi death lord argentin had dine with a 
ladi of good position, whose name wa suppress in the newspap 
reports. At about eleven o'clock lord argentin had returned, and 
inform hi man that he should not requir hi servic till the next 
morning. A littl later the valet had occas to cross the hall and wa 
somewhat astonish to see hi master quietli let himself out at the 
front door. He had taken off hi even clothes, and wa dress in a 
norfolk coat and knickerbockers, and wore a low brown hat. the valet had 
no reason to suppos that lord argentin had seen him, and though hi 
master rare kept late hours, thought littl of the occurr till the 
next morning, when he knock at the bedroom door at a quarter to nine 
as usual. He receiv no answer, and, after knock two or three 
times, enter the room, and saw lord argentine' bodi lean forward 
at an angl from the bottom of the bed. He found that hi master had 
tie a cord secur to one of the short bed-posts, and, after make a 
run noos and slip it round hi neck, the unfortun man must 
have resolut fallen forward, to die by slow strangulation. He wa 
dress in the light suit in which the valet had seen him go out, and 
the doctor who wa summon pronounc that life had been extinct for 
more than four hours. all papers, letters, and so forth seem in 
perfect order, and noth wa discov which point in the most 
remot way to ani scandal either great or small. here the evid 
ended; noth more could be discovered. sever person had been 
present at the dinner-parti at which lord argentin had assisted, and to 
all these he seem in hi usual genial spirits. the valet, indeed, said 
he thought hi master appear a littl excit when he came home, but 
he confess that the alter in hi manner wa veri slight, hardli 
noticeable, indeed. It seem hopeless to seek for ani clue, and the 
suggest that lord argentin had been suddenli attack by acut 
suicid mania wa gener accepted. 

It wa otherwise, however, when within three weeks, three more 
gentlemen, one of them a nobleman, and the two other men of good 
posit and ampl means, perish miser in almost precis the 
same manner. lord swanleigh wa found one morn in hi dressing-room, 
hang from a peg affix to the wall, and mr. collier-stuart and mr. 
herri had chosen to die as lord argentine. there wa no explan 
in either case; a few bald facts; a live man in the evening, and a 
dead bodi with a black swollen face in the morning. the polic had been 
forc to confess themselv powerless to arrest or to explain the 
sordid murder of whitechapel; but befor the horribl suicid of 
piccadilli and mayfair they were dumb-foundered, for not even the mere 
feroc which did duti as an explan of the crime of the east end, 
could be of servic in the west. each of these men who had resolv to 
die a tortur shame death wa rich, prosperous, and to all 
appear in love with the world, and not the acutest research could 
ferret out ani shadow of a lurk motiv in either case. there wa a 
horror in the air, and men look at one another' face when they met, 
each wonder whether the other wa to be the victim of the fifth 
nameless tragedy. journalist sought in vain in their scrap-book for 
materi whereof to concoct reminisc articles; and the morn paper 
wa unfold in mani a hous with a feel of awe; no man knew when or 
where the blow would next light. 

A short while after the last of these terribl events, austin came to 
see mr. villiers. He wa curiou to know whether villier had succeed 
in discov ani fresh trace of mrs. herbert, either through clark 
or by other sources, and he ask the question soon after he had sat 
down. 

'no,' said villiers, 'I wrote to clarke, but he remain obdurate, and I 
have tri other channels, but without ani result. I can't find out what 
becam of helen vaughan after she left paul street, but I think she must 
have gone abroad. but to tell the truth, austin, I haven't paid veri 
much attent to the matter for the last few weeks; I knew poor 
herri intimately, and hi terribl death ha been a great shock to me, 
a great shock.' 

'I can well believ it,' answer austin gravely; 'you know argentin 
wa a friend of mine. If I rememb rightly, we were speak of him 
that day you came to my rooms.' 

'yes; it wa in connect with that hous in ashley street, mrs. 
beaumont' house. you said someth about argentine' dine there.' 

'quit so. Of cours you know it wa there argentin dine the night 
before--befor hi death.' 

'no, I haven't heard that.' 

'oh, yes; the name wa kept out of the paper to spare mrs. beaumont. 
argentin wa a great favourit of hers, and it is said she wa in a 
terribl state for some time after.' 

A curiou look came over villiers' face; he seem undecid whether to 
speak or not. austin began again. 

'I never experienc such a feel of horror as when I read the account 
of argentine' death. I didn't understand it at the time, and I don't 
now. I knew him well, and it complet pass my understand for what 
possibl caus he--or ani of the other for the matter of that--could 
have resolv in cold blood to die in such an aw manner. you know how 
men babbl away each other' charact in london, you may be sure ani 
buri scandal or hidden skeleton would have been brought to light in 
such a case as this; but noth of the sort ha taken place. As for the 
theori of mania, that is veri well, of course, for the coroner' jury, 
but everybodi know that it' all nonsense. suicid mania is not 
small-pox.' 

austin relaps into gloomi silence. villier sat silent also, watch 
hi friend. the express of indecis still fleet across hi face; 
he seem as if weigh hi thought in the balance, and the 
consider he wa revolv left him still silent. austin tri to 
shake off the remembr of tragedi as hopeless and perplex as the 
labyrinth of dædalus, and began to talk in an indiffer voic of the 
more pleasant incid and adventur of the season. 

'that mrs. beaumont,' he said, 'of whom we were speaking, is a great 
success; she ha taken london almost by storm. I met her the other night 
at fulham's; she is realli a remark woman.' 

'you have met mrs. beaumont?' 

'yes; she had quit a court around her. she would be call veri 
handsome, I suppose, and yet there is someth about her face which I 
didn't like. the featur are exquisite, but the express is strange. 
and all the time I wa look at her, and afterwards, when I wa go 
home, I had a curiou feel that that veri express wa in some way 
or other familiar to me.' 

'you must have seen her in the row.' 

'no, I am sure I never set eye on the woman before; it is that which 
make it puzzling. and to the best of my belief I have never seen 
anybodi like her; what I felt wa a kind of dim far-off memory, vagu 
but persistent. the onli sensat I can compar it to, is that odd 
feel one sometim ha in a dream, when fantast citi and wondrou 
land and phantom personag appear familiar and accustomed.' 

villier nod and glanc aimlessli round the room, possibl in search 
of someth on which to turn the conversation. hi eye fell on an old 
chest somewhat like that in which the artist' strang legaci lay hid 
beneath a gothic scutcheon. 

'have you written to the doctor about poor meyrick?' he asked. 

'yes; I wrote ask for full particular as to hi ill and death. I 
don't expect to have an answer for anoth three week or a month. I 
thought I might as well inquir whether meyrick knew an englishwoman 
name herbert, and if so, whether the doctor could give me ani 
inform about her. but it' veri possibl that meyrick fell in with 
her at new york, or mexico, or san francisco; I have no idea as to the 
extent or direct of hi travels.' 

'yes, and it' veri possibl that the woman may have more than one 
name.' 

'exactly. I wish I had thought of ask you to lend me the portrait of 
her which you possess. I might have enclos it in my letter to dr. 
matthews.' 

'so you might; that never occur to me. We might send it now. hark! 
what are those boy calling?' 

while the two men had been talk togeth a confus nois of shout 
had been gradual grow louder. the nois rose from the eastward and 
swell down piccadilly, draw nearer and nearer, a veri torrent of 
sound; surg up street usual quiet, and make everi window a frame 
for a face, curiou or excited. the cri and voic came echo up 
the silent street where villier lived, grow more distinct as they 
advanced, and, as villier spoke, an answer rang up from the pavement: 

'the west end horrors; anoth aw suicide; full details!' 

austin rush down the stair and bought a paper and read out the 
paragraph to villier as the uproar in the street rose and fell. the 
window wa open and the air seem full of nois and terror. 

'anoth gentleman ha fallen a victim to the terribl epidem of 
suicid which for the last month ha prevail in the west end. mr. 
sidney crashaw, of stoke house, fulham, and king' pomeroy, devon, wa 
found, after a prolong search, hang from the branch of a tree in 
hi garden at one o'clock to-day. the deceas gentleman dine last 
night at the carlton club and seem in hi usual health and spirits. He 
left the club at about ten o'clock, and wa seen walk leisur up 
st. james' street a littl later. subsequ to thi hi movement 
cannot be traced. On the discoveri of the bodi medic aid wa at onc 
summoned, but life had evid been long extinct. So far as is known, 
mr. crashaw had no troubl or anxieti of ani kind. thi pain suicide, 
it will be remembered, is the fifth of the kind in the last month. the 
author at scotland yard are unabl to suggest ani explan of 
these terribl occurrences.' 

austin put down the paper in mute horror. 

'I shall leav london to-morrow,' he said, 'it is a citi of nightmares. 
how aw thi is, villiers!' 

mr. villier wa sit by the window quietli look out into the 
street. He had listen to the newspap report attentively, and the 
hint of indecis wa no longer on hi face. 

'wait a moment, austin,' he replied, 'I have made up my mind to mention 
a littl matter that occur last night. It is stated, I think, that 
crashaw wa last seen aliv in st. james' street shortli after ten?' 

'yes, I think so. I will look again. yes, you are quit right.' 

'quit so. well, I am in a posit to contradict that statement at all 
events. crashaw wa seen after that; consider later indeed.' 

'how do you know?' 

'becaus I happen to see crashaw myself at about two o'clock thi 
morning.' 

'you saw crashaw? you, villiers?' 

'yes, I saw him quit distinctly; indeed, there were but a few feet 
between us.' 

'where, in heaven' name, did you see him?' 

'not far from here. I saw him in ashley street. He wa just leav a 
house.' 

'did you notic what hous it was?' 

'yes. It wa mrs. beaumont's.' 

'villiers! think what you are saying; there must be some mistake. how 
could crashaw be in mrs. beaumont' hous at two o'clock in the morning? 
surely, surely, you must have been dreaming, villiers, you were alway 
rather fanciful.' 

'no; I wa wide awak enough. even if I had been dream as you say, 
what I saw would have rous me effectually.' 

'what you saw? what did you see? wa there anyth strang about 
crashaw? but I can't believ it; it is impossible.' 

'well, if you like I will tell you what I saw, or if you please, what I 
think I saw, and you can judg for yourself.' 

'veri good, villiers.' 

the nois and clamour of the street had die away, though now and then 
the sound of shout still came from the distance, and the dull, leaden 
silenc seem like the quiet after an earthquak or a storm. villier 
turn from the window and began speaking. 

'I wa at a hous near regent' park last night, and when I came away 
the fanci took me to walk home instead of take a hansom. It wa a 
clear pleasant night enough, and after a few minut I had the street 
pretti much to myself. it' a curiou thing, austin, to be alon in 
london at night, the gas-lamp stretch away in perspective, and the 
dead silence, and then perhap the rush and clatter of a hansom on the 
stones, and the fire start up under the horse' hoofs. I walk along 
pretti briskly, for I wa feel a littl tire of be out in the 
night, and as the clock were strike two I turn down ashley street, 
which, you know, is on my way. It wa quieter than ever there, and the 
lamp were fewer; altogether, it look as dark and gloomi as a forest 
in winter. I had done about half the length of the street when I heard a 
door close veri softly, and natur I look up to see who wa abroad 
like myself at such an hour. As it happens, there is a street lamp close 
to the hous in question, and I saw a man stand on the step. He had 
just shut the door and hi face wa toward me, and I recogn crashaw 
directly. I never knew him to speak to, but I had often seen him, and I 
am posit that I wa not mistaken in my man. I look into hi face 
for a moment, and then--i will confess the truth--i set off at a good 
run, and kept it up till I wa within my own door.' 

'why?' 

'why? becaus it made my blood run cold to see that man' face. I could 
never have suppos that such an infern medley of passion could have 
glare out of ani human eyes; I almost faint as I looked. I knew I had 
look into the eye of a lost soul, austin, the man' outward form 
remained, but all hell wa within it. furiou lust, and hate that wa 
like fire, and the loss of all hope and horror that seem to shriek 
aloud to the night, though hi teeth were shut; and the utter black 
of despair. I am sure he did not see me; he saw noth that you or I 
can see, but he saw what I hope we never shall. I do not know when he 
died; I suppos in an hour, or perhap two, but when I pass down 
ashley street and heard the close door, that man no longer belong to 
thi world; it wa a devil' face I look upon.' 

there wa an interv of silenc in the room when villier ceas 
speaking. the light wa failing, and all the tumult of an hour ago wa 
quit hushed. austin had bent hi head at the close of the story, and 
hi hand cover hi eyes. 

'what can it mean?' he said at length. 

'who knows, austin, who knows? it' a black business, but I think we had 
better keep it to ourselves, for the present at ani rate. I will see if 
I cannot learn anyth about that hous through privat channel of 
information, and if I do light upon anyth I will let you know.' 


vii 

the encount IN soho 

three week later austin receiv a note from villiers, ask him to 
call either that afternoon or the next. He chose the nearer date, and 
found villier sit as usual by the window, appar lost in 
medit on the drowsi traffic of the street. there wa a bamboo tabl 
by hi side, a fantast thing, enrich with gild and queer paint 
scenes, and on it lay a littl pile of paper arrang and docket as 
neatli as anyth in mr. clarke' office. 

'well, villiers, have you made ani discoveri in the last three weeks?' 

'I think so; I have here one or two memoranda which struck me as 
singular, and there is a statement to which I shall call your 
attention.' 

'and these document relat to mrs. beaumont? It wa realli crashaw whom 
you saw that night stand on the doorstep of the hous in ashley 
street?' 

'a to that matter my belief remain unchanged, but neither my inquiri 
nor their result have ani special relat to crashaw. but my 
investig have had a strang issue. I have found out who mrs. 
beaumont is!' 

'who she is? In what way do you mean?' 

'I mean that you and I know her better under anoth name.' 

'what name is that?' 

'herbert.' 

'herbert!' austin repeat the word, daze with astonishment. 

'yes, mrs. herbert of paul street, helen vaughan of earlier adventur 
unknown to me. you had reason to recogn the express of her face; 
when you go home look at the face in meyrick' book of horrors, and you 
will know the sourc of your recollection.' 

'and you have proof of this?' 

'yes, the best of proof; I have seen mrs. beaumont, or shall we say mrs. 
herbert?' 

'where did you see her?' 

'hardli in a place where you would expect to see a ladi who live in 
ashley street, piccadilly. I saw her enter a hous in one of the 
meanest and most disreput street in soho. In fact, I had made an 
appointment, though not with her, and she wa precis both to time and 
place.' 

'all thi seem veri wonderful, but I cannot call it incredible. you 
must remember, villiers, that I have seen thi woman, in the ordinari 
adventur of london society, talk and laughing, and sip her 
coffe in a commonplac drawing-room with commonplac people. but you 
know what you are saying.' 

'I do; I have not allow myself to be led by surmis or fancies. It 
wa with no thought of find helen vaughan that I search for mrs. 
beaumont in the dark water of the life of london, but such ha been the 
issue.' 

'you must have been in strang places, villiers.' 

'yes, I have been in veri strang places. It would have been useless, 
you know, to go to ashley street, and ask mrs. beaumont to give me a 
short sketch of her previou history. no; assuming, as I had to assume, 
that her record wa not of the cleanest, it would be pretti certain that 
at some previou time she must have move in circl not quit so 
refin as her present ones. If you see mud on the top of a stream, you 
may be sure that it wa onc at the bottom. I went to the bottom. I have 
alway been fond of dive into queer street for my amusement, and I 
found my knowledg of that local and it inhabit veri useful. It 
is, perhaps, needless to say that my friend had never heard the name of 
beaumont, and as I had never seen the lady, and wa quit unabl to 
describ her, I had to set to work in an indirect way. the peopl there 
know me; I have been abl to do some of them a servic now and again, so 
they made no difficulti about give their information; they were awar 
I had no commun direct or indirect with scotland yard. I had to 
cast out a good mani lines, though, befor I got what I wanted, and when 
I land the fish I did not for a moment suppos it wa my fish. but I 
listen to what I wa told out of a constitut like for useless 
information, and I found myself in possess of a veri curiou story, 
though, as I imagined, not the stori I wa look for. It wa to thi 
effect. some five or six year ago, a woman name raymond suddenli made 
her appear in the neighbourhood to which I am referring. she wa 
describ to me as be quit young, probabl not more than seventeen 
or eighteen, veri handsome, and look as if she came from the country. 
I should be wrong in say that she found her level in go to thi 
particular quarter, or associ with these people, for from what I 
wa told, I should think the worst den in london far too good for her. 
the person from whom I got my information, as you may suppose, no great 
puritan, shudder and grew sick in tell me of the nameless infami 
which were laid to her charge. after live there for a year, or perhap 
a littl more, she disappear as suddenli as she came, and they saw 
noth of her till about the time of the paul street case. At first she 
came to her old haunt onli occasionally, then more frequently, and 
final took up her abod there as before, and remain for six or eight 
months. it' of no use my go into detail as to the life that woman 
led; if you want particular you can look at meyrick' legacy. those 
design were not drawn from hi imagination. she again disappeared, and 
the peopl of the place saw noth of her till a few month ago. My 
inform told me that she had taken some room in a hous which he 
point out, and these room she wa in the habit of visit two or 
three time a week and alway at ten in the morning. I wa led to expect 
that one of these visit would be paid on a certain day about a week 
ago, and I accordingli manag to be on the look-out in compani with my 
ciceron at a quarter to ten, and the hour and the ladi came with equal 
punctuality. My friend and I were stand under an archway, a littl 
way back from the street, but she saw us, and gave me a glanc that I 
shall be long in forgetting. that look wa quit enough for me; I knew 
miss raymond to be mrs. herbert; as for mrs. beaumont she had quit gone 
out of my head. she went into the house, and I watch it till four 
o'clock, when she came out, and then I follow her. It wa a long 
chase, and I had to be veri care to keep a long way in the 
background, and yet not lose sight of the woman. she took me down to 
the strand, and then to westminster, and then up st. james' street, and 
along piccadilly. I felt queerish when I saw her turn up ashley street; 
the thought that mrs. herbert wa mrs. beaumont came into my mind, but 
it seem too improb to be true. I wait at the corner, keep my 
eye on her all the time, and I took particular care to note the hous at 
which she stopped. It wa the hous with the gay curtains, the hous of 
flowers, the hous out of which crashaw came the night he hang himself 
in hi garden. I wa just go away with my discovery, when I saw an 
empti carriag come round and draw up in front of the house, and I came 
to the conclus that mrs. herbert wa go out for a drive, and I wa 
right. I took a hansom and follow the carriag into the park. there, 
as it happened, I met a man I know, and we stood talk togeth a 
littl distanc from the carriage-way, to which I had my back. We had 
not been there for ten minut when my friend took off hi hat, and I 
glanc round and saw the ladi I had been follow all day. "who is 
that?" I said, and hi answer was, "mrs. beaumont; live in ashley 
street." Of cours there could be no doubt after that. I don't know 
whether she saw me, but I don't think she did. I went home at once, and, 
on consideration, I thought that I had a suffici good case with 
which to go to clarke.' 

'whi to clarke?' 

'becaus I am sure that clark is in possess of fact about thi 
woman, fact of which I know nothing.' 

'well, what then?' 

mr. villier lean back in hi chair and look reflect at austin 
for a moment befor he answered: 

'mi idea wa that clark and I should call on mrs. beaumont.' 

'you would never go into such a hous as that? no, no, villiers, you 
cannot do it. besides, consider; what result ...' 

'I will tell you soon. but I wa go to say that my inform doe 
not end here; it ha been complet in an extraordinari manner. 

'look at thi neat littl packet of manuscript; it is paginated, you 
see, and I have indulg in the civil coquetri of a ribbon of red tape. 
It ha almost a legal air, hasn't it? run your eye over it, austin. It 
is an account of the entertain mrs. beaumont provid for her 
choicer guests. the man who wrote thi escap with hi life, but I do 
not think he will live mani years. the doctor tell him he must have 
sustain some sever shock to the nerves.' 

austin took the manuscript, but never read it. open the neat page at 
haphazard hi eye wa caught by a word and a phrase that follow it; 
and, sick at heart, with white lip and a cold sweat pour like water 
from hi temples, he flung the paper down. 

'take it away, villiers, never speak of thi again. are you made of 
stone, man? why, the dread and horror of death itself, the thought of 
the man who stand in the keen morn air on the black platform, bound, 
the bell toll in hi ears, and wait for the harsh rattl of the 
bolt, are as noth compar to this. I will not read it; I should 
never sleep again.' 

'veri good. I can fanci what you saw. yes; it is horribl enough; but 
after all, it is an old story, an old mysteri play in our day, and in 
dim london street instead of amidst the vineyard and the oliv 
gardens. We know what happen to those who chanc to meet the great 
god pan, and those who are wise know that all symbol are symbol of 
something, not of nothing. It was, indeed, an exquisit symbol beneath 
which men long ago veil their knowledg of the most awful, most secret 
forc which lie at the heart of all things; forc befor which the 
soul of men must wither and die and blacken, as their bodi blacken 
under the electr current. such forc cannot be named, cannot be 
spoken, cannot be imagin except under a veil and a symbol, a symbol to 
the most of us appear a quaint, poetic fancy, to some a foolish tale. 
but you and I, at all events, have known someth of the terror that 
may dwell in the secret place of life, manifest under human flesh; 
that which is without form take to itself a form. oh, austin, how can 
it be? how is it that the veri sunlight doe not turn to black 
befor thi thing, the hard earth melt and boil beneath such a burden?' 

villier wa pace up and down the room, and the bead of sweat stood 
out on hi forehead. austin sat silent for a while, but villier saw him 
make a sign upon hi breast. 

'I say again, villiers, you will sure never enter such a hous as 
that? you would never pass out alive.' 

'yes, austin, I shall go out alive--i, and clark with me.' 

'what do you mean? you cannot, you would not dare ...' 

'wait a moment. the air wa veri pleasant and fresh thi morning; there 
wa a breez blowing, even through thi dull street, and I thought I 
would take a walk. piccadilli stretch befor me a clear, bright vista, 
and the sun flash on the carriag and on the quiver leav in the 
park. It wa a joyou morning, and men and women look at the sky and 
smile as they went about their work or their pleasure, and the wind 
blew as blith as upon the meadow and the scent gorse. but somehow 
or other I got out of the bustl and the gaiety, and found myself 
walk slowli along a quiet, dull street, where there seem to be no 
sunshin and no air, and where the few foot-passeng loiter as they 
walked, and hung indecis about corner and archways. I walk 
along, hardli know where I wa go or what I did there, but feel 
impelled, as one sometim is, to explor still further, with a vagu 
idea of reach some unknown goal. thu I forg up the street, note 
the small traffic of the milk-shop, and wonder at the incongru 
medley of penni pipes, black tobacco, sweets, newspapers, and comic 
song which here and there jostl one anoth in the short compass of a 
singl window. I think it wa a cold shudder that suddenli pass 
through me that first told me that I had found what I wanted. I look 
up from the pavement and stop befor a dusti shop, abov which the 
letter had faded, where the red brick of two hundr year ago had 
grime to black; where the window had gather to themselv the fog 
and the dirt of winter innumerable. I saw what I required; but I think 
it wa five minut befor I had steadi myself and could walk in and 
ask for it in a cool voic and with a calm face. I think there must 
even then have been a tremor in my words, for the old man who came out 
from hi back parlour, and fumbl slowli amongst hi goods, look 
oddli at me as he tie the parcel. I paid what he asked, and stood 
lean by the counter, with a strang reluct to take up my good 
and go. I ask about the business, and learnt that trade wa bad and 
the profit cut down sadly; but then the street wa not what it wa 
befor traffic had been diverted, but that wa done forti year ago, 
"just befor my father died," he said. I got away at last, and walk 
along sharply; it wa a dismal street indeed, and I wa glad to return 
to the bustl and the noise. would you like to see my purchase?' 

austin said nothing, but nod hi head slightly; he still look white 
and sick. villier pull out a drawer in the bamboo table, and show 
austin a long coil of cord, hard and new; and at one end wa a run 
noose. 

'it is the best hempen cord,' said villiers, 'just as it use to be made 
for the old trade, the man told me. not an inch of jute from end to 
end.' 

austin set hi teeth hard, and stare at villiers, grow whiter as he 
looked. 

'you would not do it,' he murmur at last. 'you would not have blood on 
your hands. My god!' he exclaimed, with sudden vehemence, 'you cannot 
mean this, villiers, that you will make yourself a hangman?' 

'no. I shall offer a choice, and leav helen vaughan alon with thi 
cord in a lock room for fifteen minutes. If when we go in it is not 
done, I shall call the nearest policeman. that is all.' 

'I must go now. I cannot stay here ani longer; I cannot bear this. 
good-night.' 

'good-night, austin.' 

the door shut, but in a moment it wa open again, and austin stood, 
white and ghastly, in the entrance. 

'I wa forgetting,' he said, 'that I too have someth to tell. I have 
receiv a letter from dr. hard of bueno ayres. He say that he 
attend meyrick for three week befor hi death.' 

'and doe he say what carri him off in the prime of life? It wa not 
fever?' 

'no, it wa not fever. accord to the doctor, it wa an utter collaps 
of the whole system, probabl caus by some sever shock. but he state 
that the patient would tell him nothing, and that he wa consequ at 
some disadvantag in treat the case.' 

'i there anyth more?' 

'yes. dr. hard end hi letter by saying: "I think thi is all the 
inform I can give you about your poor friend. He had not been long 
in bueno ayres, and knew scarc ani one, with the except of a 
person who did not bear the best of characters, and ha sinc left--a 
mrs. vaughan."' 


viii 

the fragment 

[amongst the paper of the well-known physician, dr. robert 
matheson, of ashley street, piccadilly, who die suddenly, of 
apoplect seizure, at the begin of 1892, a leaf of manuscript 
paper wa found, cover with pencil jottings. these note were in 
latin, much abbreviated, and had evid been made in great haste. 
the ms. wa onli deciph with great difficulty, and some word 
have up to the present time evad all the effort of the expert 
employed. the date, 'xxv jul. 1888,' is written on the right-hand 
corner of the ms. the follow is a translat of dr. matheson' 
manuscript.] 

'whether scienc would benefit by these brief note if they could be 
published, I do not know, but rather doubt. but certainli I shall never 
take the respons of publish or divulg one word of what is 
here written, not onli on account of my oath freeli given to those two 
person who were present, but also becaus the detail are too 
abominable. It is probabl that, upon matur consideration, and after 
weigh the good and evil, I shall one day destroy thi paper, or at 
least leav it under seal to my friend d., trust in hi discretion, 
to use it or to burn it, as he may think fit. 

'a wa befitting, I did all that my knowledg suggest to make sure 
that I wa suffer under no delusion. At first astounded, I could 
hardli think, but in a minute' time I wa sure that my puls wa steadi 
and regular, and that I wa in my real and true senses. I then fix my 
eye quietli on what wa befor me. 

'though horror and revolt nausea rose up within me, and an odour of 
corrupt choke my breath, I remain firm. I wa then privileg or 
accursed, I dare not say which, to see that which wa on the bed, lie 
there black like ink, transform befor my eyes. the skin, and the 
flesh, and the muscles, and the bones, and the firm structur of the 
human bodi that I had thought to be unchangeable, and perman as 
adamant, began to melt and dissolve. 

'I knew that the bodi may be separ into it element by extern 
agencies, but I should have refus to believ what I saw. for here 
there wa some intern force, of which I knew nothing, that caus 
dissolut and change. 

'here too wa all the work by which man had been made repeat befor my 
eyes. I saw the form waver from sex to sex, divid itself from itself, 
and then again reunited. then I saw the bodi descend to the beast 
whenc it ascended, and that which wa on the height go down to the 
depths, even to the abyss of all being. the principl of life, which 
make organism, alway remained, while the outward form changed. 

'the light within the room had turn to blackness, not the dark of 
night, in which object are seen dimly, for I could see clearli and 
without difficulty. but it wa the negat of light; object were 
present to my eyes, if I may say so, without ani medium, in such a 
manner that if there had been a prism in the room I should have seen no 
colour repres in it. 

'I watched, and at last I saw noth but a substanc as jelly. then the 
ladder wa ascend again ... [_here the ms. is illegible_] ... for one 
instant I saw a form, shape in dim befor me, which I will not 
farther describe. but the symbol of thi form may be seen in ancient 
sculptures, and in paint which surviv beneath the lava, too foul 
to be spoken of ... as a horribl and unspeak shape, neither man nor 
beast, wa chang into human form, there came final death. 

'I who saw all this, not without great horror and loath of soul, here 
write my name, declar all that I have set on thi paper to be true. 

'robert matheson, med. dr.' 

* * * * * 

... such, raymond, is the stori of what I know and what I have seen. the 
burden of it wa too heavi for me to bear alone, and yet I could tell it 
to none but you. villiers, who wa with me at the last, know noth of 
that aw secret of the wood, of how what we both saw die, lay upon the 
smooth, sweet turf amidst the summer flowers, half in sun and half in 
shadow, and hold the girl rachel' hand, call and summon those 
companions, and shape in solid form, upon the earth we tread on, the 
horror which we can but hint at, which we can onli name under a figure. 
I would not tell villier of this, nor of that resemblance, which struck 
me as with a blow upon my heart, when I saw the portrait, which fill 
the cup of terror at the end. what thi can mean I dare not guess. I 
know that what I saw perish wa not mary, and yet in the last agoni 
mary' eye look into mine. whether there be ani one who can show the 
last link in thi chain of aw mystery, I do not know, but if there be 
ani one who can do this, you, raymond, are the man. and if you know the 
secret, it rest with you to tell it or not, as you please. 

I am write thi letter to you immedi on my get back to town. 
I have been in the countri for the last few days; perhap you may be 
abl to guess in what part. while the horror and wonder of london wa at 
it height--for 'mrs. beaumont,' as I have told you, wa well known in 
society--i wrote to my friend dr. phillips, give some brief outline, 
or rather hint, of what had happened, and ask him to tell me the name 
of the villag where the event he had relat to me occurred. He gave 
me the name, as he said with the less hesitation, becaus rachel' 
father and mother were dead, and the rest of the famili had gone to a 
rel in the state of washington six month before. the parents, he 
said, had undoubtedli die of grief and horror caus by the terribl 
death of their daughter, and by what had gone befor that death. On the 
even of the day on which I receiv phillips' letter I wa at 
caermaen, and stand beneath the moulder roman walls, white with 
the winter of seventeen hundr years, I look over the meadow where 
onc had stood the older templ of the 'god of the deeps,' and saw a 
hous gleam in the sunlight. It wa the hous where helen had lived. 
I stay at caermaen for sever days. the peopl of the place, I found, 
knew littl and had guess less. those whom I spoke to on the matter 
seem surpris that an antiquarian (a I profess myself to be) 
should troubl about a villag tragedy, of which they gave a veri 
commonplac version, and, as you may imagine, I told noth of what I 
knew. most of my time wa spent in the great wood that rise just abov 
the villag and climb the hillside, and goe down to the river in the 
valley; such anoth long love valley, raymond, as that on which we 
look one summer night, walk to and fro befor your house. for mani 
an hour I stray through the maze of the forest, turn now to right 
and now to left, pace slowli down long alley of undergrowth, shadowi 
and chill, even under the midday sun, and halt beneath great oaks; 
lie on the short turf of a clear where the faint sweet scent of 
wild rose came to me on the wind and mix with the heavi perfum of 
the elder, whose mingl odour is like the odour of the room of the 
dead, a vapour of incens and corruption. I stood at the edg of the 
wood, gaze at all the pomp and process of the foxglov tower 
amidst the bracken and shine red in the broad sunshine, and beyond 
them into deep thicket of close undergrowth where spring boil up from 
the rock and nourish the water-weeds, dank and evil. but in all my 
wander I avoid one part of the wood; it wa not till yesterday 
that I climb to the summit of the hill, and stood upon the ancient 
roman road that thread the highest ridg of the wood. here they had 
walked, helen and rachel, along thi quiet causeway, upon the pavement 
of green turf, shut in on either side by high bank of red earth, and 
tall hedg of shine beech, and here I follow in their steps, 
look out, now and again, through part in the boughs, and see 
on one side the sweep of the wood stretch far to right and left, and 
sink into the broad level, and beyond, the yellow sea, and the land 
over the sea. On the other side wa the valley and the river and hill 
follow hill as wave on wave, and wood and meadow, and cornfield, and 
white hous gleaming, and a great wall of mountain, and far blue peak 
in the north. and so at last I came to the place. the track went up a 
gentl slope, and widen out into an open space with a wall of thick 
undergrowth around it, and then, narrow again, pass on into the 
distanc and the faint blue mist of summer heat. and into thi pleasant 
summer glade rachel pass a girl, and left it, who shall say what? I 
did not stay long there. 

In a small town near caermaen there is a museum, contain for the most 
part roman remain which have been found in the neighbourhood at variou 
times. On the day after my arriv at caermaen I walk over to the 
town in question, and took the opportun of inspect thi museum. 
after I had seen most of the sculptur stones, the coffins, rings, 
coins, and fragment of tessel pavement which the place contains, I 
wa shown a small squar pillar of white stone, which had been recent 
discov in the wood of which I have been speaking, and, as I found on 
inquiry, in that open space where the roman road broaden out. On one 
side of the pillar wa an inscription, of which I took a note. some of 
the letter have been defaced, but I do not think there can be ani doubt 
as to those which I supply. the inscript is as follows: 

devomnodent_i_ 
fla_v_ivssenilispossv_it_ 
propternvp_tias_ 
_qua_sviditsvbvmb_ra_ 

'to the great god noden (the god of the great deep or abyss) flaviu 
senili ha erect thi pillar on account of the marriag which he saw 
beneath the shade.' 

the custodian of the museum inform me that local antiquari were much 
puzzled, not by the inscription, or by ani difficulti in translat it, 
but as to the circumst or rite to which allus is made. 

* * * * * 

... and now, my dear clarke, as to what you tell me about helen vaughan, 
whom you say you saw die under circumst of the utmost and almost 
incred horror. I wa interest in your account, but a good deal, 
nay all, of what you told me I knew already. I can understand the 
strang like you remark both in the portrait and in the actual 
face; you have seen helen' mother. you rememb that still summer night 
so mani year ago, when I talk to you of the world beyond the shadows, 
and of the god pan. you rememb mary. she wa the mother of helen 
vaughan, who wa born nine month after that night. 

mari never recov her reason. she lay, as you saw her, all the while 
upon her bed, and a few day after the child wa born she died. I fanci 
that just at the last she knew me; I wa stand by the bed, and the 
old look came into her eye for a second, and then she shudder and 
groan and died. It wa an ill work I did that night when you were 
present; I broke open the door of the hous of life, without know or 
care what might pass forth or enter in. I recollect your tell me at 
the time, sharpli enough, and rightli enough too, in one sense, that I 
had ruin the reason of a human be by a foolish experiment, base on 
an absurd theory. you did well to blame me, but my theori wa not all 
absurdity. what I said mari would see, she saw, but I forgot that no 
human eye could look on such a vision with impunity. and I forgot, as I 
have just said, that when the hous of life is thu thrown open, there 
may enter in that for which we have no name, and human flesh may becom 
the veil of a horror one dare not express. I play with energi which 
I did not understand, and you have seen the end of it. helen vaughan 
did well to bind the cord about her neck and die, though the death wa 
horrible. the blacken face, the hideou form upon the bed, chang 
and melt befor your eye from woman to man, from man to beast, and 
from beast to wors than beast, all the strang horror that you 
witnessed, surpris me but little. what you say the doctor whom you 
sent for saw and shudder at I notic long ago; I knew what I had done 
the moment the child wa born, and when it wa scarc five year old I 
surpris it, not onc or twice but sever time with a playmate, you 
may guess of what kind. It wa for me a constant, an incarn horror, 
and after a few year I felt I could bear it no longer, and I sent helen 
vaughan away. you know now what frighten the boy in the wood. the rest 
of the strang story, and all els that you tell me, as discov by 
your friend, I have contriv to learn from time to time, almost to the 
last chapter. and now helen is with her companions.... 




the inmost light 


I 

one even in autumn, when the deform of london were veil in 
faint blue mist, and it vista and far-reach street seem 
splendid, mr. charl salisburi wa slowli pace down rupert street, 
draw nearer to hi favourit restaur by slow degrees. hi eye 
were downcast in studi of the pavement, and thu it wa that as he 
pass in at the narrow door a man who had come up from the lower end of 
the street jostl against him. 

'I beg your pardon--wasn't look where I wa going. why, it' dyson!' 

'yes, quit so. how are you, salisbury?' 

'quit well. but where have you been, dyson? I don't think I can have 
seen you for the last five years?' 

'no; I dare say not. you rememb I wa get rather hard up when you 
came to my place at charlott street?' 

'perfectly. I think I rememb your tell me that you owe five weeks' 
rent, and that you had part with your watch for a compar small 
sum.' 

'mi dear salisbury, your memori is admirable. yes, I wa hard up. but 
the curiou thing is that soon after you saw me I becam harder up. My 
financi state wa describ by a friend as "stone broke." I don't 
approv of slang, mind you, but such wa my condition. but suppos we go 
in; there might be other peopl who would like to dine--it' a human 
weakness, salisbury.' 

'certainly; come along. I wa wonder as I walk down whether the 
corner tabl were taken. It ha a velvet back, you know.' 

'I know the spot; it' vacant. yes, as I wa saying, I becam even 
harder up.' 

'what did you do then?' ask salisbury, dispos of hi hat, and 
settl down in the corner of the seat, with a glanc of fond 
anticip at the _menu_. 

'what did I do? why, I sat down and reflected. I had a good classic 
education, and a posit distast for busi of ani kind: that wa 
the capit with which I face the world. Do you know, I have heard 
peopl describ oliv as nasty! what lament philistinism! I have 
often thought, salisbury, that I could write genuin poetri under the 
influenc of oliv and red wine. let us have chianti; it may not be 
veri good, but the flask are simpli charming.' 

'it is pretti good here. We may as well have a big flask.' 

'veri good. I reflected, then, on my want of prospects, and I determin 
to embark in literature.' 

'really; that wa strange. you seem in pretti comfort circumstances, 
though.' 

'though! what a satir upon a nobl profession. I am afraid, salisbury, 
you haven't a proper idea of the digniti of an artist. you see me 
sit at my desk--or at least you can see me if you care to call--with 
pen and ink, and simpl nothing befor me, and if you come again in 
a few hour you will (in all probability) find a creation!' 

'yes, quit so. I had an idea that literatur wa not remunerative.' 

'you are mistaken; it reward are great. I may mention, by the way, 
that shortli after you saw me I succeed to a small income. An uncl 
died, and prove unexpectedli generous.' 

'ah, I see. that must have been convenient.' 

'it wa pleasant--undeni pleasant. I have alway consid it in 
the light of an endow of my researches. I told you I wa a man of 
letters; it would, perhaps, be more correct to describ myself as a man 
of science.' 

'dear me, dyson, you have realli chang veri much in the last few 
years. I had a notion, don't you know, that you were a sort of idler 
about town, the kind of man one might meet on the north side of 
piccadilli everi day from may to july.' 

'exactly. I wa even then form myself, though all unconsciously. you 
know my poor father could not afford to send me to the university. I 
use to grumbl in my ignor at not have complet my education. 
that wa the folli of youth, salisbury; my univers wa piccadilly. 
there I began to studi the great scienc which still occupi me.' 

'what scienc do you mean?' 

'the scienc of the great city; the physiolog of london; liter and 
metaphys the greatest subject that the mind of man can conceive. 
what an admir _salmi_ thi is; undoubtedli the final end of the 
pheasant. yet I feel sometim posit overwhelm with the thought 
of the vast and complex of london. pari a man may get to 
understand thoroughli with a reason amount of study; but london is 
alway a mystery. In pari you may say: "here live the actresses, here 
the bohemians, and the _ratés_"; but it is differ in london. you may 
point out a street, correctli enough, as the abod of washerwomen; but, 
in that second floor, a man may be studi chalde roots, and in the 
garret over the way a forgotten artist is die by inches.' 

'I see you are dyson, unchang and unchangeable,' said salisbury, 
slowli sip hi chianti. 'I think you are misl by a too fervid 
imagination; the mysteri of london exist onli in your fancy. It seem 
to me a dull place enough. We seldom hear of a realli artist crime in 
london, wherea I believ pari abound in that sort of thing.' 

'give me some more wine. thanks. you are mistaken, my dear fellow, you 
are realli mistaken. london ha noth to be asham of in the way of 
crime. where we fail is for want of homers, not agamemnons. _carent quia 
vate sacro_, you know.' 

'I recal the quotation. but I don't think I quit follow you.' 

'well, in plain language, we have no good writer in london who make a 
special of that kind of thing. our common report is a dull dog; 
everi stori that he ha to tell is spoilt in the telling. hi idea of 
horror and of what excit horror is so lament deficient. noth 
will content the fellow but blood, vulgar red blood, and when he can get 
it he lay it on thick, and consid that he ha produc a tell 
article. it' a poor notion. and, by some curiou fatality, it is the 
most commonplac and brutal murder which alway attract the most 
attent and get written up the most. for instance, I dare say that 
you never heard of the harlesden case?' 

'no; no, I don't rememb anyth about it.' 

'of cours not. and yet the stori is a curiou one. I will tell it you 
over our coffee. harlesden, you know, or I expect you don't know, is 
quit on the out-quart of london; someth curious differ from 
your fine old crust suburb like norwood or hampstead, differ as 
each of these is from the other. hampstead, I mean, is where you look 
for the head of your great china hous with hi three acr of land and 
pine-houses, though of late there is the artist substratum; while 
norwood is the home of the prosper middle-class famili who took the 
hous "becaus it wa near the palace," and sicken of the palac six 
month afterwards; but harlesden is a place of no character. it' too 
new to have ani charact as yet. there are the row of red hous and 
the row of white hous and the bright green venetians, and the 
blister doorways, and the littl backyard they call gardens, and a 
few feebl shops, and then, just as you think you'r go to grasp the 
physiognomi of the settlement, it all melt away.' 

'how the dicken is that? the hous don't tumbl down befor one' 
eyes, I suppose!' 

'well, no, not exactli that. but harlesden as an entiti disappears. your 
street turn into a quiet lane, and your stare hous into elm trees, 
and the back-garden into green meadows. you pass instantli from town to 
country; there is no transit as in a small countri town, no soft 
gradat of wider lawn and orchards, with hous gradual becom 
less dense, but a dead stop. I believ the peopl who live there mostli 
go into the city. I have seen onc or twice a laden 'bu bound 
thitherwards. but howev that may be, I can't conceiv a greater 
loneli in a desert at midnight than there is there at midday. It is 
like a citi of the dead; the street are glare and desolate, and as 
you pass it suddenli strike you that thi too is part of london. well, 
a year or two ago there wa a doctor live there; he had set up hi 
brass plate and hi red lamp at the veri end of one of those shine 
streets, and from the back of the house, the field stretch away to 
the north. I don't know what hi reason wa in settl down in such an 
out-of-the-way place, perhap dr. black, as we will call him, wa a 
far-se man and look ahead. hi relations, so it appear 
afterwards, had lost sight of him for mani year and didn't even know he 
wa a doctor, much less where he lived. however, there he wa settl in 
harlesden, with some fragment of a practice, and an uncommonli pretti 
wife. peopl use to see them walk out togeth in the summer 
even soon after they came to harlesden, and, so far as could be 
observed, they seem a veri affection couple. these walk went on 
through the autumn, and then ceased; but, of course, as the day grew 
dark and the weather cold, the lane near harlesden might be expect to 
lose mani of their attractions. all through the winter nobodi saw 
anyth of mrs. black; the doctor use to repli to hi patients' 
inquiri that she wa a "littl out of sorts, would be better, no 
doubt, in the spring." but the spring came, and the summer, and no mrs. 
black appeared, and at last peopl began to rumour and talk amongst 
themselves, and all sort of queer thing were said at "high teas," 
which you may possibl have heard are the onli form of entertain 
known in such suburbs. dr. black began to surpris some veri odd look 
cast in hi direction, and the practice, such as it was, fell off befor 
hi eyes. In short, when the neighbour whisper about the matter, they 
whisper that mrs. black wa dead, and that the doctor had made away 
with her. but thi wasn't the case; mrs. black wa seen aliv in june. 
It wa a sunday afternoon, one of those few exquisit day that an 
english climat offers, and half london had stray out into the fields, 
north, south, east, and west to smell the scent of the white may, and to 
see if the wild rose were yet in blossom in the hedges. I had gone out 
myself earli in the morning, and had had a long ramble, and somehow or 
other as I wa steer homeward I found myself in thi veri harlesden 
we have been talk about. To be exact, I had a glass of beer in the 
"gener gordon," the most flourish hous in the neighbourhood, and 
as I wa wander rather aimlessli about, I saw an uncommonli tempt 
gap in a hedgerow, and resolv to explor the meadow beyond. soft grass 
is veri grate to the feet after the infern grit strewn on suburban 
sidewalks, and after walk about for some time I thought I should like 
to sit down on a bank and have a smoke. while I wa get out my 
pouch, I look up in the direct of the houses, and as I look I 
felt my breath caught back, and my teeth began to chatter, and the stick 
I had in one hand snap in two with the grip I gave it. It wa as if I 
had had an electr current down my spine, and yet for some moment of 
time which seem long, but which must have been veri short, I caught 
myself wonder what on earth wa the matter. then I knew what had 
made my veri heart shudder and my bone grind togeth in an agony. As I 
glanc up I had look straight toward the last hous in the row 
befor me, and in an upper window of that hous I had seen for some 
short fraction of a second a face. It wa the face of a woman, and yet 
it wa not human. you and I, salisbury, have heard in our time, as we 
sat in our seat in church in sober english fashion, of a lust that 
cannot be satiat and of a fire that is unquenchable, but few of us 
have ani notion what these word mean. I hope you never may, for as I 
saw that face at the window, with the blue sky abov me and the warm air 
play in gust about me, I knew I had look into anoth 
world--look through the window of a commonplace, brand-new house, and 
seen hell open befor me. when the first shock wa over, I thought onc 
or twice that I should have fainted; my face stream with a cold sweat, 
and my breath came and went in sobs, as if I had been half drowned. I 
manag to get up at last, and walk round to the street, and there I 
saw the name "dr. black" on the post by the front gate. As fate or my 
luck would have it, the door open and a man came down the step as I 
pass by. I had no doubt it wa the doctor himself. He wa of a type 
rather common in london; long and thin, with a pasti face and a dull 
black moustache. He gave me a look as we pass each other on the 
pavement, and though it wa mere the casual glanc which one 
foot-passeng bestow on another, I felt convinc in my mind that here 
wa an ugli custom to deal with. As you may imagine, I went my way a 
good deal puzzl and horrifi too by what I had seen; for I had paid 
anoth visit to the "gener gordon," and had got togeth a good deal 
of the common gossip of the place about the blacks. I didn't mention the 
fact that I had seen a woman' face in the window; but I heard that mrs. 
black had been much admir for her beauti golden hair, and round 
what had struck me with such a nameless terror, there wa a mist of 
flow yellow hair, as it were an aureol of glori round the visag of 
a satyr. the whole thing bother me in an indescrib manner; and 
when I got home I tri my best to think of the impress I had 
receiv as an illusion, but it wa no use. I knew veri well I had seen 
what I have tri to describ to you, and I wa moral certain that I 
had seen mrs. black. and then there wa the gossip of the place, the 
suspicion of foul play, which I knew to be false, and my own convict 
that there wa some deadli mischief or other go on in that bright red 
hous at the corner of devon road: how to construct a theori of a 
reason kind out of these two elements. In short, I found myself in a 
world of mystery; I puzzl my head over it and fill up my leisur 
moment by gather togeth odd thread of speculation, but I never 
move a step toward ani real solution, and as the summer day went on 
the matter seem to grow misti and indistinct, shadow some vagu 
terror, like a nightmar of last month. I suppos it would befor long 
have fade into the background of my brain--i should not have forgotten 
it, for such a thing could never be forgotten--but one morn as I wa 
look over the paper my eye wa caught by a head over some two 
dozen line of small type. the word I had seen were simply, "the 
harlesden case," and I knew what I wa go to read. mrs. black wa 
dead. black had call in anoth medic man to certifi as to caus of 
death, and someth or other had arous the strang doctor' 
suspicion and there had been an inquest and _post-mortem_. and the 
result? that, I will confess, did astonish me considerably; it wa the 
triumph of the unexpected. the two doctor who made the autopsi were 
oblig to confess that they could not discov the faintest trace of 
ani kind of foul play; their most exquisit test and reagent fail to 
detect the presenc of poison in the most infinitesim quantity. death, 
they found, had been caus by a somewhat obscur and scientif 
interest form of brain disease. the tissu of the brain and the 
molecul of the grey matter had undergon a most extraordinari seri 
of changes; and the younger of the two doctors, who ha some reputation, 
I believe, as a specialist in brain trouble, made some remark in give 
hi evid which struck me deepli at the time, though I did not then 
grasp their full significance. He said: "at the commenc of the 
examin I wa astonish to find appear of a charact entir 
new to me, notwithstand my somewhat larg experience. I need not 
specifi these appear at present, it will be suffici for me to 
state that as I proceed in my task I could scarc believ that the 
brain befor me wa that of a human be at all." there wa some 
surpris at thi statement, as you may imagine, and the coron ask 
the doctor if he meant to say that the brain resembl that of an 
animal. "no," he replied, "I should not put it in that way. some of the 
appear I notic seem to point in that direction, but others, and 
these were the more surprising, indic a nervou organ of a 
wholli differ charact from that either of man or the lower 
animals." It wa a curiou thing to say, but of cours the juri brought 
in a verdict of death from natur causes, and, so far as the public wa 
concerned, the case came to an end. but after I had read what the doctor 
said I made up my mind that I should like to know a good deal more, and 
I set to work on what seem like to prove an interest 
investigation. I had realli a good deal of trouble, but I wa success 
in a measure. though why--mi dear fellow, I had no notion at the time. 
are you awar that we have been here nearli four hours? the waiter are 
stare at us. let' have the bill and be gone.' 

the two men went out in silence, and stood a moment in the cool air, 
watch the hurri traffic of coventri street pass befor them to the 
accompani of the ring bell of hansom and the cri of the 
newsboys; the deep far murmur of london surg up ever and again from 
beneath these louder noises. 

'it is a strang case, isn't it?' said dyson at length. 'what do you 
think of it?' 

'mi dear fellow, I haven't heard the end, so I will reserv my opinion. 
when will you give me the sequel?' 

'come to my room some evening; say next thursday. here' the address. 
good-night; I want to get down to the strand.' dyson hail a pass 
hansom, and salisburi turn northward to walk home to hi lodgings. 


II 

mr. salisbury, as may have been gather from the few remark which he 
had found it possibl to introduc in the cours of the evening, wa a 
young gentleman of a peculiarli solid form of intellect, coy and 
retir befor the mysteri and the uncommon, with a constitut 
dislik of paradox. dure the restaur dinner he had been forc to 
listen in almost absolut silenc to a strang tissu of improb 
strung togeth with the ingenu of a born meddler in plot and 
mysteries, and it wa with a feel of weari that he cross 
shaftesburi avenue, and dive into the recess of soho, for hi 
lodg were in a modest neighbourhood to the north of oxford street. 
As he walk he specul on the probabl fate of dyson, reli on 
literature, unbefriend by a thought relative, and could not help 
conclud that so much subtleti unit to a too vivid imagin would 
in all likelihood have been reward with a pair of sandwich-board or a 
super' banner. absorb in thi train of thought, and admir the 
pervers dexter which could transmut the face of a sickli woman and 
a case of brain diseas into the crude element of romance, salisburi 
stray on through the dimly-light streets, not notic the gusti 
wind which drove sharpli round corner and whirl the stray rubbish of 
the pavement into the air in eddies, while black cloud gather over 
the sickli yellow moon. even a stray drop or two of rain blown into hi 
face did not rous him from hi meditations, and it wa onli when with 
a sudden rush the storm tore down upon the street that he began to 
consid the expedi of find some shelter. the rain, driven by the 
wind, pelt down with the violenc of a thunderstorm, dash up from 
the stone and hiss through the air, and soon a perfect torrent of 
water cours along the kennel and accumul in pool over the 
choked-up drains. the few stray passeng who had been loaf rather 
than walk about the street had scutter away, like frighten 
rabbits, to some invis place of refuge, and though salisburi 
whistl loud and long for a hansom, no hansom appeared. He look about 
him, as if to discov how far he might be from the haven of oxford 
street, but stroll carelessli along, he had turn out of hi way, 
and found himself in an unknown region, and one to all appear devoid 
even of a public-hous where shelter could be bought for the modest sum 
of twopence. the street lamp were few and at long intervals, and burn 
behind grimi glass with the sickli light of oil, and by thi waver 
glimmer salisburi could make out the shadowi and vast old hous of 
which the street wa composed. As he pass along, hurrying, and 
shrink from the full sweep of the rain, he notic the innumer 
bell-handles, with name that seem about to vanish of old age graven 
on brass plate beneath them, and here and there a richli carv 
penthous overhung the door, blacken with the grime of fifti years. 
the storm seem to grow more and more furious; he wa wet through, and 
a new hat had becom a ruin, and still oxford street seem as far off 
as ever; it wa with deep relief that the drip man caught sight of a 
dark archway which seem to promis shelter from the rain if not from 
the wind. salisburi took up hi posit in the driest corner and look 
about him; he wa stand in a kind of passag contriv under part of 
a house, and behind him stretch a narrow footway lead between blank 
wall to region unknown. He had stood there for some time, vainli 
endeavour to rid himself of some of hi superflu moisture, and 
listen for the pass wheel of a hansom, when hi attent wa 
arous by a loud nois come from the direct of the passag behind, 
and grow louder as it drew nearer. In a coupl of minut he could 
make out the shrill, raucou voic of a woman, threaten and 
renouncing, and make the veri stone echo with her accents, while now 
and then a man grumbl and expostulated. though to all appear 
devoid of romance, salisburi had some relish for street rows, and was, 
indeed, somewhat of an amateur in the more amus phase of 
drunkenness; he therefor compos himself to listen and observ with 
someth of the air of a subscrib to grand opera. To hi annoyance, 
however, the tempest seem suddenli to be composed, and he could hear 
noth but the impati step of the woman and the slow lurch of the 
man as they came toward him. keep back in the shadow of the wall, he 
could see the two draw nearer; the man wa evid drunk, and had 
much ado to avoid frequent collis with the wall as he tack across 
from one side to the other, like some bark beat up against a wind. 
the woman wa look straight in front of her, with tear stream 
from her eyes, but suddenli as they went by the flame blaze up again, 
and she burst forth into a torrent of abuse, face round upon her 
companion. 

'you low rascal, you mean, contempt cur,' she went on, after an 
incoher storm of curses, 'you think i'm to work and slave for you 
always, I suppose, while you'r after that green street girl and 
drink everi penni you'v got? but you'r mistaken, sam--indeed, i'll 
bear it no longer. damn you, you dirti thief, i'v done with you and 
your master too, so you can go your own errands, and I onli hope they'll 
get you into trouble.' 

the woman tore at the bosom of her dress, and take someth out that 
look like paper, crumpl it up and flung it away. It fell at 
salisbury' feet. she ran out and disappear in the darkness, while the 
man lurch slowli into the street, grumbl indistinctli to himself in 
a perplex tone of voice. salisburi look out after him and saw him 
maunder along the pavement, halt now and then and sway 
indecisively, and then start off at some fresh tangent. the sky had 
cleared, and white fleeci cloud were fleet across the moon, high in 
the heaven. the light came and went by turns, as the cloud pass by, 
and, turn round as the clear, white ray shone into the passage, 
salisburi saw the littl ball of crumpl paper which the woman had cast 
down. oddli curiou to know what it might contain, he pick it up and 
put it in hi pocket, and set out afresh on hi journey. 


iii 

salisburi wa a man of habit. when he got home, drench to the skin, 
hi cloth hang lank about him, and a ghastli dew besmear hi 
hat, hi onli thought wa of hi health, of which he took studiou care. 
so, after chang hi cloth and encas himself in a warm 
dressing-gown, he proceed to prepar a sudorif in the shape of a hot 
gin and water, warm the latter over one of those spirit-lamp which 
mitig the auster of the modern hermit' life. By the time thi 
prepar had been exhibited, and salisbury' disturb feel had 
been sooth by a pipe of tobacco, he wa abl to get into bed in a 
happi state of vacancy, without a thought of hi adventur in the dark 
archway, or of the weird fanci with which dyson had season hi 
dinner. It wa the same at breakfast the next morning, for salisburi 
made a point of not think of ani thing until that meal wa over; but 
when the cup and saucer were clear away, and the morn pipe wa lit, 
he rememb the littl ball of paper, and began fumbl in the 
pocket of hi wet coat. He did not rememb into which pocket he had 
put it, and as he dive now into one and now into another, he 
experienc a strang feel of apprehens lest it should not be 
there at all, though he could not for the life of him have explain the 
import he attach to what wa in all probabl mere rubbish. but 
he sigh with relief when hi finger touch the crumpl surfac in 
an insid pocket, and he drew it out gentli and laid it on the littl 
desk by hi easy-chair with as much care as if it had been some rare 
jewel. salisburi sat smoke and stare at hi find for a few minutes, 
an odd temptat to throw the thing in the fire and have done with it 
struggl with as odd a specul as to it possibl contents, and as 
to the reason whi the infuri woman should have flung a bit of paper 
from her with such vehemence. As might be expected, it wa the latter 
feel that conquer in the end, and yet it wa with someth like 
repugn that he at last took the paper and unrol it, and laid it 
out befor him. It wa a piec of common dirti paper, to all appear 
torn out of a cheap exercise-book, and in the middl were a few line 
written in a queer cramp hand. salisburi bent hi head and stare 
eagerli at it for a moment, draw a long breath, and then fell back in 
hi chair gaze blankli befor him, till at last with a sudden 
revuls he burst into a peal of laughter, so long and loud and 
uproari that the landlady' babi on the floor below awok from sleep 
and echo hi mirth with hideou yells. but he laugh again and again, 
and took the paper up to read a second time what seem such meaningless 
nonsense. 

'q. ha had to go and see hi friend in paris,' it began. 'travers 
handl S. "onc around the grass, and twice around the lass, and 
thrice around the mapl tree."' 

salisburi took up the paper and crumpl it as the angri woman had done, 
and aim it at the fire. He did not throw it there, however, but 
toss it carelessli into the well of the desk, and laugh again. the 
sheer folli of the thing offend him, and he wa asham of hi own 
eager speculation, as one who pore over the high-sound announc 
in the agoni column of the daili paper, and find noth but 
advertis and triviality. He walk to the window, and stare out at 
the languid morn life of hi quarter; the maid in slatternli print 
dress wash door-steps, the fish-mong and the butcher on their 
rounds, and the tradesmen stand at the door of their small shops, 
droop for lack of trade and excitement. In the distanc a blue haze 
gave some grandeur to the prospect, but the view as a whole wa 
depressing, and would onli have interest a student of the life of 
london, who find someth rare and choic in it veri aspect. 
salisburi turn away in disgust, and settl himself in the easy-chair, 
upholst in a bright shade of green, and deck with yellow gimp, 
which wa the pride and attract of the apartments. here he compos 
himself to hi morning' occupation--th perus of a novel that dealt 
with sport and love in a manner that suggest the collabor of a 
stud-groom and a ladies' college. In an ordinari way, however, salisburi 
would have been carri on by the interest of the stori up to 
lunch-time, but thi morn he fidget in and out of hi chair, took 
the book up and laid it down again, and swore at last to himself and at 
himself in mere irritation. In point of fact the jingl of the paper 
found in the archway had 'got into hi head,' and do what he would he 
could not help mutter over and over, 'onc around the grass, and 
twice around the lass, and thrice around the mapl tree.' It becam a 
posit pain, like the foolish burden of a music-hal song, 
everlastingli quoted, and sung at all hour of the day and night, and 
treasur by the street-boy as an unfail resourc for six month 
together. He went out into the streets, and tri to forget hi enemi in 
the jostl of the crowd and the roar and clatter of the traffic, but 
present he would find himself steal quietli aside, and pace some 
desert byway, vainli puzzl hi brains, and tri to fix some 
mean to phrase that were meaningless. It wa a posit relief when 
thursday came, and he rememb that he had made an appoint to go 
and see dyson; the flimsi reveri of the self-styl man of letter 
appear entertain when compar with thi ceaseless iteration, thi 
maze of thought from which there seem no possibl of escape. 
dyson' abod wa in one of the quietest of the quiet street that led 
down from the strand to the river, and when salisburi pass from the 
narrow stairway into hi friend' room, he saw that the uncl had been 
benefic indeed. the floor glow and flame with all the colour of 
the east; it was, as dyson pompous remarked, 'a sunset in a dream,' 
and the lamplight, the twilight of london streets, wa shut out with 
strang work curtains, glitter here and there with thread of 
gold. In the shelv of an oak _armoire_ stood jar and plate of old 
french china, and the black and white of etch not to be found in the 
haymarket or in bond street, stood out against the splendour of a 
japanes paper. salisburi sat down on the settl by the hearth, and 
snif the mingl fume of incens and tobacco, wonder and dumb 
befor all thi splendour after the green rep and the oleographs, the 
gilt-fram mirror, and the lustr of hi own apartment. 

'I am glad you have come,' said dyson. 'comfort littl room, isn't 
it? but you don't look veri well, salisbury. noth disagre with you, 
ha it?' 

'no; but I have been a good deal bother for the last few days. the 
fact is I had an odd kind of--of--adventure, I suppos I may call it, 
that night I saw you, and it ha worri me a good deal. and the 
provok part of it is that it' the merest nonsense--but, however, I 
will tell you all about it, by and by. you were go to let me have the 
rest of that odd stori you began at the restaurant.' 

'yes. but I am afraid, salisbury, you are incorrigible. you are a slave 
to what you call matter of fact. you know perfectli well that in your 
heart you think the odd in that case is of my making, and that it is 
all realli as plain as the polic reports. however, as I have begun, I 
will go on. but first we will have someth to drink, and you may as 
well light your pipe.' 

dyson went up to the oak cupboard, and drew from it depth a rotund 
bottl and two littl glasses, quaintli gilded. 

'it' benedictine,' he said. 'you'll have some, won't you?' 

salisburi assented, and the two men sat sip and smoke reflect 
for some minut befor dyson began. 

'let me see,' he said at last, 'we were at the inquest, weren't we? no, 
we had done with that. ah, I remember. I wa tell you that on the 
whole I had been success in my inquiries, investigation, or whatev 
you like to call it, into the matter. wasn't that where I left off?' 

'yes, that wa it. To be precise, I think "though" wa the last word you 
said on the matter.' 

'exactly. I have been think it all over sinc the other night, and I 
have come to the conclus that that "though" is a veri big "though" 
indeed. not to put too fine a point on it, I have had to confess that 
what I found out, or thought I found out, amount in realiti to nothing. 
I am as far away from the heart of the case as ever. however, I may as 
well tell you what I do know. you may rememb my say that I wa 
impress a good deal by some remark of one of the doctor who gave 
evid at the inquest. well, I determin that my first step must be 
to tri if I could get someth more definit and intellig out of 
that doctor. somehow or other I manag to get an introduct to the 
man, and he gave me an appoint to come and see him. He turn out to 
be a pleasant, genial fellow; rather young and not in the least like the 
typic medic man, and he began the confer by offer me whiski 
and cigars. I didn't think it worth while to beat about the bush, so I 
began by say that part of hi evid at the harlesden inquest 
struck me as veri peculiar, and I gave him the print report, with the 
sentenc in question underlined. He just glanc at the slip, and gave 
me a queer look. "it struck you as peculiar, did it?" said he. "well, 
you must rememb that the harlesden case wa veri peculiar. In fact, I 
think I may safe say that in some featur it wa unique--quit 
unique." "quit so," I replied, "and that' exactli whi it interest me, 
and whi I want to know more about it. and I thought that if anybodi 
could give me ani inform it would be you. what is your opinion of 
the matter?" 

'it wa a pretti downright sort of question, and my doctor look rather 
taken aback. 

'"well," he said, "a I fanci your motiv in inquir into the question 
must be mere curiosity, I think I may tell you my opinion with toler 
freedom. so, mr., mr. dyson? if you want to know my theory, it is this: 
I believ that dr. black kill hi wife." 

'"but the verdict," I answered, "the verdict wa given from your own 
evidence." 

'"quit so; the verdict wa given in accord with the evid of my 
colleagu and myself, and, under the circumstances, I think the juri 
act veri sensibly. In fact, I don't see what els they could have 
done. but I stick to my opinion, mind you, and I say thi also. I don't 
wonder at black' do what I firmli believ he did. I think he wa 
justified." 

'"justified! how could that be?" I asked. I wa astonished, as you may 
imagine, at the answer I had got. the doctor wheel round hi chair and 
look steadili at me for a moment befor he answered. 

'"i suppos you are not a man of scienc yourself? no; then it would be 
of no use my go into detail. I have alway been firmli oppos myself 
to ani partnership between physiolog and psychology. I believ that 
both are bound to suffer. No one recogn more decidedli than I do the 
impass gulf, the fathomless abyss that separ the world of 
conscious from the sphere of matter. We know that everi chang of 
conscious is accompani by a rearrang of the molecul in the 
grey matter; and that is all. what the link between them is, or whi 
they occur together, we do not know, and most author believ that 
we never can know. yet, I will tell you that as I did my work, the knife 
in my hand, I felt convinced, in spite of all theories, that what lay 
befor me wa not the brain of a dead woman--not the brain of a human 
be at all. Of cours I saw the face; but it wa quit placid, devoid 
of all expression. It must have been a beauti face, no doubt, but I 
can honestli say that I would not have look in that face when there 
wa life behind it for a thousand guineas, no, nor for twice that sum." 

'"mi dear sir," I said, "you surpris me extremely. you say that it wa 
not the brain of a human being. what wa it then?" 

'"the brain of a devil." He spoke quit coolly, and never move a 
muscle. "the brain of a devil," he repeated, "and I have no doubt that 
black found some way of put an end to it. I don't blame him if he 
did. whatev mrs. black was, she wa not fit to stay in thi world. 
will you have anyth more? no? good-night, good-night." 

'it wa a queer sort of opinion to get from a man of science, wasn't it? 
when he wa say that he would not have look on that face when aliv 
for a thousand guineas, or two thousand guineas, I wa think of the 
face I had seen, but I said nothing. I went again to harlesden, and 
pass from one shop to another, make small purchases, and tri to 
find out whether there wa anyth about the black which wa not 
alreadi common property, but there wa veri littl to hear. one of the 
tradesmen to whom I spoke said he had known the dead woman well; she 
use to buy of him such quantiti of groceri as were requir for 
their small household, for they never kept a servant, but had a 
charwoman in occasionally, and she had not seen mrs. black for month 
befor she died. accord to thi man mrs. black wa "a nice lady," 
alway kind and considerate, and so fond of her husband and he of her, 
as everi one thought. and yet, to put the doctor' opinion on one side, 
I knew what I had seen. and then after think it all over, and put 
one thing with another, it seem to me that the onli person like to 
give me much assist would be black himself, and I made up my mind to 
find him. Of cours he wasn't to be found in harlesden; he had left, I 
wa told, directli after the funeral. everyth in the hous had been 
sold, and one fine day black got into the train with a small 
portmanteau, and went, nobodi knew where. It wa a chanc if he were 
ever heard of again, and it wa by a mere chanc that I came across him 
at last. I wa walk one day along gray' inn road, not bound for 
anywher in particular, but look about me, as usual, and hold on 
to my hat, for it wa a gusti day in earli march, and the wind wa 
make the treetop in the inn rock and quiver. I had come up from the 
holborn end, and I had almost got to theobald' road when I notic a 
man walk in front of me, lean on a stick, and to all appear 
veri feeble. there wa someth about hi look that made me curious, I 
don't know why, and I began to walk briskli with the idea of overtak 
him, when of a sudden hi hat blew off and came bound along the 
pavement to my feet. Of cours I rescu the hat, and gave it a glanc 
as I went toward it owner. It wa a biographi in itself; a piccadilli 
maker' name in the inside, but I don't think a beggar would have pick 
it out of the gutter. then I look up and saw dr. black of harlesden 
wait for me. A queer thing, wasn't it? but, salisbury, what a change! 
when I saw dr. black come down the step of hi hous at harlesden he 
wa an upright man, walk firmli with well-built limbs; a man, I 
should say, in the prime of hi life. and now befor me there crouch 
thi wretch creature, bent and feeble, with shrunken cheeks, and hair 
that wa whiten fast, and limb that trembl and shook together, and 
miseri in hi eyes. He thank me for bring him hi hat, saying, "I 
don't think I should ever have got it, I can't run much now. A gusti 
day, sir, isn't it?" and with thi he wa turn away, but by littl 
and littl I contriv to draw him into the current of conversation, and 
we walk togeth eastward. I think the man would have been glad to get 
rid of me; but I didn't intend to let him go, and he stop at last in 
front of a miser hous in a miser street. It was, I verili 
believe, one of the most wretch quarter I have ever seen: hous that 
must have been sordid and hideou enough when new, that had gather 
foul with everi year, and now seem to lean and totter to their 
fall. "I live up there," said black, point to the tiles, "not in the 
front--in the back. I am veri quiet there. I won't ask you to come in 
now, but perhap some other day----" I caught him up at that, and told 
him I should be onli too glad to come and see him. He gave me an odd 
sort of glance, as if he were wonder what on earth I or anybodi els 
could care about him, and I left him fumbl with hi latch-key. I 
think you will say I did pretti well when I tell you that within a few 
week I had made myself an intim friend of black's. I shall never 
forget the first time I went to hi room; I hope I shall never see such 
abject, squalid miseri again. the foul paper, from which all pattern or 
trace of a pattern had long vanished, subdu and penetr with the 
grime of the evil street, wa hang in moulder pennon from the 
wall. onli at the end of the room wa it possibl to stand upright, and 
the sight of the wretch bed and the odour of corrupt that pervad 
the place made me turn faint and sick. here I found him munch a piec 
of bread; he seem surpris to find that I had kept my promise, but he 
gave me hi chair and sat on the bed while we talked. I use to go to 
see him often, and we had long convers together, but he never 
mention harlesden or hi wife. I fanci that he suppos me ignor of 
the matter, or thought that if I had heard of it, I should never connect 
the respect dr. black of harlesden with a poor garret in the 
backwood of london. He wa a strang man, and as we sat togeth 
smoking, I often wonder whether he were mad or sane, for I think the 
wildest dream of paracelsu and the rosicrucian would appear plain and 
sober fact compar with the theori I have heard him earnestli advanc 
in that grimi den of his. I onc ventur to hint someth of the sort 
to him. I suggest that someth he had said wa in flat contradict 
to all scienc and all experience. "no," he answered, "not all 
experience, for mine count for something. I am no dealer in unprov 
theories; what I say I have prove for myself, and at a terribl cost. 
there is a region of knowledg which you will never know, which wise men 
see from afar off shun like the plague, as well they may, but into 
that region I have gone. If you knew, if you could even dream of what 
may be done, of what one or two men have done in thi quiet world of 
ours, your veri soul would shudder and faint within you. what you have 
heard from me ha been but the merest husk and outer cover of true 
science--that scienc which mean death, and that which is more aw 
than death, to those who gain it. no, when men say that there are 
strang thing in the world, they littl know the awe and the terror 
that dwell alway with them and about them." there wa a sort of 
fascin about the man that drew me to him, and I wa quit sorri to 
have to leav london for a month or two; I miss hi odd talk. A few 
day after I came back to town I thought I would look him up, but when I 
gave the two ring at the bell that use to summon him, there wa no 
answer. I rang and rang again, and wa just turn to go away, when the 
door open and a dirti woman ask me what I wanted. from her look I 
fanci she took me for a plain-cloth offic after one of her lodgers, 
but when I inquir if mr. black were in, she gave me a stare of anoth 
kind. "there' no mr. black live here," she said. "he' gone. he' dead 
thi six weeks. I alway thought he wa a bit queer in hi head, or els 
had been and got into some troubl or other. He use to go out everi 
morn from ten till one, and one monday morn we heard him come in, 
and go into hi room and shut the door, and a few minut after, just as 
we wa a-sit down to our dinner, there wa such a scream that I 
thought I should have gone right off. and then we heard a stamping, and 
down he came, rage and curs most dreadful, swear he had been 
rob of someth that wa worth millions. and then he just drop 
down in the passage, and we thought he wa dead. We got him up to hi 
room, and put him on hi bed, and I just sat there and waited, while my 
'usband he went for the doctor. and there wa the winder wide open, and 
a littl tin box he had lie on the floor open and empty, but of cours 
nobodi could possibl have got in at the winder, and as for him have 
anyth that wa worth anything, it' nonsense, for he wa often week 
and week behind with hi rent, and my 'usband he threaten often and 
often to turn him into the street, for, as he said, we'v got a live 
to myke like other people--and, of course, that' true; but, somehow, I 
didn't like to do it, though he wa an odd kind of a man, and I fanci 
had been better off. and then the doctor came and look at him, and 
said as he couldn't do nothing, and that night he die as I wa 
a-sit by hi bed; and I can tell you that, with one thing and 
another, we lost money by him, for the few bit of cloth as he had 
were worth next to noth when they came to be sold." I gave the woman 
half a sovereign for her trouble, and went home think of dr. black 
and the epitaph she had made him, and wonder at hi strang fanci 
that he had been robbed. I take it that he had veri littl to fear on 
that score, poor fellow; but I suppos that he wa realli mad, and die 
in a sudden access of hi mania. hi landladi said that onc or twice 
when she had had occas to go into hi room (to dun the poor wretch 
for hi rent, most likely), he would keep her at the door for about a 
minute, and that when she came in she would find him put away hi 
tin box in the corner by the window; I suppos he had becom possess 
with the idea of some great treasure, and fanci himself a wealthi man 
in the midst of all hi misery. _explicit_, my tale is ended, and you 
see that though I knew black, I know noth of hi wife or of the 
histori of her death.--that' the harlesden case, salisbury, and I think 
it interest me all the more deepli becaus there doe not seem the 
shadow of a possibl that I or ani one els will ever know more about 
it. what do you think of it?' 

'well, dyson, I must say that I think you have contriv to surround the 
whole thing with a mysteri of your own making. I go for the doctor' 
solution: black murder hi wife, be himself in all probabl an 
undevelop lunatic.' 

'what? Do you believe, then, that thi woman wa someth too awful, 
too terribl to be allow to remain on the earth? you will rememb 
that the doctor said it wa the brain of a devil?' 

'yes, yes, but he wa speaking, of course, metaphorically. it' realli 
quit a simpl matter if you onli look at it like that.' 

'ah, well, you may be right; but yet I am sure you are not. well, well, 
it' no good discuss it ani more. A littl more benedictine? that' 
right; tri some of thi tobacco. didn't you say that you had been 
bother by something--someth which happen that night we dine 
together?' 

'yes, I have been worried, dyson, worri a great deal. i----but it' 
such a trivial matter--indeed, such an absurdity--that I feel asham to 
troubl you with it.' 

'never mind, let' have it, absurd or not.' 

with mani hesitations, and with much inward resent of the folli of 
the thing, salisburi told hi tale, and repeat reluctantli the absurd 
intellig and the absurd doggerel of the scrap of paper, expect 
to hear dyson burst out into a roar of laughter. 

'isn't it too bad that I should let myself be bother by such stuff as 
that?' he asked, when he had stutter out the jingl of once, and 
twice, and thrice. 

dyson listen to it all gravely, even to the end, and medit for a 
few minut in silence. 

'yes,' he said at length, 'it wa a curiou chance, your take shelter 
in that archway just as those two went by. but I don't know that I 
should call what wa written on the paper nonsense; it is bizarr 
certainly, but I expect it ha a mean for somebody. just repeat it 
again, will you, and I will write it down. perhap we might find a 
cipher of some sort, though I hardli think we shall.' 

again had the reluct lip of salisburi slowli to stammer out the 
rubbish that he abhorred, while dyson jot it down on a slip of paper. 

'look over it, will you?' he said, when it wa done; 'it may be 
import that I should have everi word in it place. Is that all 
right?' 

'yes; that is an accur copy. but I don't think you will get much out 
of it. depend upon it, it is mere nonsense, a wanton scribble. I must be 
go now, dyson. no, no more; that stuff of your is pretti strong. 
good-night.' 

'I suppos you would like to hear from me, if I did find out anything?' 

'no, not I; I don't want to hear about the thing again. you may regard 
the discovery, if it is one, as your own.' 

'veri well. good-night.' 


IV 

A good mani hour after salisburi had return to the compani of the 
green rep chairs, dyson still sat at hi desk, itself a japanes 
romance, smoke mani pipes, and medit over hi friend' story. the 
bizarr qualiti of the inscript which had annoy salisburi wa to 
him an attraction, and now and again he took it up and scan 
thought what he had written, especi the quaint jingl at the 
end. It wa a token, a symbol, he decided, and not a cipher, and the 
woman who had flung it away wa in all probabl entir ignor of 
it meaning; she wa but the agent of the 'sam' she had abus and 
discarded, and he too wa again the agent of some one unknown, possibl 
of the individu style Q, who had been forc to visit hi french 
friends. but what to make of 'travers handl s.' here wa the root and 
sourc of the enigma, and not all the tobacco of virginia seem like 
to suggest ani clue here. It seem almost hopeless, but dyson regard 
himself as the wellington of mysteries, and went to bed feel assur 
that sooner or later he would hit upon the right track for the next few 
day he wa deepli engag in hi literari labours, labour which were a 
profound mysteri even to the most intim of hi friends, who search 
the railway bookstal in vain for the result of so mani hour spent at 
the japanes bureau in compani with strong tobacco and black tea. On 
thi occas dyson confin himself to hi room for four days, and it 
wa with genuin relief that he laid down hi pen and went out into the 
street in quest of relax and fresh air. the gas-lamp were be 
lighted, and the fifth edit of the even paper wa be howl 
through the streets, and dyson, feel that he want quiet, turn 
away from the clamor strand, and began to trend away to the 
north-west. soon he found himself in street that echo to hi 
footsteps, and cross a broad new thoroughfare, and verg still to 
the west, dyson discov that he had penetr to the depth of soho. 
here again wa life; rare vintag of franc and italy, at price which 
seem contempt small, allur the passer-by; here were cheeses, 
vast and rich, here oliv oil, and here a grove of rabelaisian sausages; 
while in a neighbour shop the whole press of pari appear to be on 
sale. In the middl of the roadway a strang miscellani of nation 
saunter to and fro, for there cab and hansom rare ventured; and from 
window over window the inhabit look forth in pleas contempl 
of the scene. dyson made hi way slowli along, mingl with the crowd 
on the cobble-stones, listen to the queer babel of french and german, 
and italian and english, glanc now and again at the shop-window with 
their level batteri of bottles, and had almost gain the end of 
the street, when hi attent wa arrest by a small shop at the 
corner, a vivid contrast to it neighbours. It wa the typic shop of 
the poor quarter; a shop entir english. here were vend tobacco and 
sweets, cheap pipe of clay and cherry-wood; penni exercise-book and 
penhold jostl for preced with comic songs, and stori paper 
with appal cut show that romanc claim it place besid the 
actual of the even paper, the bill of which flutter at the 
doorway. dyson glanc up at the name abov the door, and stood by the 
kennel trembling, for a sharp pang, the pang of one who ha made a 
discovery, had for a moment left him incap of motion. the name over 
the shop wa travers. dyson look up again, thi time at the corner of 
the wall abov the lamp-post, and read in white letter on a blue ground 
the word 'handel street, W. c.,' and the legend wa repeat in fainter 
letter just below. He gave a littl sigh of satisfaction, and without 
more ado walk boldli into the shop, and stare full in the face the 
fat man who wa sit behind the counter. the fellow rose to hi feet, 
and return the stare a littl curiously, and then began in stereotyp 
phrase-- 

'what can I do for you, sir?' 

dyson enjoy the situat and a dawn perplex on the man' face. 
He prop hi stick care against the counter and lean over it, 
said slowli and impressively-- 

'onc around the grass, and twice around the lass, and thrice around the 
maple-tree.' 

dyson had calcul on hi word produc an effect, and he wa not 
disappointed. the vendor of miscellani gasped, open-mouth like a 
fish, and steadi himself against the counter. when he spoke, after a 
short interval, it wa in a hoars mutter, tremul and unsteady. 

'would you mind say that again, sir? I didn't quit catch it.' 

'mi good man, I shall most certainli do noth of the kind. you heard 
what I said perfectli well. you have got a clock in your shop, I see; an 
admir timekeeper, I have no doubt. well, I give you a minut by your 
own clock.' 

the man look about him in a perplex indecision, and dyson felt that 
it wa time to be bold. 

'look here, travers, the time is nearli up. you have heard of Q, I 
think. remember, I hold your life in my hands. now!' 

dyson wa shock at the result of hi own audacity. the man shrank and 
shrivel in terror, the sweat pour down a face of ashi white, and he 
held up hi hand befor him. 

'mr. davies, mr. davies, don't say that--don't for heaven' sake. I 
didn't know you at first, I didn't indeed. good god! mr. davies, you 
wouldn't ruin me? i'll get it in a moment.' 

'you had better not lose ani more time.' 

the man slunk piteous out of hi own shop, and went into a back 
parlour. dyson heard hi trembl finger fumbl with a bunch of 
keys, and the creak of an open box. He came back present with a 
small packag neatli tie up in brown paper in hi hands, and, still 
full of terror, hand it to dyson. 

'i'm glad to be rid of it,' he said. 'i'll take no more job of thi 
sort.' 

dyson took the parcel and hi stick, and walk out of the shop with a 
nod, turn round as he pass the door. traver had sunk into hi 
seat, hi face still white with terror, with one hand over hi eyes, 
and dyson specul a good deal as he walk rapidli away as to what 
queer chord those could be on which he had play so roughly. He hail 
the first hansom he could see and drove home, and when he had lit hi 
hang lamp, and laid hi parcel on the table, he paus for a moment, 
wonder on what strang thing the lamplight would soon shine. He 
lock hi door, and cut the strings, and unfold the paper layer after 
layer, and came at last to a small wooden box, simpli but solidli made. 
there wa no lock, and dyson had simpli to rais the lid, and as he did 
so he drew a long breath and start back. the lamp seem to glimmer 
feebli like a singl candle, but the whole room blaze with light--and 
not with light alone, but with a thousand colours, with all the glori 
of some paint window; and upon the wall of hi room and on the 
familiar furniture, the glow flame back and seem to flow again to it 
source, the littl wooden box. for there upon a bed of soft wool lay the 
most splendid jewel, a jewel such as dyson had never dream of, and 
within it shone the blue of far skies, and the green of the sea by the 
shore, and the red of the ruby, and deep violet rays, and in the middl 
of all it seem aflam as if a fountain of fire rose up, and fell, and 
rose again with spark like star for drops. dyson gave a long deep 
sigh, and drop into hi chair, and put hi hand over hi eye to 
think. the jewel wa like an opal, but from a long experi of the 
shop-window he knew there wa no such thing as an opal one-quart or 
one-eighth of it size. He look at the stone again, with a feel 
that wa almost awe, and place it gentli on the tabl under the lamp, 
and watch the wonder flame that shone and sparkl in it centre, 
and then turn to the box, curiou to know whether it might contain 
other marvels. He lift the bed of wool on which the opal had reclined, 
and saw beneath, no more jewels, but a littl old pocket-book, worn and 
shabbi with use. dyson open it at the first leaf, and drop the book 
again appalled. He had read the name of the owner, neatli written in 
blue ink: 

steven black, M. d., 
oranmore, 
devon road, 
harlesden. 

It wa sever minut befor dyson could bring himself to open the book 
a second time; he rememb the wretch exil in hi garret; and hi 
strang talk, and the memori too of the face he had seen at the window, 
and of what the specialist had said, surg up in hi mind, and as he 
held hi finger on the cover, he shivered, dread what might be 
written within. when at last he held it in hi hand, and turn the 
pages, he found that the first two leav were blank, but the third wa 
cover with clear, minut writing, and dyson began to read with the 
light of the opal flame in hi eyes. 


V 

'ever sinc I wa a young man'--th record began--'i devot all my 
leisur and a good deal of time that ought to have been given to other 
studi to the investig of curiou and obscur branch of 
knowledge. what are commonli call the pleasur of life had never ani 
attract for me, and I live alon in london, avoid my 
fellow-students, and in my turn avoid by them as a man self-absorb 
and unsympathetic. So long as I could gratifi my desir of knowledg of 
a peculiar kind, knowledg of which the veri exist is a profound 
secret to most men, I wa intens happy, and I have often spent whole 
night sit in the dark of my room, and think of the strang 
world on the brink of which I trod. My profession studies, however, 
and the necess of obtain a degree, for some time forc my more 
obscur employ into the background, and soon after I had qualifi I 
met agnes, who becam my wife. We took a new hous in thi remot 
suburb, and I began the regular routin of a sober practice, and for 
some month live happili enough, share in the life about me, and onli 
think at odd interv of that occult scienc which had onc 
fascin my whole being. I had learnt enough of the path I had begun 
to tread to know that they were beyond all express difficult and 
dangerous, that to persever meant in all probabl the wreck of a 
life, and that they led to region so terrible, that the mind of man 
shrink appal at the veri thought. moreover, the quiet and the peac 
I had enjoy sinc my marriag had wile me away to a great extent from 
place where I knew no peac could dwell. but suddenly--i think inde 
it wa the work of a singl night, as I lay awak on my bed gaze into 
the darkness--suddenly, I say, the old desire, the former longing, 
returned, and return with a forc that had been intensifi ten time 
by it absence; and when the day dawn and I look out of the window, 
and saw with haggard eye the sunris in the east, I knew that my doom 
had been pronounced; that as I had gone far, so now I must go farther 
with unfalt steps. I turn to the bed where my wife wa sleep 
peacefully, and lay down again, weep bitter tears, for the sun had 
set on our happi life and had risen with a dawn of terror to us both. I 
will not set down here in minut detail what followed; outwardli I went 
about the day' labour as before, say noth to my wife. but she 
soon saw that I had changed; I spent my spare time in a room which I had 
fit up as a laboratory, and often I crept upstair in the grey dawn 
of the morning, when the light of mani lamp still glow over london; 
and each night I had stolen a step nearer to that great abyss which I 
wa to bridg over, the gulf between the world of conscious and the 
world of matter. My experi were mani and complic in their 
nature, and it wa some month befor I realiz whither they all 
pointed, and when thi wa born in upon me in a moment' time, I felt 
my face whiten and my heart still within me. but the power to draw back, 
the power to stand befor the door that now open wide befor me and 
not to enter in, had long ago been absent; the way wa closed, and I 
could onli pass onward. My posit wa as utterli hopeless as that of 
the prison in an utter dungeon, whose onli light is that of the 
dungeon abov him; the door were shut and escap wa impossible. 
experi after experi gave the same result, and I knew, and shrank 
even as the thought pass through my mind, that in the work I had to do 
there must be element which no laboratori could furnish, which no 
scale could ever measure. In that work, from which even I doubt to 
escap with life, life itself must enter; from some human be there 
must be drawn that essenc which men call the soul, and in it place 
(for in the scheme of the world there is no vacant chamber)--in it 
place would enter in what the lip can hardli utter, what the mind 
cannot conceiv without a horror more aw than the horror of death 
itself. and when I knew this, I knew also on whom thi fate would fall; 
I look into my wife' eyes. even at that hour, if I had gone out and 
taken a rope and hang myself, I might have escaped, and she also, but 
in no other way. At last I told her all. she shuddered, and wept, and 
call on her dead mother for help, and ask me if I had no mercy, and 
I could onli sigh. I conceal noth from her; I told her what she 
would become, and what would enter in where her life had been; I told 
her of all the shame and of all the horror. you who will read thi when 
I am dead--if inde I allow thi record to survive,--y who have 
open the box and have seen what lie there, if you could understand 
what lie hidden in that opal! for one night my wife consent to what I 
ask of her, consent with the tear run down her beauti face, 
and hot shame flush red over her neck and breast, consent to 
undergo thi for me. I threw open the window, and we look togeth at 
the sky and the dark earth for the last time; it wa a fine star-light 
night, and there wa a pleasant breez blowing, and I kiss her on her 
lips, and her tear ran down upon my face. that night she came down to 
my laboratory, and there, with shutter bolt and bar down, with 
curtain drawn thick and close, so that the veri star might be shut out 
from the sight of that room, while the crucibl hiss and boil over 
the lamp, I did what had to be done, and led out what wa no longer a 
woman. but on the tabl the opal flame and sparkl with such light as 
no eye of man have ever gaze on, and the ray of the flame that wa 
within it flash and glittered, and shone even to my heart. My wife had 
onli ask one thing of me; that when there came at last what I had told 
her, I would kill her. I have kept that promise.' 

* * * * * 

there wa noth more. dyson let the littl pocket-book fall, and 
turn and look again at the opal with it flame inmost light, and 
then with unutter irresist horror surg up in hi heart, 
grasp the jewel, and flung it on the ground, and trampl it beneath 
hi heel. hi face wa white with terror as he turn away, and for a 
moment stood sick and trembling, and then with a start he leapt across 
the room and steadi himself against the door. there wa an angri hiss, 
as of steam escap under great pressure, and as he gazed, motionless, 
a volum of heavi yellow smoke wa slowli issu from the veri centr 
of the jewel, and wreath itself in snake-lik coil abov it. and 
then a thin white flame burst forth from the smoke, and shot up into the 
air and vanished; and on the ground there lay a thing like a cinder, 
black and crumbl to the touch. 






end of the project gutenberg ebook of the hous of souls, by arthur machen 

*** end OF thi project gutenberg ebook the hous OF soul *** 

***** thi file should be name 25016-8.txt or 25016-8.zip ***** 
thi and all associ file of variou format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/2/5/0/1/25016/ 

produc by suzann shell, stephen blundel and the onlin 
distribut proofread team at http://www.pgdp.net 


updat edit will replac the previou one--th old edit 
will be renamed. 

creat the work from public domain print edit mean that no 
one own a unit state copyright in these works, so the foundat 
(and you!) can copi and distribut it in the unit state without 
permiss and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the gener term of use part of thi license, appli to 
copi and distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a regist trademark, and may not be use if you 
charg for the ebooks, unless you receiv specif permission. If you 
do not charg anyth for copi of thi ebook, compli with the 
rule is veri easy. you may use thi ebook for nearli ani purpos 
such as creation of deriv works, reports, perform and 
research. they may be modifi and print and given away--y may do 
practic anyth with public domain ebooks. redistribut is 
subject to the trademark license, especi commerci 
redistribution. 



*** start: full licens *** 

the full project gutenberg licens 
pleas read thi befor you distribut OR use thi work 

To protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promot the free 
distribut of electron works, by use or distribut thi work 
(or ani other work associ in ani way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agre to compli with all the term of the full project 
gutenberg-tm licens (avail with thi file or onlin at 
http://gutenberg.net/license). 


section 1. gener term of use and redistribut project gutenberg-tm 
electron work 

1.a. By read or use ani part of thi project gutenberg-tm 
electron work, you indic that you have read, understand, agre to 
and accept all the term of thi licens and intellectu properti 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agre to abid by all 
the term of thi agreement, you must ceas use and return or destroy 
all copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in your possession. 
If you paid a fee for obtain a copi of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work and you do not agre to be bound by the 
term of thi agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entiti to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a regist trademark. It may onli be 
use on or associ in ani way with an electron work by peopl who 
agre to be bound by the term of thi agreement. there are a few 
thing that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electron work 
even without compli with the full term of thi agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of thing you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electron work if you follow the term of thi agreement 
and help preserv free futur access to project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compil copyright in the collect of project 
gutenberg-tm electron works. nearli all the individu work in the 
collect are in the public domain in the unit states. If an 
individu work is in the public domain in the unit state and you are 
locat in the unit states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or creat deriv 
work base on the work as long as all refer to project gutenberg 
are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promot free access to electron work by 
freeli share project gutenberg-tm work in complianc with the term of 
thi agreement for keep the project gutenberg-tm name associ with 
the work. you can easili compli with the term of thi agreement by 
keep thi work in the same format with it attach full project 
gutenberg-tm licens when you share it without charg with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are locat also govern 
what you can do with thi work. copyright law in most countri are in 
a constant state of change. If you are outsid the unit states, check 
the law of your countri in addit to the term of thi agreement 
befor downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribut or 
creat deriv work base on thi work or ani other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundat make no represent concern 
the copyright statu of ani work in ani countri outsid the unit 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remov all refer to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the follow sentence, with activ link to, or other immedi 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm licens must appear promin 
whenev ani copi of a project gutenberg-tm work (ani work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copi or distributed: 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.net 

1.e.2. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is deriv 
from the public domain (doe not contain a notic indic that it is 
post with permiss of the copyright holder), the work can be copi 
and distribut to anyon in the unit state without pay ani fee 
or charges. If you are redistribut or provid access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associ with or appear on the 
work, you must compli either with the requir of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permiss for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is post 
with the permiss of the copyright holder, your use and distribut 
must compli with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and ani addit 
term impos by the copyright holder. addit term will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm licens for all work post with the 
permiss of the copyright holder found at the begin of thi work. 

1.e.4. Do not unlink or detach or remov the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens term from thi work, or ani file contain a part of thi 
work or ani other work associ with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribut or redistribut thi 
electron work, or ani part of thi electron work, without 
promin display the sentenc set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
activ link or immedi access to the full term of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribut thi work in ani binary, 
compressed, mark up, nonproprietari or proprietari form, includ ani 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provid access to or 
distribut copi of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the offici version 
post on the offici project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net), 
you must, at no addit cost, fee or expens to the user, provid a 
copy, a mean of export a copy, or a mean of obtain a copi upon 
request, of the work in it origin "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. ani altern format must includ the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens as specifi in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. Do not charg a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copi or distribut ani project gutenberg-tm work 
unless you compli with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charg a reason fee for copi of or provid 
access to or distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work provid 
that 

- you pay a royalti fee of 20% of the gross profit you deriv from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm work calcul use the method 
you alreadi use to calcul your applic taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
ha agre to donat royalti under thi paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literari archiv foundation. royalti payment 
must be paid within 60 day follow each date on which you 
prepar (or are legal requir to prepare) your period tax 
returns. royalti payment should be clearli mark as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat at the 
address specifi in section 4, "inform about donat to 
the project gutenberg literari archiv foundation." 

- you provid a full refund of ani money paid by a user who notifi 
you in write (or by e-mail) within 30 day of receipt that s/he 
doe not agre to the term of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must requir such a user to return or 
destroy all copi of the work possess in a physic medium 
and discontinu all use of and all access to other copi of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accord with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of ani 
money paid for a work or a replac copy, if a defect in the 
electron work is discov and report to you within 90 day 
of receipt of the work. 

- you compli with all other term of thi agreement for free 
distribut of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. If you wish to charg a fee or distribut a project gutenberg-tm 
electron work or group of work on differ term than are set 
forth in thi agreement, you must obtain permiss in write from 
both the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundat as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunt and employe expend consider 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcrib and proofread 
public domain work in creat the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despit these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electron 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limit to, incomplete, inaccur or 
corrupt data, transcript errors, a copyright or other intellectu 
properti infringement, a defect or damag disk or other medium, a 
comput virus, or comput code that damag or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limit warranty, disclaim OF damag - except for the "right 
of replac or refund" describ in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and ani other parti distribut a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work under thi agreement, disclaim all 
liabil to you for damages, cost and expenses, includ legal 
fees. you agre that you have NO remedi for negligence, strict 
liability, breach OF warranti OR breach OF contract except those 
provid IN paragraph f3. you agre that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and ani distributor under thi agreement will not BE 
liabl TO you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punit OR 
incident damag even IF you give notic OF the possibl OF such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limit right OF replac OR refund - If you discov a 
defect in thi electron work within 90 day of receiv it, you can 
receiv a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explan to the person you receiv the work from. If you 
receiv the work on a physic medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entiti that provid you with 
the defect work may elect to provid a replac copi in lieu of a 
refund. If you receiv the work electronically, the person or entiti 
provid it to you may choos to give you a second opportun to 
receiv the work electron in lieu of a refund. If the second copi 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in write without further 
opportun to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limit right of replac or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, thi work is provid to you 'as-is' with NO other 
warranti OF ani kind, express OR implied, includ but not limit TO 
warranti OF merchant OR fit for ani purpose. 

1.f.5. some state do not allow disclaim of certain impli 
warranti or the exclus or limit of certain type of damages. 
If ani disclaim or limit set forth in thi agreement violat the 
law of the state applic to thi agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaim or limit permit by 
the applic state law. the invalid or unenforc of ani 
provis of thi agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemn - you agre to indemnifi and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, ani agent or employe of the foundation, anyon 
provid copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in accord 
with thi agreement, and ani volunt associ with the production, 
promot and distribut of project gutenberg-tm electron works, 
harmless from all liability, cost and expenses, includ legal fees, 
that aris directli or indirectli from ani of the follow which you do 
or caus to occur: (a) distribut of thi or ani project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addit or delet to ani 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) ani defect you cause. 


section 2. inform about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonym with the free distribut of 
electron work in format readabl by the widest varieti of comput 
includ obsolete, old, middle-ag and new computers. It exist 
becaus of the effort of hundr of volunt and donat from 
peopl in all walk of life. 

volunt and financi support to provid volunt with the 
assist they need, is critic to reach project gutenberg-tm' 
goal and ensur that the project gutenberg-tm collect will 
remain freeli avail for gener to come. In 2001, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundat wa creat to provid a secur 
and perman futur for project gutenberg-tm and futur generations. 
To learn more about the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat 
and how your effort and donat can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundat web page at http://www.pglaf.org. 


section 3. inform about the project gutenberg literari archiv 
foundat 

the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educ corpor organ under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt statu by the intern 
revenu service. the foundation' ein or feder tax identif 
number is 64-6221541. it 501(c)(3) letter is post at 
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contribut to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. feder law and your state' laws. 

the foundation' princip offic is locat at 4557 melan dr. S. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but it volunt and employe are scatter 
throughout numer locations. it busi offic is locat at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact link and up to date contact 
inform can be found at the foundation' web site and offici 
page at http://pglaf.org 

for addit contact information: 
dr. gregori B. newbi 
chief execut and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 


section 4. inform about donat to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot surviv without wide 
spread public support and donat to carri out it mission of 
increas the number of public domain and licens work that can be 
freeli distribut in machin readabl form access by the widest 
array of equip includ outdat equipment. mani small donat 
($1 to $5,000) are particularli import to maintain tax exempt 
statu with the irs. 

the foundat is commit to compli with the law regul 
chariti and charit donat in all 50 state of the unit 
states. complianc requir are not uniform and it take a 
consider effort, much paperwork and mani fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. We do not solicit donat in locat 
where we have not receiv written confirm of compliance. To 
send donat or determin the statu of complianc for ani 
particular state visit http://pglaf.org 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribut from state where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibit 
against accept unsolicit donat from donor in such state who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

intern donat are grate accepted, but we cannot make 
ani statement concern tax treatment of donat receiv from 
outsid the unit states. u.s. law alon swamp our small staff. 

pleas check the project gutenberg web page for current donat 
method and addresses. donat are accept in a number of other 
way includ includ checks, onlin payment and credit card 
donations. To donate, pleas visit: http://pglaf.org/don 


section 5. gener inform about project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. 

professor michael S. hart is the origin of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a librari of electron work that could be freeli share 
with anyone. for thirti years, he produc and distribut project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with onli a loos network of volunt support. 


project gutenberg-tm ebook are often creat from sever print 
editions, all of which are confirm as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notic is included. thus, we do not necessarili 
keep ebook in complianc with ani particular paper edition. 


most peopl start at our web site which ha the main PG search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.net 

thi web site includ inform about project gutenberg-tm, 
includ how to make donat to the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundation, how to help produc our new ebooks, and how to 
subscrib to our email newslett to hear about new ebooks. 
