the project gutenberg ebook of varney the vampire, by thoma preskett prest 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.net 


title: varney the vampir 
Or the feast of blood 

author: thoma preskett prest 

releas date: januari 29, 2005 [ebook #14833] 
[last updat octob 4, 2011] 

language: english 


*** start OF thi project gutenberg ebook varney the vampir *** 




produc by charl franks, debra storr, sandra brown and the PG 
onlin distribut proofread team. 





[transcriber' note: thi book wa origin publish in "penni 
dreadful" form. thi edit doe not includ the entir 109 
episodes, which were publish in three volumes. authorship ha 
also been ascrib to jame malcolm rymer. 

the tabl of content wa ad by the transcriber.] 



[illustration: 

no. 1.) nos. 2, 3 and 4 are presented, gratis, with thi no. |price 1d. 

varney the vampir 

OR the 

feast OF blood 

A romanc OF excit interest 

BY the author OF 

"grace rivers, or, the merchant' daughter." 

london E. lloyd, salisburi square, and all booksellers] 




varney, the vampyre: 

or, 

the feast OF blood. 

A romance. 

"art thou a spirit of health or goblin damned?" 

london: 

print and publish BY E. lloyd, 12, salisbury-square, fleet-street. 




content 


chapter i.--midnight.--th hail-storm.--th dread visitor.--th 
vampyre. 

chapter ii.--th alarm.--th pistol shot.--th pursuit and it 
consequences. 

chapter iii.--th disappear OF the body.--flora' recoveri and 
madness.--th offer OF assist from sir franci varney. 

chapter iv.--th morning.--th consultation.--th fear suggestion. 

chapter v.--the night watch.--th proposal.--th moonlight.--th 
fear adventure. 

chapter vi.--a glanc AT the bannerworth family.--th probabl 
consequ OF the mysteri apparition' appearance. 

chapter vii.--th visit TO the vault OF the bannerworths, and it 
unpleas result.--th mystery. 

chapter viii.--th coffin.--th absenc OF the dead.--th mysteri 
circumstance, and the constern OF george. 

chapter ix.--th occurr OF the night AT the hall.--th second 
appear OF the vampyre, and the pistol-shot. 

chapter x.--the return from the vault.--th alarm, and the search 
around the hall. 

chapter xi.--th commun TO the lover.--th heart' despair. 

chapter xii.--charl holland' sad feelings.--th portrait.--th 
occurr OF the night AT the hall. 

chapter xiii.--th offer for the hall.--th visit TO sir franci 
varney.--th strang resemblance.--a dread suggestion. 

chapter xiv.--henry' agreement with sir franci varney.--th sudden 
arriv AT the hall.--flora' alarm. 

chapter xv.--the old admir and hi servant.--th commun from 
the landlord OF the nelson' arms. 

chapter xvi.--th meet OF the lover IN the garden.--an affect 
scene.--th sudden appear OF sir franci varney. 

chapter xvii.--th explanation.--th arriv OF the admir AT the 
house.--a scene OF confusion, and some OF it results. 

chapter xviii.--th admiral' advice.--th challeng TO the 
vampyre.--th new servant AT the hall. 

chapter xix.--flora IN her chamber.--h fears.--th manuscript.--an 
adventure. 

chapter xx.--the dread mistake.--th terrif interview IN the 
chamber.--th attack OF the vampyre. 

chapter xxi.--th confer between the uncl and nephew, and the 
alarm. 

chapter xxii.--th consultation.--th determin TO leav the hall. 

chapter xxiii.--th admiral' advic TO charl holland.--th challeng 
TO the vampyre. 

chapter xxiv.--th letter TO charles.--th quarrel.--th admiral' 
narrative.--th midnight meeting. 

chapter xxv.--the admiral' opinion.--th request OF charles. 

chapter xxvi.--th meet BY moonlight IN the park.--th turret window 
IN the hall.--th letters. 

chapter xxvii.--th nobl confid OF flora bannerworth IN her 
lover.--h opinion OF the three letters.--th admiral' admiration. 

chapter xxviii.--mr. marchdale' exculp OF himself.--th search 
through the gardens.--th spot OF the deadli struggle.--th mysteri 
paper. 

chapter xxix.--a peep through AN iron grating.--th lone prison IN 
hi dungeon.--th mystery. 

chapter xxx.--the visit OF flora TO the vampyre.--th offer.--th 
solemn asseveration. 

chapter xxxi.--sir franci varney and hi mysteri visitor.--th 
strang conference. 

chapter xxxii.--th thousand pounds.--th stranger' precautions. 

chapter xxxiii.--th strang interview.--th chase through the hall. 

chapter xxxiv.--th threat.--it consequences.--th rescue, and sir 
franci varney' danger. 

chapter xxxv.--the explanation.--marchdale' advice.--th project 
removal, and the admiral' anger. 

chapter xxxvi.--th consultation.--th duel and it results. 

chapter xxxvii.--sir franci varney' separ opponents.--th 
interposit OF flora. 

chapter xxxviii.--marchdale' offer.--th consult AT bannerworth 
hall.--th morn OF the duel. 

chapter xxxix.--th storm and the fight.-th admiral' repudi OF 
hi principal. 

chapter xl.--the popular riot.--sir franci varney' danger.--th 
suggest and it results. 

chapter xliv.--varney' danger, and hi rescue.--th prison again, 
and the subterranean vault. 

chapter xlv.--the open graves.--th dead bodies.--a scene OF terror. 

chapter xlvi.--th prepar for leav bannerworth hall, and the 
mysteri conduct OF the admir and mr. chillingworth. 

chapter xlvii.--th remov from the hall.--th night watch, and the 
alarm. 

chapter xlviii--th stake and the dead body. 

chapter xlix--th mob' arriv AT sir franci varney's.--th attempt 
TO gain admission. 

chapter l.--the mob' arriv AT sir franci varney's.--th attempt TO 
gain admission. 

chapter li.--th attack upon the vampyre' house.--th stori OF the 
attack.--th forc OF the doors, and the struggle. 

chapter lii.--th interview between the mob and sir franci 
varney.--th mysteri disappearance.--th wine cellars. 

chapter liii.--th destruct OF sir franci varney' hous BY 
fire.--th arriv OF the military, and A second mob. 

chapter liv.--th burn OF varney' house.--a night scene.--popular 
superstition. 

chapter lv.--the return OF the mob and militari TO the town.--th 
mad OF the mob.--th grocer' revenge. 

chapter lvi.--th departur OF the bannerworth from the hall.--th new 
abode.--jack pringle, pilot. 

chapter lvii.--th lone watch, and the adventur IN the desert 
house. 

chapter lviii.--th arriv OF jack pringle.--midnight and the 
vampyre.--th mysteri hat. 

chapter lix.--th warning.--th new plan OF operation.--th insult 
messag from varney. 

chapter lx.--the interrupt breakfast AT sir franci varney's. 

chapter lxi.--th mysteri stranger.--th particular OF the suicid 
AT bannerworth hall. 

chapter lxii.--th mysteri meet IN the ruin again.--th vampyre' 
attack upon the constable. 

chapter lxiii.--th guest AT the inn, and the stori OF the dead uncle. 

chapter lxiv.--th vampir IN the moonlight.--th fals friend. 

chapter lxv.--varney' visit TO the dungeon OF the lone prison IN 
the ruins. 

chapter lxvi.--flora bannerworth' appar inconsistency.--th 
admiral' circumst and advice.--mr. chillingworth' mysteri 
absence. 

chapter lxvii.--th admiral' stori OF the beauti belinda. 

chapter lxviii.--marchdale' attempt villany, and the result. 

chapter lxix.--flora bannerworth and her mother.--th episod OF 
chivalry. 

chapter lxx.--the funer OF the stranger OF the inn.--th popular 
commotion, and mrs. chillingworth' appeal TO the mob.--th new 
riot.--th hall IN danger. 

chapter lxxi.--th strang meet AT the hall between mr. 
chillingworth and the mysteri friend OF varney. 

chapter lxxii.--th strang story.--th arriv OF the mob AT the hall, 
and their dispersion. 

chapter lxxiii.--th visit OF the vampire.--th gener meeting. 

chapter lxxiv.--th meet OF charl and flora. 

chapter lxxv.--mutual explanations, and the visit TO the ruins. 

chapter lxxvi.--th second night-watch OF mr. chillingworth AT the 
hall. 

chapter lxxvii.--varney IN the garden.--th commun OF dr. 
chillingworth TO the admir and henry. 

chapter lxxviii.--th alterc between varney and the execution IN 
the hall.--th mutual agreement. 

chapter lxxix.--th vampyre' danger.--th last refuge.--th ruse OF 
henri bannerworth. 

chapter lxxx.--the discoveri OF the bodi OF marchdal IN the ruin BY 
the mob.--th burn OF the corpse.--th murder OF the hangman. 

chapter lxxxi.--th vampyre' flight.--hi danger, and the last place 
OF refuge. 

chapter lxxxii.--charl holland' pursuit OF the vampyre.--th 
danger interview. 

chapter lxxxiii.--th mysteri arriv AT the inn.--th hungarian 
nobleman.--th letter TO varney. 

chapter lxxxiv.--th excit populace.--varney hunted.--th place OF 
refuge. 

chapter lxxxv.--the hungarian nobleman get into danger.--h IS fire 
at, and show some OF hi quality. 

chapter lxxxvi.--th discoveri OF the pocket book OF marmaduk 
bannerworth.--it mysteri contents. 

chapter lxxxvii.--th hunt for varney.--th house-tops.--th miracul 
escape.--th last place OF refuge.--th cottage. 

chapter lxxxviii.--th recept OF the vampyr BY flora.--varney 
subdued. 

chapter lxxxix.--tel what becam OF the second vampyr who sought 
varney. 

chapter xc.--dr. chillingworth AT the hall.--th encount OF 
mystery.--th conflict.--th rescue, and the picture. 

chapter xci.--th grand consult broken UP BY mrs. chillingworth, 
and the disappear OF varney. 

chapter xcii.--th misadventur OF the doctor with the picture. 

chapter xciii.--th alarm AT anderbury.--th suspicion OF the 
bannerworth family, and the mysteri communication. 

chapter xciv.--th visitor, and the death IN the subterranean passage. 

chapter xcv.--the marriag IN the bannerworth famili arranged. 

chapter xcvi.--th baron take anderburi house, and decid upon give 
A grand entertainment. 




prefac 


the unpreced success of the romanc of "varney the vampyre," leav 
the author but littl to say further, than that he accept that success 
and it result as grate as it is possibl for ani one to do 
popular favours. 

A belief in the exist of vampyr first took it rise in norway and 
sweden, from whenc it rapidli spread to more southern regions, take a 
firm hold of the imagin of the more credul portion of mankind. 

the follow romanc is collect from seemingli the most authent 
sources, and the author must leav the question of credibl entir 
to hi readers, not even think that he is peculiarli call upon to 
express hi own opinion upon the subject. 

noth ha been omit in the life of the unhappi varney, which could 
tend to throw a light upon hi most extraordinari career, and the fact 
of hi death just as it is here related, made a great nois at the time 
through europ and is to be found in the public print for the year 
1713. 

with these few observations, the author and publisher, are well content 
to leav the work in the hand of a public, which ha stamp it with an 
approb far exceed their most sanguin expectations, and which is 
calcul to act as the strongest possibl incent to the product 
of other works, which in a like, or perchanc a still further degre may 
be deserv of public patronag and support. 

To the whole of the metropolitan press for their laudatori notices, the 
author is peculiarli obliged. 

_london sep. 1847_ 




varney, the vampyre; 

OR 

the feast OF blood 

A romanc 




chapter I. 

----"how grave give up their dead. 
and how the night air hideou grow 
with shrieks!" 

midnight.--th hail-storm.--th dread visitor.--th vampyre. 


[illustration] 

the solemn tone of an old cathedr clock have announc midnight--th 
air is thick and heavy--a strange, death like still pervad all 
nature. like the omin calm which preced some more than usual 
terrif outbreak of the elements, they seem to have paus even in 
their ordinari fluctuations, to gather a terrif strength for the great 
effort. A faint peal of thunder now come from far off. like a signal 
gun for the battl of the wind to begin, it appear to awaken them 
from their lethargy, and one awful, war hurrican swept over a whole 
city, produc more devast in the four or five minut it lasted, 
than would a half centuri of ordinari phenomena. 

It wa as if some giant had blown upon some toy town, and scatter mani 
of the build befor the hot blast of hi terrif breath; for as 
suddenli as that blast of wind had come did it cease, and all wa as 
still and calm as before. 

sleeper awakened, and thought that what they had heard must be the 
confus chimera of a dream. they trembl and turn to sleep again. 

all is still--stil as the veri grave. not a sound break the magic of 
repose. what is that--a strange, patter noise, as of a million of 
fairi feet? It is hail--yes, a hail-storm ha burst over the city. 
leav are dash from the trees, mingl with small boughs; window 
that lie most oppos to the direct furi of the pelt particl of ice 
are broken, and the rapt repos that befor wa so remark in it 
intensity, is exchang for a nois which, in it accumulation, drown 
everi cri of surpris or constern which here and there aros from 
person who found their hous invad by the storm. 

now and then, too, there would come a sudden gust of wind that in it 
strength, as it blew laterally, would, for a moment, hold million of 
the hailston suspend in mid air, but it wa onli to dash them with 
redoubl forc in some new direction, where more mischief wa to be 
done. 

oh, how the storm raged! hail--rain--wind. It was, in veri truth, an 
aw night. 

* * * * * 

there is an antiqu chamber in an ancient house. curiou and quaint 
carv adorn the walls, and the larg chimney-piec is a curios of 
itself. the ceil is low, and a larg bay window, from roof to floor, 
look to the west. the window is latticed, and fill with curious 
paint glass and rich stain pieces, which send in a strange, yet 
beauti light, when sun or moon shine into the apartment. there is 
but one portrait in that room, although the wall seem panel for the 
express purpos of contain a seri of pictures. that portrait is of 
a young man, with a pale face, a state brow, and a strang express 
about the eyes, which no one care to look on twice. 

there is a state bed in that chamber, of carv walnut-wood is it 
made, rich in design and elabor in execution; one of those work of 
art which owe their exist to the elizabethan era. It is hung with 
heavi silken and damask furnishing; nod feather are at it 
corners--cov with dust are they, and they lend a funer aspect to 
the room. the floor is of polish oak. 

god! how the hail dash on the old bay window! like an occasion 
discharg of mimic musketry, it come clashing, beating, and crack 
upon the small panes; but they resist it--their small size save them; 
the wind, the hail, the rain, expend their furi in vain. 

the bed in that old chamber is occupied. A creatur form in all 
fashion of loveli lie in a half sleep upon that ancient couch--a 
girl young and beauti as a spring morning. her long hair ha escap 
from it confin and stream over the blacken cover of the 
bedstead; she ha been restless in her sleep, for the cloth of the 
bed is in much confusion. one arm is over her head, the other hang 
nearli off the side of the bed near to which she lies. A neck and bosom 
that would have form a studi for the rarest sculptor that ever 
provid gave geniu to, were half disclosed. she moan slightli in 
her sleep, and onc or twice the lip move as if in prayer--at least 
one might judg so, for the name of him who suffer for all came onc 
faintli from them. 

she ha endur much fatigue, and the storm doe not awaken her; but it 
can disturb the slumber it doe not possess the power to destroy 
entirely. the turmoil of the element wake the senses, although it 
cannot entir break the repos they have laps into. 

oh, what a world of witcheri wa in that mouth, slightli parted, and 
exhibit within the pearli teeth that glisten even in the faint 
light that came from that bay window. how sweetli the long silken 
eyelash lay upon the cheek. now she moves, and one shoulder is 
entir visible--whiter, fairer than the spotless cloth of the bed 
on which she lies, is the smooth skin of that fair creature, just 
bud into womanhood, and in that transit state which present to 
us all the charm of the girl--almost of the child, with the more 
matur beauti and gentl of advanc years. 

wa that lightning? yes--an awful, vivid, terrifi flash--then a 
roar peal of thunder, as if a thousand mountain were roll one 
over the other in the blue vault of heaven! who sleep now in that 
ancient city? not one live soul. the dread trumpet of etern could 
not more effectu have awaken ani one. 

the hail continues. the wind continues. the uproar of the element seem 
at it height. now she awakens--that beauti girl on the antiqu bed; 
she open those eye of celesti blue, and a faint cri of alarm burst 
from her lips. At least it is a cri which, amid the nois and turmoil 
without, sound but faint and weak. she sit upon the bed and press 
her hand upon her eyes. heavens! what a wild torrent of wind, and rain, 
and hail! the thunder likewis seem intent upon awaken suffici 
echo to last until the next flash of fork lightn should again 
produc the wild concuss of the air. she murmur a prayer--a prayer 
for those she love best; the name of those dear to her gentl heart 
come from her lips; she weep and prays; she think then of what 
devast the storm must sure produce, and to the great god of 
heaven she pray for all live things. anoth flash--a wild, blue, 
bewild flash of lightn stream across that bay window, for an 
instant bring out everi colour in it with terribl distinctness. A 
shriek burst from the lip of the young girl, and then, with eye fix 
upon that window, which, in anoth moment, is all darkness, and with 
such an express of terror upon her face as it had never befor known, 
she trembled, and the perspir of intens fear stood upon her brow. 

"what--what wa it?" she gasped; "real, or a delusion? oh, god, what wa 
it? A figur tall and gaunt, endeavour from the outsid to unclasp 
the window. I saw it. that flash of lightn reveal it to me. It 
stood the whole length of the window." 

there wa a lull of the wind. the hail wa not fall so 
thickly--moreover, it now fell, what there wa of it, straight, and yet 
a strang clatter sound came upon the glass of that long window. It 
could not be a delusion--sh is awake, and she hear it. what can 
produc it? anoth flash of lightning--anoth shriek--ther could be 
now no delusion. 

A tall figur is stand on the ledg immedi outsid the long 
window. It is it finger-nail upon the glass that produc the sound so 
like the hail, now that the hail ha ceased. intens fear paralys the 
limb of that beauti girl. that one shriek is all she can utter--with 
hand clasped, a face of marble, a heart beat so wildli in her bosom, 
that each moment it seem as if it would break it confines, eye 
distend and fix upon the window, she waits, froze with horror. the 
patter and clatter of the nail continue. No word is spoken, and 
now she fanci she can trace the darker form of that figur against the 
window, and she can see the long arm move to and fro, feel for 
some mode of entrance. what strang light is that which now gradual 
creep up into the air? red and terrible--bright and brighter it 
grows. the lightn ha set fire to a mill, and the reflect of the 
rapidli consum build fall upon that long window. there can be no 
mistake. the figur is there, still feel for an entrance, and 
clatter against the glass with it long nails, that appear as if the 
growth of mani year had been untouched. she tri to scream again but a 
choke sensat come over her, and she cannot. It is too 
dreadful--sh tri to move--each limb seem weigh down by ton of 
lead--sh can but in a hoars faint whisper cry,-- 

"help--help--help--help!" 

and that one word she repeat like a person in a dream. the red glare of 
the fire continues. It throw up the tall gaunt figur in hideou relief 
against the long window. It shows, too, upon the one portrait that is in 
the chamber, and that portrait appear to fix it eye upon the 
attempt intruder, while the flicker light from the fire make it 
look fear life-like. A small pane of glass is broken, and the form 
from without introduc a long gaunt hand, which seem utterli destitut 
of flesh. the fasten is removed, and one-half of the window, which 
open like fold doors, is swung wide open upon it hinges. 

and yet now she could not scream--sh could not move. 
"help!--help!--help!" wa all she could say. but, oh, that look of 
terror that sat upon her face, it wa dreadful--a look to haunt the 
memori for a lifetime--a look to obtrud itself upon the happiest 
moments, and turn them to bitterness. 

the figur turn half round, and the light fall upon the face. It is 
perfectli white--perfectli bloodless. the eye look like polish tin; 
the lip are drawn back, and the princip featur next to those 
dread eye is the teeth--th fear look teeth--project like 
those of some wild animal, hideously, glaringli white, and fang-like. It 
approach the bed with a strange, glide movement. It clash togeth 
the long nail that liter appear to hang from the finger ends. No 
sound come from it lips. Is she go mad--that young and beauti 
girl expos to so much terror? she ha drawn up all her limbs; she 
cannot even now say help. the power of articul is gone, but the 
power of movement ha return to her; she can draw herself slowli along 
to the other side of the bed from that toward which the hideou 
appear is coming. 

but her eye are fascinated. the glanc of a serpent could not have 
produc a greater effect upon her than did the fix gaze of those 
awful, metallic-look eye that were bent on her face. crouch down 
so that the gigant height wa lost, and the horrible, protruding, 
white face wa the most promin object, came on the figure. what wa 
it?--what did it want there?--what made it look so hideous--so unlik an 
inhabit of the earth, and yet to be on it? 

now she ha got to the verg of the bed, and the figur pauses. It 
seem as if when it paus she lost the power to proceed. the cloth 
of the bed wa now clutch in her hand with unconsci power. she 
drew her breath short and thick. her bosom heaves, and her limb 
tremble, yet she cannot withdraw her eye from that marble-look face. 
He hold her with hi glitter eye. 

the storm ha ceased--al is still. the wind are hushed; the church 
clock proclaim the hour of one: a hiss sound come from the throat 
of the hideou being, and he rais hi long, gaunt arms--th lip move. 
He advances. the girl place one small foot from the bed on to the 
floor. she is unconsci drag the cloth with her. the door of 
the room is in that direction--can she reach it? ha she power to 
walk?--can she withdraw her eye from the face of the intruder, and so 
break the hideou charm? god of heaven! is it real, or some dream so 
like realiti as to nearli overturn the judgment for ever? 

the figur ha paus again, and half on the bed and half out of it that 
young girl lie trembling. her long hair stream across the entir width 
of the bed. As she ha slowli move along she ha left it stream 
across the pillows. the paus last about a minute--oh, what an age of 
agony. that minut was, indeed, enough for mad to do it full work 
in. 

with a sudden rush that could not be foreseen--with a strang howl 
cri that wa enough to awaken terror in everi breast, the figur seiz 
the long tress of her hair, and twine them round hi boni hand he 
held her to the bed. then she screamed--heaven grant her then power to 
scream. shriek follow shriek in rapid succession. the bed-cloth fell 
in a heap by the side of the bed--sh wa drag by her long silken 
hair complet on to it again. her beauti round limb quiver 
with the agoni of her soul. the glassy, horribl eye of the figur ran 
over that angel form with a hideou satisfaction--horr 
profanation. He drag her head to the bed' edge. He forc it back by 
the long hair still entwin in hi grasp. with a plung he seiz her 
neck in hi fang-lik teeth--a gush of blood, and a hideou suck 
nois follows. _the girl ha swooned, and the vampyr is at hi hideou 
repast!_ 




chapter ii. 

the alarm.--th pistol shot.--th pursuit and it consequences. 


[illustration] 

light flash about the building, and variou room door opened; voic 
call one to the other. there wa an univers stir and commot among 
the inhabitants. 

"did you hear a scream, harry?" ask a young man, half-dressed, as he 
walk into the chamber of anoth about hi own age. 

"I did--wher wa it?" 

"god knows. I dress myself directly." 

"all is still now." 

"yes; but unless I wa dream there wa a scream." 

"we could not both dream there was. where did you think it came from?" 

"it burst so suddenli upon my ear that I cannot say." 

there wa a tap now at the door of the room where these young men were, 
and a femal voic said,-- 

"for god' sake, get up!" 

"we are up," said both the young men, appearing. 

"did you hear anything?" 

"yes, a scream." 

"oh, search the house--search the house; where did it come from--can you 
tell?" 

"inde we cannot, mother." 

anoth person now join the party. He wa a man of middl age, and, as 
he came up to them, he said,-- 

"good god! what is the matter?" 

scarc had the word pass hi lips, than such a rapid success of 
shriek came upon their ears, that they felt absolut stun by them. 
the elderli lady, whom one of the young men had call mother, fainted, 
and would have fallen to the floor of the corridor in which they all 
stood, had she not been promptli support by the last comer, who 
himself staggered, as those pierc cri came upon the night air. he, 
however, wa the first to recover, for the young men seem paralysed. 

"henry," he cried, "for god' sake support your mother. can you doubt 
that these cri come from flora' room?" 

the young man mechan support hi mother, and then the man who 
had just spoken dart back to hi own bed-room, from whenc he return 
in a moment with a pair of pistols, and shouting,-- 

"follow me, who can!" he bound across the corridor in the direct of 
the antiqu apartment, from whenc the cri proceeded, but which were 
now hushed. 

that hous wa built for strength, and the door were all of oak, and of 
consider thickness. unhappily, they had fasten within, so that 
when the man reach the chamber of her who so much requir help, he 
wa helpless, for the door wa fast. 

"flora! flora!" he cried; "flora, speak!" 

all wa still. 

"good god!" he added; "we must forc the door." 

"I hear a strang nois within," said the young man, who trembl 
violently. 

"and so do I. what doe it sound like?" 

"I scarc know; but it nearest resembl some anim eating, or 
suck some liquid." 

"what on earth can it be? have you no weapon that will forc the door? I 
shall go mad if I am kept here." 

"I have," said the young man. "wait here a moment." 

He ran down the staircase, and present return with a small, but 
powerful, iron crow-bar. 

"thi will do," he said. 

"it will, it will.--giv it to me." 

"ha she not spoken?" 

"not a word. My mind misgiv me that someth veri dread must have 
happen to her." 

"and that odd noise!" 

"still goe on. somehow, it curdl the veri blood in my vein to hear 
it." 

the man took the crow-bar, and with some difficulti succeed in 
introduc it between the door and the side of the wall--stil it 
requir great strength to move it, but it did move, with a harsh, 
crackl sound. 

"push it!" cri he who wa use the bar, "push the door at the same 
time." 

the younger man did so. for a few moment the massiv door resisted. 
then, suddenly, someth gave way with a loud snap--it wa a part of 
the lock,--and the door at onc swung wide open. 

how true it is that we measur time by the event which happen within a 
given space of it, rather than by it actual duration. 

To those who were engag in forc open the door of the antiqu 
chamber, where slept the young girl whom they name flora, each moment 
wa swell into an hour of agony; but, in reality, from the first 
moment of the alarm to that when the loud crack nois herald the 
destruct of the fasten of the door, there had elaps but veri 
few minut indeed. 

"it opens--it opens," cri the young man. 

"anoth moment," said the stranger, as he still pli the 
crowbar--"anoth moment, and we shall have free ingress to the chamber. 
Be patient." 

thi stranger' name wa marchdale; and even as he spoke, he succeed 
in throw the massiv door wide open, and clear the passag to the 
chamber. 

To rush in with a light in hi hand wa the work of a moment to the 
young man name henry; but the veri rapid progress he made into the 
apart prevent him from observ accur what it contained, for 
the wind that came in from the open window caught the flame of the 
candle, and although it did not actual extinguish it, it blew it so 
much on one side, that it wa compar useless as a light. 

"flora--flora!" he cried. 

then with a sudden bound someth dash from off the bed. the 
concuss against him wa so sudden and so utterli unexpected, as well 
as so tremend violent, that he wa thrown down, and, in hi fall, 
the light wa fairli extinguished. 

all wa darkness, save a dull, reddish kind of light that now and then, 
from the nearli consum mill in the immedi vicinity, came into the 
room. but by that light, dim, uncertain, and flicker as it was, some 
one wa seen to make for the window. 

henry, although nearli stun by hi fall, saw a figure, gigant in 
height, which nearli reach from the floor to the ceiling. the other 
young man, george, saw it, and mr. marchdal likewis saw it, as did the 
ladi who had spoken to the two young men in the corridor when first the 
scream of the young girl awaken alarm in the breast of all the 
inhabit of that house. 

the figur wa about to pass out at the window which led to a kind of 
balcony, from whenc there wa an easi descent to a garden. 

befor it pass out they each and all caught a glanc of the side-face, 
and they saw that the lower part of it and the lip were dabbl in 
blood. they saw, too, one of those fearful-looking, shining, metal 
eye which present so terribl an appear of unearthli ferocity. 

No wonder that for a moment a panic seiz them all, which paralys ani 
exert they might otherwis have made to detain that hideou form. 

but mr. marchdal wa a man of matur years; he had seen much of life, 
both in thi and in foreign lands; and he, although astonish to the 
extent of be frightened, wa much more like to recov sooner than 
hi younger companions, which, indeed, he did, and act promptli 
enough. 

"don't rise, henry," he cried. "lie still." 

almost at the moment he utter these words, he fire at the figure, 
which then occupi the window, as if it were a gigant figur set in a 
frame. 

the report wa tremend in that chamber, for the pistol wa no toy 
weapon, but one made for actual service, and of suffici length and 
bore of barrel to carri destruct along with the bullet that came 
from it. 

"if that ha miss it aim," said mr. marchdale, "i'll never pull a 
trigger again." 

As he spoke he dash forward, and made a clutch at the figur he felt 
convinc he had shot. 

the tall form turn upon him, and when he got a full view of the face, 
which he did at that moment, from the opportun circumst of the ladi 
return at the instant with a light she had been to her own chamber to 
procure, even he, marchdale, with all hi courage, and that wa great, 
and all hi nervou energy, recoil a step or two, and utter the 
exclam of, "great god!" 

that face wa one never to be forgotten. It wa hideous flush with 
colour--th colour of fresh blood; the eye had a savag and remark 
lustre; whereas, before, they had look like polish tin--they now 
wore a ten time brighter aspect, and flash of light seem to dart 
from them. the mouth wa open, as if, from the natur format of the 
countenance, the lip reced much from the larg canin look teeth. 

A strang howl nois came from the throat of thi monstrou figure, 
and it seem upon the point of rush upon mr. marchdale. suddenly, 
then, as if some impuls had seiz upon it, it utter a wild and 
terribl shriek kind of laugh; and then turning, dash through the 
window, and in one instant disappear from befor the eye of those who 
felt nearli annihil by it fear presence. 

"god help us!" ejacul henry. 

mr. marchdal drew a long breath, and then, give a stamp on the floor, 
as if to recov himself from the state of agit into which even he 
wa thrown, he cried,-- 

"be it what or who it may, i'll follow it" 

"no--no--do not," cri the lady. 

"I must, I will. let who will come with me--i follow that dread 
form." 

As he spoke, he took the road it took, and dash through the window 
into the balcony. 

"and we, too, george," exclaim henry; "we will follow mr. marchdale. 
thi dread affair concern us more nearli than it doe him." 

the ladi who wa the mother of these young men, and of the beauti 
girl who had been so aw visited, scream aloud, and implor of 
them to stay. but the voic of mr. marchdal wa heard exclaim 
aloud,-- 

"I see it--i see it; it make for the wall." 

they hesit no longer, but at onc rush into the balcony, and from 
thenc drop into the garden. 

the mother approach the bed-sid of the insensible, perhap the 
murder girl; she saw her, to all appearance, welter in blood, and, 
overcom by her emotions, she faint on the floor of the room. 

when the two young men reach the garden, they found it much lighter 
than might have been fairli expected; for not onli wa the morn 
rapidli approaching, but the mill wa still burning, and those mingl 
light made almost everi object plainli visible, except when deep 
shadow were thrown from some gigant tree that had stood for 
centuri in that sweetli wood spot. they heard the voic of mr. 
marchdale, as he cried,-- 

"there--there--toward the wall. there--there--god! how it bound 
along." 

the young men hastili dash through a thicket in the direct from 
whenc hi voic sounded, and then they found him look wild and 
terrified, and with someth in hi hand which look like a portion of 
clothing. 

"which way, which way?" they both cri in a breath. 

He leant heavili on the arm of george, as he point along a vista of 
trees, and said in a low voice,-- 

"god help us all. It is not human. look there--look there--do you not 
see it?" 

they look in the direct he indicated. At the end of thi vista wa 
the wall of the garden. At that point it wa full twelv feet in height, 
and as they looked, they saw the hideous, monstrou form they had trace 
from the chamber of their sister, make frantic effort to clear the 
obstacle. 

then they saw it bound from the ground to the top of the wall, which it 
veri nearli reached, and then each time it fell back again into the 
garden with such a dull, heavi sound, that the earth seem to shake 
again with the concussion. they trembled--wel inde they might, and 
for some minut they watch the figur make it fruitless effort to 
leav the place. 

"what--what is it?" whisper henry, in hoars accents. "god, what can 
it possibl be?" 

"I know not," repli mr. marchdale. "I did seiz it. It wa cold and 
clammi like a corpse. It cannot be human." 

"not human?" 

"look at it now. It will sure escap now." 

"no, no--w will not be terrifi thus--ther is heaven abov us. come 
on, and, for dear flora' sake, let us make an effort yet to seiz thi 
bold intruder." 

"take thi pistol," said marchdale. "it is the fellow of the one I 
fired. tri it efficacy." 

"he will be gone," exclaim henry, as at thi moment, after mani 
repeat attempt and fear falls, the figur reach the top of the 
wall, and then hung by it long arm a moment or two, previou to 
drag itself complet up. 

the idea of the appearance, be it what it might, entir escaping, 
seem to nerv again mr. marchdale, and he, as well as the two young 
men, ran forward toward the wall. they got so close to the figur 
befor it sprang down on the outer side of the wall, that to miss 
kill it with the bullet from the pistol wa a matter of utter 
impossibility, unless wilfully. 

henri had the weapon, and he point it full at the tall form with a 
steadi aim. He pull the trigger--th explos followed, and that the 
bullet did it offic there could be no manner of doubt, for the figur 
gave a howl shriek, and fell headlong from the wall on the outside. 

"I have shot him," cri henry, "I have shot him." 




chapter iii. 

the disappear OF the body.--flora' recoveri and madness.--th offer 
OF assist from sir franci varney. 


[illustration] 

"he is human!" cri henry; "I have sure kill him." 

"it would seem so," said mr. marchdale. "let us now hurri round to the 
outsid of the wall, and see where he lies." 

thi wa at onc agre to, and the whole three of them made what 
expedit they could toward a gate which led into a paddock, across 
which they hurried, and soon found themselv clear of the garden wall, 
so that they could make way toward where they fulli expect to find 
the bodi of him who had worn so unearthli an aspect, but who it would be 
an excess relief to find wa human. 

So hurri wa the progress they made, that it wa scarc possibl to 
exchang mani word as they went; a kind of breathless anxieti wa upon 
them, and in the speed they disregard everi obstacle, which would, at 
ani other time, have probabl prevent them from take the direct road 
they sought. 

It wa difficult on the outsid of the wall to say exactli which wa the 
precis spot which it might be suppos the bodi had fallen on; but, by 
follow the wall in it entir length, sure they would come upon it. 

they did so; but, to their surprise, they got from it commenc to 
it further extrem without find ani dead body, or even ani 
symptom of one have lain there. 

At some part close to the wall there grew a kind of heath, and, 
consequently, the trace of blood would be lost among it, if it so 
happen that at the precis spot at which the strang be had seem 
to toppl over, such veget had existed. thi wa to be ascertained; 
but now, after travers the whole length of the wall twice, they came 
to a halt, and look wonderingli in each other' faces. 

"there is noth here," said harry. 

"nothing," ad hi brother. 

"it could not have been a delusion," at length said mr. marchdale, with 
a shudder. 

"A delusion?" exclaim the brother! "that is not possible; we all saw 
it." 

"then what terribl explan can we give?" 

"bi heavens! I know not," exclaim henry. "thi adventur surpass all 
belief, and but for the great interest we have in it, I should regard it 
with a world of curiosity." 

"it is too dreadful," said george; "for god' sake, henry, let us return 
to ascertain if poor flora is killed." 

"mi senses," said henry, "were all so much absorb in gaze at that 
horribl form, that I never onc look toward her further than to see 
that she was, to appearance, dead. god help her! poor--poor, beauti 
flora. thi is, indeed, a sad, sad fate for you to come to. 
flora--flora--" 

"do not weep, henry," said george. "rather let us now hasten home, where 
we may find that tear are premature. she may yet be live and restor 
to us." 

"and," said mr. marchdale, "she may be abl to give us some account of 
thi dread visitation." 

"true--true," exclaim henry; "we will hasten home." 

they now turn their step homeward, and as they went they much blame 
themselv for all leav home together, and with terror pictur what 
might occur in their absenc to those who were now total unprotected. 

"it wa a rash impuls of us all to come in pursuit of thi dread 
figure," remark mr. marchdale; "but do not torment yourself, henry. 
there may be no reason for your fears." 

At the pace they went, they veri soon reach the ancient house, and 
when they came in sight of it, they saw light flash from the 
windows, and the shadow of face move to and fro, indic that the 
whole household wa up, and in a state of alarm. 

henry, after some trouble, got the hall door open by a terrifi 
servant, who wa trembl so much that she could scarc hold the 
light she had with her. 

"speak at once, martha," said henry. "i flora living?" 

"yes; but--" 

"enough--enough! thank god she lives; where is she now?" 

"in her own room, master henry. oh, dear--oh, dear, what will becom of 
us all?" 

henri rush up the staircase, follow by georg and mr. marchdale, nor 
paus he onc until he reach the room of hi sister. 

"mother," he said, befor he cross the threshold, "are you here?" 

"I am, my dear--i am. come in, pray come in, and speak to poor flora." 

"come in, mr. marchdale," said henry--"com in; we make no stranger of 
you." 

they all then enter the room. 

sever light had been now brought into that antiqu chamber, and, in 
addit to the mother of the beauti girl who had been so fear 
visited, there were two femal domestics, who appear to be in the 
greatest possibl fright, for they could render no assist whatev 
to anybody. 

the tear were stream down the mother' face, and the moment she saw 
mr. marchdale, she clung to hi arm, evid unconsci of what she 
wa about, and exclaimed,-- 

"oh, what is thi that ha happened--what is this? tell me, marchdale! 
robert marchdale, you whom I have known even from my childhood, you will 
not deceiv me. tell me the mean of all this?" 

"I cannot," he said, in a tone of much emotion. "a god is my judge, I 
am as much puzzl and amaz at the scene that ha taken place here 
to-night as you can be." 

the mother wrung her hand and wept. 

"it wa the storm that first awaken me," ad marchdale; "and then I 
heard a scream." 

the brother tremblingli approach the bed. flora wa place in a 
sitting, half-reclin posture, prop up by pillows. she wa quit 
insensible, and her face wa fear pale; while that she breath at 
all could be but veri faintli seen. On some of her clothing, about the 
neck, were spot of blood, and she look more like one who had suffer 
some long and grievou illness, than a young girl in the prime of life 
and in the most robust health, as she had been on the day previou to 
the strang scene we have recorded. 

"doe she sleep?" said henry, as a tear fell from hi eye upon her 
pallid cheek. 

"no," repli mr. marchdale. "thi is a swoon, from which we must 
recov her." 

activ measur were now adopt to restor the languid circulation, 
and, after persev in them for some time, they had the satisfact 
of see her open her eyes. 

her first act upon conscious returning, however, wa to utter a loud 
shriek, and it wa not until henri implor her to look around her, and 
see that she wa surround by none but friendli faces, that she would 
ventur again to open her eyes, and look timidli from one to the other. 
then she shuddered, and burst into tear as she said,-- 

"oh, heaven, have merci upon me--heaven, have merci upon me, and save me 
from that dread form." 

"there is no one here, flora," said mr. marchdale, "but those who love 
you, and who, in defenc of you, if need were would lay down their 
lives." 

"oh, god! oh, god!" 

"you have been terrified. but tell us distinctli what ha happened? you 
are quit safe now." 

[illustration] 

she trembl so violent that mr. marchdal recommend that some 
stimul should be given to her, and she wa persuaded, although not 
without consider difficulty, to swallow a small portion of some wine 
from a cup. there could be no doubt but that the stimul effect of 
the wine wa beneficial, for a slight access of colour visit her 
cheeks, and she spoke in a firmer tone as she said,-- 

"do not leav me. oh, do not leav me, ani of you. I shall die if left 
alon now. oh, save me--sav me. that horribl form! that fear face!" 

"tell us how it happened, dear flora?" said henry. 

"or would you rather endeavour to get some sleep first?" suggest mr. 
marchdale. 

"no--no--no," she said, "I do not think I shall ever sleep again." 

"say not so; you will be more compos in a few hours, and then you can 
tell us what ha occurred." 

"I will tell you now. I will tell you now." 

she place her hand over her face for a moment, as if to collect her 
scattered, thoughts, and then she added,-- 

"I wa awaken by the storm, and I saw that terribl apparit at the 
window. I think I screamed, but I could not fly. oh, god! I could not 
fly. It came--it seiz me by the hair. I know no more. I know no more." 

she pass her hand across her neck sever times, and mr. marchdal 
said, in an anxiou voice,-- 

"you seem, flora, to have hurt your neck--ther is a wound." 

"A wound!" said the mother, and she brought a light close to the bed, 
where all saw on the side of flora' neck a small punctur wound; or, 
rather two, for there wa one a littl distanc from the other. 

It wa from these wound the blood had come which wa observ upon 
her night clothing. 

"how came these wounds?" said henry. 

"I do not know," she replied. "I feel veri faint and weak, as if I had 
almost bled to death." 

"you cannot have done so, dear flora, for there are not abov 
half-a-dozen spot of blood to be seen at all." 

mr. marchdal lean against the carv head of the bed for support, and 
he utter a deep groan. all eye were turn upon him, and henri said, 
in a voic of the most anxiou inquiry,-- 

"you have someth to say, mr. marchdale, which will throw some light 
upon thi affair." 

"no, no, no, nothing!" cri mr. marchdale, rous himself at onc from 
the appear of depress that had come over him. "I have noth to 
say, but that I think flora had better get some sleep if she can." 

"no sleep-no sleep for me," again scream flora. "dare I be alon to 
sleep?" 

"but you shall not be alone, dear flora," said henry. "I will sit by 
your bedsid and watch you." 

she took hi hand in both hers, and while the tear chase each other 
down her cheeks, she said,-- 

"promis me, henry, by all your hope of heaven, you will not leav me." 

"I promise!" 

she gentli laid herself down, with a deep sigh, and close her eyes. 

"she is weak, and will sleep long," said mr. marchdale. 

"you sigh," said henry. "some fear thoughts, I feel certain, oppress 
your heart." 

"hush-hush!" said mr. marchdale, as he point to flora. "hush! not 
here--not here." 

"I understand," said henry. 

"let her sleep." 

there wa a silenc of some few minut duration. flora had drop into 
a deep slumber. that silenc wa first broken by george, who said,-- 

"mr. marchdale, look at that portrait." 

He point to the portrait in the frame to which we have alluded, and 
the moment marchdal look at it he sunk into a chair as he 
exclaimed,-- 

"graciou heaven, how like!" 

"it is--it is," said henry. "those eyes--" 

"and see the contour of the countenance, and the strang shape of the 
mouth." 

"exact--exact." 

"that pictur shall be move from here. the sight of it is at onc 
suffici to awaken all her former terror in poor flora' brain if she 
should chanc to awaken and cast her eye suddenli upon it." 

"and is it so like him who came here?" said the mother. 

"it is the veri man himself," said mr. marchdale. "I have not been in 
thi hous long enough to ask ani of you whose portrait that may be?" 

"it is," said henry, "the portrait of sir runnag bannerworth, an 
ancestor of ours, who first, by hi vices, gave the great blow to the 
famili prosperity." 

"indeed. how long ago?" 

"about nineti years." 

"nineti years. 'ti a long while--nineti years." 

"you muse upon it." 

"no, no. I do wish, and yet I dread--" 

"what?" 

"to say someth to you all. but not here--not here. We will hold a 
consult on thi matter to-morrow. not now--not now." 

"the daylight is come quickli on," said henry; "I shall keep my sacr 
promis of not move from thi room until flora awakens; but there can 
be no occas for the detent of ani of you. one is suffici here. 
Go all of you, and endeavour to procur what rest you can." 

"I will fetch you my powder-flask and bullets," said mr. marchdale; "and 
you can, if you please, reload the pistols. In about two hour more it 
will be broad daylight." 

thi arrang wa adopted. henri did reload the pistols, and place 
them on a tabl by the side of the bed, readi for immedi action, and 
then, as flora wa sleep soundly, all left the room but himself. 

mrs. bannerworth wa the last to do so. she would have remained, but for 
the earnest solicit of henry, that she would endeavour to get some 
sleep to make up for her broken night' repose, and she wa inde so 
broken down by her alarm on flora' account, that she had not power to 
resist, but with tear flow from her eyes, she sought her own 
chamber. 

and now the calm of the night resum it sway in that evil-f 
mansion; and although no one realli slept but flora, all were still. 
busi thought kept everi one els wakeful. It wa a mockeri to lie down 
at all, and henry, full of strang and pain feel as he was, 
prefer hi present posit to the anxieti and apprehens on 
flora' account which he knew he should feel if she were not within the 
sphere of hi own observation, and she slept as soundli as some gentl 
infant tire of it playmat and it sports. 




chapter iv. 

the morning.--th consultation.--th fear suggestion. 


[illustration] 

what wonder differ impress and feelings, with regard to the 
same circumstances, come across the mind in the broad, clear, and 
beauti light of day to what haunt the imagination, and often render 
the judgment almost incap of action, when the heavi shadow of night 
is upon all things. 

there must be a downright physic reason for thi effect--it is so 
remark and so universal. It seem that the sun' ray so complet 
alter and modifi the constitut of the atmosphere, that it produces, 
as we inhal it, a wonder differ effect upon the nerv of the 
human subject. 

We can account for thi phenomenon in no other way. perhap never in hi 
life had he, henri bannerworth, felt so strongli thi transit of 
feel as he now felt it, when the beauti daylight gradual dawn 
upon him, as he kept hi lone watch by the bedsid of hi slumber 
sister. 

that watch had been a perfectli undisturb one. not the least sight or 
sound of ani intrus had reach hi senses. all had been as still as 
the veri grave. 

and yet while the night lasted, and he wa more indebt to the ray of 
the candle, which he had place upon a shelf, for the power to 
distinguish object than to the light of the morning, a thousand uneasi 
and strang sensat had found a home in hi agit bosom. 

He look so mani time at the portrait which wa in the panel that at 
length he felt an undefin sensat of terror creep over him whenev 
he took hi eye off it. 

He tri to keep himself from look at it, but he found it vain, so he 
adopt what, perhaps, wa certainli the wisest, best plan, namely, to 
look at it continually. 

He shift hi chair so that he could gaze upon it without ani effort, 
and he place the candl so that a faint light wa thrown upon it, and 
there he sat, a prey to mani conflict and uncomfort feelings, 
until the daylight began to make the candl flame look dull and sickly. 

solut for the event of the night he could find none. He rack hi 
imagin in vain to find some means, howev vague, of endeavour 
to account for what occurred, and still he wa at fault. all wa to him 
wrap in the gloom of the most profound mystery. 

and how strangely, too, the eye of that portrait appear to look upon 
him--a if instinct with life, and as if the head to which they belong 
wa busi in endeavour to find out the secret commun of hi soul. 
It wa wonder well execut that portrait; so life-like, that the 
veri featur seem to move as you gaze upon them. 

"it shall be removed," said henry. "I would remov it now, but that it 
seem absolut paint on the panel, and I should awak flora in ani 
attempt to do so." 

He aros and ascertain that such wa the case, and that it would 
requir a workman, with proper tool adapt to the job, to remov the 
portrait. 

"true," he said, "I might now destroy it, but it is a piti to obscur a 
work of such rare art as thi is; I should blame myself if I were. It 
shall be remov to some other room of the house, however." 

then, all of a sudden, it struck henri how foolish it would be to remov 
the portrait from the wall of a room which, in all likelihood, after 
that night, would be uninhabited; for it wa not probabl that flora 
would choos again to inhabit a chamber in which she had gone through so 
much terror. 

"it can be left where it is," he said, "and we can fasten up, if we 
please, even the veri door of thi room, so that no one need troubl 
themselv ani further about it." 

the morn wa now come fast, and just as henri thought he would 
partial draw a blind across the window, in order to shield from the 
direct ray of the sun the eye of flora, she awoke. 

"help--help!" she cried, and henri wa by her side in a moment. 

"you are safe, flora--y are safe," he said. 

"where is it now?" she said. 

"what--what, dear flora?" 

"the dread apparition. oh, what have I done to be made thu 
perpetu miserable?" 

"think no more of it, flora." 

"I must think. My brain is on fire! A million of strang eye seem 
gaze on me." 

"great heaven! she raves," said henry. 

"hark--hark--hark! He come on the wing of the storm. oh, it is most 
horrible--horrible!" 

henri rang the bell, but not suffici loudli to creat ani alarm. 
the sound reach the wake ear of the mother, who in a few moment wa 
in the room. 

"she ha awakened," said henry, "and ha spoken, but she seem to me to 
wander in her discourse. for god' sake, sooth her, and tri to bring 
her mind round to it usual state." 

"I will, henry--i will." 

"and I think, mother, if you were to get her out of thi room, and into 
some other chamber as far remov from thi one as possible, it would 
tend to withdraw her mind from what ha occurred." 

"yes; it shall be done. oh, henry, what wa it--what do you think it 
was?" 

"I am lost in a sea of wild conjecture. I can form no conclusion; where 
is mr. marchdale?" 

"I believ in hi chamber." 

"then I will go and consult with him." 

henri proceed at onc to the chamber, which was, as he knew, occupi 
by mr. marchdale; and as he cross the corridor, he could not but paus 
a moment to glanc from a window at the face of nature. 

As is often the case, the terrif storm of the preced even had 
clear the air, and render it delici invigor and life-like. 
the weather had been dull, and there had been for some day a certain 
heavi in the atmosphere, which wa now entir removed. 

the morn sun wa shine with uncommon brilliancy, bird were sing 
in everi tree and on everi bush; so pleasant, so spirit-stirring, 
health-giv a morning, seldom had he seen. and the effect upon hi 
spirit wa great, although not altogeth what it might have been, had 
all gone on as it usual wa in the habit of do at that house. the 
ordinari littl casualti of evil fortun had certainli from time to 
time, in the shape of illness, and one thing or another, attack the 
famili of the bannerworth in common with everi other family, but here 
suddenli had arisen a someth at onc terribl and inexplicable. 

He found mr. marchdal up and dressed, and appar in deep and 
anxiou thought. the moment he saw henry, he said,-- 

"flora is awake, I presume." 

"yes, but her mind appear to be much disturbed." 

"from bodili weakness, I dare say." 

"but whi should she be bodili weak? she wa strong and well, ay, as well 
as she could ever be in all her life. the glow of youth and health wa 
on her cheeks. Is it possibl that, in the cours of one night, she 
should becom bodili weak to such an extent?" 

"henry," said mr. marchdale, sadly, "sit down. I am not, as you know, a 
superstiti man." 

"you certainli are not." 

"and yet, I never in all my life wa so absolut stagger as I have 
been by the occurr of to-night." 

"say on." 

"there is a frightful, a hideou solut of them; one which everi 
consider will tend to add strength to, one which I trembl to name 
now, although, yesterday, at thi hour, I should have laugh it to 
scorn." 

"indeed!" 

"yes, it is so. tell no one that which I am about to say to you. let the 
dread suggest remain with ourselv alone, henri bannerworth." 

"i--i am lost in wonder." 

"you promis me?" 

"what--what?" 

"that you will not repeat my opinion to ani one." 

"I do." 

"on your honour." 

"on my honour, I promise." 

mr. marchdal rose, and proceed to the door, he look out to see 
that there were no listen near. have ascertain then that they 
were quit alone, he returned, and draw a chair close to that on 
which henri sat, he said,-- 

"henry, have you never heard of a strang and dread superstit 
which, in some countries, is extrem rife, by which it is suppos 
that there are be who never die." 

"never die!" 

"never. In a word, henry, have you never heard of--of--i dread to 
pronounc the word." 

"speak it. god of heaven! let me hear it." 

"A _vampyre_!" 

henri sprung to hi feet. hi whole frame quiver with emotion; the 
drop of perspir stood upon hi brow, as, in, a strange, hoars 
voice, he repeat the words,-- 

"A vampyre!" 

"even so; one who ha to renew a dread exist by human blood--on 
who live on for ever, and must keep up such a fear exist upon 
human gore--on who eat not and drink not as other men--a vampyre." 

henri drop into hi seat, and utter a deep groan of the most 
exquisit anguish. 

"I could echo that groan," said marchdale, "but that I am so thoroughli 
bewild I know not what to think." 

"good god--good god!" 

"do not too readili yield belief in so dread a supposition, I pray 
you." 

"yield belief!" exclaim henry, as he rose, and lift up one of hi 
hand abov hi head. "no; by heaven, and the great god of all, who 
there rules, I will not easili believ aught so aw and so monstrous." 

"I applaud your sentiment, henry; not willingli would I deliv up 
myself to so fright a belief--it is too horrible. I mere have told 
you of that which you saw wa on my mind. you have sure befor heard 
of such things." 

"I have--i have." 

"I much marvel, then, that the supposit did not occur to you, henry." 

"it did not--it did not, marchdale. it--it wa too dreadful, I suppose, 
to find a home in my heart. oh! flora, flora, if thi horribl idea 
should onc occur to you, reason cannot, I am quit sure, uphold you 
against it." 

"let no one presum to insinu it to her, henry. I would not have it 
mention to her for worlds." 

"nor i--nor I. good god! I shudder at the veri thought--th mere 
possibility; but there is no possibility, there can be none. I will not 
believ it." 

"nor i." 

"no; by heaven' justice, goodness, grace, and mercy, I will not believ 
it." 

"ti well sworn, henry; and now, discard the supposit that flora 
ha been visit by a vampyre, let us serious set about endeavouring, 
if we can, to account for what ha happen in thi house." 

"i--i cannot now." 

"nay, let us examin the matter; if we can find ani natur explanation, 
let us cling to it, henry, as the sheet-anchor of our veri souls." 

"do you think. you are fertil in expedients. Do you think, marchdale; 
and, for heaven' sake, and for the sake of our own peace, find out some 
other way of account for what ha happened, than the hideou one you 
have suggested." 

"and yet my pistol bullet hurt him not; he ha left the token of hi 
presenc on the neck of flora." 

"peace, oh! peace. Do not, I pray you, accumul reason whi I should 
receiv such a dismal, aw superstition. oh, do not, marchdale, as you 
love me!" 

"you know that my attach to you," said marchdale, "i sincere; and 
yet, heaven help us!" 

hi voic wa broken by grief as he spoke, and he turn asid hi head 
to hide the burst tear that would, despit all hi efforts, show 
themselv in hi eyes. 

"marchdale," ad henry, after a paus of some moments' duration, "I 
will sit up to-night with my sister." 

"do--do!" 

"think you there is a chanc it may come again?" 

"I cannot--i dare not specul upon the come of so dread a 
visitor, henry; but I will hold watch with you most willingly." 

"you will, marchdale?" 

"mi hand upon it. come what danger may, I will share them with you, 
henry." 

"A thousand thanks. say nothing, then, to georg of what we have been 
talk about. He is of a highli suscept nature, and the veri idea 
of such a thing would kill him." 

"I will; be mute. remov your sister to some other chamber, let me beg 
of you, henry; the one she now inhabit will alway be suggest of 
horribl thoughts." 

"I will; and that dreadful-look portrait, with it perfect like 
to him who came last night." 

"perfect indeed. Do you intend to remov it?" 

"I do not. I thought of do so; but it is actual on the panel in the 
wall, and I would not willingli destroy it, and it may as well remain 
where it is in that chamber, which I can readili now believ will becom 
henceforward a desert one in thi house." 

"it may well becom such." 

"who come here? I hear a step." 

there wa a tip at the door at thi moment, and georg made hi 
appear in answer to the summon to come in. He look pale and ill; 
hi face betray how much he had mental suffer dure that night, 
and almost directli he got into the bed-chamb he said,-- 

"I shall, I am sure, be censur by you both for what I am go to say; 
but I cannot help say it, nevertheless, for to keep it to myself 
would destroy me." 

"good god, george! what is it?" said mr. marchdale. 

"speak it out!" said henry. 

"I have been think of what ha occur here, and the result of that 
thought ha been one of the wildest supposit that ever I thought I 
should have to entertain. have you never heard of a vampyre?" 

henri sigh deeply, and marchdal wa silent. 

"I say a vampyre," ad george, with much excit in hi manner. "it 
is a fearful, a horribl supposition; but our poor, dear flora ha been 
visit by a vampyre, and I shall go complet mad!" 

He sat down, and cover hi face with hi hands, he wept bitterli and 
abundantly. 

"george," said henry, when he saw that the frantic grief had in some 
measur abated--"b calm, george, and endeavour to listen to me." 

"I hear, henry." 

"well, then, do not suppos that you are the onli one in thi hous to 
whom so dread a superstit ha occurred." 

"not the onli one?" 

"no; it ha occur to mr. marchdal also." 

"graciou heaven!" 

"he mention it to me; but we have both agre to repudi it with 
horror." 

"to--repudiate--it?" 

"yes, george." 

"and yet--and yet--" 

"hush, hush! I know what you would say. you would tell us that our 
repudi of it cannot affect the fact. Of that we are aware; but yet 
will we disbeliev that which a belief in would be enough to drive us 
mad." 

"what do you intend to do?" 

"to keep thi supposit to ourselves, in the first place; to guard it 
most zealous from the ear of flora." 

"do you think she ha ever heard of vampyres?" 

"I never heard her mention that in all her read she had gather even 
a hint of such a fear superstition. If she has, we must be guid by 
circumstances, and do the best we can." 

"pray heaven she may not!" 

"amen to that prayer, george," said henry. "mr. marchdal and I intend 
to keep watch over flora to-night." 

"may not I join you?" 

"your health, dear george, will not permit you to engag in such 
matters. Do you seek your natur repose, and leav it to us to do the 
best we can in thi most fear and terribl emergency." 

"a you please, brother, and as you please, mr. marchdale. I know I am a 
frail reed, and my belief is that thi affair will kill me quite. the 
truth is, I am horrified--utterli and fright horrified. like my 
poor, dear sister, I do not believ I shall ever sleep again." 

"do not fanci that, george," said marchdale. "you veri much add to the 
uneasi which must be your poor mother' portion, by allow thi 
circumst to so much affect you. you well know her affect for you 
all, and let me therefore, as a veri old friend of hers, entreat you to 
wear as cheer an aspect as you can in her presence." 

"for onc in my life," said george, sadly, "I will; to my dear mother, 
endeavour to play the hypocrite." 

"do so," said henry. "the motiv will sanction ani such deceit as that, 
george, be assured." 

the day wore on, and poor flora remain in a veri precari situation. 
It wa not until mid-day that henri made up hi mind he would call in a 
medic gentleman to her, and then he rode to the neighbour 
market-town, where he knew an extrem intellig practition 
resided. thi gentleman henri resolv upon, under a promis of secrecy, 
make confid of; but, long befor he reach him, he found he might 
well dispens with the promis of secrecy. 

He had never thought, so engag had he been with other matters, that 
the servant were cogniz of the whole affair, and that from them he 
had no expect of be abl to keep the whole stori in all it 
details. Of cours such an opportun for tale-bear and gossip 
wa not like to be lost; and while henri wa think over how he had 
better act in the matter, the news that flora bannerworth had been 
visit in the night by a vampyre--for the servant name the visit 
such at once--wa spread all over the county. 

As he rode along, henri met a gentleman on horseback who belong to the 
county, and who, rein in hi steed, said to him, 

"good morning, mr. bannerworth." 

"good morning," respond henry, and he would have ridden on, but the 
gentleman added,-- 

"excus me for interrupt you, sir; but what is the strang stori that 
is in everybody' mouth about a vampyre?" 

henri nearli fell off hi horse, he wa so much astonished, and, 
wheel the anim around, he said,-- 

"in everybody' mouth!" 

"yes; I have heard it from at least a dozen persons." 

"you surpris me." 

"it is untrue? Of cours I am not so absurd as realli to believ about 
the vampyre; but is there no foundat at all for it? We gener find 
that at the bottom of these common report there is a someth around 
which, as a nucleus, the whole ha formed." 

"mi sister is unwell." 

"ah, and that' all. It realli is too bad, now." 

"we had a visitor last night." 

"A thief, I suppose?" 

"yes, yes--i believ a thief. I do believ it wa a thief, and she wa 
terrified." 

"of course, and upon such a thing is graft a stori of a vampyre, and 
the mark of hi teeth be in her neck, and all the circumstanti 
particulars." 

"yes, yes." 

"good morning, mr. bannerworth." 

henri bade the gentleman good morning, and much vex at the public 
which the affair had alreadi obtained, he set spur to hi horse, 
determin that he would speak to no one els upon so uncomfort a 
theme. sever attempt were made to stop him, but he onli wave hi 
hand and trot on, nor did he paus in hi speed till he reach the 
door of mr. chillingworth, the medic man whom he intend to consult. 

henri knew that at such a time he would be at home, which wa the case, 
and he wa soon closet with the man of drugs. henri beg hi patient 
hearing, which be accorded, he relat to him at full length what had 
happened, not omitting, to the best of hi remembrance, ani one 
particular. when he had conclud hi narration, the doctor shift hi 
posit sever times, and then said,-- 

"that' all?" 

"yes--and enough too." 

"more than enough, I should say, my young friend. you astonish me." 

"can you form ani supposition, sir, on the subject?" 

"not just now. what is your own idea?" 

"I cannot be said to have one about it. It is too absurd to tell you 
that my brother georg is impress with a belief a vampyr ha visit 
the house." 

"I never in all my life heard a more circumstanti narr in favour 
of so hideou a superstition." 

"well, but you cannot believe--" 

"believ what?" 

"that the dead can come to life again, and by such a process keep up 
vitality." 

"do you take me for a fool?" 

"certainli not." 

"then whi do you ask me such questions?" 

"but the glare fact of the case." 

"I don't care if they were ten time more glaring, I won't believ it. I 
would rather believ you were all mad, the whole famili of you--that at 
the full of the moon you all were a littl cracked." 

"and so would i." 

"you go home now, and I will call and see your sister in the cours of 
two hours. someth may turn up yet, to throw some new light upon thi 
strang subject." 

with thi understand henri went home, and he took care to ride as 
fast as before, in order to avoid questions, so that he got back to hi 
old ancestr home without go through the disagre ordeal of 
have to explain to ani one what had disturb the peac of it. 

when henri reach hi home, he found that the even wa rapidli 
come on, and befor he could permit himself to think upon ani other 
subject, he inquir how hi terrifi sister had pass the hour 
dure hi absence. 

He found that but littl improv had taken place in her, and that 
she had occasion slept, but to awaken and speak incoherently, as if 
the shock she had receiv had had some seriou affect upon her nerves. 
He repair at onc to her room, and, find that she wa awake, he 
lean over her, and spoke tenderli to her. 

"flora," he said, "dear flora, you are better now?" 

"harry, is that you?" 

"yes, dear." 

"oh, tell me what ha happened?" 

"have you not a recollection, flora?" 

"yes, yes, henry; but what wa it? they none of them will tell me what 
it was, henry." 

"be calm, dear. No doubt some attempt to rob the house." 

"think you so?" 

"yes; the bay window wa peculiarli adapt for such a purpose; but now 
that you are remov here to thi room, you will be abl to rest in 
peace." 

"I shall die of terror, henry. even now those eye are glare on me so 
hidiously. oh, it is fearful--it is veri fearful, henry. Do you not piti 
me, and no one will promis to remain with me at night." 

"indeed, flora, you are mistaken, for I intend to sit by your bedsid 
armed, and so preserv you from all harm." 

she clutch hi hand eagerly, as she said,-- 

"you will, henry. you will, and not think it too much trouble, dear 
henry." 

"it can be no trouble, flora." 

"then I shall rest in peace, for I know that the dread vampyr cannot 
come to me when you are by-" 

"the what, flora!" 

"the vampyre, henry. It wa a vampyre." 

"good god, who told you so?" 

"no one. I have read of them in the book of travel in norway, which mr. 
marchdal lent us all." 

"alas, alas!" groan henry. "discard, I pray you, such a thought from 
your mind." 

"can we discard thoughts. what power have we but from that mind, which 
is ourselves?" 

"true, true." 

"hark, what nois is that? I thought I heard a noise. henry, when you 
go, ring for some one first. wa there not a noise?" 

"the accident shut of some door, dear." 

"wa it that?" 

"it was." 

"then I am relieved. henry, I sometim fanci I am in the tomb, and that 
some one is feast on my flesh. they do say, too, that those who in 
life have been bled by a vampyre, becom themselv vampyres, and have 
the same horribl tast for blood as those befor them. Is it not 
horrible?" 

"you onli vex yourself by such thoughts, flora. mr. chillingworth is 
come to see you." 

"can he minist to a mind diseased?" 

"but your is not, flora. your mind is healthful, and so, although hi 
power extend not so far, we will thank heaven, dear flora, that you 
need it not." 

she sigh deeply, as she said,-- 

"heaven help me! I know not, henry. the dread be held on by my 
hair. I must have it all taken off. I tri to get away, but it drag 
me back--a brutal thing it was. oh, then at that moment, henry, I felt 
as if someth strang took place in my brain, and that I wa go 
mad! I saw those glaze eye close to, mine--i felt a hot, pestifer 
breath upon my face--help--help!" 

"hush! my flora, hush! look at me." 

"I am calm again. It fix it teeth in my throat. did I faint away?" 

"you did, dear; but let me pray you to refer all thi to imagination; or 
at least the greater part of it." 

"but you saw it." 

"yes--" 

"all saw it." 

"we all saw some man--a housebreaker--it must have been some 
housebreaker. what more easy, you know, dear flora, than to assum some 
such disguise?" 

"wa anyth stolen?" 

"not that I know of; but there wa an alarm, you know." 

flora shook her head, as she said, in a low voice,-- 

"that which came here wa more than mortal. oh, henry, if it had but 
kill me, now I had been happy; but I cannot live--i hear it breath 
now." 

"talk of someth else, dear flora," said the much distress henry; 
"you will make yourself much worse, if you indulg yourself in these 
strang fancies." 

"oh, that they were but fancies!" 

"they are, believ me." 

"there is a strang confus in my brain, and sleep come over me 
suddenly, when I least expect it. henry, henry, what I was, I shall 
never, never be again." 

"say not so. all thi will pass away like a dream, and leav so faint a 
trace upon your memory, that the time will come when you will wonder it 
ever made so deep an impress on your mind." 

"you utter these words, henry," she said, "but they do not come from 
your heart. ah, no, no, no! who comes?" 

the door wa open by mrs. bannerworth, who said,-- 

"it is onli me, my dear. henry, here is dr. chillingworth in the 
dining-room." 

henri turn to flora, saying,-- 

"you will see him, dear flora? you know mr. chillingworth well." 

"yes, henry, yes, I will see him, or whoever you please." 

"shew mr. chillingworth up," said henri to the servant. 

In a few moment the medic man wa in the room, and he at onc 
approach the bedsid to speak to flora, upon whose pale counten he 
look with evid interest, while at the same time it seem mingl 
with a pain feeling--at least so hi own face indicated. 

"well, miss bannerworth," he said, "what is all thi I hear about an 
ugli dream you have had?" 

"A dream?" said flora, as she fix her beauti eye on hi face. 

"yes, as I understand." 

she shuddered, and wa silent. 

"wa it not a dream, then?" ad mr. chillingworth. 

she wrung her hands, and in a voic of extrem anguish and pathos, 
said,-- 

"would it were a dream--would it were a dream! oh, if ani one could but 
convinc me it wa a dream!" 

"well, will you tell me what it was?" 

"yes, sir, it wa a vampyre." 

mr. chillingworth glanc at henry, as he said, in repli to flora' 
words,-- 

"I suppos that is, after all, anoth name, flora, for the nightmare?" 

"no--no--no!" 

"do you really, then, persist in believ anyth so absurd, miss 
bannerworth?" 

"what can I say to the evid of my own senses?" she replied. "I saw 
it, henri saw it, georg saw, mr. marchdale, my mother--al saw it. We 
could not all be at the same time the victim of the same delusion." 

"how faintli you speak." 

"I am veri faint and ill." 

"indeed. what wound is that on your neck?" 

A wild express came over the face of flora; a spasmod action of the 
muscles, accompani with a shuddering, as if a sudden chill had come 
over the whole mass of blood took place, and she said,-- 

"it is the mark left by the teeth of the vampyre." 

the smile wa a forc one upon the face of mr. chillingworth. 

"draw up the blind of the window, mr. henry," he said, "and let me 
examin thi punctur to which your sister attach so extraordinari a 
meaning." 

[illustration] 

the blind wa drawn up, and a strong light wa thrown into the room. for 
full two minut mr. chillingworth attent examin the two small 
wound in the neck of flora. He took a power magnifi glass from 
hi pocket, and look at them through it, and after hi examin wa 
concluded, he said,-- 

"they are veri trifl wounds, indeed." 

"but how inflicted?" said henry. 

"bi some insect, I should say, which probably--it be the season for 
mani insects--ha flown in at the window." 

"I know the motive," said flora "which prompt all these suggest it 
is a kind one, and I ought to be the last to quarrel with it; but what I 
have seen, noth can make me believ I saw not, unless I am, as onc 
or twice I have thought myself, realli mad." 

"how do you now feel in gener health?" 

"far from well; and a strang drowsi at time creep over me. even 
now I feel it." 

she sunk back on the pillow as she spoke and close her eye with a 
deep sigh. 

mr. chillingworth beckon henri to come with him from the room, but the 
latter had promis that he would remain with flora; and as mrs. 
bannerworth had left the chamber becaus she wa unabl to control her 
feelings, he rang the bell, and request that hi mother would come. 

she did so, and then henri went down stair along with the medic man, 
whose opinion he wa certainli eager to be now made acquaint with. 

As soon as they were alon in an old-fashion room which wa call the 
oak closet, henri turn to mr. chillingworth, and said,-- 

"what, now, is your candid opinion, sir? you have seen my sister, and 
those strang indubit evid of someth wrong." 

"I have; and to tell you candidli the truth, mr. henry, I am sore 
perplexed." 

"I thought you would be." 

"it is not often that a medic man like to say so much, nor is it, 
indeed, often prudent that he should do so, but in thi case I own I am 
much puzzled. It is contrari to all my notion upon all such subjects." 

"those wounds, what do you think of them?" 

"I know not what to think. I am complet puzzl as regard them." 

"but, but do they not realli bear the appear of be bites?" 

"they realli do." 

"and so far, then, they are actual in favour of the dread 
supposit which poor flora entertains." 

"so far they certainli are. I have no doubt in the world of their be 
bites; but we not must jump to a conclus that the teeth which 
inflict them were human. It is a strang case, and one which I feel 
assur must give you all much uneasiness, as, indeed, it gave me; but, 
as I said before, I will not let my judgment give in to the fear and 
degrad superstit which all the circumst connect with thi 
strang stori would seem to justify." 

"it is a degrad superstition." 

"to my mind your sister seem to be labour under the effect of some 
narcotic." 

"indeed!" 

"yes; unless she realli ha lost a quantiti of blood, which loss ha 
decreas the heart' action suffici to produc the languor under 
which she now evid labours." 

"oh, that I could believ the former supposition, but I am confid she 
ha taken no narcotic; she could not even do so by mistake, for there is 
no drug of the sort in the house. besides, she is not heedless by ani 
means. I am quit convinc she ha not done so." 

"then I am fairli puzzled, my young friend, and I can onli say that I 
would freeli have given half of what I am worth to see that figur you 
saw last night." 

"what would you have done?" 

"I would not have lost sight of it for the world' wealth." 

"you would have felt your blood freez with horror. the face wa 
terrible." 

"and yet let it lead me where it like I would have follow it." 

"I wish you had been here." 

"I wish to heaven I had. If I though there wa the least chanc of 
anoth visit I would come and wait with patienc everi night for a 
month." 

"I cannot say," repli henry. "I am go to sit up to-night with my 
sister, and I believe, our friend mr. marchdal will share my watch with 
me." 

mr. chillingworth appear to be for a few moment lost in thought, and 
then suddenli rous himself, as if he found it either imposs to 
come to ani ration conclus upon the subject, or had arriv at one 
which he chose to keep to himself, he said,-- 

"well, well, we must leav the matter at present as it stands. time may 
accomplish someth toward it development, but at present so palpabl 
a mysteri I never came across, or a matter in which human calcul 
wa so complet foiled." 

"nor i--nor i." 

"I will send you some medicines, such as I think will be of servic to 
flora, and depend upon see me by ten o'clock to-morrow morning." 

"you have, of course, heard something," said henri to the doctor, as he 
wa pull on hi gloves, "about vampyres." 

"I certainli have, and I understand that in some countries, particularli 
norway and sweden, the superstit is a veri common one." 

"and in the levant." 

"yes. the ghoul of the mahometan are of the same descript of 
beings. all that I have heard of the european vampyr ha made it a 
be which can be killed, but is restor to life again by the ray of 
a full moon fall on the body." 

"yes, yes, I have heard as much." 

"and that the hideou repast of blood ha to be taken veri frequently, 
and that if the vampyr get it not he wast away, present the 
appear of one in the last stage of a consumption, and visibly, so to 
speak, dying." 

"that is what I have understood." 

"to-night, do you know, mr. bannerworth, is the full of the moon." 

henri started. 

"if now you had succeed in killing--. pshaw, what am I saying. I 
believ I am get foolish, and that the horribl superstit is 
begin to fasten itself upon me as well as upon all of you. how 
strang the fanci will wage war with the judgment in such a way as 
this." 

"the full of the moon," repeat henry, as he glanc toward the 
window, "and the night is near at hand." 

"banish these thought from your mind," said the doctor, "or else, my 
young friend, you will make yourself decidedli ill. good even to you, 
for it is evening. I shall see you to-morrow morning." 

mr. chillingworth appear now to be anxiou to go, and henri no longer 
oppos hi departure; but when he wa gone a sens of great loneli 
came over him. 

"to-night," he repeated, "i the full of the moon. how strang that thi 
dread adventur should have taken place just the night before. 'ti 
veri strange. let me see--let me see." 

He took from the shelv of a book case the work which flora had 
mentioned, entitled, "travel in norway," in which work he found some 
account of the popular belief in vampyres. 

He open the work at random, and then some of the leav turn over of 
themselv to a particular place, as the leav of a book will 
frequent do when it ha been kept open a length of time at that part, 
and the bind stretch there more than anywher else. there wa a 
note at the bottom of one of the page at thi part of the book, and 
henri read as follows:-- 

"with regard to these vampyres, it is believ by those who are inclin 
to give credenc to so dread a superstition, that they alway 
endeavour to make their feast of blood, for the reviv of their bodili 
powers, on some even immedi preced a full moon, becaus if 
ani accid befal them, such as be shot, or otherwis kill or 
wounded, they can recov by lie down somewher where the full moon' 
ray will fall upon them." 

henri let the book drop from hi hand with a groan and a shudder. 




chapter V. 

the night watch.--th proposal.--th moonlight.--th fear adventure. 


[illustration] 

A kind of stupefact came over henri bannerworth, and he sat for about 
a quarter of an hour scarc consciou of where he was, and almost 
incap of anyth in the shape of ration thought. It wa hi 
brother, george, who rous him by saying, as he laid hi hand upon hi 
shoulder,-- 

"henry, are you asleep?" 

henri had not been awar of hi presence, and he start up as if he had 
been shot. 

"oh, george, is it you?" he said. 

"yes, henry, are you unwell?" 

"no, no; I wa in a deep reverie." 

"alas! I need not ask upon what subject," said george, sadly. "I sought 
you to bring you thi letter." 

"A letter to me?" 

"yes, you see it is address to you, and the seal look as if it came 
from someon of consequence." 

"indeed!" 

"yes, henry. read it, and see from whenc it comes." 

there wa just suffici light by go to the window to enabl henri 
to read the letter, which he did aloud. 

It ran thus:-- 

"sir franci varney present hi compliment to mr. beaumont, and 
is much concern to hear that some domest afflict ha 
fallen upon him. sir franci hope that the genuin and love 
sympathi of a neighbour will not be regard as an intrusion, and 
beg to proffer ani assist or counsel that may be within the 
compass of hi means. 

"ratford abbey." 

"sir franci varney!" said henry, "who is he?" 

"do you not remember, henry," said george, "we were told a few day ago, 
that a gentleman of that name had becom the purchas of the estat of 
ratford abbey." 

"oh, yes, yes. have you seen him?" 

"I have not." 

"I do not wish to make ani new acquaintance, george. We are veri 
poor--much poorer inde than the gener appear of thi place, 
which, I fear, we shall soon have to part with, would warrant ani one 
believing. I must, of course, return a civil answer to thi gentleman, 
but it must be such as one as shall repress familiarity." 

"that will be difficult to do while we remain here, when we come to 
consid the veri close proxim of the two properties, henry." 

"oh, no, not at all. He will easili perceiv that we do not want to make 
acquaint with him, and then, as a gentleman, which doubtless he is, 
he will give up the attempt." 

"let it be so, henry. heaven know I have no desir to form ani new 
acquaint with ani one, and more particularli under our present 
circumst of depression. and now, henry, you must permit me, as I 
have had some repose, to share with you your night watch in flora' 
room." 

"I would advis you not, george; your health, you know, is veri far from 
good." 

"nay, allow me. If not, then the anxieti I shall suffer will do me more 
harm than the watch I shall keep up in her chamber." 

thi wa an argument which henri felt himself the forc of too strongli 
not to admit it in the case of george, and he therefor made no further 
opposit to hi wish to make one in the night watch. 

"there will be an advantage," said george, "you see, in three of us 
be engag in thi matter, because, should anyth occur, two can 
act together, and yet flora may not be left alone." 

"true, true, that is a great advantage." 

now a soft gentl silveri light began to spread itself over the heavens. 
the moon wa rising, and as the benefici effect of the storm of the 
preced even were still felt in the clear of the air, the ray 
appear to be more lustrou and full of beauti than they commonli were. 

each moment the night grew lighter, and by the time the brother were 
readi to take their place in the chamber of flora, the moon had risen 
considerably. 

although neither henri nor georg had ani object to the compani of 
mr. marchdale, yet they gave him the option, and rather in fact urg 
him not to destroy hi night' repos by sit up with them; but he 
said,-- 

"allow me to do so; I am older, and have calmer judgment than you can 
have. should anyth again appear, I am quit resolv that it shall 
not escap me." 

"what would you do?" 

"with the name of god upon my lips," said mr. marchdale, solemnly, "I 
would grappl with it." 

"you laid hand upon it last night." 

"I did, and have forgotten to show you what I tore from it. look 
here,--what should you say thi was?" 

He produc a piec of cloth, on which wa an old-fashion piec of 
lace, and two buttons. upon a close inspection, thi appear to be a 
portion of the lapel of a coat of ancient times, and suddenly, henry, 
with a look of intens anxiety, said,-- 

"thi remind me of the fashion of garment veri mani year ago, mr. 
marchdale." 

"it came away in my grasp as if rotten and incap of stand ani 
rough usage." 

"what a strang unearthli smell it has!" 

"now you mention it yourself," ad mr. marchdale, "I must confess it 
smell to me as if it had realli come from the veri grave." 

"it does--it does. say noth of thi relic of last night' work to ani 
one." 

"be assur I shall not. I am far from wish to keep up in ani one' 
mind proof of that which I would fain, veri fain refute." 

mr. marchdal replac the portion of the coat which the figur had worn 
in hi pocket, and then the whole three proceed to the chamber of 
flora. 

* * * * * 

It wa within a veri few minut of midnight, the moon had climb high 
in the heavens, and a night of such bright and beauti had seldom 
shown itself for a long period of time. 

flora slept, and in her chamber sat the two brother and mr. marchdale, 
silently, for she had shown symptom of restlessness, and they much 
fear to break the light slumber into which she had fallen. 

occasion they had convers in whispers, which could not have the 
effect of rous her, for the room, although smaller than the one she 
had befor occupied, wa still suffici spaciou to enabl them to 
get some distanc from the bed. 

until the hour of midnight now actual struck, they were silent, and 
when the last echo of the sound had die away, a feel of uneasi 
came over them, which prompt some convers to get rid of it. 

"how bright the moon is now," said henry, in a low tone. 

"I never saw it brighter," repli marchdale. "I feel as if I were 
assur that we shall not to-night be interrupted." 

"it wa later than this," said henry. 

"it was--it was." 

"do not then yet congratul us upon no visit." 

"how still the hous is!" remark george; "it seem to me as if I had 
never found it so intens quiet before." 

"it is veri still." 

"hush! she moves." 

flora moan in her sleep, and made a slight movement. the curtain were 
all drawn close round the bed to shield her eye from the bright 
moonlight which stream into the room so brilliantly. they might have 
close the shutter of the window, but thi they did not like to do, as 
it would render their watch there of no avail at all, inasmuch as they 
would not be abl to see if ani attempt wa made by ani one to obtain 
admittance. 

A quarter of an hour longer might have thu pass when mr. marchdal 
said in a whisper,-- 

"A thought ha just struck me that the piec of coat I have, which I 
drag from the figur last night, wonder resembl in colour and 
appear the style of dress of the portrait in the room which flora 
late slept in." 

"I thought of that," said henry, "when first I saw it; but, to tell the 
honest truth, I dread to suggest ani new proof connect with last 
night' visitation." 

"then I ought not to have drawn your attent to it," said mr. 
marchdale, "and regret I have done so." 

"nay, do not blame yourself on such an account," said henry. "you are 
quit right, and it is I who am too foolishli sensitive. now, however, 
sinc you have mention it, I must own I have a great desir to test 
the accuraci of the observ by a comparison with the portrait." 

"that may easili be done." 

"I will remain here," said george, "in case flora awakens, while you two 
go if you like. It is but across the corridor." 

henri immedi rose, saying-- 

"come, mr. marchdale, come. let us satisfi ourselv at all event upon 
thi point at once. As georg say it is onli across the corridor, and 
we can return directly." 

"I am willing," said mr. marchdale, with a tone of sadness. 

there wa no light needed, for the moon stood suspend in a cloudless 
sky, so that from the hous be a detach one, and contain 
numer windows, it wa as light as day. 

although the distanc from one chamber to the other wa onli across the 
corridor, it wa a greater space than these word might occupy, for the 
corridor wa wide, neither wa it directli across, but consider 
slanting. however, it wa certainli suffici close at hand for ani 
sound of alarm from one chamber to reach anoth without ani difficulty. 

A few moment suffic to place henri and mr. marchdal in that antiqu 
room, where, from the effect of the moonlight which wa stream over 
it, the portrait on the panel look exceedingli life like. 

and thi effect wa probabl the greater becaus the rest of the room 
wa not illumin by the moon' rays, which came through a window in 
the corridor, and then at the open door of that chamber upon the 
portrait. 

mr. marchdal held the piec of cloth he had close to the dress of the 
portrait, and one glanc wa suffici to show the wonder like 
between the two. 

"good god!" said henry, "it is the same." 

mr. marchdal drop the piec of cloth and trembled. 

"thi fact shake even your scepticism," said henry. 

"I know not what to make of it." 

"I can tell you someth which bear upon it. I do not know if you are 
suffici awar of my famili histori to know that thi one of my 
ancestors, I wish I could say worthi ancestors, commit suicide, and 
wa buri in hi clothes." 

"you--you are sure of that?" 

"quit sure." 

"I am more and more bewild as each moment some strang corrobor 
fact of that dread supposit we so much shrink from seem to come 
to light and to forc itself upon our attention." 

there wa a silenc of a few moment duration, and henri had turn 
toward mr. marchdal to say something, when the cautiou tread of a 
footstep wa heard in the garden, immedi beneath that balcony. 

A sicken sensat came over henry, and he wa compel to lean 
against the wall for support, as in scarc articul accent he 
said-- 

"the vampyre--th vampyre! god of heaven, it ha come onc again!" 

"now, heaven inspir us with more than mortal courage," cri mr. 
marchdale, and he dash open the window at once, and sprang into the 
balcony. 

henri in a moment recov himself suffici to follow him, and when 
he reach hi side in the balcony, marchdal said, as he point 
below,-- 

"there is some one conceal there." 

"where--where?" 

"among the laurels. I will fire a random shot, and we may do some 
execution." 

"hold!" said a voic from below; "don't do ani such thing, I beg of 
you." 

"why, that is mr. chillingworth' voice," cri henry. 

"yes, and it' mr. chillingworth' person, too," said the doctor, as he 
emerg from among some laurel bushes. 

"how is this?" said marchdale. 

"simpli that I made up my mind to keep watch and ward to-night outsid 
here, in the hope of catch the vampyre. I got into here by climb 
the gate." 

"but whi did you not let me know?" said henry. 

"becaus I did not know myself, my young friend, till an hour and a half 
ago." 

"have you seen anything?" 

"nothing. but I fanci I heard someth in the park outsid the wall." 

"indeed!" 

"what say you, henry," said mr. marchdale, "to descend and take a 
hasti examin of the garden and grounds?" 

"I am willing; but first allow me to speak to george, who otherwis 
might be surpris at our long absence." 

henri walk rapidli to the bed chamber of flora, and he said to 
george,-- 

"have you ani object to be left alon here for about half an hour, 
george, while we make an examin of the garden?" 

"let me have some weapon and I care not. remain here while I fetch a 
sword from my own room." 

henri did so, and when georg return with a sword, which he alway 
kept in hi bed-room, he said,-- 

"now go, henry. I prefer a weapon of thi descript to pistol much. 
Do not be longer gone than necessary." 

"I will not, george, be assured." 

georg wa then left alone, and henri return to the balcony, where mr. 
marchdal wa wait for him. It wa a quicker mode of descend to 
the garden to do so by clamber over the balconi than ani other, and 
the height wa not consider enough to make it veri objectionable, so 
henri and mr. marchdal chose that way of join mr. chillingworth. 

"you are, no doubt, much surpris at find me here," said the doctor; 
"but the fact is, I half made up my mind to come while I wa here; but I 
had not thoroughli done so, therefor I said noth to you about it." 

"we are much indebt to you," said henry, "for make the attempt." 

"I am prompt to it by a feel of the strongest curiosity." 

"are you armed, sir?" said marchdale. 

"in thi stick," said the doctor, "i a sword, the exquisit temper of 
which I know I can depend upon, and I fulli intend to run through ani 
one whom I saw that look in the least of the vampyr order." 

"you would have done quit right," repli mr. marchdale. "I have a 
brace of pistol here, load with ball; will you take one, henry, if 
you please, and then we shall be all armed." 

thus, then, prepar for ani exigency, they made the whole round of the 
house; but found all the fasten secure, and everyth as quiet as 
possible. 

"suppose, now, we take a survey of the park outsid the garden wall," 
said mr. marchdale. 

thi wa agre to; but befor they had proceed far, mr. marchdal 
said,-- 

"there is a ladder lie on the wall; would it not be a good plan to 
place it against the veri spot the suppos vampyr jump over last 
night, and so, from a more elev position, take a view of the open 
meadows. We could easili drop down on the outer side, if we saw anyth 
suspicious." 

"not a bad plan," said the doctor. "shall we do it?" 

"certainly," said henry; and they accordingli carri the ladder, which 
had been use for prune the trees, toward the spot at the end of the 
long walk, at which the vampyr had made good, after so mani fruitless 
efforts, hi escap from the premises. 

they made hast down the long vista of tree until they reach the 
exact spot, and then they place the ladder as near as possible, exactli 
where henry, in hi bewilder on the even before, had seen the 
apparit from the grave spring to. 

"we can ascend singly," said marchdale; "but there is ampl space for us 
all there to sit on the top of the wall and make our observations." 

thi wa seen to be the case, and in about a coupl of minut they had 
taken up their posit on the wall, and, although the height wa but 
trifling, they found that they had a much more extens view than they 
could have obtain by ani other means. 

"to contempl the beauti of such a night as this," said mr. 
chillingworth, "i ampli suffici compens for come the distanc 
I have." 

"and who knows," remark marchdale, "we may yet see someth which may 
throw a light upon our present perplex god know that I would give 
all I can call mine in the world to reliev you and your sister, henri 
bannerworth, from the fear effect which last night' proceed 
cannot fail to have upon you." 

"of that I am well assured, mr. marchdale," said henry. "if the 
happi of myself and famili depend upon you, we should be happi 
indeed." 

"you are silent, mr. chillingworth," remark marchdale, after a slight 
pause. 

"hush!" said mr. chillingworth--"hush--hush!" 

"good god, what do you hear?" cri henry. 

the doctor laid hi hand upon henry' arm as he said,-- 

"there is a young lime tree yonder to the right." 

"yes--yes." 

"carri your eye from it in a horizont line, as near as you can, 
toward the wood." 

henri did so, and then he utter a sudden exclam of surprise, and 
point to a rise spot of ground, which wa yet, in consequ of the 
number of tall tree in it vicinity, partial envelop in shadow. 

"what is that?" he said. 

"I see something," said marchdale. "bi heaven! it is a human form lie 
stretch there." 

"it is--a if in death." 

"what can it be?" said chillingworth. 

"I dread to say," repli marchdale; "but to my eyes, even at thi 
distance, it seem like the form of him we chase last night." 

"the vampyre?" 

"yes--yes. look, the moonbeam touch him. now the shadow of the tree 
gradual recede. god of heaven! the figur moves." 

henry' eye were rivet to that fear object, and now a scene 
present itself which fill them all with wonder and astonishment, 
mingl with sensat of the greatest awe and alarm. 

As the moonbeams, in consequ of the luminari rise higher and 
higher in the heavens, came to touch thi figur that lay extend on 
the rise ground, a percept movement took place in it. the limb 
appear to tremble, and although it did not rise up, the whole bodi 
gave sign of vitality. 

"the vampyre--th vampyre!" said mr. marchdale. "I cannot doubt it now. 
We must have hit him last night with the pistol bullets, and the 
moonbeam are now restor him to a new life." 

henri shuddered, and even mr. chillingworth turn pale. but he wa the 
first to recov himself suffici to propos some cours of action, 
and he said,-- 

"let us descend and go up to thi figure. It is a duti we owe to 
ourselv as much as to society." 

"hold a moment," said mr. marchdale, as he produc a pistol. "I am an 
uner shot, as you well know, henry. befor we move from thi 
posit we now occupy, allow me to tri what virtu may be in a bullet 
to lay that figur low again." 

"he is rising!" exclaim henry. 

mr. marchdal level the pistol--h took a sure and deliber aim, 
and then, just as the figur seem to be struggl to it feet, he 
fired, and, with a sudden bound, it fell again. 

"you have hit it," said henry. 

"you have indeed," exclaim the doctor. "I think we can go now." 

"hush!" said marchdale--"hush! doe it not seem to you that, hit it as 
often as you will, the moonbeam will recov it?" 

"yes--yes," said henry, "they will--they will." 

"I can endur thi no longer," said mr. chillingworth, as he sprung from 
the wall. "follow me or not, as you please, I will seek the spot where 
thi be lies." 

"oh, be not rash," cri marchdale. "see, it rise again, and it form 
look gigantic." 

"I trust in heaven and a righteou cause," said the doctor, as he drew 
the sword he had spoken of from the stick, and threw away the scabbard. 
"come with me if you like, or I go alone." 

henri at onc jump down from the wall, and then marchdal follow 
him, saying,-- 

"come on; I will not shrink." 

they ran toward the piec of rise ground; but befor they got to it, 
the form rose and made rapidli toward a littl wood which wa in the 
immedi neighbourhood of the hillock. 

"it is consciou of be pursued," cri the doctor. "see how it 
glanc back, and then increas it speed." 

"fire upon it, henry," said marchdale. 

He did so; but either hi shot did not take effect, or it wa quit 
unheed if it did, by the vampyre, which gain the wood befor they 
could have a hope of get suffici near it to effect, or 
endeavour to effect, a capture. 

"I cannot follow it there," said marchdale. "in open countri I would 
have pursu it closely; but I cannot follow it into the intricaci of 
a wood." 

"pursuit is useless there," said henry. "it is envelop in the deepest 
gloom." 

"I am not so unreasonable," remark mr. chillingworth, "a to wish you 
to follow into such a place as that. I am confound utterli by thi 
affair." 

"and i," said marchdale. "what on earth is to be done?" 

"nothing--nothing!" exclaim henry, vehemently; "and yet I have, 
beneath the canopi of heaven, declar that I will, so help me god! 
spare neither time nor troubl in the unravel of thi most fear 
piec of business. did either of you remark the cloth which thi 
spectral appear wore?" 

"they were antiqu clothes," said mr. chillingworth, "such as might have 
been fashion a hundr year ago, but not now." 

"such wa my impression," ad marchdale. 

"and such my own," said henry, excitedly. "i it at all within the 
compass of the wildest belief that what we have seen is a vampyre, and 
no other than my ancestor who, a hundr year ago, commit suicide?" 

there wa so much intens excitement, and evid of mental suffering, 
that mr. chillingworth took him by the arm, saying,-- 

"come home--com home; no more of thi at present; you will but make 
yourself serious unwell." 

"no--no--no." 

"come home now, I pray you; you are by far too much excit about thi 
matter to pursu it with the calm which should be brought to bear 
upon it." 

"take advice, henry," said marchdale, "take advice, and come home at 
once." 

"I will yield to you; I feel that I cannot control my own feelings--i 
will yield to you, who, as you say, are cooler on thi subject than I 
can be. oh, flora, flora, I have no comfort to bring to you now." 

poor henri bannerworth appear to be in a complet state of mental 
prostration, on account of the distress circumst that had 
occur so rapidli and so suddenli in hi family, which had had quit 
enough to contend with without have superad to everi other evil the 
horror of believ that some preternatur agenc wa at work to 
destroy everi hope of futur happi in thi world, under ani 
circumstances. 

He suffer himself to be led home by mr. chillingworth and marchdale; 
he no longer attempt to disput the dread fact concern the 
suppos vampyre; he could not contend now against all the corrobor 
circumst that seem to collect togeth for the purpos of prove 
that which, even when proved, wa contrari to all hi notion of heaven, 
and at varianc with all that wa record and establish is part and 
parcel of the system of nature. 

"I cannot deny," he said, when they had reach home, "that such thing 
are possible; but the probabl will not bear a moment' 
investigation." 

"there are more things," said marchdale, solemnly, "in heaven, and on 
earth, than are dream of in our philosophy." 

"there are indeed, it appears," said mr. chillingworth. 

"and are you a convert?" said henry, turn to him. 

"A convert to what?" 

"to a belief in--in--thes vampyres?" 

"i? no, indeed; if you were to shut me up in a room full of vampyres, I 
would tell them all to their teeth that I defi them." 

"but after what we have seen to-night?" 

"what have we seen?" 

"you are yourself a witness." 

"true; I saw a man lie down, and then I saw a man get up; he seem 
then to be shot, but whether he wa or not he onli knows; and then I saw 
him walk off in a desper hurry. beyond that, I saw nothing." 

"yes; but, take such circumst into combin with others, have 
you not a terribl fear of the truth of the dread appearance?" 

"no--no; on my soul, no. I will die in my disbelief of such an outrag 
upon heaven as one of these creatur would most assuredli be." 

"oh! that I could think like you; but the circumst strike too 
nearli to my heart." 

"be of better cheer, henry--b of better cheer," said marchdale; "there 
is one circumst which we ought to consider, it is that, from all we 
have seen, there seem to be some thing which would favour an opinion, 
henry, that your ancestor, whose portrait hang in the chamber which wa 
occupi by flora, is the vampyre." 

"the dress wa the same," said henry. 

"I note it was." 

"and i." 

"do you not, then, think it possibl that someth might be done to set 
that part of the question at rest?" 

"what--what?" 

"where is your ancestor buried?" 

"ah! I understand you now." 

"and i," said mr. chillingworth; "you would propos a visit to hi 
mansion?" 

"I would," ad marchdale; "anyth that may in ani way tend to assist 
in make thi affair clearer, and divest it of it mysteri 
circumstances, will be most desirable." 

henri appear to rous for some moment and then he said,-- 

"he, in common with mani other member of the family, no doubt occupi 
place in the vault under the old church in the village." 

"would it be possible," ask marchdale, "to get into that vault without 
excit gener attention?" 

"it would," said henry; "the entranc to the vault is in the floor of 
the pew which belong to the famili in the old church." 

"then it could be done?" ask mr. chillingworth. 

"most undoubtedly." 

"will you under take such an adventure?" said mr. chillingworth. "it may 
eas your mind." 

"he wa buri in the vault, and in hi clothes," said henry, musingly; 
"I will think of it. about such a proposit I would not decid 
hastily. give me leav to think of it until to-morrow." 

"most certainly." 

[illustration] 

they now made their way to the chamber of flora, and they heard from 
georg that noth of an alarm charact had occur to disturb him 
on hi lone watch. the morn wa now again dawning, and henri 
earnestli entreat mr. marchdal to go to bed, which he did, leav 
the two brother to continu as sentinel by flora' bed side, until the 
morn light should banish all uneasi thoughts. 

henri relat to georg what had taken place outsid the house, and the 
two brother held a long and interest convers for some hour 
upon that subject, as well as upon other of great import to their 
welfare. It wa not until the sun' earli ray came glare in at the 
casement that they both rose, and thought of awaken flora, who had 
now slept soundli for so mani hours. 




chapter vi. 

A glanc AT the bannerworth family.--th probabl consequ OF the 
mysteri apparition' appearance. 


[illustration] 

have thu far, we hope, interest our reader in the fortun of a 
famili which had becom subject to so dread a visitation, we trust 
that a few word concern them, and the peculiar circumst in 
which they are now placed, will not prove altogeth out of place, or 
unacceptable. the bannerworth famili then were well known in the part of 
the countri where they resided. perhaps, if we were to say they were 
better known by name than they were liked, on account of that name, we 
should be near the truth, for it had unfortun happen that for a 
veri consider time past the head of the famili had been the veri 
worst specimen of it that could be procured. while the junior branch 
were frequent amiabl and most intelligent, and such in mind and 
manner as were calcul to inspir goodwil in all who knew them, he 
who held the famili property, and who resid in the hous now occupi 
by flora and her brothers, wa a veri so--so sort of character. 

thi state of things, by some strang fatality, had gone on for nearli a 
hundr years, and the consequ wa what might have been fairli 
expected, namely--that, what with their vice and what with their 
extravagances, the success head of the bannerworth famili had 
succeed in so far diminish the famili properti that, when it came 
into the hand of henri bannerworth, it wa of littl value, on account 
of the numer encumbr with which it wa saddled. 

the father of henri had not been a veri brilliant except to the 
gener rule, as regard the head of the family. If he were not quit 
so bad as mani of hi ancestors, that gratifi circumst wa to be 
account for by the supposit that he wa not quit so bold, and that 
the chang in habits, manners, and laws, which had taken place in a 
hundr years, made it not so easi for even a land proprietor to play 
the petti tyrant. 

He had, to get rid of those anim spirit which had prompt mani of 
hi predecessor to downright crimes, had recours to the gaming-table, 
and, after rais whatev sum he could upon the properti which 
remained, he naturally, and as might have been fulli expected, lost them 
all. 

He wa found lie dead in the garden of the hous one day, and by hi 
side wa hi pocket-book, on one leaf of which, it wa the impress of 
the family, he had endeavour to write someth previou to hi 
decease, for he held a pencil firmli in hi grasp. 

the probabl wa that he had felt himself get ill, and, be 
desir of make some commun to hi famili which press 
heavili upon hi mind, he had attempt to do so, but wa stop by the 
too rapid approach of the hand of death. 

for some day previou to hi decease, hi conduct had been extrem 
mysterious. He had announc an intent of leav england for 
ever--of sell the hous and ground for whatev they would fetch 
over and abov the sum for which they were mortgaged, and so clear 
himself of all encumbrances. 

He had, but a few hour befor he wa found lie dead, made the 
follow singular speech to henry,-- 

"do not regret, henry, that the old hous which ha been in our famili 
so long is about to be part with. Be assur that, if it is but for 
the first time in my life, I have good and substanti reason now for 
what I am about to do. We shall be abl to go some other country, and 
there live like princ of the land." 

where the mean were to come from to live like a prince, unless mr. 
bannerworth had some of the german princ in hi eye, no one knew but 
himself, and hi sudden death buri with him that most import 
secret. 

there were some word written on the leaf of hi pocket-book, but they 
were of by far too indistinct and ambigu a natur to lead to 
anything. they were these:-- 

"the money is ----------" 

and then there wa a long scrawl of the pencil, which seem to have 
been occas by hi sudden decease. 

Of cours noth could be made of these words, except in the way of a 
contradict as the famili lawyer said, rather more faceti than a 
man of law usual speaks, for if he had written "the money is not," he 
would have been somewher remark near the truth. 

however, with all hi vice he wa regret by hi children, who chose 
rather to rememb him in hi best aspect than to dwell upon hi faults. 

for the first time then, within the memori of man, the head of the 
famili of the bannerworth wa a gentleman, in everi sens of the word. 
brave, generous, highli educated, and full of mani excel and nobl 
qualities--for such wa henry, whom we have introduc to our reader 
under such distress circumstances. 

and now, peopl said, that the famili properti have been all 
dissip and lost, there would take place a change, and that the 
bannerworth would have to take to some cours of honour industri 
for a livelihood, and that then they would be as much respect as they 
had befor been detest and disliked. 

indeed, the posit which henri held wa now a most precari one--for 
one of the amazingli clever act of hi father had been to encumb the 
properti with overwhelm claims, so that when henri administ to 
the estate, it wa doubt almost by hi attorney if it were at all 
desir to do so. 

An attachment, however, to the old hous of hi family, had induc the 
young man to hold possess of it as long as he could, despit ani 
advers circumst which might eventu be connect with it. 

some weeks, however, onli after the deceas of hi father, and when he 
fairli held possession, a sudden and a most unexpect offer came to him 
from a solicitor in london, of whom he knew nothing, to purchas the 
hous and grounds, for a client of his, who had instruct him so to do, 
but whom he did not mention. 

the offer made wa a liber one, and beyond the valu of the place. 
the lawyer who had conduct henry' affair for him sinc hi father' 
decease, advis him by all mean to take it; but after a consult 
with hi mother and sister, and george, they all resolv to hold by 
their own hous as long as they could, and, consequently, he refus the 
offer. 

He wa then ask to let the place, and to name hi own price for the 
occup of it; but that he would not do: so the negoti went off 
altogether, leav only, in the mind of the family, much surpris at 
the exceed eager of some one, whom they knew not, to get 
possess of the place on ani terms. 

there wa anoth circumst perhap which materi aid in 
produc a strong feel on the mind of the bannerworths, with regard 
to remain where they were. 

that circumst occur thus: a relat of the family, who wa now 
dead, and with whom had die all hi means, had been in the habit, for 
the last half dozen year of hi life, of send a hundr pound to 
henry, for the express purpos of enabl him and hi brother georg 
and hi sifter flora to take a littl continent or home tour, in the 
autumn of the year. 

A more accept present, or for a more delight purpose, to young 
people, could not be found; and, with the quiet, prudent habit of all 
three of them, they contriv to go far and to see much for the sum 
which wa thu handsom place at their disposal. 

In one of those excursions, when among the mountain of italy, an 
adventur occur which place the life of flora in immin hazard. 

they were ride along a narrow mountain path, and, her hors slipping, 
she fell over the ledg of a precipice. 

In an instant, a young man, a stranger to the whole party, who wa 
travel in the vicinity, rush to the spot, and by hi knowledg and 
exertions, they felt convinc her preserv wa effected. 

He told her to lie quiet; he encourag her to hope for immedi 
succour; and then, with much person exertion, and at immens risk to 
himself, he reach the ledg of rock on which she lay, and then he 
support her until the brother had gone to a neighbour house, 
which, bye-the-bye, wa two good english mile off, and got assistance. 

there came on, while they were gone, a terrif storm, and flora felt 
that but for him who wa with her she must have been hurl from the 
rock, and perish in an abyss below, which wa almost too deep for 
observation. 

suffic it to say that she wa rescued; and he who had, by hi 
intrepidity, done so much toward save her, wa load with the most 
sincer and heartfelt acknowledg by the brother as well as by 
herself. 

He frankli told them that hi name wa holland; that he wa travel 
for amus and instruction, and wa by profess an artist. 

He travel with them for some time; and it wa not at all to be 
wonder at, under the circumstances, that an attach of the 
tenderest natur should spring up between him and the beauti girl, 
who felt that she owe to him her life. 

mutual glanc of affect were exchang between them, and it wa 
arrang that when he return to england, he should come at onc as an 
honour guest to the hous of the famili of the bannerworths. 

all thi wa settl satisfactorili with the full knowledg and 
acquiesc of the two brothers, who had taken a strang attach to 
the young charl holland, who wa inde in everi way like to 
propiti the good opinion of all who knew him. 

henri explain to him exactli how they were situated, and told him that 
when he came he would find a welcom from all, except possibl hi 
father, whose wayward temper he could not answer for. 

young holland state that he wa compel to be away for a term of two 
years, from certain famili arrang he had enter into, and that 
then he would return and hope to meet flora unchang as he should be. 

It happen that thi wa the last of the continent excurs of the 
bannerworths, for, befor anoth year roll round, the gener 
rel who had suppli them with the mean of make such delight 
trip wa no more; and, likewise, the death of the father had occur 
in the manner we have related, so that there wa no chanc as had been 
anticip and hope for by flora, of meet charl holland on the 
contin again, befor hi two year of absenc from england should be 
expired. 

such, however, be the state of things, flora felt reluct to give 
up the house, where he would be sure to come to look for her, and her 
happi wa too dear to henri to induc him to make ani sacrific of 
it to expediency. 

therefor wa it that bannerworth hall, as it wa sometim called, wa 
retained, and fulli intend to be retain at all event until after 
charl holland had made hi appearance, and hi advic (for he was, by 
the young people, consid as one of the family) taken, with regard to 
what wa advis to be done. 

with one except thi wa the state of affair at the hall, and that 
except relat to mr. marchdale. 

He wa a distant relat of mrs. bannerworth, and, in earli life, had 
been sincer and tenderli attach to her. she, however, with the want 
of steadi reflect of a young girl, as she then was, had, as is 
gener the case among sever admirers, chosen the veri worst: that 
is, the man who treat her with the most indifference, and who paid her 
the least attention, wa of course, thought the most of, and she gave 
her hand to him. 

that man wa mr. bannerworth. but futur experi had made her 
thoroughli awak to her former error; and, but for the love she bore her 
children, who were certainli all that a mother' heart could wish, she 
would often have deepli regret the infatu which had induc her 
to bestow her hand in the quarter she had done so. 

about a month after the deceas of mr. bannerworth, there came one to 
the hall, who desir to see the widow. that one wa mr. marchdale. 

It might have been some slight tender toward him which had never 
left her, or it might be the pleasur mere of see one whom she had 
known intim in earli life, but, be that as it may, she certainli 
gave him a kindli welcome; and he, after consent to remain for some 
time as a visitor at the hall, won the esteem of the whole famili by hi 
frank demeanour and cultiv intellect. 

He had travel much and seen much, and he had turn to good account 
all he had seen, so that not onli wa mr. marchdal a man of sterl 
sound sense, but he wa a most entertain companion. 

hi intim knowledg of mani thing concern which they knew littl 
or nothing; hi accur mode of thought, and a quiet, gentlemanli 
demeanour, such as is rare to be met with, combin to make him 
esteem by the bannerworths. He had a small independ of hi own, 
and be complet alon in the world, for he had neither wife nor 
child, marchdal own that he felt a pleasur in resid with the 
bannerworths. 

Of cours he could not, in decent terms, so far offend them as to offer 
to pay for hi subsistence, but he took good care that they should 
realli be no loser by have him as an inmate, a matter which he could 
easili arrang by littl present of one kind and another, all of which 
he manag should be such as were not onli ornamental, but actual 
spare hi kind entertain some posit expens which otherwis they 
must have gone to. 

whether or not thi amiabl piec of manoeuvr wa seen through by the 
bannerworth it is not our purpos to inquire. If it wa seen through, 
it could not lower him in their esteem, for it wa probabl just what 
they themselv would have felt a pleasur in do under similar 
circumstances, and if they did not observ it, mr. marchdal would, 
probably, be all the better pleased. 

such then may be consid by our reader as a brief outlin of the 
state of affair among the bannerworths--a state which wa pregnant with 
changes, and which chang were now like to be rapid and conclusive. 

how far the feel of the famili toward the ancient hous of their 
race would be alter by the appear at it of so fear a visitor as 
a vampyre, we will not stop to inquire, inasmuch as such feel will 
develop themselv as we proceed. 

that the visit had produc a seriou effect upon all the household 
wa suffici evident, as well among the educ as among the 
ignorant. On the second morning, henri receiv notic to quit hi 
servic from the three servant he with difficulti had contriv to keep 
at the hall. the reason whi he receiv such notic he knew well enough, 
and therefor he did not troubl himself to argu about a superstit 
to which he felt now himself almost, compel to give way; for how 
could he say there wa no such thing as a vampyre, when he had, with hi 
own eyes, had the most abund evid of the terribl fact? 

He calmli paid the servants, and allow them to leav him at onc 
without at all enter into the matter, and, for the time being, some 
men were procured, who, however, came evid with fear and trembling, 
and probabl onli took the place, on account of not be able, to 
procur ani other. the comfort of the household wa like to be 
complet put an end to, and reason now for leav the hall appear 
to be most rapidli accumulating. 




chapter vii. 

the visit TO the vault OF the bannerworths, and it unpleas 
result.--th mystery. 


[illustration] 

henri and hi brother rous flora, and after agre togeth that it 
would be highli imprud to say anyth to her of the proceed of 
the night, they commenc a convers with her in encourag and 
kindli accents. 

"well, flora," said henry, "you see you have been quit undisturb 
to-night." 

"I have slept long, dear henry." 

"you have, and pleasantli too, I hope." 

"I have not had ani dreams, and I feel much refreshed, now, and quit 
well again." 

"thank heaven!" said george. 

"if you will tell dear mother that I am awake, I will get up with her 
assistance." 

the brother left the room, and they spoke to each other of it as a 
favour sign, that flora did not object to be left alon now, as 
she had done on the preced morning. 

"she is fast recovering, now, george," said henry. "if we could now but 
persuad ourselv that all thi alarm would pass away, and that we 
should hear no more of it, we might return to our old and compar 
happi condition." 

"let us believe, henry, that we shall." 

"and yet, george, I shall not be satisfi in my mind, until I have paid 
a visit." 

"A visit? where?" 

"to the famili vault." 

"indeed, henry! I thought you had abandon that idea." 

"I had. I have sever time abandon it; but it come across my mind 
again and again." 

"I much regret it." 

"look you, george; as yet, everyth that ha happen ha tend to 
confirm a belief in thi most horribl of all superstit concern 
vampyres." 

"it has." 

"now, my great object, george, is to endeavour to disturb such a state 
of things, by get something, howev slight, or of a neg 
character, for the mind to rest upon on the other side of the question." 

"I comprehend you, henry." 

"you know that at present we are not onli led to believe, almost 
irresist that we have been visit here by a vampyr but that that 
vampyr is our ancestor, whose portrait is on the panel of the wall of 
the chamber into which he contriv to make hi way." 

"true, most true." 

"then let us, by an examin of the famili vault, george, put an end 
to one of the evidences. If we find, as most sure we shall, the coffin 
of the ancestor of ours, who seems, in dress and appearance, so horribl 
mix up in thi affair, we shall be at rest on that head." 

"but consid how mani year have elapsed." 

"yes, a great number." 

"what then, do you suppose, could remain of ani corps place in a vault 
so long ago?" 

"decomposit must of cours have done it work, but still there must 
be a someth to show that a corps ha so undergon the process common 
to all nature. doubl the laps of time sure could not obliter all 
trace of that which had been." 

"there is reason in that, henry." 

"besides, the coffin are all of lead, and some of stone, so that they 
cannot have all gone." 

"true, most true." 

"if in the one which, from the inscript and the date, we discov to 
be that of our ancestor whom we seek, we find the evid remain of a 
corpse, we shall be satisfi that he ha rest in hi tomb in peace." 

"brother, you seem bent on thi adventure," said george; "if you go, I 
will accompani you." 

"I will not engag rashli in it, george. befor I final decide, I will 
again consult with mr. marchdale. hi opinion will weigh much with me." 

"and in good time, here he come across the garden," said george, as he 
look from the window of the room in which they sat. 

It wa mr. marchdale, and the brother warmli welcom him as he enter 
the apartment. 

"you have been earli afoot," said henry. 

"I have," he said. "the fact is, that although at your solicit I 
went to bed, I could not sleep, and I went out onc more to search about 
the spot where we had seen the--th I don't know what to call it, for I 
have a great dislik to name it a vampyre." 

"there is not much in a name," said george. 

"in thi instanc there is," said marchdale. "it is a name suggest of 
horror." 

"made you ani discovery?" said henry. 

"none whatever." 

"you saw no trace of ani one?" 

"not the least." 

"well, mr. marchdale, georg and I were talk over thi project 
visit to the famili vault." 

"yes." 

"and we agre to suspend our judgment until we saw you, and learn 
your opinion." 

"which I will tell you frankly," said mr. marchdale, "becaus I know you 
desir it freely." 

"do so." 

"it is, that you make the visit." 

"indeed." 

"yes, and for thi reason. you have now, as you cannot help having, a 
disagre feeling, that you may find that one coffin is untenanted. 
now, if you do find it so, you scarc make matter worse, by an 
addit confirm of what alreadi amount to a strong supposition, 
and one which is like to grow stronger by time." 

"true, most true." 

"on the contrary, if you find indubit proof that your ancestor ha 
slept soundli in the tomb, and gone the way of all flesh, you will find 
yourselv much calmer, and that an attack is made upon the train of 
event which at present all run one way." 

"that is precis the argument I wa use to george," said henry, "a 
few moment since." 

"then let us go," said george, "bi all means." 

"it is so decid then," said henry. 

"let it be done with caution," repli mr. marchdale. 

"if ani one can manag it, of cours we can." 

"whi should it not be done secretli and at night? Of cours we lose 
noth by make a night visit to a vault into which daylight, I 
presume, cannot penetrate." 

"certainli not." 

"then let it be at night." 

"but we shall sure requir the concurr of some of the church 
authorities." 

"nay, I do not see that," interpos mr. marchdale. "it is the vault 
actual vest in and belong to yourself you wish to visit, and, 
therefore, you have right to visit it in ani manner or at ani time that 
may be most suitabl to yourself." 

"but detect in a clandestin visit might produc unpleas 
consequences." 

"the church is old," said george, "and we could easili find mean of 
get into it. there is onli one object that I see, just now, and 
that is, that we leav flora unprotected." 

"we do, indeed," said henry. "I did not think of that." 

"it must be put to herself, as a matter for her own consideration," said 
mr. marchdale, "if she will consid herself suffici safe with the 
compani and protect of your mother only." 

"it would be a piti were we not all three present at the examin of 
the coffin," remark henry. 

"it would, indeed. there is ampl evidence," said mr. marchdale, "but we 
must not give flora a night of sleepless and uneasi on that 
account, and the more particularli as we cannot well explain to her 
where we are going, or upon what errand." 

"certainli not." 

"let us talk to her, then, about it," said henry. "I confess I am much 
bent upon the plan, and fain would not forego it; neither should I like 
other than that we three should go together." 

"if you determine, then, upon it," said marchdale, "we will go to-night; 
and, from your acquaint with the place, doubtless you will be abl 
to decid what tool are necessary." 

"there is a trap-door at the bottom of the pew," said henry; "it is not 
onli secur down, but it is lock likewise, and I have the key in my 
possession." 

"indeed!" 

"yes; immedi beneath is a short flight of stone steps, which 
conduct at onc into the vault." 

"i it large?" 

"no; about the size of a moder chamber, and with no intricaci about 
it." 

"there can be no difficulties, then." 

"none whatever, unless we meet with actual person interruption, which 
I am inclin to think is veri far from likely. all we shall requir 
will be a screwdriver, with which to remov the screws, and then 
someth with which to wrench open the coffin." 

"those we can easili provide, along with lights," remark mr. 
marchdale. 

"I hope to heaven that thi visit to the tomb will have the effect of 
eas your minds, and enabl you to make a success stand against 
the stream torrent of evid that ha pour in upon us regard 
thi most fear of apparitions." 

"I do, indeed, hope so," ad henry; "and now I will go at onc to 
flora, and endeavour to convinc her she is safe without us to-night." 

"by-the-bye, I think," said marchdale, "that if we can induc mr. 
chillingworth to come with us, it will be a great point gain in the 
investigation." 

"he would," said henry, "be abl to come to an accur decis with 
respect to the remains--if any--in the coffin, which we could not." 

"then have him, by all means," said george. "he did not seem avers last 
night to go on such an adventure." 

"I will ask him when he make hi visit thi morn upon flora; and 
should he not feel dispos to join us, I am quit sure he will keep the 
secret of our visit." 

all thi be arranged, henri proceed to flora, and told her that he 
and george, and mr. marchdal wish to go out for about a coupl of 
hour in the even after dark, if she felt suffici well to feel a 
sens of secur without them. 

flora chang colour, and slightli trembled, and then, as if asham of 
her fears, she said,-- 

"go, go; I will not detain you. sure no harm can come to me in 
presenc of my mother." 

"we shall not be gone longer than the time I mention to you," said 
henry. 

"oh, I shall be quit content. besides, am I to be kept thu in fear all 
my life? surely, sure not. I ought, too, to learn to defend myself." 

henri caught at the idea, as he said,-- 

"if fire-arm were left you, do you think you would have courag to use 
them?" 

"I do, henry." 

"then you shall have them; and let me beg of you to shoot ani one 
without the least hesit who shall come into your chamber." 

"I will, henry. If ever human be wa justifi in the use of deadli 
weapons, I am now. heaven protect me from a repetit of the visit to 
which I have now been onc subjected. rather, oh, much rather would I 
die a hundr death than suffer what I have suffered." 

"do not allow it, dear flora, to press too heavili upon your mind in 
dwell upon it in conversation. I still entertain a sanguin 
expect that someth may aris to afford a far less dread 
explan of what ha occur than what you have put upon it. Be of 
good cheer, flora, we shall go one hour after sunset, and return in 
about two hour from the time at which we leav here, you may be 
assured." 

notwithstand thi readi and courag acquiesc of flora in the 
arrangement, henri wa not without hi apprehens that when the night 
should come again, her fear would return with it; but he spoke to mr. 
chillingworth upon the subject, and got that gentleman' readi consent 
to accompani them. 

He promis to meet them at the church porch exactli at nine o'clock, 
and matter were all arranged, and henri wait with much eager and 
anxieti now for the come night, which he hope would dissip one of 
the fear deduct which hi imagin had drawn from recent 
circumstances. 

He gave to flora a pair of pistol of hi own, upon which he knew he 
could depend, and he took good care to load them well, so that there 
could be no likelihood whatev of their miss fire at a critic 
moment. 

"now, flora," he said, "I have seen you use fire-arm when you were much 
younger than you are now, and therefor I need give you no instructions. 
If ani intrud doe come, and you do fire, be sure you take a good aim, 
and shoot low." 

"I will, henry, I will; and you will be back in two hours?" 

"most assuredli I will." 

the day wore on, even came, and then deepen into night. It turn 
out to be a cloudi night, and therefor the moon' brillianc wa 
noth near equal to what it had been on the preced night still, 
however, it had suffici power over the vapour that frequent 
cover it for mani minut together, to produc a consider light 
effect upon the face of nature, and the night wa consequ veri far, 
indeed, from what might be call a dark one. 

george, henry, and marchdale, met in one of the lower room of the 
house, previou to start upon their expedition; and after satisfi 
themselv that they had with them all the tool that were necessary, 
inclus of the same small, but well-temp iron crow-bar with which 
marchdal had, on the night of the visit of the vampyre, forc open the 
door of flora' chamber, they left the hall, and proceed at a rapid 
pace toward the church. 

"and flora doe not seem much alarmed," said marchdale, "at be left 
alone?" 

"no," repli henry, "she ha made up her mind with a strong natur 
courag which I knew wa in her disposit to resist as much as 
possibl the depress effect of the aw visit she ha 
endured." 

"it would have driven some realli mad." 

"it would, indeed; and her own reason totter on it throne, but, thank 
heaven, she ha recovered." 

"and I fervent hope that, through her life," ad marchdale, "she may 
never have such anoth trial." 

"we will not for a moment believ that such a thing can occur twice." 

"she is one among a thousand. most young girl would never at all have 
recov the fear shock to the nerves." 

"not onli ha she recovered," said henry, "but a spirit, which I am 
rejoic to see, becaus it is one which will uphold her, of resist 
now possess her." 

"yes, she actually--i forgot to tell you before--but she actual ask 
me for arm to resist ani second visitation." 

"you much surpris me." 

"yes, I wa surprised, as well as pleased, myself." 

"I would have left her one of my pistol had I been awar of her have 
made such a request. Do you know if she can use fire-arms?" 

"oh, yes; well." 

"what a pity. I have them both with me." 

"oh, she is provided." 

"provided?" 

"yes; I found some pistol which I use to take with me on the 
continent, and she ha them both well loaded, so that if the vampyr 
make hi appearance, he is like to meet with rather a warm 
reception." 

"good god! wa it not dangerous?" 

"not at all, I think." 

"well, you know best, certainly, of course. I hope the vampyr may come, 
and that we may have the pleasure, when we return, of find him dead. 
by-the-bye, i--i--. bless me, I have forgot to get the materi for 
lights, which I pledg myself to do." 

"how unfortunate." 

"walk on slowly, while I run back and get them." 

"oh, we are too far--" 

"hilloa!" cri a man at thi moment, some distanc in front of them. 

"it is mr. chillingworth," said henry. 

"hilloa," cri the worthi doctor again. "i that you, my friend, henri 
bannerworth?" 

"it is," cri henry. 

mr. chillingworth now came up to them and said,-- 

"I wa befor my time, so rather than wait at the church porch, which 
would have expos me to observ perhaps, I thought it better to 
walk on, and chanc meet with you." 

"you guess we should come thi way?' 

"yes, and so it turn out, really. It is unquestion your most direct 
rout to the church." 

"I think I will go back," said Mr marchdale. 

"back!" exclaim the doctor; "what for?" 

"I forgot the mean of get lights. We have candles, but no mean of 
light them." 

"make yourselv easi on that score," said mr. chillingworth. "I am 
never without some chemic match of my own manufacture, so that as 
you have the candles, that can be no bar to our go on a once." 

"that is fortunate," said henry. 

"very," ad marchdale; "for it seem a mile' hard walk for me, or 
at least half a mile from the hall. let us now push on." 

they did push on, all four walk at a brisk pace. the church, although 
it belong to the village, wa not in it. On the contrary, it wa 
situat at the end of a long lane, which wa a mile nearli from the 
village, in the direct of the hall, therefore, in go to it from 
the hall, that amount of distanc wa saved, although it wa alway 
call and consid the villag church. 

It stood alone, with the except of a glebe hous and two cottages, 
that were occupi by person who held situat about the sacr 
edifice, and who were supposed, be on the spot, to keep watch and 
ward over it. 

It wa an ancient build of the earli english style of architecture, 
or rather norman, with one of those antique, square, short towers, built 
of flint stone firmli embed in cement, which, from time, had 
acquir almost the consist of stone itself. there were numer 
arch windows, partak someth of the more florid gothic style, 
although scarc ornament enough to be call such. the edific stood 
in the centr of a grave-yard, which extend over a space of about half 
an acre, and altogeth it wa one of the prettiest and most rural old 
church within mani mile of the spot. 

mani a lover of the antiqu and of the picturesque, for it wa both, 
went out of hi way while travel in the neighbourhood to look at it, 
and it had an extens and well-deserv reput as a fine specimen 
of it class and style of building. 

In kent, to the present day, are some fine specimen of the old roman 
style of church, building; and, although they are as rapidli pull down 
as the abus of modern architects, and the cupid of speculators, and 
the vaniti of clergymen can possibl encourage, in older to erect 
flimsy, italianis structur in their stead, yet suffici of them 
remain dot over england to interest the traveller. At walesden there 
is a church of thi descript which will well repay a visit. this, 
then, wa the kind of build into which it wa the intent of our 
four friend to penetrate, not on an unholy, or an unjustifi errand, 
but on one which, proceed from good and proper motives, it wa highli 
desir to conduct in as secret a manner as possible. 

the moon wa more dens cover by cloud than it had yet been that 
evening, when they reach the littl wicket-g which led into the 
churchyard, through which wa a regularli use thoroughfare. 

"we have a favour night," remark henry, "for we are not so like 
to be disturbed." 

"and now, the question is, how are we to get in?" said mr. 
chillingworth, as he paused, and glanc up at the ancient building. 

"the doors," said george, "would effectu resist us." 

"how can it be done, then?" 

"the onli way I can think of," said henry, "i to get out one of the 
small diamond-shap pane of glass from one of the low windows, and 
then we can one of us put in our hands, and undo the fastening, which is 
veri simple, when the window open like a door, and it is but a step 
into the church." 

"A good way," said marchdale. "we will lose no time." 

they walk round the church till they came to a veri low window indeed, 
near to an angl of the wall, where a huge abut struck far out into 
the burial-ground. 

"will you do it, henry?" said george. 

"yes. I have often notic the fastenings. just give me a slight hoist 
up, and all will be right." 

georg did so, and henri with hi knife easili bent back some of the 
leadwork which held in one of the pane of glass, and then got it out 
whole. He hand it down to george, saying,-- 

"take this, george. We can easili replac it when we leave, so that 
there can be no sign left of ani one have been here at all." 

georg took the piec of thick, dim-colour glass, and in anoth 
moment henri had succeed in open the window, and the mode of 
ingress to the old church wa fair and easi befor them all, had there 
been ever so many. 

"I wonder," said marchdale, "that a place so ineffici protect ha 
never been robbed." 

"no wonder at all," remark mr. chillingworth. "there is noth to 
take that I am awar of that would repay anybodi the troubl of taking." 

"indeed!" 

"not an article. the pulpit, to be sure, is cover with fade velvet; 
but beyond that, and an old box, in which I believ noth is left but 
some books, I think there is no temptation." 

"and that, heaven knows, is littl enough, then." 

"come on," said henry. "be careful; there is noth beneath the window, 
and the depth is about two feet." 

thu guided, they all got fairli into the sacr edifice, and then henri 
close the window, and fasten it on the insid as he said,-- 

"we have noth to do now but to set to work open a way into the 
vault, and I trust that heaven will pardon me for thu desecr the 
tomb of my ancestors, from a consider of the object I have in view 
by so doing." 

"it doe seem wrong thu to tamper with the secret of the tomb," 
remark mr. marchdale. 

"the secret of a fiddlestick!" said the doctor. "what secret ha the 
tomb I wonder?" 

"well, but, my dear sir--" 

"nay, my dear sir, it is high time that death, which is, then, the 
inevit fate of us all, should be regard with more philosoph eye 
than it is. there are no secret in the tomb but such as may well be 
endeavour to be kept secret." 

"what do you mean?" 

"there is one which veri probabl we shall find unpleasantli revealed." 

"which is that?" 

"the not over pleasant odour of decompos anim remains--beyond that I 
know of noth of a secret natur that the tomb can show us." 

"ah, your profess harden you to such matters." 

"and a veri good thing that it does, or else, if all men were to look 
upon a dead bodi as someth almost too dread to look upon, and by 
far too horribl to touch, surgeri would lose it value, and crime, in 
mani instanc of the most obnoxi character, would go unpunished." 

"if we have a light here," said henry, "we shall run the greatest chanc 
in the world of be seen, for the church ha mani windows." 

"do not have one, then, by ani means," said mr. chillingworth. "A match 
held low down in the pew may enabl us to open the vault." 

"that will be the onli plan." 

henri led them to the pew which belong to hi family, and in the floor 
of which wa the trap door. 

"when wa it last opened?" inquir marchdale. 

"when my father died," said henry; "some ten month ago now, I should 
think." 

"the screws, then, have had ampl time to fix themselv with fresh 
rust." 

"here is one of my chemic matches," said mr. chillingworth, as he 
suddenli irradi the pew with a clear and beauti flame, that 
last about a minute. 

the head of the screw were easili discernible, and the short time that 
the light last had enabl henri to turn the key he had brought with 
him in the lock. 

"I think that without a light now," he said, "I can turn the screw 
well." 

"can you?" 

"yes; there are but four." 

"tri it, then." 

henri did so, and from the screw have veri larg heads, and be 
made purposely, for the conveni of remov when required, with deep 
indent to receiv the screw-driver, he found no difficulti in 
feel for the proper places, and extract the screw without ani 
more light than wa afford to him from the gener whitish aspect of 
the heavens. 

"now, mr. chillingworth," he said "anoth of your matches, if you 
please. I have all the screw so loos that I can pick them up with my 
fingers." 

"here," said the doctor. 

In anoth moment the pew wa as light as day, and henri succeed in 
take out the few screws, which he place in hi pocket for their 
greater security, since, of course, the intent wa to replac 
everyth exactli as it wa found, in order that not the least surmis 
should aris in the mind of ani person that the vault had been opened, 
and visit for ani purpos whatever, secretli or otherwise. 

"let us descend," said henry. "there is no further obstacle, my friends. 
let us descend." 

"if ani one," remark george, in a whisper, as they slowli descend 
the stair which conduct into the vault--"if ani one had told me that 
I should be descend into a vault for the purpos of ascertain if a 
dead body, which had been nearli a centuri there, wa remov or not, 
and had becom a vampyre, I should have denounc the idea as one of the 
most absurd that ever enter the brain of a human being." 

"we are the veri slave of circumstances," said marchdale, "and we never 
know what we may do, or what we may not. what appear to us so 
improb as to border even upon the imposs at one time, is at 
anoth the onli cours of action which appear feasibl open to us to 
attempt to pursue." 

they had now reach the vault, the floor of which wa compos of flat 
red tiles, laid in toler order the one besid the other. As henri 
had stated, the vault wa by no mean of larg extent. indeed, sever 
of the apart for the living, at the hall, were much larger than wa 
that one destin for the dead. 

the atmospher wa dump and noisome, but not by ani mean so bad as 
might have been expected, consid the number of month which had 
elaps sinc last the vault wa open to receiv one of it ghastli 
and still visitants. 

"now for one of your lights. mr. chillingworth. you say you have the 
candles, I think, marchdale, although you forgot the matches." 

"I have. they are here." 

marchdal took from hi pocket a parcel which contain sever wax 
candles, and when it wa opened, a smaller packet fell to the ground. 

"why, these are instantan matches," said mr. chillingworth, as he 
lift the small packet up. 

"they are; and what a fruitless journey I should have had back to the 
hall," said mr. marchdale, "if you had not been so well provid as you 
are with the mean of get a light. these matches, which I thought I 
had not with me, have been, in the hurri of departure, enclosed, you 
see, with the candles. truly, I should have hunt for them at home in 
vain." 

mr. chillingworth lit the wax candl which wa now hand to him by 
marchdale, and in anoth moment the vault from one end of it to the 
other wa quit clearli discernible. 




chapter viii. 

the coffin.--th absenc OF the dead.--th mysteri circumstance, and 
the constern OF george. 


[illustration] 

they were all silent for a few moment as they look around them with 
natur feel of curiosity. two of that parti had of cours never 
been in that vault at all, and the brothers, although they had descend 
into it upon the occasion, nearli a year before, of their father be 
place in it, still look upon it with almost as curiou eye as they 
who now had their first sight of it. 

If a man be at all of a thought or imagin cast of mind, some 
curiou sensat are sure to come over him, upon stand in such a 
place, where he know around him lie, in the calm of death, those in 
whose vein have flow kindr blood to him--who bore the same name, 
and who preced him in the brief drama of hi existence, influenc 
hi destini and hi posit in life probabl larg by their action 
compound of their virtu and their vices. 

henri bannerworth and hi brother georg were just the kind of person 
to feel strongli such sensations. both were reflective, imaginative, 
educ young men, and, as the light from the wax candl flash upon 
their faces, it wa evid how deepli they felt the situat in which 
they were placed. 

mr. chillingworth and marchdal were silent. they both knew what wa 
pass in the mind of the brothers, and they had too much delicaci to 
interrupt a train of thought which, although from have no affin 
with the dead who lay around, they could not share in, yet they 
respected. henri at length, with a sudden start, seem to recov 
himself from hi reverie. 

"thi is a time for action, george," he said, "and not for romant 
thought. let us proceed." 

"yes, yes," said george, and he advanc a step toward the centr of 
the vault. 

"can you find out among all these coffins, for there seem to be nearli 
twenty," said mr. chillingworth, "which is the one we seek?" 

"I think we may," repli henry. "some of the earlier coffin of our 
race, I know, were made of marble, and other of metal, both of which 
materials, I expect, would withstand the encroach of time for a 
hundr years, at least." 

"let us examine," said george. 

there were shelv or nich built into the wall all round, on which 
the coffin were placed, so that there could not be much difficulti in a 
minut examin of them all, the one after the other. 

when, however, they came to look, they found that "decay' offens 
fingers" had been more busi than they could have imagined, and that 
whatev they touch of the earlier coffin crumbl into dust befor 
their veri fingers. 

In some case the inscript were quit illegible, and, in others, the 
plate that had born them had fallen on to the floor of the vault, so 
that it wa imposs to say to which coffin they belonged. 

Of course, the more recent and fresh-look coffin they did not 
examine, becaus they could not have anyth to do with the object of 
that melancholi visit. 

"we shall arriv at no conclusion," said george. "all seem to have 
rot away among those coffin where we might expect to find the one 
belong to marmaduk bannerworth, our ancestor." 

"here is a coffin plate," said marchdale, take one from the floor. 

He hand it to mr. chillingworth, who, upon an inspect of it, close 
to the light, exclaimed,-- 

"it must have belong to the coffin you seek." 

"what say it?" 

"ye mortal remain of marmaduk bannerworth, yeoman. god rest hi 
soule. a.d. 1540." 

"it is the plate belong to hi coffin," said henry, "and now our 
search is fruitless." 

"it is so, indeed," exclaim george, "for how can we tell to which of 
the coffin that have lost the plate thi one realli belongs?" 

"I should not be so hopeless," said marchdale. "I have, from time to 
time, in the pursuit of antiquarian lore, which I wa onc fond of, 
enter mani vaults, and I have alway observ that an inner coffin of 
metal wa sound and good, while the outer one of wood had rot away, 
and yield at onc to the touch of the first hand that wa laid upon 
it." 

"but, admit that to be the case," said henry, "how doe that assist 
us in the identif of a coffin?" 

"I have always, in my experience, found the name and rank of the 
deceas engrav upon the lid of the inner coffin, as well as be set 
forth in a much more perish manner on the plate which wa secur to 
the outer one." 

"he is right," said mr. chillingworth. "I wonder we never thought of 
that. If your ancestor wa buri in a leaden coffin, there will be no 
difficulti in find which it is." 

henri seiz the light, and proceed to one of the coffins, which 
seem to be a mass of decay, he pull away some of the rot wood 
work, and then suddenli exclaimed,-- 

"you are quit right. here is a firm strong leaden coffin within, which, 
although quit black, doe not otherwis appear to have suffered." 

"what is the inscript on that?" said george. 

with difficulti the name on the lid wa deciphered, but it wa found not 
to be the coffin of him whom they sought. 

"we can make short work of this," said marchdale, "bi onli examin 
those leaden coffin which have lost the plate from off their outer 
cases. there do not appear to be mani in such a state." 

He then, with anoth light, which he light from the one that henri 
now carried, commenc activ assist in the search, which wa 
carri on silent for more than ten minutes. 

suddenli mr. marchdal cried, in a tone of excitement,-- 

"I have found it. It is here." 

they all immedi surround the spot where he was, and then he 
point to the lid of a coffin, which he had been rub with hi 
handkerchief, in order to make the inscript more legible, and said,-- 

"see. It is here." 

By the combin light of the candl they saw the words,-- 

"marmaduk bannerworth, yeoman, 1640." 

"yes, there can be no mistak here," said henry. "thi is the coffin, 
and it shall be opened." 

"I have the iron crowbar here," said marchdale. "it is an old friend of 
mine, and I am accustom to the use of it. shall I open the coffin?" 

"do so--do so," said henry. 

they stood around in silence, while mr. marchdale, with much care, 
proceed to open the coffin, which seem of great thickness, and wa 
of solid lead. 

It wa probabl the partial rot of the metal, in consequ of the 
damp of that place, that made it easier to open the coffin than it 
otherwis would have been, but certain it wa that the top came away 
remark easily. indeed, so easili did it come off, that anoth 
supposit might have been hazarded, namely, that it had never at all 
been effectu fastened. 

[illustration] 

the few moment that elaps were one of veri great suspens to everi 
one there present; and it would, indeed, be quit sure to assert, that 
all the world wa for the time forgotten in the absorb interest which 
appertain to the affair which wa in progress. 

the candl were now both held by mr. chillingworth, and they were so 
held as to cast a full and clear light upon the coffin. now the lid slid 
off, and henri eagerli gaze into the interior. 

there lay someth certainli there, and an audibl "thank god!" escap 
hi lips. 

"the bodi is there!" exclaim george. 

"all right," said marchdale, "here it is. there is something, and what 
els can it be?" 

"hold the lights," said mr. chillingworth; "hold the lights, some of 
you; let us be quit certain." 

georg took the lights, and mr. chillingworth, without ani hesitation, 
dip hi hand at onc into the coffin, and took up some fragment of 
rag which were there. they were so rotten, that they fell to piec in 
hi grasp, like so mani piec of tinder. 

there wa a death-lik paus for some few moments, and then mr. 
chillingworth said, in a low voice,-- 

"there is not the least vestig of a dead bodi here." 

henri gave a deep groan, as he said,-- 

"mr. chillingworth, can you take upon yourself to say that no corps ha 
undergon the process of decomposit in thi coffin?" 

"to answer your question exactly, as probabl in your hurri you have 
word it," said mr. chillingworth, "I cannot take upon myself to say 
ani such thing; but thi I can say, namely, that in thi coffin there 
are no anim remains, and that it is quit imposs that ani corps 
enclos here could, in ani laps of time, have so utterli and entir 
disappeared." 

"I am answered," said henry. 

"good god!" exclaim george, "and ha thi but ad anoth damn 
proof, to those we have alreadi on our minds, of one of the must 
dread superstit that ever the mind of man conceived?" 

"it would seem so," said marchdale, sadly. 

"oh, that I were dead! thi is terrible. god of heaven, whi are these 
things? oh, if I were but dead, and so spare the tortur of suppos 
such thing possible." 

"think again, mr. chillingworth; I pray you think again," cri 
marchdale. 

"if I were to think for the remaind of my existence," he replied, "I 
could come to no other conclusion. It is not a matter of opinion; it is 
a matter of fact." 

"you are positive, then," said henry, "that the dead bodi of marmaduk 
bannerworth is not rest here?" 

"I am positive. look for yourselves. the lead is but slightli 
discoloured; it look toler clean and fresh; there is not a vestig 
of putrefaction--no bones, no dust even." 

they did all look for themselves, and the most casual glanc wa 
suffici to satisfi the most sceptical. 

"all is over," said henry; "let us now leav thi place; and all I can 
now ask of you, my friends, is to lock thi dread secret deep in your 
own hearts." 

"it shall never pass my lips," said marchdale. 

"nor mine, you may depend," said the doctor. "I wa much in hope that 
thi night' work would have had the effect of dissipating, instead of 
ad to, the gloomi fanci that now possess you." 

"good heavens!" cri george, "can you call them fancies, mr. 
chillingworth?" 

"I do, indeed." 

"have you yet a doubt?" 

"mi young friend, I told you from the first, that I would not believ in 
your vampyre; and I tell you now, that if one wa to come and lay hold 
of me by the throat, as long as I could at all gasp for breath I would 
tell him he wa a d----d impostor." 

"thi is carri incredul to the verg of obstinacy." 

"far beyond it, if you please." 

"you will not be convinced?" said marchdale. 

"I most decidedly, on thi point, will not." 

"then you are one who would doubt a miracle, if you saw it with your own 
eyes." 

"I would, becaus I do not believ in miracles. I should endeavour to 
find some ration and some scientif mean of account for the 
phenomenon, and that' the veri reason whi we have no miracl 
now-a-days, between you and I, and no prophet and saints, and all that 
sort of thing." 

"I would rather avoid such observ in such a place as this," said 
marchdale. 

"nay, do not be the moral coward," cri mr. chillingworth, "to make 
your opinions, or the express of them, depend upon ani certain 
locality." 

"I know not what to think," said henry; "I am bewild quite. let us 
now come away." 

mr. marchdal replac the lid of the coffin, and then the littl parti 
move toward the staircase. henri turn befor he ascended, and 
glanc back into the vault. 

"oh," he said, "if I could but think there had been some mistake, some 
error of judgment, on which the mind could rest for hope." 

"I deepli regret," said marchdale, "that I so strenuous advis thi 
expedition. I did hope that from it would have result much good." 

"and you had everi reason so to hope," said chillingworth. "I advis it 
likewise, and I tell you that it result perfectli astonish me, 
although I will not allow myself to embrac at onc all the conclus 
to which it would seem to lead me." 

"I am satisfied," said henry; "I know you both advis me for the best. 
the curs of heaven seem now to have fallen upon me and my house." 

"oh, nonsense!" said chillingworth. "what for?" 

"alas! I know not." 

"then you may depend that heaven would never act so oddly. In the first 
place, heaven don't curs anybody; and, in the second, it is too just to 
inflict pain where pain is not ampli deserved." 

they ascend the gloomi staircas of the vault. the counten of 
both georg and henri were veri much saddened, and it wa quit evid 
that their thought were by far too busi to enabl them to enter into 
ani conversation. they did not, and particularli george, seem to hear 
all that wa said to them. their intellect seem almost stun by the 
unexpect circumst of the disappear of the bodi of their 
ancestor. 

all along they had, although almost unknown to themselves, felt a sort 
of convict that they must find some remain of marmaduk bannerworth, 
which would render the supposition, even in the most superstiti 
minds, that he wa the vampyre, a thing total and physic 
impossible. 

but now the whole question assum a far more bewild shape. the 
bodi wa not in it coffin--it had not there quietli slept the long 
sleep of death common to humanity. where wa it then? what had becom of 
it? where, how, and under what circumst had it been removed? had it 
itself burst the band that held it, and hideous stalk forth into 
the world again to make one of it seem inhabitants, and kept up for 
a hundr year a dread exist by such adventur as it had 
consumm at the hall, where, in the cours of ordinari human life, it 
had onc lived? 

all these were question which irresist press themselv upon the 
consider of henri and hi brother. they were aw questions. 

and yet, take ani sober, sane, thinking, educ man, and show him all 
that they had seen, subject him to all to which they had been subjected, 
and say if human reason, and all the argument that the subtlest brain 
could back it with, would be abl to hold out against such a vast 
accumul of horribl evidences, and say--"i don't believ it." 

mr. chillingworth' wa the onli plan. He would not argu the question. 
He said at once,-- 

"I will not believ thi thing--upon thi point I will yield to no 
evid whatever." 

that wa the onli way of dispos of such a question; but there are not 
mani who could so dispos of it, and not one so much interest in it as 
were the brother bannerworth, who could at all hope to get into such a 
state of mind. 

the board were laid care down again, and the screw replaced. 
henri found himself unequ to the task, so it wa done by marchdale, 
who took pain to replac everyth in the same state in which they had 
found it, even to the lay even the mat at the bottom of the pew. 

then they extinguish the light, and, with heavi hearts, they all 
walk toward the window, to leav the sacr edific by the same mean 
they had enter it. 

"shall we replac the pane of glass?" said marchdale. 

"oh, it matter not--it matter not," said henry, listlessly; "noth 
matter now. I care not what becom of me--i am get weari of a life 
which now must be one of miseri and dread." 

"you must not allow yourself to fall into such a state of mind as this," 
said the doctor, "or you will becom a patient of mine veri quickly." 

"I cannot help it." 

"well, but be a man. If there are seriou evil affect you, fight out 
against them the best way you can." 

"I cannot." 

"come, now, listen to me. We need not, I think, troubl ourselv about 
the pane of glass, so come along." 

He took the arm of henri and walk on with him a littl in advanc of 
the others. 

"henry," he said, "the best way, you may depend, of meet evils, be 
they great or small, is to get up an obstin feel of defianc 
against them. now, when anyth occur which is uncomfort to me, I 
endeavour to convinc myself, and I have no great difficulti in do 
so, that I am a decidedli injur man." 

"indeed!" 

"yes; I get veri angry, and that get up a kind of obstinacy, which 
make me not feel half so much mental miseri as would be my portion, if 
I were to succumb to the evil, and commenc whine over it, as mani 
peopl do, under the pretenc of be resigned." 

"but thi famili afflict of mine transcend anyth that anybodi 
els ever endured." 

"I don't know that; but it is a view of the subject which, if I were 
you, would onli make me more obstinate." 

"what can I do?" 

"in the first place, I would say to myself, 'there may or there may not 
be supernatur beings, who, from some physic derang of the 
ordinari natur of things, make themselv obnoxi to live people; 
if there are, d--n them! there may be vampyres; and if there are, I defi 
them.' let the imagin paint it veri worst terrors; let fear do 
what it will and what it can in peopl the mind with horrors. shrink 
from nothing, and even then I would defi them all." 

"i not that like defi heaven?" 

"most certainli not; for in all we say and in all we do we act from the 
impuls of that mind which is given to us by heaven itself. If heaven 
creat an intellect and a mind of a certain order, heaven will not 
quarrel that it doe the work which it wa adapt to do." 

"I know these are your opinions. I have heard you mention them before." 

"they are the opinion of everi ration person. henri bannerworth, 
becaus they will stand the test of reason; and what I urg upon you is, 
not to allow yourself to be mental prostrated, even if a vampyr ha 
paid a visit to your house. defi him, say i--fight him. 
self-preserv is a great law of nature, implant in all our hearts; 
do you summon it to your aid." 

"I will endeavour to think as you would have me. I thought more than 
onc of summon religion to my aid." 

"well, that is religion." 

"indeed!" 

"I consid so, and the most ration religion of all. all that we read 
about religion that doe not seem expressli to agre with it, you may 
consid as an allegory." 

"but, mr. chillingworth, I cannot and will not renounc the sublim 
truth of scripture. they may be incomprehensible; they may be 
inconsistent; and some of them may look ridiculous; but still they are 
sacr and sublime, and I will not renounc them although my reason may 
not accord with them, becaus they are the law of heaven." 

No wonder thi power argument silenc mr. chillingworth, who wa one 
of those charact in societi who hold most dread opinions, and who 
would destroy religi beliefs, and all the differ sect in the 
world, if they could, and endeavour to introduc instead some horribl 
system of human reason and profound philosophy. 

but how soon the religi man silenc hi opponent; and let it not be 
suppos that, becaus hi oppon say no more upon the subject, he 
doe so becaus he is disgust with the stupid of the other; no, it 
is becaus he is complet beaten, and ha noth more to say. 

the distanc now between the church and the hall wa nearli traversed, 
and mr. chillingworth, who wa a veri good man, notwithstand hi 
disbelief in certain thing of cours pave the way for him to hell, 
took a kind leav of mr. marchdal and the brothers, promis to call 
on the follow morn and see flora. 

henri and georg then, in earnest convers with marchdale, proceed 
homewards. It wa evid that the scene in the vault had made a deep 
and sadden impress upon them, and one which wa not like easili 
to be eradicated. 




chapter ix. 

the occurr OF the night AT the hall.--th second appear OF the 
vampyre, and the pistol-shot. 


[illustration] 

despit the full and free consent which flora had given to her brother 
to entrust her sole to the care of her mother and her own courag at 
the hall, she felt greater fear creep over her after they were gone than 
she chose to acknowledge. 

A sort of presenti appear to come over her that some evil wa 
about to occur, and more than onc she caught herself almost in the act 
of saying,-- 

"I wish they had not gone." 

mrs. bannerworth, too, could not be suppos to be entir destitut of 
uncomfort feelings, when she came to consid how poor a guard she 
wa over her beauti child, and how much terror might even depriv of 
the littl power she had, should the dread visitor again make hi 
appearance. 

"but it is but for two hours," thought flora, "and two hour will soon 
pass away." 

there was, too, anoth feel which gave her some degre of 
confidence, although it aros from a bad source, inasmuch as it wa one 
which show power how much her mind wa dwell on the 
particular of the horribl belief in the class of supernatur beings, 
one of whom she believ had visit her. 

that consider wa this. the two hour of absenc from the hall of 
it male inhabitants, would be from nine o'clock until eleven, and those 
were not the two hour dure which she felt that she would be most 
timid on account of the vampyre. 

"it wa after midnight before," she thought, "when it came, and perhap 
it may not be abl to come earlier. It may not have the power, until 
that time, to make it hideou visits, and, therefore, I will believ 
myself safe." 

she had made up her mind not to go to bed until the return of her 
brothers, and she and her mother sat in a small room that wa use as a 
breakfast-room, and which had a lattic window that open on to the 
lawn. 

thi window had in the insid strong oaken shutters, which had been 
fasten as secur as their construct would admit of some time 
befor the departur of the brother and mr. marchdal on that 
melancholi expedition, the object of which, if it had been known to her, 
would have ad so much to the terror of poor flora. 

It wa not even guess at, howev remotely, so that she had not the 
addit afflict of thinking, that while she wa sit there, a 
prey to all sort of imagin terrors, they were perhap gather 
fresh evidence, as, indeed, they were, of the dread realiti of the 
appear which, but for the collater circumst attend upon 
it come and it going, she would fain have persuad herself wa but 
the vision of a dream. 

It wa befor nine that the brother started, but in her own mind flora 
gave them to eleven, and when she heard ten o'clock sound from a clock 
which stood in the hall, she felt pleas to think that in anoth hour 
they would sure be at home. 

"mi dear," said her mother, "you look more like yourself, now." 

"do, I, mother?" 

"yes, you are well again." 

"ah, if I could forget--" 

"time, my dear flora, will enabl you to do so, and all the fear of what 
made you so unwel will pass away. you will soon forget it all." 

"I will hope to do so." 

"be assur that, some day or another, someth will occur, as henri 
says, to explain all that ha happened, in some way consist with 
reason and the ordinari natur of things, my dear flora." 

"oh, I will cling to such a belief; I will get henry, upon whose 
judgment I know I can rely, to tell me so, and each time that I hear 
such word from hi lips, I will contriv to dismiss some portion of the 
terror which now, I cannot but confess, cling to my heart." 

flora laid her hand upon her mother' arm, and in a low, anxiou tone of 
voice, said,--"listen, mother." 

mrs. bannerworth turn pale, as she said,--"listen to what, dear?" 

"within these last ten minutes," said flora, "I have thought three or 
four time that I heard a slight nois without. nay, mother, do not 
tremble--it may be onli fancy." 

[illustration] 

flora herself trembled, and wa of a death-lik paleness; onc or twice 
she pass her hand across her brow, and altogeth she present a 
pictur of much mental suffering. 

they now convers in anxiou whispers, and almost all they said 
consist in anxiou wish for the return of the brother and mr. 
marchdale. 

"you will be happier and more assured, my dear, with some company," said 
mrs. bannerworth. "shall I ring for the servants, and let them remain in 
the room with us, until they who are our best safeguard next to heaven 
return?" 

"hush--hush--hush, mother!" 

"what do you hear?" 

"I thought--i heard a faint sound." 

"I heard nothing, dear." 

"listen again, mother. sure I could not be deceiv so often. I have 
now, at least, six time heard a sound as if some one wa outsid by the 
windows." 

"no, no, my darling, do not think; your imagin is activ and in a 
state of excitement." 

"it is, and yet--" 

"believ me, it deceiv you." 

"I hope to heaven it does!" 

there wa a paus of some minutes' duration, and then mrs. bannerworth 
again urg slightli the call of some of the servants, for she 
thought that their presenc might have the effect of give a differ 
direct to her child' thoughts; but flora saw her place her hand upon 
the bell, and she said,-- 

"no, mother, no--not yet, not yet. perhap I am deceived." 

mrs. bannerworth upon thi sat down, but no sooner had she done so than 
she heartili regret she had not rung the bell, for, before, anoth 
word could be spoken, there came too percept upon their ear for 
there to be ani mistak at all about it, a strang scratch nois upon 
the window outside. 

A faint cri came from flora' lips, as she exclaimed, in a voic of 
great agony,-- 

"oh, god!--oh, god! It ha come again!" 

mrs. bannerworth becam faint, and unabl to move or speak at all; she 
could onli sit like one paralysed, and unabl to do more than listen to 
and see what wa go on. 

the scratch nois continu for a few seconds, and then altogeth 
ceased. perhaps, under ordinari circumstances, such a sound outsid the 
window would have scarc afford food for comment at all, or, if it 
had, it would have been attribut to some natur effect, or to the 
exert of some bird or anim to obtain admitt to the house. 

but there had occur now enough in that famili to make ani littl 
sound of wonder importance, and these thing which befor would have 
pass complet unheeded, at all event without creat much alarm, 
were now invest with a fear interest. 

when the scratch nois ceased, flora spoke in a low, anxiou whisper, 
as she said,-- 

"mother, you heard it then?" 

mrs. bannerworth tri to speak, but she could not; and then suddenly, 
with a loud clash, the bar, which on the insid appear to fasten the 
shutter strongly, fell as if by some invis agency, and the shutter 
now, but for the intervent of the window, could be easili push open 
from without. 

mrs. bannerworth cover her face with her hands, and, after rock to 
and fro for a moment, she fell off her chair, have faint with the 
excess of terror that came over her. 

for about the space of time in which a fast speaker could count twelve, 
flora thought her reason wa leav her, but it did not. she found 
herself recovering; and there she sat, with her eye fix upon the 
window, look more like some exquisitely-chisel statu of despair 
than a be of flesh and blood, expect each moment to have it eye 
blast by some horribl appearance, such as might be suppos to drive 
her to madness. 

and now again came the strang knock or scratch against the glass 
of the window. 

thi continu for some minutes, dure which it appear likewis to 
flora that some confus wa go on at anoth part of the house, for 
she fanci she heard voic and the bang of doors. 

It seem to her as if she must have sat look at the shutter of that 
window a long time befor she saw them shake, and then one wide hing 
portion of them slowli opened. 

onc again horror appear to be on the point of produc mad in 
her brain, and then, as before, a feel of calm rapidli ensued. 

she wa abl to see plainli that someth wa by the window, but what 
it wa she could not plainli discern, in consequ of the light she 
had in the room. A few moments, however, suffic to settl that 
mystery, for the window wa open and a figur stood befor her. 

one glance, one terrifi glance, in which her whole soul wa 
concentrated, suffic to shew her who and what the figur was. there 
wa the tall, gaunt form--ther wa the fade ancient apparel--th 
lustrou metallic-look eyes--it half-open month, exhibit the 
tusk-lik teeth! It was--yes, it was--_th vampyre!_ 

It stood for a moment gaze at her, and then in the hideou way it had 
attempt befor to speak, it appar endeavour to utter some word 
which it could not make articul to human ears. the pistol lay befor 
flora. mechan she rais one, and point it at the figure. It 
advanc a step, and then she pull the trigger. 

A stun report followed. there wa a loud cri of pain, and the 
vampyr fled. the smoke and the confus that wa incident to the 
spot prevent her from see if the figur walk or ran away. she 
thought she heard a crash sound among the plant outsid the window, 
as if it had fallen, but she did not feel quit sure. 

It wa no effort of ani reflection, but a pure mechan movement, 
that made her rais the other pistol, and discharg that likewis in the 
direct the vampyr had taken. then cast the weapon away, she rose, 
and made a frantic rush from the room. she open the door, and wa 
dash out, when she found herself caught in the circl arm of some 
one who either had been there waiting, or who had just at that moment 
got there. 

the thought that it wa the vampyre, who by some mysteri means, had 
got there, and wa about to make her hi prey, now overcam her 
completely, and she sunk into a state of utter insens on the 
moment. 




chapter X. 

the return from the vault.--th alarm, and the search around the hall. 


[illustration] 

It so happen that georg and henri bannerworth, along with mr. 
marchdale, had just reach the gate which conduct into the garden of 
the mansion when they all were alarm by the report of a pistol. amid 
the still of the night, it came upon them with so sudden a shock, 
that they involuntarili paused, and there came from the lip of each an 
express of alarm. 

"good heavens!" cri george, "can that be flora fire at ani 
intruder?" 

"it must be," cri henry; "she ha in her possess the onli weapon 
in the house." 

mr. marchdal turn veri pale, and trembl slightly, but he did not 
speak. 

"on, on," cri henry; "for god' sake, let us hasten on." 

As he spoke, he clear the gate at a bound, and at a terrif pace he 
made toward the house, pass over beds, and plantations, and flower 
heedlessly, so that he went the most direct way to it. 

before, however, it wa possibl for ani human speed to accomplish even 
half of the distance, the report of the other shot came upon hi ears, 
and he even fanci he heard the bullet whistl past hi head in 
toler close proximity. thi supposit gave him a clue to the 
direct at all event from whenc the shot proceeded, otherwis he 
knew not from which window they were fired, becaus it had not occur 
to him, previou to leav home, to inquir in which room flora and hi 
mother were like to be seat wait hi return. 

He wa right as regard the bullet. It wa that wing messeng of 
death which had pass hi head in such veri danger proximity, and 
consequ he made with toler accuraci toward the open window 
from whenc the shot had been fired. 

the night wa not near so dark as it had been, although even yet it wa 
veri far from be a light one, and he wa soon enabl to see that 
there wa a room, the window of which wa wide open, and light burn 
on the tabl within. He made toward it in a moment, and enter it. To 
hi astonishment, the first object he beheld were flora and a stranger, 
who wa now support her in hi arms. To grappl him by the throat wa 
the work of a moment, but the stranger cri aloud in a voic which 
sound familiar to harry,-- 

"good god, are you all mad?" 

henri relax hi hold, and look in hi face. 

"graciou heavens, it is mr. holland!" he said. 

"yes; did you not know me?" 

henri wa bewildered. He stagger to a seat, and, in do so, he saw 
hi mother, stretch appar lifeless upon the floor. To rais her 
wa the work of a moment, and then marchdal and george, who had 
follow him as fast as they could, appear at the open window. 

such a strang scene as that small room now exhibit had never been 
equal in bannerworth hall. there wa young mr. holland, of whom 
mention ha alreadi been made, as the affianc lover of flora, 
support her faint form. there wa henri do equal servic to hi 
mother; and on the floor lay the two pistols, and one of the candl 
which had been upset in the confusion; while the terrifi attitud of 
georg and mr. marchdal at the window complet the strange-look 
picture. 

"what is this--oh! what ha happened?" cri george. 

"I know not--i know not," said henry. "some one summon the servants; I 
am nearli mad." 

mr. marchdal at onc rung the bell, for georg look so faint and ill 
as to be incap of do so; and he rung it so loudli and so 
effectually, that the two servant who had been employ suddenli upon 
the other leav came with much speed to know what wa the matter. 

"see to your mistress," said henry. "she is dead, or ha fainted. for 
god' sake, let who can give me some account of what ha caus all thi 
confus here." 

"are you aware, henry," said marchdale, "that a stranger is present in 
the room?" 

He point to mr. holland as he spoke, who, befor henri could reply, 
said,-- 

"sir, I may be a stranger to you, as you are to me, and yet no stranger 
to those whose home thi is." 

"no, no," said henry, "you are no stranger to us, mr. holland, but are 
thrice welcome--non can be more welcome. mr. marchdale, thi is Mr 
holland, of whom you have heard me speak." 

"I am proud to know you, sir," said marchdale. 

"sir, I thank you," repli holland, coldly. 

It will so happen; but, at first sight, it appear as if those two 
person had some sort of antagonist feel toward each other, which 
threaten to prevent effectu their ever becom intim friends. 

the appeal of henri to the servant to know if they could tell him what 
had occur wa answer in the negative. all they knew wa that they 
had heard two shot fired, and that, sinc then, they had remain where 
they were, in a great fright, until the bell wa rung violently. thi 
wa no news at all and, therefore, the onli chanc was, to wait 
patient for the recoveri of the mother, or of flora, from one or the 
other of whom sure some inform could be at onc then procured. 

mrs. bannerworth wa remov to her own room, and so would flora have 
been; but mr. holland, who wa support her in hi arms, said,-- 

"I think the air from the open window is recov her, and it is 
like to do so. oh, do not now take her from me, after so long an 
absence. flora, flora, look up; do you not know me? you have not yet 
given me one look of acknowledgment. flora, dear flora!" 

the sound of hi voic seem to act as the most potent of charm in 
restor her to consciousness; it broke through the death-lik tranc 
in which she lay, and, open her beauti eyes, she fix them upon 
hi face, saying,-- 

"yes, yes; it is charles--it is charles." 

she burst into a hyster flood of tears, and clung to him like some 
terrifi child to it onli friend in the whole wide world. 

"oh, my dear friends," cri charl holland, "do not deceiv me; ha 
flora been ill?" 

"we have all been ill," said george. 

"all ill?" 

"ay, and nearli mad," exclaim harry. 

holland look from one to the other in surprise, as well he might, nor 
wa that surpris at all lessen when flora made an effort to extric 
herself from hi embrace, as she exclaimed,-- 

"you must leav me--you must leav me, charles, for ever! oh! never, 
never look upon my face again!" 

"i--i am bewildered," said charles. 

"leav me, now," continu flora; "think me unworthy; think what you 
will, charles, but I cannot, I dare not, now be yours." 

"i thi a dream?" 

"oh, would it were. charles, if we had never met, you would be 
happier--i could not be more wretched." 

"flora, flora, do you say these word of so great cruelti to tri my 
love?" 

"no, as heaven is my judge, I do not." 

"graciou heaven, then, what do they mean?" 

flora shuddered, and henry, come up to her, took her hand in hi 
tenderly, as he said,-- 

"ha it been again?" 

"it has." 

"you shot it?" 

"I fire full upon it, henry, but it fled." 

"it did--fly?" 

"it did, henry, but it will come again--it will be sure to come again." 

"you--you hit it with the bullet?" interpos mr. marchdale. "perhap 
you kill it?" 

"I think I must have hit it, unless I am mad." 

charl holland look from one to the other with such a look of intens 
surprise, that georg remark it, and said at onc to him,-- 

"mr. holland, a full explan is due to you, and you shall have it." 

"you seem the onli ration person here," said charles. "pray what is it 
that everybodi call '_it_?'" 

"hush--hush!" said henry; "you shall hear soon, but not at present." 

"hear me, charles," said flora. "from thi moment mind, I do releas you 
from everi vow, from everi promis made to me of constanc and love; and 
if you are wise, charles, and will be advised, you will now thi moment 
leav thi hous never to return to it." 

"no," said charles--"no; by heaven I love you, flora! I have come to say 
again all that in anoth clime I said with joy to you. when I forget 
you, let what troubl may oppress you, may god forget me, and my own 
right hand forget to do me honest service." 

[illustration] 

"oh! no more--no more!" sob flora. 

"yes, much more, if you will tell me of word which shall be stronger 
than other in which to paint my love, my faith, and my constancy." 

"be prudent," said henry. "say no more." 

"nay, upon such a theme I could speak for ever. you may cast me off, 
flora; but until you tell me you love another, I am your till the 
death, and then with a sanguin hope at my heart that we shall meet 
again, never, dearest, to part." 

flora sob bitterly. 

"oh!" she said, "thi is the unkindest blow of all--thi is wors than 
all." 

"unkind!" echo holland. 

"heed her not," said henry; "she mean not you." 

"oh, no--no!" she cried. "farewell, charles--dear charles." 

"oh, say that word again!" he exclaimed, with animation. "it is the 
first time such music ha met my ears." 

"it must be the last." 

"no, no--oh, no." 

"for your own sake I shall be abl now, charles, to show you that I 
realli love you." 

"not by cast me from you?" 

"yes, even so. that will be the way to show you that I love you." 

she held up her hand wildly, as she added, in an excit voice,-- 

"the curs of destini is upon me! I am singl out as one lost and 
accursed. oh, horror--horror! would that I were dead!" 

charl stagger back a pace or two until he came to the table, at 
which he clutch for support. He turn veri pale as he said, in a 
faint voice,-- 

"is--i she mad, or am i?" 

"tell him I am mad, henry," cri flora. "do not, oh, do not make hi 
lone thought terribl with more than that. tell him I am mad." 

"come with me," whisper henri to holland. "I pray you come with me at 
once, and you shall know all." 

"i--will." 

"george, stay with flora for a time. come, come, mr. holland, you ought, 
and you shall know all; then you can come to a judgment for yourself. 
thi way, sir. you cannot, in the wildest freak of your imagination, 
guess that which I have now to tell you." 

never wa mortal man so utterli bewild by the event of the last 
hour of hi exist as wa now charl holland, and truli he might 
well be so. He had arriv in england, and made what speed he could to 
the hous of a famili whom he admir for their intelligence, their high 
culture, and in one member of which hi whole thought of domest 
happi in thi world were centered, and he found noth but 
confusion, incoherence, mystery, and the wildest dismay. 

well might he doubt if he were sleep or waking--wel might he ask if 
he or they were mad. 

and now, as, after a long, linger look of affect upon the pale, 
suffer face of flora, he follow henri from the room, hi thought 
were busi in fanci a thousand vagu and wild imagin with 
respect to the commun which wa promis to be made to him. 

but, as henri had truli said to him, not in the wildest freak of hi 
imagin could he conceiv of ani thing near the terribl strang 
and horror of that which he had to tell him, and consequ he found 
himself closet with henri in a small privat room, remov from the 
domest part of the hall, to the full in as bewild a state as he 
had been from the first. 




chapter xi. 

the commun TO the lover.--th heart' despair. 


[illustration] 

constern is sympathetic, and ani one who had look upon the 
featur of charl holland, now that he wa seat with henri 
bannerworth, in expect of a commun which hi fear told him 
wa to blast all hi dearest and most fondli cherish hope for ever, 
would scarc have recognis in him the same young man who, one short 
hour before, had knock so loudly, and so full of joy hope and 
expectation, at the door of the hall. 

but so it was. He knew henri bannerworth too well to suppos that ani 
unreal caus could blanch hi cheek. He knew flora too well to imagin 
for one moment that capric had dictat the, to him, fear word of 
dismiss she had utter to him. 

happier would it at that time have been for charl holland had she 
act caprici toward him, and convinc him that hi true heart' 
devot had been cast at the feet of one unworthi of so realli nobl a 
gift. pride would then have enabl him, no doubt, success to 
resist the blow. A feel of honest and proper indign at have 
hi feel trifl with, would, no doubt, have sustain him, but, 
alas! the case seem wide different. 

true, she implor him to think of her no more--no longer to cherish in 
hi breast the fond dream of affect which had been it guest so long; 
but the manner in which she did so brought along with it an irresist 
conviction, that she wa make a nobl sacrific of her own feel 
for him, from some caus which wa involv in the profoundest mystery. 

but now he wa to hear all. henri had promis to tell him, and as he 
look into hi pale, but handsom intellectu face, he half dread 
the disclosur he yet pant to hear. 

"tell me all, henry--tel me all," he said. "upon the word that come 
from your lip I know I can rely." 

"I will have no reserv with you," said henry, sadly. "you ought to 
know all, and you shall. prepar yourself for the strangest revel 
you ever heard." 

"indeed!" 

"ay. one which in hear you may well doubt; and one which, I hope, you 
will never find an opportun of verifying." 

"you speak in riddles." 

"and yet speak truly, charles. you heard with what a frantic vehem 
flora desir you to think no more of her?" 

"I did--i did." 

"she wa right. she is a noble-heart girl for utter those words. A 
dread incid in our famili ha occurred, which might well induc 
you to paus befor unit your fate with that of ani member of it." 

"impossible. noth can possibl subdu the feel of affect I 
entertain for flora. she is worthi of ani one, and, as such, amid all 
changes--al mutat of fortune, she shall be mine." 

"do not suppos that ani chang of fortun ha produc the scene you 
were wit to." 

"then, what else?" 

"I will tell you, holland. In all your travels, and in all your reading, 
did you ever come across anyth about vampyres?" 

"about what?" cri charles, draw hi chair forward a little. "about 
what?" 

"you may well doubt the evid of your own ears, charl holland, and 
wish me to repeat what I said. I say, do you know anyth about 
vampyres?" 

charl holland look curious in henry' face, and the latter 
immedi added,-- 

"I can guess what is pass in your mind at present, and I do not 
wonder at it. you think I must be mad." 

"well, really, henry, your extraordinari question--" 

"I knew it. were I you, I should hesit to believ the tale; but the 
fact is, we have everi reason to believ that one member of our own 
famili is one of those horribl preternatur be call vampyres." 

"good god, henry, can you allow your judgment for a moment to stoop to 
such a supposition?" 

"that is what I have ask myself a hundr times; but, charl holland, 
the judgment, the feelings, and all the prejudices, natur and 
acquired, must succumb to actual ocular demonstration. listen to me, and 
do not interrupt me. you shall know all, and you shall know it 
circumstantially." 

henri then relat to the astonish charl holland all that had 
occurred, from the first alarm of flora, up to that period when he, 
holland, caught her in hi arm as she wa about to leav the room. 

"and now," he said, in conclusion, "I cannot tell what opinion you may 
come to as regard these most singular events. you will recollect that 
here is the unbiass evid of four or five peopl to the facts, and, 
beyond that, the servants, who have seen someth of the horribl 
visitor." 

"you bewild me, utterly," said charl holland. 

"a we are all bewildered." 

"but--but, graciou heaven! it cannot be." 

"it is." 

"no--no. there is--ther must be yet some dread mistake." 

"can you start ani supposit by which we can otherwis explain ani of 
the phenomena I have describ to you? If you can, for heaven' sake do 
so, and you will find no one who will cling to it with more tenac 
than i." 

"ani other speci or kind of supernatur appear might admit of 
argument; but this, to my perception, is too wildli improbable--too much 
at varianc with all we see and know of the oper of nature." 

"it is so. all that we have told ourselv repeatedly, and yet is all 
human reason at onc struck down by the few brief word of--'w have 
seen it.'" 

"I would doubt my eyesight." 

"one might; but mani cannot be labour under the same delusion." 

"mi friend, I pray you, do not make me shudder at the supposit that 
such a dread thing as thi is at all possible." 

"_i_ am, believ me, charles, most unwil to oppress anyon with the 
knowledg of these evils; but you are so situat with us, that you 
ought to know, and you will clearli understand that you may, with 
perfect honour, now consid yourself free from all engag you have 
enter into with flora." 

"no, no! By heaven, no!" 

"yes, charles. reflect upon the consequ now of a union with such a 
family." 

"oh, henri bannerworth, can you suppos me so dead to all good feeling, 
so utterli lost to honour impulses, as to eject from my heart her 
who ha possess of it entirely, on such a ground as this?" 

"you would be justified." 

"coldli justifi in prudenc I might be. there are a thousand 
circumst in which a man may be justifi in a particular cours of 
action, and that cours yet may be neither honour nor just. I love 
flora; and were she torment by the whole of the supernatur world, I 
should still love her. nay, it becomes, then, a higher and a nobler duti 
on my part to stand between her and those evils, if possible." 

"charles--charles," said henry, "I cannot of cours refus to you my 
meed of prais and admir for your generos of feeling; but, 
remember, if we are compelled, despit all our feel and all our 
predilect to the contrary, to give in to a belief in the exist 
of vampyres, whi may we not at onc receiv as the truth all that is 
record of them?" 

"to what do you allude?" 

"to this. that one who ha been visit by a vampyre, and whose blood 
ha form a horribl repast for such a being, becomes, after death, one 
of the dread race, and visit other in the same way." 

"now thi must be insanity," cri charles. 

"it bear the aspect of it, indeed," said henry; "oh, that you could by 
some mean satisfi yourself that I am mad." 

"there may be insan in thi family," thought charles, with such an 
exquisit pang of misery, that he groan aloud. 

"already," ad henry, mournfully, "alreadi the blight influenc of 
the dread tale is upon you, charles. oh, let me add my advic to 
flora' entreaties. she love you, and we all esteem you; fly, then, 
from us, and leav us to encount our miseri alone. fli from us, 
charl holland, and take with you our best wish for happi which 
you cannot know here." 

"never," cri charles; "I devot my exist to flora. I will not play 
the coward, and fli from one whom I love, on such grounds. I devot my 
life to her." 

henri could not speak for emot for sever minutes, and when at 
length, in a falter voice, he could utter some words, he said,-- 

"god of heaven, what happi is mar by these horribl events? what 
have we all done to be the victim of such a dread act of vengeance?" 

"henry, do not talk in that way," cri charles. "rather let us bend all 
our energi to overcom the evil, than spend ani time in useless 
lamentations. I cannot even yet give in to a belief in the exist of 
such a be as you say visit flora." 

"but the evidences." 

"look you here, henry: until I am convinc that some thing have 
happen which it is total imposs could happen by ani human mean 
whatever, I will not ascrib them to supernatur influence." 

"but what human means, charles, could produc what I have now narrat 
to you?" 

"I do not know, just at present, but I will give the subject the most 
attent consideration. will you accommod me here for a time?" 

"you know you are as welcom here as if the hous were your own, and all 
that it contains." 

"I believ so, most truly. you have no objection, I presume, to my 
convers with flora upon thi strang subject?" 

"certainli not. Of cours you will be care to say noth which can 
add to her fears." 

"I shall be most guarded, believ me. you say that your brother george, 
mr. chillingworth, yourself, and thi mr. marchdale, have all been 
cognis of the circumstances." 

"yes--yes." 

"then with the whole of them you permit me to hold free commun 
upon the subject?" 

"most certainly." 

"I will do so then. keep up good heart, henry, and thi affair, which 
look so full of terror at first sight, may yet be divest of some of 
it hideou aspect." 

"I am rejoiced, if anyth can rejoic me now," said henry, "to see you 
view the subject with so much philosophy." 

"why," said charles, "you made a remark of your own, which enabl me, 
view the matter in it veri worst and most hideou aspect, to gather 
hope." 

"what wa that?" 

"you said, properli and natur enough, that if ever we felt that 
there wa such a weight of evid in favour of a belief in the 
exist of vampyr that we are compel to succumb to it, we might 
as well receiv all the popular feel and superstit concern 
them likewise." 

"I did. where is the mind to pause, when onc we open it to the 
recept of such things?" 

"well, then, if that be the case, we will watch thi vampyr and catch 
it." 

"catch it?" 

"yes; sure it can be caught; as I understand, thi speci of be is 
not like an apparition, that may be compos of thin air, and utterli 
impalp to the human touch, but it consist of a revivifi corpse." 

"yes, yes." 

"then it is tangibl and destructible. By heaven! if ever I catch a 
glimps of ani such thing, it shall drag me to it home, be that where 
it may, or I will make it prisoner." 

"oh, charles! you know not the feel of horror that will come across 
you when you do. you have no idea of how the warm blood will seem to 
curdl in your veins, and how you will be paralys in everi limb." 

"did you feel so?" 

"I did." 

"I will endeavour to make head against such feelings. the love of flora 
shall enabl me to vanquish them. think you it will come again 
to-morrow?" 

[illustration] 

"I can have no thought the one way or the other." 

"it may. We must arrang among us all, henry, some plan of watch 
which, without complet prostrat our health and strength, will 
alway provid that one shall be up all night and on the alert." 

"it must be done." 

"flora ought to sleep with the conscious now that she ha ever at 
hand some intrepid and well-arm protector, who is not onli himself 
prepar to defend her, but who can in a moment give an alarm to us all, 
in case of necess requir it." 

"it would be a dread captur to make to seiz a vampyre," said henry. 

"not at all; it would be a veri desir one. be a corps 
revivified, it is capabl of complet destruction, so as to render it no 
longer a scourg to ani one." 

"charles, charles, are you jest with me, or do you realli give ani 
credenc to the story?" 

"mi dear friend, I alway make it a rule to take thing at their worst, 
and then I cannot be disappointed. I am content to reason upon thi 
matter as if the fact of the exist of a vampyr were thoroughli 
established, and then to think upon what is best to be done about it." 

"you are right." 

"if it should turn out then that there is an error in the fact, well and 
good--w are all the better off; but if otherwise, we are prepared, and 
arm at all points." 

"let it be so, then. It strike me, charles, that you will be the 
coolest and the calmest among us all on thi emergency; but the hour now 
wax late, I will get them to prepar a chamber for you, and at least 
to-night, after what ha occur already, I should think we can be 
under no apprehension." 

"probabl not. but, henry, if you would allow me to sleep in that room 
where the portrait hang of him whom you suppos to be the vampyre, I 
should prefer it." 

"prefer it!" 

"yes; I am not one who court danger for danger' sake, but I would 
rather occupi that room, to see if the vampyre, who perhap ha a 
partial for it, will pay me a visit." 

"a you please, charles. you can have the apartment. It is in the same 
state as when occupi by flora. noth ha been, I believe, remov 
from it." 

"you will let me, then, while I remain here, call it my room?" 

"assuredly." 

thi arrang wa accordingli made to the surpris of all the 
household, not one of whom would, indeed, have slept, or attempt to 
sleep there for ani amount of reward. but charl holland had hi own 
reason for prefer that chamber, and he wa conduct to it in the 
cours of half an hour by henry, who look around it with a shudder, as 
he bade hi young friend good night. 




chapter xii. 

charl holland' sad feelings.--th portrait.--th occurr OF the 
night AT the hall. 


[illustration] 

charl holland wish to be alone, if ever ani human be had wish 
fervent to be so. hi thought were most fear oppressive. 

the commun that had been made to him by henri bannerworth, had 
about it too mani strange, confirmatori circumst to enabl him to 
treat it, in hi own mind, with the disrespect that some mere freak of a 
distract and weak imagin would, most probably, have receiv from 
him. 

He had found flora in a state of excit which could aris onli from 
some such terribl caus as had been mention by her brother, and then 
he was, from an occurr which certainli never could have enter into 
hi calculations, ask to forego the bright dream of happi which he 
had held so long and so raptur to hi heart. 

how truli he found that the cours of true love ran not smooth; and yet 
how littl would ani one have suspect that from such a caus as that 
which now oppress hi mind, ani obstruct would arise. 

flora might have been fickl and false; he might have seen some other 
fairer face, which might have enchain hi fancy, and woven for him a 
new heart' chain; death might have step between him and the 
realiz of hi fondest hopes; loss of fortun might have made the 
love cruel which would have yoke to it distress a young and 
beauti girl, rear in the lap of luxury, and who wa not, even by 
those who love her, suffer to feel, even in later years, ani of the 
pinch necess of the family. 

all these thing were possible--som of them were probable; and yet none 
of them had occurred. she love him still; and he, although he had 
look on mani a fair face, and bask in the sunni smile of beauty, 
had never for a moment forgotten her faith, or lost hi devot to hi 
own dear english girl. 

fortun he had enough for both; death had not even threaten to rob him 
of the prize of such a nobl and faith heart which he had won. but a 
horribl superstit had arisen, which seem to place at onc an 
impass abyss between them, and to say to him, in a voic of 
thunder denunciation,-- 

"charl holland, will you have a vampyr for your bride?" 

the thought wa terrific. He pace the gloomi chamber to and fro with 
rapid strides, until the idea came across hi mind that by so do he 
might not onli be proclaim to hi kind entertain how much he wa 
mental distracted, but he likewis might be serious distract 
them. 

the moment thi occur to him he sat down, and wa profoundli still 
for some time. He then glanc at the light which had been given to him, 
and he found himself almost unconsci engag in a mental 
calcul as to how long it would last him in the night. 

half ashamed, then, of such terrors, as such a consider would seem 
to indicate, he wa on the point of hastili extinguish it, when he 
happen to cast hi eye on the now mysteri and highli interest 
portrait in the panel. 

the picture, as a picture, wa well done, whether it wa a correct 
like or not of the parti whom it represented. It wa one of those 
kind of portrait that seem so life-like, that, as you look at them, 
they seem to return your gaze fully, and even to follow you with their 
eye from place to place. 

By candle-light such an effect is more like to becom strike and 
remark than by daylight; and now, as charl holland shade hi own 
eye from the light, so as to cast it full radianc upon the portrait, 
he felt wonder interest in it life-lik appearance. 

"here is true skill," he said; "such as I have not befor seen. how 
strang thi like of a man whom I never saw seem to gaze upon 
me." 

unconsciously, too, he aid the effect, which he justli enough call 
life-like, by a slight movement of the candle, such as ani one not 
bless with nerv of iron would be sure to make, and such a movement 
made the face look as if it wa inspir with vitality. 

charl remain look at the portrait for a consider period of 
time. He found a kind of fascin in it which prevent him from 
draw hi eye away from it. It wa not fear which induc him to 
continu gaze on it, but the circumst that it wa a like of 
the man who, after death, wa suppos to have borrow so new and so 
hideou an existence, combin with it artist merits, chain him to 
the spot. 

"I shall now," he said, "know that face again, let me see it where I 
may, or under what circumst I may. each featur is now indel 
fix upon my memory--i never can mistak it." 

He turn asid as he utter these words, and as he did so hi eye 
fell upon a part of the ornament frame which compos the edg of the 
panel, and which seem to him to be of a differ colour from the 
surround portion. 

curios and increas interest prompt him at onc to make a closer 
inquiri into the matter; and, by a care and dilig scrutiny, he wa 
almost induc to come to the posit opinion, that it no veri distant 
period in time past, the portrait had been remov from the place it 
occupied. 

when onc thi idea, even vagu and indistinct as it was, in consequ 
of the slight ground he form it on, had got possess of hi mind, 
he felt most anxiou to prove it verif or it fallacy. 

He held the candl in a varieti of situations, so that it light fell in 
differ way on the picture; and the more he examin it, the more he 
felt convinc that it must have been move lately. 

It would appear as if, in it removal, a piec of the old oaken carv 
framework of the panel had been accident broken off, which caus 
the new look of the fracture, and that thi accident, from the natur of 
the broken bit of framing, could have occur in ani other way than 
from an actual or attempt remov of the picture, he felt wa 
extrem unlikely. 

He set down the candl on a chair near at hand, and tri if the panel 
wa fast in it place. upon the veri first touch, he felt convinc it 
wa not so, and that it easili moved. how to get it out, though, 
present a difficulty, and to get it out wa tempting. 

"who knows," he said to himself, "what may be behind it? thi is an old 
baroni sort of hall, and the greater portion of it was, no doubt, 
built at a time when the construct of such place as hidden chamber 
and intric staircas were, in all build of importance, 
consid a disiderata." 

that he should make some discoveri behind the portrait, now becam an 
idea that possess him strongly, although he certainli had no definit 
ground for realli suppos that he should do so. 

perhap the wish wa more father to the thought than he, in the partial 
state of excit he wa in, realli imagined; but so it was. He felt 
convinc that he should not be satisfi until he had remov that 
panel from the wall, and seen what wa immedi behind it. 

after the panel contain the pictur had been place where it was, it 
appear that piec of mould had been insert all around, which had 
had the effect of keep it in it place, and it wa a fractur of one 
of these piec which had first call charl holland' attent to 
the probabl of the pictur have been removed. that he should have 
to get two, at least, of the piec of mould away, befor he could 
hope to remov the picture, wa to him quit apparent, and he wa 
consid how he should accomplish such a result, when he wa suddenli 
startl by a knock at hi chamber door. 

until that sudden demand for admiss at hi door came, he scarc 
knew to what a nervou state he had work himself up. It wa an odd 
sort of tap--on only--a singl tap, as if some one demand admittance, 
and wish to awaken hi attent with the least possibl chanc of 
disturb ani one else. 

"come in," said charles, for he knew he had not fasten hi door; "come 
in." 

there wa no reply, but after a moment' pause, the same sort of low tap 
came again. 

again he cri "come in," but, whoever it was, seem determin that 
the door should be open for him, and no movement wa made from the 
outside. A third time the tap came, and charl wa veri close to the 
door when he heard it, for with a noiseless step he had approach it 
intend to open it. the instant thi third mysteri demand for 
admiss came, he did open it wide. there wa no one there! In an 
instant he cross the threshold into the corridor, which ran right and 
left. A window at one end of it now sent in the moon' rays, so that it 
wa toler light, but he could see no one. indeed, to look for ani 
one, he felt sure wa needless, for he had open hi chamber-door 
almost simultan with the last knock for admission. 

"it is strange," he said, as he linger on the threshold of hi room 
door for some moments; "mi imagin could not so complet deceiv 
me. there wa most certainli a demand for admission." 

slowly, then, he return to hi room again, and close the door behind 
him. 

"one thing is evident," he said, "that if I am in thi apart to be 
subject to these annoyances, I shall get no rest, which will soon 
exhaust me." 

thi thought wa a veri provok one, and the more he thought that he 
should ultim find a necess for give up that chamber he had 
himself ask as a special favour to be allow to occupy, the more 
vex he becam to think what construct might be put upon hi conduct 
for so doing. 

"they will all fanci me a coward," he thought, "and that I dare not 
sleep here. they may not, of course, say so, but they will think that my 
appear so bold wa one of those act of bravado which I have not 
courag to carri fairli out." 

take thi view of the matter wa just the way to enlist a young man' 
pride in staying, under all circumstances, where he was, and, with a 
slight access of colour, which, even although he wa alone, would 
visit hi cheeks, charl holland said aloud,-- 

"I will remain the occup of thi room come what may, happen what may. 
No terrors, real or unsubstantial, shall drive me from it: I will brave 
them all, and remain here to brave them." 

tap came the knock at the door again, and now, with more an air of 
vexat than fear, charl turn again toward it, and listened. tap 
in anoth minut again succeeded, and much annoyed, he walk close to 
the door, and laid hi hand upon the lock, readi to open it at the 
precis moment of anoth demand for admiss be made. 

He had not to wait long. In about half a minut it came again, and, 
simultan with the sound, the door flew open. there wa no one to 
be seen; but, as he open the door, he heard a strang sound in the 
corridor--a sound which scarc could be call a groan, and scarc a 
sigh, but seem a compound of both, have the agoni of the one 
combin with the sad of the other. from what direct it came he 
could not at the moment decide, but he call out,-- 

"who' there? who' there?" 

the echo of hi own voic alon answer him for a few moments, and then 
he heard a door open, and a voice, which he knew to be henry's, cried,-- 

"what is it? who speaks?" 

"henry," said charles. 

"yes--yes--yes." 

"I fear I have disturb you." 

"you have been disturb yourself, or you would not have done so. I 
shall be with you in a moment." 

henri close hi door befor charl holland could tell him not to come 
to him, as he intend to do, for he felt asham to have, in a manner 
of speaking, summon assist for so trifl a caus of alarm as 
that to which he had been subjected. however, he could not go to henry' 
chamber to forbid him from come to his, and, more vex than before, 
he retir to hi room again to await hi coming. 

He left the door open now, so that henri bannerworth, when he had got on 
some articl of dress, walk in at once, saying,-- 

"what ha happened, charles?" 

"A mere trifle, henry, concern which I am asham you should have 
been at all disturbed." 

"never mind that, I wa wakeful." 

"I heard a door open, which kept me listening, but I could not decid 
which door it wa till I heard your voic in the corridor." 

"well, it wa thi door; and I open it twice in consequ of the 
repeat tap for admiss that came to it; some one ha been knock 
at it, and, when I go to it, lo! I can see nobody." 

"indeed!" 

[illustration] 

"such is the case." 

"you surpris me." 

"I am veri sorri to have disturb you, because, upon such a ground, I 
do not feel that I ought to have done so; and, when I call out in the 
corridor, I assur you it wa with no such intention." 

"do not regret it for a moment," said henry; "you were quit justifi 
in make an alarm on such an occasion." 

"it' strang enough, but still it may aris from some accident cause; 
admitting, if we did but know it, of some readi enough explanation." 

"it may, certainly, but, after what ha happen already, we may well 
suppos a mysteri connexion between ani unusu sight or sound, and 
the fear one we have alreadi seen." 

"certainli we may." 

"how earnestli that strang portrait seem to look upon us, charles." 

"it does, and I have been examin it carefully. It seem to have been 
remov lately." 

"removed!" 

"yes, I think, as far as I can judge, that it ha been taken from it 
frame; I mean, that the panel on which it is paint ha been taken 
out." 

"indeed!" 

"if you touch it you will find it loose, and, upon a close examination, 
you will perceiv that a piec of the mould which hold it in it 
place ha been chip off, which is done in such a place that I think 
it could onli have arisen dure the remov of the picture." 

"you must be mistaken." 

"I cannot, of course, take upon myself, henry, to say precis such is 
the case," said charles. 

"but there is no one here to do so." 

"that I cannot say. will you permit me and assist me to remov it? I 
have a great curios to know what is behind it." 

"if you have, I certainli will do so. We thought of take it away 
altogether, but when flora left thi room the idea wa given up as 
useless. remain here a few moments, and I will endeavour to find 
someth which shall assist us in it removal." 

henri left the mysteri chamber in order to search in hi own for some 
mean of remov the frame-work of the picture, so that the panel would 
slip easili out, and while he wa gone, charl holland continu gaze 
upon it with greater interest, if possible, than before. 

In a few minut henri returned, and although what he had succeed in 
find were veri ineffici implement for the purpose, yet with thi 
aid the two young men set about the task. 

It is said, and said truli enough, that "where there is a will there is 
a way," and although the young men had no tool at all adapt for the 
purpose, they did succeed in remov the mould from the side of the 
panel, and then by a littl tap at one end of it, and use a knife 
at a lever at the other end of the panel, they got it fairli out. 

disappoint wa all they got for their pains. On the other side there 
wa noth but a rough wooden wall, against which the finer and more 
nice finish oak panel of the chamber rested. 

"there is no mysteri here," said henry. 

"none whatever," said charles, as he tap the wall with hi knuckles, 
and found it all hard and sound. "we are foiled." 

"we are indeed." 

"I had a strang presentiment, now," ad charles, "that we should make 
some discoveri that would repay us for our trouble. It appears, however, 
that such is not to be the case; for you see noth present itself to 
us but the most ordinari appearances." 

"I perceiv as much; and the panel itself, although of more than 
ordinari thickness, is, after all, but a bit of plane oak, and 
appar fashion for no other object than to paint the portrait on." 

"true. shall we replac it?" 

charl reluctantli assented, and the pictur wa replac in it 
origin position. We say charl reluctantli assented, because, 
although he had now had ocular demonstr that there wa realli 
noth behind the panel but the ordinari woodwork which might have been 
expect from the construct of the old house, yet he could not, even 
with such a fact stare him in the face, get rid entir of the 
feel that had come across him, to the effect that the pictur had 
some mysteri or another. 

"you are not yet satisfied," said henry, as he observ the doubt 
look of charl holland' face. 

"mi dear friend," said charles, "I will not deceiv you. I am much 
disappoint that we have made no discoveri behind that picture." 

"heaven know we have mysteri enough in our family," said henry. 

even as he spoke they were both startl by a strang clatter nois 
at the window, which wa accompani by a shrill, odd kind of shriek, 
which sound fear and preternatur on the night air. 

"what is that?" said charles. 

"god onli knows," said henry. 

the two young men natur turn their earnest gaze in the direct 
of the window, which we have befor remark wa one unprovid with 
shutters, and there, to their intens surprise, they saw, slowli rise 
up from the lower part of it, what appear to be a human form. henri 
would have dash forward, but charl restrain him, and draw 
quickli from it case a larg holster pistol, he level it care 
at the figure, say in a whisper,-- 

"henry, if I don't hit it, I will consent to forfeit my head." 

He pull the trigger--a loud report followed--th room wa fill with 
smoke, and then all wa still. A circumstance, however, had occurred, as 
a consequ of the concuss of air produc by the discharg of the 
pistol, which neither of the young men had for the moment calcul 
upon, and that wa the put out of the onli light they there had. 

In spite of thi circumstance, charles, the moment he had discharg the 
pistol, drop it and sprung forward to the window. but here he wa 
perplexed, for he could not find the old fashioned, intric fasten 
which held it shut, and he had to call to henry,-- 

"henry! for god' sake open the window for me, henry! the fasten of 
the window is known to you, but not to me. open it for me." 

thu call upon, henri sprung forward, and by thi time the report of 
the pistol had effectu alarm the whole household. the flash of 
light from the corridor came into the room, and in anoth minute, just 
as henri succeed in get the window wide open, and charl holland 
had made hi way on to the balcony, both georg bannerworth and mr. 
marchdal enter the chamber, eager to know what had occurred. To their 
eager question henri replied,-- 

"ask me not now;" and then call to charles, he said,--"remain where 
you are, charles, while I run down to the garden immedi beneath the 
balcony." 

"yes--yes," said charles. 

henri made prodigi haste, and wa in the garden immedi below the 
bay window in a wonder short space of time. He spoke to charles, 
saying,-- 

"will you now descend? I can see noth here; but we will both make a 
search." 

georg and mr. marchdal were both now in the balcony, and they would 
have descend likewise, but henri said,-- 

"do not all leav the house. god onli knows, now, situat as we are, 
what might happen." 

"I will remain, then," said george. "I have been sit up to-night as 
the guard, and, therefore, may as well continu to do so." 

marchdal and charl holland clamber over the balcony, and easily, 
from it insignific height, drop into the garden. the night wa 
beautiful, and profoundli still. there wa not a breath of air 
suffici to stir a leaf on a tree, and the veri flame of the candl 
which charl had left burn in the balconi burnt clearli and 
steadily, be perfectli unruffl by ani wind. 

It cast a suffici light close to the window to make everyth veri 
plainli visible, and it wa evid at a glanc that no object wa 
there, although had that figure, which charl shot at, and no doubt 
hit, been flesh and blood, it must have drop immedi below. 

As they look up for a moment after a cursori examin of the 
ground, charl exclaimed,-- 

"look at the window! As the light is now situated, you can see the hole 
made in one of the pane of glass by the passag of the bullet from my 
pistol." 

they did look, and there the clear, round hole, without ani starring, 
which a bullet discharg close to a pane of glass will make in it, wa 
clearli and plainli discernible. 

"you must have hit him," said henry. 

"one would think so," said charles; "for that wa the exact place where 
the figur was." 

"and there is noth here," ad marchdale. "what can we think of 
these events--what resourc ha the mind against the most dread 
supposit concern them?" 

charl and henri were both silent; in truth, they knew not what to 
think, and the word utter by marchdal were too strikingli true to 
disput for a moment. they were lost in wonder. 

"human mean against such an appear as we saw to-night," said 
charles, "are evid useless." 

"mi dear young friend," said marchdale, with much emotion, as he grasp 
henri bannerworth' hand, and the tear stood in hi eye as he did 
so,--"mi dear young friend, these constant alarm will kill you. they 
will drive you, and all whose happi you hold dear, distracted. you 
must control these dread feelings, and there is but one chanc that I 
can see of get now the better of these." 

"what is that?" 

"bi leav thi place for ever." 

"alas! am I to be driven from the home of my ancestor from such a caus 
as this? and whither am I to fly? where are we to find a refuge? To 
leav here will be at onc to break up the establish which is now 
held together, certainli upon the suffer of creditors, but still to 
their advantage, inasmuch as I am do what no one els would do, 
namely, pay away to within the scantiest pittanc the whole proce 
of the estat that spread around me." 

"heed noth but an escap from such horror as seem to be accumul 
now around you." 

"if I were sure that such a remov would bring with it such a 
correspond advantage, I might, indeed, be induc to risk all to 
accomplish it." 

"a regard poor dear flora," said mr. marchdale, "I know not what to 
say, or what to think; she ha been attack by a vampyre, and after 
thi mortal life shall have ended, it is dread to think there may be 
a possibl that she, with all her beauty, all her excel and 
puriti of mind, and all those virtu and qualiti which should make 
her the belov of all, and which do, indeed, attach all heart toward 
her, should becom one of that dread tribe of be who cling to 
exist by feeding, in the most dread manner, upon the life blood 
of others--oh, it is too dread to contemplate! too horrible--too 
horrible!" 

"then wherefor speak of it?" said charles, with some asperity. "now, by 
the great god of heaven, who see all our hearts, I will not give in to 
such a horribl doctrine! I will not believ it; and were death itself 
my portion for my want of faith, I would thi moment die in my disbelief 
of anyth so truli fearful!" 

"oh, my young friend," ad marchdale, "if anyth could add to the 
pang which all who love, and admire, and respect flora bannerworth must 
feel at the unhappi condit in which she is placed, it would be the 
nobl natur of you, who, under happier auspices, would have been her 
guid through life, and the happi partner of her destiny." 

"a I will be still." 

"may heaven forbid it! We are now among ourselves, and can talk freeli 
upon such a subject. mr. charl holland, if you wed, you would look 
forward to be bless with children--thos sweet tie which bind the 
sternest heart to life with so exquisit a bondage. oh, fancy, then, 
for a moment, the mother of your babe come at the still hour of 
midnight to drain from their vein the veri life blood she gave to them. 
To drive you and them mad with the expect horror of such 
visitations--to make your night hideous--your day but so mani hour of 
melancholi retrospection. oh, you know not the world of terror, on the 
aw brink of which you stand, when you talk of make flora 
bannerworth a wife." 

"peace! oh, peace!" said henry. 

"nay, I know my word are unwelcome," continu mr. marchdale. "it 
happens, unfortun for human nature, that truth and some of our best 
and holiest feel are too often at variance, and hold a sad 
contest--" 

"I will hear no more of this," cri charl holland.--"i will hear no 
more." 

"I have done," said mr. marchdale. 

"and 'twere well you had not begun." 

"nay, say not so. I have but done what I consid wa a solemn duty." 

"under that assumpt of do duty--a solemn duty--heedless of the 
feel and the opinion of others," said charles, sarcastically, "more 
mischief is produced--mor heart-burn and anxieti caused, than by 
ani other two caus of such mischiev result combined. I wish to 
hear no more of this." 

"do not be anger with mr. marchdale, charles," said henry. "he can 
have no motiv but our welfar in what he says. We should not condemn a 
speaker becaus hi word may not sound pleasant to our ears." 

"bi heaven!" said charles, with animation, "I meant not to be illiberal; 
but I will not becaus I cannot see a man' motiv for activ 
interfer in the affair of others, alway be ready, mere on 
account of such ignorance, to jump to a conclus that they must be 
estimable." 

"to-morrow, I leav thi house," said marchdale. 

"leav us?" exclaim henry. 

"ay, for ever." 

"nay, now, mr. marchdale, is thi generous?" 

"am I treat gener by one who is your own guest, and toward whom 
I wa will to hold out the honest right hand of friendship?" 

henri turn to charl holland, saying,-- 

"charles, I know your gener nature. say you meant no offenc to my 
mother' old friend." 

"if to say I meant no offence," said charles, "i to say I meant no 
insult, I say it freely." 

"enough," cri marchdale; "I am satisfied." 

"but do not," ad charles, "draw me ani more such pictur as the one 
you have alreadi present to my imagination, I beg of you. from the 
storehous of my own fanci I can find quit enough to make me wretched, 
if I choos to be so; but again and again do I say I will not allow thi 
monstrou superstit to tread me down, like the tread of a giant on a 
broken reed. I will contend against it while I have life to do so." 

"brave spoken." 

"and when I desert flora bannerworth, may heaven, from that moment, 
desert me!" 

"charles!" cri henry, with emotion, "dear charles, my more than 
friend--broth of my heart--nobl charles!" 

"nay, henry, I am not entitl to your praises. I were base inde to be 
other than that which I purpos to be. come weal or woe--com what may, 
I am the affianc husband of your sister, and she, and she only, can 
break asund the tie that bind me to her." 




chapter xiii. 

the offer for the hall.--th visit TO sir franci varney.--th strang 
resemblance.--a dread suggestion. 


[illustration] 

the parti made a strict search through everi nook and corner of the 
garden, but it prove to be a fruitless one: not the least trace of ani 
one could be found. there wa onli one circumstance, which wa ponder 
over deepli by them all, and that wa that, beneath the window of the 
room in which flora and her mother sat while the brother were on their 
visit to the vault of their ancestors, were visibl mark of blood to a 
consider extent. 

It will be rememb that flora had fire a pistol at the spectral 
appearance, and that immedi upon that it had disappeared, after 
utter a sound which might well be constru into a cri of pain from a 
wound. 

that a wound then had been inflict upon some one, the blood beneath 
the window now abundantli testified; and when it wa discovered, henri 
and charl made a veri close examin inde of the garden, to 
discov what direct the wound figure, be it man or vampyre, had 
taken. 

[illustration] 

but the closest scrutini did not reveal to them a singl spot of blood, 
beyond the space immedi beneath the window;--ther the apparit 
seem to have receiv it wound, and then, by some mysteri means, 
to have disappeared. 

At length, weari with the continu excitement, combin with want of 
sleep, to which they had been subjected, they return to the hall. 

flora, with the except of the alarm she experienc from the fire 
of the pistol, had met with no disturbance, and that, in order to spare 
her pain reflections, they told her wa mere done as a 
precautionari measure, to proclaim to ani one who might be lurk in 
the garden that the inmat of the hous were readi to defend themselv 
against ani aggression. 

whether or not she believ thi kind deceit they knew not. she onli 
sigh deeply, and wept. the probabl is, that she more than 
suspect the vampyr had made anoth visit, but they forbor to press 
the point; and, leav her with her mother, henri and georg went from 
her chamber again--th former to endeavour to seek some repose, as it 
would be hi turn to watch on the succeed night, and the latter to 
resum hi station in a small room close to flora' chamber, where it 
had been agre watch and ward should be kept by turn while the alarm 
lasted. 

At length, the morn again dawn upon that unhappi family, and to 
none were it beam more welcome. 

the bird sang their pleasant carol beneath the window. the sweet, 
deep-colour autumn sun shone upon all object with a golden luster; 
and to look abroad, upon the beam face of nature, no one could for a 
moment suppose, except from sad experience, that there were such thing 
as gloom, misery, and crime, upon the earth. 

"and must i," said henry, as he gaze from a window of the hall upon the 
undul park, the majest trees, the flowers, the shrubs, and the 
mani natur beauti with which the place wa full,--"must I be chase 
from thi spot, the home of my self and of my kindred, by a 
phantom--must I inde seek refug elsewhere, becaus my own home ha 
becom hideous?" 

It wa inde a cruel and a pain thought! It wa one he yet would 
not, could not be convinc wa absolut necessary. but now the sun 
wa shining: it wa morning; and the feelings, which found a home in hi 
breast amid the darkness, the stillness, and the uncertainti of night, 
were chase away by those gloriou beam of sunlight, that fell upon 
hill, valley, and stream, and the thousand sweet sound of life and 
anim that fill that sunni air! 

such a revuls of feel wa natur enough. mani of the distress 
and mental anxieti of night vanish with the night, and those which 
oppress the heart of henri bannerworth were consider modified. 

He wa engag in these reflect when he heard the sound of the lodg 
bell, and as a visitor wa now somewhat rare at thi establishment, he 
wait with some anxieti to see to whom he wa indebt for so earli a 
call. 

In the cours of a few minutes, one of the servant came to him with a 
letter in her hand. 

It bore a larg handsom seal, and, from it appearance, would seem to 
have come from some personag of consequence. A second glanc at it 
shew him the name of "varney" in the corner, and, with some degre of 
vexation, he mutter to himself, 

"anoth condol epistl from the troublesom neighbour whom I have 
not yet seen." 

"if you please, sir," said the servant who had brought him the letter, 
"a i'm here, and you are here, perhap you'll have no object to give 
me what i'm to have for the day and two night as i'v been here, co I 
can't stay in a famili as is so familiar with all sort o' ghostesses: I 
ain't use to such company." 

"what do you mean?" said henry. 

the question wa a superflu one--: too well he knew what the woman 
meant, and the convict came across hi mind strongli that no domest 
would consent to live long in a hous which wa subject to such dread 
visitations. 

"what doe I mean!" said the woman,--"why, sir, if it' all the same to 
you, I don't myself come of a wampyr family, and I don't choos to 
remain in a hous where there is sich thing encouraged. that' what I 
means, sir." 

"what wage are owe to you?" said henry. 

"why, as to wages, I onli come here by the day." 

"go, then, and settl with my mother. the sooner you leav thi house, 
the better." 

"oh, indeed. i'm sure I don't want to stay." 

thi woman wa one of those who were alway arm at all point for a 
row, and she had no notion of conclud ani engagement, of ani 
charact whatever, without some disturbance; therefore, to see henri 
take what she said with such provok calm wa aggrav in the 
extreme; but there wa no help for such a sourc of vexation. she could 
find no other ground of quarrel than what wa connect with the 
vampyre, and, as henri would not quarrel with her on such a score, she 
wa compel to give it up in despair. 

when henri found himself alone, and free from the annoy of thi 
woman, he turn hi attent to the letter he held in hi hand, and 
which, from the autograph in the corner, he knew came from hi new 
neighbour, sir franci varney, whom, by some chanc or another, he had 
never yet seen. 

To hi great surprise, he found that the letter contain the follow 
words:-- 

dear sir,--"a a neighbour, by purchas of an estat contigu 
to your own, I am quit sure you have excused, and taken in good 
part, the cordial offer I made to you of friendship and servic 
some short time since; but now, in address to you a distinct 
proposition, I trust I shall meet with an indulg 
consideration, whether such proposit be accord with your 
view or not. 

"what I have heard from common report induc me to believ that 
bannerworth hall cannot be a desir resid for yourself, or 
your amiabl sister. If I am right in that conjecture, and you 
have ani seriou thought of leav the place, I would earnestli 
recommend you, as one have some experi in such descript 
of property, to sell it at once. 

"now, the proposit with which I conclud thi letter is, I 
know, of a charact to make you doubt the disinterested of 
such advice; but that it is disinterested, nevertheless, is a 
fact of which I can assur my own heart, and of which I beg to 
assur you. I propose, then, should you, upon consideration, 
decid upon such a cours of proceeding, to purchas of you the 
hall. I do not ask for a bargain on account of ani extran 
circumst which may at the present time depreci the valu 
of the property, but I am will to give a fair price for it. 
under these circumstances, I trust, sir, that you will give a 
kindli consider to my offer, and even if you reject it, I 
hope that, as neighbours, we may live long in peac and amity, 
and in the interchang of those good offic which should subsist 
between us. await your reply, 

"believ me to be, dear sir, 

"your veri obedi servant, 

"franci varney. 

"to henri bannerworth, esq." 

henry, after have read thi most unobjection letter through, 
fold it up again, and place it in hi pocket. clasp hi hands, 
then, behind hi back, a favourit attitud of hi when he wa in deep 
contemplation, he pace to and fro in the garden for some time in deep 
thought. 

"how strange," he muttered. "it seem that everi circumst combin 
to induc me to leav my old ancestr home. It appear as if everyth 
now that happen had that direct tendency. what can be the mean of 
all this? 'ti veri strange--amazingli strange. here aris circumst 
which are enough to induc ani man to leav a particular place. then a 
friend, in whose single-minded and judgment I know I can rely, 
advis the step, and immedi upon the back of that come a fair and 
candid offer." 

there wa an appar connexion between all these circumst which 
much puzzl henry. He walk to and fro for nearli an hour, until he 
heard a hasti footstep approach him, and upon look in the 
direct from whenc it came, he saw mr. marchdale. 

"I will seek marchdale' advice," he said, "upon thi matter. I will 
hear what he say concern it." 

"henry," said marchdale, when he came suffici near to him for 
conversation, "whi do you remain here alone?" 

"I have receiv a commun from our neighbour, sir franci 
varney," said henry. 

"indeed!" 

"it is here. perus it for yourself, and then tell me, marchdale, 
candidli what you think of it." 

"I suppose," said marchdale, as he open the letter, "it is anoth 
friendli note of condol on the state of your domest affairs, 
which, I griev to say, from the prattl of domestics, whose tongu 
it is quit imposs to silence, have becom food for gossip all over 
the neighbour villag and estates." 

"if anyth could add anoth pang to those I have alreadi been made to 
suffer," said henry, "it would certainli aris from be made the food 
of vulgar gossip. but read the letter, marchdale. you will find it 
content of a more import charact than you anticipate." 

"indeed!" said marchdale, as he ran hi eye eagerli over the note. 

when he had finish it he glanc at henry, who then said,-- 

"well, what is your opinion?" 

"I know not what to say, henry. you know that my own advic to you ha 
been to get rid of thi place." 

"it has." 

"with the hope that the disagre affair connect with it now may 
remain connect with it as a house, and not with you and your as a 
family." 

"it may be so." 

"there appear to me everi likelihood of it." 

"I do not know," said henry, with a shudder. "I must confess, marchdale, 
that to my own percept it seem more probabl that the inflict we 
have experienc from the strang visitor, who seem now resolv to 
pester us with visits, will rather attach to a famili than to a house. 
the vampyr may follow us." 

"if so, of cours the part with the hall would be a great pity, and 
no gain." 

"none in the least." 

"henry, a thought ha struck me." 

"let' hear it, marchdale." 

"it is this:--suppos you were to tri the experi of leav the hall 
without sell it. suppos for one year you were to let it to some one, 
henry." 

"it might be done." 

"ay, and it might, with veri great promis and candour, be propos to 
thi veri gentleman, sir franci varney, to take it for one year, to see 
how he like it befor becom the possessor of it. then if he found 
himself torment by the vampyre, he need not complet the purchase, or 
if you found that the apparit follow you from hence, you might 
yourself return, feel that perhap here, in the spot familiar to 
your youth, you might be most happy, even under such circumst as at 
present oppress you." 

"most happy!" ejacul henry. 

"perhap I should not have use that word." 

"I am sure you should not," said henry, "when you speak of me." 

"well--well; let us hope that the time may not be veri far distant when 
I may use the term happy, as appli to you, in the most conclus and 
the strongest manner it can be used." 

"oh," said henry, "I will hope; but do not mock me with it now, 
marchdale, I pray you." 

"heaven forbid that I should mock you!" 

"well--well; I do not believ you are the man to do so to ani one. but 
about thi affair of the house." 

"distinctly, then, if I were you, I would call upon sir franci varney, 
and make him an offer to becom a tenant of the hall for twelv months, 
dure which time you could go where you please, and test the fact of 
absenc rid you or not rid you of the dread visit who 
make the night here truli hideous." 

"I will speak to my mother, to george, and to my sister of the matter. 
they shall decide." 

mr. marchdal now strove in everi possibl manner to rais the spirit 
of henri bannerworth, by paint to him the futur in far more radiant 
colour than the present, and endeavour to induc a belief in hi 
mind that a short period of time might after all replac in hi mind, 
and in the mind of those who were natur so dear to him, all their 
wont serenity. 

henry, although he felt not much comfort from these kindli efforts, yet 
could feel gratitud to him who made them; and after express such a 
feel to marchdale, in strong terms, he repair to the house, in 
order to hold a solemn consult with those whom he felt ought to be 
consult as well as himself as to what step should be taken with 
regard to the hall. 

the proposition, or rather the suggestion, which had been made by 
marchdal upon the proposit of sir franci varney, wa in everi 
respect so reason and just, that it met, as wa to be expected, with 
the concurr of everi member of the family. 

flora' cheek almost resum some of their wont colour at the mere 
thought now of leav that home to which she had been at one time so 
much attached. 

"yes, dear henry," she said, "let us leav here if you are agreeabl so 
to do, and in leav thi house, we will believ that we leav behind 
us a world of terror." 

"flora," remark henry, in a tone of slight reproach, "if you were so 
anxiou to leav bannerworth hall, whi did you not say so befor thi 
proposit came from other mouths? you know your feel upon such a 
subject would have been law to me." 

"I knew you were attach to the old house," said flora; "and, besides, 
event have come upon us all with such fear rapidity, there ha 
scarc been time to think." 

"true--true." 

"and you will leave, henry?" 

"I will call upon sir franci varney myself, and speak to him upon the 
subject." 

A new impetu to exist appear now to come over the whole family, 
at the idea of leav a place which alway would be now associ in 
their mind with so much terror. each member of the famili felt happier, 
and breath more freeli than before, so that the chang which had come 
over them seem almost magical. and charl holland, too, wa much 
better pleased, and he whisper to flora,-- 

"dear flora, you will now sure no longer talk of drive from you the 
honest heart that love you?" 

"hush, charles, hush!" she said; "meet me an hour henc in the garden, 
and we will talk of this." 

"that hour will seem an age," he said. 

henry, now, have made a determin to see sir franci varney, lost 
no time in put it into execution. At mr. marchdale' own request, he 
took him with him, as it wa desir to have a third person present in 
the sort of busi negoti which wa go on. the estat which 
had been so recent enter upon by the person call himself sir 
franci varney, and which common report said he had purchased, wa a 
small, but complet property, and situat so close to the ground 
connect with bannerworth hall, that a short walk soon place henri and 
mr. marchdal befor the resid of thi gentleman, who had shown so 
kindli a feel toward the bannerworth family. 

"have you seen sir franci varney?" ask henri of mr. marchdale, as he 
rung the gate-bell. 

"I have not. have you?" 

"no; I never saw him. It is rather awkward our both be absolut 
stranger to hi person." 

"we can but send in our names, however; and, from the great vein of 
courtesi that run through hi letter, I have no doubt but we shall 
receiv the most gentlemanli recept from him." 

A servant in handsom liveri appear at the iron-gates, which open 
upon a lawn in the front of sir franci varney' house, and to thi 
domest henri bannerworth hand hi card, on which he had written, in 
pencil, likewis the name of mr. marchdale. 

"if your master," he said, "i within, we shall be glad to see him." 

"sir franci is at home, sir," wa the reply, "although not veri well. 
If you will be pleas to walk in, I will announc you to him." 

henri and marchdal follow the man into a handsom enough 
reception-room, where they were desir to wait while their name were 
announced. 

"do you know if thi gentleman be a baronet," said henry, "or a knight 
merely?" 

"I realli do not; I never saw him in my life, or heard of him befor he 
came into thi neighbourhood." 

"and I have been too much occupi with the pain occurr of thi 
hall to know anyth of our neighbours. I dare say mr. chillingworth, 
if we had thought to ask him, would have known someth concern 
him." 

"no doubt." 

thi brief colloquy wa put an end to by the servant, who said,-- 

"mi master, gentlemen, is not veri well; but he beg me to present hi 
best compliments, and to say he is much gratifi with your visit, and 
will be happi to see you in hi study." 

henri and marchdal follow the man up a flight of stone stairs, and 
then they were conduct through a larg apart into a smaller one. 
there wa veri littl light in thi small room; but at the moment of 
their entranc a tall man, who wa seated, rose, and, touch the 
spring of a blind that wa to the window, it wa up in a moment, 
admit a broad glare of light. A cri of surprise, mingl with 
terror, came from henri bannerworth' lip. _the origin of the portrait 
on the panel stood befor him!_ there wa the lofti stature, the long, 
sallow face, the slightli project teeth, the dark, lustrous, although 
somewhat sombr eyes; the express of the features--al were alike. 

"are you unwell, sir?" said sir franci varney, in soft, mellow accents, 
as he hand a chair to the bewild henry. 

"god of heaven!" said henry; "how like!" 

"you seem surprised, sir. have you ever seen me before?" 

sir franci drew himself up to hi full height, and cast a strang 
glanc upon henry, whose eye were rivet upon hi face, as if with a 
speci of fascin which he could not resist. 

"marchdale," henri gasped; "marchdale, my friend, marchdale. i--i am 
sure mad." 

"hush! be calm," whisper marchdale. 

"calm--calm--can you not see? marchdale, is thi a dream? 
look--look--oh! look." 

"for god' sake, henry, compos yourself." 

"i your friend often thus?" said sir franci varney, with the same 
melliflu tone which seem habitu to him. 

"no, sir, he is not; but recent circumst have shatter hi nerves; 
and, to tell the truth, you bear so strong a resembl to an old 
portrait, in hi house, that I do not wonder so much as I otherwis 
should at hi agitation." 

"indeed." 

"A resemblance!" said henry; "a resemblance! god of heaven! it is the 
face itself." 

"you much surpris me," said sir francis. 

[illustration] 

henri sunk into the chair which wa near him, and he trembl violently. 
the rush of pain thought and conjectur that came through hi mind 
wa enough to make ani one tremble. "i thi the vampyre?" wa the 
horribl question that seem impress upon hi veri brain, in letter 
of flame. "i thi the vampyre?" 

"are you better, sir?" said sir franci varney, in hi bland, music 
voice. "shall I order ani refresh for you?" 

"no--no," gasp henry; "for the love of truth tell me! is--i your name 
realli varney!" 

"sir?" 

"have you no other name to which, perhaps, a better titl you could 
urge?" 

"mr. bannerworth, I can assur you that I am too proud of the name of 
the famili to which I belong to exchang it for ani other, be it what it 
may." 

"how wonder like!" 

"I griev to see you so much distressed. mr. bannerworth. I presum ill 
health ha thu shatter your nerves?" 

"no; ill health ha not done the work. I know not what to say, sir 
franci varney, to you; but recent event in my famili have made the 
sight of you full of horribl conjectures." 

"what mean you, sir?" 

"you know, from common report, that we have had a fear visitor at our 
house." 

"A vampyre, I have heard," said sir franci varney, with a bland, and 
almost beauti smile, which display hi white glisten teeth to 
perfection. 

"yes; a vampyre, and--and--" 

"I pray you go on, sir; you sure are far abov the vulgar superstit 
of believ in such matters?" 

"mi judgment is assail in too mani way and shape for it to hold out 
probabl as it ought to do against so hideou a belief, but never wa it 
so much bewild as now." 

"whi so?" 

"because--" 

"nay, henry," whisper mr. marchdale, "it is scarc civil to tell sir 
franci to hi face, that he resembl a vampyre." 

"I must, I must." 

"pray, sir," interrupt varney to marchdale, "permit mr. bannerworth to 
speak here freely. there is noth in the whole world I so much admir 
as candour." 

"then you so much resembl the vampyre," ad henry, "that--that I know 
not what to think." 

"i it possible?" said varney. 

"it is a damn fact." 

"well, it' unfortun for me, I presume? ah!" 

varney gave a twing of pain, as if some sudden bodili ailment had 
attack him severely. 

"you are unwell, sir?" said marchdale. 

"no, no--no," he said; "i--hurt my arm, and happen accident to 
touch the arm of thi chair with it." 

"A hurt?" said henry. 

"yes, mr. bannerworth." 

"a--a wound?" 

"yes, a wound, but not much more than skin deep. In fact, littl beyond 
an abras of the skin." 

"may I inquir how you came by it?" 

"oh, yes. A slight fall." 

"indeed." 

"remarkable, is it not? veri remarkable. We never know a moment when, 
from same most trifl cause, we may receiv realli some seriou bodili 
harm. how true it is, mr. bannerworth, that in the midst of life we are 
in death." 

"and equal true, perhaps," said henry, "that in the midst of death 
there may be found a horribl life." 

"well, I should not wonder. there are realli so mani strang thing in 
thi world, that I have left off wonder at anyth now." 

"there are strang things," said henry. "you wish to purchas of me the 
hall, sir?" 

"if you wish to sell." 

"you--you are perhap attach to the place? perhap you recollect it, 
sir, long ago?" 

"not veri long," smile sir franci varney. "it seem a nice comfort 
old house; and the grounds, too, appear to be amazingli well wooded, 
which, to one of rather a romant tempera like myself, is alway an 
addit charm to a place. I wa extrem pleas with it the first 
time I beheld it, and a desir to call myself the owner of it took 
possess of my mind. the sceneri is remark for it beauty, and, 
from what I have seen of it, it is rare to be excelled. No doubt you 
are greatli attach to it." 

"it ha been my home from infancy," return henry, "and be also the 
resid of my ancestor for centuries, it is natur that I should be 
so." 

"true--true." 

"the house, no doubt, ha suffer much," said henry, "within the last 
hundr years." 

"no doubt it has. A hundr year is a toler long space of time, you 
know." 

"it is, indeed. oh, how ani human life which is spun out to such an 
extent, must lose it charms, by lose all it fondest and dearest 
associations." 

"ah, how true," said sir franci varney. He had some minut previous 
touch a bell, and at thi moment a servant brought in on a tray some 
wine and refreshments. 




chapter xiv. 

henry' agreement with sir franci varney.--th sudden arriv AT the 
hall.--flora' alarm. 


[illustration] 

On the tray which the servant brought into the room, were refresh 
of differ kinds, includ wine, and after wave hi hand for the 
domest to retire, sir franci varney said,-- 

"you will be better, mr. bannerworth, for a glass of wine after your 
walk, and you too, sir. I am asham to say, I have quit forgotten your 
name." 

"marchdale." 

"mr. marchdale. ay, marchdale. pray, sir, help yourself." 

"you take noth yourself?" said henry. 

"I am under a strict regimen," repli varney. "the simplest diet alon 
doe for me, and I have accustom myself to long abstinence." 

"he will not eat or drink," mutter henry, abstractedly. 

"will you sell me the hall?" said sir franci varney. 

henri look in hi face again, from which he had onli momentarili 
withdrawn hi eyes, and he wa then more struck than ever with the 
resembl between him and the portrait on the panel of what had been 
flora' chamber. what made that resemblance, too, one about which there 
could scarc be two opinions, wa the mark or cicatrix of a wound in 
the forehead, which the painter had slightli indent in the portrait, 
but which wa much more plainli visibl on the forehead of sir franci 
varney. now that henri observ thi distinct mark, which he had not 
done before, he could feel no doubt, and a sicken sensat came over 
him at the thought that he wa actual now in the presenc of one of 
those terribl creatures, vampyres. 

"you do not drink," said varney. "most young men are not so modest with 
a decant of unimpeach wine befor them. I pray you help yourself." 

"I cannot." 

henri rose as he spoke, and turn to marchdale, he said, in 
addition,-- 

"will you come away?" 

"if you please," said marchdale, rising. 

"but you have not, my dear sir," said varney, "given me yet ani answer 
about the hall?" 

"I cannot yet," answer henry, "I will think. My present impress is, 
to let you have it on whatev term you may yourself propose, alway 
provid you consent to one of mine." 

"name it." 

"that you never show yourself in my family." 

"how veri unkind. I understand you have a charm sister, young, 
beautiful, and accomplished. shall I confess, now, that I had hope of 
make myself agreeabl to her?" 

"you make yourself agreeabl to her? the sight of you would blast her 
for ever, and drive her to madness." 

"am I so hideous?" 

"no, but--you are--" 

"what am i?" 

"hush, henry, hush," cri marchdale. "rememb you are in thi 
gentleman' house." 

"true, true. whi doe he tempt me to say these dread things? I do not 
want to say them." 

"come away, then--com away at once. sir franci varney, my friend, mr. 
bannerworth, will think over your offer, and let you know. I think you 
may consid that your wish to becom the purchas of the hall will be 
compli with." 

"I wish to have it," said varney, "and I can onli say, that if I am 
master of it, I shall be veri happi to see ani of the famili on a visit 
at ani time." 

"A visit!" said henry, with a shudder. "A visit to the tomb were far 
more desirable. farewell, sir." 

"adieu," said sir franci varney, and he made one of the most eleg 
bow in the world, while there came over hi face a peculiar of 
express that wa strange, if not painful, to contemplate. In anoth 
minut henri and marchdal were clear of the house, and with feel of 
bewilder and horror, which beggar all description, poor henri 
allow himself to be led by the arm by marchdal to some distance, 
without utter a word. when he did speak, he said,-- 

"marchdale, it would be chariti of some one to kill me." 

"to kill you!" 

"yes, for I am certain otherwis that I must go mad." 

"nay, nay; rous yourself." 

"thi man, varney, is a vampyre." 

"hush! hush!" 

"I tell you, marchdale," cri henry, in a wild, excit manner, "he is 
a vampyre. He is the dread be who visit flora at the still hour 
of midnight, and drain the life-blood from her veins. He is a vampyre. 
there are such things. I cannot doubt now. oh, god, I wish now that your 
lightn would blast me, as here I stand, for over into annihilation, 
for I am go mad to be compel to feel that such horror can realli 
have existence." 

"henry--henry." 

"nay, talk not to me. what can I do? shall I kill him? Is it not a 
sacr duti to destroy such a thing? oh, horror--horror. He must be 
killed--destroyed--burnt, and the veri dust to which he is consum must 
be scatter to the wind of heaven. It would be a deed well done, 
marchdale." 

"hush! hush! these word are dangerous." 

"I care not." 

"what if they were overheard now by unfriendli ears? what might not be 
the uncomfort results? I pray you be more cautiou what you say of 
thi strang man." 

"I must destroy him." 

"and wherefore?" 

"can you ask? Is he not a vampyre?" 

"yes; but reflect, henry, for a moment upon the length to which you 
might carri out so danger an argument. It is said that vampyr are 
made by vampyr suck the blood of those who, but for that 
circumstance, would have die and gone to decay in the tomb along with 
ordinari mortals; but that be so attack dure life by a vampyre, 
they themselves, after death, becom such." 

"well--well, what is that to me?" 

"have you forgotten flora?" 

A cri of despair came from poor henry' lips, and in a moment he seem 
completely, mental and physically, prostrated. 

"god of heaven!" he moaned, "I had forgotten her!" 

"I thought you had." 

"oh, if the sacrific of my own life would suffic to put an end to all 
thi accumul horror, how gladli would I lay it down. ay, in ani 
way--in ani way. No mode of death should appal me. No amount of pain 
make me shrink. I could smile then upon the destroyer, and say, 
'welcome--welcome--most welcome.'" 

"rather, henry, seek to live for those whom you love than die for them. 
your death would leav them desolate. In life you may ward off mani a 
blow of fate from them." 

"I may endeavour so to do." 

"consid that flora may be wholli depend upon such kind as you 
may be abl to bestow upon her." 

"charl cling to her." 

"humph!" 

"you do not doubt him?" 

"mi dear friend, henri bannerworth, although I am not an old man, yet I 
am so much older than you that I have seen a great deal of the world, 
and am, perhaps, far better abl to come to accur judgment with 
regard to individuals." 

"no doubt--no doubt; but yet--" 

"nay, hear me out. such judgments, found upon experience, when utter 
have all the charact of propheci about them. I, therefore, now 
propheci to you that charl holland will yet be so stung with horror at 
the circumst of a vampyr visit flora, that he will never make 
her hi wife." 

"marchdale, I differ from you most completely," said henry. "I know that 
charl holland is the veri soul of honour." 

"I cannot argu the matter with you. It ha not becom a thing of fact. 
I have onli sincer to hope that I am wrong." 

"you are, you may depend, entir wrong. I cannot be deceiv in 
charles. from you such word produc no effect but one of regret that 
you should so much err in your estim of ani one. from ani one but 
yourself they would have produc in me a feel of anger I might have 
found it difficult to smother." 

"it ha often been my misfortun through life," said mr. marchdale, 
sadly, "to give the greatest offenc where I feel the truest friendship, 
becaus it is in such quarter that I am alway tempt to speak too 
freely." 

"nay, no offence," said henry. "I am distracted, and scarc know what 
I say. marchdale, I know you are my sincer friend--but, as I tell you, 
I am nearli mad." 

"mi dear henry, be calmer. consid upon what is to be said concern 
thi interview at home." 

"ay; that is a consideration." 

"I should not think it advis to mention the disagre fact, that 
in your neighbour you think you have found out the nocturn disturb 
of your family." 

"no--no." 

"I would say noth of it. It is not at all probabl that, after what 
you have said to him thi sir franci varney, or whatev hi real name 
may be will obtrud himself upon you." 

"if he should he die." 

"he will, perhaps, consid that such a step would be danger to him." 

"it would be fatal, so help me. however, and then would I take especi 
care that no power of resuscit should ever enabl that man again to 
walk the earth." 

"they say that onli way of destroy a vampyr is to fix him to the 
earth with a stake, so that he cannot move, and then, of course, 
decomposit will take it course, as in ordinari cases." 

"fire would consum him, and be a quicker process," said henry. "but 
these are fear reflections, and, for the present, we will not pursu 
them. now to play the hypocrite, and endeavour to look compos and 
seren to my mother, and to flora while my heart is breaking." 

the two friend had by thi time reach the hall, and leav hi 
friend marchdale, henri bannerworth, with feel of the most 
unenvi description, slowli made hi way to the apart occupi by 
hi mother and sister. 

[illustration] 




chapter xv. 

the old admir and hi servant.--th commun from the landlord OF 
the nelson' arms. 


[illustration] 

while those matter of most grave and seriou import were go on at 
the hall, while each day, and almost each hour in each day, wa 
produc more and more conclus evid upon a matter which at first 
had seem too monstrou to be at all credited, it may well be suppos 
what a wonder sensat wa produc among the gossip-mong of the 
neighbourhood by the exagger report that had reach them. 

the servants, who had left the hall on no other account, as they 
declared, but sheer fright at the aw visit of the vampyre, spread 
the news far and wide, so that in the adjoin villag and 
market-town the vampyr of bannerworth hall becam quit a stapl 
articl of conversation. 

such a posit godsend for the lover of the marvel had not 
appear in the countri side within the memori of that sapient 
individual--th oldest inhabitant. 

and, moreover, there wa one thing which stagger some peopl of better 
educ and matur judgments, and that was, that the more they took 
pain to inquir into the matter, in order, if possible, to put an end 
to what they consid a gross lie from the commencement, the more 
evid they found to stagger their own sens upon the subject. 

everywher then, in everi house, public as well as private, someth 
wa be continu said of the vampyre. nurseri maid began to think 
a vampyr vastli superior to "old scratch and old bogie" as a mean of 
terrifi their infant charg into quietness, if not to sleep, until 
they themselv becam too much afraid upon the subject to mention it. 

but nowher wa gossip carri on upon the subject with more 
systemat fervour than at an inn call the nelson' arms, which wa in 
the high street of the nearest market town to the hall. 

there, it seem as if the lover of the horribl made a point of 
hold their head quarters, and so thirsti did the numer discuss 
make the guests, that the landlord wa heard to declar that he, from 
hi heart, realli consid a vampyr as veri nearli equal to a 
contest election. 

It wa toward even of the same day that marchdal and henri made 
their visit to sir franci varney, that a postchais drew up to the inn 
we have mentioned. In the vehicl were two person of exceedingli 
dissimilar appear and gener aspect. 

one of these peopl wa a man who seem fast verg upon seventi year 
of age, although, from hi still ruddi and embrown complexion and 
stentorian voice, it wa quit evid he intend yet to keep time at 
arm's-length for mani year to come. 

He wa attir in ampl and expens clothing, but everi articl had a 
naval animu about it, if we may be allow such an express with 
regard to clothing. On hi button wa an anchor, and the gener 
assort and colour of the cloth as nearli assimil as possibl 
to the undress naval uniform of an offic of high rank some fifti or 
sixti year ago. 

hi companion wa a younger man, and about hi appear there wa no 
secret at all. He wa a genuin sailor, and he wore the shore costum of 
one. He wa hearty-looking, and well dressed, and evid well fed. 

As the chais drove up to the door of the inn, thi man made an 
observ to the other to the follow effect,-- 

"a-hoy!" 

"well, you lubber, what now?" cri the other. 

"they call thi the nelson' arms; and you know, shiver me, that for the 
best half of hi life he had but one." 

"d--n you!" wa the onli rejoind he got for thi observation; but, 
with that, he seem veri well satisfied. 

"heav to!" he then shout to the postilion, who wa about to drive the 
chais into the yard. "heav to, you lubberli son of a gun! we don't 
want to go into dock." 

"ah!" said the old man, "let' get out, jack. thi is the port; and, do 
you hear, and be curs to you, let' have no swearing, d--n you, nor 
bad language, you lazi swab." 

"aye, aye," cri jack; "i'v not been ashor now a matter o' ten years, 
and not larnt a littl shore-go politeness, admiral, I ain't been 
your _walley de sham_ without larn a littl about land reckonings. 
nobodi would take me for a sailor now, i'm thinking, admiral." 

"hold your noise!" 

"aye, aye, sir." 

jack, as he wa called, bundl out of the chais when the door wa 
opened, with a movement so close resembl what would have ensu had 
he been drag out by the collar, that one wa tempt almost to 
believ that such a feat must have been accomplish all at onc by some 
invis agency. 

He then assist the old gentleman to alight, and the landlord of the 
inn commenc the usual profus of bow with which a passeng by a 
postchais is usual welcom in prefer to one by a stage coach. 

"be quiet, will you!" shout the admiral, for such inde he was. "be 
quiet." 

"best accommodation, sir--good wine--well-air beds--good 
attendance--fin air--" 

"belay there," said jack; and he gave the landlord what no doubt he 
consid a gentl admonition, but which consist of such a dig in the 
ribs, that he made as mani evolut as the clown in a pantomim when 
he vocifer hot codlings. 

"now, jack, where' the sail instructions?" said hi master. 

"here, sir, in the locker," said jack, as he took from hi pocket a 
letter, which he hand to the admiral. 

"won't you step in, sir?" said the landlord, who had begun now to 
recov a littl from the dig in the ribs. 

"what' the use of come into port and pay harbour dues, and all 
that sort of thing, till we know if it' the right, you lubber, eh?" 

"no; oh, dear me, sir, of course--god bless me, what can the old 
gentleman mean?" 

the admir open the letter, and read:-- 

"if you stop at the nelson' aim at uxotter, you will hear of 
me, and I can be sent for, when I will tell you more. 

"yours, veri obedi and humbly, 

"josiah crinkles." 

"who the deuc is he?" 

"thi is uxotter, sir," said the landlord; "and here you are, sir, at 
the nelson' arms. good beds--good wine--good--" 

"silence!" 

"yes, sir--oh, of course" 

"who the devil is josiah crinkles?" 

"ha! ha! ha! ha! make me laugh, sir. who the devil indeed! they do say 
the devil and lawyers, sir, know someth of each other--mak me 
smile." 

"i'll make you smile on the other side of that d----d great hatchway of 
a mouth of your in a minute. who is crinkles?" 

"oh, mr. crinkles, sir, everybodi knows, most respect attorney, sir, 
indeed, highli respect man, sir." 

"A lawyer?" 

"yes, sir, a lawyer." 

"well, i'm d----d!" 

jack gave a long whistle, and both master and man look at each other 
aghast. 

"now, hang me!" cri the admiral, "if ever I wa so taken in in all my 
life." 

"ay, ay, sir," said jack. 

"to come a hundr and seventi mile see a d----d swab of a rascal 
lawyer." 

"ay, ay, sir." 

"i'll smash him--jack!" 

"yer honour?" 

"get into the chais again." 

"well, but where' master charles? lawyers, in course, sir, is all 
bless rogues; but, howsomdever, he may have for onc in hi life thi 
here one of 'em have told us of the right channel, and if so be as he 
has, don't be the yanke to leav him among the pirates. i'm asham on 
you." 

"you infern scoundrel; how dare you preach to me in such a way, you 
lubberli rascal?" 

"co you desarv it." 

"mutiny--mutiny--bi jove! jack, i'll have you put in irons--you'r a 
scoundrel, and no seaman." 

"no seaman!--no seaman!" 

"not a bit of one." 

"veri good. it' time, then, as I wa off the purser' books. good bye 
to you; I onli hope as you may get a better seaman to stick to you and 
be your _walley de sham_ nor jack pringle, that' all the harm I wish 
you. you didn't call me no seaman in the bay of corfu, when the bullet 
were scuttl our nobs." 

"jack, you rascal, give us your fin. come here, you d----d villain. 
you'll leav me, will you?" 

"not if I know it." 

"come in, then" 

"don't tell me i'm no seaman. call me a wagabon if you like, but don't 
hurt my feelings. there i'm as tender as a baby, I am.--don't do it." 

"confound you, who is do it?" 

"the devil." 

"who is?" 

"don't, then." 

thu wrangling, they enter the inn, to the great amus of sever 
bystanders, who had collect to hear the alterc between them. 

"would you like a privat room, sir?" said the landlord. 

"what' that to you?" said jack. 

"hold your noise, will you?" cri hi master. "yes, I should like a 
privat room, and some grog." 

"strong as the devil!" put in jack. 

"yes, sir-yes, sir. good wines--good beds--good--" 

"you said all that before, you know," remark jack, as he bestow upon 
the landlord anoth terrif dig in the ribs. 

"hilloa!" cri the admiral, "you can send for that infern lawyer, 
mister landlord." 

"mr. crinkles, sir?" 

"yes, yes." 

"who may I have the honour to say, sir, want to see him?" 

"admir bell." 

"certainly, admiral, certainly. you'll find him a veri conversible, 
nice, gentlemanli littl man, sir." 

"and tell him as jack pringl is here, too," cri the seaman. 

"oh, yes, yes--of course," said the landlord, who wa in such a state of 
confus from the dig in the rib he had receiv and the nois hi 
guest had alreadi made in hi house, that, had he been suddenli put 
upon hi oath, he would scarc have like to say which wa the master 
and which wa the man. 

"the idea now, jack," said the admiral, "of come all thi way to see a 
lawyer." 

"ay, ay, sir." 

"if he'd said he wa a lawyer, we would have known what to do. but it' 
a take in, jack." 

"so I think. howsomdever, we'll serv him out when we catch him, you 
know." 

"good--so we will." 

"and, then, again, he may know someth about master charles, sir, you 
know. lord love him, don't you rememb when he came aboard to see you 
onc at portsmouth?" 

"ah! I do, indeed." 

"and how he said he hate the french, and quit a baby, too. what 
persever and sense. 'uncle,' say he to you, 'when i'm a big man, 
i'll go in a ship, and fight all the french in a heap,' say he. 'and 
beat 'em, my boy, too,' say you; co you thought he'd forgot that; and 
then he says, 'what' the use of say that, stupid?--don't we alway 
beat 'em?'" 

the admir laugh and rub hi hands, as he cri aloud,-- 

"I remember, jack--i rememb him. I wa stupid to make such a remark." 

"I know you was--a d----d old fool I thought you." 

"come, come. hilloa, there!" 

"well, then, what do you call me no seaman for?" 

"why, jack, you bear malic like a marine." 

"there you go again. goodbye. Do you rememb when we were yard arm to 
yard arm with those two yanke frigates, and took 'em both! you didn't 
call me a marin then, when the scupper were run with blood. wa I 
a seaman then?" 

"you were, jack--you were; and you save my life." 

"I didn't." 

"you did." 

"I say I didn't--it wa a marlin-spike." 

"but I say you did, you rascal scoundrel.--i say you did, and I won't 
be contradict in my own ship." 

"call thi your ship?" 

"no, d--n it--i--" 

"mr. crinkles," said the landlord, fling the door wide open, and so 
at onc put an end to the discuss which alway appar had a 
tendenc to wax exceedingli warm. 

"the shark, by g--d!" said jack. 

A little, neatli dress man made hi appearance, and advanc rather 
timidli into the room. perhap he had heard from the landlord that the 
parti who had sent for him were of rather a violent sort. 

"so you are crinkles, are you?" cri the admiral. "sit down, though you 
are a lawyer." 

"thank you, sir. I am an attorney, certainly, and my name as certainli 
is crinkles." 

"look at that." 

the admir place the letter in the littl lawyer' hands, who said,-- 

"am I to read it?" 

"yes, to be sure." 

"aloud?" 

"read it to the devil, if you like, in a pig' whisper, or a west india 
hurricane." 

"oh, veri good, sir. i--i am will to be agreeable, so i'll read it 
aloud, if it' all the same to you." 

He then open the letter, and read as follows:-- 

"to admir bell. 

"admiral,--being, from variou circumstances, awar that you take 
a warm and a praiseworthi interest in your nephew, charl 
holland, I ventur to write to you concern a matter in which 
your immedi and activ co-oper with other may rescu him 
from a condit which will prove, if allow to continue, veri 
much to hi detriment, and ultim unhappiness. 

"you are, then, herebi informed, that he, charl holland, has, 
much earlier than he ought to have done, return to england, and 
that the object of hi return is to contract a marriag into a 
famili in everi way objectionable, and with a girl who is highli 
objectionable. 

"you, admiral, are hi nearest and almost hi onli rel in 
the world; you are the guardian of hi property, and, therefore, 
it becom a duti on your part to interfer to save him from the 
ruinou consequ of a marriage, which is sure to bring ruin 
and distress upon himself and all who take an interest in hi 
welfare. 

"the famili he wish to marri into is name bannerworth, and the 
young lady' name is flora bannerworth. when, however, I inform 
you that a vampyr is in that family, and that if he marri into 
it, he marri a vampyre, and will have vampyr for children, I 
trust I have said enough to warn you upon the subject, and to 
induc you to lose no time in repair to the spot. 

"if you stop at the nelson' arm at uxotter, you will hear of 
me. I can be sent for, when I will tell you more. 

"yours, veri obedi and humbly, 

"josiah crinkles." 

"p.s. I enclos you dr. johnson' definit of a vampyre, which 
is as follows: 

"vampyr (a german blood-sucker)--bi which you perceiv how mani 
vampyres, from time immemorial, must have been well entertain 
at the expens of john bull, at the court of st. james, where no 
thing hardli is to be met with but german blood-suckers." 

[illustration] 

* * * * * 

the lawyer ceas to read, and the amaz look with which he glanc at 
the face of admir bell would, under ani other circumstances, have much 
amus him. hi mind, however, wa by far too much engross with a 
consider of the danger of charl holland, hi nephew, to be amus 
at anything; so, when he found that the littl lawyer said nothing, he 
bellow out,-- 

"well, sir?" 

"we--we--well," said the attorney. 

"i'v sent for you, and here you are, and here I am, and here' jack 
pringle. what have you got to say?" 

"just thi much," said mr. crinkles, recov himself a little, "just 
thi much, sir, that I never saw that letter befor in all my life." 

"you--never--saw--it?" 

"never." 

"didn't you write it?" 

"on my solemn word of honour, sir, I did not." 

jack pringl whistled, and the admir look puzzled. like the admir 
in the song, too, he "grew paler," and then mr. crinkl added,-- 

"who ha forg my name to a letter such as this, I cannot imagine. As 
for write to you, sir, I never heard of your existence, except 
publicly, as one of those gallant offic who have spent a long life in 
nobli fight their country' battles, and who are entitl to the 
admir and the applaus of everi englishman." 

jack and the admir look at each other in amazement, and then the 
latter exclaimed,-- 

"what! thi from a lawyer?" 

"A lawyer, sir," said crinkles, "may know how to appreci the deed of 
gallant men, although he may not be abl to imit them. that letter, 
sir, is a forgery, and I now leav you, onli much gratifi at the 
incid which ha procur me the honour of an interview with a 
gentleman, whose name will live in the histori of hi country. good day, 
sir! good day!" 

"no! i'm d----d if you go like that," said jack, as he sprang to the 
door, and put hi back against it. "you shall take a glass with me in 
honour of the wooden wall of old england, d----e, if you wa twenti 
lawyers." 

"that' right, jack," said the admiral. "come, mr. crinkles, i'll think, 
for your sake, there may be two decent lawyer in the world, and you one 
of them. We must have a bottl of the best wine the ship--i mean the 
house--can afford together." 

"if it is your command, admiral, I obey with pleasure," said the 
attorney; "and although I assur you, on my honour, I did not write that 
letter, yet some of the matter mention in it are so gener 
notori here, that I can afford you inform concern them." 

"can you?" 

"I regret to say I can, for I respect the parties." 

"sit down, then--sit down. jack, run to the steward' room and get the 
wine. We will go into it now starboard and larboard. who the deuc could 
have written that letter?" 

"I have not the least idea, sir." 

"well--well, never mind; it ha brought me here, that' something, so I 
won't grumbl much at it. I didn't know my nephew wa in england, and I 
dare say he didn't know I was; but here we both are, and I won't rest 
till i'v seen him, and ascertain how the what's-its-name--" 

"the vampyre." 

"ah! the vampyre." 

"shiver my timbers!" said jack pringle, who now brought in some wine 
much against the remonstr of the waiter of the establishment, who 
consid that he wa tread upon their vest interest by so 
doing.--"shiv my timbers, if I know what a _wamphigher_ is, unless 
he' some distant relat to davi jones!" 

"hold your ignor tongue," said the admiral; "nobodi want you to make 
a remark, you great lubber!" 

"veri good," said jack, and he sat down the wine on the table, and then 
retir to the other end of the room, remark to himself that he wa 
not call a great lubber on a certain occasion, when bullet were 
scuttl their nobs, and they were yard arm and yard arm with god know 
who. 

"now, mister lawyer," said admir bell, who had about him a larg share 
of the habit of a rough sailor. "now, mister lawyer, here is a glass 
first to our better acquaintance, for d----e, if I don't like you!" 

"you are veri good, sir." 

"not at all. there wa a time, when i'd just as soon have thought of 
ask a young shark to supper with me in my own cabin as a lawyer, but 
I begin to see that there may be such a thing as a decent, good sort of 
a fellow seen in the law; so here' good luck to you, and you shall 
never want a friend or a bottl while admir bell ha a shot in the 
locker." 

"gammon," said jack. 

"d--n you, what do you mean by that?" roar the admiral, in a furiou 
tone. 

"I wasn't speak to you," shout jack, about two octav higher. 
"it' two boy in the street as is pretend they'r a go to fight, 
and I know d----d well they won't." 

"hold your noise." 

"i'm going. I wasn't told to hold my noise, when our nob were be 
scuttl off beyrout." 

"never mind him, mister lawyer," ad the admiral. "he don't know what 
he' talk about. never mind him. you go on and tell me all you know 
about the--the--" 

"the vampyre!" 

"ah! I alway forget the name of strang fish. I suppose, after all, 
it' someth of the mermaid order?" 

"that I cannot say, sir; but certainli the story, in all it pain 
particulars, ha made a great sensat all over the country." 

"indeed!" 

"yes, sir. you shall hear how it occurred. It appear that one night 
miss flora bannersworth, a young ladi of great beauty, and respect and 
admir by all who knew her wa visit by a strang be who came in 
at the window." 

"mi eye," said jack, "it waren't me, I wish it had a been." 

"so petrifi by fear wa she, that she had onli time to creep half out 
of the bed, and to utter one cri of alarm, when the strang visitor 
seiz her in hi grasp." 

"d--n my pig tail," said jack, "what a squall there must have been, to 
be sure." 

"do you see thi bottle?" roar the admiral. 

"to be sure, I does; I think as it' time I seed another." 

"you scoundrel, i'll make you feel it against that d----d stupid head of 
yours, if you interrupt thi gentleman again." 

"don't be violent." 

"well, as I wa saying," continu the attorney, "she did, by great good 
fortune, manag to scream, which had the effect of alarm the whole 
house. the door of her chamber, which wa fast, wa broken open." 

"yes, yes--" 

"ah," cri jack. 

"you may imagin the horror and the constern of those who enter 
the room to find her in the grasp of a fiend-lik figure, whose teeth 
were fasten on her neck, and who wa actual drain her vein of 
blood." 

"the devil!" 

"befor ani one could lay hand suffici upon the figur to detain 
it, it had fled precipit from it dread repast. shot were fire 
after it in vain." 

"and they let it go?" 

"they follow it, I understand, as well as they were able, and saw it 
scale the garden wall of the premises; there it escaped, leaving, as you 
may well imagine, on all their minds, a sensat of horror difficult to 
describe." 

"well, I never did hear anyth the equal of that. jack, what do you 
think of it?" 

"I haven't begun to think, yet," said jack. 

"but what about my nephew, charles?" ad the admiral. 

"of him I know nothing." 

"nothing?" 

"not a word, admiral. I wa not awar you had a nephew, or that ani 
gentleman bear that, or ani other relationship to you, had ani sort 
of connexion with these mysteri and most unaccount circumstances. 
I tell you all I have gather from common report about thi vampyr 
business. further I know not, I assur you." 

"well, a man can't tell what he don't know. It puzzl me to think who 
could possibl have written me thi letter." 

"that I am complet at a loss to imagine," said crinkles. "I assur 
you, my gallant sir, that I am much hurt at the circumst of ani one 
use my name in such a way. but, nevertheless, as you are here, permit 
me to say, that it will be my pride, my pleasure, and the boast of the 
remaind of my existence, to be of some servic to so gallant a 
defend of my country, and one whose name, along with the memori of hi 
deeds, is engrav upon the heart of everi briton." 

"quit ekal to a book, he talks," said jack. "I never could read one 
myself, on account o' not know how, but i'v heard 'em read, and 
that' just the sort o' incomprehens gammon." 

"we don't want ani of your ignor remarks," said the admiral, "so you 
be quiet." 

"ay, ay, sir." 

"now, mister lawyer, you are an honest fellow, and an honest fellow is 
gener a sensibl fellow." 

"sir, I thank you." 

"if so be as what thi letter say is true, my nephew charl ha got a 
like for thi girl, who ha had her neck bitten by a vampyre, you 
see." 

"I perceive, sir." 

"now what would you do?" 

"one of the most difficult, as well, perhaps, as one of the most 
ungraci of tasks," said the attorney, "i to interfer with famili 
affairs. the cold and steadi eye of reason gener see thing in such 
veri differ light to what they appear to those whose feel and 
whose affect are much compromis in their results." 

"veri true. Go on." 

"taking, my dear sir, what in my humbl judgment appear to be a 
reason view of thi subject, I should say it would be a dread 
thing for your nephew to marri into a famili ani member of which wa 
liabl to the visit of a vampyre." 

"it wouldn't be pleasant." 

"the young ladi might have children." 

"oh, lots," cri jack. 

"hold your noise, jack." 

"ay, ay, sir." 

"and she might herself actually, when after death she becam a vampyre, 
come and feed on her own children." 

"becom a vampyre! what, is she go to be a vampyr too?" 

"mi dear sir, don't you know that it is a remark fact, as regard 
the physiolog of vampyres, that whoever is bitten by one of those 
dread beings, becom a vampyre?" 

"the devil!" 

"it is a fact, sir." 

"whew!" whistl jack; "she might bite us all, and we should be a whole 
ship' crew o' _wamphighers_. there would be a confound go!" 

"it' not pleasant," said the admiral, as he rose from hi chair, and 
pace to and fro in the room, "it' not pleasant. hang me up at my own 
yard-arm if it is." 

"who said it was?" cri jack. 

"who ask you, you brute?" 

"well, sir," ad mr. crinkles, "I have given you all the inform I 
can; and I can onli repeat what I befor had the honour of say more 
at large, namely, that I am your humbl servant to command, and that I 
shall be happi to attend upon you at ani time." 

"thank ye--thank ye, mr.--a--a--" 

"crinkles." 

"ah, crinkles. you shall hear from me again, sir, shortly. now that I am 
down here, I will see to the veri bottom of thi affair, were it deeper 
than fathom ever sounded. charl holland wa my poor sister' son; he' 
the onli rel I have in the wide world, and hi happi is dearer 
to my heart than my own." 

crinkl turn aside, and, by the twinkl of hi eyes, one might 
premis that the honest littl lawyer wa much affected. 

"god bless you, sir," he said; "farewell." 

"good day to you." 

"good-bye, lawyer," cri jack. "mind how you go. d--n me, if you don't 
seem a decent sort of fellow, and, after all, you may give the devil a 
clear berth, and get into heaven' strait with a flow sheet, 
provid as you don't, toward the end of the voyage, make ani lubberli 
blunders." 

the old admir threw himself into a chair with a deep sigh. 

"jack," said he. 

"aye, aye, sir." 

"what' to be done now?" 

jack open the window to discharg the superflu moistur from an 
enorm quid he had indulg himself with while the lawyer wa tell 
about the vampyre, and then again turn hi face toward hi master, 
he said,-- 

"do! what shall we do? why, go at onc and find out charles, our _nevy_, 
and ask him all about it, and see the young lady, too, and lay hold o' 
the _wamphigher_ if we can, as well, and go at the whole affair 
broadsid to broadside, till we make a prize of all the particulars, 
after which we can turn it over in our mind agin, and see what' to be 
done." 

"jack, you are right. come along." 

"I know I am. Do you know now which way to steer?" 

"of cours not. I never wa in thi latitud before, and the channel 
look intricate. We will hail a pilot, jack, and then we shall be all 
right, and if we strike it will be hi fault." 

"which is a mighti great consolation," said jack. "come along." 




chapter xvi. 

the meet OF the lover IN the garden.--an affect scene.--th 
sudden appear OF sir franci varney. 


[illustration] 

our reader will recollect that flora bannerworth had made an 
appoint with charl holland in the garden of the hall. thi meet 
wa look forward to by the young man with a varieti of conflict 
feelings, and he pass the intermedi time in a most pain state of 
doubt as to what would be it result. 

the thought that he should be much urg by flora to give up all 
thought of make her his, wa a most bitter one to him, who love her 
with so much truth and constancy, and that she would say all she could 
to induc such a resolut in hi mind he felt certain. but to him the 
idea of now abandon her present itself in the worst of aspects. 

"shall i," he said, "sink so low in my own estimation, as well as in 
hers, and in that of all honourable-mind persons, as to desert her now 
in the hour of affliction? dare I be so base as actual or virtual to 
say to her, 'flora, when your beauti wa undim by sorrow--when all 
around you seem life and joy, I love you selfishli for the increas 
happi which you might bestow upon me; but now the hand of misfortun 
press heavili upon you--you are not what you were, and I desert you? 
never--never--never!" 

charl holland, it will be seen by some of our more philosoph 
neighbours, felt more acut than he reasoned; but let hi error of 
argument be what they may, can we do other than admir the nobil 
of soul which dictat such a self deni gener cours as that he 
wa pursuing? 

As for flora, heaven onli know if at that precis time her intellect 
had complet stood the test of the tri event which had nearli 
overwhelm it. 

the two grand feel that seem to possess her mind were fear of the 
renew visit of the vampyre, and an earnest desir to releas charl 
holland from hi repeat vow of constanc toward her. 

feeling, generosity, and judgment, all revolt hold a young man to 
such a destini as hers. To link him to her fate, would be to make him to 
a real extent a sharer in it, and the more she heard fall from hi lip 
in the way of gener feel of continu attach to her, the more 
sever did she feel that he would suffer most acut if unit to 
her. 

and she wa right. the veri generos of feel which would have now 
prompt charl holland to lead flora bannerworth to the altar, even 
with the mark of the vampyre' teeth upon her throat, gave an assur 
of a depth of feel which would have made him an ampl haven in all 
her miseries, in all her distress and afflictions. 

what wa familiarli in the famili at the hall call the garden, wa a 
semicircular piec of ground shade in sever direct by trees, and 
which wa exclus devot to the growth of flowers. the piec of 
ground wa nearli hidden from the view of the house, and in it centr 
wa a summer-house, which at the usual season of the year wa cover 
with all kind of creep plant of exquisit perfumes, and rare 
beauty. all around, too, bloom the fairest and sweetest of flowers, 
which a rich soil and a shelter situat could produce. 

alas! though, of late mani weed had straggl up among their more 
estim floral culture, for the decay fortun of the famili had 
prevent them from keep the necessari servants, to place the hall 
and it ground in a state of neatness, such as it had onc been the 
pride of the inhabit of the place to see them. It wa then in thi 
flower-garden that charl and flora use to meet. 

As may be supposed, he wa on the spot befor the appoint hour, 
anxious expect the appear of her who wa so realli and truli 
dear to him. what to him were the sweet flower that there grew in such 
happi luxuri and heedless beauty? alas, the flower that to hi mind 
wa fairer than them all, wa blighted, and in the wan cheek of her whom 
he loved, he sigh to see the lili usurp the place of the radiant 
rose. 

"dear, dear flora," he ejaculated, "you must inde be taken from thi 
place, which is so full of the most pain remembrance; now, I cannot 
think that mr. marchdal somehow is a friend to me, but that conviction, 
or rather impression, doe not paralyz my judgment suffici to 
induc me not to acknowledg that hi advic is good. He might have 
couch it in pleasant words--word that would not, like daggers, each 
have brought a deadli pang home to my heart, but still I do think that 
in hi conclus he wa right." 

A light sound, as of some fairi footstep among the flowers, came upon 
hi ears, and turn instantli to the direct from whenc the sound 
proceeded, he saw what hi heart had previous assur him of, namely, 
that it wa hi flora who wa coming. 

[illustration] 

yes, it wa she; but, ah, how pale, how wan--how languid and full of the 
evid of much mental suffer wa she. where now wa the elast 
of that youth step? where now wa that lustrou beam beauti of 
mirthfulness, which wa wont to dawn in those eyes? 

alas, all wa changed. the exquisit beauti of form wa there, but the 
light of joy which had lent it most transcend charm to that 
heavenli face, wa gone. charl wa by her side in a moment. He had her 
hand clasp in his, while hi disengag one wa wound tenderli around 
her taper waist. 

"flora, dear, dear flora," he said, "you are better. tell me that you 
feel the gentl air reviv you?" 

she could not speak. her heart wa too full of woe. 

"oh; flora, my own, my beautiful," he added, in those tone which come 
so direct from the heart, and which are so differ from ani assumpt 
of tenderness. "speak to me, dear, dear flora--speak to me if it be but 
a word." 

"charles," wa all she could say, and then she burst into a flood of 
tears, and leant so heavili upon hi arm, that it wa evid but for 
that support she must have fallen. 

charl holland welcom those, although, they griev him so much that 
he could have accompani them with hi own, but then he knew that she 
would be soon now more composed, and that they would reliev the heart 
whose sorrow call them into existence. 

He forbor to speak to her until he found thi sudden gush of feel 
wa subsid into sobs, and then in low, soft accents, he again 
endeavour to breath comfort to her afflict and terrifi spirit. 

"mi flora," he said, "rememb that there are warm heart that love you. 
rememb that neither time nor circumst can chang such endear 
affect as mine. ah, flora, what evil is there in the whole world that 
love may not conquer, and in the height of it nobl feel laugh to 
scorn." 

"oh, hush, hush, charles, hush." 

"wherefore, flora, would you still the voic of pure affection? I love 
you surely, as few have ever loved. ah, whi would you forbid me to give 
such utter as I may to those feel which fill up my whole heart?" 

"no--no--no." 

"flora, flora, wherefor do you say no?" 

"do not, charles, now speak to me of affect or love. Do not tell me 
you love me now." 

"not tell you I love you! ah, flora, if my tongue, with it poor 
eloqu to give utter to such a sentiment, were to do it office, 
each featur of my face would tell the tale. each action would show to 
all the world how much I love you." 

"I must not now hear this. great god of heaven give me strength to carri 
out the purpos of my soul." 

"what purpos is it, flora, that you have to pray thu fervent for 
strength to execute? oh, if it savour aught of treason against love' 
majesty, forget it. love is a gift from heaven. the greatest and the 
most gloriou gift it ever bestow upon it creatures. heaven will not 
aid you in repudi that which is the one grand redeem featur 
that rescu human natur from a world of reproach." 

flora wrung her hand despairingli as she said,-- 

"charles, I know I cannot reason with you. I know I have not power of 
language, aptitud of illustration, nor depth of thought to hold a 
mental content with you." 

"flora, for what do I contend?" 

"you, you speak of love." 

"and I have, ere this, spoken to you of love unchecked." 

"yes, yes. befor this." 

"and now, wherefor not now? Do not tell me you are changed." 

"I am changed, charles. fear changed. the curs of god ha fallen 
upon me, I know not why. I know not that in word or in thought I have 
done evil, except perchanc unwittingly, and yet--th vampyre." 

"let not that affright you." 

"affright me! It ha kill me." 

"nay, flora,--y think too much of what I still hope to be suscept 
of far more ration explanation." 

"bi your own words, then, charles, I must convict you. I cannot, I dare 
not be yours, while such a dread circumst is hang over me, 
charles; if a more ration explan than the hideou one which my 
own fanci give to the form that visit me can be found, find it, and 
rescu me from despair and from madness." 

they had now reach the summer-house, and as flora utter these word 
she threw herself on to a seat, and cover her beauti face with her 
hands, she sob convulsively. 

"you have spoken," said charles, dejectedly. "I have heard that which 
you wish to say to me." 

"no, no. not all, charles." 

"I will be patient, then, although what more you may have to add should 
tear my veri heart-strings." 

"i--i have to add, charles," she said, in a tremul voice, "that 
justice, religion, mercy--everi human attribut which bear the name of 
virtue, call loudli upon me no longer to hold you to vow made under 
differ auspices." 

"go on, flora." 

"I then implor you, charles, find me what I am, to leav me to the 
fate which it ha pleas heaven to cast upon me. I do not ask you, 
charles, not to love me." 

"'ti well. Go on, flora." 

"becaus I should like to think that, although I might never see you 
more, you love me still. but you must think seldom of me, and you must 
endeavour to be happi with some other--" 

"you cannot, flora, pursu the pictur you yourself would draw. these 
word come not from your heart." 

"yes--yes--yes." 

"did you ever love me?" 

"charles, charles, whi will you add anoth pang to those you know must 
alreadi rend my heart?" 

"no, flora, I would tear my own heart from my bosom ere I would add one 
pang to yours. well I know that gentl maiden modesti would seal your 
lip to the soft confess that you love me. I could not hope the joy 
of hear you utter these words. the tender devot lover is content to 
see the truth passion in the speak eye of beauty. content is he 
to translat it from a thousand acts, which, to eye that look not so 
acut as a lover's, bear no signification; but when you tell me to 
seek happi with another, well may the anxiou question burst from my 
throb heart of, 'did you ever love me, flora?'" 

her sens hung entranc upon hi words. oh, what a witcheri is in the 
tongu of love. some even of the former colour of her cheek return as 
forget all for the moment but that she wa listen to the voic of 
him, the thought of whom had made up the day dream of her happiness, 
she gaze upon hi face. 

hi voic ceased. To her it seem as if some music had suddenli left 
off in it most exquisit passage. she clung to hi arm--sh look 
imploringli up to him. her head sunk upon hi breast as she cried, 

"charles, charles, I did love you. I do love you now." 

"then let sorrow and misfortun shake their grisli lock in vain," he 
cried. "heart to heart--hand to hand with me, defi them." 

He lift up hi arm toward heaven as he spoke, and at the moment came 
such a rattl peal of thunder, that the veri earth seem to shake 
upon it axis. 

A half scream of terror burst from the lip of flora, as she cried,-- 

"what wa that?" 

"onli thunder," said charles, calmly. 

"'twa an aw sound." 

"A natur one." 

"but at such a moment, when you were defi fate to injur us. oh! 
charles, is it ominous?" 

"flora, can you realli give way to such idl fancies?" 

"the sun is obscured." 

"ay, but it will shine all the brighter for it temporari eclipse. the 
thunder-storm will clear the air of mani noxiou vapours; the fork 
lightn ha it use as well as it power of mischief. hark! there 
again!" 

anoth peal, of almost equal intens to the other, shook the 
firmament. flora trembled. 

"charles," she said, "thi is the voic of heaven. We must part--w must 
part for ever. I cannot be yours." 

"flora, thi is madness. think again, dear flora. misfortun for a time 
will hover over the best and most fortun of us; but, like the cloud 
that now obscur the sweet sunshine, will pass away, and leav no trace 
behind them. the sunshin of joy will shine on you again." 

there wa a small break in the clouds, like a window look into 
heaven. from it stream one beam of sunlight, so bright, so dazzling, 
and so beautiful, that it wa a sight of wonder to look upon. It fell 
upon the face of flora; it warm her cheek; it lent lustr to her pale 
lip and tear eyes; it illumin that littl summer-hous as if it 
had been the shrine of some saint. 

"behold!" cri charles, "where is your omen now?" 

"god of heaven!'" cri flora; and she stretch out her arms. 

"the cloud that hover over your spirit now," said charles, "shall pass 
away. accept thi beam of sunlight as a promis from god." 

"I will--i will. It is going." 

"it ha done it office." 

the cloud close over the small orifice, and all wa gloom again as 
before. 

"flora," said charles, "you will not ask me now to leav you?" 

she allow him to clasp her to hi heart. It wa beat for her, and 
for her only. 

"you will let me, flora, love you still?" 

her voice, as she answer him, wa like the murmur of some distant 
melodi the ear can scarc translat to the heart. 

"charl we will live, love, and die together." 

and now there wa a wrapt still in that summer-hous for mani 
minutes--a tranc of joy. they did not speak, but now and then she would 
look into hi face with an old familiar smile, and the joy of hi heart 
wa near to burst in tear from hi eyes. 

A shriek burst from flora' lips--a shriek so wild and shrill that it 
awaken echo far and near. charl stagger back a step, as if shot, 
and then in such agonis accent as he wa long inde in banish the 
remembr of, she cried,-- 

"the vampyre! the vampyre!" 




chapter xvii. 

the explanation.--th arriv OF the admir AT the house.--a scene OF 
confusion, and some OF it results. 


[illustration] 

So sudden and so utterli unexpect a cri of alarm from flora, at such a 
time might well have the effect of astound the nerv of ani one, and 
no wonder that charl wa for a few second absolut petrifi and 
almost unabl to think. 

mechanically, then, he turn hi eye toward the door of the 
summer-house, and there he saw a tall, thin man, rather elegantli 
dressed, whose counten certainly, in it wonder resembl to 
the portrait on the panel, might well appal ani one. 

the stranger stood in the irresolut attitud on the threshold of the 
summer-hous of one who did not wish to intrude, but who found it as 
awkward, if not more so now, to retreat than to advance. 

befor charl holland could summon ani word to hi aid, or think of 
free himself from the cling grasp of flora, which wa wound around 
him, the stranger made a veri low and courtli bow, after which he said, 
in win accents,-- 

"I veri much fear that I am an intrud here. allow me to offer my 
warmest apologies, and to assur you, sir, and you, madam, that I had no 
idea ani one wa in the arbour. you perceiv the rain is fall 
smartly, and I made toward here, see it wa like to shelter me 
from the shower." 

these word were spoken in such a plausibl and courtli tone of voice, 
that they might well have becom ani drawing-room in the kingdom. 

flora kept her eye fix upon him dure the utter of these words; 
and as she convuls clutch the arm of charles, she kept on 
whispering,-- 

"the vampyre! the vampyre!" 

"I much fear," ad the stranger, in the same bland tones, "that I have 
been the caus of some alarm to the young lady!" 

"releas me," whisper charl to flora. "releas me; I will follow him 
at once." 

"no, no--do not leav me--do not leav me. the vampyre--th dread 
vampyre!" 

"but, flora--" 

"hush--hush--hush! It speak again." 

"perhap I ought to account for my appear in the garden at all," 
ad the insinu stranger. "the fact is, I came on a visit--" 

flora shuddered. 

"to mr. henri bannerworth," continu the stranger; "and find the 
garden-g open, I came in without troubl the servants, which I much 
regret, as I can perceiv I have alarm and annoy the lady. madam, 
pray accept of my apologies." 

"in the name of god, who are you?" said charles. 

"mi name is varney." 

"oh, yes. you are the sir franci varney, resid close by, who bear 
so fear a resembl to--" 

"pray go on, sir. I am all attention." 

"to a portrait here." 

"indeed! now I reflect a moment, mr. henri bannerworth did incident 
mention someth of the sort. it' a most singular coincidence." 

the sound of approach footstep wa now plainli heard, and in a few 
moment henri and george, along with mr. marchdale, reach the spot. 
their appear show that they had made haste, and henri at onc 
exclaimed,-- 

"we heard, or fanci we heard, a cri of alarm." 

"you did hear it," said charl holland. "do you know thi gentleman?" 

"it is sir franci varney." 

"indeed!" 

varney bow to the new comers, and wa altogeth as much at hi eas 
as everybodi els seem quit the contrary. even charl holland found 
the difficulti of go up to such a well-bred, gentlemanli man, and 
saying, "sir, we believ you to be a vampyre"--to be almost, if not 
insurmountable. 

"I cannot do it," he thought, "but I will watch him." 

"take me away," whisper flora. "'ti he--'ti he. oh, take me away, 
charles." 

"hush, flora, hush. you are in some error; the accident resembl 
should not make us be rude to thi gentleman." 

"the vampyre!--it is the vampyre!" 

"are you sure, flora?" 

"do I know your features--mi own--mi brother's? Do not ask me to 
doubt--i cannot. I am quit sure. take me from hi hideou presence, 
charles." 

"the young lady, I fear, is veri much indisposed," remark sir franci 
varney, in a sympathet tone of voice. "if she will accept of my arm, I 
shall esteem it a great honour." 

"no--no--no!--god! no," cri flora. 

"madam, I will not press you." 

He bowed, and charl led flora from the summer-hous toward the hall. 

"flora," he said, "I am bewildered--i know not what to think. that man 
most certainli ha been fashion after the portrait which is on the 
panel in the room you formerli occupied; or it ha been paint from 
him." 

"he is my midnight visitor!" exclaim flora. "he is the vampyre;--thi 
sir franci varney is the vampyre." 

"good god! what can be done?" 

"I know not. I am nearli distracted." 

"be calm, flora. If thi man be realli what you name him, we now know 
from what quarter the mischief comes, which is, at all events, a point 
gained. Be assur we shall place a watch upon him." 

"oh, it is terribl to meet him here." 

"and he is so wonder anxious, too, to possess the hall." 

"he is--h is." 

"it look strange, the whole affair. but, flora, be assur of one 
thing, and that is, of your own safety." 

"can I be assur of that?" 

"most certainly. Go to your mother now. here we are, you see, fairli 
within doors. Go to your mother, dear flora, and keep yourself quiet. I 
will return to thi mysteri man now with a cooler judgment than I 
left him." 

"you will watch him, charles?" 

"I will, indeed." 

"and you will not let him approach the hous here alone?" 

"I will not." 

"oh, that the almighti should allow such be to haunt the earth!" 

"hush, flora, hush! we cannot judg of hi allwis purpose." 

'"ti hard that the innoc should be inflict with it presence." 

charl bow hi head in mourn assent. 

[illustration] 

"i it not very, veri dreadful?" 

"hush--hush! calm yourself, dearest, calm yourself. recollect that all 
we have to go upon in thi matter is a resemblance, which, after all, 
may be accidental. but leav it all to me, and be assur that now I 
have some clue to thi affair, I will not lose sight of it, or of sir 
franci varney." 

So saying, charl surrend flora to the care of her mother, and then 
wa hasten back to the summer-house, when he met the whole parti 
come toward the hall, for the rain wa each moment increas in 
intensity. 

"we are returning," remark sir franci varney, with a half bow and a 
smile, to charles. 

"allow me," said henry, "to introduc you, mr. holland, to our 
neighbour, sir franci varney." 

charl felt himself compel to behav with courtesy, although hi 
mind wa so full of conflict feel as regard varney; but there 
wa no avoiding, without such brutal rude as wa inconsist with 
all hi pursuit and habits, repli in someth like the same strain 
to the extrem courtli polit of the suppos vampyre. 

"I will watch him closely," thought charles. "I can do no more than 
watch him closely." 

sir franci varney seem to be a man of the most gener and discurs 
information. He talk fluentli and pleasantli upon all sort of topics, 
and notwithstand he could not but have heard what flora had said of 
him, he ask no question whatev upon that subject. 

thi silenc as regard a matter which would at onc have induc some 
sort of inquiri from ani other man, charl felt told much against him, 
and he trembl to believ for a moment that, after all, it realli might 
be true. 

"i he a vampyre?" he ask himself. "are there vampyres, and is thi 
man of fashion--thi courtly, talented, educ gentleman one?" It wa 
a perfectli hideou question. 

"you are charmingli situat here," remark varney, as, after ascend 
the few step that led to the hall door, he turn and look at the 
view from that slight altitude. 

"the place ha been much esteemed," said henry, "for it picturesqu 
beauti of scenery." 

"and well it may be. I trust, mr. holland, the young ladi is much 
better?" 

"she is, sir," said charles. 

"I wa not honour by an introduction." 

"it wa my fault," said henry, who spoke to hi extraordinari guest with 
an air of forc hilarity. "it wa my fault for not introduc you to 
my sister." 

"and that wa your sister?" 

"it was, sir." 

"report ha not beli her--sh is beautiful. but she look rather pale, 
I thought. ha she bad health?" 

"the best of health." 

"indeed! perhap the littl disagre circumstance, which is made so 
much food for gossip in the neighbourhood, ha affect her spirits?" 

"it has." 

"you allud to the suppos visit here of a vampyre?" said charles, as 
he fix hi eye upon varney' face. 

"yes, I allud to the suppos appear of a suppos vampyr in thi 
family," said sir franci varney, as he return the earnest gaze of 
charles, with such unshrink assurance, that the young man wa 
compelled, after about a minute, nearli to withdraw hi own eyes. 

"he will not be cowed," thought charles. "use ha made him familiar to 
such cross-questioning." 

It appear now suddenli to occur to henri that he had said someth at 
varney' own hous which should have prevent him from come to the 
hall, and he now remarked,-- 

"we scarc expect the pleasur of your compani here, sir franci 
varney." 

"oh, my dear sir, I am awar of that; but you rous my curiosity. you 
mention to me that there wa a portrait here amazingli like me." 

"did i?" 

"inde you did, or how could I know it? I want to see if the 
resembl wa so perfect." 

"did you hear, sir," ad henry, "that my sister wa alarm at your 
like to that portrait?" 

"no, really." 

"I pray you walk in, and we will talk more at larg upon that matter." 

"with great pleasure. one lead a monoton life in the country, when 
compar with the brillianc of a court existence. just now I have no 
particular engagement. As we are near neighbour I see no reason whi we 
should not be good friends, and often interchang such civil as 
make up the amen of existence, and which, in the country, more 
particularly, are valuable." 

henri could not be hypocrit enough to assent to this; but still, under 
the present aspect of affairs, it wa imposs to return ani but a 
civil reply; so he said,-- 

"oh, yes, of course--certainly. My time is veri much occupied, and my 
sister and mother see no company." 

"oh, now, how wrong." 

"wrong, sir?" 

"yes, surely. If anyth more than anoth tend to harmon 
individuals, it is the societi of that fairer half of the creation which 
we love for their veri foibles. I am much attach to the softer sex--to 
young person full of health. I like to see the rosi checks, where the 
warm blood mantl in the superfici veins, and all is loveli and 
life." 

charl shrank back, and the word "demon" unconsci escap hi 
lips. 

sir franci took no manner of notic of the expression, but went on 
talking, as if he had been on the veri happiest term with everi one 
present. 

"will you follow me, at once, to the chamber where the portrait hangs," 
said henry, "or will you partak of some refresh first?" 

"no refresh for me," said varney. "mi dear friend, if you will 
permit me to call you such, thi is a time of the day at which I never 
do take ani refreshment." 

"nor at ani other," thought henry. 

they all went to the chamber where charl had pass one veri 
disagre night, and when they arrived, henri point to the portrait 
on the panel, saying-- 

"there, sir franci varney, is your likeness." 

He looked, and, have walk up to it, in an under tone, rather as if 
he were convers with himself than make a remark for ani one els to 
hear, he said-- 

"it is wonder like." 

"it is, indeed," said charles. 

"if I stand besid it, thus," said varney, place himself in a 
favour attitud for compar the two faces, "I dare say you will be 
more struck with the like than before." 

So accur wa it now, that the same light fell upon hi face as that 
under which the painter had execut the portrait, that all start back 
a step or two. 

"some artists," remark varney, "have the sens to ask where a portrait 
is to be hung befor they paint it, and then they adapt their light and 
shadow to those which would fall upon the original, were it similarli 
situated." 

"I cannot stand this," said charl to henry; "I must question him 
farther." 

"a you please, but do not insult him." 

"I will not." 

"he is beneath my roof now, and, after all, it is but a hideou 
suspicion we have of him." 

"reli upon me." 

charl step forward, and onc again confront varney, with an 
earnest gaze, he said-- 

"do you know, sir, that miss bannerworth declar the vampyr she 
fanci to have visit thi chamber to be, in features, the exact 
counterpart of thi portrait?" 

"doe she indeed?" 

"she does, indeed." 

"and perhaps, then, that account for her think that I am the 
vampyre, becaus I bear a strong resembl to the portrait." 

"I should not be surprised," said charles. 

"how veri odd." 

"very." 

"and yet entertaining. I am rather amus than otherwise. the idea of 
be a vampyre. ha! ha! If ever I go to a masquerad again, I shall 
certainli assum the charact of a vampyre." 

"you would do it well." 

"I dare say, now, I should make quit a sensation." 

"I am certain you would. Do you not think, gentlemen, that sir franci 
varney would enact the charact to the veri life? By heavens, he would 
do it so well that one might, without much difficulty, realli imagin 
him a vampyre." 

"bravo--bravo," said varney, as he gentli fold hi hand together, 
with that genteel applaus that may even be indulg in in a box at the 
opera itself. "bravo. I like to see young person enthusiastic; it look 
as if they had some of the real fire of geniu in their composition. 
bravo--bravo." 

thi was, charl thought, the veri height and acm of impudence, and 
yet what could he do? what could he say? He wa foil by the downright 
cool of varney. 

As for henry, george, and mr. marchdale, they had listen to what wa 
pass between sir franci and charl in silence. they fear to 
diminish the effect of anyth charl might say, by ad a word of 
their own; and, likewise, they did not wish to lose one observ that 
might come from the lip of varney. 

but now charl appear to have said all he had to say, he turn to 
the window and look out. He seem like a man who had made up hi 
mind, for a time, to give up some contest in which he had been engaged. 

and, perhaps, not so much did he give it up from ani feel or 
conscious of be beaten, as from a convict that it could be the 
more effectually, at some other and far more elig opportunity, 
renewed. 

varney now address henry, saying,-- 

"I presum the subject of our conference, when you did me the honour of 
a call, is no secret to ani one here?" 

"none whatever," said henry. 

"then, perhaps, I am too earli in ask you if you have made up your 
mind?" 

"I have scarcely, certainly, had time to think." 

"mi dear sir, do not let me hurri you; I much regret, indeed, the 
intrusion." 

"you seem anxiou to possess the hall," remark mr. marchdale, to 
varney. 

"I am." 

"i it new to you?" 

"not quite. I have some boyish recollect connect with thi 
neighbourhood, among which bannerworth hall stand suffici 
prominent." 

"may I ask how long ago that was?" said charl howard, rather abruptly. 

"I do not recollect, my enthusiast young friend," said varney. "how 
old are you?" 

"just about twenty-one." 

"you are, then, for your age, quit a model of discretion." 

It would have been difficult for the most accur observ of human 
natur to have decid whether thi wa said truth or ironically, 
so charl made no repli to it whatever. 

"I trust," said henry, "we shall induc you, as thi is your first 
visit, sir franci varney, to the hall, to partak of some thing." 

"well, well, a cup of wine--" 

"i at your service." 

henri now led the way to a small parlour, which, although by no mean 
one of the showiest room of the house, was, from the care and exquisit 
carv with which it abounded, much more to the tast of ani who 
possess an accur judgment in such work of art. 

then wine wa ordered, and charl took an opportun of whisper to 
henry,-- 

"notic well if he drinks." 

"I will." 

"do you see that beneath hi coat there is a rais place, as if hi arm 
wa bound up?" 

"I do." 

"there, then, wa where the bullet from the pistol fire by flora, when 
we were at the church, hit him." 

"hush! for god' sake, hush! you are get into a dread state of 
excitement, charles; hush! hush!" 

"and can you blame--" 

"no, no; but what can we do?" 

"you are right. noth can we do at present. We have a clue now, and be 
it our mutual inclination, as well as duty, to follow it. oh, you shall 
see how calm I will be!" 

"for heaven' sake, be so. I have note that hi eye flash upon your 
with no friendli feeling." 

"hi friendship were a curse." 

"hush! he drinks!" 

"watch him." 

"I will." 

"gentlemen all," said sir franci varney, in such soft, dulcet tones, 
that it wa quit a fascin to hear him speak; "gentlemen all, be 
as I am, much delight with your company, do not accus me of 
presumption, if I drink now, poor drinker as I am, to our futur merri 
meetings." 

He rais the wine to hi lips, and seem to drink, after which he 
replac the glass upon the table. 

charl glanc at it, it wa still full. 

"you have not drank, sir franci varney," he said. 

"pardon me, enthusiast young sir," said varney, "perhap you will have 
the liber to allow me to take my wine how I pleas and when I 
please." 

"your glass is full." 

"well, sir?" 

"will you drink it?" 

"not at ani man' bidding, most certainly. If the fair flora bannerworth 
would grace the board with her sweet presence, methink I could then 
drink on, on, on." 

"hark you, sir," cri charles, "I can bear no more of this. We have had 
in thi hous most horribl and damn evid that there are such 
thing as vampyres." 

"have you really? I suppos you eat raw pork at supper, and so had the 
nightmare?" 

"A jest is welcom in it place, but pray hear me out, sir, if it suit 
your lofti courtesi to do so." 

"oh, certainly." 

"then I say we believe, as far as human judgment ha a right to go, that 
a vampyr ha been here." 

"go on, it' interesting. I alway wa a lover of the wild and the 
wonderful." 

"we have, too," continu charles, "some reason to believ that you are 
the man." 

varney tap hi forehead as he glanc at henry, and said,-- 

"oh, dear, I did not know. you should have told me he wa a littl wrong 
about the brain; I might have quarrel with the lad. dear me, how 
lament for hi poor mother." 

"thi will not do, sir franci varney _alias_ bannerworth." 

"oh--oh! Be calm--b calm." 

"I defi you to your teeth, sir! no, god, no! your teeth!" 

"poor lad! poor lad!" 

"you are a cowardli demon, and here I swear to devot myself to your 
destruction." 

sir franci varney drew himself up to hi full height, and that wa 
immense, as he said to henry,-- 

"I pray you, mr. bannerworth, sinc I am thu grievous insult 
beneath your roof, to tell me if your friend here be mad or sane?" 

"he' not mad." 

"then--" 

"hold, sir! the quarrel shall be mine. In the name of my persecut 
sister--in the name of heaven. sir franci varney, I defi you." 

sir francis, in spite of hi impenetr calmness, appear somewhat 
moved, as he said,-- 

"I have alreadi endur insult sufficient--i will endur no more. If 
there are weapon at hand--" 

"mi young friend," interrupt mr. marchdale, step between the 
excit men, "i carri away by hi feelings, and know not what he 
says. you will look upon it in that light, sir francis." 

"we need no interference," exclaim varney, hi hitherto bland voic 
chang to one of fury. "the hot blood fool wish to fight, and he 
shall--to the death--to the death." 

[illustration] 

"and I say he shall not," exclaim mr. marchdale, take henri by the 
arm. "george," he added, turn to the young man, "assist me in 
persuad your brother to leav the room. conceiv the agoni of your 
sister and mother if anyth should happen to him." 

varney smile with a devilish sneer, as he listen to these words, and 
then he said,-- 

"a you will--a you will. there will be plenti of time, and perhap 
better opportunity, gentlemen. I bid you good day." 

and with provok coolness, he then move toward the door, and quit 
the room. 

"remain here," said marchdale; "I will follow him, and see that he quit 
the premises." 

He did so, and the young men, from the window, beheld sir franci 
walk slowli across the garden, and then saw mr. marchdal follow on 
hi track. 

while they were thu occupied, a tremend ring came at the gate, 
but their attent wa so rivet to what wa pass in the garden, 
that they paid not the least attent to it. 




chapter xviii. 

the admiral' advice.--th challeng TO the vampyre.--th new servant AT 
the hall. 


[illustration] 

the violent ring of the bell continu uninterruptedli until at 
length georg volunt to answer it. the fact was, that now there wa 
no servant at all in the place for, after the one who had recent 
demand of henri her dismiss had left, the other wa terrifi to 
remain alone, and had precipit gone from the house, without even 
go through the ceremoni of announc her intent to. To be sure, 
she sent a boy for her money afterwards, which may be consid a great 
act of condescension. 

suspecting, then, thi state of things, georg himself hasten to the 
gate, and, be not over well pleas at the continu and unnecessari 
ring which wa kept up at it, he open it quickly, and cried, with 
more impatience, by a vast amount, than wa usual with him. 

"who is so impati that he cannot wait a season time for the door 
to be opened?" 

"and who the d----l are you?" cri one who wa immedi outside. 

"who do you want?" cri george. 

"shiver my timbers!" cri admir bell, for it wa no other than that 
personage. "what' that to you?" 

"ay, ay," ad jack, "answer that if you can, you shore-going-look 
swab." 

"two madmen, I suppose," ejacul george, and he would have close the 
gate upon them; but jack introduc between it and the post the end of a 
thick stick, saying,-- 

"avast there! none of that; we have had troubl enough to get in. If you 
are the famili lawyer, or the chaplain, perhap you'll tell us where 
mister charley is." 

"onc more I demand of you who you want?" said george, who wa now 
perhap a littl amus at the conduct of the impati visitors. 

"we want the admiral' _nevey_" said jack. 

"but how do I know who is the admiral' _nevey_ as you call him." 

"why, charl holland, to be sure. have you got him aboard or not?" 

"mr. charl holland is certainli here; and, if you had said at once, 
and explicitly, that you wish to see him, I could have given you a 
direct answer." 

"he is here?" cri the admiral. 

"most certainly." 

"come along, then; yet, stop a bit. I say, young fellow, just befor we 
go ani further, tell us if he ha maim the vampyre?" 

"the what? 

"the _wamphigher_," said jack, by way of being, as he considered, a 
littl more explanatori than the admiral. 

"I do not know what you mean," said george; "if you wish to see mr. 
charl holland walk in and see him. He is in thi house; but, for 
myself, as you are stranger to me, I declin answer ani questions, 
let their import be what they may." 

"hilloa! who are they?" suddenli cri jack, as he point to two 
figur some distanc off in the meadows, who appear to be angrili 
conversing. 

georg glanc in the direct toward which jack pointed, and there he 
saw sir franci varney and mr. marchdal stand within a few pace of 
each other, and appar engag in some angri discussion. 

hi first impuls wa to go immedi toward them; but, befor he 
could execut even that suggest of hi mind, he saw varney strike 
marchdale, and the latter fell to the ground. 

"allow me to pass," cri george, as he endeavour to get by the rather 
unwieldi form of the admiral. but, befor he could accomplish this, for 
the gate wa narrow, he saw varney, with great swiftness, make off, and 
marchdale, rise to hi feet, came toward the hall. 

when marchdal got near enough to the garden-g to see george, he 
motion to him to remain where he was, and then, quicken hi pace, 
he soon came up to the spot. 

"marchdale," cri george, "you have had an encount with sir franci 
varney." 

"I have," said marchdale, in an excit manner. "I threaten to follow 
him, but he struck me to the earth as easili as I could a child. hi 
strength is superhuman." 

"I saw you fall." 

"I believe, but that he wa observed, he would have murder me." 

"indeed!" 

"what, do you mean to say that lankey, horse-marin look fellow is as 
bad as that!" said the admiral. 

marchdal now turn hi attent to the two new comers, upon whom he 
look with some surprise, and then, turn to george, he said,-- 

"i thi gentleman a visitor?" 

"to mr. holland, I believ he is," said george; "but I have not the 
pleasur of know hi name." 

"oh, you may know my name as soon as you like," cri the admiral. "the 
enemi of old england know it, and I don't care if all the world know 
it. i'm old admir bell, someth of a hulk now, but still abl to 
head a quarter-deck if there wa ani need to do so." 

"ay, ay," cri jack, and take from hi pocket a boatswain' whistle, 
he blew a blast so long, and loud, and shrill, that georg wa fain to 
cover hi ear with hi hand to shut out the brain-piercing, and, to 
him unusu sound. 

"and are you, then, a relative," said marchdale, "of mr. holland's, sir, 
may I ask?" 

"i'm hi uncle, and be d----d to him, if you must know, and some one ha 
told me that the young scamp think of marri a mermaid, or a ghost, 
or a vampyre, or some such thing, so, for the sake of the memori of hi 
poor mother, i'v come to say no to the bargain, and d--n me, who 
cares." 

"come in, sir," said george, "I will conduct you to mr. holland. I 
presum thi is your servant?" 

"why, not exactly. that' jack pringle, he wa my boatswain, you see, 
and now he' a kind o' someth betwixt and between. not exactli a 
servant." 

"ay, ay, sir," said jack. "have it all your own way, though we is paid 
off." 

"hold your tongue, you audaci scoundrel, will you." 

"oh, I forgot, you don't like anyth said about pay off, co it 
put you in mind of--" 

"now, d--n you, i'll have you strung up to the yard-arm, you dog, if you 
don't belay there." 

"i'm done. all' right." 

By thi time the party, includ the admiral, jack, georg bannerworth, 
and marchdale, had got more than half-way across the garden, and were 
observ by charl holland and henry, who had come to the step of the 
hall to see what wa go on. the moment charl saw the admir a 
chang of colour came over hi face, and he exclaimed,-- 

"bi all that' surprising, there is my uncle!" 

"your uncle!" said henry. 

"yes, as good a heart a man as ever drew breath, and yet, withal, as 
full of prejudices, and as ignor of life, as a child." 

without wait for ani repli from henry, charl holland rush 
forward, and seiz hi uncl by the hand, he cried, in tone of 
genuin affection,-- 

"uncle, dear uncle, how came you to find me out?" 

"charley, my boy," cri the old man, "bless you; I mean, confound your 
d----d impudence; you rascal, i'm glad to see you; no, I ain't, you 
young mutineer. what do you mean by it, you ugly, ill-looking, d----d 
fine fellow--mi dear boy. oh, you infern scoundrel." 

all thi wa accompani by a shake of the hand, which wa enough to 
disloc anybody' shoulder, and which charl wa compel to bear as 
well as he could. 

It quit prevent him from speaking, however, for a few moments, for it 
nearli shook the breath out of him. when, then, he could get in a word, 
he said,-- 

"uncle, I dare say you are surprised." 

"surprised! d--n me, I am surprised." 

"well, I shall be abl to explain all to your satisfaction, I am sure. 
allow me now to introduc you to my friends." 

turn then to henry, charl said,-- 

"thi is mr. henri bannerworth, uncle; and thi mr. georg bannerworth, 
both good friend of mine; and thi is mr. marchdale, a friend of 
theirs, uncle." 

"oh, indeed!" 

"and here you see admir bell, my most worthy, but rather eccentr 
uncle." 

"confound your impudence." 

"what brought him here I cannot tell; but he is a brave officer, and a 
gentleman." 

"none of your nonsense," said the admiral. 

"and here you see jack pringle," said that individual, introduc 
himself, sinc no one appear inclin to do that offic for him, "a 
tar for all weathers. one as hate the french, and is never so happi as 
when he' alongsid o' some o' those lubberli craft blaze away." 

"that' uncommonli true," remark the admiral. 

"will you walk in, sir?" said henry, courteously. "ani friend of charl 
holland' is most welcom here. you will have much to excus us for, 
becaus we are defici in servant at present, in consequ of come 
occurr in our family, which your nephew ha our full permiss to 
explain to you in full." 

"oh, veri good, I tell you what it is, all of you, what i'v seen of 
you, d----e, I like, so here goes. come along, jack." 

the admir walk into the house, and as he went, charl holland said 
to him,-- 

"how came you to know I wa here, uncle?" 

"some fellow wrote me a despatch." 

"indeed!" 

"yes, say at you wa a go to marri some odd sort of fish as it 
wasn't at all the thing to introduc into the family." 

"was--wa a vampyr mentioned?" 

"that' the veri thing." 

"hush, uncle--hush." 

"what for?" 

"do not, I implore, hint at such a thing befor these kind friend of 
mine. I will take an opportun within the next hour of explain all 
to you, and you shall form your own kind and gener judgement upon 
circumst in which my honour and my happi are so nearli 
concerned." 

"gammon," said the admiral. 

"what, uncle?" 

"oh, I know you want to palav me into say it' all right. I suppos 
if my judgment and generos don't like it, I shall be an old fool, and 
a curs goose?" 

"now, uncle." 

"now, _nevey_." 

"well, well--no more at present. We will talk over thi at leisure. you 
promis me to say noth about it until you have heard my explanation, 
uncle?" 

"veri good. make it as soon as you can, and as short as you can, that' 
all I ask of you." 

"I will, I will." 

charl wa to the full as anxiou as hi uncl could be to enter upon 
the subject, some remot inform of which, he felt convinced, had 
brought the old man down to the hall. who it could have been that so far 
intermeddl with hi affair as to write to him, he could not possibl 
conceive. 

A veri few word will suffic to explain the precis posit in which 
charl holland was. A consider sum of money had been left to him, 
but it wa saddl with the condit that he should not come into 
possess of it until he wa one year beyond the age which is usual 
denomin that of discretion, namely, twenty-one. hi uncle, the 
admiral, wa the truste of hi fortune, and he, with rare discretion, 
had got the activ and zealou assist of a profession gentleman of 
great honour and emin to conduct the busi for him. 

thi gentleman had advis that for the two year between the age of 
twenti and twenty-two, charl holland should travel, inasmuch as in 
english societi he would find himself in an awkward position, be for 
one whole year of age, and yet wait for hi property. 

under such circumstances, reason the lawyer, a young man, unless he is 
possess of veri rare discret indeed, is almost sure to get 
fear involv with money-lenders. be of age, hi notes, and 
bills, and bond would all be good, and he would be in a ten time wors 
situat than a wealthi minor. 

all thi wa duli explain to charles, who, rather eagerli than 
otherwise, caught at the idea of a two year wander on the continent, 
where he could visit so mani places, which to a well read young man like 
himself, and one of a live imagination, were full of the most 
delight associations. 

but the acquaint with flora bannerworth effect a great revolut 
in hi feelings. the dearest, sweetest spot on earth becam that which 
she inhabited. when the bannerworth left him abroad, he knew not what 
to do with himself. everything, and everi pursuit in which he had befor 
taken a delight, becam most distast to him. He was, in fact, in a 
short time, complet "use up," and then he determin upon return 
to england, and find out the dear object of hi attach at once. 
thi resolut wa no sooner taken, than hi health and spirit 
return to him, and with what rapid he could, he now made hi way to 
hi nativ shores. 

the two year were so nearli expired, that he made up hi mind he would 
not commun either with hi uncle, the admiral, or the profession 
gentleman upon whose judgment he set so high and so just a value. and at 
the hall he consid he wa in perfect secur from ani interruption, 
and so he would have been, but for that letter which wa written to 
admir bell, and sign josiah crinkles, but which josiah crinkl so 
emphat deni all knowledg of. who wrote it, remain at present 
one of those mysteri which time, in the progress of our narrative, 
will clear up. 

the opportune, or rather the pain junctur at which charl holland 
had arriv at bannerworth hall, we are well cognis of. where he 
expect to find smile he found tears, and the famili with whom he had 
fondli hope he should pass a time of uninterrupt happiness, he found 
plung in the gloom incident to an occurr of the most pain 
character. 

our reader will perceive, too, that come as he did with an utter 
disbelief in the vampyre, charl had been compelled, in some measure, 
to yield to the overwhelm weight of evid which had been brought 
to bear upon the subject, and although he could not exactli be said to 
believ in the exist and the appear of the vampyr at 
bannerworth hall, he wa upon the subject in a most pain state of 
doubt and indecision. 

charl now took an opportun to speak to henri privately, and inform 
him exactli how he stood with hi uncle, adding-- 

"now, my dear friend, if you forbid me, I will not tell my uncl of thi 
sad affair, but I must own I would rather do so fulli and freely, and 
trust to hi own judgment upon it." 

"I implor you to do so," said henry. "conceal nothing. let him know the 
precis situat and circumst of the famili by all means. there is 
noth so mischiev as secrecy: I have the greatest dislik to it. I 
beg you tell him all." 

"I will; and with it, henry, I will tell him that my heart is 
irrevoc flora's." 

"your gener cling to one whom your heart saw and loved, under veri 
differ auspices," said henry, "believ me, charles, sink deep into 
my heart. she ha relat to me someth of a meet she had with 
you." 

"oh, henry, she may tell you what I said; but there are no word which 
can express the depth of my tenderness. 'ti onli time which can prove 
how much I love her." 

"go to your uncle," said henry, in a voic of emotion. "god bless you, 
charles. It is true you would have been fulli justifi in leav my 
sister; but the nobler and the more gener path you have chosen ha 
endear you to us all." 

"where is flora now?" said charles. 

"she is in her own room. I have persuad her, by some occupation, to 
withdraw her mind from a too close and consequ pain 
contempl of the distress circumst in which she feel 
herself placed." 

"you are right. what occup best pleas her?" 

"the page of romanc onc had a charm for her gentl spirit." 

"then come with me, and, from among the few articl I brought with me 
here, I can find some paper which may help her to pass some merri 
hours." 

charl took henri to hi room, and, unstrap a small valise, he took 
from it some manuscript papers, one of which he hand to henry, 
saying-- 

"give that to her: it contain an account of a wild adventure, and show 
that human natur may suffer much more--and that wrong too--than 
came ever under our present mysteri affliction." 

"I will," said henry; "and, come from you, I am sure it will have a 
more than ordinari valu in her eyes." 

"I will now," said charles, "seek my uncle. I will tell him how I love 
her; and at the end of my narration, if he should not object, I would 
fain introduc her to him, that he might himself see that, let what 
beauti may have met hi gaze, her peer he never yet met with, and may in 
vain hope to do so." 

"you are partial, charles." 

"not so. 'ti true I look upon her with a lover' eyes, but I look still 
with those of truth observation." 

"well, I will speak to her about see your uncle, and let you know. No 
doubt, he will not be at all avers to an interview with ani one who 
stand high in your esteem." 

the young men now separated--henry, to seek hi beauti sister; and 
charles, to commun to hi uncl the strang particular connect 
with varney, the vampyre. 




chapter xix. 

flora IN her chamber.--h fears.--th manuscript.--an adventure. 


[illustration] 

henri found flora in her chamber. she wa in deep thought when he tap 
at the door of the room, and such wa the state of nervou excit in 
which she wa that even the demand for admiss made by him to the room 
wa suffici to produc from her a sudden cri of alarm. 

"who--who is there?" she then said, in accent full of terror. 

"'ti I, dear flora," said henry. 

she open the door in an instant, and, with a feel of grate 
relief, exclaimed-- 

"oh, henry, is it onli you?" 

"who did you suppos it was, flora?" 

she shuddered. 

"i--i--do not know; but I am so foolish now, and so weak-spirited, that 
the slightest nois is enough to alarm me." 

"you must, dear flora, fight up, as I had hope you were doing, against 
thi nervousness." 

"I will endeavour. did not some stranger come a short time since, 
brother?" 

"stranger to us, flora, but not to charl holland. A rel of 
his--an uncl whom he much respects, ha found him out here, and ha now 
come to see him." 

"and to advis him," said flora, as she sunk into a chair, and wept 
bitterly; "to advis him, of course, to desert, as he would a 
pestilence, a vampyr bride." 

"hush, hush! for the sake of heaven, never make use of such a phrase, 
flora. you know not what a pang it bring to my heart to hear you." 

"oh, forgiv me, brother." 

"say no more of it, flora. heed it not. It may be possible--in fact, it 
may well be suppos as more than probable--that the rel of charl 
holland may shrink from sanction the alliance, but do you rest 
secur in the possess of the heart which I feel convinc is wholli 
yours, and which, I am sure, would break ere it surrend you." 

A smile of joy came across flora' pale but beauti face, as she 
cried,-- 

"and you, dear brother--y think so much of charles' faith?" 

"a heaven is my judge, I do." 

"then I will bear up with what strength god may give me against all 
thing that seek to depress me; I will not be conquered." 

"you are right, flora; I rejoic to find in you such a disposition. here 
is some manuscript which charl think will amus you, and he bade me 
ask you if you would be introduc to hi uncle." 

"yes, yes--willingly." 

"I will tell him so; I know he wish it, and I will tell him so. Be 
patient, dear flora, and all may yet be well." 

"but, brother, on your sacr word, tell me do you not think thi sir 
franci varney is the vampyre?" 

"I know not what to think, and do not press me for a judgment now. He 
shall be watched." 

henri left hi sister, and she sat for some moment in silenc with the 
paper befor her that charl had sent her. 

"yes," she then said, gently, "he love me--charl love me; I ought to 
be very, veri happy. He love me. In those word are concentr a 
whole world of joy--charl love me--h will not forsak me. oh, wa 
there ever such dear love--such fond devotion?--never, never. dear 
charles. He love me--h love me!" 

the veri repetit of these word had a charm for flora--a charm which 
wa suffici to banish much sorrow; even the much-dread vampyr wa 
forgotten while the light of love wa beam upon her, and she told 
herself,-- 

"he is mine!--h is mine! He love me truly." 

after a time, she turn to the manuscript which her brother had brought 
her, and, with a far greater concentr of mind than she had thought 
it possibl she could bring to it, consid the mani pain subject 
of contempl that she might have occupi herself with, she read the 
page with veri great pleasur and interest. 

the tale wa one which chain her attent both by it incid and 
the manner of it recital. It commenc as follows, and wa entitled, 
"hugo de verole; or, the doubl plot." 

In a veri mountain part of hungari live a nobleman whose patern 
estat cover mani a mile of rock and mountain land, as well as some 
fertil valleys, in which repos a hardi and content peasantry. the 
old count de hugo de verol had quit life early, and had left hi 
onli son, the then count hugo de verole, a boy of scarc ten years, 
under the guardianship of hi mother, an arbitrari and unscrupul 
woman. 

the count, her husband, had been one of those quiet, even-temp men, 
who have no desir to step beyond the sphere in which they are placed; 
he had no cares, save those includ in the manag of hi estate, 
the prosper of hi serfs, and the happi of those, around him. 

hi death caus much lament throughout hi domains, it wa so 
sudden and unexpected, be in the enjoy of hi health and strength 
until a few hour previous, and then hi energi becam prostrat by 
pain and disease. there wa a splendid funer ceremony, which, 
accord to the usag of hi house, took place by torch-light. 

So great and rapid were the ravag of disease, that the count' bodi 
quickli becam a mass of corruption. all were amaz at the phenomena, 
and were heartili glad when the bodi wa dispos of in the place 
prepar for it recept in the vault of hi own castle. the guest 
who came to wit the funeral, and attend the count' obsequies, and 
to condol with the widow on the loss she had sustained, were 
entertain sumptuous for mani days. 

the widow sustain her part well. she wa inconsol for the loss of 
her husband, and mourn hi death bitterly. her grief appear 
profound, but she, with difficulty, subdu it to within decent bounds, 
that she might not offend ani of her numer guests. 

however, they left her with the assur of their profound regard, and 
then when they were gone, when the last guest had departed, and were no 
longer visibl to the eye of the countess, as she gaze from the 
battlements, then her behaviour chang totally. 

she descend from the battlements, and then with an imperi gestur 
she gave her order that all the gate of the castl should be closed, 
and a watch set. all sign of mourn she order to be laid on one 
side save her own, which she wore, and then she retir to her own 
apartment, where she remain unseen. 

here the countess remain in profound medit for nearli two days, 
dure which time the attend believ she wa pray for the 
welfar of the soul of their deceas master, and they fear she would 
starv herself to death if she remain ani longer. 

just as they had assembl togeth for the purpos of either recal 
her from her vigil or break open the door, they were amaz to see 
the countess open the room-door, and stand in the midst of them. 

"what do you here?" she demanded, in a stern voice. 

the servant were amaz and terrifi at her contract brow, and 
forgot to answer the question she put to them. 

"what do you do here?" 

"we came, my lady, to see--see--if--if you were well." 

"and why?" 

"becaus we hadn't seen your ladyship these two days, and we thought 
that your grief wa so excess that we fear some harm might befal 
you." 

the countess' brow contract for a few seconds, and she wa about to 
make a hasti reply, but she conquer the desir to do so, and mere 
said,-- 

"I am not well, I am faint; but, had I been dying, I should not have 
thank you for interf to prevent me; however, you act for the 
best, but do so no more. now prepar me some food." 

the servants, thu dismissed, repair to their stations, but with such 
a degre of alacrity, that they suffici show how much they fear 
their mistress. 

the young count, who wa onli in hi sixth year, knew littl about the 
loss he had sustained; but after a day or two' grief, there wa an end 
of hi sorrow for the time. 

that night there came to the castle-g a man dress in a black cloak, 
attend by a servant. they were both mount on good horses, and they 
demand to be admit to the presenc of the countess de hugo de 
verole. 

the messag wa carri to the countess, who started, but said,-- 

"admit the stranger." 

accordingli the stranger wa admitted, and shown into the apart 
where the countess wa sitting. 

At a signal the servant retired, leav the countess and the stranger 
alone. It wa some moment ere they spoke, and then the countess said in 
a low tone,-- 

"you are come?" 

"I am come." 

"you cannot now, you see, perform your threat. My husband, the count, 
caught a putrid disease, and he is no more." 

"I cannot inde do what I intended, inform your husband of your amours; 
but I can do someth as good, and which will give you as much 
annoyance." 

"indeed." 

"aye, more, it will caus you to be hated. I can spread reports." 

"you can." 

"and these may ruin you." 

"they may." 

"what do you intend to do? Do you intend that I shall be an enemi or a 
friend? I can be either, accord to my will." 

"what, do you desir to be either?" inquir the countess, with a 
careless tone. 

"if you refus my terms, you can make me an implac enemy, and if you 
grant them, you can make me a use friend and auxiliary," said the 
stranger. 

"what would you do if you were my enemy?" inquir the countess. 

"it is hardli my place," said the stranger, "to furnish you with a 
knowledg of my intentions, but I will say thi much, that the bankrupt 
count of morven is your lover." 

"well?" 

"and in the second place, that you were the caus of the death of your 
husband." 

"how dare you, sir--" 

"I dare say so much, and I dare say, also, that the count of morven 
bought the drug of me, and that he gave it to you, and that you gave it 
to the count your husband." 

"and what could you do if you were my friend?" inquir the countess, in 
the same tone, and without emotion. 

"I should abstain from do all this; should be abl to put ani one 
els out of your way for you, when you get rid of thi count of morven, 
as you assuredli will; for I know him too well not to be sure of that." 

"get rid of him!" 

"exactly, in the same manner you got rid of the old count." 

"then I accept your terms." 

"it is agreed, then?" 

"yes, quite." 

"well, then, you must order me some room in a tower, where I can pursu 
my studi in quiet." 

"you will be seen--and noticed--al will be discovered." 

"no, indeed, I will take care of that, I can so far disguis myself that 
he will not recognis me, and you can give out I am a philosoph or 
necromancer, or what you will; no one will come to me--they will be 
terrified." 

"veri well." 

"and the gold?" 

"shall be forthcom as soon as I can get it. the count ha place all 
hi gold in safe keeping, and all I can seiz are the rent as they 
becom due." 

"veri well; but let me have them. In the meantim you must provid for 
me, as I have come here with the full intent of stay here, or in 
some neighbour town." 

"indeed!" 

"yes; and my servant must be discharged, as I want none here." 

the countess call to an attend and gave the necessari orders, and 
afterward remain some time with the stranger, who had thu so 
unceremoni thrust himself upon her, and insist upon stay under 
such strang and aw circumstances. 

* * * * * 

the count of morven came a few week after, and remain some day with 
the countess. they were ceremoni and polit until they had a moment 
to retir from befor people, when the countess chang her cold disdain 
to a cordial and familiar address. 

"and now, my dear morven," she exclaimed, as soon as they were 
unobserved--"and now, my dear morven, that we are not seen, tell me, 
what have you been do with yourself?" 

"why, I have been in some trouble. I never had gold that would stay by 
me. you know my hand wa alway open." 

"the old complaint again." 

"no; but have come to the end of my store, I began to grow serious." 

"ah, morven!' said the countess, reproachfully. 

"well, never mind; when my purs is low my spirit sink, as the mercuri 
doe with the cold. you use to say my spirit were mercurial--i think 
they were." 

"well, what did you do?" 

"oh, nothing." 

"wa that what you were about to tell me?" inquir the countess. 

"oh, dear, no. you recollect the italian quack of whom I bought the drug 
you gave to the count, and which put an end to hi days--h want more 
money. well, as I had no more to spare, I could spare no more to him, 
and he turn vicious, and threatened. I threatened, too, and he knew I 
wa fulli abl and will to perform ani promis I might make to him on 
that score. I endeavour to catch him, as he had alreadi began to set 
peopl off on the suspici and marvel concern me, and if I 
could have come across him, I would have laid him veri low indeed." 

"and you could not find him?" 

"no, I could not." 

[illustration] 

"well, then, I will tell you where he is at thi present moment." 

"you?" 

"yes, i." 

"I can scarc credit my sens at what you say," said count morven. 
"mi worthi doctor, you are littl better than a candid for divin 
honours. but where is he?" 

"will you promis to be guid by me?" said the countess. 

"if you make it a condit upon which you grant the information, I 
must." 

"well, then, I take that as a promise." 

"you may. where--oh, where is he?" 

"rememb your promise. your doctor is at thi moment in thi castle." 

"thi castle?" 

"yes, thi castle." 

"sure there must be some mistake; it is too much fortun at once." 

"he came here for the same purpos he went to you." 

"indeed!" 

"yes, to get more money by extortion, and a promis to poison anybodi I 
liked." 

"d--n! it is the offer he made to me, and he name you." 

"he name you to me, and said I should be soon tire of you." 

"you have cage him?" 

"oh, dear, no; he ha a suit of apart in the eastern tower, where 
he pass for a philosopher, or a wizard, as peopl like best." 

"how?" 

"I have given him leav there." 

"indeed!" 

"yes; and what is more amaz is, that he is to aid me in poison you 
when I have becom tire of you." 

"thi is a riddl I cannot unravel; tell me the solution." 

"well, dear, listen,--h came to me and told me of someth I alreadi 
knew, and demand money and a resid for hi convenience, and I have 
grant him the asylum." 

"you have?" 

"I have." 

"I see; I will give him an inch or two of my andrea ferrara." 

"no--no." 

"do you counten him?" 

"for a time. listen--w want men in the mines; my late husband sent veri 
few to them of late years, and therefor they are get short of men 
there." 

"aye, aye." 

"the thing will be for you to feign ignor of the man, and then you 
will be abl to get him seized, and place in the mines, for such men as 
he are dangerous, and carri poison weapons." 

"would he not be better out of the world at once; there would be no 
escape, and no futur contingencies?" 

"no--no. I will have no more live taken; and he will be made useful; 
and, moreover, he will have time to reflect upon the mistak he had made 
in threaten me." 

"he wa paid for the job, and he had no futur claim. but what about the 
child?" 

"oh, he may remain for some time longer here with us." 

"it will be danger to do so," said the count; "he is now ten year 
old, and there is no know what may be done for him by hi relatives." 

"they dare not enter the gate of thi castl morven." 

"well, well; but you know he might have travel the same road as hi 
father, and all would be settled." 

"no more lives, as I told you; but we can easili secur him some other 
way, and we shall be equal as free from him and them." 

"that is enough--ther are dungeons, I know, in thi castle, and he can 
be kept there safe enough." 

"he can; but that is not what I propose. We can put him into the mine 
and confin him as a lunatic." 

"excellent!" 

"you see, we must make those mine more product somehow or other; 
they would be so, but the count would not hear of it; he said it wa so 
inhuman, they were so destruct of life." 

"paha! what were the mine intend for if not for use?" 

"exactly--i often said so, but he alway put a neg to it." 

"we'll make use of an affirmative, my dear countess, and see what will 
be the result in a chang of policy. By the way, when will our marriag 
be celebrated?" 

"not for some months." 

"how, so long? I am impatient." 

"you must restrain your impatience--but we must have the boy settl 
first, and the count will have been dead a longer time then, and we 
shall not give so much scandal to the weak-mind fool that were hi 
friends, for it will be danger to have so mani event happen about 
the same period." 

"you shall act as you think proper--but the first thing to be done will 
be, to get thi cun doctor quietli out of the way." 

"yes." 

"I must contriv to have him seized, and carri to the mines." 

"beneath the tower in which he live is a trap-door and a vault, from 
which, by mean of anoth trap and vault, is a long subterranean 
passag that lead to a door that open into one end of the mines; near 
thi end live sever men whom you must give some reward to, and they 
will, by concert, seiz him, and set him to work." 

"and if he will not work?" 

"why, they will scourg him in such a manner, that he would be afraid 
even of a threat of a repetit of the same treatment." 

"that will do. but I think the worthi doctor will split himself with 
rage and malice, he will be like a cage tiger." 

"but he will be denud of hi teeth and claws," repli the countess, 
smile "therefor he will have leisur to repent of have threaten 
hi employers." 

* * * * * 

some week pass over, and the count of morven contriv to becom 
acquaint with the doctor. they appear to be utter stranger to each 
other, though each knew the other; the doctor have disguis himself, 
he believ the disguis impenetr and therefor sat at ease. 

"worthi doctor," said the count to him, one day; "you have, no doubt, in 
your studies, becom acquaint with mani of the secret of science." 

"I have, my lord count; I may say there are few that are not known to 
father aldrovani. I have spent mani year in research." 

"indeed!" 

"yes; the midnight lamp ha burn till the gloriou sun ha reach the 
horizon, and bring back the day, and yet have I been found besid my 
books." 

"'ti well; men like you should well know the valu of the purest and 
most valuabl metal the earth produces?" 

"I know of but one--that is gold!" 

"'ti what I mean." 

"but 'ti hard to procur from the bowel of the earth--from the heart 
of these mountain by which we are surrounded." 

"yes, that is true. but know you not the owner of thi castl and 
territori possess these mine and work them?" 

"I believ they do; but I thought they had discontinu work them 
some years." 

"oh, no! that wa given out to deceiv the government, who claim so 
much out of it products." 

"oh! ah! aye, I see now." 

"and ever sinc they have been work it privately, and store bar of 
gold up in the vault of this--" 

"here, in thi castle?" 

"yes; beneath thi veri tower--it be the least frequented--th 
strongest, and perfectli inaccess from all sides, save the 
castle--it wa place there for the safest deposit." 

"I see; and there is much gold deposit in the vaults?" 

"I believ there is an immens quantiti in the vaults." 

"and what is your motiv for tell me of thi hoard of the preciou 
metal?" 

"why, doctor, I thought that you or I could use a few bars; and that, if 
we act in concert, we might be abl to take away, at variou times, 
and secrete, in some place or other, enough to make us rich men for all 
our lives." 

"I should like to see thi gold befor I said anyth about it," 
repli the doctor, thoughtfully. 

"a you please; do you find a lamp that will not go out by the sudden 
draught of air, or have the mean of relight it, and I will 
accompani you." 

"when?" 

"thi veri night, good doctor, when you shall see such a golden harvest 
you never yet hope for, or even believ in." 

"to-night be it, then," repli the doctor. "I will have a lamp that 
will answer our purpose, and some other matters." 

"do, good doctor," and the count left the philosopher' cell. 

* * * * * 

"the plan takes," said the count to the countess, "give me the keys, and 
the worthi man will be in safeti befor daylight." 

"i he not suspicious?" 

"not at all." 

* * * * * 

that night, about an hour befor midnight,--th count morven stole 
toward the philosopher' room. He tap at the door. 

"enter," said the philosopher. 

the count entered, and saw the philosoph seated, and by him a lamp of 
peculiar construction, and incas in gauz wire, and a cloak. 

"are you ready?" inquir the count. 

"quite," he replied. 

"i that your lamp?" 

"it is." 

"follow me, then, and hold the lamp toler high, as the way is 
strange, and the step steep." 

"lead on." 

"you have made up your mind, I dare say, as to what share of the 
undertak you will accept of with me." 

"and what if I will not?" said the philosopher, coolly. 

"it fall to the ground, and I return the key to their place." 

"I dare say I shall not refuse, if you have not deceiv me as to the 
quantiti and puriti of the metal they have store up." 

"I am no judg of these metals, doctor. I am no assayest; but I believ 
you will find what I have to show you will far exceed your expect 
on that head." 

"'ti well: proceed." 

they had now got to the first vault, in which stood the first door, and, 
with some difficulty, they open the vault door. 

"it ha not been open for some time," said the philosopher. 

"I dare say not, they seldom use to go here, from what I can learn, 
though it is kept a great secret." 

"and we can keep it so, likewise." 

"true." 

they now enter the vault, and came to the second door, which open 
into a kind of flight of steps, cut out of the solid rock, and then 
along a passag cut out of the mountain, of some kind of stone, but not 
so hard as the rock itself. 

"you see," said the count, "what care ha been taken to isol the 
place, and detach it from the castle, so that it should not be depend 
upon the possessor of the castle. thi is the last door but one, and now 
prepar yourself for a surprise, doctor, thi will be an extraordinari 
one." 

So saying, the count open the door, and step on one side, when the 
doctor approach the place, and wa immedi thrust forward by the 
count and he roll down some step into the mine, and wa immedi 
seiz by some of the miners, who had been station there for that 
purpose, and carri to a distant part of the mine, there to work for 
the remaind of hi life. 

the count, see all secure, refasten the doors, and return to the 
castle. A few week after thi the bodi of a youth, mangl and 
disfigured, wa brought to the castle, which the countess said wa her 
son' body. 

the count had immedi secur the real heir, and thrust him into the 
mines, there to pass a life of labour and hopeless misery. 

* * * * * 

there wa a high feast held. the castl gate were thrown open, and 
everybodi who came were entertain without question. 

thi wa on the occas of the count' and countess' marriage. It 
seem mani month after the death of her son, whom she affect to 
mourn for a long time. 

however, the marriag took place, and in all magnific and splendour. 
the countess again appear array in splendour and beauty: she wa 
proud and haughty, and the count wa imperious. 

In the mean time, the young count de hugo de verol wa confin in the 
mines, and the doctor with him. 

By a strang coincidence, the doctor and the young count becam 
companions, and the former, medit project of revenge, educ the 
young count as well as he wa abl for sever year in the mines, and 
cherish in the young man a spirit of revenge. they final escap 
together, and proceed to leyden, where the doctor had friends, and 
where he place hi pupil at the university, and thu made him a most 
effici mean of revenge, becaus the educ of the count gave him 
a mean of appreci the splendour and rank he had been depriv of. 
he, therefore, determin to remain at leyden until he wa of age, and 
then appli to hi father' friends, and then to hi sovereign, to 
dispossess and punish them both for their doubl crime. 

the count and countess live on in a state of regal splendour. the 
immens revenu of hi territory, and the treasur the late count had 
amassed, as well as the revenu that the mine brought in, would have 
support a much larger expenditur than even their tast dispos them 
to enjoy. 

they had heard noth of the escap of the doctor and the young count. 
indeed, those who knew of it held their peac and said noth about it, 
for they fear the consequ of their negligence. the first 
intim they receiv wa at the hand of a state messenger, 
summon them to deliv up the castl revenu and treasur of the 
late count. 

thi wa astound to them, and they refus to do so, but were soon 
after seiz upon by a regiment of cuirassi sent to take them, and 
they were accus of the crime of murder at the instanc of the doctor. 

they were arraign and found guilty, and, as they were of the patrician 
order, their execut wa delayed, and they were commit to exile. 
thi wa done out of favour to the young count, who did not wish to have 
hi famili name taint by a public execution, or their be confin 
like convicts. 

the count and countess quit hungary, and settl in italy, where they 
live upon the remain of the count of morven' property, shorn of all 
their splendour but enough to keep them from be compel to do ani 
menial office. 

the young count took possess of hi patrimoni and hi treasur at 
last, such as wa left by hi mother and her paramour. 

the doctor continu to hide hi crime from the young count, and the 
perpetr deni all knowledg of it, he escaped; but he return to 
hi nativ place, leyden, with a reward for hi servic from the young 
count. 

flora rose from her perus of the manuscript, which here ended, and 
even as she did so, she heard a footstep approach her chamber door. 




chapter xx. 

the dread mistake.--th terrif interview IN the chamber.--th 
attack OF the vampyre. 


[illustration] 

the footstep which flora, upon the close of the tale she had been 
reading, heard approach her apartment, came rapidli along the 
corridor. 

"it is henry, return to conduct me to an interview with charles' 
uncle," she said. "I wonder, now, what manner of man he is. He should in 
some respect resembl charles; and if he do so, I shall bestow upon him 
some affect for that alone." 

tap--tap came upon the chamber door. flora wa not at all alarm now, 
as she had been when henri brought her the manuscript. from some strang 
action of the nervou system, she felt quit confident, and resolv to 
brave everything. but then she felt quit sure that it wa henry, and 
befor the knock had taken her by surprise. 

"come in," she said, in a cheer voice. "come in." 

the door open with wonder swiftness--a figur step into the 
room, and then close it as rapidly, and stood against it. flora tri 
to scream, but her tongu refus it office; a confus whirl of 
sensat pass through her brain--sh trembled, and an ici cold 
came over her. It wa sir franci varney, the vampyre! 

He had drawn up hi tall, gaunt frame to it full height, and cross 
hi arm upon hi breast; there wa a hideou smile upon hi sallow 
countenance, and hi voic wa deep and sepulchral, as he said,-- 

"flora bannerworth, hear that which I have to say, and hear it calmly. 
you need have noth to fear. make an alarm--scream, or shout for help, 
and, by the hell beneath us, you are lost!" 

there wa a death-like, cold, passionless manner about the utter of 
these words, as if they were spoken mechanically, and came from no human 
lips. 

flora heard them, and yet scarc comprehend them; she step slowli 
back till she reach a chair, and there she held for support. the onli 
part of the address of varney that thoroughli reach her ears, wa that 
if she gave ani alarm some dread consequ were to ensue. but it 
wa not on account of these word that she realli gave no alarm; it wa 
becaus she wa utterli unabl to do so. 

"answer me," said varney. "promis that you will hear that which I have 
to say. In so promis you commit yourself to no evil, and you shall 
hear that which shall give you much peace." 

It wa in vain she tri to speak; her lip moved, but she utter no 
sound. 

"you are terrified," said varney, "and yet I know not why. I do not come 
to do you harm, although harm have you done me. girl, I come to rescu 
you from a thraldom of the soul under which you now labour." 

there wa a paus of some moments' duration, and then, faintly, flora 
manag to say,-- 

"help! help! oh, help me, heaven!" 

varney made a gestur of impatience, as he said,-- 

"heaven work no special matter now. flora bannerworth, if you have as 
much intellect as your nobil and beauti would warrant the world in 
supposing, you will listen to me." 

"i--i hear," said flora, as she still, drag the chair with her, 
increas the distanc between them. 

"'ti well. you are now more composed." 

she fix her eye upon the face of varney with a shudder. there could 
be no mistake. It wa the same which, with the strange, glassi look 
eyes, had glare upon her on that aw night of the storm when she wa 
visit by the vampyre. and varney return that gaze unflinchingli 
there wa a hideou and strang contort of hi face now as he said,-- 

"you are beautiful. the most cun statuari might well model some rare 
work of art from those round limbs, that were sure made to bewitch 
the gazer. your skin rival the driven snow--what a face of loveliness, 
and what a form of enchantment." 

she did not speak, but a thought came across her mind, which at onc 
crimson her cheek--sh knew she had faint on the first visit of the 
vampyre, and now he, with a hideou reverence, prais beauti which he 
might have cast hi demoniac eye over at such a time. 

"you understand me," he said. "well, let that pass. I am someth 
alli to human yet." 

"speak your errand," gasp flora, "or come what may, I scream for help 
to those who will not be slow to render it." 

"I know it." 

"you know I will scream?" 

"no; you will hear me. I know they would not be slow to tender help to 
you, but you will not call for it; I will present to you no necessity." 

"say on--say on." 

"you perceiv I do not attempt to approach you; my errand is one of 
peace." 

"peac from you! horribl being, if you be realli what even now my 
appal imagin shrink from name you, would not even to you 
absolut annihil be a blessing?" 

"peace, peace. I came not here to talk on such a subject. I must be 
brief, flora bannerworth, for time presses. I do not hate you. wherefor 
should I? you are young, and you are beautiful, and you bear a name 
which should command, and doe command, some portion of my best regard." 

"there is a portrait," said flora, "in thi house." 

"no more--no more. I know what you would say." 

"it is yours." 

"the house, and all within, I covet," he said, uneasily. "let that 
suffice. I have quarrel with your brother--i have quarrel with one 
who just now fanci he love you." 

"charl holland love me truly." 

"it doe not suit me now to disput that point with you. I have the 
mean of know more of the secret of the human heart than common men. 
I tell you, flora bannerworth, that he who talk to you of love, love 
you not but with the fleet fanci of a boy; and there is one who hide 
deep in hi heart a world of passion, one who ha never spoken to you of 
love, and yet who love you with a love as far surpass the evanesc 
fanci of thi boy holland, as doe the mighti ocean the most placid lake 
that ever bask in idl beneath a summer' sun." 

there wa a wonder fascin in the manner now of varney. hi voic 
sound like music itself. hi word flow from hi tongue, each gentli 
and properli accented, with all the charm of eloquence. 

despit her trembl horror of that man--despit her fear opinion, 
which might be said to amount to a convict of what he realli was, 
flora felt an irresist wish to hear him speak on. ay, despit too, 
the ungrat theme to her heart which he had now chosen as the subject 
of hi discourse, she felt her fear of him gradual dissipating, and 
now when he made a pause, she said,-- 

"you are much mistaken. On the constanc and truth of charl holland, I 
would stake my life." 

"no doubt, no doubt." 

"have you spoken now that which you had to say?" 

"no, no. I tell you I covet thi place, I would purchas it, but have 
with your bad-temp brother quarrelled, they will hold no further 
convers with me." 

"and well they may refuse." 

"be, that as it may, sweet lady, I come to you to be my mediator. In the 
shadow of the futur I can see mani event which are to come." 

"indeed." 

"it is so. borrow some wisdom from the past, and some from resourc 
I would not detail to you, I know that if I have inflict much miseri 
upon you, I can spare you much more. your brother or your lover will 
challeng me." 

"oh, no, no." 

"I say such will happen, and I can kill either. My skill as well as my 
strength is superhuman." 

"mercy! mercy!" gasp flora. "I will spare either or both on a 
condition." 

"what fear condition?" 

"it is not a fear one. your terror go far befor the fact. all I 
wish, maiden, of you is to induc these imperi brother of your to 
sell or let the hall to me." 

"i that all?" 

"it is. I ask no more, and, in return, I promis you not onli that I 
will not fight with them, but that you shall never see me again. rest 
securely, maiden, you will be undisturb by me." 

"oh, god! that were inde an assur worth the strive for," said 
flora. 

"it is one you may have. but--" 

"oh, I knew--mi heart told me there wa yet some fear condit to 
come." 

"you are wrong again. I onli ask of you that you keep thi meet a 
secret." 

"no, no, no--i cannot." 

"nay, what so easy?" 

"I will not; I have no secret from those I love." 

"indeed, you will find soon the expedi of a few at least; but if you 
will not, I cannot urg it longer. Do as your wayward woman' natur 
prompt you." 

there wa a slight, but a veri slight, tone of aggrav in these 
words, and the manner in which they were uttered. 

As he spoke, he move from the door toward the window, which open 
into a kitchen garden. flora shrunk as far from him as possible, and for 
a few moment they regard each other in silence. 

"young blood," said varney, "mantl in your veins." 

she shudder with terror. 

"be mind of the condit I have propos to you. I covet bannerworth 
hall." 

"i--i hear." 

"and I must have it. I will have it, although my path to it be through a 
sea of blood. you understand me, maiden? repeat what ha pass between 
us or not, as you please. I say, bewar of me, if you keep not the 
condit I have proposed." 

"heaven know that thi place is becom daili more hate to us all," 
said flora. 

"indeed!" 

"you well might know so much. It is no sacrific to urg it now. I will 
urg my brother." 

"thanks--a thousand thanks. you may not live to regret even have made 
a friend of varney--" 

"the vampyre!" said flora. 

He advanc toward her a step, and she involuntarili utter a scream 
of terror. 

In an instant hi hand clasp her waist with the power of an iron vice; 
she felt hit hot breath flush on her cheek. her sens reeled, and 
she found herself sinking. she gather all her breath and all her 
energi into one pierc shriek, and then she fell to the floor. there 
wa a sudden crash of broken glass, and then all wa still. 




chapter xxi. 

the confer between the uncl and nephew, and the alarm. 


[illustration] 

meanwhil charl holland had taken hi uncl by the arm, and led him 
into a privat room. 

"dear uncle," he said, "be seated, and I will explain everyth without 
reserve." 

"seated!--nonsense! i'll walk about," said the admiral. "d--n me! i'v 
no patienc to be seated, and veri seldom had or have. Go on now, you 
young scamp." 

"well--well; you abus me, but I am quit sure, had you been in my 
situation, you would have act precis as I have done." 

"no, I shouldn't." 

"well, but, uncle--" 

"don't think to come over me by call me uncle. hark you, 
charles--from thi moment I won't be your uncl ani more." 

"veri well, sir." 

"it ain't veri well. and how dare you, you buccaneer, call me sir, eh? I 
say, how dare you?" 

"I will call you anyth you like." 

"but I won't be call anyth I like. you might as well call me at 
onc morgan, the pirate, for he wa call anyth he liked. hilloa, 
sir! how dare you laugh, eh? i'll teach you to laugh at me. I wish I had 
you on board ship--that' all, you young rascal. i'd soon teach you to 
laugh at your superior officer, I would." 

"oh, uncle, I did not laugh at you." 

"what did you laugh at, then?" 

"at the joke." 

"joke. d--n me, there wa no joke at all!" 

"oh, veri good." 

"and it ain't veri good." 

charl knew veri well that, thi sort of humour, in which wa the old 
admiral, would soon pass away, and then that he would listen to him 
comfort enough; so he would not allow the least exhibit of 
petul or mere impati to escap himself, but content himself by 
wait until the ebullit of feel fairli work itself out. 

"well, well," at length said the old man, "you have drag me here, 
into a veri small and a veri dull room, under pretenc of have 
someth to tell me, and I have heard noth yet." 

"then I will now tell you," said charles. "I fell in love--" 

"bah!" 

"with flora bannerworth, abroad; she is not onli the most beauti of 
creat beings--" 

"bah!" 

"but her mind is of the highest order of intelligence, honour, candour, 
and all amiabl feelings--" 

"bah!" 

"really, uncle, if you say 'bah!' to everything, I cannot go on." 

"and what the deuc difference, sir, doe it make to you, whether I say 
'bah!' or not?" 

"well, I love her. she came to england, and, as I could not exist, but 
wa get ill, and should, no doubt, have die if I had not done so, I 
came to england." 

"but d----e, I want to know about the mermaid." 

"the vampyre, you mean, sir?" 

"well, well, the vampyre." 

"then, uncle, all I can tell you is, that it is suppos a vampyr came 
one night and inflict a wound upon flora' neck with hi teeth, and 
that he is still endeavour to renew hi horribl exist from the 
young, pure blood that flow through her veins." 

"the devil he is!" 

"yes. I am bewildered, I must confess, by the mass of circumst that 
have combin to give the affair a horribl truthfulness. poor flora is 
much injur in health and spirits; and when I came home, she, at once, 
implor me to give her up, and think of her no more, for she could not 
think of allow me to unit my fate with hers, under such 
circumstances." 

"she did?" 

"such were her words, uncle. she implor me--sh use that word, 
'implore'--to fli from her, to leav her to her fate, to endeavour to 
find happi with some one else." 

"well?" 

"but I saw her heart wa breaking." 

"what o' that?" 

"much of that, uncle. I told her that when I desert her in the hour of 
misfortun that I hope heaven would desert me. I told her that if her 
happi wa wrecked, to cling yet to me, and that with what power and 
what strength god had given me, I would stand between her and all ill." 

"and what then?" 

"she--sh fell upon my breast and wept and bless me. could I desert 
her--could I say to her, 'mi dear girl, when you were full of health and 
beauty, I love you, but now that sad is at your heart I leav you?' 
could I tell her that, uncle, and yet call myself a man?" 

"no!" roar the old admiral, in a voic that made the room echo again; 
"and I tell you what, if you had done so, d--n you, you puppy, i'd have 
brace you, and--and marri the girl myself. I would, d----e, but I 
would." 

"dear uncle!" 

"don't dear me, sir. talk of desert a girl when the signal of 
distress, in the shape of a tear, is in her eye!" 

"but i--" 

"you are a wretch--a confound lubberli boy--a swab--a d----d bad 
grampus." 

"you mistake, uncle." 

"no, I don't. god bless you, charles, you shall have her--if a whole 
ship' crew of vampyr said no, you shall have her. let me see 
her--just let me see her." 

the admir gave hi lip a vigor wipe with hi sleeve, and charl 
said hastily,-- 

"mi dear uncle, you will recollect that miss bannerworth is quit a 
young lady." 

"I suppos she is." 

"well, then, for god' sake, don't attempt to kiss her." 

"not kiss her! d----e, they like it. not kiss her, becaus she' a young 
lady! d----e, do you think i'd kiss a corpor of marines?" 

"no, uncle; but you know young ladi are veri delicate." 

"and ain't I delicate--shiv my timbers, ain't I delicate? where is 
she? that' what I want to know." 

"then you approv of what I have done?" 

"you are a young scamp, but you have got some of the old admiral' 
famili blood in you, so don't take ani credit for act like an honest 
man--you couldn't help it." 

"but if I had not so acted," said charles, with a smile, "what would 
have becom of the famili blood, then?" 

"what' that to you? I would have disown you, becaus that veri thing 
would have convinc me you were an impostor, and did not belong to the 
famili at all." 

"well, that would have been one way of get over the difficulty." 

"no difficulti at all. the man who desert the good ship that carri 
him through the waves, or the girl that trust her heart to him, ought 
to be chop up into meat for wild monkeys." 

"well, I think so to." 

"of cours you do." 

"why, of course?" 

"becaus it' so d----d reason that, be a nephew of mine, you 
can't possibl help it." 

"bravo, uncle! I had no idea you were so argumentative." 

"hadn't you, spooney; you'd be an ornament to the gun-room, you would; 
but where' the 'young lady' who is so infern delicate--wher is she, 
I say?" 

"I will fetch her, uncle." 

"ah, do; i'll be bound, now, she' one of the right build--a good 
figure-head, and don't make too much stern-way." 

[illustration] 

"well, well, whatev you do, now don't pay her ani compliments, for 
your effort in that line are of such a veri doubt order, that I 
shall dread to hear you." 

"you be off, and mind your own business; I haven't been at sea forti 
year without pick up some out-and-out delic compliment to say to 
a young lady." 

"but do you realli imagine, now, that the deck of a man-of-war is a nice 
place to pick up courtli compliment in?" 

"of cours I do. there you hear the best of language, d----e! you don't 
know what you are talk about, you fellow that have stuck on shore 
all your lives; it' we seamen who learn life." 

"well, well--hark!" 

"what' that?" 

"A cry--did you not hear a cry?" 

"A signal of distress, by g--d!" 

In their effort to leav the room, the uncl and nephew for about a 
minut actual block up the door-way, but the superior bulk of the 
admir prevailed, and after nearli squeez poor charl flat, he got 
out first. 

but thi did not avail him, for he knew not where to go. now, the second 
scream which flora had utter when the vampyr had clasp her waist 
came upon their ears, and, as they were outsid the room, it act well 
as a guid in which direct to come. 

charl fanci correctli enough at onc that it proceed from the room 
which wa call "flora' own room," and thitherward accordingli he 
dash at tremend speed. 

henry, however, happen to be nearer at hand, and, moreover, he did not 
hesit a moment, becaus he knew that flora wa in her own room; so he 
reach it first, and charl saw him rush in a few moment befor he 
could reach the room. 

the differ of time, however, wa veri slight, and henri had onli 
just rais flora from the floor as charl appeared. 

"god of heaven!" cri the latter, "what ha happened?" 

"I know not," said henry; "a god is my judge, I know not. flora, flora, 
speak to us! flora! flora!" 

"she ha fainted!" cri charles. "some water may restor her. oh, 
henry, henry, is not thi horrible?" 

"courage! courage!" said henri although hi voic betray what a 
terribl state of anxieti he wa himself in; "you will find water in 
that decanter, charles. here is my mother, too! anoth visit! god help 
us!" 

mrs. bannerworth sat down on the edg of the sofa which wa in the room, 
and could onli wring her hand and weep. 

"avast!" cri the admiral, make hi appearance. "where' the enemy, 
lads?" 

"uncle," said charles, "uncle, uncle, the vampyr ha been here 
again--th dread vampyre!" 

"d--n me, and he' gone, too, and carri half the window with him. look 
there!" 

It wa liter true; the window, which wa a long lattic one, wa 
smash through. 

"help! oh, help!" said flora, as the water that wa dash in her face 
began to recov her. 

"you are safe!" cri henry, "you are safe!" 

"flora," said charles; "you know my voice, dear flora? look up, and you 
will see there are none here but those who love you." 

flora open her eye timidli as the said,-- 

"ha it gone?" 

"yes, yes, dear," said charles. "look around you; here are none but true 
friends." 

"and tri friends, my dear," said admir bell, "except me; and 
whenev you like to tri me, afloat or ashore, d--n me, shew me old nick 
himself, and I won't shrink--yard arm and yard arm--grapnel to 
grapnel--pitch pot and grenades!" 

"thi is my uncle, flora," said charles. 

"I thank you, sir," said flora, faintly. 

"all right!" whisper the admir to charles; "what a figure-head, to 
be sure! poll at swansea would have made just about four of her, but she 
wasn't so delicate, d--n me!" 

"I should think not." 

"you are right for onc in a way, charley." 

"what wa it that alarm you?" said charles, tenderly, as he now took 
one of flora' hand in his. 

"varney--varney, the vampyre." 

"varney!" exclaim henry; "varney here!" 

"yes, he came in at that door: and when I screamed, I suppose--for I 
hardli wa conscious--h dart out through the window." 

"this," said henry, "i beyond all human patience. By heaven! I cannot 
and will not endur it." 

"it shall be my quarrel," said charles; "I shall go at onc and defi 
him. He shall meet me." 

"oh, no, no, no," said flora, as she clung convuls to charles. "no, 
no; there is a better way." 

"what way?" 

"the place ha becom full of terrors. let us leav it. let him, as he 
wishes, have it." 

"let _him_ have it?" 

"yes, yes. god knows, if it purchas an immun from these visits, we 
may well be overjoyed. rememb that we have ampl reason to believ him 
more than human. whi should you allow yourselv to risk a person 
encount with such a man, who might be glad to kill you that he might 
have an opportun of replenish hi own hideou exist from your 
best heart' blood?" 

the young men look aghast. 

"besides," ad flora, "you cannot tell what dread power of 
mischief he may have, against which human courag might be of no avail." 

"there is truth and reason," said mr. marchdale, step forward, "in 
what flora says." 

"onli let me come across him, that' all," said admir bell, "and i'll 
soon find out what he is. I suppos he' some long slab of a lubber 
after all, ain't he, with no strength." 

"hi strength is immense," said marchdale. "I tri to seiz him, and I 
fell beneath hi arm as if I had been struck by the hammer of a 
cyclops." 

"A what?" cri the admiral. 

"A cyclops." 

"d--n me, I serv aboard the cyclop eleven years, and never saw a veri 
big hammer aboard of her." 

"what on earth is to be done?" said henry. 

"oh," chime in the admiral, "there' alway a bother about what' to be 
done on earth. now, at sea, I could soon tell you what wa to be done." 

"we must hold a solemn consult over thi matter," said henry. "you 
are safe now, flora." 

"oh, be rule by me. give up the hall." 

"you tremble." 

"I do tremble, brother, for what may yet ensue. I implor you to give up 
the hall. It is but a terror to us now--giv it up. have no more to do 
with it. let us make term with sir franci varney. remember, we dare 
not kill him." 

"he ought to be smothered," said the admiral. 

"it is true," remark henry, "we dare not, even hold all the 
terribl suspicion we do, take hi life." 

"bi foul mean certainli not," said charles, "were he ten time a 
vampyre. I cannot, however, believ that he is so invulner as he is 
represented." 

"no one repres him here," said marchdale. "I speak, sir, becaus I 
saw you glanc at me. I onli know that, have made two unsuccess 
attempt to seiz him, he elud me, onc by leav in my grasp a piec 
of hi coat, and the next time he struck me down, and I feel yet the 
effect of the terrif blow." 

"you hear?" said flora. 

"yes, I hear," said charles. 

"for some reason," ad marchdale, in a tone of emotion, "what I say 
seem to fall alway badli upon mr. holland' ear. I know not why; but 
if it will give him ani satisfaction, I will leav bannerworth hall 
to-night." 

"no, no, no," said henry; "for the love of heaven, do not let us 
quarrel." 

"hear, hear," cri the admiral. "we can never fight the enemi well if 
the ship' crew are on bad terms. come now, you charles, thi appear to 
be an honest, gentlemanli fellow--g him your hand." 

"if mr. charl holland," said marchdale, "know aught to my prejudic 
in ani way, howev slight, I here beg of him to declar it at once, and 
openly." 

"I cannot assert that I do," said charles. 

"then what the deuc do you make yourself so disagre for, eh?" 
cri the admiral. 

"one cannot help one' impress and feelings," said charles; "but I am 
will to take mr. marchdale' hand." 

"and I yours, young sir," said marchdale, "in all sincer of spirit, 
and with good will toward you." 

they shook hands; but it requir no conjuror to perceiv that it wa 
not done willingli or cordially. It wa a handshak of that charact 
which seem to impli on each side, "I don't like you, but I don't know 
posit ani harm of you." 

"there now," said the admiral, "that' better." 

"now, let us hold counsel about thi varney," said henry. "come to the 
parlour all of you, and we will endeavour to come to some decid 
arrangement." 

"do not weep, mother," said flora. "all may yet be well. We will leav 
thi place." 

"we will consid that question, flora," said henry; "and believ me 
your wish will go a long way with all of us, as you may well suppos 
they alway would." 

they left mrs. bannerworth with flora, and proceed to the small oaken 
parlour, in which were the elabor and beauti carv which have 
been befor mentioned. 

henry' countenance, perhaps, wore the most determin express of 
all. He appear now as if he had thoroughli made up hi mind to do 
someth which should have a decid tendenc to put a stop to the 
terribl scene which were now day by day take place beneath that 
roof. 

charl holland look seriou and thoughtful, as if he were revolv 
some cours of action in hi mind concern which he wa not quit 
clear. 

mr. marchdal wa more sad and depressed, to all appearance, than ani of 
them. 

As for the admiral, he wa evid in a state of amazement, and knew 
not what to think. He wa anxiou to do something, and yet what that wa 
to be he had not the most remot idea, ani more than as if he wa not at 
all cognis of ani of those circumstances, everi one of which wa so 
complet out of the line of hi former life and experience. 

georg had gone to call on mr. chillingworth, so he wa not present at 
the first part of thi seriou council of war. 




chapter xxii. 

the consultation.--th determin TO leav the hall. 


[illustration] 

thi wa certainli the most serious reason meet which had been 
held at bannerworth hall on the subject of the much dread vampyre. the 
absolut necess for do someth of a decis charact wa 
abundantli apparent, and when henri promis flora that her earnest wish 
to leav the hous should not be forgotten as an element in the 
discuss which wa about to ensue, it wa with a rapidli grow 
feel on hi own part, to the effect that that house, associ even 
as it wa with mani endear recollections, wa no home for him. 

henc he wa the more inclin to propos a departur from the hall if 
it could possibl be arrang satisfactorili in a pecuniari point of 
view. the pecuniari point of view, however, in which henri wa compel 
to look at the subject, wa an import and a troublesom one. 

We have alreadi hint at the veri peculiar state of the financ of the 
family; and, in fact, although the incom deriv from variou sourc 
ought to have been ampli suffici to provid henry, and those who were 
depend upon him, with a respect livelihood, yet it wa nearli all 
swallow up by the payment of regular instal upon famili debt 
incur by hi father. and the creditor took great credit to 
themselv that they allow of such an arrangement, instead of sweep 
off all befor them, and leav the famili to starve. 

the question, therefore, or, at all events, one of the questions, now 
was, how far would a departur from the hall of him, henry, and the 
other branch of the family, act upon that arrangement? 

dure a veri few minutes' consideration, henry, with the frank and 
candid disposit which wa so strong a characterist of hi 
character, made up hi mind to explain all thi fulli to charl holland 
and hi uncle. 

when onc he form such a determin he wa not like to be slow in 
carri it into effect, and no sooner, then, were the whole of them 
seat in the small oaken parlour than he made an explicit statement of 
hi circumstances. 

"but," said mr. marchdale, when he had done, "I cannot see what right 
your creditor have to complain of where you live, so long as you 
perform your contract to them." 

"true; but they alway expect me, I knew, to remain at the hall, and 
if they chose, why, of course, at ani time, they could sell off the 
whole properti for what it would fetch, and pay themselv as far as the 
proce would go. At all events, I am quit certain there could be 
noth at all left for me." 

"I cannot imagine," ad mr. marchdale, "that ani men could be so 
unreasonable." 

"it is scarc to be borne," remark charl holland, with more 
impati than he usual displayed, "that a whole famili are to be put 
to the necess of leav their home for no other reason than the 
be pester by such a neighbour as sir franci varney. It make one 
impati and angri to reflect upon such a state of things." 

"and yet they are lament true," said henry. "what can we do?" 

"sure there must be some sort of remedy." 

"there is but one that I can imagine, and that is one we all alik 
revolt from. We might kill him." 

"that is out of the question." 

"of cours my impress is that he bear the same name realli as 
myself, and that he is my ancestor, from whom wa paint the portrait 
on the panel." 

"have circumst realli so far press upon you," said charl 
holland, "a at length to convinc you that thi man is realli the 
horribl creatur we surmis he may be?" 

"dare we longer doubt it?" cri henry, in a tone of excitement. "he is 
the vampyre." 

"i'll be hang if I believ it," said admir bell! "stuff and 
nonsense! vampyre, indeed! bother the vampyre." 

"sir," said henry, "you have not had brought befor you, painfully, as 
we have, all the circumst upon which we, in a manner, feel 
compel to found thi horribl belief. At first incredul wa a 
natur thing. We had no idea that ever we could be brought to believ 
in such a thing." 

"that is the case," ad marchdale. "but, step by step, we have been 
driven from utter disbelief in thi phenomenon to a trembl convict 
that it must be true." 

"unless we admit that, simultaneously, the sens of a number of person 
have been deceived." 

"that is scarc possible." 

"then do you mean realli to say there are such fish?" said the admiral. 

"we think so." 

"well, i'm d----d! I have heard all sort of yarn about what fellow 
have seen in one ocean and another; but thi doe beat them all to 
nothing." 

"it is monstrous," exclaim charles. 

there wa a paus of some few moments' duration, and then mr. marchdal 
said, in a low voice,-- 

"perhap I ought not to propos ani cours of action until you, henry, 
have yourself done so; but even at the risk of be presumptuous, I 
will say that I am firmli of opinion you ought to leav the hall." 

"I am inclin to think so, too," said henry. 

"but the creditors?" interpos charles. 

"I think they might be consult on the matter beforehand," ad 
marchdale, "when no doubt they would acquiesc in an arrang which 
could do them no harm." 

"certainly, no harm," said henry, "for I cannot take the estat with me, 
as they well know." 

"precisely. If you do not like to sell it, you can let it." 

"to whom?" 

"why, under the exist circumstances, it is not like you would get 
ani tenant for it than the one who ha offer himself." 

"sir franci varney?" 

"yes. It seem to be a great object with him to live here, and it 
appear to me, that notwithstand all that ha occurred, it is most 
decidedli the best polici to let him." 

nobodi could realli deni the reason of thi advice, although it 
seem strange, and wa repugn to the feel of them all, as they 
heard it. there wa a paus of some seconds' duration, and then henri 
said,-- 

"it does, indeed, seem singular, to surrend one' hous to such a 
being." 

"especially," said charles, "after what ha occurred." 

"true." 

"well," said mr. marchdale, "if ani better plan of proceeding, take 
the whole case into consideration, can be devised, I shall be most 
happy." 

"will you consent to put off all proceed for three days?" said 
charl holland, suddenly. 

"have you ani plan, my dear sir?" said mr. marchdale. 

"I have, but it is one which I would rather say noth about for the 
present." 

"I have no objection," said henry, "I do not know that three day can 
make ani differ in the state of affairs. let it be so, if you wish, 
charles." 

"then I am satisfied," said charles. "I cannot but feel that, situat 
as I am regard flora, thi is almost more my affair than even yours, 
henry." 

"I cannot see that," said henry. "whi should you take upon yourself more 
of the respons of these affair than I, charles? you induc in my 
mind a suspicion that you have some desper project in your 
imagination, which by such a proposit you would seek to reconcil me 
to." 

charl wa silent, and henri then added,-- 

"now, charles, I am quit convinc that what I have hint at is the 
fact. you have conceiv some scheme which you fanci would be much 
oppos by us?" 

"I will not deni that I have," said charles. "it is one, however, which 
you must allow me for the present to keep lock in my own breast." 

"whi will you not trust us?" 

"for two reasons." 

"indeed!" 

"the one is, that I have not yet thoroughli determin upon the cours I 
project; and the other is, that it is one in which I am not justifi in 
involv ani one else." 

"charles, charles," said henry, despondingly; "onli consid for a 
moment into what new miseri you may plung poor flora, who is, heaven 
knows, alreadi suffici afflicted, by attempt an enterpris which 
even we, who are your friends, may unwittingli cross you in the 
perform of." 

"thi is one in which I fear no such result. It cannot so happen. Do not 
urg me." 

"can't you say at onc what you think of doing?" said the old admiral. 
"what do you mean by turn your sail in all sort of direct so 
oddly? you sneak, whi don't you be what do you call it--explicit?" 

"I cannot, uncle." 

"what, are you tongue-tied?" 

"all here know well," said charles, "that if I do not unfold my mind 
fully, it is not that I fear to trust ani one present, but from some 
other most special reason." 

"charles, I forbear to urg you further," said henry, "and onli implor 
you to be careful." 

At thi moment the room door opened, and georg bannerworth, accompani 
by mr. chillingworth, came in. 

"do not let me intrude," said the surgeon; "I fear, as I see you seated, 
gentlemen, that my presenc must be a rude and a disturb to some 
famili consult among yourselves?" 

"not at all, mr. chillingworth," said henry. "pray be seated; we are 
veri glad inde to see you. admir bell, thi is a friend on whom we 
can rely--mr. chillingworth." 

"and one of the right sort, I can see," said the admiral, as he shook 
mr. chillingworth by the hand. 

"sir, you do me much honour," said the doctor. 

"none at all, none at all; I suppos you know all about thi infern 
odd vampyr business?" 

"I believ I do, sir." 

"and what do you think of it?" 

"I think time will develop the circumst suffici to convinc us 
all that such thing cannot be." 

"d--n me, you are the most sensibl fellow, then, that I have yet met 
with sinc I have been in thi neighbourhood; for everybodi els is so 
convinc about the vampyre, that they are readi to swear by him." 

"it would take much more to convinc me. I wa come over here when I 
met mr. georg bannerworth come to my house." 

"yes," said george, "and mr. chillingworth ha someth to tell us of a 
natur confirmatori of our own suspicions." 

"it is strange," said henry; "but ani piec of news, come it from what 
quarter it may, seem to be confirmatory, in some degre or another, of 
that dread belief in vampyres." 

"why," said the doctor, "when mr. georg say that my news is of such a 
character, I think he goe a littl too far. what I have to tell you, I 
do not conceiv ha anyth whatev to do with the fact, or one fact 
of there be vampyres." 

"let us hear it," said henry. 

"it is simpli this, that I wa sent for by sir franci varney myself." 

"you sent for?" 

"yes; he sent for me by a special messeng to come to him, and when I 
went, which, under the circumstances, you may well guess, I did with all 
the celer possible, I found it wa to consult me about a flesh wound 
in hi arm, which wa show some angri symptoms." 

"indeed." 

"yes, it wa so. when I wa introduc to him I found him lie on a 
couch, and look pale and unwell. In the most respect manner, he 
ask me to be seated, and when I had taken a chair, he added,-- 

"'mr. chillingworth, I have sent for you in consequ of a slight 
accid which ha happen to my arm. I wa incauti load some 
fire-arms, and discharg a pistol so close to me that the bullet 
inflict a wound on my arm.' 

"'if you will allow me," said I, 'to see the wound, I will give you my 
opinion.' 

"he then show me a jag wound, which had evid been caus by 
the passag of a bullet, which, had it gone a littl deeper, must have 
inflict seriou injury. As it was, the wound wa but trifling. 

"he had evid been attempt to dress it himself, but find some 
consider inflammation, he veri like got a littl alarmed." 

"you dress the wound?" 

"I did." 

"and what do you think of sir franci varney, now that you have had so 
capit an opportunity," said henry, "of a close examin of him?" 

"why, there is certainli someth odd about him which I cannot well 
define, but, take him altogether, he can be a veri gentlemanli man 
indeed." 

"so he can." 

"hi manner are easi and polished; he ha evid mix in good 
society, and I never, in all my life, heard such a sweet, soft, win 
voice." 

"that is strictli him. you noticed, I presume, hi great like to the 
portrait on the panel?" 

"I did. At some moments, and view hi face in some particular lights, 
it show much more strongli than at others. My impress wa that he 
could, when he liked, look much more like the portrait on the panel than 
when he allow hi face to assum it ordinari appearance." 

"probabl such an impress would be produc upon your mind," said 
charles, "bi some accident express of the counten which even he 
wa not awar of, and which often occur in families." 

"it may be so." 

"of cours you did not hint, sir, at what ha pass here with regard to 
him?" said henry. 

"I did not. being, you see, call in professionally, I had no right to 
take advantag of that circumst to make ani remark to him about hi 
privat affairs." 

"certainli not." 

"it wa all one to me whether he wa a vampyr or not, professionally, 
and howev deepli I might feel, personally, interest in the matter, I 
said noth to him about it, because, you see, if I had, he would have 
had a fair opportun of say at once, 'pray, sir, what is that to 
you?' and I should have been at a loss what to reply." 

"can we doubt," said henry, "but that thi veri wound ha been inflict 
upon sir franci varney, by the pistol-bullet which wa discharg at 
him by flora?" 

"everyth lead to such an assumpt certainly," said charl 
holland. 

"and yet you cannot even deduc from that the absolut fact of sir 
franci varney be a vampyre?" 

"I do not think, mr. chillingworth," said marchdale, "anyth would 
convinc you but a visit from him, and an actual attempt to fasten upon 
some of your own veins." 

"that would not convinc me," said chillingworth. 

"then you will not be convinced?" 

"I certainli will not. I mean to hold out to the last. I said at the 
first, and I say so still, that I never will give way to thi most 
outrag superstition." 

"I wish I could think with you," said marchdale, with a shudder; "but 
there may be someth in the veri atmospher of thi hous which ha 
been render hideou by the aw visit that have been made to it, 
which forbid me to disbeliev in those thing which other more happili 
situat can hold at arm' length, and utterli repudiate." 

"there may be," said henry; "but as to that, I think, after the veri 
strongli express wish of flora, I will decid upon leav the house." 

"will you sell it or let it?" 

"the latter I should much prefer," wa the reply. 

"but who will take it now, except sir franci varney? whi not at onc 
let him have it? I am well awar that thi doe sound odd advice, but 
remember, we are all the creatur of circumstances, and that, in some 
case where we least like it, we must swim with the stream." 

"that you will not decid upon, however, at present," said charl 
holland, as he rose. 

"certainli not; a few day can make no difference." 

"none for the worse, certainly, and possibl much for the better." 

"be it so; we will wait." 

"uncle," said charles, "will you spare me half an hour of your company?" 

"an hour, my boy, if you want it," said the admiral, rise from hi 
chair. 

"then thi consult is over," said henry, "and we quit understand 
that to leav the hall is a matter determin on, and that in a few day 
a decis shall be come to as to whether varney the vampyr shall be 
it tenant or not." 




chapter xxiii. 

the admiral' advic TO charl holland.--th challeng TO the vampyre. 


[illustration] 

when charl holland got hi uncl into a room by themselves, he said,-- 

"uncle, you are a seaman, and accustom to decid upon matter of 
honour. I look upon myself as have been most grievous insult by 
thi sir franci varney. all account agre in repres him as a 
gentleman. He goe openli by a title, which, if it were not his, could 
easili be contradicted; therefore, on the score of posit in life, 
there is no fault to find with him. what would you do if you were 
insult by a gentleman?" 

the old admiral' eye sparkled, and he look comic in the face of 
charles, as he said,-- 

"I know now where you are steering." 

"what would you do, uncle?" 

"fight him!" 

"I knew you would say so, and that' just what I want to do as regard 
sir franci varney." 

"well, my boy, I don't know that you can do better. He must be a 
thunder rascal, whether he is a vampyr or not; so if you feel that 
he ha insult you, fight him by all means, charles." 

"I am much pleased, uncle, to find that you take my view of the 
subject," said charles. "I knew that if I mention such a thing to the 
bannerworths, they would endeavour all in their power to pursuad me 
against it." 

"yes, no doubt; becaus they are all impress with a strang fear of 
thi fellow' vampyr powers. besides, if a man is go to fight, the 
fewer peopl he mention it to most decidedli the better, charles." 

"I believ that is the fact, uncle. should I overcom varney, there will 
most like be at onc an end to the numer and uncomfort 
perplex of the bannerworth as regard him; and if he overcom me, 
why, then, at all events, I shall have made an effort to rescu flora 
from the dread of thi man." 

"and then he shall fight me," ad the admiral, "so he shall have two 
chances, at all events, charles." 

"nay, uncle, that would, you know, scarc be fair. besides, if I 
should fall, I solemnli bequeath flora bannerworth to your good offices. 
I much fear that the pecuniari affair of poor henry,--from no fault of 
his, heaven knows,--ar in a veri bad state, and that flora may yet live 
to want some kind and abl friend." 

"never fear, charles. the young creatur shall never want while the old 
admir ha got a shot in the locker." 

"thank you, uncle, thank you. I have ampl caus to know, and to be abl 
to reli upon your kind and gener nature. and now about the 
challenge?" 

"you write it, boy, and i'll take it." 

"will you second me, uncle?" 

"to be sure I will. I wouldn't trust anybodi els to do so on ani 
account. you leav all the arrang with me, and i'll second you as 
you ought to be seconded." 

"then I will write it at once, for I have receiv injuri at the hand 
of that man, or devil, be he what he may, that I cannot put up with. hi 
visit to the chamber of her whom I love would alon constitut ampl 
ground of action." 

"I should say it rather would, my boy." 

"and after thi corrobor stori of the wound, I cannot for a moment 
doubt that sir franci varney is the vampyre, or the personifi of the 
vampyre." 

"that' clear enough, charles. come, just you write your challenge, my 
boy, at once, and let me have it." 

"I will, uncle." 

charl wa a littl astonished, although pleased, at hi uncle' readi 
acquiesc in hi fight a vampyre, but that circumst he 
ascrib to the old man' habit of life, which made him so familiar 
with strife and person content of all sorts, that he did not 
ascrib to it that amount of import which more peaceabl peopl did. 
had he, while he wa write the note to sir franci varney, seen the 
old admiral' face, and the exceedingli cun look it wore, he might 
have suspect that the acquiesc in the duel wa but a seem 
acquiescence. this, however, escap him, and in a few moment he read 
to hi uncl the follow note:-- 

"to sir franci varney. 

"sir,--th express made use of toward me by you, as well as 
gener circumstances, which I need not further allud to here, 
induc me to demand of you that satisfact due from one 
gentleman to another. My uncle, admir bell, is the bearer of 
thi note, and will arrang preliminari with ani friend you may 
choos to appoint to act in your behalf. I am, sir, yours, &c. 

"charl holland." 

"will that do?" said charles. 

"capital!" said the admiral. 

"I am glad you like it." 

"oh, I could not help like it. the least said and the most to the 
purpose, alway pleas me best; and thi explain nothing, and demand 
all you want--which is a fight; so it' all right, you see, and noth 
can be possibl better." 

charl did glanc in hi uncle' face, for he suspected, from the 
manner in which these word were uttered, that the old man wa amus 
himself a littl at hi expense. the admiral, however, look so 
supernatur seriou that charl wa foiled. 

"I repeat, it' a capit letter," he said. 

"yes, you said so." 

"well, what are you stare at?" 

"oh, nothing." 

"do you doubt my word?" 

"not at all, uncle; onli I thought there wa a degre of ironi in the 
manner in which you spoke." 

"none at all, my boy. I never wa more seriou in all my life." 

"veri good. then you will rememb that I leav my honour in thi affair 
complet in your hands." 

"depend upon me, my boy." 

"I will, and do." 

"i'll be off and see the fellow at once." 

the admir bustl out of the room, and in a few moment charl heard 
him call loudly,-- 

"jack--jack pringle, you lubber, where are you?--jack pringle, I say." 

"ay, ay, sir," said jack, emerg from the kitchen, where he had been 
make himself gener use in assist mrs. bannerworth, there 
be no servant in the house, to cook some dinner for the family. 

"come on, you rascal, we are go for a walk." 

"the ration will be serv out soon," growl jack. 

"we shall be back in time, you cormorant, never fear. you are alway 
think of eat and drinking, you are, jack; and i'll be hang if I 
think you ever think of anyth else. come on, will you; i'm go on 
rather a particular cruis just now, so mind what you are about." 

"aye, aye, sir," said the tar, and these two originals, who so perfectli 
understood each other, walk away, convers as they went, and their 
differ voic come upon the ear of charles, until distanc 
obliter all impress of the sound. 

charl pace to and fro in the room where he had held thi brief and 
conclus convers with hi uncle. He wa thoughtful, as ani one 
might well be who knew not but that the next four-and-twenti hour would 
be the limit of hi sojourn in thi world. 

"oh, flora--flora!" he at length said, "how happi we might to have been 
together--how happi we might have been! but all is past now, and there 
seem noth left us but to endure. there it but one chance, and that 
is in my kill thi fear man who is invest with so dread an 
existence. and if I do kill him in fair and in open fight, I will take 
care that hi mortal frame ha no power again to revisit the glimps of 
the moon." 

It wa strang to imagin that such wa the forc of mani concurr 
circumstances, that a young man like charl holland, of first-rat 
abil and education, should find it necessari to give in so far to a 
belief which wa repugn to all hi best feel and habit of 
thought, as to be reason with himself upon the best mean of 
prevent the resuscit of the corps of a vampyre. but so it was. 
hi imagin had yield to a success of event which veri few 
person inde could have held out against. 

"I have heard and read," he said, as he continu hi agit and 
uneasi walk, "of how these dread be are to be in their graves. I 
have heard of stake be driven through the bodi so as to pin it to 
the earth until the gradual progress of decay ha render it 
revivif a thing of utter and total impossibility. then, again," 
he added, after a slight pause, "I have heard of their be burned, and 
the ash gather to the wind of heaven to prevent them from ever 
again unit or assum human form." 

[illustration] 

these were disagre and strang fancies, and he shudder while he 
indulg in them. He felt a kind of trembl horror come over him even 
at the thought of engag in conflict with a being, who perhaps, had 
live more than a hundr years. 

"that portrait," he thought, "on the panel, is the portrait of a man in 
the prime of life. If it be the portrait of sir franci varney, by the 
date which the famili ascrib to it he must be nearli one hundr and 
fifti year of age now." 

thi wa a supposit which carri the imagin to a vast amount of 
strang conjectures. 

"what chang he must have wit about him in that time," thought 
charles. "how he must have seen kingdom totter and fall, and how mani 
chang of habits, of manners, and of custom must he have becom a 
spectat of. renew too, ever and anon, hi fear exist by such 
fear means." 

thi wa a wide field of conjectur for a fertil imagination, and now 
that he wa on the eve of engag with such a be in mortal combat, 
on behalf of her he loved, the thought it gave rise to came more 
strongli and thickli upon him than ever they had done before. 

"but I will fight him," he suddenli said, "for flora' sake, were he a 
hundr time more hideou a be than so mani evid tend to prove 
him. I will fight with him, and it may be my fate to rid the world of 
such a monster in human form." 

charl work himself up to a kind of enthusiasm by which he almost 
succeed in convinc himself that, in attempt the destruct of 
sir franci varney, he wa the champion of human nature. 

It would be asid from the object of these pages, which is to record 
fact as they occurred, to enter into the metaphys cours of 
reason which came across charles' mind; suffic it to say that he 
felt noth shaken as regard hi resolv to meet varney the vampyre, 
and that he made up hi mind the conflict should be one of life or 
death. 

"it must be so," he said. "it must be so. either he or I must fall in 
the fight which shall sure be." 

He now sought flora, for how soon might he now be torn from her for ever 
by the irresist hand of death. He felt that, dure the few brief 
hour which now would onli elaps previou to hi meet with sir 
franci varney, he could not enjoy too much of the societi of her who 
reign suprem in hi heart, and held in her own keep hi best 
affections. 

but while charl is thu employed, let us follow hi uncl and jack 
pringl to the resid of varney, which, as the reader is aware, wa 
so near at hand that it requir not mani minutes' sharp walk to 
reach it. 

the admir knew well he could trust jack with ani secret, for long 
habit of disciplin and defer to the order of superior take off 
the propens to blab which, among civilian who are not accustom 
to discipline, is so veri prevalent. the old man therefor explain to 
jack what he meant to do, and it receiv jack' full approval; but as 
in the enforc detail of other matter it must come out, we will not 
here prematur enter into the admiral' plans. 

when they reach the resid of sir franci varney, they were 
receiv courteous enough, and the admir desir jack to wait for 
him in the handsom hall of the house, while he wa shewn up stair to 
the privat room of the vampyre. 

"confound the fellow!" mutter the old admiral, "he is well lodg at 
all events. I should say he wa not one of those sort of vampyr who 
have nowher to go to but their own coffin when the even comes." 

the room into which the admir wa shewn had green blind to it, and 
they were all drawn down. It is true that the sun wa shine brightli 
outside, although transiently, but still a strang green ting wa 
thrown over everyth in the room, and more particularli did it appear 
to fall upon the face of varney, convert hi usual sallow 
counten into a still more hideou and strang colour. He wa sit 
upon a couch, and, when the admir came in, he rose, and said, in a 
deep-ton voice, extrem differ to that he usual spoke in,-- 

"mi humbl home is much honoured, sir, by your presenc in it." 

"good morning," said the admiral. "I have come to speak to you, sir, 
rather seriously." 

"howev abrupt thi announc may sound to me," said varney, "I am 
quit sure I shall alway hear, with the most profound respect, whatev 
admir bell may have to say." 

"there is no respect required," said the admiral, "but onli a littl 
attention." 

sir franci bow in a state manner, saying,-- 

"I shall be quit unhappi if you will not be seated, admir bell." 

"oh, never mind that, sir franci varney, if you be sir franci varney; 
for you may be the devil himself, for all I know. My nephew, charl 
holland, consid that, one way and another, he ha a veri toler 
quarrel with you." 

"I much griev to hear it." 

"do you?" 

"believ me, I do. I am most scrupul in what I say; and an assert 
that I am grieved, you may thoroughli and entir depend upon." 

"well, well, never mind that; charl holland is a young man just 
enter into life. He love a girl who is, I think, everi way worthi of 
him." 

"oh, what a felicit prospect!" 

"just hear me out, if you please." 

"with pleasure, sir--with pleasure." 

"well, then, when a young, hot-head fellow think he ha a good ground 
of quarrel with anybody, you will not be surpris at hi want to 
fight it out." 

"not at all." 

"well, then, to come to the point, my nephew, charl holland, ha a 
fanci for fight with you." 

"ah!" 

"you take it d----d easy." 

"mi dear sir, whi should I be uneasy? He is not my nephew, you know. I 
shall have no particular cause, beyond those feel of common 
compass which I hope inhabit my breast as well as everi one else's." 

"what do you mean?" 

"why, he is a young man just, as you say, enter into life, and I 
cannot help think it would be a piti to cut him off like a flower in 
the bud, so veri soon." 

"oh, you make quit sure, then, of settl him, do you?" 

"mi dear sir, onli consider; he might be veri troublesome, indeed; you 
know young men are hot-head and troublesome. even if I were onli to 
maim him, he might be a continu and never-ceas annoy to me. I 
think I should be absolutely, in a manner of speaking, compel to cut 
him off." 

"the devil you do!" 

"a you say, sir." 

"d--n your assurance, mr. vampyre, or whatev odd fish you may be." 

"admir bell, I never call upon you and receiv a courteou 
reception, and then insult you." 

"then whi do you talk of cut off a better man than yourself? d--n 
it, what would you say to him cut you off?" 

"oh, as for me, my good sir, that' quit anoth thing. cut me off 
is veri doubtful." 

sir franci varney gave a strang smile as he spoke, and shook hi head, 
as if some most extraordinari and extravag proposit had been 
mooted, which it wa scarc worth the while of anybodi possess of 
common sens to set about expecting. 

admir bell felt strongli inclin to get into a rage, but he repress 
the idea as much as he could, although, but for the curiou faint green 
light that came through the blinds, hi heighten colour would have 
suffici proclaim what state of mind he wa in. 

"mr. varney," he said, "all thi is quit besid the question; but, at 
all events, if it have ani weight at all, it ought to have a 
consider influenc in decid you to accept of what term I 
propose." 

"what are they, sir?" 

"why, that you permit me to espous my nephew charles' quarrel, and 
meet you instead of him." 

"you meet me?" 

"yes; i'v met a better man more than onc before. It can make no 
differ to you." 

"I don't know that, admir bell. one gener likes, in a duel, to 
face him with whom one ha had the misunderstanding, be it on what 
ground it may." 

"there' some reason, I know, in what you say; but, surely, if I am 
willing, you need not object." 

"and is your nephew will thu to shift the danger and the job of 
resent hi own quarrel on to your shoulders?" 

"no; he know noth about it. He ha written you a challenge, of which 
I am the bearer, but I voluntarily, and of my own accord, wish to meet 
you instead." 

"thi is a strang mode of proceeding." 

"if you will not acced to it, and fight him first, and ani harm come 
to him, you shall fight me afterwards." 

"indeed." 

"yes, inde you shall, howev surpris you may look." 

"a thi appear to be quit a famili affair, then," said sir franci 
varney, "it certainli doe appear immateri which of you I fight with 
first." 

"quit so; now you take a sensibl view of the question. will you meet 
me?" 

"I have no particular objection. have you settl all your affairs, and 
made your will?" 

"what' that to you?" 

"oh, I onli asked, becaus there is gener so much food for 
litig if a man die intestate, and is worth ani money." 

"you make devilish sure," said the admiral, "of be the victor. have 
you made your will?" 

"oh, my will," smile sir francis; "that, my good sir, is quit an 
indiffer affair." 

"well, make it or not, as you like. I am old, I know, but I can pull a 
trigger as well as ani one." 

"do what?" 

"pull a trigger." 

"why, you don't suppos I resort to ani such barbar mode of 
fighting?" 

"barbarous! why, how do you fight then?" 

"a a gentleman, with my sword." 

"swords! oh, nonsense! nobodi fight with sword now-a-days. that' all 
exploded." 

"I cling to the custom and the fashion of my youth," said varney. "I 
have been, year ago, accustom alway to wear a sword, and to be 
without one now vex me." 

"pray, how mani year ago?" 

"I am older than I look, but that is not the question. I am will to 
meet you with sword if you like. you are no doubt awar that, as the 
challeng party, I am entitl to the choic of weapons." 

"I am." 

"then you cannot object to my avail myself of the one in the use of 
which I am perfectli unequalled." 

"indeed." 

"yes, I am, I think, the first swordsman in europe; I have had immens 
practice." 

"well, sir, you have certainli made a most unexpect choic of weapons. 
I can use a sword still, but am by no mean a master of fencing. 
however, it shall not be said that I went back from my word, and let the 
chanc be as desper as they may, I will meet you." 

"veri good." 

"with swords?" 

"ay, with swords; but I must have everyth properli arranged, so that 
no blame can rest on me, you know. As you will be killed, you are safe 
from all consequences, but I shall be in a veri differ position; so, 
if you please, I must have thi meet got up in such a manner as shall 
enabl me to prove, to whoever may question me on the subject, that you 
had fair play." 

"oh, never fear that." 

"but I do fear it. the world, my good sir, is censorious, and you cannot 
stop peopl from say extrem ill-natur things." 

"what do you require, then?" 

"I requir you to send me a friend with a formal challenge." 

"well?" 

"then I shall refer him to a friend of mine, and they two must settl 
everyth between them." 

"i that all?" 

"not quite. I will have a surgeon on the ground, in case, when I pink 
you, there should be a chanc of save your life. It alway look 
humane." 

"when you pink me?" 

"precisely." 

"upon my word, you take these affair easy. I suppos you have had a few 
of them?" 

"oh, a good number. peopl like yourself worri me into them, I don't 
like the trouble, I assur you; it is no amus to me. I would 
rather, by a great deal, make some concess than fight, becaus I will 
fight with swords, and the result is then so certain that there is no 
danger in the matter to me." 

"hark you, sir franci varney. you are either a veri clever actor, or a 
man, as you say, of such skill with your sword, that you can make sure 
of the result of a duel. you know, therefore, that it is not fair play 
on your part to fight a duel with that weapon." 

"oh, I beg your pardon there. I never challeng anybody, and when 
foolish peopl will call me out, contrari to my inclination, I think I 
am bound to take what care of myself I can." 

"d--n me, there' some reason in that, too," said the admiral; "but whi 
do you insult people?" 

"peopl insult me first." 

"oh, nonsense!" 

"how should you like to be call a vampyre, and stare at as if you 
were some hideou natur phenomenon?" 

"well, but--" 

"I say, admir bell, how should you like it? I am a harmless countri 
gentleman, and because, in the heat imagin of some member of a 
crack-brain family, some housebreak ha been convert into a 
vampyre, I am to be pitch upon as the man, and insult and persecut 
accordingly." 

"but you forget the proofs." 

"what proofs?" 

"the portrait, for one." 

"what! becaus there is an accident like between me and an old 
picture, am I to be set down as a vampyre? why, when I wa in austria 
last, I saw an old portrait of a celebr court fool, and you so 
strongli resembl it, that I wa quit struck when I first saw you with 
the likeness; but I wa not so unpolit as to tell you that I consid 
you were the court fool turn vampyre." 

"d--n your assurance!" 

"and d--n yours, if you come to that." 

the admir wa fairli beaten. sir franci varney wa by far too 
long-head and witti for him. after now in vain endeavour to find 
someth to say, the old man button up hi coat in a great passion, 
and look fierc at varney, he said,--"i don't pretend to a gift of 
the gab. d--n me, it ain't one of my peculiarities; but though you may 
talk me down, you sha'n't keep me down." 

"veri good, sir." 

"it is not veri good. you shall hear from me." 

"I am willing." 

"I don't care whether you are will or not. you shall find that when 
onc I begin to tackl an enemy, I don't so easili leav him. one or 
both of us, sir, is sure to sink." 

"agreed." 

"so say I. you shall find that i'm a tar for all weathers, and if you 
were a hundr and fifti vampir all roll into one, i'd tackl you 
somehow." 

the admir walk to the door in high dudgeon; when he wa near to it, 
varney said, in some of hi most win and gentl accents,-- 

"will you not take some refreshment, sir befor you go from my humbl 
house?" 

"no!" roar the admiral. 

"someth cooling?" 

"no!" 

"veri good, sir. A hospit host can do no more than offer to 
entertain hi guests." 

admir bell turn at the door, and said, with some degre of intens 
bitterness, 

"you look rather poorly. I suppose, to-night, you will go and suck 
somebody' blood, you shark--you confound vampyre! you ought to be 
made to swallow a red-hot brick, and then let danc about till it 
digests." 

varney smile as he rang the bell, and said to a servant,-- 

"show my veri excel friend admir bell out. He will not take ani 
refreshments." 

the servant bowed, and preced the admir down the staircase; but, to 
hi great surprise, instead of a compliment in the shape of a shill 
or half-a-crown for hi pains, he receiv a tremend kick behind, 
with a request to go and take it to hi master, with hi compliments. 

the fume that the old admir wa in beggar all description. He walk 
to bannerworth hall at such a rapid pace, that jack pringl had the 
greatest difficulti in the world to keep up with him, so as to be at all 
within speak distance. 

"hilloa, jack," cri the old man, when they were close to the hall. 
"did you see me kick that fellow?" 

"ay, ay, sir." 

"well, that' some consolation, at ani rate, if somebodi saw it. It 
ought to have been hi master, that' all I can say to it, and I wish it 
had." 

"how have you settl it, sir?" 

"settl what?" 

"the fight, sir." 

"d--n me, jack, I haven't settl it at all." 

"that' bad, sir." 

"I know it is; but it shall be settl for all that, I can tell him, let 
him vapour as much as he may about pink me, and one thing and 
another." 

"pink you, sir?" 

"yes. He want to fight with cutlasses, or toasting-forks, d--n me, I 
don't know exactli which, and then he must have a surgeon on the ground, 
for fear when he pink me I shouldn't slip my cabl in a regular way, 
and he should be blamed." 

jack gave a long whistle, as he replied,-- 

"go to do it, sir?" 

"I don't know now what i'm go to do. mind, jack, mum is the word." 

"ay, ay, sir." 

"i'll turn the matter over in my mind, and then decid upon what had 
best be done. If he pink me, i'll take d----d good care he don't pink 
charles." 

"no, sir, don't let him do that. A _wamphigher_, sir, ain't no good 
oppon to anybody. I never seed one afore, but it strike me as the 
best way to settl him, would be to shut him up in some littl bit of a 
cabin, and then smoke him with brimstone, sir." 

"well, well, i'll consider, jack, i'll consider. someth must be done, 
and that quickli too. zounds, here' charles--what the deuc shall I say 
to him, by way of an excuse, I wonder, for not arrang hi affair with 
varney? hang me, if I ain't taken aback now, and don't know where to 
place a hand." 




chapter xxiv. 

the letter TO charles.--th quarrel.--th admiral' narrative.--th 
midnight meeting. 


[illustration] 

It wa charl holland who now advanc hurriedli to meet the admiral. 
the young man' manner wa anxious. He wa evid most intent upon 
know what answer could be sent by sir franci varney to hi 
challenge. 

"uncle," he said, "tell me at once, will he meet me? you can talk of 
particular afterwards, but now tell me at onc if he will meet me?" 

"why, as to that," said the admiral, with a great deal of fidgetti 
hesitation, "you see, I can't exactli say." 

"not say!" 

"no. he' a veri odd fish. don't you think he' a veri odd fish, jack 
pringle'?" 

"ay, ay, sir." 

"there, you hear, charles, that jack is of my opinion that your oppon 
is an odd fish." 

"but, uncle, whi trifl with my impati thus? have you seen sir 
franci varney?" 

"seen him. oh, yes." 

"and what did he say?" 

"why, to tell the truth, my lad, I advis you not to fight with him at 
all." 

"uncle, is thi like you? thi advic from you, to compromis my honour, 
after send a man a challenge?" 

"d--n it all, jack, I don't know how to get out of it," said the 
admiral. "I tell you what it is, charles, he want to fight with swords; 
and what on earth is the use of your engag with a fellow who ha been 
practis at hi weapon for more than a hundr years?" 

"well, uncle, if ani one had told me that you would be terrifi by thi 
sir franci varney into advis me not to fight, I should have had no 
hesit whatev in say such a thing wa impossible." 

"I terrified?" 

"why, you advis me not to meet thi man, even after I have challeng 
him." 

"jack," said the admiral, "I can't carri it on, you see. I never could 
go on with anyth that wa not as plain as an anchor, and quit 
straightforward. I must just tell all that ha occurred." 

"ay, ay, sir. the best way." 

"you think so, jack?" 

"I know it is, sir, alway axe pardon for have a opinion at all, 
except when it happen to be the same as yourn, sir." 

"hold your tongue, you libel villain! now, listen to me, charles. I 
got up a scheme of my own." 

charl gave a groan, for he had a veri toler appreci of hi 
uncle' amount of skill in get up a scheme of ani kind or 
description. 

"now here am i," continu the admiral, "an old hulk, and not fit for 
use anymore. what' the use of me, I should like to know? well, that' 
settled. but you are young and hearty, and have a long life befor you. 
whi should you throw away your life upon a lubberli vampyre?" 

"I begin to perceiv now, uncle," said charles, reproachfully, "whi you, 
with such appar readiness, agre to thi duel take place." 

"well, I intend to fight the fellow myself, that' the long and short 
of it, boy." 

"how could you treat me so?" 

"no nonsense, charles. I tell you it wa all in the family. I intend 
to fight him myself. what wa the odd whether I slip my cabl with 
hi assistance, or in the regular cours a littl after this? that' the 
way to argufi the subject; so, as I tell you, I made up my mind to fight 
him myself." 

charl look despairingly, but said,-- 

"what wa the result?" 

"oh, the result! d--n me, I suppos that' to come. the vagabond won't 
fight like a christian. He say he' quit will to fight anybodi that 
call him out, provid it' all regular." 

"well--well." 

"and he, be the parti challenged--for he say he never himself 
challeng anybody, as he is quit tire of it--must have hi choic of 
weapons." 

"he is entitl to that; but it is gener understood now-a-day that 
pistol are the weapon in use among gentlemen for such purposes." 

"ah, but he won't understand ani such thing, I tell you. He will fight 
with swords." 

"I suppos he is, then, an adept at the use of the sword?" 

"he say he is." 

"no doubt--no doubt. I cannot blame a man for choosing, when he ha the 
liberti of choice, that weapon in the use of which he most particularly, 
from practice, excels." 

"yes; but if he be one half the swordsman he ha had time enough, 
accord to all accounts, to be, what sort of chanc have you with 
him?" 

"do I hear you reason thus?" 

"yes, to be sure you do. I have turn wonder prudent, you see: so 
I mean to fight him myself, and mind, now, you have noth whatev to 
do with it." 

"an effort of prudenc that, certainly." 

"well, didn't I say so?" 

"come--come, uncle, thi won't do. I have challeng sir franci varney, 
and I must meet him with ani weapon he may, as the challeng party, 
choos to select. besides, you are not, I dare say, awar that I am a 
veri good fencer, and probabl stand as fair a chanc as varney in a 
contest with swords." 

"indeed!" 

"yes, uncle. I could not be so long on the contin as I have been 
without pick up a good knowledg of the sword, which is so popular 
all over germany." 

"humph! but onli consider, thi d----d fellow is no less than a hundr 
and fifti year old." 

"I care not." 

"yes, but I do." 

"uncle, uncle, I tell you I will fight with him; and if you do not 
arrang matter for me so that I can have the meet with thi man, 
which I have myself sought, and cannot, even if I wished, now reced 
from with honour, I must seek some other less scrupul friend to do 
so." 

"give me an hour or two to think of it, charles," said the admiral. 
"don't speak to ani one else, but give me a littl time. you shall have 
no caus of complaint. your honour cannot suffer in my hands." 

"I will wait your leisure, uncle; but rememb that such affair as 
these, when onc broached, had alway better be conclud with all 
conveni dispatch." 

"I know that, boy--i know that." 

the admir walk away, and charles, who realli felt much fret at 
the delay which had taken place, return to the house. 

He had not been there long, when a lad, who had been temporarili hire 
dure the morn by henri to answer the gate, brought him a note, 
saying,-- 

"A servant, sir, left thi for you just now." 

"for me?" said charles, as he glanc at the direction. "thi is 
strange, for I have no acquaint about here. doe ani one wait?" 

"no, sir." 

the note wa properli direct to him, therefor charl holland at onc 
open it. A glanc at the bottom of the page told him that it came from 
hi enemy, sir franci varney, and then he read it with much eagerness. 
It ran thus:-- 

"sir,--your uncle, as he state himself to be, admir bell, wa 
the bearer to me, as I understood him thi day, of a challeng 
from you. owe to some unaccount hallucin of intellect, 
he seem to imagin that I intend to set myself up as a sort 
of anim target, for ani one to shoot at who might have a 
fanci so to do. 

"accord to thi eccentr view of the case, the admir had 
the kind to offer to fight me first, when, should he not have 
the good fortun to put me out of the world, you were to tri your 
skill, doubtless. 

"I need scarc say that I object to these famili arrangements. 
you have challeng me, and, fanci the offenc sufficient, you 
defi me to mortal combat. if, therefore, I fight with ani one at 
all, it must be with you. 

"you will clearli understand me, sir, that I do not accus you of 
be at all parti to thi freak of intellect of your uncle's. 
he, no doubt, alon conceiv it, with a laudabl desir on hi 
part of serv you. if, however, to meet me, do so to-night, in 
the middl of the park surround your own friend estate. 

"there is a pollard oak grow close to a small pool; you, no 
doubt, have notic the spot often. meet me there, if you please, 
and ani satisfact you like I will give you, at twelv o'clock 
thi night. 

"come alone, or you will not see me. It shall be at your own 
option entirely, to convert the meet into a hostil one or 
not. you need send me no answer to this. If you are at the place 
I mention at the time I have named, well and good. If you an not, 
I can only, if I please, imagin that you shrink from a meet 
with 

"franci varney." 

charl holland read thi letter twice over carefully, and then fold 
it up, and place it in hi pocket, he said,-- 

"yes, I will meet him; he may be assur that I will meet him. He shall 
find that I do not shrink from franci varney In the name of honour, 
love, virtue, and heaven, I will meet thi man, and it shall go hard 
with me but I will thi night wring from him the secret of what he 
realli is. for the sake of her who is so dear to me--for her sake, I 
will meet thi man, or monster, be he what he may." 

It would have been far more prudent had charl inform henri 
bannerworth or georg of hi determin to meet the vampyr that 
evening, but he did not do so. somehow he fanci it would be some 
reproach against hi courag if he did not go, and go alone, too, for he 
could not help suspect that, from the conduct of hi uncle, sir 
franci varney might have got up an opinion inim to hi courage. 

with all the eager excit of youth, there wa noth that array 
itself to hi mind in such melancholi and uncomfort colour as an 
imput upon hi courage. 

"I will show thi vampyre, if he be such," he said, "that I am not 
afraid to meet him, and alone, too, at hi own hour--at midnight, even 
when, if hi preternatur power be of more avail to him than at ani 
other time, he can attempt, if he dare, to use them." 

charl resolv upon go armed, and with the greatest care he load 
hi pistols, and place them asid readi for action, when the time 
should come to set out to meet the vampyr at the spot in the park which 
had been particularli allud to in hi letter. 

thi spot wa perfectli well known to charles; indeed, no one could be a 
singl day at bannerworth hall without notic it, so promin an 
object wa that pollard oak, standing, as it did, alone, with the 
beauti green sward all around it. near to it wa the pool which hid 
been mentioned, which was, in reality, a fish-pond, and some littl 
distanc off commenc the thick plantation, among the intricaci of 
which sir franci varney, or the vampyre, had been suppos to 
disappear, after the revivif of hi bodi at the full of the moon. 

thi spot wa in view of sever of the window of the house, so that if 
the night should happen to be a veri light one, and ani of the 
inhabit of the hall should happen to have the curios to look from 
those particular windows, no doubt the meet between charl holland 
and the vampyr would be seen. 

this, however, wa a conting which wa noth to charles, whatev 
it might be to sir franci varney, and he scarc at all consid it 
as worth consideration. He felt more happi and comfort now that 
everyth seem to be definit arrang by which he could come to 
some sort of explan with that mysteri be who had so 
effectually, as yet, succeed in destroy hi peac of mind and hi 
prospect of happiness. 

"I will thi night forc him to declar himself," thought charles. "he 
shall tell me who and what he realli is, and by some mean I will 
endeavour to put an end to those fright persecut which flora ha 
suffered." 

thi wa a thought which consider rais charles' spirits, and when 
he sought flora again, which he now did, she wa surpris to see him so 
much more easi and compos in hi mind, which wa suffici shown by 
hi manner, than he had been but so short a time before. 

"charles," she said, "what ha happen to give such an impetu to your 
spirits?" 

"nothing, dear flora, nothing; but I have been endeavour to throw 
from my mind all gloomi thoughts, and to convinc myself that in the 
futur you and I, dearest, may yet be veri happy." 

"oh, charles, if I could but think so." 

"endeavour, flora, to think so. rememb how much our happi is 
alway in our own power, flora, and that, let fate do her worst, so long 
as we are true to each other, we have a recompens for everi ill." 

"oh, indeed, charles, that is a dear recompense." 

"and it is well that no forc of circumst short of death itself can 
divid us." 

"true, charles, true, and I am more than ever now bound to look upon you 
with a love heart; for have you not clung to me gener under 
circumst which, if ani at all could have justifi you in rend 
asund everi tie which bound us together, sure would have done so 
most fully." 

"it is misfortun and distress that tri love," said charles. "it is 
thu that the touchston is appli to see if it be current gold indeed, 
or some base metal, which by a superfici glitter imit it." 

"and your love is inde true gold." 

"I am unworthi of one glanc from those dear eye if it were not." 

"oh, if we could but go from here I think then we might be happy. A 
strong impress is upon my mind, and ha been so for some time, that 
these persecut to which I have been subject are peculiar to thi 
house." 

"think you so?" 

"I do, indeed!" 

"it may be so, flora. you are awar that your brother ha made up hi 
mind that he will leav the hall." 

"yes, yes." 

"and that onli in defer to an express wish of mine he put off the 
carri such a resolv into effect for a few days." 

"he said so much." 

"do not, however, imagine, dearest flora, that those few day will be 
idli spent." 

"nay, charles, I could not imagin so." 

"believ me, I have some hope that in that short space of time I shall 
be abl to accomplish yet someth which shall have a materi effect 
upon the present postur of affairs." 

"do not run into danger, charles." 

"I will not. believ me, flora, I have too much appreci of the 
valu of an exist which is bless by your love, to encount ani 
needless risks." 

"you say needless. whi do you not confid in me, and tell me if the 
object you have in view to accomplish in the few day delay is a 
danger one at all." 

"will you forgiv me, flora, if for onc I keep a secret from you?" 

"then, charles, along with the forgiv I must conjur up a host of 
apprehensions." 

"nay, whi so?" 

"you would tell me if there were no circumst that you fear would 
fill me with alarm." 

"now, flora, your fear and not your judgment condemn me. sure you 
cannot think me so utterli heedless as to court danger for danger' 
sake." 

"no, not so--" 

"you pause." 

"and yet you have a sens of what you call honour, which, I fear, would 
lead you into much risk." 

"I have a sens of honour; but not that foolish one which hang far more 
upon the opinion of other than my own. If I thought a cours of honour 
lay befor me, and all the world, in a mistaken judgment, were to 
condemn it as wrong, I would follow it." 

"you are right, charles; you are right. let me pray of you to be 
careful, and, at all events, to interpos no more delay to our leav 
thi hous than you shall feel convinc is absolut necessari for 
some object of real and perman importance." 

charl promis flora bannerworth that for her sake, as well as hi 
own, he would be most special care of hi safety; and then in such 
endear convers as may be well suppos to be dictat by such 
heart as their anoth happi hour wa pass away. 

[illustration] 

they pictur to themselv the scene where first they met, and with a 
world of interest hang on everi word they uttered, they told each 
other of the first delight dawn of that affect which had 
sprung up between them, and which they fondli believ neither time nor 
circumst would have the power to chang or subvert. 

In the meantim the old admir wa surpris that charl wa so 
patient, and had not been to him to demand the result of hi 
deliberation. 

but he knew not on what rapid pinion time flies, when in the presenc 
of those whom we love. what wa an actual hour, wa but a fleet 
minut to charl holland, as he sat with flora' hand clasp in his, 
and look at her sweet face. 

At length a clock strike remind him of hi engag with hi 
uncle, and he reluctantli rose. 

"dear flora," he said, "I am go to sit up to watch to-night, so be 
under no sort of apprehension." 

"I will feel doubli safe," she said. 

"I have now someth to talk to my uncl about, and must leav you." 

flora smiled, and held out her hand to him. He press it to hi heart. 
He knew not what impuls came over him then, but for the first time he 
kiss the cheek of the beauti girl. 

with a heighten colour she gentli repuls him. He took a long 
linger look at her as he pass out of the room, and when the door 
wa close between them, the sensat he experienc wa as if some 
sudden cloud had swept across the face of the sun, dim to a vast 
extent it preciou lustre. 

A strang heavi came across hi spirits, which befor had been so 
unaccount raised. He felt as if the shadow of some come evil wa 
rest on hi soul--a if some moment calam wa prepar for 
him, which would almost be enough to drive him to madness, and 
irredeem despair. 

"what can thi be," he exclaimed, "that thu oppress me? what feel 
is thi that seem to tell me, I shall never again see flora 
bannerworth?" 

unconsci he utter these words, which betray the natur of hi 
worst forebodings. 

"oh, thi is weakness," he then added. "I must fight out against this; 
it is mere nervousness. I must not endur it, I will not suffer myself 
thu to becom the sport of imagination. courage, courage, charl 
holland. there are real evil enough, without your ad to them by 
those of a disord fancy. courage, courage, courage." 




chapter xxv. 

the admiral' opinion.--th request OF charles. 


[illustration] 

charl then sought the admiral, whom he found with hi hand behind 
him, pace to and fro in one of the long walk of the garden, evid 
in a veri unsettl state of mind. when charl appeared, he quicken 
hi pace, and look in such a state of unusu perplex that it wa 
quit ridicul to observ him. 

"I suppose, uncle, you have made up your mind thoroughli by thi time?" 

"well, I don't know that." 

"why, you have had long enough sure to think over it. I have not 
troubl you soon." 

"well, I cannot exactli say you have, but, somehow or another, I don't 
think veri fast, and I have an unfortun propens after a time of 
come exactli round to where I began." 

"then, to tell the truth, uncle, you can come to no sort of conclusion." 

"onli one." 

"and what may that be?" 

"why, that you are right in one thing, charles, which is, that have 
sent a challeng to thi fellow of a vampyre, you must fight him." 

"I suspect that that is a conclus you had from the first, uncle?" 

"whi so?" 

"becaus it is an obviou and a natur one. all your doubts, and 
trouble, and perplexities, have been to tri and find some excus for not 
entertain that opinion, and now that you realli find it in vain to 
make it, I trust that you will acced as you first promis to do, and 
not seek by ani mean to thwart me." 

"I will not thwart you, my boy, although in my opinion you ought not to 
fight with a vampyre." 

"never mind that. We cannot urg that as a valid excuse, so long as he 
choos to deni be one. and after all, if he be realli wrong 
suspected, you must admit that he is a veri injur man." 

"injured!--nonsense. If he is not a vampyre, he' some other 
out-of-the-way sort of fish, you may depend. he' the oddest-look 
fellow ever I came across in all my born days, ashor or afloat." 

"i he?" 

"yes, he is: and yet, when I come to look at the thing again in my mind, 
some droll sight that I have seen come across my memory. the sea is the 
place for wonder and for mysteries. why, we see more in a day and a 
night there, than you landsmen could contriv to make a whole 
twelvemonth' wonder of." 

"but you never saw a vampyre, uncle?" 

"well, I don't know that. I didn't know anyth about vampyr till I 
came here; but that wa my ignorance, you know. there might have been 
lot of vampyr where i'v been, for all I know." 

"oh, certainly; but as regard thi duel, will you wait now until 
to-morrow morning, befor you take ani further step in the matter?" 

"till to-morrow morning?" 

"yes, uncle." 

"why, onli a littl while ago, you were all eager to have someth 
done off-hand." 

"just so; but now I have a particular reason for wait until to-morrow 
morning." 

"have you? well, as you please, boy--a you please. have everyth your 
own way." 

"you are veri kind, uncle; and now I have anoth favour to ask of you." 

"what is it?" 

"why, you know that henri bannerworth receiv but a veri small sum out 
of the whole proce of the estat here, which ought, but for hi 
father' extravagance, to be wholli at hi disposal." 

"so I have heard." 

"I am certain he is at present distress for money, and I have not 
much. will you lend me fifti pounds, uncle, until my own affair are 
suffici arrang to enabl you to pay yourself again?" 

"will I! of cours I will." 

"I wish to offer that sum as an accommod to henry. from me, I dare 
say he will receiv it freely, becaus he must be convinc how freeli 
it is offered; and, besides, they look upon me now almost as a member of 
the famili in consequ of my engag with flora." 

"certainly, and quit correct too: there' a fifty-pound note, my boy; 
take it, and do what you like with it, and when you want ani more, come 
to me for it." 

"I knew I could trespass thu far on your kindness, uncle." 

"trespass! it' no trespass at all." 

"well, we will not fall out about the term in which I cannot help 
express my gratitud to you for mani favours. to-morrow, you will 
arrang the duel for me." 

"a you please. I don't altogeth like go to that fellow' hous 
again." 

"well, then, we can manage, I dare say, by note." 

"veri good. Do so. He put me in mind altogeth of a circumst that 
happen a good while ago, when I wa at sea, and not so old a man as I 
am now." 

"put you in mind of a circumstance, uncle?" 

"yes; he' someth like a fellow that figur in an affair that I know 
a good deal about; onli I do think as my chap wa more mysteri by a 
d----d sight than thi one." 

"indeed!" 

"oh, dear, yes. when anyth happen in an odd way at sea, it is as odd 
again as anyth that occur on land, my boy, you may depend." 

"oh, you onli fanci that, uncle, becaus you have spent so long a time 
at sea." 

"no, I don't imagin it, you rascal. what can you have on shore equal to 
what we have at sea? why, the sight that come befor us would make you 
landsmen' hair stand up on end, and never come down again." 

"in the ocean, do you mean, that you see those sights, uncle?" 

"to be sure. I wa onc in the southern ocean, in a small frigate, 
look out for a seventy-four we were to join compani with, when a man 
at the mast-head sung out that he saw her on the larboard bow. well, we 
thought it wa all right enough, and made away that quarter, when what 
do you think it turn out to be?" 

"I realli cannot say." 

"the head of a fish." 

"A fish!" 

"yes! a d----d deal bigger than the hull of a vessel. He wa swim 
along with hi head just what I dare say he consid a shave or so 
out of the water." 

"but where were the sails, uncle?" 

"the sails?" 

"yes; your man at the mast-head must have been a poor seaman not to have 
miss the sails." 

"all, that' one of your shore-go ideas, now. you know noth 
whatev about it. i'll tell you where the sail were, master charley." 

"well, I should like to know." 

"the spray, then, that he dash up with a pair of fin that were close 
to hi head, wa in such a quantity, and so white, that they look just 
like sails." 

"oh!" 

"ah! you may say 'oh!' but we all saw him--th whole ship' crew; and we 
sail alongsid of him for some time, till he got tire of us, and 
suddenli dive down, make such a vortex in the water, that the ship 
shook again, and seem for about a minut as if she wa inclin to 
follow him to the bottom of the sea." 

"and what do you suppos it was, uncle?" 

"how should I know?" 

"did you ever see it again?" 

"never; though other have caught a glimps of him now and then in the 
same ocean, but never came so near him as we did, that ever I heard of, 
at all events. they may have done so." 

"it is singular!" 

"singular or not, it' a fool to what I can tell you. why, i'v seen 
thing that, if I were to set about describ them to you, you would 
say I wa make up a romance." 

"oh, no; it' quit impossible, uncle, ani one could ever suspect you of 
such a thing." 

"you'd believ me, would you?" 

"of cours I would." 

"then here goes. i'll just tell you now of a circumst that I haven't 
like to mention to anybodi yet." 

"indeed! whi so?" 

"becaus I didn't want to be continu fight peopl for not 
believ it; but here you have it:--" 

We were outward bound; a good ship, a good captain, and good messmates, 
you know, go far toward make a prosper voyag a pleasant and happi 
one, and on thi occas we had everi reason prospect of all. 

our hand were all tri men--they had been sailor from infancy; none 
of your french craft, that serv an apprenticeship and then becom land 
lubber again. oh, no, they were stanch and true, and love the ocean as 
the sluggard love hi bed, or the lover hi mistress. 

ay, and for the matter of that, the love wa a more endur and a more 
healthi love, for it increas with years, and made men love one 
another, and they would stand by each other while they had a limb to 
lift--whil they were abl to chew a quid or wink an eye, leav alon 
wag a pigtail. 

We were outward bound for ceylon, with cargo, and were to bring spice 
and other matter home from the indian market. the ship wa new and 
good--a pretti craft; she sat like a duck upon the water, and a stiff 
breez carri her along the surfac of the wave without your rocking, 
and pitching, and tossing, like an old wash-tub at a mill-tail, as I 
have had the misfortun to sail in more than onc afore. 

no, no, we were well laden, and well pleased, and weigh anchor with 
light heart and a hearti cheer. 

away we went down the river, and soon round the north foreland, and 
stood out in the channel. the breez wa a steadi and stiff one, and 
carri us through the water as though it had been made for us. 

"jack," said I to a messmat of mine, as he stood look at the skies, 
then at the sails, and final at the water, with a graver air than I 
thought wa at all consist with the occas or circumstances. 

"well," he replied. 

"what ail you? you seem as melancholi as if we were about to cast lot 
who should be eaten first. are you well enough?" 

"I am hearti enough, thank heaven," he said, "but I don't like thi 
breeze." 

"don't like the breeze!" said I; "why, mate, it is as good and kind a 
breez as ever fill a sail. what would you have, a gale?" 

"no, no; I fear that." 

"with such a ship, and such a set of hearti abl seamen, I think we 
could manag to weather out the stiffest gale that ever whistl through 
a yard." 

"that may be; I hope it is, and I realli believ and think so." 

"then what make you so infern mopish and melancholy?" 

"I don't know, but can't help it. It seem to me as though there wa 
someth hang over us, and I can't tell what." 

"yes, there are the colours, jack, at the masthead; they are fli over 
us with a hearti breeze." 

"ah! ah!" said jack, look up at the colours, and then went away 
without say anyth more, for he had some piec of duti to perform. 

I thought my messmat had someth on hi mind that caus him to feel 
sad and uncomfortable, and I took no more notic of it; indeed, in the 
cours of a day or two he wa as merri as ani of the rest, and had no 
more melancholi that I could perceive, but wa as comfort as 
anybody. 

We had a gale off the coast of biscay, and rode it out without the loss 
of a spar or a yard; indeed, without the slightest accid or rent of 
ani kind. 

"now, jack, what do you think of our vessel?" said I. 

"she' like a duck upon water, rise and fall with the waves, and 
doesn't tumbl up and down like a hoop over stones." 

"no, no; she goe smoothli and sweetly; she is a gallant craft, and thi 
is her first voyage, and I predict a prosper one." 

"I hope so," he said. 

well, we went on prosper enough for about three weeks; the ocean 
wa as calm and as smooth as a meadow, the breez light but good, and we 
stem along majest over the deep blue waters, and pass coast 
after coast, though all around wa noth but the appar pathless 
main in sight. 

"A better sailer I never step into," said the captain one day; "it 
would be a pleasur to live and die in such a vessel." 

well, as I said, we had been three week or thereabouts, when one 
morning, after the sun wa up and the deck washed, we saw a strang man 
sit on one of the water-cask that were on deck, for, be full, we 
were compel to stow some of them on deck. 

you may guess those on deck did a littl more than stare at thi strang 
and unexpect apparition. By jingo, I never saw men open their eye 
wider in all my life, nor wa I ani except to the rule. I stared, as 
well I might; but we said noth for some minutes, and the stranger 
look calmli on us, and then cock hi eye with a nautic air up at 
the sky, as if he expect to receiv a twopenny-post letter from st. 
michael, or a _billet doux_ from the virgin mary. 

"where ha he come from?" said one of the men in a low tone to hi 
companion, who wa stand by him at that moment. 

"how can I tell?" repli hi companion. "he may have drop from the 
clouds; he seem to be examin the road; perhap he is go back." 

the stranger sat all thi time with the most extrem and provok 
cool and unconcern; he deign us but a pass notice, but it wa 
veri slight. 

He wa a tall, spare man--what is term long and lathy--but he wa 
evid a power man. He had a broad chest, and long, sinewi arms, a 
hook nose, and a black, eagl eye. hi hair wa curly, but frost by 
age; it seem as though it had been ting with white at the 
extremities, but he wa hale and activ otherwise, to judg from 
appearances. 

notwithstand all this, there wa a singular repuls about him 
that I could not imagin the cause, or describe; at the same time there 
wa an air of determin in hi wild and singular-look eyes, and 
over their whole there wa decidedli an air and an appear so 
sinist as to be posit disagreeable. 

"well," said I, after we had stood some minutes, "where did you come 
from, shipmate?" 

He look at me and then up at the sky, in a know manner. 

"come, come, that won't do; you have none of peter wilkins' wings, and 
couldn't come on the aerial dodge; it won't do; how did you get here?" 

He gave me an aw wink, and made a sort of involuntari movement, which 
jump him up a few inches, and he bump down again on the water-cask. 

"that' as much as to say," thought I, "that he' sat himself on it." 

"i'll go and inform the captain," said I, "of thi affair; he'll hardli 
believ me when I tell him, I am sure." 

So saying, I left the deck and went to the cabin, where the captain wa 
at breakfast, and relat to him what I had seen respect the 
stranger. the captain look at me with an air of disbelief, and said,-- 

"what?--do you mean to say there' a man on board we haven't seen 
before?" 

"yes, I do, captain. I never saw him afore, and he' sit beat hi 
heel on the water-cask on deck." 

"the devil!" 

"he is, I assur you, sir; and he won't answer ani questions." 

"i'll see to that. i'll see if I can't make the lubber say something, 
provid hi tongue' not cut out. but how came he on board? confound 
it, he can't be the devil, and drop from the moon." 

"don't know, captain," said I. "he is evil-look enough, to my mind, 
to be the father of evil, but it' ill bespeak attent from that 
quarter at ani time." 

"go on, lad; i'll come up after you." 

I left the cabin, and I heard the captain come after me. when I got on 
deck, I saw he had not move from the place where I left him. there wa 
a gener commot among the crew when they heard of the occurrence, 
and all crowd round him, save the man at the wheel, who had to remain 
at hi post. 

the captain now came forward, and the men fell a littl back as he 
approached. for a moment the captain stood silent, attent examin 
the stranger, who wa excess cool, and stood the scrutini with the 
same unconcern that he would had the captain been look at hi watch. 

"well, my man," said the captain, "how did you come here?" 

"i'm part of the cargo," he said, with an indescrib leer. 

"part of the cargo be d----d!" said the captain, in sudden rage, for he 
thought the stranger wa come hi joke too strong. "I know you are 
not in the bill of lading." 

"i'm contraband," repli the stranger; "and my uncle' the great chain 
of tartary." 

the captain stared, as well he might, and did not speak for some 
minutes; all the while the stranger kept kick hi heel against the 
water-cask and squint up at the skies; it made us feel veri queer. 

"well, I must confess you are not in the regular way of trading." 

"oh, no," said the stranger; "I am contraband--entir contraband." 

"and how did you come on board?" 

At thi question the stranger again look curious up at the skies, 
and continu to do so for more than a minute; he then turn hi gaze 
upon the captain. 

"no, no," said the captain; "eloqu dumb show won't do with me; you 
didn't come, like mother shipton, upon a birch broom. how did you come 
on board my vessel?" 

"I walk on board," said the stranger. 

"you walk on board; and where did you conceal yourself?" 

"below." 

"veri good; and whi didn't you stay below altogether?" 

"becaus I want fresh air. i'm in a delic state of health, you see; 
it doesn't do to stay in a confin place too long." 

"confound the binnacle!" said the captain; it wa hi usual oath when 
anyth bother him, and he could not make it out. "confound the 
binnacle!--what a delicate-look anim you are. I wish you had stay 
where you were; your delicaci would have been all the same to me. 
delicate, indeed!" 

"yes, very," said the stranger, coolly. 

there wa someth so comic in the assert of hi delic of 
health, that we should all have laughed; but we were somewhat scared, 
and had not the inclination. 

"how have you live sinc you came on board?" inquir the captain. 

"veri indifferently." 

"but how? what have you eaten? and what have you drank?" 

"nothing, I assur you. all I did while wa below was--" 

"what?" 

"why, I suck my thumb like a polar bear in it winter quarters." 

and as he spoke the stranger put hi two thumb into hi mouth, and 
extraordinari thumb they were, too, for each would have fill an 
ordinari man' mouth. 

"these," said the stranger, pull them out, and gaze at them 
wistfully, and with a deep sigh he continued,-- 

"these were thumb at one time; but they are noth now to what they 
were." 

"confound the binnacle!" mutter the captain to himself, and then he 
added, aloud,-- 

"it' cheap living, however; but where are you go to, and whi did you 
come aboard?" 

"I want a cheap cruise, and I am go there and back." 

"why, that' where we are going," said the captain. 

"then we are brothers," exclaim the stranger, hop off the 
water-cask like a kangaroo, and bound toward the captain, hold 
out hi hand as though he would have shaken hand with him. 

"no, no," said the captain; "I can't do it." 

"can't do it!" exclaim the stranger, angrily. "what do you mean?" 

"that I can't have anyth to do with contraband articles; I am a fair 
trader, and do all abov board. I haven't a chaplain on board, or he 
should offer up prayer for your preservation, and the recoveri of your 
health, which seem so delicate." 

"that be--" 

the stranger didn't finish the sentence; he mere screw hi mouth up 
into an incomprehens shape, and puf out a lot of breath, with 
some force, and which sound veri much like a whistle: but, oh, what 
thick breath he had, it wa as much like smoke as anyth I ever saw, 
and so my shipmat said. 

"I say, captain," said the stranger, as he saw him pace the deck. 

"well." 

"just send me up some beef and biscuit, and some coffe royal--b sure 
it' royal, do you hear, becaus i'm partial to brandy, it' the onli 
good thing there is on earth." 

I shall not easili forget the captain' look as he turn toward the 
stranger, and gave hi huge shoulder a shrug, as much as to say,-- 

"well, I can't help it now; he' here, and I can't throw him overboard." 

the coffee, beef, and biscuit were sent him, and the stranger seem to 
eat them with great _gout_, and drank the coffe with much relish, and 
return the things, saying, 

"your captain is an excel cook; give him my compliments." 

I thought the captain would think that wa but a left-hand compliment, 
and look more angri than pleased, but no notic wa taken of it. 

It wa strange, but thi man had impress upon all in the vessel some 
singular notion of hi be more than he should be--mor than a mere 
mortal, and not one endeavour to interfer with him; the captain wa a 
stout and dare-devil a fellow as you would well met with, yet he seem 
tacitli to acknowledg more than he would say, for he never after took 
ani further notic of the stranger nor he of him. 

they had bare ani conversation, simpli a civil word when they first 
met, and so forth; but there wa littl or no convers of ani kind 
between them. 

the stranger slept upon deck, and live upon deck entirely; he never 
onc went below after we saw him, and hi own account of be below so 
long. 

thi wa veri well, but the night-watch did not enjoy hi society, and 
would have willingli dispens with it at that hour so particularli 
lone and deject upon the broad ocean, and perhap a thousand mile 
away from the nearest point of land. 

At thi dread and lone hour, when no sound reach the ear and 
disturb the wrapt still of the night, save the whistl of the 
wind through the cordage, or an occasion dash of water against the 
vessel' side, the thought of the sailor are fix on far distant 
objects--hi own nativ land and the friend and love one he ha left 
behind him. 

He then think of the wilder before, behind, and around him; of the 
immens bodi of water, almost in place bottomless; gaze upon such a 
scene, and with thought as strang and indefinit as the veri 
boundless expans befor him, it is no wonder if he should becom 
superstitious; the time and place would, inde unbidden, conjur up 
thought and feel of a fear charact and intensity. 

the stranger at such time would occupi hi favourit seat on the water 
cask, and look up at the sky and then on the ocean, and between 
while he would whistl a strange, wild, unknown melody. 

the flesh of the sailor use to creep up in knot and bump when they 
heard it; the wind use to whistl as an accompani and pronounc 
fear sound to their ears. 

the wind had been highli favour from the first, and sinc the 
stranger had been discov it had blown fresh, and we went along at a 
rapid rate, stem the water, and dash the spray off from the bows, 
and cut the water like a shark. 

thi wa veri singular to us, we couldn't understand it, neither could 
the captain, and we look veri suspici at the stranger, and wish 
him at the bottom, for the fresh of the wind now becam a gale, and 
yet the ship came through the water steadily, and away we went befor 
the wind, as if the devil drove us; and mind I don't mean to say he 
didn't. 

the gale increas to a hurricane, and though we had not a stitch of 
canvass out, yet we drove befor the gale as if we had been shot out of 
the mouth of a gun. 

the stranger still sat on the water casks, and all night long he kept up 
hi infern whistle. now, sailor don't like to hear ani one whistl 
when there' such a gale blow over their heads--it' like ask for 
more; but he would persist, and the louder and stronger the wind blew, 
the louder he whistled. 

At length there came a storm of rain, lightning, and wind. We were 
toss mountain high, and the foam rose over the vessel, and often 
entir over our heads, and the men were lash to their post to 
prevent be wash away. 

but the stranger still lay on the water casks, kick hi heel and 
whistl hi infern tune, alway the same. He wasn't wash away nor 
move by the action of the water; indeed, we heartili hope and expect 
to see both him and the water cask float overboard at everi minute; 
but, as the captain said,-- 

"confound the binnacle! the old water tub seem as if it were screw on 
to the deck, and won't move off and he on the top of it." 

there wa a strong inclin to throw him overboard, and the men 
convers in low whispers, and came round the captain, saying,-- 

"we have come, captain, to ask you what you think of thi strang man 
who ha come so mysteri on board?" 

"I can't tell what to think, lads; he' past think about--he' 
someth abov my comprehens altogether, I promis you." 

"well, then, we are think much of the same thing, captain." 

"what do you mean?" 

"that he ain't exactli one of our sort." 

"no, he' no sailor, certainly; and yet, for a land lubber, he' about 
as rum a custom as ever I met with." 

"so he is, sir." 

"he stand salt water well; and I must say that I couldn't lay a top of 
those water cask in that style veri well." 

"nor nobodi amongst us, sir." 

"well, then, he' in nobody' way, it he?--nobodi want to take hi 
berth, I suppose?" 

the men look at each other somewhat blank; they didn't understand the 
mean at all--far from it; and the idea of ani one' want to take 
the stranger' place on the water cask wa so outrag ludicrous, 
that at ani other time they would have consid it a devilish good 
joke and have never ceas laugh at it. 

He paus some minutes, and then one of them said,-- 

"it isn't that we envi him hi berth, captain, 'caus nobodi els could 
live there for a moment. ani one amongst us that had been there would 
have been wash overboard a thousand time over." 

"so they would," said the captain. 

"well, sir, he' more than us." 

"veri likely; but how can I help that?" 

"we think he' the main caus of all thi racket in the heavens--th 
storm and hurricane; and that, in short, if he remain much longer we 
shall all sink." 

"I am sorri for it. I don't think we are in ani danger, and had the 
strang be ani power to prevent it, he would assuredli do so, lest he 
got drowned." 

"but we think if he were thrown overboard all would be well." 

"indeed!" 

"yes, captain, you may depend upon it he' the caus of all the 
mischief. throw him overboard and that' all we want." 

"I shall not throw him overboard, even if I could do such a thing; and I 
am by no mean sure of anyth of the kind." 

"we do not ask it, sir." 

"what do you desire?" 

"leav to throw him overboard--it is to save our own lives." 

"I can't let you do ani such thing; he' in nobody' way." 

"but he' alway a whistling. onli hark now, and in such a hurrican as 
this, it is dread to think of it. what els can we do, sir?--he' not 
human." 

At thi moment, the stranger' whistl came clear upon their ears; 
there wa the same wild, unearthli note as before, but the cadenc 
were stronger, and there wa a supernatur clear in all the tones. 

"there now," said another, "he' kick the water cask with hi heels." 

"confound the binnacle!" said the captain; "it sound like short peal 
of thunder. Go and talk to him, lads." 

"and if that won't do, sir, may we--" 

"don't ask me ani questions. I don't think a score of the best men that 
were ever born could move him." 

"I don't mind trying," said one. 

upon thi the whole of the men move to the spot where the water cask 
were stand and the stranger lay. 

there wa he, whistl like fury, and, at the same time, beat hi 
heel to the tune against the empti casks. We came up to him, and he 
took no notic of us at all, but kept on in the same way. 

"hilloa!" shout one. 

"hilloa!" shout another. 

No notice, however, wa taken of us, and one of our number, a big, 
herculean fellow, an irishman, seiz him by the leg, either to make him 
get up, or, as we thought, to give him a lift over our head into the 
sea. 

however, he had scarc got hi finger round the calf of the leg, when 
the stranger pinch hi leg so tight against the water cask, that he 
could not move, and wa as effectu pin as if he had been nail 
there. the stranger, after he had finish a bar of the music, rose 
gradual to a sit posture, and without the aid of hi hands, and 
look the unlucki fellow in the face, he said,-- 

"well, what do you want?" 

"mi hand," said the fellow. 

"take it then," he said. 

He did take it, and we saw that there wa blood on it. 

the stranger stretch out hi left hand, and take him by the breech, 
he lift him, without ani effort, upon the water-cask besid him. 

We all stare at this, and couldn't help it; and we were quit convinc 
we could not throw him overboard, but he would probabl have no 
difficulti in throw us overboard. 

"well, what do you want?" he again exclaim to us all. 

We look at one another, and had scarc courag to speak; at length I 
said,-- 

"we wish you to leav off whistling." 

"leav off whistling!" he said. "and whi should I do anyth of the 
kind?" 

"becaus it bring the wind." 

"ha! ha! why, that' the veri reason I am whistling, to bring the wind." 

"but we don't want so much." 

"pho! pho! you don't know what' good for you--it' a beauti breeze, 
and not a bit too stiff." 

"it' a hurricane." 

"nonsense." 

"but it is." 

"now you see how i'll prove you are wrong in a minute. you see my hair, 
don't you?" he said, after he took off hi cap. "veri well, look now." 

He got up on the water-cask, and stood bolt upright; and run hi 
finger through hi hair, made it all stand straight on end. 

"confound the binnacle!" said the captain, "if ever I saw the like." 

"there," said the stranger, triumphantly, "don't tell me there' ani 
wind to signify; don't you see, it doesn't even move one of my grey 
hairs; and if it blew as hard as you say, I am certain it would move a 
hair." 

"confound the binnacle!" mutter the captain as he walk away. "d--n 
the cabouse, if he ain't older than I am--he' too mani for me and 
everybodi else." 

"are you satisfied?" 

what could we say?--w turn away and left the place, and stood at our 
quarters--ther wa no help for it--w were impel to grin and abid 
by it. 

[illustration] 

As soon as we had left the place he put hi cap on again and sat down on 
the water-casks, and then took leav of hi prisoner, whom he set free, 
and there lay at full length on hi back, with hi leg hang down. 
onc more he began to whistl most furiously, and beat time with hi 
feet. 

for full three week did he continu at thi game night and day, without 
ani interruption, save such as he requir to consum enough coffe 
royal, junk, and biscuit, as would have serv three hearti men. 

well, about that time, one night the whistl ceas and he began to 
sing--oh! it wa singing--such a voice! gog and magog in guildhall, 
london, when they spoke were noth to him--it wa awful; but the wind 
calm down to a fresh and stiff breeze. He continu at thi game for 
three whole day and nights, and on the fourth it ceased, and when we 
went to take hi coffe royal to him he wa gone. 

We hunt about everywhere, but he wa entir gone, and in three week 
after we safe cast anchor, have perform our voyag in a good month 
under the usual time; and had it been an old vessel she would have 
leak and stint like a tub from the straining; however, we were glad 
enough to get in, and were curious inquisit as to what wa put in 
our vessel to come back with, for as the captain said,-- 

"confound the binnacle! i'll have no more contraband articl if I can 
help it." 




chapter xxvi. 

the meet BY moonlight IN the park.--th turret window IN the 
hall.--th letters. 


[illustration] 

the old admir show such a strong disposit to take offenc at 
charl if he should presume, for a moment, to doubt the truth of the 
narr that wa thu commun to him, that the latter would not 
anger him by so doing, but confin hi observ upon it to say 
that he consid it wa veri wonderful, and veri extraordinary, and so 
on, which veri well satisfi the old man. 

the day wa now, however, get far advanced, and charl holland 
began to think of hi engag with the vampyre. He read and read the 
letter over and over again, but he could not come to a correct 
conclus as to whether it intend to impli that he, sir franci 
varney, would wish to fight him at the hour and place mentioned, or 
mere give him a meet as a preliminari step. 

He wa rather, on the whole, inclin to think that some explan 
would be offer by varney, but at all event he persev in hi 
determin of go well armed, lest anyth in the shape of 
treacheri should be intended. 

As noth of ani import occur now in the interv of time till 
nearli midnight, we will at onc step to that time, and our reader will 
suppos it to be a quarter to twelv o'clock at night, and young charl 
holland on the point of leav the house, to keep hi appoint by 
the pollard oak, with the mysteri sir franci varney. 

He place hi load pistol conveni in hi pocket, so that at a 
moment' notic he could lay hand on them, and then wrap himself up 
in a travel cloak he had brought with him to bannerworth hall, he 
prepar to leav hi chamber. 

the moon still shone, although now somewhat on the wane, and although 
there were certainli mani cloud in the sky they were but of a light 
fleeci character, and veri littl interrupt the ray of light that 
came from the nearli full disc of the moon. 

from hi window he could not perceiv the spot in the park where he wa 
to meet varney, becaus the room in which he wa occupi not a 
suffici high place in the hous to enabl him to look over a belt 
of tree that stop the view. from almost ani of the upper window the 
pollard oak could be seen. 

It so happen now that the admir had been place in a room 
immedi abov the one occupi by hi nephew, and, as hi mind wa 
full of how he should manag with regard to arrang the preliminari 
of the duel between charl and varney on the morrow, he found it 
difficult to sleep; and after remain in bed about twenti minutes, and 
find that each moment he wa onli get more and more restless, he 
adopt a cours which he alway did under such circumstances. 

He rose and dress himself again, intend to sit up for an hour and 
then turn into bed and tri a second time to get to sleep. but he had no 
mean of get a light, so he drew the heavi curtain from befor the 
window, and let in as much of the moonlight as he could. 

thi window command a most beauti and extens view, for from it 
the eye could carri complet over the top of the tallest trees, so 
that there wa no interrupt whatev to the prospect, which wa as 
extens as it wa delightful. 

even the admiral, who never would confess to see much beauti in 
sceneri where water form not a larg portion of it, could not resist 
open hi window and look out, with a consider degre of 
admiration, upon wood and dale, as they were illumin by the moon' 
rays, softened, and rendered, if anything, more beauti by the light 
vapours, through which they had to struggl to make their way. 

charl holland, in order to avoid the likelihood of meet with ani 
one who would question him as to where he wa going, determin upon 
leav hi room by the balcony, which, as we are aware, present ampl 
facil for hi so doing. 

He cast a glanc at the portrait in the panel befor he left the 
apartment, and then saying,-- 

"for you, dear flora, for you I essay thi meet with the fear 
origin of that portrait," he immedi open hi window, and 
step out on to the balcony. 

young and activ as wa charl holland, to descend from that balconi 
present to him no difficulti whatever, and he was, in a veri few 
moments, safe in the garden of bannerworth hall. 

He never thought, for a moment, to look up, or he would, in an instant, 
have seen the white head of hi old uncle, as it wa project over the 
sill of the window of hi chamber. 

the drop of charl from the balconi of hi window, just made suffici 
nois to attract the admiral' attention, and, then, befor he could 
think of make ani alarm, he saw charl walk hastili across a grass 
plot, which wa suffici in the light of the moon to enabl the 
admir at onc to recognis him, and leav no sort of doubt as to hi 
posit identity. 

Of course, upon discov that it wa charles, the necess for 
make an alarm no longer existed, and, indeed, not know what it wa 
that had induc him to leav hi chamber, a moment' reflect 
suggest to him the proprieti of not even call to charles, lest he 
should defeat some discoveri which he might be about to make. 

"he ha heard something, or seen something," thought the admiral, "and 
is gone to find out what it is. I onli wish I wa with him; but up here 
I can do noth at all, that' quit clear." 

charles, he saw, walk veri rapidly, and like a man who ha some fix 
destin which he wish to reach as quickli as possible. 

when he dive among the tree which skirt one side of the flower 
gardens, the admir wa more puzzl than ever, and he said-- 

"now where on earth is he off to? He is fulli dressed, and ha hi cloak 
about him." 

after a few moments' reflect he decid that, have seen someth 
suspicious, charl must have got up, and dress himself, to fathom it. 

the moment thi idea becam fairli impress upon hi mind, he left hi 
bedroom, and descend to where one of the brother he knew wa sit 
up, keep watch dure the night. It wa henri who wa so on guard; 
and when the admir came into the room, he utter an express of 
surpris to find him up, for it wa now some time past twelv o'clock. 

"I have come to tell you that charl ha left the house," said the 
admiral. 

"left the house?" 

"yes; I saw him just now go across the garden." 

"and you are sure it wa he?" 

"quit sure. I saw him by the moonlight cross the green plot." 

"then you may depend he ha seen or heard something, and gone alon to 
find out what it is rather than give ani alarm." 

"that is just what I think." 

"it must be so. I will follow him, if you can show me exactli which way 
he went." 

"that I can easily. and in case I should have made ani mistake, which it 
is not at all likely, we can go to hi room first and see if it is 
empty." 

"A good thought, certainly; that will at onc put an end to all doubt 
upon the question." 

they both immedi proceed to charles' room, and then the 
admiral' accuraci of identif of hi nephew wa immedi 
prove by find that charl wa not there, and that the window wa 
wide open. 

"you see I am right," said the admiral. 

"you are," cri henry; "but what have we here?" 

"where?" 

"here on the dressing-table. here are no less than three letters, all 
laid as it on purpos to catch the eye of the first one who might enter 
the room." 

"indeed!" 

"you perceiv them?" 

henri held them to the light, and after a moment' inspect of them, 
he said, in a voic of much surprise,-- 

"good god! what is the mean of this?" 

"the mean of what?" 

"the letter are address to parti in the hous here. Do you not 
see?" 

"to whom?" 

"one to admir bell--" 

"the deuce!" 

"anoth to me, and the third to my sister flora. there is some new 
mysteri here." 

the admir look at the superscript of one of the letter which wa 
hand to him in silent amazement. then he cried,-- 

"set down the light, and let us read them." 

henri did so, and then they simultan open the epistl which 
were sever address to them. there wa a silence, as of the veri 
grave, for some moments, and then the old admir stagger to a seat, 
as he exclaimed,-- 

"am I dreaming--am I dreaming?" 

"i thi possible?" said henry, in a voic of deep emotion, as he 
allow the note address to him to drop on to the floor. 

"d--n it, what doe your say?" cri the old admiral, in a louder tone. 

"read it--what say yours?" 

"read it--i'm amazed." 

the letter were exchanged, and read by each with the same breathless 
attent they had bestow upon their own; after which, they both 
look at each other in silence, pictur of amazement, and the most 
absolut state of bewilderment. 

not to keep our reader in suspense, we at onc transcrib each of these 
letters. 

the one to the admir contain these words,-- 

"mi dear uncle, 

"of cours you will perceiv the prudenc of keep thi letter 
to yourself, but the fact is, I have now made up my mind to leav 
bannerworth hall. 

"flora bannerworth is not now the person she wa when first I 
knew her and love her. such be the case, and she have 
altered, not I, she cannot accus me of fickleness. 

"I still love the flora bannerworth I first knew, but I cannot 
make my wife one who is subject to the visit of a vampyre. 

"I have remain here long enough now to satisfi myself that thi 
vampyr busi is no delusion. I am quit convinc that it is 
a posit fact, and that, after death, flora will herself becom 
one of the horribl exist known by that name. 

"I will commun to you from the first larg citi on the 
contin whither I am going, at which I make ani stay, and in 
the meantime, make what excus you like at bannerworth hall, 
which I advis you to leav as quickli as you can, and believ me 
to be, my dear uncle, your truly, 

"charl holland." 

henry' letter wa this:-- 

"mi dear sir, 

"if you calmli and dispassion consid the pain and 
distress circumst in which your famili are placed, I am 
sure that, far from blame me for the step which thi note will 
announc to you I have taken, you will be the first to give me 
credit for act with an amount of prudenc and foresight which 
wa highli necessari under the circumstances. 

"if the suppos visit of a vampyr to your sister flora had 
turn out, as first I hope they would, a delus and been 
in ani satisfactori manner explain away I should certainli have 
felt pride and pleasur in fulfil my engag to that young 
lady. 

"you must, however, yourself feel that the amount of evid in 
favour of a belief that an actual vampyr ha visit flora, 
enforc a convict of it truth. 

"I cannot, therefore, make her my wife under such veri singular 
circumstances. 

"perhap you may blame me for not take at onc advantag of the 
permiss given me to forego my engag when first I came to 
your house; but the fact is, I did not then in the least believ 
in the exist of the vampyre, but sinc a posit convict 
of that most pain fact ha now forc itself upon me, I beg to 
declin the honour of an allianc which I had at one time look 
forward to with the most consider satisfaction. 

"I shall be on the contin as fast as convey can take me, 
therefore, should you entertain ani romant notion of call 
me to an account for a cours of proceed I think perfectli and 
fulli justifiable, you will not find me. 

"accept the assur of my respect for yourself and piti for 
your sister, and believ me to be, my dear sir, your sincer 
friend, 

"charl holland." 

these two letter might well make the admir stare at henri 
bannerworth, and henri stare at him. 

An occurr so utterli and entir unexpect by both of them, wa 
enough to make them doubt the evid of their own senses. but there 
were the letters, as a damn evid of the outrag fact, and 
charl holland wa gone. 

It wa the admir who first recov from the stun effect of the 
epistles, and he, with a gestur of perfect fury, exclaimed,-- 

"the scoundrel--th cold-blood villain! I renounc him for ever! he is 
no nephew of mine; he is some d----d imposter! nobodi with a dash of my 
famili blood in hi vein would have act so to save himself from a 
thousand deaths." 

"who shall we trust now," said henry, "when those whom we take to our 
inmost heart deceiv us thus? thi is the greatest shock I have yet 
received. If there be a pang greater than another, sure it is to be 
found in the faithless and heartless of one we love and 
trusted." 

"he is a scoundrel!" roar the admiral. "d--n him, he'll die on a 
dunghill, and that' too good a place for him. I cast him off--i'l find 
him out, and old as I am, i'll fight him--i'l wring hi neck, the 
rascal; and, as for poor dear miss flora, god bless her! i'll--i'l 
marri her myself, and make her an admiral.--i'l marri her myself. oh, 
that I should be uncl to such a rascal!" 

"calm yourself," said henry, "no one can blame you." 

"yes, you can; I had no right to be hi uncle, and I wa an old fool to 
love him." 

the old man sat down, and hi voic becam broken with emot as he 
said,-- 

"sir, I tell you I would have die willingli rather than thi should 
have happened. thi will kill me now,--i shall die now of shame and 
grief." 

tear gush from the admiral' eye and the sight of the nobl old 
man' emot did much to calm the anger of henri which, although he 
said but little, wa boil at hi heart like a volcano. 

"admir bell," he said, "you have noth to do with thi business; we 
can not blame you for the heartless of another. I have but one 
favour to ask of you." 

"what--what can I do?" 

"say no more about him at all." 

"I can't help say someth about him. you ought to turn me out of 
the house." 

"heaven forbid! what for?" 

"becaus i'm hi uncle--hi d----d old fool of an uncle, that alway 
thought so much of him." 

"nay, my good sir, that wa a fault on the right side, and cannot 
discredit you. I thought him the most perfect of human beings." 

"oh, if I could but have guess this." 

"it wa impossible. such duplic never wa equal in thi world--it 
wa imposs to forese it." 

"hold--hold! did he give you fifti pounds?" 

"what?" 

"did he give you fifti pounds?" 

"give me fifti pounds! most decidedli not; what made you think of such a 
thing?" 

"becaus to-day he borrow fifti pound of me, he said, to lend to 
you." 

"I never heard of the transact until thi moment." 

"the villain!" 

"no, doubt, sir, he want that amount to expedit hi progress abroad." 

"well, now, damme, if an angel had come to me and said 'hilloa! admir 
bell, your nephew, charl holland, is a thunder rogue,' I should 
have said 'you'r a liar!'" 

"thi is fight against facts, my dear sir. He is gone--ment him no 
more; forget him, as I shall endeavour myself to do, and persuad my 
poor sister to do." 

"poor girl! what can we say to her?" 

"nothing, but give her all the letters, and let her be at onc satisfi 
of the worthless of him she loved." 

"the best way. her woman' pride will then come to her help." 

"I hope it will. she is of an honour race, and I am sure she will 
not condescend to shed a tear for such a man as charl holland ha 
prove himself to be." 

"d--n him, i'll find him out, and make him fight you. He shall give you 
satisfaction." 

"no, no." 

"no? but he shall." 

"I cannot fight with him." 

"you cannot?" 

"certainli not. He is too far beneath me now. I cannot fight on 
honour term with one whom I despis as too dishonour to contend 
with. I have noth now but silenc and contempt." 

"I have though, for i'll break hi neck when I see him, or he shall 
break mine. the villain! i'm asham to stay here, my young friend." 

"how mistaken a view you take of thi matter, my dear sir. As admir 
bell, a gentleman, a brave officer, and a man of the purest and most 
unblemish honour, you confer a distinct upon us by your presenc 
here." 

the admir wrung henri by the hand, as he said,-- 

"to-morrow--wait till to-morrow; we will talk over thi matter to 
morrow--i cannot to-night, I have not patience; but to-morrow, my dear 
boy, we will have it all out. god bless you. good night." 




chapter xxvii. 

the nobl confid OF flora bannerworth IN her lover.--h opinion OF 
the three letters.--th admiral' admiration. 


[illustration] 

To describ the feel of henri bannerworth on the occas of thi 
appar defalc from the path of rectitud and honour by hi 
friend, as he had fondli imagin charl holland to be, would be next 
to impossible. 

if, as we have taken occas to say, it be a posit fact, that a 
nobl and a gener mind feel more acut ani heartless of thi 
descript from one on whom it ha place implicit confidence, than the 
most deliber and wick of injuri from absolut strangers, we can 
easili conceiv that henri bannerworth wa precis the person to feel 
most acut the conduct which all circumst appear to fix upon 
charl holland, upon whose faith, truth, and honour, he would have 
stake hi veri exist but a few short hour before. 

with such a bewild sensat that he scarc knew where he walk 
or whither to betak himself, did he repair to hi own chamber, and 
there he strove, with what energi he wa abl to bring to the task, to 
find out some excuses, if he could, for charles' conduct. but he could 
find none. view it in what light he would, it present but a pictur of 
the most heartless selfish it had ever been hi lot to encounter. 

the tone of the letters, too, which charl had written, materi 
aggrav the moral delinqu of which he had been guilty; belief, 
far better, had he not attempt an excus at all than have attempt 
such excus as were there put down in those epistles. 

A more cold blooded, dishonour proceed could not possibl be 
conceived. 

It would appear, that while he entertain a doubt with regard to the 
realiti of the visit of the vampyr to flora bannerworth, he had 
been will to take to himself abund of credit for the most 
honour feelings, and to induc a belief in the mind of all that an 
exalt feel of honour, as well as a true affect that would know 
no change, kept him at the feet of her whom he loved. 

like some braggart, who, when there is no danger, is a veri hero, but 
who, the moment he feel convinc he will be actual and truli call 
upon for an exhibit of hi much-vaunt prowess, had charl holland 
desert the beauti girl who, if anything, had now certainly, in her 
misfortunes, a far higher claim upon hi kindli feel than before. 

henri could not sleep, although, at the request of george, who offer 
to keep watch for him the remaind of the night he attempt to do so. 

He in vain said to himself, "I will banish from my mind thi most 
unworthi subject. I have told admir bell that contempt is the onli 
feel I can now have for hi nephew, and yet I now find myself 
dwell upon him, and upon hi conduct, with a persever which is a 
foe to my repose." 

At length came the welcom and beauti light of day, and henri rose 
fever and unrefreshed. 

hi first impuls now wa to hold a consult with hi brother 
george, as to what wa to be done, and georg advis that mr. 
marchdale, who as yet knew noth of the matter, should be immedi 
inform of it, and consulted, as be probabl better qualifi than 
either of them to come to a just, a cool, and a reason opinion upon 
the pain circumstance, which it could not be expect that either of 
them would be abl to view calmly. 

"let it be so, then," said henry; "mr. marchdal shall decid for us." 

they at onc sought thi friend of the family, who wa in hi own 
bed-room, and when henri knock at the door, marchdal open it 
hurriedly, eagerli inquir what wa the matter. 

"there is no alarm," said henry. "we have onli come to tell you of a 
circumst which ha occur dure the night, and which will 
somewhat surpris you." 

"noth calamitous, I hope?" 

"vexatious; and yet, I think it is a matter upon which we ought almost 
to congratul ourselves. read those two letters, and give us your 
candid opinion upon them." 

henri place in mr. marchdale' hand the letter address to himself, 
as well as that to the admiral. 

marchdal read them both with mark attention, but he did not exhibit 
in hi counten so much surpris as regret. 

when he had finished, henri said to him,-- 

"well, marchdale, what think you of thi new and extraordinari episod 
in our affairs?" 

"mi dear young friends," said marchdale, in a voic of great emotion, "I 
know not what to say to you. I have no doubt but that you are both of 
you much astonish at the receipt of these letters, and equal so at 
the sudden absenc of charl holland." 

"and are not you?" 

"not so much as you, doubtless, are. the fact is, I never did entertain 
a favour opinion of the young man, and he knew it. I have been 
accustom to the studi of human natur under a varieti of aspects; I 
have made it a matter of deep, and I may add, sorrowful, contemplation, 
to studi and remark those minor shade of charact which commonli 
escap observ wholly. and, I repeat, I alway had a bad opinion of 
charl holland, which he guessed, and henc he conceiv a hatr to 
me, which more than once, as you cannot but remember, show itself in 
littl act of opposit and hostility." 

"you much surpris me." 

"I expect to do so. but you cannot help rememb that at one time I 
wa on the point of leav here sole on hi account." 

"you were so." 

"inde I should have done so, but that I reason with myself upon the 
subject, and subdu the impuls of the anger which some year ago, when 
I had not seen so much of the world, would have guid me." 

"but whi did you not impart to us your suspicions? We should at least, 
then, have been prepar for such a conting as ha occurred." 

"place yourself in my position, and then yourself what you would have 
done. suspicion is one of those hideou thing which all men should be 
most special care not onli how they entertain at all, but how they 
give express to. besides, whatev may be the amount of one' own 
intern convict with regard to the charact of ani one, there is 
just a possibl that one may be wrong." 

"true, true." 

"that possibl ought to keep ani one silent who ha noth but 
suspicion to go upon, howev cautiou it may make him, as regard hi 
deal with the individual. I onli suspect from littl minut shade 
of character, that would peep out in spite of him, that charl holland 
wa not the honour man he would fain have had everybodi believ him 
to be." 

"and had you from the first such a feeling?" 

"I had." 

"it is veri strange." 

"yes; and what is more strang still, is that he from the first seem 
to know it; and despit a caution which I could see he alway kept 
uppermost in hi thoughts, he could not help speak tartli to me at 
times." 

"I have notic that," said george. 

"you may depend it is a fact," ad marchdale, "that noth so much 
excit the deadli and desper hatr of a man who is act a 
hypocrit part, as the suspicion, well ground or not, that anoth 
see and understand the secret impuls of hi dishonour heart." 

"I cannot blame you, or ani one else, mr. marchdale," said henry, "that 
you did not give utter to your secret thoughts, but I do wish that 
you had done so." 

"nay, dear henry," repli mr. marchdale, "believ me, I have made thi 
matter a subject of deep thought, and have abund of reason whi I 
ought not to have spoken to you upon the subject." 

"indeed!" 

"inde I have, and not among the least import is the one, that if I 
had acquaint you with my suspicions, you would have found yourself in 
the pain posit of act a hypocrit part yourself toward thi 
charl holland, for you must either have kept the secret that he wa 
suspected, or you must have shewn it to him by your behaviour." 

"well, well. I dare say, marchdale, you act for the best. what shall 
we do now?" 

"can you doubt?" 

"I wa think of let flora at onc know the absolut and complet 
worthless of her lover, so that she could have no difficulti in at 
onc tear herself from him by the assist of the natur pride 
which would sure come to her aid, upon find herself so much 
deceived." 

"the test may be possible." 

"you think so?" 

"I do, indeed." 

"here is a letter, which of cours remain unopened, address to flora 
by charl holland. the admir rather thought it would hurt her 
feel to deliv her such an epistle, but I must confess I am of a 
contrari opinion upon that point, and think now the more evid she 
ha of the utter worthless of him who profess to love her with so 
much disinterest affection, the better it will be for her." 

"you could not, possibly, henry, have taken a more sensibl view of the 
subject." 

"I am glad you agre with me." 

"no reason man could do otherwise, and from what I have seen of 
admir bell, I am sure, upon reflection, he will be of the same 
opinion." 

"then it shall be so. the first shock to poor flora may be severe, but 
we shall then have the consol of know that it is the onli one, 
and that in know the veri worst, she ha no more on that score to 
apprehend. alas, alas! the hand of misfortun now appear to have 
press heavili upon us indeed. what in the name of all that is unlucki 
and disastrous, will happen next, I wonder?" 

"what can happen?" said marchdale; "I think you have now got rid of the 
greatest evil of all--a fals friend." 

"we have, indeed." 

"go, then, to flora; assur her that in the affect of other who know 
no falsehood, she will find a solac from everi ill. assur her that 
there are heart that will place themselv between her and everi 
misfortune." 

mr. marchdal wa much affect as he spoke. probabl he felt deeper 
than he chose to express the misfortun of that famili for whom he 
entertain so much friendship. He turn asid hi head to hide the 
trace of emot which, despit even hi great power of self-command, 
would shew themselv upon hi handsom and intellig countenance. 
then it appear as if hi nobl indign had got, for a few brief 
moments, the better of all prudence, and he exclaimed,-- 

"the villain! the wors than villain! who would, with a thousand 
artifices, make himself belov by a young, unsuspecting, and beauti 
girl, but then to leav her to the bitter of regret, that she had 
ever given such a man a place in her esteem. the heartless ruffian!" 

"be calm, mr. marchdale, I pray you be calm," said george; "I never saw 
you so much moved." 

"excus me," he said, "excus me; I am much moved, and I am human. I 
cannot always, let me strive my utmost, place a curb upon my feelings." 

"they are feel which do you honour." 

"nay, nay, I am foolish to have suffer myself to be led away into such 
a hasti express of them. I am accustom to feel acut and to feel 
deeply, but it is seldom I am so much overcom as this." 

"will you accompani us to the breakfast room at once, mr. marchdale, 
where we will make thi commun to flora; you will then be abl to 
judg by her manner of receiv it, what it will be best to say to 
her." 

"come, then, and pray be calm. the least that is said upon thi pain 
and harass subject, after thi morning, will be the best." 

"you are right--you are right." 

mr. marchdal hastili put on hi coat. He wa dressed, with the 
except of that one articl of apparel, when the brother came to hi 
chamber, and then he came to the breakfast-parlour where the pain 
commun wa to be made to flora of her lover' faithlessness. 

flora wa alreadi seat in that apartment. indeed, she had been 
accustom to meet charl holland there befor other of the famili 
made their appearance, but, alas! thi morn the kind and tender lover 
wa not there. 

the express that sat upon the counten of her brothers, and of 
mr. marchdale, wa quit suffici to convinc her that someth more 
seriou than usual had occurred, and she at the moment turn veri pale. 
marchdal observ thi chang of chang of counten in her, and he 
advanc toward her, saying,-- 

"calm yourself, flora, we have someth to commun to you, but it 
is a someth which should excit indignation, and no other feeling, in 
your breast." 

"brother, what is the mean of this?" said flora, turn asid from 
marchdale, and withdraw the hand which he would have taken. 

"I would rather have admir bell here befor I say anything," said 
henry, "regard a matter in which he cannot but feel much interest 
personally." 

"here he is," said the admiral, who at that moment had open the door 
of the breakfast room. "here he is, so now fire away, and don't spare 
the enemy." 

"and charles?" said flora, "where is charles?" 

"d--n charles!" cri the admiral, who had not been much accustom to 
control hi feelings. 

"hush! hush!" said henry; "mi dear sir, hush! do not indulg now in ani 
invectives. flora, here are three letters; you will see that the one 
which is unopen is address to yourself. however, we wish you to read 
the whole three of them, and then to form your own free and unbias 
opinion." 

flora look as pale as a marbl statue, when she took the letter into 
her hands. she let the two that were open fall on the tabl befor her, 
while she eagerli broke the seal of that which wa address to herself. 

[illustration] 

henry, with an instinct delicacy, beckon everi one present to the 
window, so that flora had not the pain of feel that ani eye were 
fix upon her but those of her mother, who had just come into the room, 
while she wa perus those document which told such a tale of 
heartless dissimulation. 

"mi dear child," said mrs. bannerworth, "you are ill." 

"hush! mother--hush!" said flora, "let me know all." 

she read the whole of the letter through, and then, as the last one 
drop from her grasp, she exclaimed,-- 

"oh, god! oh, god! what is all that ha occur compar to this? 
charles--charles--charles!" 

"flora!" exclaim henry, suddenli turn from the window. "flora, is 
thi worthi of you?" 

"heaven now support me!" 

"i thi worthi of the name you bear flora? I should have thought, and I 
did hope, that woman' pride would have support you." 

"let me implor you," ad marchdale, "to summon indign to your 
aid, miss bannerworth." 

"charles--charles--charles!" she again exclaimed, as she wrung her hand 
despairingly. 

"flora, if anyth could add a sting to my alreadi irrit feelings," 
said henry, "thi conduct of your would." 

"henry--brother, what mean you? are you mad?" 

"are you, flora?" 

"god, I wish now that I was." 

"you have read those letters, and yet you call upon the name of him who 
wrote them with frantic tenderness." 

"yes, yes," she cried; "frantic tender is the word. It is with 
frantic tender I call upon hi name, and ever will.--charles! 
charles!--dear charles!" 

"thi surpass all belief," said marchdale. 

"it is the frenzi of grief," ad george; "but I did not expect it of 
her. flora--flora, think again." 

"think--think--th rush of thought distracts. whenc came these 
letters?--wher did you find these most disgrac forgeries?" 

"forgeries!" exclaim henry; and he stagger back, as if someon had 
struck him a blow. 

"yes, forgeries!" scream flora. "what ha becom of charl holland? 
ha he been murder by some secret enemy, and then these most vile 
fabric made up in hi name? oh, charles, charles, are you lost to 
me for ever?" 

"good god!" said henry; "I did not think of that" 

"madness!--madness!" cri marchdale. 

"hold!" shout the admiral. "let me speak to her." 

He push everi one aside, and advanc to flora. He seiz both her 
hand in hi own, and in a tone of voic that wa struggl with 
feeling, he cried,-- 

"look at me, my dear; i'm an old man old enough to be your grandfather, 
so you needn't mind look me steadili in the face. look at me, I want 
to ask you a question." 

flora rais her beauti eyes, and look the old weather-beaten 
admir full in the face. 

oh! what a strike contrast did those two person present to each 
other. that young and beauti girl, with her small, delicate, 
childlik hand clasped, and complet hidden in the huge one of the 
old sailor, the white, smooth skin contrast wonder with hi 
wrinkled, harden features. 

"mi dear," he cried, "you have read those--thos d----d letters, my 
dear?" 

"I have, sir." 

"and what do you think of them?" 

"they were not written by charl holland, your nephew." 

A choke sensat seem to come over the old man, and he tri to 
speak, but in vain. He shook the hand of the young girl violently, 
until he saw that he wa hurt her, and then, befor she could be 
awar of what he wa about, he gave her a kiss on the cheek, as he 
cried,-- 

"god bless you--god bless you! you are the sweetest, dearest littl 
creatur that ever was, or that ever will be, and i'm a d----d old fool, 
that' what I am. these letter were not written by my nephew, charles. 
He is incap of write them, and, d--n me, I shall take shame to 
myself as long as I live for ever think so." 

"dear sir," said flora, who somehow or anoth did not seem at all 
offend at the kiss which the old man had given her; "dear sir, how 
could you believe, for one moment, that they came from him? there ha 
been some desper villani on foot. where is he?--oh, find him, if he 
be yet alive. If they who have thu striven to steal from him that 
honour, which is the jewel of hi heart, have murder him, seek them 
out, sir, in the sacr name of justice, I implor you." 

"I will--i will. I don't renounc him; he is my nephew still--charl 
holland--mi own dear sister' son; and you are the best girl, god bless 
you, that ever breathed. He love you--h love you still; and if he' 
abov ground, poor fellow, he shall yet tell you himself he never saw 
those infam letters." 

"you--you will seek for him?" sob flora, and the tear gush from 
her eyes. "upon you, sir, who, as I do, feel assur of hi innocence, I 
alon rely. If all the world say he is guilty, we will not think so." 

"i'm d----d if we do." 

henri had sat down by the table, and, with hi hand clasp together, 
seem in an agoni of thought. 

He wa now rous by a thump on the back by the admiral, who cried,-- 

"what do you think, now, old fellow? d--n it, thing look a littl 
differ now." 

"a god is my judge," said henry, hold up hi hands, "I know not what 
to think, but my heart and feel all go with you and with flora, in 
your opinion of the innoc of charl holland." 

"I knew you would say that, becaus you could not possibl help it, my 
dear boy. now we are all right again, and all we have got to do is to 
find out which way the enemi ha gone, and then give chase to him." 

"mr. marchdale, what do you think of thi new suggestion," said georg 
to that gentleman. 

"pray, excus me," wa hi reply; "I would much rather not be call 
upon to give an opinion." 

"why, what do you mean by that?" said the admiral. 

"precis what I say, sir." 

"d--n me, we had a fellow onc in the combin fleets, who never had an 
opinion till after someth had happened, and then he alway said that 
wa just what he thought." 

"I wa never in the combined, or ani other fleet, sir," said marchdale, 
coldly. 

"who the devil said you were?" roar the admiral. 

marchdal mere hawed. 

"however," ad the admiral, "I don't care, and never did, for 
anybody' opinion, when I know I am right. i'd back thi dear girl here 
for opinions, and good feelings, and courag to express them, against 
all the world, I would, ani day. If I wa not the old hulk I am, I would 
take a cruis in ani latitud under the sun, if it wa onli for the 
chanc of meet with just such another." 

"oh, lose no time!" said flora. "if charl is not to be found in the 
house, lose no time in search for him, I pray you; seek him, wherev 
there is the remotest probabl he may chanc to be. Do not let him 
think he is deserted." 

"not a bit of it," cri the admiral. "you make your mind easy, my dear. 
If he' abov ground, we shall find him out, you may depend upon it. 
come along master henry, you and I will consid what had best be done 
in thi uncommonli ugli matter." 

henri and georg follow the admir from the breakfast-room, leav 
marchdal there, who look seriou and full of melancholi thought. 

It wa quit clear that he consid flora had spoken from the gener 
warmth of her affect as regard charl holland, and not from the 
convict which reason would have enforc her to feel. 

when he wa now alon with her and mrs. bannerworth, he spoke in a 
feel and affection tone regard the pain and inexplic 
event which had transpired. 




chapter xxviii. 

mr. marchdale' exculp OF himself.--th search through the 
gardens.--th spot OF the deadli struggle.--th mysteri paper. 


[illustration] 

It was, perhaps, veri natur that, with her feel toward charl 
holland, flora should shrink from everi one who seem to be of a 
directli contrari impression, and when mr. marchdal now spoke, she 
show but littl inclin to hear what he had to say in explanation. 

the genuin and unaffect manner, however, in which he spoke, could not 
but have it effect upon her, and she found herself compel to listen, 
as well as, to a great extent, approv of the sentiment that fell from 
hi lips. 

"flora," he said, "I beg that you will here, in the presenc of your 
mother, give me a patient hearing. you fanci that, becaus I cannot join 
so glibli as the admir in believ that these letter are forgeries, 
I must be your enemy." 

"those letters," said flora, "were not written by charl holland." 

"that is your opinion." 

"it is more than an opinion. He could not write them." 

"well, then, of course, if I felt inclined, which heaven alon know I 
do not, I could not hope success to argu against such a 
conviction. but I do not wish to do so. all I want to impress upon you 
is, that I am not to be blame for doubt hi innocence; and, at the 
same time, I wish to assur you that no one in thi hous would feel 
more exquisit satisfact than I in see it established." 

"I thank you for so much," said flora; "but as, to my mind, hi 
innoc ha never been doubted, it need to me no establishing." 

"veri good. you believ these letter forgeries?" 

"I do." 

"and that the disappear of charl holland is enforced, and not of 
hi own free will?" 

"I do." 

"then you may reli upon my unremit exert night and day to find 
him and ani suggest you can make, which is like to aid in the 
search, shall, I pledg myself, be fulli carri out." 

"I thank you, mr. marchdale." 

"mi dear," said the mother, "reli on mr. marchdale." 

"I will reli on ani one who believ charl holland innoc of write 
those odiou letters, mother--i reli upon the admiral. He will aid me 
heart and hand." 

"and so will mr. marchdale." 

"I am glad to hear it." 

"and yet doubt it, flora," said marchdale, dejectedly. "I am veri sorri 
that such should be the case; I will not, however, troubl you ani 
further, nor, give me leav to assur you, will I relax in my honest 
endeavour to clear up thi mystery." 

So saying, mr. marchdal bowed, and left the room, appar more vex 
than he care to express at the misconstruct which had been put upon 
hi conduct and motives. He at onc sought henri and the admiral, to 
whom he express hi most earnest desir to aid in attempt to 
unravel the mysteri circumst which had occurred. 

"thi strongly-express opinion of flora," he remarked, "i of cours 
ampli suffici to induc us to paus befor we say one word more that 
shall in ani way sound like a condemn of mr. holland. heaven forbid 
that I should." 

"no," said the admiral; "don't." 

"I do not intend." 

"I would not advis anybody." 

"sir, if you use that as a threat--" 

"A threat?" 

"yes; I must say, it sound marvel like one." 

"oh, dear, no--quit a mistake. I consid that everi man ha a fair 
right to the enjoy of hi opinion. all I have to remark is, that I 
shall, after what ha occurred, feel myself call upon to fight anybodi 
who say those letter were written by my nephew." 

"indeed, sir!" 

"ah, indeed." 

"you will permit me to say such is a strang mode of allow everi one 
the free enjoy of hi opinion." 

"not at all." 

"whatev pain and penalti may be the result, admir bell, of 
differ with so infal author as yourself, I shall do so 
whenev my judgment induc me." 

"you will?" 

"inde I will." 

"veri good. you know the consequences." 

"a to fight you, I should refus to do so." 

"refuse?" 

"yes; most certainly." 

"upon what ground?" 

"upon the ground that you were a madman." 

"come," now interpos henry, "let me hope that, for my sake as well as 
for flora's, thi disput will proceed no further." 

"I have not court it," said marchdale. "I have much temper, but I am 
not a stick or a stone." 

"d----e, if I don't think," said the admiral, "you are a bit of both." 

"mr. henri bannerworth," said marchdale, "I am your guest, and but for 
the duti I feel in assist in the search for mr. charl holland, I 
should at onc leav your house." 

"you need not troubl yourself on my account," said the admiral; "if I 
find no clue to him in the neighbourhood for two or three days, I shall 
be off myself." 

"I am going," said henry, rising, "to search the garden and adjoin 
meadows; if you two gentlemen choos to come with me, I shall of cours 
be happi of your company; if, however, you prefer remain here to 
wrangle, you can do so." 

thi had the effect, at all events, of put a stop to the disput for 
the present, and both the admir and mr. marchdal accompani henri on 
hi search. that search wa commenc immedi under the balconi of 
charl holland' window, from which the admir had seen him emerge. 

there wa noth particular found there, or in the garden. admir bell 
point out accur the rout he had seen charl take across the 
grass plot just befor he himself left hi chamber to seek henry. 

accordingly, thi rout wa now taken, and it led to a low part of the 
garden wall, which ani one of ordinari vigour could easili have 
surmounted. 

"mi impress is," said the admiral, "that he got over here." 

"the ivi appear to be disturbed," remark henry. 

"suppos we mark the spot, and then go round to it on the outer side?" 
suggest george. 

thi wa agre to; for, although the young man might have chosen rather 
to clamber over the wall than go round, it wa doubt if the old 
admir could accomplish such a feat. 

the distanc round, however, wa not great, and as they had cast over 
the wall a hand of flower from the garden to mark the precis spot, 
it wa easili discoverable. 

the moment they reach it, they were panic-stricken by the appear 
which it presented. the grass wa for some yard round about complet 
trodden up, and convert into mud. there were deep indent of 
feet-mark in all directions, and such abund of evid that some 
most desper struggl had recent taken place there, that the most 
sceptic person in the world could not have entertain ani doubt upon 
the subject. 

henri wa the first to break the silenc with which they each regard 
the broken ground. 

"thi is conclus to my mind," he said, with a deep sigh. "here ha 
poor charl been attacked." 

"god keep him!" exclaim marchdale, "and pardon me my doubts--i am now 
convinced." 

the old admir gaze about him like one distracted. suddenli he cried-- 

"they have murder him. some fiend in the shape of men have murder 
him, and heaven onli know for what." 

"it seem but too probable," said henry. "let us endeavour to trace the 
footsteps. oh! flora, flora, what terribl news thi will be to you." 

"A horribl supposit come across my mind," said george. "what if he 
met the vampyre?" 

"it may have been so," said marchdale, with a shudder. "it is a point 
which we should endeavour to ascertain, and I think we may do so." 

"how!" 

"bi some inquiri as to whether sir franci varney wa from home at 
midnight last night." 

"true; that might be done." 

"the question, suddenli put to one of hi servants, would, most 
probably, be answer as a thing of course." 

"it would." 

"then that shall be decid upon. and now, my friends, sinc you have 
some of you thought me luke-warm in thi business, I pledg myself that, 
should it be ascertain that varney wa from home at midnight last 
evening, I will defi him personally, and meet him hand to hand." 

"nay, nay," said henry, "leav that cours to younger hands." 

"whi so?" 

"it more befit me to be hi challenger." 

"no, henry. you are differ situat to what I am." 

"how so?" 

"remember, that I am in the world a lone man; without tie or 
connexions. If I lose my life, I compromis no one by my death; but you 
have a mother and a bereav sister to look to who will deserv your 
care." 

"hilloa," cri the admiral, "what' this?" 

"what?" cri each, eagerly, and they press forward to where the 
admir wa stoop to the ground to pick up someth which wa nearli 
complet trodden into the grass. 

He with some difficulti rais it. It wa a small slip of paper, on 
which wa some writing, but it wa so much cover with mud as not to be 
legible. 

"if thi be washed," said henry, "I think we shall be abl to read it 
clearly." 

"we can soon tri that experiment," said george. "and as the footsteps, 
by some mysteri means, show themselv nowher els but in thi one 
particular spot, ani further pursuit of inquiri about here appear 
useless." 

"then we will return to the house," said henry, "and wash the mud from 
thi paper." 

"there is one import point," remark marchdale, "which it appear to 
me we have all overlooked." 

"indeed!" 

"yes." 

"what may that be?" 

"it is this. Is ani one here suffici acquaint with the 
handwrit of mr. charl holland to come to an opinion upon the 
letters?" 

"I have some letter from him," said henry, "which we receiv while on 
the continent, and I dare say flora ha likewise." 

"then they should be compar with the alleg forgeries." 

"I know hi handwrit well," said the admiral. "the letter bear so 
strong a resembl to it that they would deceiv anybody." 

"then you may depend," remark henry, "some most deep-laid and 
desper plot is go on." 

"I begin," ad marchdale, "to dread that such must be the case. what 
say you to claim the assist of the authorities, as well as 
offer a larg reward for ani inform regard mr. charl 
holland?" 

"no plan shall be left untried, you may depend." 

they had now reach the house, and henri have procur some clean 
water, care wash the paper which had been found among the trodden 
grass. when freed from the mixtur of clay and mud which had obscur 
it, they made out the follow words,-- 

"--it be so well. At the next full moon seek a conveni spot, and it 
can be done. the signatur is, to my apprehension, perfect. the money 
which I hold, in my opinion, is much more in amount than you imagine, 
must be ours; and as for--" 

here the paper wa torn across, and no further word were visibl upon 
it. 

mysteri seem now to be accumul upon mystery; each one, as it 
show itself darkly, seem to bear some remot relat to what 
preced it; and yet onli confus it the more. 

that thi appar scrap of a letter had drop from some one' pocket 
dure the fear struggle, of which there were such ampl evidences, 
wa extrem probable; but what it relat to, by whom it wa written, 
or by whom dropped, were unfathom mysteries. 

In fact, no one could give an opinion upon these matter at all; and 
after a further seri of conjectures, it could onli be decided, that 
unimport as the scrap of paper appear now to be, it should be 
preserved, in case it should, as there wa a dim possibl that it 
might becom a connect link in some chain of evid at anoth 
time. 

"and here we are," said henry, "complet at fault, and know not 
what to do." 

"well, it is a hard case," said the admiral, "that, with all the will in 
the world to be up and do something, we are lie here like a fleet 
of ship in a calm, as idl as possible." 

"you perceiv we have no evid to connect sir franci varney with 
thi affair, either nearli or remotely," said marchdale. 

"certainli not," repli henry. 

"but yet, I hope you will not lose sight of the suggest I proposed, 
to the effect of ascertain if he were from home last night." 

"but how is that to be carri out?" 

"boldly." 

"how boldly?" 

"bi go at once, I should advise, to hi house, and ask the first 
one of hi domest you may happen to see." 

"I will go over," cri george; "on such occas as these one cannot 
act upon ceremony." 

He seiz hi hat, and without wait for a word from ani one approv 
or condemn hi going, off he went. 

"if," said henry, "we find that varney ha noth to do with the 
matter, we are complet at fault." 

"completely," echo marchdale. 

"in that case, admiral, I think we ought to defer to your feel upon 
the subject, and do whatev you suggest should be done." 

"I shall offer a hundr pound reward to ani one who can and will bring 
ani news of charles." 

"A hundr pound is too much," said marchdale. 

"not at all; and while I am about it, sinc the amount is made a subject 
of discussion, I shall make it two hundred, and that may benefit some 
rascal who is not so well paid for keep the secret as I will pay him 
for disclos it." 

"perhap you are right," said marchdale. 

"I know I am, as I alway am." 

marchdal could not forbear a smile at the opinion old man, who 
thought no one' opinion upon ani subject at all equal to hi own; but 
he made no remark, and onli waited, as did henry, with evid anxieti 
for the return of george. 

the distanc wa not great, and georg certainli perform hi errand 
quickly, for he wa back in less time than they had thought he could 
return in. the moment he came into the room, he said, without wait 
for ani inquiri to be made of him,-- 

"we are at fault again. I am assur that sir franci varney never 
stir from home after eight o'clock last evening." 

"d--n it, then," said the admiral, "let us give the devil hi due. He 
could not have had ani hand in thi business." 

"certainli not." 

"from whom, george, did you get your information?" ask henry, in a 
despond tone. 

"from, first of all, one of hi servants, whom I met away from the 
house, and then from one whom I saw at the house." 

"there can be no mistake, then?" 

"certainli none. the servant answer me at once, and so frankli that I 
cannot doubt it." 

the door of the room wa slowli opened, and flora came in. she look 
almost the shadow of what she had been but a few week before. she wa 
beautiful, but she almost realis the poet' descript of one who had 
suffer much, and wa sink into an earli grave, the victim of a 
broken heart:-- 

"she wa more beauti than death, 
and yet as sad to look upon." 

her face wa of a marbl paleness, and as she clasp her hands, and 
glanc from face to face, to see if she could gather hope and 
consol from the express of ani one, she might have been taken 
for some exquisit statu of despair. 

"have you found him?" she said. "have you found charles?" 

"flora, flora," said henry, as he approach her. 

"nay, answer me; have you found him? you went to seek him. dead or 
alive, have you found him?" 

"we have not, flora." 

"then I must seek him myself. none will search for him as I will search; 
I must myself seek him. 'ti true affect that can alon be success 
in such a search." 

"believ me, dear flora, that all ha been done which the short of 
the time that ha elaps would permit. further measur will now 
immedi be taken. rest assured, dear sister, that all will be done 
that the utmost zeal can suggest." 

"they have kill him! they have kill him!" she said, mournfully. "oh, 
god, they have kill him! I am not now mad, but the time will come when 
I must sure be maddened. the vampyr ha kill charl holland--th 
dread vampyre!" 

"nay, now, flora, thi is frenzy." 

"becaus he love me ha he been destroyed. I know it, I know it. the 
vampyr ha doom me to destruction. I am lost, and all who love me 
will be involv in one common ruin on my account. leav me all of you 
to perish. if, for iniqu done in our family, some one must suffer 
to appeas the divin vengeance, let that one be me, and onli me." 

"hush, sister, hush!" cri henry. "I expect not thi from you. the 
express you use are not your expressions. I know you better. there 
is abund of divin mercy, but no divin vengeance. Be calm, I pray 
you." 

"calm! calm!" 

"yes. make an exert of that intellect we all know you to possess. It 
is too common a thing with human nature, when misfortun overtak it, 
to imagin that such a state of thing is special arranged. We quarrel 
with provid becaus it doe not interfer with some special miracl 
in our favour; forget that, be denizen of thi earth, and 
member of a great social system; We must be subject occasion to the 
accid which will disturb it effici working." 

"oh, brother, brother!" she exclaimed, as she drop into a seat, "you 
have never loved." 

"indeed!" 

"no; you have never felt what it wa to hold your be upon the breath 
of another. you can reason calmly, becaus you cannot know the extent of 
feel you are vainli endeavour to combat." 

"flora, you do me less than justice. all I wish to impress upon your 
mind is, that you are not in ani way pick out by provid to be 
special unhappy--that there is no pervers of natur on your 
account." 

"call you that hideou vampyr form that haunt me no pervers of 
ordinari nature?" 

"what is is natural," said marchdale. 

"cold reason to one who suffer as I suffer. I cannot argu with you; 
I can onli know that I am most unhappy--most miserable." 

"but that will pass away, sister, and the sun of your happi may 
smile again." 

"oh, if I could but hope!" 

"and wherefor should you depriv yourself of that poorest privileg of 
the most unhappy?" 

"becaus my heart tell me to despair." 

"tell it you won't, then," cri admir bell. "if you had been at sea 
as long as I have, miss bannerworth, you would never despair of anyth 
at all." 

"provid guard you," said marchdale. 

"yes, that' true enough, I dare say, I wa in a storm onc off cape 
ushant, and it wa onli through providence, and cut away the 
mainmast myself, that we succeed in get into port." 

"you have one hope," said marchdal to flora, as he look in her wan 
face. 

"one hope?" 

"yes. recollect you have one hope." 

"what is that?" 

"you think that, by remov from thi place, you may find that peac 
which is here deni you." 

"no, no, no." 

"indeed. I thought that such wa your firm conviction." 

"it was; but circumst have altered." 

"how?" 

"charl holland ha disappear here, and here must I remain to seek 
for him." 

"true he may have disappear here," remark marchdale; "and yet that 
may be no argument for suppos him still here." 

"where, then, is he?" 

"god know how rejoic I should be if I were abl to answer your 
question. I must seek him, dead or alive! I must see him yet befor I 
bid adieu to thi world, which ha now lost all it charm for me." 

"do not despair," said henry; "I will go to the town now at once, to 
make known our suspicion that he ha met with some foul play. I will 
set everi mean in oper that I possibl can to discov him. mr. 
chillingworth will aid me, too; and I hope that not mani day will 
elapse, flora, befor some intellig of a most satisfactori natur 
shall be brought to you on charl holland' account." 

"go, go, brother; go at once." 

"I go now at once." 

"shall I accompani you?" said marchdale. 

"no. remain here to keep watch over flora' safeti while I am gone; I 
can alon do all that can be done." 

"and don't forget to offer the two hundr pound reward," said the 
admiral, "to ani one who can bring us news of charles, on which we can 
rely." 

"I will not." 

"surely--sur someth must result from that," said flora, as she 
look in the admiral' face, as if to gather encourag in her 
dawn hope from it expression. 

"of cours it will, my dear," he said. "don't you be downhearted; you 
and I are of one mind in thi affair, and of one mind we will keep. We 
won't give up our opinion for anybody." 

"our opinions," she said, "of the honour and honesti of charl holland. 
that is what we will adher to." 

"of cours we will." 

"ah, sir, it joy me, even in the midst of this, my affliction, to find 
one at least who is determin to do him full justice. We cannot find 
such contradict in natur as that a mind, full of nobl impulses, 
should stoop to such a sudden act of selfish as those letter would 
attribut to charl holland. It cannot--cannot be." 

"you are right, my dear. and now, master henry, you be off, will you, if 
you please." 

"I am off now. farewell, flora, for a brief space." 

"farewell, brother; and heaven speed you on your errand." 

"amen to that," cri the admiral; "and now, my dear, if you have got 
half an hour to spare, just tuck your arm under mine, and take a walk 
with me in the garden, for I want to say someth to you." 

"most willingly," said flora. 

"I would not advis you to stray far from the house, miss bannerworth," 
said marchdale. 

"nobodi ask you for advice," said the admiral. "d----e, do you want to 
make out that I ain't capabl of take care of her?" 

"no, no; but--" 

"oh, nonsense! come along, my dear; and if all the vampyr and odd fish 
that were ever creat were to come across our path, we would settl 
them somehow or another. come along, and don't listen to anybody' 
croaking." 




chapter xxix. 

A peep through AN iron grating.--th lone prison IN hi 
dungeon.--th mystery. 


[illustration] 

without forestal the interest of our story, or record a fact in 
it wrong place, we now call our readers' attent to a circumst 
which may, at all events, afford some food for conjecture. 

some distanc from the hall, which, from time immemorial, had been the 
home and the properti of the bannerworth family, wa an ancient ruin 
known by the name of the monks' hall. 

It wa conjectur that thi ruin wa the remain of some one of those 
half monastic, half militari build which, dure the middl ages, 
were so common in almost everi command situat in everi counti of 
england. 

At a period of histori when the church arrog to itself an amount of 
polit power which the intellig of the spirit of the age now 
deni to it, and when it member were quit readi to assert at ani 
time the truth of their doctrin by the strong arm of power, such 
build as the one, the old grey ruin of which were situat near to 
bannerworth hall, were erected. 

ostens for religi purposes, but realli as a stronghold for 
defence, as well as for aggression, thi monks' hall, as it wa called, 
partook quit as much of the charact of a fortress, as of an 
ecclesiast building. 

the ruin cover a consider extent, of ground, but the onli part 
which seem success to have resist the encroach of time, at 
least to a consider extent, wa a long, hall in which the jolli 
monk no doubt feast and caroused. 

adjoin to thi hall, were the wall of other part of the building, 
and at sever place there were small, low, mysterious-look door 
that led, heaven know where, into some intricaci and labyrinth 
beneath the building, which no one had, within the memori of man, been 
content to run the risk of lose himself in. 

[illustration] 

It wa relat that among these subterranean passag and arch there 
were pitfal and pool of water; and whether such a statement wa true 
or not, it certainli act as a consider damper upon the vigour of 
curiosity. 

thi ruin wa so well known in the neighbourhood, and had becom from 
earliest childhood so familiar to the inhabit of bannerworth hall, 
that one would as soon expect an old inhabit of ludgate-hil to make 
some remark about st. paul's, as ani of them to allud to the ruin of 
monks' hall. 

they never now thought of go near to it, for in infanc they had 
spoil among it ruins, and it had becom one of those familiar object 
which, almost, from that veri familiarity, ceas to hold a place in the 
memori of those who know it so well. 

It is, however, to thi ruin we would now conduct our readers, premis 
that what we have to say concern it now, is not precis in the form 
of a connect portion of our narrative. 

* * * * * 

It is evening--th even of that first day of heart loneli to poor 
flora bannerworth. the linger ray of the set sun are gild the 
old ruin with a wondrou beauty. the edg of the decay stone seem 
now to be tip with gold, and as the rich golden refulg of light 
gleam upon the paint glass which still adorn a larg window of the 
hall, a flood of many-colour beauti light wa cast within, make 
the old flag-stones, with which the interior wa paved, look more like 
some rich tapestry, laid down to do honour to a monarch. 

So picturesqu and so beauti an aspect did the ancient ruin wear, 
that to one with a soul to appreci the romant and the beautiful, it 
would have ampli repaid the fatigu of a long journey now to see it. 

and as the sun sank to rest, the gorgeou colour that it cast upon the 
moulder wall, deepen from an appear of burnish gold to a 
crimson hue, and from that again the colour chang to a shift 
purple, mingl with the shadow of the evening, and so gradual 
fade away into absolut darkness. 

the place is as silent as the tomb--a silenc far more solemn than could 
have existed, had there been no remain of a human habitation; becaus 
even these time-worn wall were suggest of what onc had been; and 
the wrapt still which now pervad them brought with them a 
melancholi feel for the past. 

there wa not even the low hum of insect life to break the still of 
these ancient ruins. 

and now the last ray of the sun are gradual fade away. In a short 
time all will be darkness. A low gentl wind is get up, and 
begin slightli to stir the tall blade of grass that have shot up 
between some of the old stones. the silenc is broken, aw broken, 
by a sudden cri of despair; such a cri as might come from some 
imprison spirit, doom to wast an age of horror in a tomb. 

and yet it wa scarc to be call a scream, and not all a groan. It 
might have come from some one on the moment of some dread sacrifice, 
when the judgment had not suffici time to call courag to it aid, 
but involuntarili had induc that sound which might not be repeated. 

A few startl bird flew from odd hole and corner about the ruins, to 
seek some other place of rest. the owl hoot from a corner of what had 
onc been a belfry, and a dreamy-look bat flew out from a cranni and 
struck itself headlong against a projection. 

then all wa still again. silenc resum it reign, and if there had 
been a mortal ear to drink in that sudden sound, the mind might well 
have doubt if fanci had not more to do with the matter than reality. 

from out a portion of the ruin that wa envelop in the deepest gloom, 
there now glide a figure. It is of gigant height, and it move along 
with a slow and measur tread. An ampl mantl envelop the form, 
which might well have been taken for the spirit of one of the monk who, 
centuri since, had made that place their home. 

It walk the whole length of the ampl hall we have allud to, and 
then, at the window from which had stream the long flood of mani 
colour light, it paused. 

for more than ten minut thi mysteri look figur there stood. 

At length there pass someth on the outsid of the window, that 
look like the shadow of a human form. 

then the tall, mysterious, apparition-look man turned, and sought a 
side entranc to the hall. 

then he paused, and, in about a minute, he wa join by anoth who 
must have been he who had so recent pass the stain glass window on 
the outer side. 

there wa a friendli salut between these two beings, and they 
walk to the centr of the hall, where they remain for some time in 
anim conversation. 

from the gestur they used, it wa evid that the subject of their 
discours wa one of deep and absorb interest to both. It wa one, 
too, upon which, after a time, they seem a littl to differ, and more 
than onc they each assum attitud of mutual defiance. 

thi continu until the sun had so complet sunk, that twilight wa 
begin sensibl to wane, and then gradual the two men appear to 
have come to a better understanding, and whatev might be the subject 
of their discourse, there wa some posit result evid arriv at 
now. 

they spoke in lower tones. they use less anim gestur than before; 
and, after a time, they both walk slowli down the hull toward the 
dark spot from whenc the first tall figur had so mysteri emerged. 

* * * * * 

there it a dungeon--damp and full of the most unwholesom 
exhalations--deep under ground it seems, and, in it excavations, it 
would appear as if some small land spring had been liberated, for the 
earthen floor wa one continu extent of moisture. 

from the roof, too, came perpetu the drip of water, which fell 
with sullen, startl splash in the pool below. 

At one end, and near to the roof,--so near that to reach it, without the 
most effici mean from the inside, wa a matter of posit 
impossibility--i a small iron grating, and not much larger than might 
be entir obscur by ani human face that might be close to it from 
the outsid of the dungeon. 

that dread abod is tenanted. In one corner, on a heap of straw, 
which appear freshli to have been cast into the place, lie a hopeless 
prisoner. 

It is no great stretch of fanci to suppose, that it is from hi lip 
came the sound of terror and of woe that had disturb the repos of 
that lone spot. 

the prison is lie on hi back; a rude bandag round hi head, on 
which were numer spot of blood, would seem to indic that he had 
suffer person injuri in some recent struggle. hi eye were open. 
they were fix desparingly, perhap unconsciously, upon that small 
grate which look into the upper world. 

that grate slant upwards, and look to the west, so that ani one 
confin in that dreari dungeon might be tantalized, on a sweet summer' 
day, by see the sweet blue sky, and occasion the white cloud 
flit by in that freedom which he cannot hope for. 

the carol of a bird, too, might reach him there. alas! sad remembr 
of life, and joy, and liberty. 

but now all is deepen gloom. the prison see nothing--hear 
nothing; and the sky is not quit dark. that small grate look like a 
strang light-patch in the dungeon wall. 

hark! some footstep sound upon hi ear. the creak of a door 
follows--a gleam of light shine into the dungeon, and the tall 
mysterious-look figur in the cloak stand befor the occup of 
that wretch place. 

then come in the other man, and he carri in hi hand write 
materials. He stoop to the stone couch on which the prison lies, and 
offer him a pen, as he rais him partial from the miser damp 
pallet. 

but there is no specul in the eye of that oppress man. In vain 
the pen is repeatedli place in hi grasp, and a document of some 
length, written on parchment, spread out befor him to sign. In vain is 
he held up now by both the men, who have thu mysteri sought him in 
hi dungeon; he ha not power to do as they would wish him. the pen 
fall from hi nerveless grasp, and, with a deep sigh, when they ceas 
to hold him up, he fall heavili back upon the stone couch. 

then the two men look at each other for about a minut silently; after 
which he who wa the shorter of the two rais one hand, and, in a voic 
of such concentr hatr and passion as wa horribl to hear, he 
said,-- 

"d--n!" 

the repli of the other wa a laugh; and then he took the light from the 
floor, and motion the one who seem so littl abl to control hi 
feel of bitter and disappoint to leav the place with him. 

with a hast and vehemence, then, which show how much anger he was, 
the shorter man of the two now roll up the parchment, and place it in 
a breast-pocket of hi coat. 

He cast a wither look of intens hatr on the form of the 
nearly-unconsci prisoner, and then prepar to follow the other. 

but when they reach the door of the dungeon, the taller man of the two 
paused, and appear for a moment or two to be in deep thought; after 
which he hand the lamp he carri to hi companion, and approach the 
pallet of the prisoner. 

He took from hi pocket a small bottle, and, rais the head of the 
feebl and wound man, he pour some portion of the content into hi 
mouth, and watch him swallow it. 

the other look on in silence, and then they both slowli left the 
dreari dungeon. 

* * * 

the wind rose, and the night had deepen into the utmost darkness. the 
black of a night, unillumin by the moon, which would not now rise 
for some hours, wa upon the ancient ruins. all wa calm and still, and 
no one would have suppos that aught human wa within those ancient, 
dreari look walls. 

time will show who it wa who lay in that unwholesom dungeon, as well 
as who were they who visit him so mysteriously, and retir again with 
feel of such evid disappoint with the document it seem of 
such importance, at least to one of them, to get that unconsci man to 
sign. 




chapter xxx. 

the visit OF flora TO the vampyre.--th offer.--th solemn asseveration. 


[illustration] 

admir bell had, of course, noth particular to commun to flora 
in the walk he induc her to take with him in the garden of 
bannerworth hall, but he could talk to her upon a subject which wa sure 
to be a welcom one, namely, of charl holland. 

and not onli could he talk to her of charles, but he wa will to talk 
of him in the style of enthusiast commend which assimil best 
with her own feelings. No one but the honest old admiral, who wa as 
violent in hi like and hi dislik as ani one could possibl be, 
could just then have convers with flora bannerworth to her 
satisfact of charl holland. 

He express no doubt whatev concern charles' faith, and to hi 
mind, now that he had got that opinion firmli fix in hi mind, 
everybodi that held a contrari one he at onc denounc as a fool or a 
rogue. 

"never you mind, miss flora," he said; "you will find, I dare say, that 
all will come right eventually. d--n me! the onli thing that provok me 
in the whole busi is, that I should have been such an old fool as 
for a moment to doubt charles." 

"you should have known him better, sir." 

"I should, my dear, but I wa taken by surprise, you see, and that wa 
wrong, too, for a man who ha held a respons command." 

"but the circumstances, dear sir, were of a natur to take everi one by 
surprise." 

"they were, they were. but now, candidli speaking, and I know I can 
speak candidli to you; do you realli think thi varney is the vampyre?" 

"I do." 

"you do? well, then, somebodi must tackl him, that' quit clear; we 
can't put up with hi fanci always." 

"what can be done?" 

"ah, that I don't know, but someth must be done, you know. He want 
thi place; heaven onli know whi or wherefor he ha taken such a fanci 
to it; but he ha done so, that is quit clear. If it had a good sea 
view, I should not be so much surprised; but there' noth of the 
sort, so it' no way at all better than ani other shore-go stupid 
sort of house, that you can see noth but land from." 

"oh, if my brother would but make some compromis with him to restor 
charl to us and take the house, we might yet be happy." 

"d--n it! then you still think that he ha a hand in spirit away 
charles?" 

"who els could do so?" 

"i'll be hang if I know. I do feel toler sure, and I have good 
deal of relianc upon your opinion, my dear; I say, I do feel toler 
sure: but, if I wa d----d sure, now, i'd soon have it out of him." 

"for my sake, admir bell, I wish now to extract one promis from you." 

"say your say, my dear, and i'll promis you." 

"you will not then expos yourself to the danger of ani person 
conflict with that most dread man, whose power of mischief we do not 
know, and therefor cannot well meet or appreciate." 

"whew! is that what you mean?" 

"yes; you will, I am sure, promis me so much." 

"why, my dear, you see the case is this. In affair of fighting, the 
less ladi interfer the better." 

"nay, whi so?" 

"because--because, you see, a ladi ha no reput for courag to keep 
up. indeed, it' rather the other way, for we dislik a bold woman as 
much as we hold in contempt a cowardli man." 

"but if you grant to us femal that in consequ of our affections, 
we are not courageous, you must likewis grant how much we are doom to 
suffer from the danger of those whom we esteem." 

"you would be the last person in the world to esteem a coward." 

"certainly. but there is more true courag often in not fight than in 
enter into a contest." 

"you are right enough there, my dear." 

"under ordinari circumstances, I should not oppos your carri out the 
dictat of your honour, but now, let me entreat you not to meet thi 
dread man, if man he can be called, when you know not how unfair the 
contest may be." 

"unfair?" 

"yes. may he not have some mean of prevent you from injur him, 
and of overcom you, which no mortal possesses?" 

"he may." 

"then the supposit of such a case ought to be suffici ground for 
at onc induc you to abandon all idea of meet with him." 

"mi dear, i'll consid of thi matter." 

"do so." 

"there is anoth thing, however, which now you will permit me to ask of 
you as a favour." 

"it is grant ere it is spoken." 

"veri good. now you must not be offend with what I am go to say, 
because, howev it may touch that veri proper pride which you, and such 
as you, are alway sure to possess, you are fortun at all time 
abl to call suffici judgment to your aid to enabl you to see what 
is realli offens and what is not." 

"you alarm me by such a preface." 

"do I? then here goe at once. your brother henry, poor fellow, ha 
enough to do, ha he not, to make all end meet." 

A flush of excit came over flora' cheek as the old admir thu 
bluntli broach a subject of which she alreadi knew the bitter to 
such a spirit as her brother's. 

"you are silent," continu the old man; "bi that I guess I am not wrong 
in my I supposition; inde it is hardli a supposit at all, for 
master charl told me as much, and no doubt he had it from a correct 
quarter." 

"I cannot deni it, sir." 

"then don't. It ain't worth denying, my dear. poverti is no crime, but, 
like be born a frenchman, it' a d----d misfortune." 

flora could scarc refus a smile, as the nation of the old 
admir peep out even in the midst of hi most liber and best 
feelings. 

"well," he continued, "I don't intend that he shall have so much troubl 
as he ha had. the enemi of hi king and hi countri shall free him 
from hi embarrassments." 

"the enemies?" 

"yes; who else?" 

"you speak in riddles, sir." 

"do I? then i'll soon make the riddl plain. when I went to sea I wa 
worth nothing--a poor as a ship' cat after the crew had been paid off 
for a month. well, I began fight away as hard and fast as I could, 
and the more I fought, and the more hard knock I gave and took, the 
more money I got." 

"indeed." 

"yes; prize after prize we haul into port, and at last the french 
vessel wouldn't come out of their harbours." 

"what did you do then?" 

"what did we do then? whi what wa the most natur thing in the whole 
world for us to do, we did." 

"I cannot guess." 

"well, I am surpris at that. tri again." 

"oh, yes; I can guess now. how could I have been so dull? you went and 
took them out." 

"to be sure we did--to be sure we did, my dear; that' how we manag 
them. and, do you see, at the end of the war I found myself with lot of 
prize money, all wrung from old england' enemies, and I intend that 
some of it shall find it' way to your brother' pocket; and you see 
that will bear out just what I said, that the enemi of hi king and 
hi countri shall free him from hi difficulties--don't you see?" 

"I see your nobl generosity, admiral." 

"nobl fiddlestick! now I have mention thi matter to you, my dear, 
and I don't so much mind talk to you about such matter as I should 
to your brother, I want you to do me the favour of manag it all for 
me." 

"how, sir?" 

"why, just thi way. you must find out how much money will free your 
brother just now from a parcel of bother that beset him, and then 
I will give it to you, and you can hand it to him, you see, so I need 
not say anyth about it; and if he speak to me on the subject at all, 
I can put him down at onc by saying, 'avast there, it' no busi of 
mine.'" 

"and can you, dear admiral, imagin that I could conceal the gener 
sourc from where so much assist came?" 

"of course; it will come from you. I take a fanci to make you a present 
of a sum of money; you do with it what you please--it' yours, and I 
have no right and no inclin to ask you what use you put it to." 

tear gush from the eye of flora as she tri to utter some word, but 
could not. the admir swore rather fearfully, and pretend to wonder 
much what on earth she could be cri for. At length, after the first 
gush of feel wa over, she said,-- 

"I cannot accept of so much generosity, sir--i dare not" 

"dare not!" 

"no; I should think meanli of myself were I to take advantag of the 
boundless munific of your nature." 

"take advantage! I should like to see anybodi take advantag of me, 
that' all." 

"I ought not to take the money of you. I will speak to my brother, and 
well I know how much he will appreci the noble, gener offer, my 
dear sir." 

"well, settl it your own way, onli rememb I have a right to do what I 
like with my own money." 

"undoubtedly." 

"veri good. then as that is undoubted, whatev I lend to him, mind I 
give to you, so it' as broad as it' long, as the dutchman said, when 
he look at the new ship that wa built for him, and you may as well 
take it yourself you see, and make no more fuss about it." 

"I will consider," said flora, with much emotion--"between thi time and 
the same hour to-morrow I will consider, sir, and if you can find ani 
word more express of heartfelt gratitud than others, pray imagin 
that I have use them with refer to my own feel toward you for 
such an unexampl offer of friendship." 

"oh, bother--stuff." 

the admir now at onc chang the subject, and began to talk of 
charles--a most grate theme to flora, as may well be supposed. He 
relat to her mani littl particular connect with him which all 
tend to place hi charact in a most amiabl light, and as her ear 
drank in the word of commend of him she loved, what sweeter music 
could there be to her than the voic of that old weather-beaten 
rough-spoken man. 

"the idea," he added, to a warm eulogium he had utter concern 
charles--"th idea that he could write those letter my dear, is quit 
absurd." 

"it is, indeed. oh, that we could know what had becom of him!" 

"we shall know. I don't think but what he' alive. someth seem to 
assur me that we shall some of these day look upon hi face again." 

"I am rejoic to hear you say so." 

"we will stir heaven and earth to find him. If he were killed, do you 
see, there would have been some trace of him now at hand; besides, he 
would have been left lie where the rascal attack him." 

flora shuddered. 

"but don't you fret yourself. you may depend that the sweet littl 
cherub that sit up aloft ha look after him." 

"I will hope so." 

"and now, my dear, master henri will soon be home, I am thinking, and as 
he ha quit enough disagre on hi own mind to be abl to spare a 
few of them, you will take the earliest opportunity, I am sure, of 
acquaint him with the littl matter we have been talk about, and 
let me know what he says." 

"I will--i will." 

"that' right. now, go in doors, for there' a cold air blow here, 
and you are a delic plant rather just now--go in and make yourself 
comfort and easy. the worst storm must blow over at last." 




chapter xxxi. 

sir franci varney and hi mysteri visitor.--th strang conference. 


sir franci varney is in what he call hi own apartment. It is night, 
and a dim and uncertain light from a candl which ha been long 
neglected, onli serv to render obscur more perplexing. the room is 
a costli one. one replet with all the applianc of refin and 
luxuri which the spirit and the geniu of the age could possibl suppli 
him with, but there is upon hi brow the mark of corrod care, and 
littl doe that most mysteri be seem to care for all the rich 
furnish of that apart in which he sits. 

hi cadaverous-look face is even paler and more death-like-look 
than usual; and, if it can be conceiv possibl that such an one can 
feel larg interest in human affairs, to look at him, we could well 
suppos that some interest of no common magnitud wa at stake. 

occasionally, too, he mutter some unconnect words, no doubt mental 
fill up the gaps, which render the sentenc incomplete, and be 
unconscious, perhaps, that he wa give audibl utter to ani of hi 
dark and secret meditations. 

At length he rose, and with an anxiou express of countenance, he 
went to the window, and look out into the dark of the night. all 
wa still, and not an object wa visible. It wa that pitchi dark 
without, which, for some hours, when the moon is late in lend her 
reflect beams, come over the earth' surface. 

"it is near the hour," he muttered. "it is now veri near the hour; 
sure he will come, and yet I know not whi I should fear him, although 
I seem to trembl at the thought of hi approach. He will sure come. 
onc a year--onli onc doe he visit me, and then 'ti but to take the 
price which he ha compel me to pay for that existence, which but for 
him had been long sinc terminated. sometim I devoutli wish it were." 

with a shudder he return to the seat he had so recent left, and 
there for some time he appear to medit in silence. 

suddenli now, a clock, which wa in the hall of that mansion he had 
purchased, sound the hour loudly. 

"the time ha come," said sir francis. "the time ha come. He will 
sure soon be here. hark! hark!" 

slowli and distinctli he count the stroke of the clock, and, when 
they had ceased, he exclaimed, with sudden surprise-- 

"eleven! but eleven! how have I been deceived. I thought the hour of 
midnight wa at hand." 

He hastili consult the watch he wore, and then he inde found, that 
whatev he had been look forward to with dread for some time past, 
as certain to ensue, at or about twelv o clock, had yet anoth hour in 
which to prey upon hi imagination. 

"how could I have made so grievou an error?" he exclaimed. "anoth 
hour of suspens and wonder as to whether that man be among the live 
or the dead. I have thought of rais my hand against hi life, but 
some strang mysteri feel ha alway staid me; and I have let him 
come and go freely, while an opportun might well have serv me to 
put such a design into execution. He is old, too--veri old, and yet he 
keep death at a distance. He look pale, but far from unwel or 
failing, when last I saw him. alas! a whole hour yet to wait. I would 
that thi interview were over." 

that extrem well known and popular diseas call the fidgets, now 
began, indeed, to torment sir franci varney. He could not sit--h could 
not walk, and, somehow or another, he never onc seem to imagin that 
from the wine cup he should experi ani relief, although, upon a side 
table, there stood refresh of that character. and thu some more 
time pass away, and he strove to cheat it of it weari by think 
of a varieti of subjects; but as the fate would have it, there seem 
not one agreeabl reminisc in the mind of that most inexplic 
man, and the more he plung into the recess of memori the more 
uneasy, not to say almost terrified, he look and became. A shudder 
nervous came across him, and, for a few moments, he sat as if he 
were upon the point of fainting. By a vigor effort, however, he shook 
thi off, and then place befor him the watch, which now indic 
about the quarter past eleven, he strove with a calmer aspect to wait 
the come of him whose presence, when he did come, would realli be a 
great terror, sinc the veri thought beforehand produc so much 
hesit and appar dismay. 

In order too, if possible, then to further withdraw himself from a too 
pain consider of those terrors, which in due time the reader 
will be acquaint with the caus of, he took up a book, and plung at 
random into it contents, he amus hi mind for a time with the 
follow brief narrative:-- 

the wind howl round the gabl end of bridport hous in sudden and 
furiou gusts, while the inmat sat by the fire-side, gaze in silenc 
upon the blaze ember of the huge fire that shed a red and bright 
light all over the immens apart in which they all sat. 

It wa an ancient look place, veri large, end capabl of contain a 
number of guests. sever were present. 

An age coupl were seat in tall high straight-back chairs. they 
were the owner of that lordli mansion, and near them sat two young 
maiden of surpass beauty; they were dissimilar, and yet there wa a 
slight likeness, but of total differ complexions. 

the one had tress of raven black; eyebrows, eyelashes, and eye were 
all of the same hue; she wa a beauti and proud-look girl, her 
complexion clear, with the hue of health upon her cheeks, while a smile 
play around her lips. the glanc of the eye wa suffici to thrill 
through the whole soul. 

the other maiden wa altogeth different; her complexion altogeth 
fairer--h hair of sunni chestnut, and her beauti hazel eye were 
shade by long brown eyelashes, while a play smile also lit up her 
countenance. she wa the younger of the two. 

the attent of the two young maiden had been direct to the word of 
the age owner of the house, for he had been speak a few moment 
before. 

there were sever other person present, and at some littl distanc 
were mani of the domest who were not deni the privileg of warmth 
and rest in the presenc of their master. 

these were not the times, when, if servant sat down, they were deem 
idle; but the daili task done, then the even hour wa spent by the 
fire-side. 

"the wind howl and moans," said an age domestic, "in an aw manner. 
I never heard the like." 

"it seem as though some imprison spirit wa wait for the repos 
that had been deni on earth," said the old ladi as she shift her 
seat and gaze steadili on the fire. 

"ay," said her age companion, "it is a windi night, and there will be a 
storm befor long, or i'm mistaken." 

"it wa just such a night as that my son henri left hi home," said mrs. 
bradley, "just such another--onli it had the addit of sleet and 
rain." 

the old man sigh at the mention of hi son' name, a tear stood in the 
eye of the maidens, while one look silent at the other, and seem 
to exchang glances. 

"I would that I might again see him befor my bodi seek it final home 
in the cold remorseless grave." 

"mother," said the fairest of the two maidens, "do not talk thus, let us 
hope that we yet may have mani year of happi together." 

"many, emma?" 

"yes, mamma, many." 

"do you know that I am veri old, emma, veri old indeed, consid what 
I have suffered, such a life of sorrow and ill health is at least equal 
to thirti year ad to my life." 

"you may have deceiv yourself, aunt," said the other maiden; "at all 
events, you cannot count upon life as certain, for the strongest often 
go first, while those who seem much more like to fall, by care, as 
often live in peac and happiness." 

"but I lead no life of peac and happiness, while henri bradley is not 
here; besides, my life might be pass without me see him again." 

"it is now two year sinc he wa here last," said the old man, 

"thi night two year wa the night on which he left." 

"thi night two years?" 

"yes." 

"it wa thi night two years," said one of the servant men, "becaus old 
dame poutlet had twin on that night." 

"A memor circumstance." 

"and one die at a twelvemonth old," said the man; "and she had a dream 
which foretold the event." 

"ay, ay." 

"yes, and moreov she' had the same dream again last wednesday wa a 
week," said the man. 

"and lost the other twin?" 

"ye sir, thi morning." 

"omen multiply," said the age man; "I would that it would seem to 
indic the return of henri to hi home." 

"I wonder where he can have gone to, or what he could have done all thi 
time; probabl he may not be in the land of the living." 

"poor henry," said emma. 

"alas, poor boy! We may never see him again--it wa a mistaken act of 
his, and yet he knew not otherwis how to act or escap hi father' 
displeasure." 

"say no more--say no more upon that subject; I dare not listen to it. 
god know I know quit enough," said mr. bradley; "I knew not he would 
have taken my word so to heart as he did." 

"why," said the old woman, "he thought you meant what you said." 

there wa a long pause, dure which all gaze at the blaze fire, 
seemingli wrapt in their own meditation. 

henri bradley, the son of the appar age couple, had left that day 
two years, and wherefor had he left the home of hi childhood? 
wherefor had he, the heir to larg estates, done this? 

He had dare to love without hi father' leave, and had refus the 
offer hi father made him of marri a young ladi whom he had chosen 
for him, but whom he could not love. 

It wa as much a matter of surpris to the father that the son should 
refuse, as it wa to the son that hi father should contempl such a 
match. 

"henry," said the father, "you have been thought of by me, I have made 
propos for marri you to the daughter of our neighbour, sir arthur 
onslow." 

"indeed, father!" 

"yes; I wish you to go there with me to see the young lady." 

"in the charact of a suitor?" 

"yes," repli the father, "certainly; it' high time you were settled." 

"indeed, I would rather not go, father; I have no intent of marri 
just yet. I do not desir to do so." 

thi wa an opposit that mr. bradley had not expect from hi son, 
and which hi imperi temper could ill brook, and with a darken brow 
he said,-- 

"it is not much, henry, that I trespass upon your obedience; but when I 
do so, I expect that you will obey me." 

"but, father, thi matter affect me for my whole life." 

"that is whi I have deliber so long and care over it." 

"but it is not unreason that I should have a voic in the affair, 
father, sinc it may render me miserable." 

"you shall have a voice." 

"then I say no to the whole regulation," said henry, decisively. 

"if you do so you forfeit my protection, much more favour; but you had 
better consid over what you have said. forget it, and come with me." 

"I cannot." 

"you will not?" 

"no, father; I cannot do as you wish me; my mind is fulli made up upon 
that matter." 

[illustration] 

"and so is mine. you either do as I would have you, or you leav the 
house, and seek your own living, and you are a beggar." 

"I should prefer be such," said henry, "than to marri ani young lady, 
and be unabl to love her." 

"that is not required." 

"no! I am astonished! not necessari to love the woman you marry!" 

"not at all; if you act justli toward her she ought to be grateful; and 
it is all that is requisit in the marriag state. gratitud will beget 
love, and love in one beget love in the other." 

"I will not argu with you, father, upon the matter. you are a better 
judg than I; you have had more experience." 

"I have." 

"and it would be useless to speak upon the subject; but of thi I can 
speak--mi own resolve--that I will not marri the ladi in question." 

the son had all the stern resolv of the father, but he had also veri 
good reason for what he did. He loved, and wa belov in return; and 
henc he would not break hi faith with her whom he loved. 

To have explain thi to hi father would have been to gain noth 
except an access of anger, and he would have made a new demand upon 
hi (the son's) obedience, by order him to discard from hi bosom the 
imag that wa there indel engraven. 

"you will not marri her whom I have chosen for your bride?" 

"I cannot." 

"do not talk to me of can and can't, when I speak of will and wont. It 
Is useless to disguis the fact. you have your free will in the matter. 
I shall take no answer but ye or no." 

"then, no, father." 

"good, sir; and now we are strangers." 

with that mr. bradley turn abruptli from hi son, and left him to 
himself. 

It wa the first time they had ani word of differ together, and it 
wa sudden and soon terminated. 

henri bradley wa indign at what had happened; he did not think hi 
father would have act as he had done in thi instance; but he wa too 
much interest in the fate of anoth to hesit for a moment. then 
came the consider as to what he should do, now that he had arriv 
at such a climax. 

hi first thought turn to hi mother and sister. He could not leav 
the hous without bid them good-bye. He determin to see hi 
mother, for hi father had left the hall upon a visit. 

mrs. bradley and emma were alon when he enter their apartment, and to 
them he relat all that had pass between himself and father. 

they besought him to stay, to remain there, or at least in the 
neighbourhood; but he wa resolv to quit the place altogeth for a 
time, as he could do noth there, and he might chanc to do someth 
elsewhere. 

upon this, they got togeth all the money and such jewel as they could 
spare, which in all amount to a consider sum; then take an 
affection leav of hi mother and sister, henri left the hall--not 
befor he had taken a long and affection farewel of one other who 
live within those walls. 

thi wa no other than the raven-ey maiden who sat by the fire side, 
and listen attent to the convers that wa go on. she wa 
hi love--she, a poor cousin. for her sake he had brave all hi 
father' anger, and attempt to seek hi fortun abroad. 

thi done, he quietli left the hall, without give ani one ani 
intim of where he wa going. 

old mr. bradley, when he had said so much to hi son, wa highli 
incens at what he deem hi obstinacy; and he thought the threat 
hang over him would have had a good effect; but he wa amaz when he 
discov that henri had inde left the hall, and he knew not whither. 

for some time he comfort himself with the assur that he would, he 
must return, but, alas! he came not, and thi wa the second anniversari 
of that melancholi day, which no one more repent of and griev for, 
than did poor mr. bradley. 

"surely, sure he will return, or let us know where he is," he said; 
"he cannot be in need, els he would have written to us for aid." 

"no, no," said mrs. bradley; "it is, I fear, becaus he ha not written, 
that he is in want; he would never write if he wa in poverty, lest he 
should caus us unhappi at hi fate. were he do well, we should 
hear of it, for he would be proud of the result of hi own unaid 
exertions." 

"well, well," said mr. bradley, "I can say no more; if I wa hasty, so 
wa he; but it is passed. I would forgiv all the past, if I could but 
see him onc again--onc again!" 

"how the wind howls," ad the age man; "and it' get wors and 
worse." 

"yes, and the snow is come down now in style," said one of the 
servants, who brought in some fresh log which were pile up on the 
fire, and he shook the white flake off hi clothes. 

"it will be a heavi fall befor morning," said one of the men. 

"yes, it ha been gather for some days; it will be much warmer than 
it ha been when it is all down." 

"so it will--so it will." 

At that moment there wa a knock at the gate, and the dog burst into 
a dread uproar from their kennels. 

"go, robert," said mr. bradley, "and see who it is that knock such a 
night as this; it is not fit or safe that a dog should be out in it." 

the man went out, and shortli returned, saying,-- 

"so pleas you, sir, there is a travel that ha miss hi way, and 
desir to know if he can obtain shelter here, or if ani one can be 
found to guid him to the nearest inn." 

"bid him come in; we shall lose no warmth becaus there is one more 
befor the fire." 

the stranger entered, and said,--"i have miss my way, and the snow 
come down so thick and fast, and is whirl in such eddies, that I 
fear, by myself, I should fall into some drift, and perish befor 
morning." 

"do not speak of it, sir," said mr. bradley; "such a night as thi is a 
suffici apolog for the request you make, and an induc to me to 
grant it most willingly." 

"thanks," repli the stranger; "the welcom is most seasonable." 

"be seated, sir; take your seat by the ingle; it is warm." 

the stranger seat himself, and seem lost in reflection, as he gaze 
intent on the blaze logs. He wa a robust man, with great whisker 
and beard, and, to judg from hi outward habiliments, he wa a stout 
man. 

"have you travel far?" 

"I have, sir." 

"you appear to belong to the army, if I mistak not?" 

"I do, sir." 

there wa a pause; the stranger seem not inclin to speak of himself 
much; but mr. bradley continued,-- 

"have you come from foreign service, sir? I presum you have." 

"yes; I have not been in thi countri more than six days." 

"indeed; shall we have peac think you?" 

"I do so, and I hope it may be so, for the sake of mani who desir to 
return to their nativ land, and to those they love best." 

mr. bradley heav a deep sigh, which wa echo softli by all present, 
and the stranger look from one to another, with a hasti glance, and 
then turn hi gaze upon the fire. 

"may I ask, sir, if you have ani person whom you regard in the army--ani 
relative?" 

"alas! I have--perhaps, I ought to say I had a son. I know not, however, 
where he is gone." 

"oh! a runaway; I see." 

"oh, no; he left becaus there were some famili differences, and now, I 
would, that he were onc more here." 

"oh!" said the stranger, softly, "differ and mistak will happen 
now and then, when least desired." 

At thi moment, an old hound who had lain besid ellen mowbray, she who 
wore the coal-black tresses, lift hi head at the differ in sound 
that wa notic in the stranger' voice. He got up and slowli walk up 
to him, and began to smell around him, and, in anoth moment, he rush 
at him with a cri of joy, and began to lick and caress him in the most 
extravag manner. thi wa follow by a cri of joy in all present. 

"it is henry!" exclaim ellen mowbray, rise and rush into hi 
arms. 

It wa henry, and he threw off the sever coat he had on, as well as 
the larg beard he wore to disguis himself. 

the meet wa a happi one; there wa not a more joy hous than that 
within mani mile around. henri wa restor to the arm of those who 
love him, and, in a month, a wed wa celebr between him and hi 
cousin ellen. 

* * * * * 

sir franci varney glanc at hi watch. It indic but five minut 
to twelv o'clock, and he sprang to hi feet. even as he did so, a loud 
knock at the princip entranc to hi hous awaken everi echo 
within it walls. 





chapter xxxii. 

the thousand pounds.--th stranger' precautions. 


[illustration] 

varney move not now, nor did he speak, but, like a statue, he stood, 
with hi unearthli look eye rivet upon the door of the apartment. 

In a few moment one of hi servant came, and said-- 

"sir, a person is here, who say he want to see you. He desir me to 
say, that he had ridden far, and that moment were preciou when the 
tide of life wa eb fast." 

"yes! yes!" gasp varney; "admit him, I know him! bring him here? It 
is--an--old friend--of mine." 

He sank into a chair, and still he kept hi eye fix upon that door 
through which hi visitor must come. sure some secret of dread 
moment must be connect with him whom sir franci expected--dreaded--and 
yet dare not refus to see. and now a footstep approaches--a slow and a 
solemn footstep--it paus a moment at the door of the apartment, and 
then the servant fling it open, and a tall man enters. He is envelop 
in the fold of a horseman' cloak, and there is the clank of spur upon 
hi heel as he walk into the room. 

varney rose again, but he said not a word and for a few moment they 
stood opposit each other in silence. the domest ha left the room, 
and the door is closed, so that there wa noth to prevent them from 
conversing; and, yet, silent they continu for some minutes. It seem 
as if each wa most anxiou that the other should commenc the 
conversation, first. 

and yet there wa noth so veri remark in the appear of that 
stranger which should entir justifi sir franci varney, in feel so 
much alarm at hi presence. He certainli wa a man past the prime of 
life; and he look like one who had battl much with misfortune, and 
as if time had not pass so lightli over hi brow, but that it had left 
deep trace of it progress. the onli thing posit bad about hi 
countenance, wa to be found in hi eyes. there there wa a most 
ungraci and sinist expression, a kind of lurk and suspicion 
look, as if he were alway resolv in hi mind some deep laid scheme, 
which might be suffici to circumv the whole of mankind. 

finding, probably, that varney would not speak first, he let hi cloak 
fall more loos about him, and in a low, deep tone, he said, 

"I presum I wa expected?" 

"you were," said varney. "it is the day, and it is the hour." 

"you are right. I like to see you so mindful. you don't improv in look 
since--" 

"hush--hush! no more of that; can we not meet without a dread 
allus to the past! there need noth to remind me of it; and your 
presenc here now show that you are not forgetful. speak not of that 
fear episode. let no word combin to place it in a tangibl shape to 
human understanding. I cannot, dare not, hear you speak of that." 

"it is well," said the stranger; "a you please. let our interview be 
brief. you know my errand?" 

"I do. So fear a drag upon limit means, is not like to be readili 
forgotten." 

"oh, you are too ingenious--too full of well laid schemes, and to apt 
and readi in their execution, to feel, as ani fear drag, the 
condit of our bargain. whi do you look at me so earnestly?" 

"because," said varney--and he trembl as he spoke--"becaus each 
lineament of your counten bring me back to the recollect of the 
onli scene in life that made me shudder, and which I cannot think of, 
even with the indiffer of contempt. I see it all befor my mind' 
eye, come in fright panoram array, those incidents, which even to 
dream of, are suffici to drive the soul to madness; the dread of thi 
annual visit, hang upon me like a dark cloud upon my veri heart; it 
sit like some foul incubus, destroy it vital and drag me, 
from day to day, nearer to that tomb, from whenc not as before, I can 
emerge." 

"you have been among the dead?" said the stranger. 

"I have." 

"and yet are mortal." 

"yes," repeat varney, "yes, and yet am mortal." 

"it wa I that pluck you back to that world, which, to judg from your 
appearance, ha had sinc that event period but few charm for you. 
By my faith you look like--" 

"like what I am," interrupt varney. 

"thi is a subject that onc a year get fright renew between us. 
for week befor your visit I am haunt by fright recollections, and 
it take me mani week after you are gone, befor I can restor myself 
to serenity. look at me; am I not an alter man?" 

"in faith you are," said the stranger "I have no wish to press upon you 
pain recollections. and yet 'ti strang to me that upon such a man 
as you, the event to which you allud should produc so terribl an 
impression." 

"I have pass through the agoni of death," said varney, "and have again 
endur the torture--for it is such--of the re-union of the bodi and the 
soul; not have endur so much, not the faintest echo of such feel 
can enter into your imagination." 

"there may be truth in that, and yet, like a flutter moth round a 
flame, it seem to me, that when I do see you, you take a terrif kind 
of satisfact in talk of the past." 

"that is strictli true," said varney; "the imag with which my mind is 
fill are frightful. pent up do they remain for twelv long months. I 
can speak to you, and you only, without disguise, and thu doe it seem 
to me that I get rid of the uneasi load of horribl imaginings. when you 
are gone, and have been gone a suffici laps of time, my slumber are 
not haunt with fright images--i regain a compar peace, until 
the time slowli come around again, when we are doom to meet." 

"I understand you. you seem well lodg here?" 

"I have ever kept my word, and sent to you, tell you where I am." 

"you have, truly. I have no shadow of complaint to make against you. No 
one, could have more faith perform hi bond than you have. I give 
you ampl credit for all that, and long may you live still to perform 
your conditions." 

"I dare not deceiv you, although to keep such faith I may be compel 
to deceiv a hundr others." 

"of that I cannot judge. fortun seem to smile upon you; you have not 
as yet disappoint me." 

"and will not now," said varney. "the gigant and fright penalti of 
disappoint you, stare me in the face. I dare not do so." 

He took from hi pocket, as he spoke, a clasp book, from which he 
produc sever bank notes, which he place befor the stranger. 

"A thousand pounds," he said; "that is the agreement." 

"it is to the veri letter. I do not return to you a thousand thanks--w 
understand each other better than to wast time with idl compliment. 
inde I will go quit as far as to say, truthfully, that did not my 
necess requir thi amount from you, you should have the boon, for 
which you pay that price at a much cheaper rate." 

"enough! enough!" said varney. "it is strange, that your face should 
have been the last I saw, when the world close upon me, and the first 
that met my eye when I wa again snatch back to life! Do you pursu 
still your dread trade?" 

"yes," said the stranger, "for anoth year, and then, with such a 
moder compet as fortun ha assign me, I retire, to make way 
for younger and abler spirits." 

"and then," said varney, "shall you still requir of me such an amount 
as this?" 

"no; thi is my last visit but one. I shall be just and liber toward 
you. you are not old; and I have no wish to becom the clog of your 
existence. As I have befor told you, it is my necessity, and not my 
inclination, that set the valu upon the servic I render you." 

"I understand you, and ought to thank you. and in repli to so much 
courtesy, be assured, that when I shudder at your presence, it is not 
that I regard you with horror, as an individual, but it is becaus the 
sight of you awaken mourn the remembr of the past." 

"it is clear to me," said the stranger; "and now I think we part with 
each other in a better spirit than we ever did before; and when we meet 
again, the remembr that it is the last time, will clear away the 
gloom that I now find hang over you." 

"it may! it may! with what an earnest gaze you still regard me!" 

"I do. It doe appear to me most strange, that time should not have 
obliter the effect which I thought would have ceas with their 
cause. you are no more the man that in my recollect you onc were, 
than I am like a sport child." 

"and I never shall be," said varney; "never--nev again! thi self-sam 
look which the hand of death had place upon me, I shall ever wear. I 
shudder at myself, and as I oft perceiv the eye of idl curios fix 
steadfastli upon me, I wonder in my inmost heart, if even the wildest 
guesser hit upon the caus whi I am not like unto other men?" 

"no. Of that you may depend there is no suspicion; but I will leav you 
now; we part such friends, as men situat as we are can be. onc again 
shall we meet, and then farewel for ever." 

"do you leav england, then?" 

"I do. you know my situat in life. It is not one which offer me 
induc to remain. In some other land, I shall win the respect and 
attent I may not hope for here. there my wealth will win mani golden 
opinions; and casting, as best I may, the veil of forget over my 
former life, my declin year may yet be happy. thi money, that I 
have had of you from time to time, ha been more pleasantli earn than 
all beside. wrung, as it ha been, from your fears, still have I taken 
it with less reproach. and now, farewell!" 

varney rang for a servant to show the stranger from the house, and 
without anoth word they parted. 

then, when he wa alone, that mysteri owner of that costli home drew 
a long breath of appar exquisit relief. 

"that is over!--that is over!" he said. "he shall have the other 
thousand pounds, perchance, sooner than he thinks. with all expedit I 
will send it to him. and then on that subject I shall be at peace. I 
shall have paid a larg sum; but that which I purchas wa to me 
priceless. It wa my life!--it wa my life itself! that possess which 
the world' wealth cannot restore! and shall I grudg these thousands, 
which have found their way into thi man' hands? no! 'ti true, that 
existence, for me, ha lost some of it most resplend charms. 'ti 
true, that I have no earthli affections, and that shun companionship 
with all, I am alik shun by all; and yet, while the life-blood still 
will circul within my shrunken veins, I cling to vitality." 

He pass into an inner room, and take from a hook, on which it hung, 
a long, dark-colour cloak, he envelop hi tall, unearthli figur 
within it folds. 

then, with hi hat in hi hand, he pass out of hi house, and appear 
to be take hi way toward bannerworth house. 

sure it must be guilt of no common die that could oppress a man so 
destitut of human sympathi as sir franci varney. the dread 
suspicion that hover round him with respect to what he was, appear 
to gather confirm from everi act of hi existence. 

whether or not thi man, to whom he felt bound to pay annual so larg 
a sum, wa in the secret, and knew him to be someth more than 
earthly, we cannot at present declare; but it would seem from the tenor 
of their convers as if such were the fact. 

perchanc he had save him from the corrupt of the tomb, by place 
out, on some sylvan spot, where the cold moonbeam fell, the appar 
lifeless form, and now claim so larg a reward for such a service, and 
the necessari secreci conting upon it. 

We say thi may be so, and yet again some more natur and ration 
explan may unexpectedli present itself; and there may be yet a dark 
page in sir franci varney' life' volume, which will place him in a 
light of superad terror to our readers. 

time, and the now rapidli accumul incid of our tale, will soon 
tear asid the veil of mysteri that now envelop some of our _dramati 
personae_. 

and let us hope that in the develop of those incid we shall be 
enabl to rescu the beauti flora bannerworth from the despair 
gloom that is around her. let us hope and even anticip that we shall 
see her smile again; that the roseat hue of health will again revisit 
her cheeks, the light buoyanc of her step return, and that as befor 
she may be the joy of all around her, dispens and receiv 
happiness. 

and, he too, that gallant fearless lover, he whom no chanc of time or 
tide could sever from the object of hi fond affections, he who listen 
to noth but the dictat of hi heart' best feelings, let us indulg 
a hope that he will have a bright reward, and that the sunshin of a 
perman felic will onli seem the brighter for the shadow that for 
a time have obscur it glory. 




chapter xxxiii. 

the strang interview.--th chase through the hall. 


[illustration] 

It wa with the most melancholi aspect that anyth human could well 
bear, that sir franci varney took hi lone walk, although perhap in 
say so much, probabl we are institut a comparison which 
circumst scarc empow us to do; for who shall say that that 
singular man, around whom a veri atmospher of mysteri seem to be 
perpetu increasing, wa human? 

avers as we are to believ in the supernatural, or even to invest 
human with ani preternatur powers, the more than singular fact and 
circumst surround the exist and the act of that man bring 
to the mind a kind of shudder conviction, that if he be inde realli 
mortal he still must possess some power beyond ordinari mortality, and 
be walk the earth for some unhallow purposes, such as ordinari men 
with the ordinari attribut of human natur can scarc guess at. 

silent and alon he took hi way through that beauti tract of 
country, comprehend such picturesqu charm of hill and dale which 
lay between hi home and bannerworth hall. He wa evid intent upon 
reach the latter place by the shortest possibl route, and in the 
dark of that night, for the moon had not yet risen, he show no 
slight acquaint with the intricaci of that locality, that he wa 
at all enabl to pursu so undeviatingli a tract as that which he took. 

He mutter frequent to himself low, indistinct word as he went, and 
chiefli did they seem to have refer to that strang interview he had 
so recent had with one who, from some combin of circumst 
scarc to be guess at, evid exercis a power control over 
him, and wa enabl to make a demand upon hi pecuniari resourc of 
rather startl magnitude. 

and yet, from a stray word or two, which were pronounc more 
distinctly, he did not seem to be think in anger over that interview; 
but it would appear that it rather had recal to hi remembr 
circumst of a pain and a degrad nature, which time had not 
been abl entir to obliter from hi recollection. 

"yes, yes," he said, as he paus upon the margin of the wood, to the 
confin of which he, or what seem to be he, had onc been chase by 
marchdal and the bannerworths--"yes, the veri sight of that man recal 
all the fright pageantri of a horribl tragedy, which I can 
never--nev forget. never can it escap my memory, as a horrible, a 
terrif fact; but it is the sight of thi man alon that can recal all 
it fear minutia to my mind, and paint to my imagination, in the 
most vivid colours, every, the least particular connect with that time 
of agony. these period visit much affect me. for month I dread 
them, and for month I am but slowli recov from the shock they 
give me. 'but onc more,' he says--'but onc more,' and then we shall 
not meet again. well, well; perchanc befor that time arrives, I may be 
abl to possess myself of those resourc which will enabl me to 
forestal hi visit, and so at least free myself from the pang of 
expect him." 

He paus at the margin of the wood, and glanc in the direct of 
bannerworth hall. By the dim light which yet show from out the light 
sky, he could discern the ancient gabl ends, and turret-lik windows; 
he could see the well laid out gardens, and the grove of state fir 
that shade it from the northern blasts, and, as he gazed, a strong 
emot seem to come over him, such as no one could have suppos 
would for one moment have possess the frame of one so appar 
unconnect with all human sympathies. 

"I know thi spot well," he said, "and my appear here on that 
event occasion, when the dread of my approach induc a crime onli 
second to murder itself, wa on such a night as this, when all wa so 
still and calm around, and when he who, at the merest shadow of my 
presence, rather chose to rush on death than be assur it wa myself. 
curs on the circumst that so foil me! I should have been most 
wealthy. I should have possess the mean of command the adul 
of those who now hold me but cheaply; but still the time may come. I 
have a hope yet, and that great which I have ever pant for, that 
magician-lik power over my kind, which the possess of ampl mean 
alon can give, may yet be mine." 

wrap hi cloak more close around him, he strode forward with that 
long, noiseless step which wa peculiar to him. mechan he appear 
to avoid those obstacl of hedg and ditch which imped hi pathway. 
sure he had come that road often, or he would not so easili have 
pursu hi way. and now he stood by the edg of a plantat which in 
some measur protect from trespass the more privat garden of the 
hall, and there he paused, as if a feel of irresolut had come over 
him, or it might be, as inde it seem from hi subsequ conduct, 
that he had come without ani fix intention, or if with a fix 
intention, without ani regular plan of carri it into effect. 

did he again dream of intrud into ani of the chamber of that 
mansion, with the ghastli aspect of that terribl creation with which, 
in the mind of it inhabitants, he seem to be but too close 
identified? He wa pale, attenuated, and trembled. could it be that so 
soon it had becom necessari to renew the life-blood in hi vein in the 
aw manner which it is suppos the vampyr brood are compel to 
protract their miser existence? 

It might be so, and that he wa even now reflect upon how onc more 
he could kindl the fire of mad in the brain of that beauti girl, 
who he had alreadi made so irretriev wretched. 

He leant against an age tree, and hi strange, lustrous-look eye 
seem to collect everi wander scintil of light that wa 
around, and to shine with preternatur intensity. 

"I must, I will," he said, "be master of bannerworth hall. It must come 
to that. I have set an exist upon it possession, and I will have 
it; and then, if with my own hand I displac it brick by brick and 
stone by stone, I will discov that hidden secret which no one but 
myself now dream of. It shall be done by forc or fraud, by love or by 
despair, I care not which; the end shall sanctifi all means. ay, even if 
I wade through blood to my desire, I say it shall be done." 

there wa a holi and a still calm about the night much at varianc 
with the storm of angri passion that appear to be momentarili 
gather power in the breast of that fear man. not the least sound 
came from bannerworth hall, and it wa onli occasion that from afar 
off on the night air there came the bark of some watchdog, or the low of 
distant cattle. all els wa mute save when the deep sepulchr tone of 
that man, if man he was, gave an impuls to the soft air around him. 

with a stroll movement as if he were careless if he proceed in that 
direct or not, he still went onward toward the house, and now he 
stood by that littl summer-hous onc so sweet and so dear a retreat, 
in which the heart-stricken flora had held her interview with him whom 
she love with a devot unknown to meaner minds. 

thi spot scarc command ani view of the house, for so enclos wa 
it among evergreen and bloom flowers, that it seem like a veri 
wilder of nature, upon which, with liber hand, she had shower 
down in wild luxuri her wildest floral beauties. 

In and around that spot the night air wa load with sweets. the 
mingl perfum of mani flower made that place seem a veri paradise. 
but oh, how sadli at varianc with that beauti and contented of 
natur wa he who stood amidst such beauty! all incap as he wa of 
appreci it tenderness, or of gather the faintest moral from it 
glory. 

"whi am I here?" he said. "here, without fix design or stabil of 
purpose, like some miser who ha hidden hi own hoard so deepli within 
the bowel of the earth he cannot hope that he shall ever again be abl 
to bring them to the light of day. I hover around thi spot which I 
feel--which I know--contain my treasure, though I cannot lay my hand 
upon it, or exult in it glisten beauty." 

even as he spoke he cower down like some guilti thing, for he heard a 
faint footstep upon the garden path. So light, so fragil wa the step, 
that, in the light of day, the veri hum of summer insect would have 
drown the noise; but he heard it, that man of crime--of unholi and 
aw impulses. He heard it, and he shrunk down among the shrub and 
flower till he wa hidden complet from observ amid a world of 
fragrant essences. 

wa it some one stealthili in that place even as he was, unwelcom or 
unknown? or wa it one who had observ him intrud upon the privaci of 
those now unhappi precincts, and who wa come to deal upon him that 
death which, vampyr though he might be, he wa yet suscept of from 
mortal hands? 

the footstep advanced, and lower down he shrunk until hi coward-heart 
beat against the veri earth itself. He knew that he wa unarmed, a 
circumst rare with him, and onli to be account for by the 
disturb of hi mind consequ upon the visit of that strang man to 
hi house, whose presenc had awaken so mani conflict emotions. 

nearer and nearer still came that light footstep, and hi deep-seat 
fear would not let him perceiv that it wa not the step of caution or 
of treachery, but owe it light to the natur grace and freedom of 
movement of it owner. 

the moon must have arisen, although obscur by clouds, through which it 
cast but a dim radiance, for the night had certainli grown lighter; so 
that although there were no strong shadow cast, a more diffus 
bright wa about all things, and their outlin look not so 
dancing, and confus the one with the other. 

He strain hi eye in the direct whenc the sound proceeded, and 
then hi fear for hi person safeti vanished, for he saw it wa a 
femal form that wa slowli advanc toward him. 

hi first impuls wa to rise, for with the transient glimps he got of 
it, he knew that it must be flora bannerworth; but a second thought, 
probabl one of intens curios to know what could possibl have 
brought her to such a spot at such a time, restrain him, and he wa 
quiet. but if the surpris of sir franci varney wa great to see flora 
bannerworth at such a time in such a place, we have no doubt, that with 
the knowledg which our reader have of her, their astonish would 
more than fulli equal his; and when we come to consider, that sinc that 
event period when the sanctiti of her chamber had been so violat by 
that fear midnight visitant, it must appear somewhat strang that she 
could gather courag suffici to wander forth alon at such an hour. 

had she no dread of meet that unearthli being? did the possibl 
that she might fall into hi ruthless grasp, not come across her mind 
with a shudder conscious of it probability? had she no 
reflect that each step she took, wa take her further and further 
from those who would aid her in all extremities? It would seem not, for 
she walk onward, unheeding, and appar unthink of the presence, 
possibl or probable, of that bane of her existence. 

but let us look at her again. how strang and spectral-lik she move 
along; there seem no specul in her countenance, but with a strang 
and glide step, she walk like some dim shadow of the past in that 
ancient garden. she is veri pale, and on her brow there is the stamp of 
suffering; her dress is a morn robe, she hold it lightli round her, 
and thu she move forward toward that summer-hous which probabl to 
her wa sanctifi by have wit those vow of pure affection, 
which came from the lip of charl holland, about whose fate there now 
hung so great a mystery. 

ha mad realli seiz upon the brain of that beauti girl? ha the 
strong intellect realli sunk beneath the oppress to which it ha 
been subjected? doe she now walk forth with a disord intellect, the 
queen of some fantast realm, view the materi world with eye that 
are not of earth; shun perhap that which she should have sought, 
and, perchance, in her frenzy, seek that which in a happier frame of 
mind she would have shunned. 

[illustration] 

such might have been the impress of ani one who had look upon her 
for a moment, and who knew the disastr scene through which she had 
so recent passed; but we can spare our reader the pang of such a 
supposition. We have bespoken their love for flora bannerworth, and we 
are certain that she ha it; therefor would we spare them, even for a 
few brief moments, from imagin that cruel destini had done it worst, 
and that the fine and beauti spirit we have so much commend had 
lost it power of ration reflection. no; thank heaven, such is not the 
case. flora bannerworth is not mad, but under the strong influenc of 
some eccentr dream, which ha pictur to her mind imag which have 
no home but in the airi realm of imagination. she ha wander forth 
from her chamber to that sacr spot where she had met him she loved, 
and heard the noblest declar of truth and constanc that ever 
flow from human lips. 

yes, she is sleeping; but, with a precis such as the somnambulist so 
strang exerts, she trod the well-known path slowly, but surely, 
toward that summer' bower, where her dream had not told her lay 
crouch that most hideou spectr of her imagination, sir franci 
varney. He who stood between her and her heart' best joy; he who had 
destroy all hope of happiness, and who had convert her dearest 
affect into onli so mani caus of greater disquietud than the 
bless they should have been to her. 

oh! could she have imagin but for one moment that he wa there, with 
what an eager of terror would she have flown back again to the 
shelter of those walls, where at least wa to be found some protect 
from the fear vampyre' embrace, and where she would be within hail 
of friendli hearts, who would stand boldli between her and everi thought 
of harm. 

but she knew it not, and onward she went until the veri hem of her 
garment touch the face of sir franci varney. 

and he wa terrified--h dare not move--h dare not speak! the idea 
that she had died, and that thi wa her spirit, come to wreak some 
terribl vengeanc upon him, for a time possess him, and so paralys 
with fear wa he, that he could neither move nor speak. 

It had been well if, dure that tranc of indecis in which hi 
coward heart place him, flora had left the place, and again sought her 
home; but unhappili such an impuls came not over her; she sat upon that 
rustic seat, where she had repos when charl had clasp her to hi 
heart, and through her veri dream the remembr of that pure affect 
came across her, and in the tenderest and most melodi accents, she 
said,-- 

"charles! charles! and do you love me still? no--no; you have not 
forsaken me. save me, save me from the vampyre!" 

she shuddered, and sir franci varney heard her weeping. 

"fool that I am," he muttered, "to be so terrified. she sleeps. thi is 
one of the phase which a disord imagin oft put on. she 
sleeps, and perchanc thi may be an opportun of further increas 
the dread of my visitation, which shall make bannerworth hall far too 
terribl a dwelling-plac for her; and well I know, if she goes, they 
will all go. It will becom a desert house, and that is what I want. A 
house, too, with such an evil reputation, that none but myself, who have 
creat that reputation, will ventur within it walls:--a house, which 
superstit will point out as the abod of evil spirits;--a house, as 
it were, by gener opinion, cede to the vampyre. yes, it shall be my 
own; fit dwelling-plac for a while for me. I have sworn it shall be 
mine, and I will keep my oath, littl such as I have to do with vows." 

He rose, and move slowli to the narrow entranc of the summer-house; a 
movement he could make, without at all disturb flora, for the rustic 
seat, on which she sat, wa at it further extremity. and there he 
stood, the upper part of hi gaunt and hideou form clearli defin upon 
the now much lighter sky, so that if flora bannerworth had not been in 
that tranc of sleep in which she realli was, one glanc upward would 
let her see the hideou companion she had, in that onc much-lov 
spot--a spot hitherto sacr to the best and noblest feelings, but now 
doom for ever to be associ with that terrif spectr of despair. 

but she wa in no state to see so terribl a sight. her hand were over 
her face, and she wa weep still. 

"surely, he love me," she whispered; "he ha said he love me, and he 
doe not speak in vain. He love me still, and I shall again look upon 
hi face, a heaven to me! charles! charles! you will come again? surely, 
they sin against the divin of love, who would tell me that you love 
me not!" 

"ha!" mutter varney, "thi passion is her first, and take a strong 
hold on her young heart--sh love him--but what are human affect to 
me? I have no right to count myself in the great muster-rol of 
humanity. I look not like an inhabit of the earth, and yet am on it. 
I love no one, expect no love from ani one, but I will make human a 
slave to me; and the lip-servic of them who hate me in their hearts, 
shall be as pleasant jingl music to my ear, as if it were quit 
sincere! I will speak to thi girl; she is not mad--perch she may 
be." 

there wa a diabol look of concentr hatr upon varney' face, 
as he now advanc two pace toward the beauti flora. 




chapter xxxiv. 

the threat.--it consequences.--th rescue, and sir franci varney' 
danger. 


[illustration] 

sir franci varney now paus again, and he seem for a few moment to 
gloat over the helpless condit of her whom he had so determin to 
make hi victim; there wa no look of piti in hi face, no one touch of 
human kind could be found in the whole express of those 
diabol features; and if he delay make the attempt to strike 
terror into the heart of that unhappy, but beauti being, it could not 
be from ani relent feeling, but simply, that he wish for a few 
moment to indulg hi imagin with the idea of perfect hi 
villani more effectually. 

alas! and they who would have flown to her rescue,--they, who for her 
would have chanc all accidents, ay, even life itself, were sleeping, 
and knew not of the love one' danger. she wa alone, and far enough 
from the house, to be driven to that totter verg where saniti ends, 
and the dream of madness, with all it terrors, commences. 

but still she slept--if that half-wak sleep could inde be 
consid as ani thing akin to ordinari slumber--stil she slept, and 
call mourn upon her lover' name; and in tender, beseech 
accents, that should have melt even the stubbornest hearts, did she 
express her soul' convict that he love her still. 

the veri repetit of the name of charl holland seem to be gall 
to sir franci varney. He made a gestur of impatience, as she again 
utter it, and then, step forward, he stood within a pace of where 
she sat, and in a fear distinct voic he said,-- 

"flora bannerworth, awake! awake! and look upon me, although the sight 
blast and drive you to despair. awake! awake!" 

It wa not the sound of the voic which arous her from that strang 
slumber. It is said that those who sleep in that eccentr manner, are 
insens to sounds, but that the lightest touch will arous them in an 
instant; and so it wa in thi case, for sir franci varney, as he 
spoke, laid upon the hand of flora two of hi cold, corpse-lik look 
fingers. A shriek burst from her lips, and although the confus of her 
memori and concept wa immense, yet she wa awake, and the 
somnambulist tranc had left her. 

"help, help!" she cried. "graciou heavens! where am i?" 

varney spoke not, but he spread out hi long, thin arm in such a manner 
that he seem almost to encircl her, while he touch her not, so that 
escap becam a matter of impossibility, and to attempt to do so, must 
have been to have thrown herself into hi hideou embrace. 

she could obtain but a singl view of the face and figur of him who 
oppos her progress, but, slight as that view was, it more than 
sufficed. the veri extrem of fear came across her, and she sat like 
one paralysed; the onli evid of exist she gave consist in the 
words,-- 

"the vampyre--th vampyre!" 

"yes," said varney, "the vampyre. you know me, flora 
bannerworth--varney, the vampyre; your midnight guest at that feast of 
blood. I am the vampyre. look upon me well; shrink not from my gaze. you 
will do well not to shun me, but to speak to me in such a shape that I 
may learn to love you." 

flora shook as in a convulsion, and she look as white as ani marbl 
statue. 

"thi is horrible!" she said. "whi doe not heaven grant me the death I 
pray for?" 

"hold!" said varney. "dress not up in the fals colour of the 
imagin that which in itself is suffici terrif to need none 
of the allur of romance. flora bannerworth, you are 
persecuted--persecut by me, the vampyre. It is my fate to persecut 
you; for there are law to the invis as well as the visibl creation 
that forc even such a be as I am to play my part in the great drama 
of existence. I am a vampyre; the susten that support thi frame 
must be drawn from the life-blood of others." 

"oh, horror--horror!" 

"but most I do affect the young and beautiful. It is from the vein of 
such as thou art, flora bannerworth, that I would seek the susten 
i'm compel to obtain for my own exhaust energies. but never yet, in 
all my long career--a career extend over centuri of time--nev yet 
have I felt the soft sensat of human piti till I look on thee, 
exquisit piec of excellence. even at the moment when the reviv 
fluid from the gush fountain of your vein wa warm at my heart, I 
piti and I love you. oh, flora! even I can now feel the pang of be 
what I am!" 

there wa a someth in the tone, a touch of sad in the manner, and 
a deep sincer in these words, that in some measur disabus flora of 
her fears. she sob hysterically, and a gush of tear came to her 
relief, as, in almost inarticul accents, she said,-- 

"may the great god forgiv even you!" 

"I have need of such a prayer," exclaim varney--"heaven know I have 
need of such a prayer. may it ascend on the wing of the night air to 
the throne of heaven. may it be softli whisper by minist angel 
to the ear of divinity. god know I have need of such a prayer!" 

"to hear you speak in such a strain," said flora, "calm the excit 
fancy, and strip even your horribl presenc of some of it madden 
influence." 

"hush," said the vampire, "you must hear more--y must know more ere 
you speak of the matter that have of late exercis an influenc of 
terror over you." 

"but how came I here?" said flora, "tell me that. By what more than 
earthli power have you brought me to thi spot? If I am to listen to 
you, whi should it not be at some more like time and place?" 

"I have powers," said varney, assum from flora' words, that she 
would believ such arrogance--"i have power which suffic to bend mani 
purpos to my will--pow incident to my position, and therefor is 
it I have brought you here to listen to that which should make you 
happier than you are." 

"I will attend," said flora. "I do not shudder now; there' an ici 
cold through my veins, but it is the night air--speak, I will attend 
you." 

"I will. flora bannerworth, I am one who ha wit time' mutat 
on man and on hi works, and I have piti neither; I have seen the fall 
of empires, and sigh not that high reach ambit wa toppl to 
the dust. I have seen the grave close over the young and the 
beautiful--thos whom I have doom by my insati thirst for human 
blood to death, long ere the usual span of life wa past, but I never 
love till now." 

"can such a be as you," said flora "be suscept of such an earthli 
passion?" 

"and wherefor not?" 

"love is either too much of heaven, or too much of earth to find a home 
with thee." 

"no, flora, no! it may be that the feel is born of pity. I will save 
you--i will save you from a continu of the horror that are 
assail you." 

"oh! then may heaven have merci in your hour of need!" 

"amen!" 

"may you even yet know peac and joy above." 

"it is a faint and straggl hope--but if achieved, it will be through 
the interposit of such a spirit as thine, flora, which ha alreadi 
exercis so benign an influenc upon my tortur soul, as to produc 
the wish within my heart, to do a least one unselfish action." 

"that wish," said flora, "shall be father to the deed. heaven ha 
boundless merci yet." 

"for thi sweet sake, I will believ so much, flora bannerworth; it is a 
condit with my hate race, that if we can find one human heart to 
love us, we are free. if, in the face of heaven, you will consent to be 
mine, you will snatch me from a continu of my fright doom, and 
for your pure sake, and on your merits, shall I yet know heavenli 
happiness. will you be mine?" 

A cloud swept from off the face of the moon, and a slant ray fell upon 
the hideou featur of the vampire. He look as if just rescu from 
some charnel-house, and endow for a space with vital to destroy all 
beauti and harmoni in nature, and drive some benight soul to madness. 

"no, no, no!" shriek flora, "never!" 

"enough," said varney, "I am answered. It wa a bad proposal. I am a 
vampyr still." 

"spare me! spare me!" 

"blood!" 

flora sank upon her knees, and uplift her hand to heaven. "mercy, 
mercy!" she said. 

"blood!" said varney, and she saw hi hideous, fang-lik teeth. "blood! 
flora bannerworth, the vampyre' motto. I have ask you to love me, and 
you will not--th penalti be yours." 

"no, no!" said flora. "can it be possibl that even you, who have 
alreadi spoken with judgment and precision, can be so unjust? you must 
feel that, in all respects, I have been a victim, most gratuitously--a 
sufferer, while there exist no just caus that I should suffer; one 
who ha been tortured, not from person fault, selfishness, laps of 
integrity, or honour feelings, but becaus you have found it 
necessary, for the prolong of your terrif existence, to attack me 
as you have done. By what plea of honour, honesty, or justice, can I be 
blame for not embrac an altern which is beyond all human 
control?--i cannot love you." 

"then be content to suffer. flora bannerworth, will you not, even for a 
time, to save yourself and to save me, becom mine?" 

"horribl proposition!" 

"then am I doom yet, perhaps, for mani a cycl of years, to spread 
miseri and desol around me; and yet I love you with a feel which 
ha in it more of grate and unselfish than ever yet found a 
home within my breast. I would fain have you, although you cannot save 
me; there may yet be a chance, which shall enabl you to escap from the 
persecut of my presence." 

"oh! gloriou chance!" said flora. "which way can it come? tell me how I 
may embrac it, and such grate feel as a heart-stricken mourner 
can offer to him who ha rescu her from her deep affliction, shall yet 
be yours." 

"hear me, then, flora bannerworth, while I state to you some particular 
of mysteri existence, of such be as myself, which never yet have 
been breath to mortal ears." 

flora look intent at him, and listened, while, with a seriou 
earnest of manner, he detail to her someth of the physiolog of 
the singular class of be which the concurr of all circumst 
tend to make him appear. 

"flora," he said, "it is not that I am so enamour of an exist to 
be prolong onli by such fright means, which induc me to becom a 
terror to you or to others. believ me, that if my victims, those whom 
my insati thirst for blood make wretched, suffer much, I, the 
vampyre, am not without my moment of unutter agony. but it is a 
mysteri law of our nature, that as the period approach when the 
exhaust energi of life requir a new support from the warm, gush 
fountain of another' veins, the strong desir to live grow upon us, 
until, in a paroxysm of wild insanity, which will recognis no 
obstacles, human or divine, we seek a victim." 

"A fear state!" said flora. 

"it is so; and, when the dread repast is over, then again the puls 
beat healthfully, and the wast energi of a strang kind of vital 
are restor to us, we becom calm again, but with that calm come 
all the horror, all the agoni of reflection, and we suffer far more than 
tongu can tell." 

"you have my pity," said flora; "even you have my pity." 

"I might well demand it, if such a feel held a place within your 
breast. I might well demand your pity, flora bannerworth, for never 
crawl an abject wretch upon the earth' rotundity, so pitiabl as i." 

"go on, go on." 

"I will, and with such brief conclus as I may. have onc attack 
ani human being, we feel a strange, but terribl impuls desir again 
to seek that person for more blood. but I love you, flora; the small 
amount of sensibl that still linger about my preternatur 
existence, acknowledg in you a pure and better spirit. I would fain 
save you." 

"oh! tell me how I may escap the terribl infliction." 

"that can onli be done by flight. leav thi place, I implor you! leav 
it as quickli as the movement may be made. linger not--cast not one 
regret look behind you on your ancient home. I shall remain in thi 
local for years. let me lose sight of you, I will not pursu you; 
but, by forc of circumstances, I am myself compel to linger here. 
flight is the onli mean by which you may avoid a doom as terrif as 
that which I endure." 

"but tell me," said flora, after a moment' pause, dure which she 
appear to be endeavour to gather courag to ask some fear 
question; "tell me if it be true that those who have onc endur the 
terrif attack of a vampyre, becom themselves, after death, one of 
that dread race?" 

"it is by such means," said varney, "that the fright brood increases; 
but time and circumst must aid the develop of the new and 
horribl existence. you, however, are safe." 

"safe! oh! say that word again." 

"yes, safe; not onc or twice will the vampyre' attack have suffici 
influenc on your mortal frame, as to induc a suscept on your 
part to becom coexist with such as he. the attack must be often 
repeated, and the termin of mortal exist must be a consequ 
essential, and direct from those attacks, befor such a result may be 
anticipated." 

"yes, yes; I understand." 

"if you were to continu my victim from year to year, the energi of 
life would slowli wast away, and, till like some faint taper' gleam, 
consum more susten than it received, the veriest accid would 
extinguish your existence, and then, flora bannerworth, you might becom 
a vampyre." 

"oh! horrible! most horrible!" 

"if by chance, or by design, the least glimps of the cold moonbeam 
rest on your appar lifeless remains, you would rise again and be 
one of us--a terror to yourself and a desol to all around." 

"oh! I will fli from here," said flora. "the hope of escap from so 
terrif and dread a doom shall urg me onward; if flight can save 
me--flight from bannerworth hall, I will paus not until contin and 
ocean divid us." 

"it is well. i'm abl now thu calmli to reason with you. A few short 
month more and I shall feel the languor of death creep over me, and 
then will come that mad excit of the brain, which, were you hidden 
behind tripl door of steel, would tempt me again to seek your 
chamber--again to seiz you in my full embrace--again to draw from your 
vein the mean of prolong life--again to convuls your veri soul with 
terror." 

"I need no incentives," said flora, with a shudder, "in the shape of 
descript of the past, to urg me on." 

"you will fli from bannerworth hall?" 

"yes, yes!" said flora, "it shall be so; it veri chamber now are 
hideou with the recollect of scene enact in them. I will urg my 
brothers, my mother, all to leave, and in some distant clime we will 
find secur and shelter. there even we will learn to think of you with 
more of sorrow than of anger--mor piti than reproach--mor curios 
than loathing." 

"be it so," said the vampyre; and he clasp hi hands, as if with a 
thank that he had done so much toward restor peac at least 
to one, who, in consequ of hi acts, had felt such exquisit 
despair. "be it so; and even I will hope that the feel which have 
induc so desol and so isol a be as myself to endeavour to 
bring peac to one human heart, will plead for me, trumpet-tongued, to 
heaven!" 

"it will--it will," said flora. 

"do you think so?" 

"I do; and I will pray that the thought may turn to certainti in such a 
cause." 

the vampyr appear to be much affected; and then he added,-- 

"flora, you know that thi spot ha been the scene of a catastroph 
fear to look back upon, in the annal of your family?" 

"it has," said flora. "I know to what you allude; 'ti a matter of 
common knowledg to all--a sad theme to me, and one I would not court." 

"nor would I oppress you with it. your father, here, on thi veri spot, 
commit that desper act which brought him uncal for to the 
judgment seat of god. I have a strange, wild curios upon such 
subjects. will you, in return for the good that I have tri to do you, 
gratifi it?" 

"I know not what you mean," said flora. 

"to be more explicit, then, do you rememb the day on which your father 
breath hi last?" 

"too well--too well." 

"did you see him or convers with him shortli befor that desper act 
wa committed?" 

"no; he shut himself up for some time in a solitari chamber." 

"ha! what chamber?" 

"the one in which I slept myself on the night--" 

"yes, yes; the one with the portrait--that speak portrait--th eye 
of which seem to challeng an intrud as he enter the apartment." 

"the same." 

"for hour shut up there!" ad varney, musingly; "and from thenc he 
wander to the garden, where, in thi summer-house, he breath hi 
last?" 

"it wa so." 

"then, flora, ere I bid you adieu--" 

these word were scarc uttered, when there wa a quick, hasti 
footstep, and henri bannerworth appear behind varney, in the veri 
entranc of the summer-house. 

"now," he cried, "for revenge! now, foul being, blot upon the earth' 
surface, horribl imit of humanity, if mortal arm can do aught 
against you, you shall die!" 

A shriek came from the lip of flora, and fling herself past varney, 
who step aside, she clung to her brother, who made an unavail pass 
with hi sword at the vampyre. It wa a critic moment; and had the 
presenc of mind of varney desert him in the least, unarm as he was, 
he must have fallen beneath the weapon of henry. To spring, however, up 
the seat which flora had vacated, and to dash out some of the flimsi and 
rotten wood-work at the back of the summer-hous by the propuls power 
of hi whole frame, wa the work of a moment; and befor henri could 
free himself from the cling embrac of flora, varney, the vampyr wa 
gone, and there wa no greater chanc of hi captur than on a former 
occasion, when he wa pursu in vain from the hall to the wood, in the 
intricaci of which he wa so entir lost. 




chapter xxxv. 

the explanation.--marchdale' advice.--th project removal, and the 
admiral' anger. 


[illustration] 

thi extrem sudden movement on the part of varney wa certainli as 
unexpect as it wa decisive. henri had imagined, that by take 
possess of the onli entranc to the summer-house, he must come into 
person conflict with the be who had work so much evil for him and 
his; and that he should so suddenli have creat for himself anoth 
mode of exit, certainli never occur to him. 

"for heaven' sake, flora," he said, "unhand me; thi is a time for 
action." 

"but, henry, henry, hear me." 

"presently, presently, dear flora; I will yet make anoth effort to 
arrest the headlong flight of varney." 

He shook her off, perhap with not more rough than wa necessari to 
induc her to forego her grasp of him, but in a manner that fulli show 
he intend to be free; and then he sprang through the same apertur 
whenc varney had disappeared, just as georg and mr. marchdal arriv 
at the door of the summer-house. 

It wa nearli morning, so that the field were brighten up with the 
faint radianc of the come day; and when henri reach a point which 
he knew command an extens view, he paused, and ran hi eye eagerli 
along the landscape, with a hope of discov some trace of the 
fugitive. 

such, however, wa not the case; he saw nothing, heard noth of sir 
franci varney; and then he turned, and call loudli to georg to join 
him, and wa immedi repli to by hi brother' presence, 
accompani by marchdale. 

before, however, they could exchang a word, a rattl discharg of 
fire-arm took place from one of the windows, and they heard the 
admiral, in a loud voice, shouting,-- 

"broadsid to broadside! give it them again, jack! hit them between wind 
and water!" 

then there wa anoth rattl discharge, and henri exclaimed,-- 

"what is the mean of that firing?" 

"it come from the admiral' room," said marchdale. "on my life, I think 
the old man must be mad. He ha some six or eight pistol rang in a 
row along the window-sill, and all loaded, so that by the aid of a match 
they can be pretti well discharg as a volley, which he consid the 
onli proper mean of fire upon the vampyre." 

"it is so," repli george; "and, no doubt, hear an alarm, he ha 
commenc oper by fire into the enemy." 

"well, well," said henry; "he must have hi way. I have pursu varney 
thu far, and that he ha again retreat to the wood, I cannot doubt. 
between thi and the full light of day, let us at least make an effort 
to discov hi place of retreat. We know the local as well as he can 
possibly, and I propos now that we commenc an activ search." 

"come on, then," said marchdale. "we are all armed; and I, for one, 
shall feel no hesit in take the life, if it be possibl to do so, 
of that strang being." 

"of that possibl you doubt?" said george, as they hurri on across 
the meadows. 

"inde I do, and with reason too. i'm certain that when I fire at him 
befor I hit him; and besides, flora must have shot him upon the 
occas when we were absent, and she use your pistol henry, to defend 
herself and her mother." 

"it would seem so," said henry; "and disregard all present 
circumstances, if I do meet him, I will put to the proof whether he be 
mortal or not." 

the distanc wa not great, and they soon reach the margin of the 
wood; they then separ agre to meet within it, at a well-spring, 
familiar to them all: previou to which each wa to make hi best 
endeavour to discov if ani one wa hidden among the bush-wood or in 
the hollow of the ancient tree they should encount on their line of 
march. 

the fact was, that henri find that he wa like to pass an 
exceedingli disturbed, restless night, through agit of spirits, 
had, after toss to and fro on hi couch for mani hours, wise at 
length risen, and determin to walk abroad in the garden belong to 
the mansion, in prefer to continu in such a state of fever and 
anxiety, as he wa in, in hi own chamber. 

sinc the vampyre' dread visit, it had been the custom of both the 
brothers, occasionally, to tap at the chamber door of flora, who, at her 
own request, now that she had chang her room, and dispens with ani 
one sit up with her, wish occasion to be commun with by 
some member of the family. 

henry, then, after rapidli dressing, as he pass the door of her 
bedroom, wa about to tap at it, when to hi surpris he found it open, 
and upon hastili enter it he observ that the bed wa empty, and a 
hasti glanc round the apart convinc him that flora wa not there. 

alarm took possess of him, and hastili arm himself, he rous 
marchdal and george, but without wait for them to be readi to 
accompani him, he sought the garden, to search it thoroughli in case she 
should be anywher there concealed. 

thu it wa he had come upon the confer so strang and so 
unexpectedli held between varney and flora in the summer-house. with 
what occur upon that discoveri the reader are acquainted. 

flora had promis georg that she would return immedi to the 
house, but when, in complianc with the call of henry, georg and 
marchdal had left her alone, she felt so agit and faint that she 
began to cling to the trelli work of the littl build for a few 
moment befor she could gather strength to reach the mansion. 

two or three minut might thu have elapsed, and flora wa in such a 
state of mental bewilder with all that had occurred, that she could 
scarc believ it real, when suddenli a slight sound attract her 
attention, and through the gap which had been made in the wall of the 
summer-house, with an appear of perfect composure, again appear 
sir franci varney. 

"flora," he said, quietli resum the discours which had been broken 
off, "I am quit convinc now that you will be much the happier for the 
interview." 

"graciou heaven!" said flora, "whenc have you come from?" 

"I have never left," said varney. 

"but I saw you fli from thi spot." 

"you did; but it wa onli to anoth immedi outsid the summer 
house. I had no idea of break off our confer so abruptly." 

"have you anyth to add to what you have alreadi stated?" 

"absolut nothing, unless you have a question to propos to me--i 
should have thought you had, flora. Is there no other circumst 
weigh heavili upon your mind, as well as the dread visit I 
have subject you to?" 

"yes," said flora. "what ha becom of charl holland?" 

"listen. Do not discard all hope; when you are far from here you will 
meet with him again." 

"but he ha left me." 

"and yet he will be able, when you again encount him, so far to 
extenu hi seem perfidy, that you shall hold him as untouch in 
honour as when first he whisper to you that he love you." 

"oh, joy! joy!" said flora; "bi that assur you have rob 
misfortun of it sting, and richli compens me for all that I have 
suffered." 

"adieu!" said the vampyre. "I shall now proceed to my own home by a 
differ rout to that taken by those who would kill me." 

"but after this," said flora, "there shall be no danger; you shall be 
held harmless, and our departur from bannerworth hall shall be so 
quick, that you will soon be releas from all apprehens of vengeanc 
from my brother, and I shall tast again of that happi which I 
thought had fled from me for ever." 

"farewell," said the vampire; and fold hi cloak close around him, 
he strode from the summer-house, soon disappear from her sight behind 
the shrub and ampl veget with which that garden abounded. 

flora sunk upon her knees, and utter a brief, but heartfelt 
thanksgiv to heaven for thi happi chang in her destiny. the hue of 
health faintli again visit her cheeks, and as she now, with a feel 
of more energi and strength than she had been capabl of exert for 
mani days, walk toward the house, she felt all that delight 
sensat which the mind experi when it is shake off the trammel 
of some seriou evil which it delight now to find that the imagin 
ha attir in far wors colour than the fact deserved. 

It is scarc necessary, after this, to say that the search in the wood 
for sir franci varney wa an unproduct one, and that the morn 
dawn upon the labour of the brother and of mr. marchdale, without 
their have discov the least indic of the presenc of varney. 
again puzzl and confounded, they stood on the margin of the wood, and 
look sadli toward the brighten window of bannerworth hall, which 
were now reflect with a golden radianc the slant ray of the morn 
sun. 

"foil again," remark henry, with a gestur of impatience; "foil 
again, and as complet as before. I declar that I will fight thi 
man, let our friend the admir say what he will against such a measur 
I will meet him in mortal combat; he shall consumm hi triumph over 
our whole famili by my death, or I will rid the world and ourselv of 
so fright a character." 

"let us hope," said marchdale, "that some other cours may be adopted, 
which shall put an end to these proceedings." 

"that," exclaim henry, "i to hope against all probability; what other 
cours can be pursued? Be thi varney man or devil, he ha evid 
mark us for hi prey." 

[illustration] 

"indeed, it would seem so," remark george; "but yet he shall find that 
we will not fall so easily; he shall discov that if poor flora' 
gentl spirit ha been crush by these fright circumstances, we are 
of a sterner mould." 

"he shall," said henry; "I for one will dedic my life to thi matter. 
I will know no more rest than is necessari to recruit my frame, until I 
have succeed in overcom thi monster; I will seek no pleasur here, 
and will banish from my mind, all els that may interfer with that one 
fix pursuit. He or I must fall." 

"well spoken," said marchdale; "and yet I hope that circumst may 
occur to prevent such a necess of action, and that probabl you will 
yet see that it will be wise and prudent to adopt a milder and a safer 
course." 

"no, marchdale, you cannot feel as we feel. you look on more as a 
spectator, sympathis with the afflict of either, than feel the 
full sting of those afflict yourself." 

"do I not feel acut for you? i'm a lone man in the world, and I 
have taught myself now to centr my affect in your family; my 
recollect of earli year assist me in so doing. believ me, both of 
you, that I am no idl spectat of your griefs, but that I share them 
fully. If I advis you to be peaceful, and to endeavour by the gentlest 
mean possibl to accomplish your aims, it is not that I would counsel 
you cowardice; but have seen so much more of the world than either of 
you have had time or opportun of seeing, I do not look so 
enthusiast upon matters, but, with a cooler, calmer judgment, I do 
not say a better, I proffer to you my counsel." 

"we thank you," said henry; "but thi is a matter in which action seem 
special call for. It is not to be born that a whole famili is to be 
oppress by such a fiend in human shape as that varney." 

"let me," said marchdale, "counsel you to submit to flora' decis in 
thi business; let her wish constitut the rule of action. she is the 
greatest sufferer, and the one most deepli interest in the termin 
of thi fear business. moreov she ha judgment and decis of 
character--sh will advis you rightly, be assured." 

"that she would advis us honourably," said henry, "and that we should 
feel everi disposit in the world to defer to her wish our 
proposition, is not to be doubted; but littl shall be done without her 
counsel and sanction. let us now proceed homeward, for I am most anxiou 
to ascertain how it came about that she and sir franci varney were 
togeth in that summer-hous at so strang an hour." 

they all three walk togeth toward the house, convers in a 
similar strain as they went. 




chapter xxxvi. 

the consultation.--th duel and it results. 


[illustration] 

independ of thi interview which flora had had with the much dread 
sir franci varney, the circumst in which she and all who were dear 
to her, happen at that moment to be placed, certainli requir an 
amount of consideration, which could not be too soon bestowed. 

By a combin of disagreeables, everyth that could possibl occur 
to disturb the peac of the famili seem to have taken place at once; 
like macbeth's, their troubl had truli come in battalions, and now 
that the seren of their domest posit wa destroyed, minor evil 
and annoy which that veri seren had enabl them to hold at 
arm's-length becam gigantic, and ad much to their distress. 

the small income, which, when all wa happiness, health and peace, wa 
made to constitut a comfort household, wa now total inadequ 
to do so--th power to economis and to make the most of a little, had 
flown along with that contented of spirit which the harmoni of 
circumst alon could produce. 

It wa not to be suppos that poor mrs. bannerworth could now, as she 
had formerli done, when her mind wa free from anxiety, attend to those 
domest matter which make up the comfort of a family--distract at 
the situat of her daughter, and bewild by the rapid success of 
troublesom event which so short a period of time had given birth to, 
she fell into an inert state of mind as differ as anyth could 
possibl be, from her former activ existence. 

It ha likewis been seen how the veri domest fled from bannerworth 
hall in dismay, rather than remain beneath the same roof with a famili 
believ to be subject to the visit of so aw a be as a 
vampyre. 

among the class who occupi posit of servitude, certainli there might 
have been found some, who, with feel and understand abov such 
considerations, would have clung sympathet to that famili in 
distress, which they had known under a happier aspect; but it had not 
been the good fortun of the bannerworth to have such as these about 
them; henc selfish had it way, and they were deserted. It wa not 
likely, then, that stranger would willingli accept servic in a famili 
so situated, without some power impuls in the shape of a higher 
pecuniari consideration, as wa complet out of the power of the 
bannerworth to offer. 

thu wa it, then, that most cruelly, at the veri time that they had 
most need of assist and of sympathy, thi unfortun famili almost 
becam isol from their kind; and, apart from everi other 
consideration, it would have been almost imposs for them to continu 
inhabit of the hall, with anyth like comfort, or advantage. 

and then, although the disappear of charl holland no longer 
awaken those feel of indign at hi suppos perfidi which 
were first produc by that event; still, view it in which way they 
might, it wa a sever blow of fate, and after it, they one and all 
found themselv still less abl to contend against the sea of troubl 
that surround them. 

the reader, too, will not have fail to remark that there wa about the 
whole of the famili that pride of independ which induc them to 
shrink from live upon extran aid; and hence, although they felt 
and felt truly, that when admir bell, in hi frank manner, offer 
them pecuniari assistance, that it wa no idl compliment, yet with a 
sensit such as they might well be expect to feel, they held 
back, and ask each other what prospect there wa of emerg from such 
a state of things, and if it were justifi to commenc a life of 
dependence, the end of which wa not evid or tangible. 

notwithstanding, too, the nobl confid of flora in her lover, and 
notwithstand that confid had been echo by her brothers, there 
would at time obtrud into the mind of the latter, a feel of the 
possibility, that after all they might be mistaken; and charl holland 
might, from some sudden impulse, fanci hi futur happi wa all 
at stake, have withdrawn himself from the hall, and realli written the 
letter attribut to him. 

We say thi onli obtrud itself occasionally, for all their real 
feel and aspir were the other way, although mr. marchdale, 
they could perceive, had hi doubts, and they could not but confess that 
he wa more like to view the matter calmli and dispassion than 
they. 

In fact, the veri hesit with which he spoke upon the subject, 
convinc them of hi doubt; for they attribut that hesit to a 
fear of give them pain, or of wound the prejudic of admir bell, 
with whom he had alreadi had word so nearli approach to a quarrel. 

henry' visit to mr. chillingworth wa not like to be product of 
ani result beyond those of a conjectur character. all that that 
gentleman could do wa to express a willing to be direct by them 
in ani way, rather than suggest ani cours of conduct himself upon 
circumst which he could not be expect to judg of as they who 
were on the spot, and had wit their actual occurrence. 

and now we will suppos that the reader is enabl with us to look into 
one of the princip room of bannerworth hall. It is evening, and some 
candl are shed a sickli light on the ampl proport of the onc 
handsom apartment. At solemn consult the whole of the famili are 
assembled. As well as the admiral, mr. chillingworth, and marchdale, 
jack pringle, too, walk in, by the suffer of hi master, as if he 
consid he had a perfect right to do so. 

the occas of the meet had been a commun which flora had 
made concern her most singular and deepli interest interview with 
the vampyre. the detail of thi interview had produc a deep effect 
upon the whole of the family. flora wa there, and she look better, 
calmer, and more collect than she had done for some day past. 

No doubt the interview she had had with varney in the summer-hous in 
the garden had dispel a host of imaginari terror with which she had 
surround him, although it had confirm her fulli that he and he onli 
wa the dread be who had caus her so much misery. 

that interview had tend to show her that about him there wa yet 
someth human, and that there wa not a danger of her be hunt 
down from place to place by so horribl an existence. 

such a feel as thi was, of course, a sourc of deep consolation; and 
with a firmer voice, and more of her old spirit of cheer about 
her than she had late exhibited, she again detail the particular of 
the interview to all who had assembled, conclud by saying,-- 

"and thi ha given me hope of happier days. If it be a delusion, it is 
a happi one; and now that but a fright veil of mysteri still hang 
over the fate of charl holland, I how gladli would I bid adieu to thi 
place, and all that ha made it terrible. I could almost piti sir 
franci varney, rather than condemn him." 

"that may be true," said henry, "to a certain extent, sister; but we 
never can forget the amount of miseri he ha brought upon us. It is no 
slight thing to be forc from our old and much-lov home, even if such 
proceed doe succeed in free us from hi persecutions." 

"but, my young friend," said marchdale, "you must recollect, that 
through life it is continu the lot of human to be endeavour to 
fli from great evil to those which do not present themselv to the 
mind in so bad an aspect. It is something, surely, to allevi 
affliction, if we cannot entir remov it." 

"that is true," said mr. chillingworth, "to a consider extent, but 
then it take too much for grant to pleas me." 

"how so, sir?" 

"why, certainly, to remov from bannerworth hall is a much less evil 
than to remain at bannerworth hall, and be haunt by a vampyre; but 
then that proposit take for grant that vampyr business, which I 
will never grant. I repeat, again and again, it is contrari to all 
experience, to philosophy, and to all the law of ordinari nature." 

"fact are stubborn things," said marchdale. 

"apparently," remark mr. chillingworth. 

"well, sir; and here we have the fact of a vampyre." 

"the presum fact. one swallow don't make a summer, mr. marchdale." 

"thi is wast of time," said henry--"of course, the amount of evid 
that will suffic to bring convict to one man' mind will fail in 
do so to another. the question is, what are we to do?" 

all eye were turn upon flora, as if thi question wa more 
particularli address to her, and it behov her, abov all others, to 
answer it. she did so; and in a firm, clear voice, she said,-- 

"I will discov the fate of charl holland, and then leav the hall." 

"the fate of charl holland!" said marchdale. "why, really, unless that 
young gentleman choos to be commun himself upon so interest 
a subject, we may be a long while discov hi fate. I know that it 
is not a romant view to take of the question, to suppos simpli that 
he wrote the three letter found upon hi dressing-table, and then 
decamped; but to my mind, it savour most wonder of matter-of-fact. 
I now speak more freeli than I have otherwis done, for I am now upon 
the eve of my departure. I have no wish to remain here, and breed 
dissens in ani family, or to run a tilt against anybody' 
prejudices." here he look at admir bell. "I leav thi hous 
to-night." 

"you'r a d----d lubberli thief," said the admiral; "the sooner you 
leav it the better. why, you bad-look son of a gun, what do you 
mean? I thought we'd had enough of that." 

"I fulli expect thi abuse," said marchdale. 

"did you expect that?" said the admiral, as he snatch up an inkstand, 
and threw at marchdale, hit him a hard knock on the chin, and 
bespatt it content on hi breast. "now i'll give you 
satisfaction, you lubber. d--me, if you ain't a second jones, and enough 
to sink the ship. shiver my timber if I sha'n't say someth strong 
presently." 

"I really," said henry, "must protest, admir bell, against thi 
conduct." 

"protest and be d----d." 

"mr. marchdal may be right, sir, or he may be wrong, it' a matter of 
opinion." 

"oh, never mind," said marchdale; "I look upon thi old nautic ruffian 
as someth between a fool and a madman. If he were a younger man I 
should chastis him upon the spot; but as it is I live in hope yet of 
get him into some comfort lunat asylum." 

"me into an asylum!" shout the admiral. "jack, did you hear that?" 

"ay, ay, sir." 

"farewel all of you," said marchdale; "mi best wish be with thi 
family. I cannot remain under thi roof to be so insulted." 

"A good riddance," cri the admiral. "i'd rather sail round the world 
with a shipload of vampyr than with such a humbug son of a gun as 
you are. d----e, you'r wors than a lawyer." 

"nay, nay," cri they, "mr. marchdale, stay." 

"stay, stay," cri george, and mrs. bannerworth, likewise, said stay; 
but at the moment flora step forward, and in a clear voic she 
said,-- 

"no, let him go, he doubt charl holland; let all go who doubt charl 
holland. mr. marchdale, heaven forgiv you thi injustic you are doing. 
We may never meet again. farewell, sir!" 

these word were spoken in so decid a tone, that no one contradict 
them. marchdal cast a strang kind of look round upon the famili 
circle, and in anoth instant he wa gone. 

"huzza!" shout jack pringle; "that' one good job." 

henri look rather resentful, which the admir could not but observe, 
and so, less with the devil-may-car manner in which he usual spoke, 
the old man address him. 

"hark ye, mr. henri bannerworth, you ain't best pleas with me, and in 
that case I don't know that I shall stay to troubl you ani longer, as 
for your friend who ha left you, sooner or later you'll find him out--i 
tell you there' no good in that fellow. Do you think i'v been cruiz 
about for a matter of sixti years, and don't know an honest man when I 
see him. but never mind, i'm go on a voyag of discoveri for my 
nephew, and you can do as you like." 

"heaven onli knows, admir bell," said henry, "who is right and who is 
wrong. I do much regret that you have quarrel with mr. marchdale; but 
what is done can't be undone." 

"do not leav us," said flora; "let me beg of you, admir bell, not to 
leav us; for my sake remain here, for to you I can speak freeli and 
with confidence, of charles, when probabl I can do so to no one else. 
you knew him well and have a confid in him, which no one els can 
aspir to. I pray you, therefore, to stay with us." 

"onli on one condition," said the admiral. 

"name it--nam it! 

"you think of let the hall?" 

"yes, yes." 

"let me have it, then, and let me pay a few year in advance. If you 
don't, i'm d----d if I stay anoth night in the place. you must give me 
immedi possession, too, and stay here as my guest until you suit 
yourselv elsewhere. those are my term and conditions. say yes, and 
all' right; say no, and i'm off like a round shot from a carronade. 
d----me, that' the thing, jack, isn't it?" 

"ay, ay, sir." 

there wa a silenc of some few moment after thi extraordinari offer 
had been made, and then they spoke, saying,-- 

"admir bell, your gener offer, and the feel which dictat it, 
are by far too transpar for us to affect not to understand them. your 
actions, admiral--" 

"oh, bother my actions! what are they to you? come, now, I consid 
myself master of the house, d--n you! I invit you all to dinner, or 
supper, or to whatev meal come next. mrs. bannerworth, will you 
oblig me, as i'm an old fool in famili affairs, by buy what' want 
for me and my guests? there' the money, ma'am. come along, jack, we'll 
take a look over our new house. what do you think of it?" 

"want some sheathing, sir, here and there." 

"veri like; but, however, it will do well enough for us; we'r in port, 
you know. come along." 

"ay, ay, sir." 

and off went the admir and jack, after leav a twenti pound note in 
mrs. bannerworth' lap. 




chapter xxxvii. 

sir franci varney' separ opponents.--th interposit OF flora. 


[illustration] 

the old admir so complet overcam the famili of the bannerworth by 
hi generos and evid single-minded of hi behaviour, that 
although not one, except flora, approv of hi conduct toward mr. 
marchdale, yet they could not help like him; and had they been place 
in a posit to choos which of the two they would have had remain with 
them, the admir or marchdale, there can be no question they would have 
made choic of the former. 

still, however, it wa not pleasant to find a man like marchdal 
virtual driven from the house, becaus he presum to differ in 
opinion upon a veri doubt matter with anoth of it inmates. but as 
it wa the natur of the bannerworth famili alway to inclin to the 
most gener view of subjects, the frank, hearti confid of the old 
admir in charl holland pleas them better than the calm and seriou 
doubt of marchdale. 

hi ruse of hire the hous of them, and pay the rent in advance, 
for the purpos of place ampl fund in their hand for ani 
contingency, wa not the less amiabl becaus it wa so easili seen 
through; and they could not make up their mind to hurt the feel of 
the old man by the reject of hi gener offer. 

when he had left, thi subject wa canvass among them, and it wa 
agre that he should have hi own way in the matter for the present, 
although they hope to hear someth from marchdale, which should make 
hi departur appear less abrupt and uncomfort to the whole of the 
family. 

dure the cours of thi conversation, it wa made known to flora with 
more distinct than under ani other circumst it would have been, 
that georg holland had been on the eve of fight a duel with sir 
franci varney, previou to hi mysteri disappearance. 

when she becam fulli awar of thi fact, to her mind it seem 
materi to add to the suspicion previous to then entertained, that 
foul mean had been use in order to put charl out of the way. 

"who knows," she said, "that thi varney may not shrink with the 
greatest terror from a conflict with ani human being, and feel one 
wa inevit with charl holland, unless interrupt by some vigor 
act of hi own, he or some myrmidon of hi may have taken charles' 
life!" 

"I do not think, flora," said henry, "that he would have ventur upon 
so desper an act; I cannot well believ such a thing possible. but 
fear not; he will find, if he have realli commit ani such atrocity, 
that it will not save him." 

these word of henry, though it made no impress at the time upon 
flora, beyond what they carri upon their surface, they really, 
however, as concern henri himself, impli a settl resolution, which 
he immedi set about reduc to practice. 

when the confer broke up, night, as it still was, he, without say 
anyth to ani one, took hi hat and cloak, and left the hall, 
proceed by the nearest practic rout to the resid of sir 
franci varney, where he arriv without ani interrupt of ani 
character. 

varney wa at first deni to him, but befor he could leav the house, 
a servant came down the great staircase, to say it wa a mistake; and 
that sir franci wa at home, and would be happi to see him. 

He wa usher into the same apart where sir franci varney had 
befor receiv hi visitors; and there sat the now declar vampyre, 
look pale and ghastli by the dim light which burn in the apartment, 
and, indeed, more like some spectr of the tomb, than one of the great 
famili of man. 

"be seated, sir," said varney; "although my eye have seldom the 
pleasur of behold you within these walls, be assur you are a 
honour guest." 

"sir franci varney," said henry, "I came not here to bandi compliment 
with you; I have none to pay to you, nor do I wish to hear ani of them 
from your lips." 

"an excel sentiment, young man," said varney, "and well delivered. 
may I presume, then, without infring too far upon your extrem 
courtesy, to inquire, to what circumst I am indebt for your 
visit?" 

"to one, sir francis, that I believ you are better acquaint with than 
you will have the candour to admit." 

"indeed, sir," said varney, coldly; "you measur my candour, probably, 
by a standard of your own; in which case I fear, I may be no gainer; and 
yet that may be of itself a circumst that should afford littl food 
for surprise, but proceed, sir--sinc we have so few compliment to 
stand between us and our purpose, we shall in all due time arriv at 
it." 

"yes, in due time, sir franci varney, and that due time ha arrived. 
know you anyth of my friend, mr. charl holland?" said henry, in 
mark accents; and he gaze on sir franci varney with earnestness, 
that seem to say not even a look should escap hi observation. 

varney, however, return the gaze as steadily, but coldly, as he 
repli in hi measur accents,-- 

"I have heard of the young gentleman." 

"and seen him?" 

"and seen him too, as you, mr. bannerworth, must be well aware. sure 
you have not come all thi way, mere to make such an inquiry; but, 
sir, you are welcom to the answer." 

henri had someth of a struggl to keep down the rise anger, at 
these cool taunt of varney; but he succeeded--and then he said,-- 

"I suspect charl holland, sir franci varney, ha met with unfair 
treatment, and that he ha been unfairli dealt with, for an unworthi 
purpose." 

"undoubtedly," said varney, "if the gentleman you allud to, ha been 
unfairli dealt with, it wa for a foul purpose; for no good or gener 
object, my young sir, could be so obtained--y acknowledg so much, I 
doubt not?" 

"I do, sir franci varney; and henc the purpos of my visit here--for 
thi reason I appli to you--" 

"A singular object, support by a singular reason. I cannot see the 
connection, young sir; pray proceed to enlighten me upon thi matter, 
and when you have done that, may I presum upon your consideration, to 
inquir in what way I can be of ani servic to you?" 

"sir francis," said henry, hi anger rais hi tones--"thi will not 
serv you--i have come to exact an account of how you have dispos of 
my friend; and I will have it." 

"gently, my good sir; you are awar I know noth of your friend; hi 
motion are hi own; and as to what I have done with him; my onli answer 
is, that he would permit me to do noth with him, had I been so 
inclin to have taken the liberty." 

"you are suspected, sir franci varney, of have made an attempt upon 
the life or liberti of charl holland; you, in fact, are suspect of 
be hi murderer--and, so help me heaven! if I have not justice, I 
will have vengeance!" 

"young sir, your word are of grave import, and ought to be coolli 
consid befor they are uttered. with regard to justic and 
vengeance, mr. bannerworth, you may have both; but I tell you, of 
charl holland, or what ha becom of him, I know nothing. but 
wherefor do you come to so unlik a quarter to learn someth of an 
individu of whom I know nothing?" 

"becaus charl holland wa to have fought a duel with you: but befor 
that had time to take place, he ha suddenli becom missing. I suspect 
that you are the author of hi disappearance, becaus you fear an 
encount with a mortal man." 

"mr. bannerworth, permit me to say, in my own defence, that I do not 
fear ani man, howev foolish he may be; and wisdom is not an attribut 
I find, from experi in all men, of your friend. however, you must be 
dreaming, sir--a kind of vivid insan ha taken possess of your 
mind, which distorts--" 

"sir franci varney!" exclaim henry, now perfectli uncontrollable. 

"sir," said varney, as he fill up the pause, "proceed; I am all 
attention. you do me honour." 

"if," resum henry, "such wa your object in put mr. holland aside, 
by becom person or by proxi an assassin, you are mistaken in 
suppos you have accomplish your object." 

"go on, sir," said sir franci varney, in a bland and sweet tone; "I am 
all attention; pray proceed." 

"you have failed; for I now here, on thi spot, defi you to mortal 
combat. coward, assassin as you are, I challeng you to fight." 

"you don't mean on the carpet here?" said varney, deliberately. 

"no, sir; but beneath the canopi of heaven, in the light of the day. and 
then, sir francis, we shall see who will shrink from the conflict." 

"it is remark good, mr. bannerworth, and, beg your pardon, for I 
do not wish to give ani offence, my honour sir, it would rehears 
befor an audience; in short, sir, it is highli dramatic." 

"you shrink from the combat, do you? now, indeed, I know you." 

"young man--young man," said sir francis, calmly, and shake hi head 
veri deliberately, and the shadow pass across hi pale face, "you 
know me not, if you think sir franci varney shrink from ani man, much 
less one like yourself." 

"you are a coward, and worse, if you refus my challenge." 

"I do not refus it; I accept it," said varney, calmly, and in a 
dignifi manner; and then, with a sneer, he added,--"y are well 
acquaint with the mode in which gentlemen gener manag these 
matters, mr. bannerworth, and perhap I am somewhat confin in my 
knowledg in the way of the world, becaus you are your own princip 
and second. In all my experience, I never met with a similar case." 

"the circumst under which it is given are as unexampled, and will 
excus the mode of the challenge," said henry, with much warmth. 

"singular coincidence--th challeng and mode of it is most singular! 
they are well match in that respect. singular, did I say? the more I 
think of it, mr. bannerworth, the more I am inclin to think thi 
posit odd." 

"earli to-morrow, sir francis, you shall hear from me." 

"in that case, you will not arrang preliminari now? well, well; it is 
veri unusu for the princip themselv to do so; and yet, excus my 
freedom, I presumed, as you had so far desert the beaten track, that I 
had no idea how far you might be dispos to lead the same route." 

"I have said all I intend to say, sir franci varney; we shall see 
each other again." 

"I may not detain you, I presume, to tast aught in the way of 
refreshment?" 

henri made no reply, but turn toward the door, without even make an 
attempt to return the grave and formal bow that sir franci varney made 
as he saw him about to quit the apartment; for henri saw that hi pale 
featur were light up with a sarcast smile, most disagre to 
look upon as well as irrit to henri bannerworth. 

He now quit sir franci varney' abode, be let out by a servant 
who had been rung for for that purpos by hi master. 

henri walk homeward, satisfi that he had now done all that he could 
under the circumstances. 

"I will send chillingworth to him in the morning, and then I shall see 
what all thi will end in. He must meet me, and then charl holland, if 
not discovered, shall be, at least, revenged." 

there wa anoth person in bannerworth hall who had form a similar 
resolution. that person wa a veri differ sort of person to henri 
bannerworth, though quit as estim in hi way. 

thi wa no other than the old admiral. It wa singular that two such 
veri differ person should deem the same step necessary, and both 
keep the secret from each other; but so it was, and, after some intern 
swearing, he determin upon challeng varney in person. 

"i'd send jack pringle, but the swab would settl the matter as shortli 
as if a youngster wa make an entri in a log, and heard the 
boatswain' whistl summon the hand to a mess, and fear he would 
lose hi grog. 

"d--n my quarters! but sir franci varney, as he style himself, sha'n't 
make ani way against old admir bell. he' as tough as a hawser, and 
just the sort of blade for a vampyr to come athwart. i'll pitch him 
end-long, and make a plank of him afor long. cu my windpipe! what a 
long, lanki swab he is, with teeth fit to unpick a splice; but let me 
alone, i'll see if I can't make a hull of hi carcass, vampyr or no 
vampyre. 

"mi nevy, charl holland, can't be allow to cut away without nobody' 
leav or licence. no, no; i'll not stand that anyhow. 'never desert a 
messmat in the time of need,' is the first maxim of a seaman, and I 
ain't the one as 'll do so." 

thu self-communing, the old admir march along until he came to sir 
franci varney' house, at the gate of which he gave the bell what he 
call a long pull, a strong pull, and a pull altogether, that set it 
ring with a fury, the like of which had never certainli been heard by 
the household. 

A minut or two scarc elaps befor the domest hurri to answer 
so urgent a summons; and when the gate wa opened, the servant who 
answer it inquir hi business. 

"what' that to you, snob? Is your master, sir franci varney, in? 
because, if he be, let him know old admir bell want to speak to him. 
d'ye hear?" 

"yes, sir," repli the servant, who had paus a few moment to examin 
the individu who gave thi odd kind of address. 

In anoth minut word wa brought to him that sir franci varney would 
be veri happi to see admir bell. 

"ay, ay," he muttered; "just as the devil like to meet with holi water, 
or as I like ani water save salt water." 

He wa speedili introduc to sir franci varney, who wa seat in the 
same postur as he had been left by henri bannerworth not mani minut 
before. 

"admir bell," said sir francis, rising, and bow to that individu 
in the most polite, calm, and dignifi manner imaginable, "permit me to 
express the honour I feel at thi unexpect visit." 

"none of your gammon." 

"will you be seated. allow me to offer you such refresh as thi 
poor hous affords." 

"d--n all this! you know, sir francis, I don't want none o' thi 
palaver. it' for all the world like a frenchman, when you are go to 
give him a broadside; he make grimaces, throw dust in your eyes, and 
tri to stab you in the back. oh, no! none of that for me." 

"I should say not, admir bell. I should not like it myself, and I dare 
say you are a man of too much experi not to perceiv when you are or 
are not impos upon." 

"well, what is that to you? d--n me, I didn't come here to talk to you 
about myself." 

"then may I presum upon your courtesi so far as to beg that you will 
enlighten me upon the object of your visit!" 

"yes; in pretti quick time. just tell me where you have stow away my 
nephew, charl holland?" 

"really, i--" 

"hold your slack, will you, and hear me out; if he' living, let him 
out, and i'll say no more about it; that' liberal, you know; it ain't 
term everybodi would offer you." 

"I must, in truth, admit they are not; and, moreover, they quit 
surpris even me, and I have learn not to be surpris at almost 
anything." 

"well, will you give him up alive? but, hark ye, you mustn't have made 
veri queer fish of him, do ye see?" 

"I hear you," said sir francis, with a bland smile, pass one hand 
gentli over the other, and show hi front teeth in a peculiar manner; 
"but I realli cannot comprehend all this; but I may say, generally, that 
mr. holland is no acquaint of mine, and I have no sort of knowledg 
where he may be." 

"that won't do for me," said the admiral, positively, shake hi head. 

"I am particularli sorry, admir bell, that it will not, see that I 
have noth els to say." 

"I see how it is; you'v put him out of the way, and i'm d----d if you 
shan't bring him to life, whole and sound, or i'll know the reason why." 

"with that I have alreadi furnish you, admir bell," quietli rejoin 
varney; "anyth more on that head is out of my power, though my 
willing to oblig a person of such consider as yourself, is 
veri great; but, permit me to add, thi is a veri strang and odd 
commun from one gentleman to another. you have lost a relative, 
who has, veri probably, taken some offence, or some notion into hi 
head, of which nobodi but himself know anything, and you come to one 
yet more unlik to know anyth of him, than even yourself. 

"gammon again, now, sir franci varney, or blarney." 

"varney, if you please, admir bell; I wa christen varney." 

"christened, eh?" 

"yes, christened--wer you not christened? If not, I dare say you 
understand the ceremoni well enough." 

[illustration] 

"I should think I did; but, as for christening, a--" 

"go on, sir." 

"A vampyre! whi I should as soon think of read the burial servic of 
a pig." 

"veri possible; but what ha all thi to do with your visit to me?" 

"thi much, you lubber. now, d--n my carcass from head to stern, if I 
don't call you out." 

"well, admir bell," slid varney, mildly, "in that case, I suppos I 
must come out; but whi do you insist that I have ani knowledg of your 
nephew, mr. charl holland?" 

"you were to have fought a duel with him, and now he' gone." 

"I am here," said varney. 

"ay," said the admiral, "that' as plain as a purser' shirt upon a 
handspike; but that' the veri reason whi my nevey ain't here, and 
that' all about it." 

"and that' marvel little, so far as the sens is concerned," said 
varney, without the movement of a muscle. 

"it is said that peopl of your class don't like fight mortal men; 
now you have dispos of him, lest he should dispos of you." 

"that is explicit, but it is to no purpose, sinc the gentleman in 
question hasn't place himself at my disposal." 

"then, d----e, I will; fish, flesh, or fowl, I don't care; all' one to 
admir bell. come fair or fowl, i'm a tar for all men; a seaman ever 
readi to face a foe, so here goes, you lubberli moon manufactur calf." 

"I hear, admiral, but it is scarc civil, to say the least of it; 
however, as you are somewhat eccentric, and do not, I dare say, mean all 
your word imply, I am quit will to make everi allowance." 

"I don't want ani allowance; d--n you and your allowance, too; noth 
but allow of grog, and a pretti good allowance, too, will do for me, 
and tell you, sir franci varney," said the admiral, with much wrath, 
"that you are a d----d lubberli hound, and i'll fight you; yes, i'm 
readi to hammer away, or with anyth from a pop-gun to a ship' gun; 
you don't come over me with your gammon, I tell you. you'v murder 
charl holland becaus you couldn't face him--that' the truth of it." 

"with the other part of your speech, admir bell, allow me to say, you 
have mix up a seriou accusation--on I cannot permit to pass 
lightly." 

"will you or not fight?" 

"oh, yes; I shall be happi to serv you ani way that I can. I hope thi 
will be an answer to your accusation, also." 

"that' settled, then." 

"why, I am not captious, admir bell, but it is not gener usual for 
the princip to settl the preliminari themselves; doubtless you, in 
your career of fame and glory, know someth of the manner in which 
gentlemen demean themselv on these occasions." 

"oh, d--n you! yes, i'll send some one to do all this. yes, yes, jack 
pringl will be the man, though jack ain't a holiday, shore-going, 
smooth-spoken swab, but as good a seaman as ever trod deck or handl a 
boarding-pike." 

"ani friend of yours," said varney, blandly, "will be receiv and 
treat as such upon an errand of such consequence; and now our 
confer has, I presume, concluded." 

"yes, yes, i'v done--d----e, no--yes--no. I will keel-haul you but i'll 
know someth of my neavy, charl holland." 

"good day, admir bell." As varney spoke, he place hi hand upon the 
bell which he had near him, to summon an attend to conduct the 
admir out. the latter, who had said a vast deal more than he ever 
intended, left the room in a great rage, protest to himself that he 
would ampli aveng hi nephew, charl holland. 

He proceed homeward, consider vex and annoy that he had been 
treat with so much calmness, and all knowledg of hi nephew denied. 

when he got back, he quarrel heartili with jack pringle--mad it 
up--drank grog--quarrelled--mad it up, and finish with grog 
again--until he went to bed swear he should like to fire a broadsid 
at the whole of the french army, and annihil it at once. 

with thi wish, he fell asleep. 

earli next morning, henri bannerworth sought mr. chillingworth, and 
have found him, he said in a seriou tone,-- 

"mr. chillingworth, I have rather a seriou favour to ask you, and one 
which you may hesit in granting." 

"it must be veri seriou indeed," said mr. chillingworth, "that I should 
hesit to grant it to you; but pray inform me what it is that you deem 
so serious?" 

"sir franci varney and I must have a meeting," said henry. 

"have you realli determin upon such a course?" said mr. chillingworth; 
"you know the charact of your adversary?" 

"that is all settled,--i have given a challenge, and he ha accept it; 
so all other consider verg themselv into one--and that is the 
when, where, and how." 

"I see," said mr. chillingworth. "well, sinc it cannot be help on 
your part, I will do what is requisit for you--do you wish anyth to 
be done or insist on in particular in thi affair." 

"noth with regard to sir franci varney that I may not leav to your 
discretion. I feel convinc that he is the assassin of charl holland, 
whom he fear to fight in duel." 

"then there remain but littl els to do, but to arrang preliminaries, 
I believe. are you prepar on everi other point?" 

"I am--you will see that I am the challenger, and that he must now 
fight. what accid may turn up to save him, I fear not, but sure I am, 
that he will endeavour to take everi advantag that may arise, and so 
escap the encounter." 

"and what do you imagin he will do now he ha accept your challenge?" 
said mr. chillingworth; "one would imagin he could not veri well 
escape." 

"no--but he accept the challeng which charl holland sent him--a 
duel wa inevitable, and it seem to me to be a necessari consequ 
that he disappear from amongst us, for mr. holland would never have 
shrunk from the encounter." 

"there can be no sort of suspicion about that," remark chillingworth; 
"but allow me to advis you that you take care of yourself, and keep a 
watch eye upon everi one--do not be seen out alone." 

"I fear not." 

"nay, the gentleman who ha disappear was, I am sure, fearless enough; 
but yet that ha not save him. I would not advis you to be fearful, 
onli watchful; you have now an event await upon you, which it is well 
you should go through with, unless circumst should so turn out, 
that it is needless; therefor I say, when you have the suspicion you 
do entertain of thi man' conduct, beware, be cautious, and vigilant." 

"I will do so--in the mean time, I trust myself confid in your 
hands--you know all that is necessary." 

"thi affair is quit a secret from all of the family?" 

"most certainli so, and will remain so--i shall be at the hall." 

"and there I will see you--but be care not to be drawn into ani 
adventur of ani kind--it is best to be on the safe side under all 
circumstances." 

"I will be especi careful, be assured, but farewell; see sir franci 
varney as earli as you can, and let the meet be as earli as you can, 
and thu diminish the chanc of accident." 

"that I will attend to. farewel for the present." 

mr. chillingworth immedi set about the conduct of the affair 
thu confid to him; and that no time might be lost, he determin to 
set out at onc for sir franci varney' residence. 

"thing with regard to thi famili seem to have gone on wild of late," 
thought mr. chillingworth; "thi may bring affair to a conclusion, 
though I had much rather they had come to some other. My life for it, 
there is a juggl or a mysteri somewhere; I will do this, and then we 
shall see what will come of it; if thi sir franci varney meet 
him--and at thi moment I can see no reason whi he should not do so--it 
will tend much to depriv him of the mysteri about him; but if, on the 
other hand, he refuse--but then that' all improbable, becaus he ha 
agre to do so. I fear, however, that such a man as varney is a 
dread enemi to encounter--h is cool and unruffled--and that give 
him all the advantag in such affairs; but henry' nerv are not bad, 
though shaken by these untoward events; but time will show--i would it 
were all over." 

with these thought and feel strang intermixed, mr. chillingworth 
set forward for sir franci varney' house. 

* * * * * 

admir bell slept soundli enough though, toward morning, he fell into 
a strang dream, and thought he wa yard arm and yard arm with a strang 
fish--someth of the mermaid species. 

"well," exclaim the admiral, after a customari benedict of hi eye 
and limbs, "what' to come next? may I be splice to a shark if I 
understand what thi is all about. I had some grog last night, but then 
grog, d'y'see, is--is--a seaman' nativ element, as the newspap say, 
though I never read 'em now, it' such a plague." 

He lay quiet for a short time, consid in hi own mind what wa best 
to be done, and what wa the proper cours to pursue, and whi he should 
dream. 

"hilloa, hilloa, hil--loa! jack a-hoy! a-hoy!" shout the admiral, as a 
sudden recollect of hi challeng came across hi memory; "jack 
pringl a-hoy? d--n you, where are you?--you'r never at hand when you 
are wanted. oh, you lubber,--a-hoy!" 

"a-hoy!" shout a voice, as the door opened, and jack thrust hi head 
in; "what cheer, messmate? what ship is this?" 

"oh, you lubberly--" 

the door wa shut in a minute, and jack pringl disappeared. 

"hilloa, jack pringle, you don't mean to say you'll desert your colours, 
do you, you dumb dog?" 

"who say i'll desert the ship as she' sea-worthy!" 

"then whi do you go away?" 

"becaus I won't be call lubberly. i'm as good a man as ever swab a 
deck, and don't care who say to the contrary. i'll stick to the ship as 
long as she' seaworthy," said jack. 

"well, come here, and just listen to the log, and be d----d to you." 

"what' the order now, admiral?" said jack, "though, as we are paid 
off--" 

"there, take that, will you?" said admir bell, as he flung a pillow at 
jack, be the onli thing in the shape of a missil within reach. 

jack ducked, and the pillow produc a clatter in the washhand-stand 
among the crockery, as jack said,-- 

"there' a mutini in the ship, and hark how the cargo clatters; will you 
have it back again?" 

"come, will you? i'v been dreaming, jack." 

"dreaming! what' that?" 

"think of someth when you are asleep, you swab." 

"ha, ha, ha!" laugh jack; "never did such a thing in my life--ha, ha, 
ha! what' the matter now?" 

"i'll tell you what' the matter. jack pringle, you are becom 
mutinous, and I won't have it; if you don't hold your jaw and draw in 
your slacks, i'll have anoth second." 

"anoth second! what' in the wind, now?" said jack. "i thi the 
dream?" 

"if ever I dream when i'm alongsid a strang craft, then it is a dream; 
but old admir bell ain't the man to sleep when there' ani work to be 
done." 

"that' uncommon true," said jack, turn a quid. 

"well, then, i'm go to fight." 

"fight!" exclaim jack. "avast, there, I don't see where' the 
enemy--non o' that gammon; jack pringl can fight, too, and will lay 
alongsid hi admiral, but he don't see the enemi anywhere." 

"you don't understand these things, so i'll tell you. I have had a bit 
of talk with sir franci varney, and I am go to fight him." 

"what the _wamphigher_?" remark jack, parenthetically. 

"yes." 

"well, then," resum jack, "then we shall see anoth blaze, at least 
afor we die; but he' an odd fish--on of davi jones' sort." 

"I don't care about that; he may be anyth he likes; but admir bell 
ain't a-go to have hi nephew burn and eaten, and suck like I 
don't know what, by a vampyre, or by ani other confound land-shark." 

"in course," said jack, "we ain't a-go to put up with noth of that 
sort, and if so be as how he ha put him out of the way, whi it' our 
duti to send him after him, and squar the board." 

"that' the thing, jack; now you know you must go to sir franci varney 
and tell him you come from me." 

"I don't care if I goe on my own account," said jack. 

"that won't do; i'v challeng him and I must fight him." 

"in cours you will," return jack, "and, if he blow you away, whi 
i'll take your place, and have a blaze myself." 

the admir gave a look at jack of great admiration, and then said,-- 

"you are a d----d good seaman, jack, but he' a knight, and might say no 
to that, but do you go to him, and tell him that you come from me to 
settl the when and the where thi duel is to be fought." 

"singl fight?" said jack. 

"yes; consent to ani thing that is fair," said the admiral, "but let it 
be as soon as you can. now, do you understand what I have said?" 

"yes, to be sure; I ain't live all these year without know your 
lingo." 

"then go at once; and don't let the honour of admir bell and old 
england suffer, jack. i'm hi man, you know, at ani price." 

"never fear," said jack; "you shall fight him, at ani rate. i'll go and 
see he don't back out, the warmint." 

"then go along, jack; and mind don't you go blaze away like a fire 
ship, and let everybodi know what' go on, or it'll be stopped." 

"i'll not spoil sport," said jack, as he left the room, to go at onc to 
sir franci varney, charg with the conduct of the import cartel 
of the admiral. jack made the best of hi way with becom graviti and 
expedit until he reach the gate of the admiral' enemy. 

jack rang loudli at the gate; there seemed, if one might judg by hi 
countenance, a someth on hi mind, that jack wa almost anoth man. 
the gate wa open by the servant, who inquir what he want there. 

"the wamphigher." 

"who?" 

"the wamphigher." 

the servant frowned, and wa about to say someth uncivil to jack, who 
wink at him veri hard, and then said,-- 

"oh, may be you don't know him, or won't know him by that name: I want 
to see sir franci varney." 

"he' at home," said the servant; "who are you?" 

"show me up, then. i'm jack pringle, and i'm come from admir bell; i'm 
the admiral' friend, you see, so none of your black looks." 

the servant seem amazed, as well as rather daunted, at jack' address; 
he show him, however, into the hall, where mr. chillingworth had just 
that moment arrived, and wa wait for an interview with varney. 




chapter xxxviii. 

marchdale' offer.--th consult AT bannerworth hall.--th morn 
OF the duel. 


[illustration] 

mr. chillingworth wa much annoy to see jack pringl in the hall, and 
jack wa somewhat surpris at see mr. chillingworth there at that 
time in the rooming; they had but littl time to indulg in their mutual 
astonishment, for a servant came to announc that sir franci varney 
would see them both. 

without say anyth to the servant or each other, they ascend the 
staircase, and were shown into the apart where sir franci varney 
receiv them. 

"gentlemen," said sir francis, in hi usual bland tone, "you are 
welcome." 

"sir francis," said mr. chillingworth, "I have come upon matter of some 
importance; may I crave a separ audience?" 

"and I too," said jack pringle; "I come as the friend of admir bell, I 
want a privat audience; but, stay, I don't care a rope' end who know 
who I am, or what I come about; say you are readi to name time and 
place, and i'm as dumb as a figure-head; that is say something, at all 
events; and now i'm done." 

"why, gentlemen," said sir francis, with a quiet smile, "a you have 
both come upon the same errand, and as there may aris a controversi 
upon the point of precedence, you had better be both present, as I must 
arrang thi matter myself upon due inquiry." 

"I do not exactli understand this," said mr. chillingworth; "do you, mr. 
pringle? perhap you can enlighten me?" 

"it," said jack, "a how you came here upon the same errand as I, and I 
as you, whi we both come about fight sir franci varney." 

"yes," said sir francis; "what mr. pringl says, is, I believ correct 
to a letter. I have a challeng from both your principals, and am readi 
to give you both the satisfact you desire, provid the first 
encount will permit me the honour of join in the second. you, mr. 
pringle, are awar of the chanc of war?" 

"I should say so," said jack, with a wink and a nod of a familiar 
character. "i'v seen a few of them." 

"will you proceed to make the necessari agreement between you both, 
gentlemen? My affect for the one equal fulli the good will I bear 
the other, and I cannot give a prefer in so delic a matter; 
proceed gentlemen." 

mr. chillingworth look at jack, and jack pringl look at mr. 
chillingworth, and then the former said,-- 

"well, the admir mean fighting, and I am come to settl the 
necessaries; pray let me know what are your terms, mr. 
what-d'ye-call'em." 

"I am agreeabl to anyth that is at all reasonable--pistols, I 
presume?" 

"sir franci varney," said mr. chillingworth, "I cannot consent to carri 
on thi office, unless you can appoint a friend who will settl these 
matter with us--myself, at least." 

"and I too," said jack pringle; "we don't want to bear down an enemy. 
admir bell ain't the man to do that, and if he were, i'm not the man 
to back him in do what isn't fair or right; but he won't do it." 

"but, gentlemen, thi must not be; mr. henri bannerworth must not be 
disappointed, and admir bell must not be disappointed. moreover, I 
have accept the two cartels, and I am readi and will to fight;--on 
at a time, I presume?" 

"sir francis, after what you have said, I must take upon myself, on the 
part of mr. henri bannerworth, to declin meet you, if you cannot 
name a friend with whom I can arrang thi affair." 

"ah!" said jack pringle, "that' right enough. I recollect veri well 
when jack mizeu fought tom foremast, they had their seconds. admir 
bell can't do anyth in the dark. no, no, d----e! all must be abov 
board." 

"gentlemen," said sir franci varney, "you see the dilemma I am in. your 
princip have both challeng me. I am readi to fight ani one, or both 
of them, as the case may be. distinctli understand that; becaus it is a 
notion of their that I will not do so, or that I shrink from them; but 
I am a stranger in thi neighbourhood, and have no one whom I could call 
upon to relinquish so much, as they run the risk of do by attend 
me to the field." 

"then your acquaint are no friends, d----e!" said jack pringle, 
spit through hi teeth into the bar of a beauti polish 
grate. "i'd stick to anybody--th devil himself, leav alon a 
vampyre--if so be as how I had been hi friend and drunk grog from the 
same can. they are a set of lubbers." 

"I have not been here long enough to form ani such friendships, mr. 
chillingworth; but can confid reli upon your honour and that of 
your principal, and will freeli and fairli meet him." 

"but, sir francis, you forget the fact, in transacting, myself for 
mr. bannerworth, and thi person or admir bell, we do match, and have 
our own charact at stake; nay more, our live and fortunes. these may 
be small; but they are everyth to us. allow me to say, on my own 
behalf, that I will not permit my princip to meet you unless you can 
name a second, as is usual with gentlemen on such occasions." 

"I regret, while I declar to you my entir willing to meet you, 
that I cannot compli through utter inabl to do so, with your 
request. let thi go forth to the world as I have state it, and let it 
be an answer to ani aspers that may be utter as to my 
unwilling to fight." 

there wa a paus of some moments. mr. chillingworth wa resolv that, 
come of it what would, he would not permit henri to fight, unless sir 
franci varney himself should appoint a friend, and then they could meet 
upon equal terms. 

jack pringl whistled, and spit, and chew and turn hi quid--hitch 
up hi trousers, and look wist from one to the other, as he 
said,-- 

"so then it' like to be no fight at all, sir franci what's-o'-name?" 

"it seem like it, mr. pringle," repli varney, with a mean smile; 
"unless you can be more complais toward myself, and kind toward the 
admiral." 

"why, not exactli that," said jack; "it' a piti to stop a good play in 
the beginning, just becaus some littl thing is wrong in the tackling." 

"perhap your skill and geniu may enabl us to find some medium cours 
that we may pursu with pleasur and profit. what say you, mr. pringle?" 

"all I know about genius, as you call it is the fli dutchman, or some 
such odd out of the way fish. but, as I said, I am not one to spoil 
sport, nor more is the admiral. oh, no, we is all true men and good." 

"I believ it," said varney, bow politely. 

"you needn't keep your figure-head on the move; I can see you just as 
well. howsoever, as I wa saying, I don't like to spoil sport, and 
sooner than both parti should be disappointed, my princip shall 
becom your second, sir francis." 

"what, admir bell?" exclaim varney, lift hi eyebrow with 
surprise. 

"what, charl holland' uncle!" exclaim mr. chillingworth, in accent 
of amazement. 

"and whi not?" said jack, with great gravity. "I will pledg my 
word--jack pringle' word--that admir bell shall be second to sir 
franci varney, dure hi scrimmag with mr. henri bannerworth. that 
will let the matter go on; there can be no back-out then, eh?" continu 
jack pringle, with a know nod at chillingworth as he spoke. 

"that will, I hope, remov your scruples, mr. chillingworth," said 
varney, with a courteou smile. 

"but will admir bell do this?" 

"hi second say so, and has, I daresay, influenc enough with him to 
induc that person to act in conform with hi promise." 

"in cours he will. Do you think he would be the man to hang back? oh, 
no; he would be the last to leav jack pringl in the lurch--no. depend 
upon it, sir francis, he'll be as sure to do what I say, as I have said 
it." 

"after that assurance, I cannot doubt it," said sir franci varney; 
"thi act of kind will, indeed, lay me under a deep and last 
oblig to admir bell, which I fear I shall never be abl to pay." 

"you need not troubl yourself about that," said jack pringle; "the 
admir will credit all, and you can pay off old score when hi turn 
come in the field." 

"I will not forget," said varney; "he deserv everi consideration; but 
now, mr. chillingworth, I presum that we may come to some understand 
respect thi meeting, which you were so kind as to do me the honour 
of seeking." 

"I cannot object to it take place. I shall be most happi to meet your 
second in the field, and will arrang with him." 

"I imagin that, under the circumstances, that it will be bare 
necessari to go to that length of ceremony. futur interview can be 
arrang later; name the time and place, and after that we can settl 
all the rest on the ground." 

"yes," said jack; "it will be time enough, surely, to see the admir 
when we are upon the ground. i'll warrant the old buffer is a true brick 
as ever was: there' no flinch about him." 

"I am satisfied," said varney. 

"and I also," said chillingworth; "but, understand, sir francis, ani 
default for second make the meet a blank." 

"I will not doubt mr. pringle' honour so much as to believ it 
possible." 

"i'm d----d," said jack, "if you ain't a trump-card, and no mistake; 
it' a great piti as you is a wamphigher." 

"the time, mr. chillingworth?" 

"to-morrow, at seven o'clock," repli that gentleman. 

"the place, sir?" 

"the best place that I can think of is a level meadow half-way between 
here and bannerworth hall; but that is your privilege, sir franci 
varney." 

"I waiv it, and am much oblig to you for the choic of the spot; it 
seem of the best charact imaginable. I will be punctual." 

"I think we have noth further to arrang now," said mr. 
chillingworth. "you will meet with admir bell." 

"certainly. I believ there is noth more to be done; thi affair is 
veri satisfactorili arranged, and much better than I anticipated." 

"good morning, sir francis," said mr. chillingworth. "good morning." 

"adieu," said sir francis, with a courteou salutation. "good day, mr. 
pringle, and commend me to the admiral, whose servic will be of 
infinit valu to me." 

"don't mention it," said jack; "the admiral' the man as'd lend ani bodi 
a help hand in case of distress like the present; and i'll pledg my 
word--jack pringle' too, as that he'll do what' right, and give up hi 
turn to mr. henri bannerworth; caus you see he can have hi turn 
arterwards, you know--it' onli wait awhile." 

"that' all," said sir francis. 

jack pringl made a sea bow and took hi leave, as he follow mr. 
chillingworth, and they both left the hous together, to return to 
bannerworth hall. 

"well," said mr. chillingworth, "I am glad that sir franci varney ha 
got over the difficulti of have no seconds; for it would not be proper 
or safe to meet a man without a friend for him." 

"it ain't the right thing," said jack hitch up hi trousers; "but I 
wa afeard as how he would back out, and that would be just the wrong 
thing for the admiral; he'd go rave mad." 

they had got but veri few pace from sir franci varney' house, when 
they were join by marchdale. 

"ah," he said, as he came up, "I see you have been to sir franci 
varney's, if I may judg from the direct whenc you'r coming, and 
your proximity." 

"yes, we have," said mr. chillingworth. "I thought you had left these 
parts?" 

"I had intend to do so," repli marchdale; "but second thought are 
sometim best, you know." 

"certainly." 

"I have so much friendship for the famili at the hall, that 
notwithstand I am compel to be absent from the mansion itself, yet 
I cannot quit the neighbourhood while there are circumst of such a 
charact hang about them. I will remain, and see if there be not 
someth arising, in which I may be use to them in some matter." 

"it is veri disinterest of you; you will remain here for some time, I 
suppose?" 

"yes, undoubtedly; unless, as I do not anticipate, I should see ani 
occas to quit my present quarters." 

"I tell you what it is," said jack pringle; "if you had been here 
half-an-hour earlier you could have second the wamphigher." 

"seconded!" 

"yes, we'r here to challenge." 

"A doubl challenge?" 

"yes; but in confid thi matter to you, mr. marchdale, you will make 
no use of it to the explod of thi affair. By so do you will 
serious damag the honour of mr. henri bannerworth." 

"I will not, you may reli upon it; but mr. chillingworth, do I not see 
you in the charact of a second?" 

"you do, sir." 

"to mr. henry?" 

"the same, sir." 

"have you reflect upon the probabl consequ of such an act, 
should ani seriou mischief occur?" 

"what I have undertaken, mr. marchdale, I will go through with; the 
consequ I have duli considered, and yet you see me in the charact 
of mr. henri bannerworth' friend." 

"I am happi to see you as such, and I do not think henri could find a 
better. but thi is besid the question. what induc me to make the 
remark wa this,--had I been at the hall, you will admit that henri 
bannerworth would have chosen myself, without ani disparag to you, 
mr. chillingworth." 

"well sir, what then?" 

"whi I am a singl man, I can live, resid and go ani where; one countri 
will suit me as well as another. I shall suffer no loss, but as for you, 
you will be ruin in everi particular; for if you go in the charact 
of a second, you will not be excused; for all the penalti incur 
your profess of a surgeon will not excus you." 

"I see all that, sir." 

"what I propos is, that you should accompani the parti to the field, 
but in your own proper charact of surgeon, and permit me to take that 
of second to mr. bannerworth." 

"thi cannot be done, unless by mr. henri bannerworth' consent," said 
mr. chillingworth. 

"then I will accompani you to bannerworth hall, and see mr. henry, whom 
I will request to permit me to do what I have mention to you." 

mr. chillingworth could not but admit the reason of thi 
proposal, and it wa agre they should return to bannerworth hall in 
company. 

here they arriv in a veri short time after, and enter together. 

"and now," said mr. chillingworth, "I will go and bring our two 
principals, who will be as much astonish to find themselv engag in 
the same quarrel, as I wa to find myself sent on a similar errand to 
sir franci with our friend mr. john pringle." 

"oh, not john--jack pringle, you mean," said that individual. 

chillingworth now went in search of henry, and sent him to the apart 
where mr. marchdal wa with jack pringle, and then he found the admir 
wait the return of jack with impatience. 

"admiral!" he said, "I perceiv you are unwel thi morning." 

"unwel be d----d," said the admiral, start up with surprise. "who 
ever heard that old admir bell look ill just afor he wa go into 
action? I say it' a scandal lie." 

"admiral, admiral, I didn't say you were ill; onli you look ill--a--a 
littl nervous, or so. rather pale, eh? Is it not so?" 

"confound you, do you think I want to be physicked? I tell you, I have 
not a littl but a great inclin to give you a good keelhauling. I 
don't want a doctor just yet." 

"but it may not be so long, you know, admiral; but there is jack pringl 
a-wait you below. will you go to him? there is a particular reason; 
he ha someth to commun from sir franci varney, I believe." 

the admir gave a look of some amaz at mr. chillingworth, and then 
he said, mutter to himself,-- 

"if jack pringl should have betray me--but, no; he could not do that, 
he is too true. i'm sure of jack; and how did that son of a gallipot 
hint about the odd fish I sent jack to?" 

fill with a dubiou kind of belief which he had about someth he had 
heard of jack pringle, he enter the room, where he met marchdale, jack 
pringle, and henri bannerworth. immedi afterwards, mr. 
chillingworth enter the apartment. 

"I have," said he, "been to sir franci varney, and there had an 
interview with him, and with mr. pringle; when I found we were both 
intent upon the same object, namely, an encount with the knight by our 
principals." 

"eh?" said the admiral. 

"what!" exclaim henry; "had he challeng you, admiral?" 

"challeng me!" exclaim admir bell, with a round oath. 
"i--however--sinc it come to this, I must admit I challeng him." 

"that' what I did," said henri bannerworth, after a moment' thought; 
"and I perceiv we have both fallen into the same line of conduct." 

"that is the fact," said mr. chillingworth. "both mr. pringl and I went 
there to settl the preliminaries, and we found an insurmount bar to 
ani meet take place at all." 

"he wouldn't fight, then?" exclaim henry. "I see it all now." 

"not fight!" said admir bell, with a sort of melancholi 
disappointment. "d--n the cowardli rascal! tell me, jack pringle, what 
did the long horse-marine-look slab say to it? He told me he would 
fight. whi he ought to be made to stand sentri over the wind." 

"you challeng him in person, too, I suppose?" said henry. 

"yes, confound him! I went there last night." 

"and I too." 

"it seem to me," said marchdale, "that thi affair ha been not 
indiscret conducted; but somewhat unusu and strangely, to say the 
least of it." 

"you see," said chillingworth, "sir franci wa will to fight both 
henri and the admiral, as he told us." 

"yes," said jack; "he told us he would fight us both, if so be as hi 
light wa not dous in the first brush." 

"that wa all that wa wanted," said the admiral. 

"we could expect no more." 

"but then he desir to meet you without ani second; but, of course, I 
would not acced to thi proposal. the respons wa too great and 
too unequ born by the parti engag in the rencontre." 

"decidedly," said henry; "but it is unfortunate--veri unfortunate." 

"very," said the admiral--"very. what a rascal thing it is there ain't 
anoth rogu in the countri to keep him in countenance." 

[illustration] 

"I thought it wa a piti to spoil sport," said jack pringle. "it wa a 
piti a good intent should be spoiled, and I promis the wamphigh 
that if as how he would fight, you should second him, and you'd meet him 
to do so." 

"eh! who? i!" exclaim the admir in some perplexity. 

"yes; that is the truth," said mr. chillingworth. "mr pringl said you 
would do so, and he then and there pledg hi word that you should meet 
him on the ground and second him." 

"yes," said jack "you must do it. I knew you would not spoil sport, and 
that there had better be a fight than no fight. I believ you'd sooner 
see a scrimmag than none, and so it' all arranged." 

"veri well," said the admiral, "I onli wish mr. henri bannerworth had 
been hi second; I think I wa entitl to the first meeting." 

"no," said jack, "you warn't, for mr. chillingworth wa there first; 
first come first served, you know." 

"well, well, I mustn't grumbl at anoth man' luck; mine'l come in 
turn; but it had better be so than a disappoint altogether; i'll be 
second to thi sir franci varney; he shall have fair play, as i'm an 
admiral; but, d----e he shall fight--yes, yes, he shall fight." 

"and to thi conclus I would come," said henry, "I wish him to fight; 
now I will take care that he shall not have ani opportun of put 
me on one side quietly." 

"there is one thing," observ marchdale, "that I wish to propose. 
after what ha passed, I should not have returned, had I not some 
presenti that someth wa go forward in which I could be use 
to my friend." 

"oh!" said the admiral, with a huge twist of hi countenance. 

"what I wa about to say wa this,--mr. chillingworth ha much to lose 
as he is situated, and I noth as I am placed. I am chain down to no 
spot of earth. I am abov follow a profession--mi means, I mean, 
place me abov the necessity. now, henry, allow me to be your second in 
thi affair; allow mr. chillingworth to attend in hi profession 
capacity; he may be of service--of great servic to one of the 
principals; whereas, if he go in ani other capacity, he will inevit 
have hi own safeti to consult." 

"that is most unquestion true," said henry, "and, to my mind, the 
best plan that can be proposed. what say you, admir bell, will you act 
with mr. marchdal in thi affair?" 

"oh, i!--yes--certainly--i don't care. mr. marchdal is mr. marchdale, I 
believe, and that' all I care about. If we quarrel to-day, and have 
anyth to do to-morrow, in course, to-morrow I can put off my quarrel 
for next day; it will keep,--that' all I have to say at present." 

"then thi is a final arrangement?" said mr. chillingworth. 

"it is." 

"but, mr. bannerworth, in resign my charact of second to mr. 
marchdale, I onli do so becaus it appear and seem to be the opinion 
of all present that I can be much better employ in anoth capacity." 

"certainly, mr. chillingworth; and I cannot but feel that I am under the 
same oblig to you for the readi and zeal with which you have 
acted." 

"I have done what I have done," said chillingworth, "becaus I believ 
it wa my duti to do so." 

"mr. chillingworth ha undoubtedli act most friendli and effici 
in thi affair," said marchdale; "and he doe not relinquish the part 
for the purpos of escap a friendli deed, but to perform one in which 
he may act in a capac that no one els can." 

"that is true," said the admiral. 

"and now," said chillingworth, "you are to meet to-morrow morn in the 
meadow at the bottom of the valley, half way between here and sir 
franci varney' house, at seven o'clock in the morning." 

more convers pass among them, and it wa agre that they should 
meet earli the next morning, and that, of course, the affair should be 
kept a secret. 

marchdal for that night should remain in the house, and the admir 
should appear as if littl or noth wa the matter; and he and jack 
pringl retired, to talk over in privat all the arrangements. 

henri bannerworth and marchdal also retired, and mr. chillingworth, 
after a time, retired, promis to be with them in time for the meet 
next morning. 

much of that day wa spent by henri bannerworth in hi own apartment, in 
write document and letter of one kind and another; but at night he 
had not finished, for he had been compel to be about, and in flora' 
presence, to prevent anyth from be suspected. 

marchdal wa much with him, and in secret examin the arms, 
ammunition, and bullets, and saw all wa right for the next morning; and 
when he had done, he said,-- 

"now, henry, you must permit me to insist that you take some hours' 
repose, els you will scarc be as you ought to be." 

"veri good," said henry. "I have just finished, and can take your 
advice." 

after mani thought and reflections, henri bannerworth fell into a deep 
sleep, and slept sever hour in calm and quietude, and at an earli 
hour he awoke, and saw marchdal sit by him. 

"i it time, marchdale? I have not overslept myself, have i?" 

"no; time enough--tim enough," said marchdale. "I should have let you 
sleep longer, but I should have awaken you in good time." 

It wa now the grey light of morning, and henri aros and began to 
prepar for the encounter. marchdal stole to admir bell' chamber, 
but he and jack pringl were ready. 

few word were spoken, and those few were in a whisper, and the whole 
parti left the hall in as noiseless a manner as possible. It wa a mild 
morning, and yet it wa cold at that time of the morning, just as day is 
begin to dawn in the east. there was, however, ampl time to reach 
the rendezvous. 

It wa a curiou parti that which wa now proceed toward the spot 
appoint for the duel, the result of which might have so import an 
effect on the interest of those who were to be engag in it. 

It would be difficult for us to analys the differ and conflict 
emot that fill the breast of the variou individu compos 
that party--th hope and fears--th doubt and surmis that were given 
utter to; though we are compel to acknowledg that though to 
henry, the charact of the man he wa go to meet in mortal fight wa 
of a most ambigu and undefin nature, and though no one could 
imagin the mean he might be endow with for protect against the 
arm of man--henry, as we said, strode firmli forward with unflinch 
resolution. hi heart wa set on recov the happi of hi sister, 
and he would not falter. 

So far, then, we may consid that at length proceed of a hostil 
charact were so far clearli and fairli arrang between henri 
bannerworth and that most mysteri be who certainly, from some 
caus or another, had betray no inclin to meet an oppon in 
that manner which is sanctioned, bad as it is, by the usag of society. 

but whether hi motiv wa one of cowardic or mercy, remain yet to be 
seen. It might be that he fear himself receiv some mortal injury, 
which would at onc put a stop to that preternatur career of exist 
which he affect to shudder at, and yet evid took consider 
pain to prolong. 

upon the other hand, it is just possibl that some conscious of 
invulner on hi own part, or of great power to injur hi 
antagonist, might be the caus whi he had held back so long from 
fight the duel, and place so mani obstacl in the way of the usual 
necessari arrang incident to such occasions. 

now, however, there would seem to be no possibl mean of escape. sir 
franci varney must fight or fly, for he wa surround by too mani 
opponents. 

To be sure he might have appeal to the civil author to protect 
him, and to sanction him in hi refus to commit what undoubtedli is a 
legal offence; but then there cannot be a question that the whole of the 
circumst would come out, and meet the public eye--th result of 
which would be, hi acquisit of a reput as unenvi as it 
would be universal. 

It had so happened, that the peculiar posit of the bannerworth famili 
kept their acquaint within extrem narrow limits, and greatli 
indispos them to set themselv up as mark for peculiar observation. 

onc holding, as they had, a proud posit in the county, and be 
look upon quit as magnat of the land, they did not now court the 
pri eye of curios to look upon their poverty; but rather with a 
gloomi melancholi they live apart, and repel the advanc of societi 
by a cold reserve, which few could break through. 

had thi famili suffer in ani nobl cause, or had the misfortun 
which had come over them, and rob their ancestr hous of it 
lustre, been an unavoid dispens of providence, they would have 
born the hard posit with a differ aspect; but it must be 
remembered, that to the faults, the vices, and the crimin of some 
of their race, wa to be attribut their present depress state. 

It ha been seen dure the progress of our tale, that it action ha 
been toler confin to bannerworth hall, it adjac meadows, and 
the seat of sir franci varney; the onli person at ani distance, know 
anyth of the circumstances, or feel ani interest in them, be 
mr. chillingworth, the surgeon, who, from person feeling, as well as 
from profession habit, wa not like to make a family' affair a 
subject of gossip. 

A change, however, wa at hand--a chang of a most startl and 
alarm charact to varney--on which he might expect, yet not be well 
prepar for. 

thi period of seren wa to pass away, and he wa to becom most 
alarmingli popular. We will not, however, anticipate, but proceed at 
onc to detail as briefli as may be the hostil meeting. 

It would appear that varney, now that he had onc consent to the 
definit arrang of a duel, shrunk not in ani way from carri 
them out, nor in the slightest attempt to retard arrang which 
might be fatal to himself. 

the earli morn wa one of those cloudi one so frequent occur 
in our fickl climate, when the cleverest weather prophet would find it 
difficult to predict what the next hour might produce. 

there wa a kind of dim gloomi over all objects; and as there were 
no bright lights, there were no deep shadows--th consequ of which 
wa a sure of effect over the landscape, that rob it of mani of 
it usual beauties. 

such wa the state of thing when marchdal accompani henri and 
admir bell from bannerworth hall across the garden in the direct of 
the hilli wood, close to which wa the spot intend for the scene of 
encounter. 

jack pringl came on at a lazi pace behind with hi hand in hi 
pockets, and look as unconcern as if he had just come out for a 
morning' stroll, and scarc knew whether he saw what wa go on or 
not. 

the curiou contort into which he twist hi countenance, and the 
differ odd-look lump that appear in it from time to time, may 
be account for by a quid of unusu size, which he seem to be 
mastic with a relish quit horrifi to one unus to so barbar 
a luxury. 

the admir had strictli enjoin him not to interfer on pain of be 
consid a lubber and no seaman for the remaind of hi 
existence--threaten penalti which, of course, had their own weight 
with jack, and accordingli he came just, to see the row in as quiet a 
way as possible, perhap not without a hope, that someth might turn 
up in the shape of a _causu belli_, that might justifi him in adopt 
a threaten attitud toward somebody. 

"now, master henry," said the admiral, "none of your palav to me as we 
go along, recollect I don't belong to your party, you know. i'v stood 
friend to two or three fellow in my time; but if anybodi had said to 
me, 'admir bell, the next time you go out on a quiet littl shoot 
party, it will be as second to a vampyre,' i'd have said 'you'r a liar' 
howsomever, d--me, here you goes, and what I mean to say is this, Mr 
henry, that i'd second even a frenchman rather than he shouldn't fight 
when he' asked" 

"that' liber of you," said henry, "at all event" 

"I believ you it is," said the admiral, "so mind if you don't hit him, 
i'm not a-go to tell you how--al you'v got to do, is to fire low; 
but that' no busi of mine. shiver my timbers, I oughtn't to tell 
you, but d--n you, hit him if you can." 

"admiral," said henry, "I can hardli think you are even preserv a 
neutral in the matter, put asid my own partisanship as regard 
your own man." 

"oh, hang him. i'm not go to let him creep out of the thing on such a 
shabbi pretence. I can tell you. I think I ought to have gone to hi 
hous thi morning; only, as I said I never would cross hi threshold 
again, I won't." 

"I wonder if he'll come," said Mr marchdal to henry. "after all, you 
know he may take to flight, and shun an encount which, it is evident, 
he ha enter into but tardily." 

"I hope not," said henry, "and yet I must own that your supposit ha 
sever time cross my mind. if, however, he do not meet me, he never 
can appear at all in the country, and we should, at least, be rid of 
him, and all hi troublesom importun concern the hall. I would 
not allow that man, on ani account, to cross the threshold of my house, 
as it tenant or it owner." 

"why, it ain't usual," said the admiral, "to let one hous to two 
peopl at once, unless you seem quit to forget that i'v taken yours. I 
may as well remind you of it." 

"hurra" said jack pringle, at thi moment. 

"what' the matter with you? who told you to hurra?" 

"enemi in the offing," said jack, "three or four pint to the sou-west." 

"so he is, by jove! dodg about among the trees. come, now, thi 
vampyre' a decent fellow than I thought him. He means, after all, to 
let us have a pop at him." 

they had now reach so close to the spot, that sir franci varney, who, 
to all appearance, had been waiting, emerg from among the trees, 
roll up in hi dismal-look cloak, and, if possible, look longer 
and thinner than ever he had look before. 

hi face wore a singular cadaver look aspect. hi veri lip were 
white and there wa a curious, pinkish-look circl round each of hi 
eyes, that impart to hi whole counten a most uninvit 
appearance. He turn hi eye from one to the other of those who were 
advanc toward him, until he saw the admiral, upon which he gave such 
a grim and horribl smile, that the old man exclaimed,-- 

"I say, jack, you lubber, there' a face for a figur head." 

"ay, ay, sir." 

"did you ever see such a d----d grin as that in your life, in ani 
latitude?" 

"ay, ay, sir." 

"you did you swab." 

"I should think so." 

"it' a lie, and you know it." 

"veri good," said jack, "don't you recollect when that ere iron bullet 
walk over your head, leav a nice littl nick, all the way off 
bergen-ap-zoom, that wa the time--bless if you didn't give just such 
a grin as that." 

"I didn't, you rascal." 

"and I say you did." 

"mutiny, by god!" 

"go to blazes!" 

how far thi content might have gone, have now reach it 
culmin point, had the admir and jack been alone, it is hard to 
say; but as it was, henri and marchdal interfered, and so the quarrel 
wa patch up for the moment, in order to give place to more import 
affairs. 

varney seem to think, that after the smile welcom he had given to 
hi second, he had done quit enough; for there he stood, tall, and 
gaunt, and motionless, if we may except an occasion singular movement 
of the mouth, and a clap togeth of hi teeth, at times, which wa 
enough to make anybodi jump to hear. 

"for heaven' sake," said marchdale, "do not let us trifl at such a 
moment as this. mr. pringle, you realli had no busi here." 

"mr. who?" said jack. 

"pringle, I believe, is your name?" return marchdale. 

"it were; but blow if ever I wa call mister before." 

the admir walk up to sir franci varney, and gave him a nod that 
look much more like one of defianc than of salutation, to which the 
vampyr repli by a low, courtli bow. 

"oh, bother!" mutter the old admiral. "if I wa to doubl up my 
backbon like that, I should never get it down straight again. well, 
all' right; you'v come; that' all you could do, I suppose." 

"I am here," said varney, "and therefor it becom a work of 
supererog to remark that i'v come." 

"oh! doe it? I never bolt a dictionary, and, therefore, I don't know 
exactli what you mean." 

"step asid with me a moment, admir bell, and I will tell you what you 
are to do with me after I am shot, if such should be my fate." 

"do with you! d----d if i'll do anyth with you." 

"I don't expect you will regret me; you will eat." 

"eat!" 

"yes, and drink as usual, no doubt, notwithstand be wit to the 
deceas of a fellow-creature." 

"belay there; don't call yourself a fellow-creatur of mine; I ain't a 
vampyre." 

"but there' no know what you may be; and now listen to my 
instructions; for as you'r my second, you cannot veri well refus to me 
a few friendli offices. rain is falling. step beneath thi ancient tree, 
and I will talk to you." 




chapter xxxix. 

the storm and the fight.-th admiral' repudi OF hi principal. 


[illustration] 

"well," said the admiral, when they were fairli under the tree, upon the 
leav of which the patter rain might be heard falling: "well--what 
is it?" 

"if your young friend, mr. bannerworth, should chanc to send a 
pistol-bullet through ani portion of my anatomy, prejudici to the 
prolong of my existence, you will be so good as not to interfer 
with anyth I may have about me, or to make ani disturb whatever." 

"you may depend I sha'n't." 

"just take the matter perfectli easy--a a thing of course." 

"oh! I mean d----d easy." 

"ha! what a delight thing is friendship! there is a littl knoll or 
mound of earth midway between here and the hall. Do you happen to know 
it? there is one solitari tree glow near it summit--an orient 
look tree, of the fir tribe, which, fan-like, spread it deep green 
leaves; across the azur sky." 

"oh! bother it; it' a d----d old tree, grow upon a littl bit of a 
hill, I suppos you mean?" 

"precisely; onli much more poetic expressed. the moon rise at a 
quarter past four to-night, or rather to-morrow, morning." 

"doe it?" 

"yes; and if I should happen to be killed, you will have me remov 
gentli to thi mound of earth, and there laid beneath thi tree, with my 
face upwards; and take care that it is done befor the moon rises. you 
can watch that no one interferes." 

"A like job. what the deuc do you take me for? I tell you what it is, 
mr. vampyre, or varney, or whatever' your name, if you should chanc to 
be hit, where-ev you chanc to fall, there you'll lie." 

"how veri unkind." 

"uncommon, ain't it?" 

"well, well, sinc that is your determination, I must take care of 
myself in anoth way. I can do so, and I will." 

"take care of yourself how you like, for all I care; i'v come here to 
second you, and to see that, on the honour of a seaman, if you are put 
out of the world, it' done in a proper manner, that' all I have to do 
with you--now you know." 

sir franci varney look after him with a strang kind of smile, as he 
walk away to make the necessari prepar with marchdal for the 
immedi commenc of the contest. 

these were simpl and brief. It wa agre that twelv pace should be 
measur out, six each way, from a fix point; one six to be pace by 
the admiral, and the other by marchdale; then they were to draw lots, to 
see at which end of thi imaginari line varney wa to be placed; after 
thi the signal for fire wa to be one, two, three--fire! 

A few minut suffic to complet these arrangements; the ground wa 
measur in the manner we have stated, and the combat place in 
their respect positions, sir franci varney occupi the same spot 
where he had at first stood, namely, that nearest to the littl wood, 
and to hi own residence. 

It is imposs that under such circumst the bravest and the 
calmest of mankind could fail to feel some slight degre of tremour or 
uneasiness; and, although we can fairli claim for henri bannerworth that 
he wa as truli courag as ani right feel christian man could wish 
to be, yet when it wa possibl that he stood within, as it were, a 
hair' breadth of eternity, a strang world of sensat and emot 
found a home in hi heart, and he could not look altogeth undaunt on 
that futur which might, for all he knew to the contrary, be so close at 
hand, as far as he wa concerned. 

It wa not that he fear death, but that he look with a decent 
graviti upon so grave a chang as that from thi world to the next, and 
henc wa it that hi face wa pale, and that he look all the emot 
which he realli felt. 

thi wa the aspect and the bear of a brave but not a reckless man; 
while sir franci varney, on the other hand, seemed, now that he had 
fairli engag in the duel, to look upon it and it attend 
circumst with a kind of smirk satisfaction, as if he were far 
more amus than person interested. 

thi wa certainli the more extraordinari after the manner in which he 
had tri to evad the fight, and, at all events, wa quit a suffici 
proof that cowardic had not been hi actuat motiv in so doing. 

the admiral, who stood on a level with him, could not see the sort of 
express he wore, or, probably, he would have been far from well 
pleased; but the other did, and they found someth inexpress 
disagre in the smirk kind of satisfact with which the vampyr 
seem to regard now the proceedings. 

"confound him," whisper marchdal to henry, "one would think he wa 
quit delighted, instead, as we had imagin him, not well pleased, at 
these proceedings; look how he grins." 

"it is no matter," said henry; "let him wear what aspect he may, it is 
the same to me; and, as heaven is my judge, I here declare, if I did not 
think myself justifi in so doing, I would not rais my hand against 
thi man." 

"there can be no shadow of a doubt regard your justification. have at 
him, and heaven protect you." 

"amen!" 

the admir wa to give the word to fire, and now he and marshal have 
step suffici on one side to be out of all possibl danger from 
ani stray shot, he commenc repeat the signal,-- 

"are you ready, gentlemen?--once." 

they look sternli at each other, and each grasp hi pistol. 

"twice!" 

sir franci varney smile and look around him, as if the affair were 
one of the most common-plac description. 

"thrice!" 

varney seem to be studi the sky rather than attend to the duel. 

"fire!" said the admiral, and one report onli struck upon the ear. It 
wa that from henry' pistol. 

all eye were turn upon sir franci varney, who had evid reserv 
hi fire, for what purpos could not be devised, except a murder one, 
the take of a more steadi aim at henry. 

sir francis, however, seem in no hurry, but smile significantly, and 
gradual rais the point of hi weapon. 

"did you hear the word, sir francis? I gave it loud enough, I am sure. I 
never spoke plainer in my life; did I ever, jack?" 

"yes, often," said jack pringle; "what' the use of your ask such 
yarn as them? you know you have done so often enough when you want 
grog." 

"you d----d rascal, i'll--i'l have your back scored, I will." 

"so you will, when you are afloat again, which you never will be--you'r 
paid off, that' certain." 

"you lubberli lout, you ain't a seaman; a seaman would never mutini 
against hi admiral; howsomever, do you hear, sir francis, i'll give the 
matter up, if you don't pay some attent to me." 

henri look steadili at varney, expect everi moment to feel hi 
bullet. mr. marchdal hastili exclaim that thi wa not accord to 
usage. 

sir franci varney took no notice, but went on elev hi weapon; 
when it wa perpendicular to the earth he fire in the air. 

"I had not anticip this," said marchdale, as he walk to henry. "I 
thought he wa take a more deadli aim." 

"and i," said henry. 

"ay, you have escaped, henry; let me congratul you." 

"not so fast; we may fire again." 

"I can afford to do that," he said, with a smile. 

"you should have fired, sir, accord to custom," said the admiral; 
"thi is not the proper thing." 

"what, fire at your friend?" 

"oh, that' all veri well! you are my friend for a time, vampyr as you 
are, and I intend you shall fire." 

"if mr. henri bannerworth demand anoth fire, I have no object to 
it, and will fire at him; but as it is I shall not do so, indeed, it 
would be quit useless for him to do so--to point mortal weapon at me 
is mere child' play, they will not hurt me." 

"the devil they won't," said the admiral. 

"why, look you here," said sir franci varney, step forward and 
place hi hand to hi neckerchief; "look you here; if mr. henri 
bannerworth should demand anoth fire, he may do so with the same 
bullet." 

"the same bullet!" said marchdale, step forward--"th same bullet! 
how is this?" 

"mi eyes," said jack; "who'd a thought it; there' a go! wouldn't he do 
for a dummy--to lead a forlorn hope, or to put among the boarders?" 

"here," said sir francis, hand a bullet to henri bannerworth--"her 
is the bullet you shot at me." 

henri look at it--it wa blacken by powder; and then marchdal 
seiz it and tri it in the pistol, but found the bullet fit 
henry' weapon. 

"bi heavens, it is so!" he exclaimed, step back and look at 
varney from top to toe in horror and amazement. 

"d----e," said the admiral, "if I understand this. whi jack pringle, you 
dog, here' a strang fish." 

"on, no! there' plenti on 'um in some countries." 

"will you insist upon anoth fire, or may I consid you satisfied?" 

"I shall object," said marchdale. "henry, thi affair must go no 
further; it would be madness--wors than madness, to fight upon such 
terms." 

"so say i," said the admiral. "I will not have anyth to do with you, 
sir francis. i'll not be your second ani longer. I didn't bargain for 
such a game as this. you might as well fight with the man in brass 
armour, at the lord mayor' show, or the champion at a coronation." 

"oh!" said jack pringle; "a man may as well fire at the back of a 
hallig as a wamphigher." 

"thi must be consid as have been concluded," said mr. marchdale. 

"no!" said henry. 

"and wherefor not?" 

"becaus I have not receiv hi fire." 

"heaven forbid you should." 

"I may not with honour quit the ground without anoth fire." 

"under ordinari circumst there might be some shadow of an excus 
for your demand; but as it is there is none. you have neither honour nor 
credit to gain by such an encounter, and, certainly, you can gain no 
object." 

"how are we to decid thi affair? Am I consid absolv from the 
accus under which I lay, of cowardice?" inquir sir franci 
varney, with a cold smile. 

"why, as for that," said the admiral, "I should as soon expect credit 
for fight behind a wall, as with a man that I couldn't hit ani more 
than the moon." 

"henry; let me implor you to quit thi scene; it can do no good." 

At thi moment, a noise, as of human voices, wa heard at a distance; 
thi caus a momentari pause, and, the whole parti stood still and 
listened. 

the murmur and shout that now aros in the distanc were indistinct 
and confused. 

"what can all thi mean?" said marchdale; "there is someth veri 
strang about it. I cannot imagin a caus for so unusu an 
occurrence." 

"nor i," said sir franci varney, look suspici at henri 
bannerworth. 

"upon my honour I know neither what is the caus nor the natur of the 
sound themselves." 

"then we can easili see what is the matter from yonder hillock," said 
the admiral; "and there' jack pringle, he' up there already. what' he 
telegraph about in that manner, I wonder?" 

the fact was, jack pringle, hear the riot, had thought that if he got 
to the neighbour emin he might possibl ascertain what it wa 
that wa the caus of what he term the "row," and had succeed in 
some degree. 

there were a number of peopl of all kind come out from the village, 
appar armed, and shouting. jack pringl hitch up hi trouser and 
swore, then took off hi hat and began to shout to the admiral, as he 
said,-- 

"d----e, they are too late to spoil the sport. hilloa! hurrah!" 

"what' all that about, jack?" inquir the admiral, as he came puf 
along. "what' the squall about?" 

"onli a few horse-marin and bumboat-women, that have been startl 
like a compani of penguins." 

"oh! my eyes! wouldn't a whole broadsid set 'em flying, jack?" 

"ay; just as them frenchmen that you murder on board the big 
thunderer, as you call it." 

"I murder them, you rascal?" 

"yes; there wa about five hundr of them killed." 

"they were onli shot." 

"they were killed, onli your conscienc tell you it' uncomfortable." 

"you rascal--y villain! you ought to be keel-haul and well payed." 

"ay; you'r payed, and paid off as an old hulk." 

"d----e--you--you--oh! I wish I had you on board ship, i'd make your 
lubberli carcass like a union jack, full of red and blue stripes." 

"oh! it' all veri well; but if you don't take to your heels, you'll 
have all the old women in the villag a whack on you, that' all I 
have to say about it. you'd better port your helm and about ship, or 
you'll be keel-hauled." 

"d--n your--" 

"what' the matter?" inquir marchdale, as he arrived. 

"what' the caus of all the nois we have heard?" said sir francis; 
"ha some villag festiv spontan burst forth among the rustic 
of thi place?" 

"I cannot tell the caus of it," said henri bannerworth; "but they seem 
to me to be come toward thi place." 

"indeed!" 

"I think so too," said marchdale. 

"with what object?" inquir sir franci varney. 

"no peaceabl one," observ henry; "for, as far I can observe, they 
struck across the country, as though they would enclos something, or 
intercept somebody." 

"indeed! but whi come here?" 

"if I knew that I could have at onc told the cause." 

"and they appear arm with a varieti of odd weapons," observ sir 
francis; "they mean an attack upon some one! who is that man with them? 
he seem to be deprec their coming." 

"that appear to be mr. chillingworth," said henry; "I think that is 
he." 

"yes," observ the admiral; "I think I know the build of that craft; 
he' been in our societi before. I alway know a ship as soon as I see 
it." 

"doe you, though?" said jack. 

"yea; what do you mean, eh? let me hear what you'v got to say against 
your captain and your admiral, you mutin dog; you tell me, I say." 

"so I will; you thought you were fight a big ship in a fog, and fire 
a dozen broadsid or so, and it wa onli the fli dutchman, or the 
devil." 

"you infern dog--" 

"well, you know it was; it might a been our own shadow for all I can 
tell. indeed, I think it was." 

"you think!" 

"yes." 

"that' mutiny; i'll have no more to do with you, jack pringle; you'r 
no seaman, and have no respect for your officer. now sheer off, or i'll 
cut your yards." 

"why, as for my yards, i'll squar 'em present if I like, you old 
swab; but as for leav you, veri well; you have said so, and you shall 
be accommodated, d----e; however, it wa not so when your nob wa nearli 
rove through with a board pike; it wasn't 'i'll have no more to do 
with jack pringle' then, it wa more t'other." 

"well, then, whi be so mutinous?" 

"becaus you aggraw me." 

the cri of the mob becam more distinct as they drew nearer to the 
party, who began to evinc some uneasi as to their object. 

"surely," said marchdale, "mr. chillingworth ha not name anyth 
respect the duel that ha taken place." 

"no, no." 

"but he wa to have been here thi morning," said the admiral. "I 
understood he wa to be here in hi own charact of a surgeon, and yet 
I have not seen him; have ani of you?" 

"no," said henry. 

"then here he come in the charact of conserv of the public 
peace," said varney, coldly; "however, I believ that hi errand will be 
useless sinc the affair is, I presume, concluded." 

"down with the vampyre!" 

"eh!" said the admiral, "eh, what' that, eh? what did they say?" 

"if you'll listen they'll tell you soon enough, i'll warrant." 

"may be they will, and yet i'd like to know now." 

sir franci varney look significantli at marchdale, and then wait 
with downcast eye for the repetit of the words. 

"down with the vampyre!" resound on all side from the peopl who came 
rapidli toward them, and converg toward a centre. "burn, destroy, 
and kill the vampyre! No vampyre; burn him out; down with him; kill 
him!" 

[illustration] 

then came mr. chillingworth' voice, who, with much earnestness, 
endeavour to exhort them to moderation, and to refrain from violence. 

sir franci varney becam veri pale agitated; he immedi turned, and 
take the least notice, he made for the wood, which lay between him and 
hi own house, leav the peopl in the greatest agitation. 

mr. marchdal wa not unmov at thi occurrence, but stood hi ground 
with henri bannerworth, the admiral, and jack pringle, until the mob 
came veri near to them, shouting, and utter cri of vengeance, and 
death of all imagin kind that it wa possibl to conceive, against 
the unpopular vampyre. 

pend the arriv of these infuri persons, we will, in a few 
words, state how it wa that so suddenli a set of circumst aros 
product of an amount of person danger to varney, such as, up to 
that time, had seem not at all like to occur. 

We have befor state there wa but one person out of the famili of the 
bannerworth who wa abl to say anyth of a posit charact 
concern the singular and inexplic proceed at the hall; and 
that that person wa mr. chillingworth, an individu not at all like 
to becom garrul upon the subject. 

but, alas! the best of men have their weaknesses, and we much regret to 
say that mr. chillingworth so far in thi instanc forgot that admir 
discret which commonli belong to him, as to be the caus of the 
popular tumult which had now readi such a height. 

In a moment of thoughtless and confidence, he told hi wife. yes, 
thi realli clever man, from whom one would not have expect such a 
piec of horribl indiscretion, actual told hi wife all about the 
vampyre. but such is human nature; combin with an amount of firm 
and reason power, that one would have thought to be invulner 
safeguards, we find some weak which astonish all calculation. 

such wa thi of mr. chillingworth's. It is true, he caution the ladi 
to be secret, and point to her the danger of make varney the vampyr 
a theme for gossip; but he might as well have whisper to a hurrican 
to be so good as not to go on blow so, as request mrs. chillingworth 
to keep a secret. 

Of cours she burst into the usual fervent declar of "who wa she 
to tell? wa she a person who went about tell things? when did she 
see anybody? not she, onc in a blue moon;" and then, when mr. 
chillingworth went out, like the king of otaheite, she invit the 
neighbour round about to come to take some tea. 

under solemn promis of secrecy, sixteen ladi that even were made 
acquaint with the full and interest particular of the attack of 
the vampyr on flora bannerworth, and all the evid inculp sir 
franci varney as the blood-thirsti individual. 

when the mind come to consid that these sixteen ladi multipli 
their inform by about four-and-twenti each, we becom quit lost in 
a sea of arithmetic, and feel compel to sum up the whole by a candid 
assumpt that in four-and-twenti hour not an individu in the whole 
town wa ignor of the circumstances. 

On the morn befor the project duel, there wa an unusu commot 
in the streets. peopl were convers togeth in littl knots, and 
use rather violent gesticulations. poor mr. chillingworth! he alon 
wa ignor of the caus of the popular commotion, and so he went to 
bed wonder that an unusu bustl pervad the littl market town, 
but not at all guess it origin. 

somehow or another, however, the populace, who had determin to make a 
demonstr on the follow morn against the vampyre, thought it 
highli necessari first to pay some sort of compliment to mr. 
chillingworth, and, accordingly, at an earli hour, a great mob assembl 
outsid hi house, and gave three terrif applaud shouts, which 
rous him most unpleasantli from hi sleep; and induc the greatest 
astonish at the caus of such a tumult. 

oh, that art mrs. chillingworth! too well she knew what wa the 
matter; yet she pretend to be so oblivi upon the subject. 

"good god!" cri mr. chillingworth, as he start up in bed, "what' 
all that?" 

"all what?" said hi wife. 

"all what! Do you mean to say you heard nothing?" 

"well, I think I did hear a littl sort of something." 

"A littl sort of something? It shook the house." 

"well, well; never mind. Go to sleep again; it' no busi of ours." 

"yes; but it may be, though. it' all veri well to say 'go to sleep.' 
that happen to be a thing I can't do. there' someth amiss." 

"well, what' that to you?" 

"perhap nothing; but, perhaps, everything." 

mr. chillingworth sprang from hi bed, and began dressing, a process 
which he execut with consider rapidity, and in which he wa much 
acceler by two or three supplementari shout from the peopl below. 

then, in a temporari lull, a loud voic shouted,-- 

"down with the vampyre--down with the vampyre!" 

the truth in an instant burst over the mind of mr. chillingworth; and, 
turn to hi wife, he exclaimed,-- 

"I understand it now. you'v been gossip about sir franci varney, 
and have caus all thi tumult." 

"I gossip! well, I never! lay it on me; it' sure to be my fault. I 
might have known that beforehand. I alway am." 

"but you must have spoken of it." 

"who have I got to speak to about it?" 

"did you, or did you not?" 

"who should I tell?" 

mr. chillingworth wa dressed, and he hasten down and enter the 
street with great desperation. He had a hope that he might be enabl to 
dispers the crowd, and yet be in time to keep hi appoint at the 
duel. 

hi appear wa hail with anoth shout, for it wa considered, of 
course, that he had come to join in the attack upon sir franci varney. 
He found assembl a much more consider mob than he had imagined, 
and to hi alarm he found mani arm with all sort of weapon of 
offence. 

"hurrah!" cri a great lumpy-look fellow, who seem half mad with 
the prospect of a disturbance. "hurrah! here' the doctor, he'll tell us 
all about it as we go along. come on." 

"for heaven' sake," said mr. chillingworth, "stop; what are you about 
to do all of you?" 

"burn the vampyre--burn the vampyre!" 

"hold--hold! thi is folly. let me implor you all to return to your 
homes, or you will get into seriou troubl on thi subject." 

thi wa a piec of advic not at all like to be adopted; and when the 
mob found that mr. chillingworth wa not dispos to encourag and 
counten it in it violence, it gave anoth loud shout of defiance, 
and move off through the long straggl street of the town in a 
direct toward sir franci varney' house. 

It is true that what were call the author of the town had becom 
alarmed, and were stirring, but they found themselv in such a 
fright minority, that it becam out of the question for them to 
interfer with ani effect to stop the lawless proceed of the 
rioters, so that the infuri populac had it all their own way, and 
in a straggling, disorderly-look kind of process they move off, 
vow vengeanc as they went against varney the vampyre. 

hopeless as mr. chillingworth thought it wa to interfer with ani 
degre of effect in the proceed of the mob, he still could not 
reconcil it to himself to be absent from a scene which he now felt 
certain had been produc by hi own imprudence, so he went on with the 
crowd, endeavouring, as he did so, by everi argument that could be 
suggest to him to induc them to abstain from the act of violenc 
they contemplated. He had a hope, too, that when they reach sir 
franci varney's, find him not within, as probabl would be the case, 
as by that time he would have start to meet henri bannerworth on the 
ground, to fight the duel, he might induc the mob to return and forego 
their medit violence. 

and thu wa it that, urg on by a multitud of persons, the unhappi 
surgeon wa expiating, both in mind and person, the seriou mistak he 
had commit in trust a secret to hi wife. 

let it not be suppos that we for one moment wish to lay down a gener 
principl as regard the confid secret to ladies, becaus from the 
begin of the world it ha becom notori how well they keep them, 
and with what admir discretion, tact, and forethought thi fairest 
portion of human conduct themselves. 

We know how few mrs. chillingworth there are in the world, and have but 
to regret that our friend the doctor should, in hi matrimoni 
adventure, have met with such a specimen. 




chapter xl. 

the popular riot.--sir franci varney' danger.--th suggest and it 
results. 


[illustration] 

such, then, were the circumst which at onc alter the whole 
aspect of the affairs, and, from privat and domest caus of veri 
deep annoyance, led to public result of a charact which seem like 
to involv the whole country-sid in the greatest possibl confusion. 

but while we blame mr. chillingworth for be so indiscreet as to 
commun the secret of such a person as varney the vampyr to hi 
wife, we trust in a short time to be enabl to show that he made as 
much repar as it wa possibl to make for the mischief he had 
unintent committed. and now as he struggl onward--appar 
onward--first and foremost among the rioters, he wa realli do all in 
hi power to quell that tumult which superstit and dread had raised. 

human natur truli delight in the marvellous, and in proport as a 
knowledg of the natur phenomena of natur is restricted, and 
unbridl imagin allow to give the rein to fathomless conjecture, 
we shall find an eager likewis to believ the marvel to be the 
truth. 

that dim and uncertain condit concern vampyres, origin 
probabl as it had done in germany, had spread itself slowly, but 
insidiously, throughout the whole of the civil world. 

In no countri and in no clime is there not someth which bear a kind 
of famili relationship to the verit vampyr of which sir franci 
varney appear to be so choic a specimen. 

the _ghoul_ of eastern nation is but the same being, alter to suit 
habit and localities; and the _sema_ of the scandinavian is but the 
vampyr of a more primit race, and a personif of that morbid 
imagin which ha onc fanci the probabl of the dead walk 
again among the living, with all the fright insignia of corrupt 
and the grave about them. 

although not popular in england, still there had been tale told of such 
midnight visitants, so that mrs. chillingworth, when she had impart 
the inform which she had obtained, had alreadi some rough materi 
to work upon in the mind of her auditors, and therefor there wa no 
great difficulti in veri soon establish the fact. 

under such circumstances, ignor peopl alway do what they have heard 
ha been done by some one els befor them and in an incred short 
space of time the proprieti of catch sir franci varney, depriv 
him of hi vampyre-lik existence, and drive a stake through hi body, 
becam not at all a question proposition. 

alas, poor mr. chillingworth! as well might he have attempt king 
canute' task of stem the wave of the ocean as that of attempt 
to stop the crowd from proceed to sir franci varney' house. 

hi veri presenc wa a sort of confirm of the whole affair. In 
vain he gesticulated, in vain he beg and pray that they would go 
back, and in vain he declar that full and ampl justic should be done 
upon the vampyre, provid popular clamour spare him, and he wa left 
to more deliber judgment. 

those who were foremost in the throng paid no attent to these 
remonstr while those who were more distant heard them not, and, for 
all they knew, he might be urg the crowd on to violence, instead of 
deprec it. 

thus, then, thi disorderli rabbl soon reach the hous of sir franci 
varney and loudli demand of hi terrifi servant where he wa to be 
found. 

the knock at the hall door wa prodigious, and, with a laudabl 
desire, doubtless, of save time, the moment one wa done amus 
himself with the ponder knocker, anoth seiz it; so that until the 
door wa flung open by some of the bewild and terrifi men, there 
wa no cessat whatev of the furiou demand for admittance. 

"varney the vampyre--varney the vampyre!" cri a hundr voices. "death 
to the vampyre! where is he? bring him out. varney the vampyre!" 

the servant were too terrifi to speak for some moments, as they saw 
such a tumultu assemblag seek their master, while so singular a 
name wa appli to him. At length, one more bold than the rest 
contriv to stammer out,-- 

"mi good people, sir franci varney is not at home. He took an earli 
breakfast, and ha been out nearli an hour." 

the mob paus a moment in indecision, and then one of the foremost 
cried,-- 

"who'd suppos they'd own he wa at home? he' hide somewher of 
course; let' pull him out." 

"ah, pull him out--pul him out!" cri mani voices. A rush wa made 
into the hall and in a veri few minut it chamber were ransacked, and 
all it hidden place care searched, with the hope of discov 
the hidden form of sir franci varney. 

the servant felt that, with their ineffici strength, to oppos the 
proceed of an assemblag which seem to be uncheck by all sort of 
law or reason, would be madness; they therefor onli look on, with 
wonder and dismay, satisfi certainli in their own mind that sir 
franci would not be found, and indulg in much conjectur as to what 
would be the result of such violent and unexpect proceedings. 

mr. chillingworth hope that time wa be gained, and that some sort 
of indic of what wa go on would reach the unhappi object of 
popular detest suffici earli to enabl him to provid for hi 
own safety. 

He knew he wa break hi own engag to be present at the duel 
between henri bannerworth and sir franci varney, and, as that thought 
recur to him, he dread that hi profession servic might be 
requir on one side or the other; for he knew, or fanci he knew, that 
mutual hatr dictat the contest; and he thought that if ever a duel 
had taken place which wa like to be attend with some disastr 
result, that wa sure the one. 

but how could he leave, watch and surround as he wa by an 
infuri multitude--how could he hope but that hi footstep would be 
dogged, or that the slightest attempt of hi to convey a warn to sir 
franci varney, would not be the mean of bring down upon hi head 
the veri danger he sought to shield him from. 

In thi state of uncertainty, then, did our medic man remain, a prey 
to the bitterest reflections, and full of the direst apprehensions, 
without have the slightest power of himself to alter so disastr a 
train of circumstances. 

dissatisfi with their non-success, the crowd twice search the hous 
of sir franci varney, from the attic to the basement; and then, and 
not till then, did they begin reluctantli to believ that the servant 
must have spoken the truth. 

"he' in the town somewhere," cri one. "let' go back to the town." 

It is strang how suddenli ani mob will obey ani impulse, and thi 
perfectli groundless supposit wa suffici to turn their step back 
again in the direct whenc they came, and they had actually, in a 
straggl sort of column, reach halfway toward the town, when they 
encount a boy, whose profession pursuit consist in tend sheep 
veri earli of a morning, and who at onc inform them that he had seen 
sir franci varney in the wood, half way between bannerworth hall and 
hi own home. 

thi event at onc turn the whole tide again, and with renew 
clamours, carri mr. chillingworth along with them, they now rapidli 
near the real spot, where, probably, had they turn a littl earlier, 
they would have view the object of their suspicion and hatred. 

but, as we have alreadi recorded, the advanc throng wa seen by the 
parti on the ground, where the duel could scarc have been said to 
have been fought; and then had sir franci varney dash into the wood, 
which wa so opportun at hand to afford him a shelter from hi 
enemies, and from the intricaci of which--wel acquaint with them as 
he doubtless was,--h had everi chanc of elud their pursuit. 

the whole affair wa a great surpris to henri and hi friends, when 
they saw such a string of peopl advancing, with such shout and 
imprecations; they could not, for the life of them, imagin what could 
have excit such a turn out among the ordinarili industri and quiet 
inhabit of a town, remark rather for the quietud and steadi 
of it population, than for ani violent outbreak of popular feeling. 

"what can mr. chillingworth be about," said henry, "to bring such a mob 
here? ha he taken leav of hi senses?" 

"nay," said marchdale; "look again; he seem to be tri to keep them 
back, although ineffectually, for they will not be stayed." 

"d----e," said the admiral, "here' a gang of pirates; we shall be 
board and carri befor we know where we are, jack." 

"ay ay, sir," said jack. 

"and is that all you'v got to say, you lubber, when you see your 
admir in danger? you'd better go and make term with the enemi at 
once." 

"really, thi is serious," said henry; "they shout for varney. can mr. 
chillingworth have been so mad as to adopt thi mean of stop the 
duel?" 

"impossible," said marchdale; "if that had been hi intention, he could 
have done so quietly, through the medium of the civil authorities." 

"hang me!" exclaim the admiral, "if there are ani civil authorities; 
they talk of smash somebody. what do they say, jack? I don't hear 
quit so well as I used." 

"you alway wa a littl deaf," said jack. 

"what?" 

"A littl deaf, I say." 

"why, you lubberli lie swab, how dare you say so?" 

"becaus you was." 

"you slave-go scoundrel!" 

"for heaven' sake, do not quarrel at such a time as this!" said henry; 
"we shall be surround in a moment. come, mr. marchdale, let you and I 
visit these people, and ascertain what it is that ha so much excit 
their indignation." 

"agreed," said marchdale; and they both step forward at a rapid pace, 
to meet the advanc throng. 

the crowd which had now approach to within a short distanc of the 
expect littl party, wa of a most motley description, and it 
appearance, under mani circumstances, would caus consider 
risibility. men and women were mix indiscrimin together, and in 
the shouting, the latter, if such a thing were possible, exceed the 
former, both in discord and energy. 

everi individu compos that mob carri some weapon calcul for 
defence, such as flails, scythes, sickles, bludgeons, &c., and thi mode 
of arm caus them to wear a most formid appearance; while the 
passion that superstit had call up wa strongli depict in their 
inflam features. their fury, too, had been excit by their 
disappointment, and it wa with concentr rage that they now press 
onward. 

the calm and steadi advanc of henri and mr. marchdal to meet the 
advanc throng, seem to have the effect of retard their progress 
a little, and they came to a parley at a hedge, which separ them 
from the meadow in which the duel had been fought. 

"you seem to be advanc toward us," said henry. "do you seek me or 
ani of my friends; and if so, upon what errand? mr. chillingworth, for 
heaven' sake, explain what is the caus of all thi assault. you seem 
to be at the head of it." 

"seem to be," said mr. chillingworth, "without be so. you are not 
sought, nor ani of your friends?" 

"who, then?" 

"sir franci varney," wa the immedi reply. 

"indeed! and what ha he done to excit popular indignation? of privat 
wrong I can accus him; but I desir no crowd to take up my cause, or to 
aveng my quarrels." 

"mr. bannerworth, it ha becom known, through my indiscretion, that sir 
franci varney is suspect of be a vampyre." 

"i thi so?" 

"hurrah!" shout the mob. "down with the vampyre! hurrah! where is he? 
down with him!" 

"drive a stake through him," said a woman; "it' the onli way, and the 
humanest. you'v onli to take a hedg stake and sharpen it a bit at one 
end, and char it a littl in the fire so as there mayt'n't be no 
splinter to hurt, and then poke it through hi stomach." 

the mob gave a great shout at thi human piec of advice, and it wa 
some time befor henri could make himself heard at all, even to those 
who were nearest to him. 

when he did succeed in so doing, he cried, with a loud voice,-- 

"hear me, all of you. It is quit needless for me to inquir how you 
becam possess of the inform that a dread suspicion hang over 
the person of sir franci varney; but if, in consequ of hear such 
news, you fanci thi public demonstr will be agreeabl to me, or 
like to reliev those who are nearest or dearest to me from the state 
of miseri and apprehens into which they have fallen, you are much 
mistaken." 

"hear him, hear him!" cri mr. marchdale; "he speak both wisdom and 
truth." 

"if anything," pursu henry, "could add to the annoy of vexat 
and miseri we have suffered, it would assuredli be the be made 
subject of every-day gossip, and every-day clamour." 

"you hear him?" said mr. marchdale. 

"yes, we does," said a man; "but we come out to catch a vampyre, for 
all that." 

"oh, to be sure," said the human woman; "nobody' feel is noth 
to us. are we to be woke up in the night with vampyr suck our 
blood while we'v got a stake in the country?" 

"hurrah!" shout everybody. "down with the vampyre! where is he?" 

"you are wrong. I assur you, you are all wrong," said mr. 
chillingworth, imploringly; "there is no vampyr here, you see. sir 
franci varney ha not onli escaped, but he will take the law of all of 
you." 

thi wa an argument which appear to stagger a few, but the bolder 
spirit push them on, and a suggest to search the wood have been 
made by some one who wa more cun than hi neighbours, that measur 
wa at onc proceed with, and execut in a systemat manner, which 
made those who knew it to be the hiding-plac of sir franci varney 
trembl for hi safety. 

It wa with a strang mixtur of feel that henri bannerworth wait 
the result of the search for the man who but a few minut befor had 
been oppos to him in a contest of life or death. 

the destruct of sir franci varney would certainli have been an 
effectu mean of prevent him from continu to be the incubu he 
then wa upon the bannerworth family; and yet the gener natur of 
henri shrank with horror from see even such a creatur as varney 
sacrif at the shrine of popular resentment, and murder by an 
infuri populace. 

He felt as great an interest in the escap of the vampyr as if some 
great advantag to himself had been conting upon such an event; and, 
although he spoke not a word, while the echo of the littl wood were 
all awaken by the clamor manner in which the mob search for their 
victim, hi feel could be well read upon hi countenance. 

the admiral, too, without possess probabl the fine feel of henri 
bannerworth, took an unusu sympathet interest in the fate of the 
vampyre; and, after place himself in variou attitud of intens 
excitement, he exclaimed,-- 

"d--n it, jack, I do hope, after all, the vampyr will get the better of 
them. it' like a whole flotilla attack one vessel--a lubberli 
proceed at the best, and i'll be hang if I like it. I should like 
to pour in a broadsid into those fellows, just to let them see it 
wasn't a proper english mode of fighting. shouldn't you, jack?" 

"ay, ay, sir, I should." 

"shiver me, if I see an opportunity, if I don't let some of those 
rascal know what' what." 

scarc had these word escap the lip of the old admir than there 
aros a loud shout from the interior of the wood. It wa a shout of 
success, and seem at the veri least to herald the captur of the 
unfortun varney. 

"bi heaven!" exclaim henry, "they have him." 

"god forbid!" said mr. marchdale; "thi grow too serious." 

"bear a hand, jack," said the admiral: "we'll have a fight for it yet; 
they sha'n't murder even a vampyr in cold blood. load the pistol and 
send a fli shot or two among the rascals, the moment they appear." 

"no, no," said henry; "no more violence, at least there ha been 
enough--ther ha been enough." 

even as he spoke there came rush from among the trees, at the corner 
of the wood, the figur of a man. there need but one glanc to assur 
them who it was. sir franci varney had been seen, and wa fli befor 
those implac foe who had sought hi life. 

He had divest himself of hi huge cloak, as well as of hi low 
slouch hat, and, with a speed which noth but the most absolut 
desper could have enabl him to exert, he rush onward, beat 
down befor him everi obstacle, and bound over the meadow at a rate 
that, if he could have continu it for ani length of time, would have 
set pursuit at defiance. 

"bravo!" shout the admiral, "a stern chase is a long chase, and I wish 
them joy of it--d----e, jack, did you ever see anybodi get along like 
that?" 

"ay, ay, sir." 

"you never did, you scoundrel." 

"yes, I did." 

"when and where?" 

"when you ran away off the sound." 

the admir turn nearli blue with anger, but jack look perfectli 
imperturbable, as he added,-- 

"you know you ran away after the french frigat who wouldn't stay to 
fight you." 

"ah! that indeed. there he goes, put on everi stitch of canvass, 
i'll be bound." 

"and there they come," said jack, as he point to the corner of the 
wood, and some of the more activ of the vampyre' pursuer show 
themselves. 

It would appear as if the vampyr had been start from some 
hiding-plac in the interior of the wood, and had then thought it 
expedi altogeth to leav that retreat, and make hi way to some 
more secur one across the open country, where there would be more 
obstacl to hi discoveri than persever could overcome. probably, 
then, among the brushwood and trees, for a few moment he had been again 
lost sight of, until those who were closest upon hi track had emerg 
from among the dens foliage, and saw him scour across the countri at 
such headlong speed. these were but few, and in their extrem anxieti 
themselv to captur varney, whose precip and terrifi flight 
brought a firm convict to their mind of hi be a vampyre, they 
did not stop to get much of a reinforcement, but plung on like 
greyhound in hi track. 

"jack," said the admiral, "thi won't do. look at that great lubberli 
fellow with the queer smock-frock." 

"never saw such a figure-head in my life," said jack. 

"stop him." 

"ay, ay, sir." 

the man wa come on at a prodigi rate, and jack, with all the 
deliber in the world, advanc to meet him; and when they got 
suffici close together, that in a few moment they must encount 
each other, jack made himself into as small a bundl as possible, and 
present hi shoulder to the advanc countryman in such a way, that 
he flew off it at a tangent, as if he had run against a brick wall, and 
after roll head over heel for some distance, safe deposit 
himself in a ditch, where he disappear complet for a few moment 
from all human observation. 

"don't say I hit you," said jack. "curs yer, what did yer run against 
me for? sarv you right. lubber as don't know how to steer, in cours 
run agin things." 

"bravo," said the admiral; "there' anoth of them." 

the pursuer of varney the vampyre, however, now came too thick and fast 
to be so easili dispos of, and as soon as hi figur could be seen 
cours over the meadows, and spring over road and ditch with an 
agil almost fright to look upon, the whole rabbl rout wa in 
pursuit of him. 

By thi time, the man who had fallen into the ditch had succeed in 
make hi appear in the visibl world again, and as he crawl up 
the bank, look a thing of mire and mud, jack walk up to him with 
all the careless in the world, and said to him,-- 

"ani luck, old chap?" 

"oh, murder!" said the man, "what do you mean? who are you? where am I? 
what' the matter? old muster fowler, the fat crowner, will set upon me 
now." 

"have you caught anything?" said jack. 

"caught anything?" 

"yes; you'v been in for eels, haven't you?" 

"d--n!" 

"well, it is odd to me, as some peopl can't go a fish without 
get out of temper. have it your own way; I won't interfer with 
you;" and away jack walked. 

the man clear the mud out of hi eyes, as well as he could, and look 
after him with a power suspicion that in jack he saw the veri caus 
of hi mortal mishap: but, somehow or other, hi immers in the not 
over limpid stream had wonder cool hi courage, and cast one 
despair look upon hi begrim apparel, and anoth at the last of 
the straggler who were pursu sir franci varney across the fields, 
he thought it prudent to get home as fast he could, and get rid of the 
disagre result of an adventur which had turn out for him 
anyth but auspici or pleasant. 

mr. chillingworth, as though by a sort of impuls to be present in case 
sir franci varney should realli be run down and with a hope of save 
him from person violence, had follow the foremost of the rioter in 
the wood, found it now quit imposs for him to carri on such a chase 
as that which wa be undertaken across the field after sir franci 
varney. 

hi person wa unfortun but ill qualifi for the continu of 
such a pursuit, and, although with the greatest reluctance, he at last 
felt himself compel to give it up. 

In make hi way through the intricaci of the wood, he had been 
serious incommod by the thick undergrowth, and he had accident 
encount sever miri pools, with which he had involuntarili made a 
closer acquaint than wa at all conduc either to hi person 
appear or comfort. the doctor' temper, though, gener speaking, 
one of the most even, wa at last affect by hi mishaps, and he could 
not restrain from an execr upon hi want of prudenc in let hi 
wife have a knowledg of a secret that wa not hi own, and the 
produc an unlook for circumstance, the termin of which might 
be of a most disastr nature. 

tired, therefore, and nearli exhaust by the exert he had alreadi 
taken, he emerg now alon from the wood, and near the spot where stood 
henri bannerworth and hi friend in consultation. 

the jade look of the surgeon wa quit suffici indic of the 
troubl and turmoil he had gone through, and some express of 
sympathi for hi condit were drop by henry, to whom he replied,-- 

"nay, my young friend, I deserv it all. I have noth but my own 
indiscret to thank for all the turmoil and tumult that ha arisen 
thi morning." 

"but to what possibl caus can we attribut such an outrage?" 

"reproach me as much as you will, I deserv it. A man may prate of hi 
own secret if he like, but he should be care of those of other 
people. I trust your to another, and am properli punished." 

"enough," said henry; "we'll say no more of that, mr. chillingworth. 
what is done cannot be undone, and we had better spend our time in 
reflect of how to make the best of what is, than in useless 
lament over it causes. what is to be done?" 

"nay, I know not. have you fought the duel?" 

"yes; and, as you perceive, harmlessly." 

"thank heaven for that." 

"nay, I had my fire, which sir franci varney refus to return; so the 
affair had just ended, when the sound of approach tumult came upon 
our ears." 

[illustration] 

"what a strang mixture," exclaim marchdale, "of feel and passion 
thi varney appear to be. At one moment act with the appar 
greatest malignity; and another, seem to have awaken in hi mind a 
romant generos which know no bounds. I cannot understand him." 

"nor I, indeed," said henry; "but yet I somehow trembl for hi fate, 
and I seem to feel that someth ought to be done to save him from the 
fear consequ of popular feeling. let us hasten to the town, and 
procur what assist we may: but a few persons, well organis and 
properli armed, will achiev wonder against a desultori and 
ill-appoint multitude. there may be a chanc of save him, yet, from 
the immin danger which surround him." 

"that' proper," cri the admiral. "I don't like to see anybodi run 
down. A fair fight' anoth thing. yard arm and yard arm--stink pot 
and pipkins--broadsid to broadside--and throw in your bodies, if you 
like, on the lee quarter; but don't do anyth shabby. what do you 
think of it, jack?" 

"why, I mean to say as how if varney onli keep on sail as he' been 
doing, that the devil himself wouldn't catch him in a gale." 

"and yet," said henry, "it is our duti to do the best we can. let us at 
onc to the town, and summon all the assist in our power. come 
on--com on!" 

hi friend need no further urging, but, at a brisk pace, they all 
proceed by the nearest footpath toward the town. 

It puzzl hi pursuer to think in what possibl direct sir franci 
varney expect to find susten or succour, when they saw how 
curious he took hi flight across the meadows. instead of 
endeavouring, by ani circuit path, to seek the shelter of hi own 
house, or to throw himself upon the care of the author of the town, 
who must, to the extent of their power, have protect him, he struck 
across the fields, appar without aim or purpose, seemingli intent 
upon noth but to distanc hi pursuer in a long chase, which might 
possibl tire them, or it might not, accord to their or hi power of 
endurance. 

We say thi seem to be the case, but it wa not so in reality. sir 
franci varney had a deeper purpose, and it wa scarc to be suppos 
that a man of hi subtl genius, and, apparently, far-se and 
reflect intellect, could have so far overlook the mani danger of 
hi posit as not to be fulli prepar for some such conting as 
that which had just now occurred. 

holding, as he did, so strang a place in society--liv among men, and 
yet possess so few attribut in common with humanity--h must all 
along have felt the possibl of draw upon himself popular 
violence. 

He could not wholli reli upon the secreci of the bannerworth family, 
much as they might well be suppos to shrink from give public to 
circumst of so fear strang and peril a natur as those 
which had occur amongst them. the merest accid might, at ani 
moment, make him the town' talk. the overhear of a few chanc word 
by some gossip domestic--som ebullit of anger or annoy by 
some member of the family--or a commun from some friend who had 
been treat with confidence--might, at ani time, awaken around him some 
such a storm as that which now rage at hi heels. 

varney the vampir must have calcul this. He must have felt the 
possibl of such a state of things; and, as a matter of course, 
politicli provid himself with some place of refuge. 

after about twenti minut of hard chase across the fields, there 
could be no doubt of hi intentions. He had such a place of refuge; and, 
strang a one as it might appear, he sped toward it in as direct a line 
as ever a well-sp arrow flew toward it mark. 

that place of refuge, to the surpris of everi one, appear to be the 
ancient ruin, of which we have befor spoken, and which wa so well 
known to everi inhabit of the county. 

truly, it seem like some act of mere desper for sir franci 
varney to hope there to hide himself. there remain within, of what had 
onc been a state pile, but a few grey crumbl walls, which the 
hunt have would have pass unheeded, know that not for one instant 
could he have baffl hi pursuer by seek so ineffici a refuge. 

and those who follow hard and fast upon the track of sir franci 
varney felt so sure of their game, when they saw whither he wa 
speeding, that they relax in their hast considerably, call loudli 
to each other that the vampir wa caught at last, for he could be 
easili surround among the old ruins, and drag from amongst it 
moss-grown walls. 

In anoth moment, with a wild dash and a cri of exultation, he sprang 
out of sight, behind an angle, form by what had been at one time one 
of the princip support of the ancient structure. 

then, as if there wa still someth so danger about him, that onli 
by a great number of hand could he be hope to be secured, the 
infuri peasantri gather in a dens circl around what they 
consid hi temporari place of refuge, and as the sun, which had now 
climb abov the tree tops, and dispersed, in a great measure, mani of 
the heavi cloud of morning, shone down upon the excit group, they 
might have been suppos there assembl to perform some superstiti 
rite, which time had hallow as an associ of the crumbl ruin 
around which they stood. 

By the time the whole of the stragglers, who had persist in the chase, 
had come up, there might have been about fifti or sixti resolut men, 
each intent upon secur the person of one whom they felt, while in 
existence, would continu to be a terror to all the weaker and dearer 
portion of their domest circles. 

there wa a paus of sever minutes. those who had come the fleetest 
were gather breath, and those who had come up last were look to 
their more forward companion for some inform as to what had 
occur befor their arrival. 

all wa profoundli still within the ruin, and then suddenly, as if by 
common consent, there aros from everi throat a loud shout of 
"down with the vampyre! down with the vampyre!" 

the echo of that shout die away, and then all wa still as before, 
while a superstiti feel crept over even the boldest. It would 
almost seem as if they had expect some kind of respons from sir 
franci varney to the shout of defianc with which they had just greet 
him; but the veri calmness, repose, and absolut quiet of the ruin, and 
all about it, alarm them, and they look the one at the other as if 
the adventur after all were not one of the pleasantest description, and 
might not fall out so happili as they had expected. 

yet what danger could there be? there were they, more than half a 
hundr stout, strong men, to cope with one; they felt convinc that he 
wa complet in their power; they knew the ruin could not hide him, 
and that five minut time given to the task, would suffic to explor 
everi nook and corner of them. 

and yet they hesitated, while an unknown terror shook their nerves, and 
seemingli from the veri fact that they had run down their game 
successfully, they dread to secur the trophi of the chase. 

one bold spirit wa wanting; and, if it wa not a bold one that spoke at 
length, he might be compliment as be compar such. It wa one 
who had not been foremost in the chase, perchanc from want of physic 
power, who now stood forward, and exclaimed,-- 

"what are you wait for, now? you can have him when you like. If you 
want your wive and children to sleep quietli in their beds, you will 
secur the vampyre. come on--w all know he' here--whi do you hesitate? 
Do you expect me to go alon and drag him out by the ears?" 

ani voic would have suffic to break the spell which bound them. thi 
did so; and, with one accord, and yell of imprecation, they rush 
forward and plung among the old wall of the ruin. 

less time than we have befor remark would have enabl ani one to 
explor the totter fabric suffici to bring a convict to their 
mind that, after all, there might have been some mistak about the 
matter, and sir franci varney wa not quit caught yet. 

It wa astonish how the fact of not find him in a moment, again 
rous all their angri feel against him, and dispel everi feel 
of superstiti awe with which he had been surrounded; rage gave place 
to the sort of shudder horror with which they had befor contempl 
hi immedi destruction, when they had believ him to be virtual 
within their veri grasp. 

over and over again the ruin were searched--hastili and impati by 
some, care and deliber by others, until there could be no 
doubt upon the mind of everi one individual, that somehow or somewher 
within the shadow of those walls, sir franci varney had disappear 
most mysteriously. 

then it would have been a strang sight for ani indiffer spectat to 
have seen how they shrunk, one by one, out of the shadow of those ruins; 
each seem to be afraid that the vampyre, in some mysteri manner, 
would catch him if he happen to be the last within their sombr 
influence; and, when they had all collect in the bright, open space, 
some littl distanc beyond, they look at each other and at the ruins, 
with dubiou express of countenance, each, no doubt, wish that 
each would suggest someth of a consolatori or practic character. 

"what' to be done, now?" said one. 

"ah! that' it," said another, sententiously. "i'll be hang if I 
know." 

"he' given us the slip," remark a third. 

"but he can't have given us the slip," said one man, who wa 
particularli famou for a dogmat spirit of argumentation; "how is it 
possible? he must be here, and I say he is here." 

"find him, then," cri sever at once. 

"oh! that' noth to do with the argument; he' here, whether we find 
him or not." 

one veri cun fellow laid hi finger on hi nose, and beckon to a 
comrad to retir some paces, where he deliv himself of the 
follow veri oracular sentiment:-- 

"mi good friend, you must know sir franci varney is here or he isn't." 

"agreed, agreed." 

"well, if he isn't here it' no use troubl our head ani more about 
him; but, otherwise, it' quit anoth thing, and, upon the whole, I 
must say, that I rather think he is." 

all look at him, for it wa evid he wa big with some suggestion. 
after a pause, he resumed,-- 

"now, my good friends, I propos that we all appear to give it up, and 
to go away; but that some one of us shall remain and hide among the 
ruin for some time, to watch, in case the vampyr make hi appear 
from some hole or corner that we haven't found out." 

"oh, capital!" said everybody. 

"then you all agre to that?" 

"yes, yes." 

"veri good; that' the onli way to nick him. now, we'll pretend to give 
it up; let' all of us talk loud about go home." 

they did all talk loud about go home; they swore that it wa not 
worth the troubl of catch him, that they gave it up as a bad job; 
that he might go to the deuc in ani way he liked, for all they cared; 
and then they all walk off in a body, when, the man who had made the 
suggestion, suddenli cried,-- 

"hilloa! hilloa!--stop! stop! you know one of us is to wait?" 

"oh, ay; yes, yes, yes!" said everybody, and still they move on. 

"but really, you know, what' the use of this? who' to wait?" 

that was, indeed, a knotti question, which induc a seriou 
consultation, end in their all, with one accord, pitch upon the 
author of the suggestion, as by far the best person to hide in the ruin 
and catch the vampyre. 

they then all set off at full speed; but the cun fellow, who 
certainli had not the slightest idea of so practic carri out hi 
own suggestion, scamper off after them with a speed that soon brought 
him in the midst of the throng again, and so, with fear in their looks, 
and all the evid of fatigu about them, they reach the town to 
spread fresh and more exagger account of the mysteri conduct of 
varney the vampyre. 




chapter xliv. 

varney' danger, and hi rescue.--th prison again, and the 
subterranean vault. 


[illustration] 

We have befor slightli mention to the reader, and not unadvisedly, 
the exist of a certain prisoner, confin in a gloomi dungeon, into 
whose sad and blacken recess but few and faint glimmer ray of 
light ever penetrated; for, by a diabol ingenuity, the narrow 
loophol which serv for a window to that subterran abod wa so 
constructed, that, let the sun be at what point it might, dure it 
diurnal course, but a few reflect beam of light could ever find their 
way into that abod of sorrow. 

the prisoner--th same prison of whom we befor spoke--i there. 
despair is in hi looks, and hi templ are still bound with those 
cloths, which seem now for mani day to have been sop in blood, 
which ha becom encrust in their folds. 

He still lives, appar incap of movement. how he ha live so 
long seem to be a mystery, for one would think him scarc in a state, 
even were nourish place to hi lips, to enabl him to swallow it. 

It may be, however, that the mind ha as much to do with that appar 
absolut prostrat of all sort of physic energi as those bodili 
wound which he ha receiv at the hand of the enemi who have 
reduc him to hi present pain and hopeless situation. 

occasion a low groan burst from hi lips; it seem to come from the 
veri bottom of hi heart, and it sound as if it would carri with it 
everi remnant of vital that wa yet remain to him. 

then he move restlessly, and repeat in hurri accent the name of 
some who are dear to him, and far away--som who may, perchance, be 
mourn him, but who know not, guess not, aught of hi present 
sufferings. 

As he thu moves, the rustl of a chain among the straw on which he lie 
give an indication, that even in that dungeon it ha not been 
consid prudent to leav him master of hi own actions, lest, by too 
vigor an effort, he might escap from the thraldom in which he is 
held. 

the sound reach hi own ears, and for a few moments, in the deep 
impati of hi wound spirit, he heap maledict on the head of 
those who have reduc him to hi present state. 

but soon a better natur seem to come over him, and gentler word fall 
from hi lips. He preach patienc to himself--h talk not of revenge, 
but of justice, and in accent of more hope than he had befor 
spoken, he call upon heaven to succour him in hi deep distress. 

then all is still, and the prison appear to have resign himself 
onc more to the calm of expect or of despair; but hark! hi 
sens of hearing, render doubli acut by lie so long alon in nearli 
darkness, and in posit silence, detect sound which, to ordinari 
mortal power of perception, would have been by far too indistinct to 
produc ani tangibl effect upon the senses. 

It is the sound of feet--on, on they come; far overhead he hear them; 
they beat the green earth--that sweet, verdant sod, which he may never 
see again--with an impati tread. nearer and nearer still; and now 
they pause; he listen with all the intens of one who listen for 
existence; some one comes; there is a lumber noise--a hasti footstep; 
he hear some one labour for breath--pant like a hunt hare; hi 
dungeon door is opened, and there totter in a man, tall and gaunt; he 
reel like one intoxicated; fatigu ha done more than the work of 
inebriation; he cannot save himself, and he sink exhaust by the side 
of that lone prisoner. 

the captiv rais himself as far as hi chain will allow him; he 
clutch the throat of hi enerv visitor. 

"villain, monster, vampyre!" he shrieks, "I have thee now;" and lock 
in a deadli embrace, they roll upon the damp earth, struggl for life 
together. 

* * * * * 

It is mid-day at bannerworth hall, and flora is look from the 
casement anxious expect the arriv of her brothers. she had seen, 
from some of the topmost window of the hall, that the whole 
neighbourhood had been in a state of commotion, but littl did she guess 
the caus of so much tumult, or that it in ani way concern her. 

she had seen the peasantri forsak their work in the field and the 
gardens, and appar intent upon some object of absorb interest; 
but she fear to leav the house, for she had promis henri that she 
would not do so, lest the former pacif conduct of the vampyr should 
have been but a new snare, for the purpos of draw her so far from 
her home as to lead her into some danger when she should be far from 
assistance. 

and yet more than onc wa she tempt to forget her promise, and to 
seek the open country, for fear that those she love should be 
encount some danger for her sake, which she would willingli either 
share with them or spare them. 

the solicitation, however, of her brother kept her compar quiet; 
and, moreover, sinc her last interview with varney, in which, at all 
events, he had shown some feel for the melancholi situat to which, 
he had reduc her, she had been more abl to reason calmly, and to meet 
the suggest of passion and of impuls with a sober judgment. 

about midday, then, she saw the domest parti returning--that party, 
which now consist of her two brothers, the admiral, jack pringle, and 
mr. chillingworth. As for mr. marchdale, he had given them a polit 
adieu on the confin of the ground of bannerworth hall, stating, that 
although he had felt it to be hi duti to come forward and second henri 
bannerworth in the duel with the vampyre, yet that circumst by no 
mean obliter from hi memori the insult he had receiv from 
admir bell, and, therefore, he declin go to bannerworth hall, and 
bade them a veri good morning. 

To all this, admir bell repli that he might go and be d----d, if he 
liked, and that he consid him a swab and a humbug, and appeal to 
jack pringl whether he, jack, ever saw such a sanctifi look prig 
in hi life. 

"ay, ay," say jack. 

thi answer, of course, produc the usual contention, which last them 
until they got fairli in the house, where they swore at each other to an 
extent that wa enough to make ani one' hair stand on end, until henri 
and mr. chillingworth interfered, and realli beg that they would 
postpon the discuss until some more fit opportunity. 

the whole of the circumst were then relat to flora; who, while 
she blame her brother much for fight the duel with the vampyre, 
found in the conduct of that mysteri individual, as regard the 
encounter, yet anoth reason for believ him to be strictli sincer 
in hi desir to save her from the consequ of hi futur visits. 

her desir to leav bannerworth hall consequ becam more and more 
intense, and as the admir realli now consid himself the master of 
the house, they offer no amount of opposit to the subject, but 
mere said,-- 

"mi dear flora, admir bell shall decid in all these matters, now. We 
know that he is our sincer friend; and that whatev he say we ought 
to do, will be dictat by the best possibl feel toward us." 

"then I appeal to you, sir," said flora, turn to the admiral. 

"veri good," repli the old man; "then I say--" 

"nay, admiral," interrupt mr. chillingworth; "you promis me, but a 
short time since, that you would come to no decis whatev upon thi 
question, until you had heard some particular which I have to relat to 
you, which, in my humbl opinion, will sway your judgment." 

"and so I did," cri the admiral; "but I had forgotten all about it. 
flora, my dear, i'll be with you in an hour or two. My friend, the 
doctor, here, ha got some sow by the ear, and fanci it' the right 
one; however, i'll hear what he ha got to say, first, befor we come to 
a conclusion. so, come along, mr. chillingworth, and let' have it out 
at once." 

"flora," said henry, when the admir had left the room, "I can see that 
you wish to leav the hall." 

"I do, brother; but not to go far--i wish rather to hide from varney 
than to make myself inaccess by distance." 

"you still cling to thi neighbourhood?" 

"I do, I do; and you know with what hope I cling to it." 

"perfectly; you still think it possibl that charl holland may be 
unit to you." 

"I do, I do." 

"you believ hi faith." 

"oh, yes; as I believ in heaven' mercy." 

"and I, flora; I would not doubt him now for worlds; someth even now 
seem to whisper to me that a brighter sun of happi will yet dawn 
upon us, and that, when the mist which at present enshroud ourselv 
and our fortun pass away, they will disclos a landscap full of 
beauty, the futur of which shall know no pangs." 

"yes, brother," exclaim flora, enthusiastically; "this, after all, may 
be but some trial, grievou while it lasts, but yet tend eventu 
onli to make the futur look more bright and beautiful. heaven may yet 
have in store for us all some great happiness, which shall spring 
clearli and decidedli from out these misfortunes." 

"be it so, and may we ever thu banish despair by such hope 
propositions. lean on my arm, flora; you are safe with me. come, 
dearest, and tast the sweet of the morn air." 

there was, inde now, a hope about the manner in which henri 
bannerworth spoke, such as flora had not for some weari month had the 
pleasur of listen to, and she eagerli rose to accompani him into the 
garden, which wa glow with all the beauti of sunshine, for the day 
had turn out to be much finer than the earli morn had at all 
promis it would be. 

"flora," he said, when they had taken some turn to and fro in the 
garden, "notwithstand all that ha happened, there is no convinc 
mr. chillingworth that sir franci varney is realli what to us he 
appears." 

"indeed!" 

"it is so. In the face of all evidence, he neither will believ in 
vampyr at all, nor that varney is anyth but some mortal man, like 
ourselves, in hi thoughts, talents, feelings, and mode of life; and 
with no more power to do ani one an injuri than we have." 

"oh, would that I could think so!" 

"and I; but, unhappily, we have by far too many, and too conclus 
evid to the contrary." 

"we have, indeed, brother." 

"and though, while we respect that strength of mind in our friend which 
will not allow him, even almost at the last extremity, to yield to what 
appear to be stern facts, we may not ourselv be so obdurate, but may 
feel that we know enough to be convinced." 

"you have no doubt, brother?" 

"most reluctantly, I must confess, that I feel compel to consid 
varney as someth more than mortal." 

"he must be so." 

"and now, sister, befor we leav the place which ha been a home to us 
from earliest life, let us for a few moment consid if there be ani 
possibl excus for the notion of mr. chillingworth, to the effect that 
sir franci varney want possess of the hous for some purpos still 
more inim to our peac and prosper than ani he ha yet 
attempted." 

"ha he such an opinion?" 

"he has." 

"'ti veri strange." 

"yes, flora; he seem to gather from all the circumstances, noth but 
an overwhelm desir on the part of sir franci varney to becom the 
tenant of bannerworth hall." 

"he certainli wish to possess it." 

"yes; but can you, sister, in the exercis of ani possibl amount of 
fancy, imagin ani motiv for such an anxieti beyond what he alleges?" 

"which is mere that he is fond of old houses." 

"precis so. that is the reason, and the onli one, that can be got 
from him. heaven onli know if it be the true one." 

"it may be, brother." 

"a you say, it may; but there' a doubt, nevertheless, flora. I much 
rejoic that you have had an interview with thi mysteri being, for 
you have certainty, sinc that time, been happier and more compos than 
I ever hope to see you again." 

"I have indeed." 

"it is suffici perceivable." 

"somehow, brother, sinc that interview, I have not had the same sort of 
dread of sir franci varney which befor made the veri sound of hi name 
a note of terror to me. hi words, and all he said to me dure that 
interview which took place so strang between us, inde how I know 
not, tend altogeth rather to make him, to a certain extent, an 
object of my sympathi rather than my abhorrence." 

"that is veri strange." 

"I own that it is strange, henry; but when we come for but a brief 
moment to reflect upon the circumst which have occurred, we shall, 
I think, be abl to find some caus even to piti varney the vampyre." 

"how?" 

"thus, brother. It is said--and well may I who have been subject to an 
attack of such a nature, trembl to repeat the saying--that those who 
have been onc subject to the visit of a vampyre, are themselv 
in a way to becom one of the dread and madden fraternity." 

"I have heard so much, sister," repli henry. 

"yes; and therefor who know but that sir franci varney may, at one 
time, have been as innoc as we are ourselv of the terribl and 
fiendish propens which now make him a terror and a reproach to all 
who know him, or are in ani way obnoxi to hi attacks." 

"that is true." 

"there may have been a time--who shall say there wa not?--when he, like 
me, would have shrunk, with a dread as great as ani one could have 
experienced, from the contamin of the touch even of a vampyre." 

"I cannot, sister, deni the sound of your reasoning," said henry, 
with a sigh; "but I still no not see anything, even from a full 
convict that varney is unfortunate, which should induc us to 
toler him." 

"nay, brother, I said not tolerate. what I mean is, that even with the 
horror and dread we must natur feel at such a being, we may afford 
to mingl some amount of pity, which shall make us rather seek to shun 
him, than to cross hi path with a resolut of do him an injury." 

"I perceiv well, sister, what you mean. rather than remain here, and 
make an attempt to defi sir franci varney, you would fli from him, and 
leav him undisput master of the field." 

"I would--i would." 

"heaven forbid that I or ani one should thwart you. you know well, 
flora, how dear you are to me; you know well that your happi ha 
ever been to us all a matter which ha assum the most import of 
shapes, as regard our gener domest policy. It is not, therefore, 
like now, dear sister, that we should thwart you in your wish to 
remov from here." 

"I know, henry, all you would say," remark flora, as a tear start to 
her eyes. "I know well all you think, and, in your love for me, I 
likewis know well I reli for ever. you are attach to thi place, as, 
indeed, we all are, by a thousand happi and pleasant associations; but 
listen to me further, henry, I do not wish to wander far." 

"not far, flora?" 

"no. Do I not still cling to a hope that charl may yet appear? and if 
he do so, it will assuredli be in thi neighbourhood, which he know is 
nativ and most dear to us all." 

"true." 

"then do I wish to make some sort of parade, in the way of publicity, of 
our leav the hall." 

"yes, yes." 

"and yet not go far. In the neighbour town, for example, sure we 
might find some mean of live entir free from remark or observ 
as to who or what we were." 

"that, sister, I doubt. If you seek for that speci of solitud which 
you contemplate, it is onli to be found in a desert." 

"A desert?" 

"yes; or in a larg city." 

"indeed!" 

"ay, flora; you may well believ me, that it is so. In a small commun 
you can have no possibl chanc of evad an amount of scrutini which 
would veri soon pierc through ani disguis you could by ani possibl 
assume." 

"then there is no resource. We must go far." 

"nay, I will consid for you, flora; and although, as a gener 
principle, what I have said I know to be true, yet some more special 
circumst may aris that may point a cours that, while it enabl 
us, for charl holland' sake, to remain in thi immedi 
neighbourhood, yet will procur to us all the secreci we may desire." 

"dear--dear brother," said flora, as she flung herself upon henry' 
neck, "you speak cheeringli to me, and, what is more, you believ in 
charles' faith and truth." 

"a heaven is my judge, I do." 

"A thousand, thousand thank for such an assurance. I know him too well 
to doubt, for one moment, hi faith. oh, brother! could he--could 
charl holland, the soul of honour, the abod of everi nobl impuls 
that can adorn humanity--could he have written those letters? no, no! 
perish the thought!" 

"it ha perished." 

"thank god!" 

"I only, upon reflection, wonder how, misl for the moment by the 
concurr of a number of circumstances, I could ever have suspect 
him." 

"it is like your gener nature, brother to say so; but you know as 
well as I, that there ha been one here who has, far from feel ani 
sort of anxieti to think as well as possibl of poor charl holland, 
ha done all that in him lay to take the worst view of hi mysteri 
disappearance, and induc us to do the like." 

"you allud to mr. marchdale?" 

"I do." 

"well, flora, at the same time that I must admit you have caus for 
speak of mr. marchdal as you do, yet when we come to consid all 
things, there may be found for him excuses." 

"may there?" 

"yes, flora; he is a man, as he himself says, past the meridian of life, 
and the world is a sad as well as a bad teacher, for it soon--too soon, 
alas! depriv us of our trust confid in human nature." 

"it may be so; but yet, he, know as he did so veri littl of charl 
holland, judg him hastili and harshly." 

"you rather ought to say, flora, that he did not judg him generously." 

"well, be it so." 

"and you must recollect, when you say so, that marchdal did not love 
charl holland." 

"nay, now," said flora, while there flash across her cheek, for a 
moment, a heighten colour, "you are commenc to jest with me, and, 
therefore, we will say no more. you know, dear henry, all my hopes, my 
wishes, and my feelings, and I shall therefor leav my futur destini 
in your hands, to dispos of as you please. look yonder!" 

"where?" 

"there. Do you not see the admir and mr. chillingworth walk among 
the trees?" 

"yes, yes; I do now." 

"how veri seriou and intent they are upon the subject of their 
discourse. they seem quit lost to all surround objects. I could not 
have imagin ani subject that would so complet have absorb the 
attent of admir bell." 

"mr. chillingworth had someth to relat to him or to propose, of a 
natur which, perchance, ha had the effect of enchain all hi 
attention--h call him from the room." 

"yes; I saw that he did. but see, they come toward us, and now we 
shall, probably, hear what is the subject-matt of their discours and 
consultation." 

"we shall." 

admir bell had evid seen henri and hi sister, for now, suddenly, 
as if not from have for the first moment observ them, and, in 
consequence, broken off their privat discourse, but as if they arriv 
at some point in it which enabl them to come to a conclus to be 
communicative, the admir came toward the brother and sister. 

"well," said the bluff old admiral, when they were suffici near to 
exchang words, "well, miss flora, you are look a thousand time 
better than you were." 

"I thank you, admiral, I am much better." 

"oh, to be sure you are; and you will be much better still, and no sort 
of mistake. now, here' the doctor and I have both been agre upon 
what is best for you." 

"indeed!" 

"yes, to be sure. have we not, doctor?" 

"we have, admiral." 

"good; and what, now, miss flora, do you suppos it is?" 

"I realli cannot say." 

"why, it' chang of air, to be sure. you must get away from here as 
quickli as you can, or there will be no peac for you." 

"yes," ad mr. chillingworth, advancing; "I am quit convinc that 
chang of scene and chang of place, and habits, and people, will tend 
more to your complet recoveri than ani other circumstances. In the most 
ordinari case of indisposit we alway find that the invalid recov 
much sooner away from the scene of hi indisposition, than by remain 
in it, even though it gener salubr be much greater than the place 
to which he may be removed." 

"good," said the admiral. 

"then we are to understand," said henry, with a smile, "that we are no 
longer to be your guests, admir bell?" 

"belay there!" cri the admiral; "who told you to understand ani such 
thing, I should like to know?" 

"well, but we shall look upon thi hous as yours, now; and, that be 
the case, if we remov from it, of cours we ceas to be your guest ani 
longer." 

"that' all you know about it. now, hark ye. you don't command the 
fleet, so don't pretend to know what the admir is go to do. I have 
made money by knock about some of the enemi of old england, and 
that' the most gratifi manner in the world of make money, so far 
as I am concerned." 

[illustration] 

"it is an honour mode." 

"of cours it is. well, I am go to--what the deuc do you call it?" 

"what?" 

"that' just what I want to know. oh, I have it now. I am go to what 
the lawyer call invest it." 

"A prudent step, admiral, and one which it is to be hoped, befor now, 
ha occur to you." 

"perhap it ha and perhap it hasn't; however, that' my business, and 
no one' else's. I am go to invest my spare cash in take houses; 
so, as I don't care a straw where the hous may be situated, you can 
look out for one somewher that will suit you, and i'll take it; so, 
after all, you will be my guest there just the same as you are here." 

"admiral," said henry, "it would be impos upon a generos as rare 
as it is noble, were we to allow you to do so much for us as you 
contemplate." 

"veri good." 

"we cannot--w dare not." 

"but I say you shall. So you have had your say, and i'v had mine, after 
which, if you please, master henri bannerworth, I shall take upon myself 
to consid the affair as altogeth settled. you can commenc 
oper as soon as you like. I know that miss flora, here--bless her 
sweet eyes--don't want to stay at bannerworth hall ani longer than she 
can help it." 

"inde I wa urg upon henri to remove," said flora; "but yet I 
cannot help feel with him, admiral, that we are impos upon your 
goodness." 

"go on imposing, then." 

"but--" 

"psha! can't a man be impos upon if he likes? d--n it, that' a poor 
privileg for an englishman to be forc to make a row about. I tell you 
I like it. I will be impos upon, so there' an end of that; and now 
let' come in and see what mrs. bannerworth ha got readi for luncheon." 

* * * * * 

It can hardli be suppos that such a popular ferment as had been 
creat in the countri town, by the singular report concern varney 
the vampyre, should readily, and without abund satisfaction, subside. 

An idea like that which had lent so power an impuls to the popular 
mind, wa one far easier to set go than to deprec or extinguish. 
the veri circumst which had occur to foil the excit mob in 
their pursuit of sir franci varney, were of a natur to increas the 
popular superstit concern him, and to make him and hi act appear 
in still more dread colours. 

mob do not reason veri close and clearly; but the veri fact of the 
frantic flight of sir franci varney from the project attack of the 
infuri multitude, wa seiz hold of as proof posit of the 
realiti of hi vampyre-lik existence. 

then, again, had he not disappear in the most mysteri manner? had 
he not sought refug where no human be would think of seek refuge, 
namely, in that old, dilapid ruin, where, when hi pursuer were so 
close upon hi track, he had succeed in elud their grasp with a 
facil which look as if he had vanish into thin air, or as if the 
veri earth had open to receiv him bodili within it cold embraces? 

It is not to be wonder at, that the few who fled so precipit from 
the ruin, lost noth of the wonder stori they had to tell, in the 
carri it from that place to the town. when they reach their 
neighbours, they not onli told what had realli occurred, but they ad 
to it all their own surmises, and the fanci creation of all their own 
fears, so that befor mid-day, and about the time when henri bannerworth 
wa convers so quietli in the garden of the hall with hi beauti 
sister, there wa an amount of popular ferment in the town, of which 
they had no conception. 

all busi wa suspended, and mani persons, now that onc the idea had 
been start concern the possibl that a vampyr might have been 
visit some of the hous in the place, told how, in the dead of the 
night, they had heard strang noises. how children had shriek from no 
appar cause--door open and shut without human agency; and window 
rattl that never had been known to rattl before. 

some, too, went so far as to declar that they had been awaken out of 
their sleep by nois incident to an effort made to enter their 
chambers; and other had seen duski form of gigant proport 
outsid their windows, tamper with their fastenings, and onli 
disappear when the light of day mock all attempt at concealment. 

these tale flew from mouth to mouth, and all listen to them with such 
an eager interest, that none thought it worth while to challeng their 
inconsistencies, or to express a doubt of their truth, becaus they had 
not been mention before. 

the onli individual, and he wa a remark clever man, who made the 
slightest remark upon the subject of a practic character, hazard a 
suggest that made confus wors confounded. 

He knew someth of vampyres. He had travel abroad, and had heard of 
them in germany, as well as in the east, and, to a crowd of wonder 
and aghast listeners, he said,-- 

"you may depend upon it, my friends, thi ha been go on for some 
time; there have been sever mysteri and sudden death in the town 
lately; peopl have wast away and die nobodi knew how or wherefore." 

"yes--yes," said everybody. 

"there wa miles, the butcher; you know how fat he was, and then how fat 
he wasn't." 

A gener assent wa given to the proposition; and then, elev one 
arm in an orator manner, the clever fellow continued,-- 

"I have not a doubt that miles, the butcher, and everi one els who ha 
die suddenli lately, have been victim of the vampyre; and what' more, 
they'll all be vampyres, and come and suck other people' blood, till at 
last the whole town will be a town of vampyres." 

"but what' to be done?" cri one, who trembl so excess that he 
could scarc stand under hi apprehension. 

"there is but one plan--sir franci varney must be found, and put out of 
the world in such a manner that he can't come back to it again; and all 
those who are dead that we have ani suspicion of, should be taken up out 
of their grave and look at, to see if they'r rot or not; if they 
are it' all right; but, if they look fresh and much, as usual, you may 
depend they'r vampyres, and no mistake." 

thi wa a terrif suggest thrown amongst a mob. To have caught sir 
franci varney and immol him at the shrine of popular fury, they 
would not have shrunk from; but a desecr of the grave of those 
whom they had known in life wa a matter which, howev much it had to 
recommend it, even the boldest stood aghast at, and felt some qualm of 
irresolution. 

there are mani ideas, however, which, like the first plung into a cold 
bath, are rather uncomfort for the moment; but which, in a littl 
time, we becom so familiar with, that they becom strip of their 
disagre concomitants, and appear quit pleas and natural. 

So it wa with thi notion of exhum the dead bodi of those 
townspeopl who had recent die from what wa call a decay of 
nature, and such other failur of vital as bore not the tangibl 
name of ani understood disease. 

from mouth to mouth the aw suggest spread like wildfire, until at 
last it grew into such a shape that it almost seem to becom a duty, 
at all events, to have up mile the butcher, and see how he looked. 

there is, too, about human natur a natur crave curios concern 
everyth connect with the dead. there is not a man of educ or 
of intellectu endow who would not travel mani mile to look upon 
the exhum of the remain of some one famou in hi time, whether 
for hi vices, hi virtues, hi knowledge, hi talents, or hi heroism; 
and, if thi feel exist in the mind of the educ and refin in a 
sublim shape, which lend to it grace and dignity, we may look for 
it among the vulgar and the ignorant, take onli a grosser and meaner 
form, in accord with their habit of thought. the rude materials, of 
which the highest and noblest feel of educ mind are formed, 
will be found amongst the most grovel and base; and so thi vulgar 
curiosity, which, combin with other feelings, prompt an ignor and 
illiter mob to exhum miles, the onc fat butcher, in a differ 
form tempt the philosoph hamlet to moralis upon the skull of 
yorick. 

and it wa wonder to see how, when these peopl had made up their 
mind to carri out the singularli interesting, but, at the same, 
fearful, suggestion, they assum to themselv a great virtu in so 
doing--told each other what an absolut necess there was, for the 
public good, that it should be done; and then, with loud shout and 
cri concern the vampyre, they proceed in a bodi to the villag 
churchyard, where had been lain, with a hope of repos in peace, the 
bone of their ancestors. 

A speci of savag feroc now appear to have seiz upon the crowd, 
and the people, in make up their mind to do someth which wa 
strikingli at varianc with all their preconceiv notion of right and 
wrong, appear to feel that it wa necessary, in order that they might 
be consistent, to cast off mani of the decenc of life, and to becom 
riotou and reckless. 

As they proceed toward the graveyard, they amus themselv by 
break the window of the tax-gatherers, and do what pass 
mischief they could to the habit of all who held ani offici 
situat or authority. 

thi wa someth like a proclam of war against those who might 
think it their duti to interfer with the lawless proceed of an 
ignor multitude. A public-hous or two, likewise, _en route_, wa 
sack of some of it inebri contents, so that, what with the 
mad of intoxication, and the gener excit consequ upon the 
veri natur of the busi which took them to the churchyard, a more 
wild and infuri multitud than that which paus at two iron gate 
which led into the sanctuari of that church could not be imagined. 

those who have never seen a mob place in such a situat as to have 
cast off all moral restraint whatever, at the same time that it feel 
there is no physic power to cope with it, can form no notion of the 
mass of terribl passion which lie slumber under what, in ordinari 
cases, have appear harmless bosoms, but which now run riot, and 
overcam everi principl of restraint. It is a melancholi fact, but, 
nevertheless, a fact, despit it melancholy, that, even in a civilis 
countri like this, with a gener well-educ population, noth 
but a well-organis physic forc keep down, from the commiss of 
the most outrag offences, hundr and thousand of persons. 

We have said that the mob paus at the iron gate of the churchyard, 
but it wa more a paus of surpris than one of vacillation, becaus 
they saw that those iron gate were closed, which had not been the case 
within the memori of the oldest among them. 

At the first build of the church, and the enclosur of it graveyard, 
two pair of these massiv gate had been present by some munific 
patron; but, after a time, they hung idli upon their hinges, ornament 
certainly, but useless, while a coupl of turnstiles, to keep cattl 
from stray within the sacr precincts, did duti instead, and 
established, without trouble, the regular thoroughfare, which long habit 
had dictat as necessary, through the place of sepulture. 

but now those gate were closed, and for onc were do duty. heaven 
onli know how they had been move upon their rusti and time-worn 
hinges. the mob, however, wa check for the moment, and it wa clear 
that the ecclesiast author were resolv to attempt someth 
to prevent the desecr of the tombs. 

those gate were suffici strong to resist the first vigor shake 
which wa given to them by some of the foremost among the crowd, and 
then one fellow start the idea that they might be open from the 
inside, and volunt to clamber over the wall to do so. 

hoist up upon the shoulder of several, he grasp the top of the 
wall, and rais hi head abov it level, and then someth of a 
mysteri natur rose up from the inside, and dealt him such a whack 
between the eyes, that down he went sprawl among hi coadjutors. 

now, nobodi had seen how thi injuri had been inflicted, and the polici 
of those in the garrison should have been certainli to keep up the 
mystery, and leav the invad in ignor of what sort of person it 
wa that had so foil them. man, however, is prone to indulg in vain 
glorification, and the secret wa explod by the triumphant wave of 
the long staff of the beadle, with the gilt knob at the end of it, just 
over the parapet of the wall, in token of victory. 

"it' waggles! it' waggles!" cri everybodi "it' waggles, the 
beadle!" 

"yes," said a voic from within, "it' waggles, the beadle; and he 
think as he had yer there rather; tri it again. the church isn't in 
danger; oh, no. what do you think of this?" 

the staff wa flourish more vigor than ever, and in the secur 
posit that waggl occupi it seem not onli imposs to attack 
him, but that he possess wonder power of resistance, for the staff 
wa long and the knob wa heavy. 

It wa a boy who hit upon the ingeni expedi of throw up a great 
stone, so that it just fell insid the wall, and hit waggl a great 
blow on the head. 

the staff wa flourish more vigor than ever, and the mob, in the 
ecstasi at the fun which wa go on, almost forgot the errand which 
had brought them. 

perhap after all the affair might have pass off jestingly, had not 
there been some realli mischiev person among the throng who were 
determin that such should not be the case, and they incit the 
multitud to commenc an attack upon the gates, which in a few moment 
must have produc their entir demolition. 

suddenly, however, the boldest drew back, and there wa a pause, as the 
well-known form of the clergyman appear advanc from the church 
door, attir in full canonicals. 

"there' mr. leigh," said several; "how unlucki he should be here." 

"what is this?" said the clergyman, approach the gates. "can I 
believ my eye when I see befor me those who compos the worshipp 
at thi church armed, and attempt to enter for the purpos of 
violenc to thi sacr place! oh! let me beseech you, lose not a 
moment, but return to your homes, and repent of that which you have 
alreadi done. It is not yet too late; listen, I pray you, to the voic 
of one with whom you have so often join in prayer to the throne of the 
almighty, who is now look upon your actions." 

thi appeal wa heard respectfully, but it wa evid veri far from 
suit the feel and the wish of those to whom it wa addressed; 
the presenc of the clergyman wa evid an unexpect circumstance, 
and the more especi too as he appear in that costum which they 
had been accustom to regard with a rever almost amount to 
veneration. He saw the favour effect he had produced, and anxiou to 
follow it up, he added,-- 

"let thi littl ebullit of feel pass away, my friends; and, 
believ me, when I assur you upon my sacr word, that whatev ground 
there may be for complaint or subject for inquiry, shall be fulli and 
fairli met; and that the greatest exert shall be made to restor 
peac and tranquil to all of you." 

"it' all about the vampyre!" cri one fellow--"mr. leigh, how should 
you like a vampyr in the pulpit?" 

"hush, hush! can it be possibl that you know so littl of the work of 
that great be whom you all pretend to adore, as to believ that he 
would creat ani class of be of a natur such as those you ascrib 
to that terrif word! oh, let me pray of you to get rid of these 
superstitions--alik disgrac to yourselv and afflict to me." 

the clergyman had the satisfact of see the crowd rapidli thin 
from befor the gates, and he believ hi exhort were have all 
the effect he wished. It wa not until he heard a loud shout behind him, 
and, upon hastili turning, saw that the churchyard had been scale at 
anoth place by some fifti or sixti persons, that hi heart sunk within 
him, and he began to feel that what he had dread would sure come to 
pass. 

even then he might have done someth in the way of pacif exertion, 
but for the interfer of waggles, the beadle, who spoilt everything. 




chapter xlv. 

the open graves.--th dead bodies.--a scene OF terror. 


[illustration] 

We have said waggl spoilt everything, and so he did, for befor mr. 
leigh could utter a word more, or advanc two step toward the rioters, 
waggl charg them staff in hand, and there soon ensu a riot of a 
most formid description. 

A kind of desper seem to have seiz the beadle, and certainly, 
by hi sudden and unexpect attack, he achiev wonders. when, however, 
a dozen hand got hold of the staff, and it wa wrench from him, and 
he wa knock down, and half-a-dozen peopl roll over him, waggl 
wa not near the man he had been, and he would have been veri well 
content to have lain quiet where he was; this, however, he wa not 
permit to do, for two or three, who had felt what a weighti 
instrument of warfar the parochi staff was, lift him bodili from 
the ground, and cant him over the wall, without much regard to whether 
he fell on a hard or a soft place on the other side. 

thi feat accomplished, no further attent wa paid to mr. leigh, who, 
find that hi exhort were quit unheeded, retir into the 
church with an appear of deep afflict about him, and lock 
himself in the vestry. 

the crowd now had entir possession--without even the sort of control 
that an exhort assum over them--of the burying-ground, and soon 
in a dens mass were these desper and excit peopl collect round 
the well-known spot where lay the mortal remain of miles, the butcher. 

"silence!" cri a loud voice, and everi one obey the mandate, look 
toward the speaker, who wa a tall, gaunt-look man, attir in a 
suit of fade black, and who now press forward to the front of the 
throng. 

"oh!" cri one, "it' fletcher, the ranter. what doe he do here?" 

"hear him! hear him!" cri others; "he won't stop us." 

"yes, hear him," cri the tall man, wave hi arm about like the 
sail of a windmill. "yes, hear him. son of darkness, you'r all 
vampyres, and are continu suck the life-blood from each other. No 
wonder that the evil one ha power over you all. you'r as men who walk 
in the dark when the sunlight invit you, and you listen to the 
word of human when those of a divin origin are offer to your 
acceptance. but there shall be miracl in the land, and even in thi 
place, set apart with a pretend pieti that is in itself most damnable, 
you shall find an evid of the true light; and the proof that those 
who will follow me the true path to glori shall be found here within 
thi grave. dig up miles, the butcher!" 

"hear, hear, hear, hurra!" said everi body. "mr. fletcher' not such a 
fool, after all. He mean well." 

"yes, you sinners," said the ranter, "and if you find miles, the 
butcher, decaying--even as men are expect to decay whose mortal 
tabernacl are place within the bowel of the earth--you shall gather 
from that a great omen, and a sign that if you follow me you seek the 
lord; but I you find him look fresh and healthy, as if the warm blood 
wa still within hi veins, you shall take that likewis as a 
signif that what I say to you shall be as the gospel, and that by 
come to the chapel of the littl boozlehum, ye shall achiev a great 
salvation." 

"veri good," said a brawni fellow, advanc with a spade in hi hand; 
"you get out of the way, and i'll soon have him up. here goes, like blue 
blazes!" 

the first shovel of earth he took up, he cast over hi head into the 
air, so that it fell in a shower among the mob, which of cours rais a 
shout of indignation; and, as he continu so to dispos of the 
superflu earth, a gener row seem like to ensue. mr. fletcher 
open hi mouth to make a remark, and, as that featur of hi face wa 
rather a capaci one, a descend lump of mould, of a clayey 
consistency, fell into it, and got so wedg among hi teeth, that in 
the process of extract it he nearli brought some of those essenti 
portion of hi anatomi with it. 

thi wa a state of thing that could not last long, and he who had been 
so liber with hi spades of mould wa speedili disarmed, and yet he 
wa a popular favourite, and had done the thing so good-humouredly, that 
nobodi touch him. six or eight others, who had brought spade and 
pickaxes, now push forward to the work, and in an incred short 
space of time the grave of miles, the butcher, seem to be veri nearli 
excavated. 

work of ani kind or natur whatever, is speedili execut when done with 
a wish to get through it; and never, perhaps, within the memori of man, 
wa a grave open in that churchyard with such a wonder celerity. 
the excit of the crowd grew intense--everi avail spot from 
which a view of the grave could be got, wa occupied; for the last few 
minut scarc a remark had been uttered, and when, at last, the spade 
of one of those who were dig struck upon someth that sound like 
wood, you might have heard a pin drop, and each one there present drew 
hi breath more shortli than before. 

"there he is," said the man, whose spade struck upon the coffin. 

those few word broke the spell, and there wa a gener murmur, while 
everi individu present seem to shift hi posit in hi anxieti to 
obtain a better view of what wa about to ensue. 

the coffin now have been onc found, there seem to be an increas 
impetu given to the work; the earth wa thrown out with a rapid that 
seem almost the quick result of the work of some machine; and those 
closest to the grave' brink crouch down, and, intent as they were 
upon the progress of events, heed not the damp earth that fell upon 
them, nor the frail brittl and humid remain of human that 
occasion roll to their feet. 

It was, indeed, a scene of intens excitement--a scene which onli want 
a few promin featur in it foreground of a more intellectu and 
higher cast than compos the mob, to make it a fit theme for a painter 
of the highest talent. 

and now the last few shovel of earth that hid the top of the coffin 
were cast from the grave, and that narrow hous which contain the 
mortal remain of him who wa so well known, while in life, to almost 
everi one then present, wa brought to the gaze of eye which never had 
seem like to have look upon him again. 

the cri wa now for ropes, with which to rais the cumbrou mass; but 
these were not to be had, no one thought of provid himself with such 
appliances, so that by main strength, only, could the coffin be rais 
to the brink. 

the difficulti of do thi wa immense, for there wa noth tangibl 
to stand upon; and even when the mould from the side wa suffici 
clear away, that the handl of the coffin could be laid hold of, they 
came away immedi in the grasp of those who did so. 

but the more troubl that present itself to the accomplish of the 
design of the mob, the more intent that bodi seem upon carri out 
to the full extent their origin designs. 

find it quit imposs by bodili strength to rais the coffin of 
the butcher from the posit in which it had got imbed by excess 
rains, a boy wa hastili despatch to the villag for ropes, and never 
did boy run with such speed before, for all hi own curios wa 
excit in the issu of an adventure, that to hi young imagin wa 
appallingli interesting. 

As impati as mob usual are, they had not time, in thi case, for 
the exercis of that qualiti of mind befor the boy came back with the 
necessari mean of exert quit a differ speci of power against 
the butcher' coffin. 

strong rope were slid under the inert mass, and twenti hand at onc 
pli the task of rais that receptacl of the dead from what had been 
presum to be it last resting-place. the rope strain and creaked, 
and mani thought that they would burst asund sooner than rais the 
heavi coffin of the defunct butcher. 

It is singular what reason peopl find for back their opinion. 

"you may depend he' a vampyre," said one, "or it wouldn't be so 
difficult to get him out of the grave." 

"oh, there can be no mistak about that," said one; "when did a natur 
christian' coffin stick in the mud in that way?" 

"ah, to be sure," said another; "I knew no good would come of hi go 
on; he never wa a decent sort of man like hi neighbours, and mani 
queer thing have been said of him that I have no doubt are true enough, 
if we did but know the right of them." 

"ah, but," said a young lad, thrust hi head between the two who were 
talking, "if he is a vampyre, how doe he get out of hi coffin of a 
night with all that weight of mould a top of him?" 

one of the men consid for a moment, and then find no ration 
answer occur to him, he gave the boy a box on the ear, saying,-- 

"I should like to know what busi that is of yours? boys, now-a-days, 
ain't like the boy in my time; they think noth now of put their 
spoke in grown-up people' wheels, just as if their opinion were of 
ani consequence." 

now, by a vigor effort, those who were tug at the rope succeed 
in move the coffin a little, and that first step wa all the 
difficulty, for it wa loosen from the adhes soil in which it lay, 
and now came up with consider facility. 

there wa a half shout of satisfact at thi result, while some of the 
congreg turn pale, and trembl at the prospect of the sight 
which wa about to present itself; the coffin wa drag from the 
grave' brink fairli among the long rank grass that flourish in the 
churchyard, and then they all look at it for a time, and the men who 
had been most earnest in rais it wipe the perspir from their 
brows, and seem to shrink from the task of open that receptacl of 
the dead now that it wa fairli in their power so to do. 

each man look anxious in hi neighbour' face, and sever audibl 
wonder whi somebodi els didn't open the coffin. 

"there' no harm in it," said one; "if he' a vampyre, we ought to know 
it; and, if he ain't, we can't do ani hurt to a dead man." 

"oughtn't we to have the servic for the dead?" said one. 

"yes," said the impertin boy who had befor receiv the knock on the 
head, "I think we ought to have that read backwards." 

thi ingeni idea wa recompens by a great mani kick and cuffs, 
which ought to have been suffici to have warn him of the great 
danger of be a littl befor hi age in wit. 

"where' the use of shirk the job?" cri he who had been so activ 
in shovel the mud upon the multitude; "why, you cowardli sneak set 
of humbugs, you'r half afraid, now." 

"afraid--afraid!" cri everybody: "who' afraid." 

"ah, who' afraid?" said a littl man, advancing, and assum an heroic 
attitude; "I alway notice, if anybody' afraid, it' some big fellow, 
with more bone than brains." 

At thi moment, the man to whom thi reproach wa more particularli 
levelled, rais a horribl shout of terror, and cri out, in frantic 
accents,-- 

"he' a-coming--he' a-coming!" 

the littl man fell at onc into the grave, while the mob, with one 
accord, turn tail, and fled in all directions, leav him alon with 
the coffin. such a fighting, and kicking, and scrambl ensu to get 
over the wall of the grave-yard, that thi great fellow, who had caus 
all the mischief, burst into such peal of laughter that the major of 
the peopl becam awar that it wa a joke, and came creep back, 
look as sheepish as possible. 

some got up veri faint sort of laugh, and said "veri good," and swore 
they saw what big dick meant from the first, and onli ran to make the 
other run. 

"veri good," said dick, "i'm glad you enjoy it, that' all. My eye, 
what a scamper there wa among you. where' my littl friend, who wa 
so infern cun about bone and brains?" 

with some difficulti the littl man wa extric from the grave, and 
then, oh, for the consist of a mob! they all laugh at him; those 
veri peopl who, heedless of all the amen of existence, had been 
trampl upon each other, and roar with terror, actual had the 
impud to laugh at him, and call him a cowardli littl rascal, and 
say it serv him right. 

but such is popularity! 

"well, if nobodi won't open the coffin," said big dick, "I will, so here 
goes. I know the old fellow when he wa alive, and mani a time he' 
d----d me and i'v d----d him, so I ain't a-go to be afraid of him 
now he' dead. We wa veri intimate, you see, 'co we wa the two 
heaviest men in the parish; there' a reason for everything." 

"ah, dick' the fellow to do it," cri a number of persons; "there' 
nobodi like dick for open a coffin; he' the man as don't care for 
nothing." 

"ah, you snivel curs," said dick, "I hate you. If it warn't for my 
own satisfaction, and all for to prove that my old friend, the butcher, 
as weigh seventeen stone, and stood six feet two and-a-half on hi own 
sole, i'd see you all jolli well--" 

"d----d first," said the boy; "open the lid, dick, let' have a look." 

"ah, you'r a rum un," said dick, "arter my own heart. I sometim 
think as you must be a nevy, or some sort of relat of mine. 
howsomdever, here goes. who'd a thought that I should ever had a look at 
old fat and thunder again?--that' what I use to call him; and then he 
use to request me to go down below, where I needn't turn round to light 
my bless pipe." 

"hell--w know," said the boy; "whi don't you open the lid, dick?" 

"i'm a going," said dick; "kim up." 

He introduc the corner of a shovel between the lid and the coffin, and 
give it a sudden wrench, he loosen it all down one side. 

A shudder pervad the multitude, and, popularli speaking, you might 
have heard a pin drop in that crowd churchyard at that event 
moment. 

dick then proceed to the other side, and execut the same manoeuvre. 

"now for it," he said; "we shall see him in a moment, and we'll think we 
seed him still." 

"what a lark!" said the boy. 

"you hold yer jaw, will yer? who axe you for a remark, blow yer? what 
do you mean by squat down there, like a cock-sparrow, with a pain in 
hi tail, hang yer head, too, right over the coffin? did you never 
hear of what they call a fluvifium come from the dead, yer ignor 
beast, as is enough to send nobodi to blaze in a minute? get out of the 
way of the cold meat, will yer?" 

"A what, do you say, dick?" 

"request inform from the extrem point of my elbow." 

dick threw down the spade, and lay hold of the coffin-lid with both 
hands, he lift it off, and flung it on one side. 

there wa a visibl movement and an exclam among the multitude. 
some were push down, in the eager desir of those behind to obtain a 
sight of the ghastli remain of the butcher; those at a distanc were 
frantic, and the excit wa momentarili increasing. 

they might all have spare themselv the trouble, for the coffin wa 
empty--her wa no dead butcher, nor ani evid of one ever have 
been there, not even the grave-clothes; the onli thing at all in the 
receptacl of the dead wa a brick. 

dick' astonish wa so intens that hi eye and mouth kept open 
togeth to such an extent, that it seem doubt when they would 
reach their extrem point of elongation. He then took up the brick and 
look at it curiously, and turn it over and over, examin the end 
and the side with a critic eye, and at length he said,-- 

"well, i'm blowed, here' a transmogrification; he' consolidifi 
himself into a bless brick--mi eye, here' a curiosity." 

"but you don't mean to say that' the butcher, dick?" said the boy. 

dick reach over, and gave him a tap on the head with the brick. 

"there!" he said, "that' what I call occular demonstration. Do you 
believ it now, you bless infidel? what' more natural? He wa an 
out-and-out brick while he wa alive; and he' turn to a brick now 
he' dead." 

"give it to me, dick," said the boy; "I should like to have that brick, 
just for the fun of the thing." 

"i'll see you turn into a pantil first. I sha'n't part with thi 
here, it look so bless sensible; it' a gain on me everi minut as 
a most remark likeness, d----d if it ain't." 

By thi time the bewilder of the mob had subsided; now that there 
wa no dead butcher to look upon, they fanci themselv most 
grievous injured; and, somehow or other, dick, notwithstand all hi 
exert in their service, wa look upon in the light of a showman, 
who had promis some startl exhibit and then had disappoint hi 
auditors. 

the first intim he had of popular vengeanc wa a stone thrown at 
him, but dick' eye happen to be upon the fellow who threw it, and 
collar him in a moment, he dealt him a cuff on the side of the head, 
which confus hi faculti for a week. 

"hark ye," he then cried, with a loud voice, "don't interfer with me; 
you know it won't go down. there' someth wrong here; and, as one of 
yourselves, i'm as much interest in find out what it is as ani of 
you can possibl be. there seem to be some truth in thi vampyr 
business; our old friend, the butcher, you see, is not in hi grave; 
where is he then?" 

the mob look at each other, and none attempt to answer the question. 

"why, of course, he' a vampyre," said dick, "and you may all of you 
expect to see him, in turn, come into your bed-room window with a 
burst, and lay hold of you like a million and a half of leech roll 
into one." 

there wa a gener express of horror, and then dick continued,-- 

"you'd better all of you go home; I shall have no hand in pull up ani 
more of the coffins--thi is a dose for me. Of cours you can do what 
you like." 

[illustration] 

"pull them all up!" cri a voice; "pull them all up! let' see how mani 
vampyr there are in the churchyard." 

"well, it' no busi of mine," said dick; "but I wouldn't, if I wa 
you." 

"you may depend," said one, "that dick know someth about it, or he 
wouldn't take it so easy." 

"ah! down with him," said the man who had receiv the box on the ears; 
"he' perhap a vampyr himself." 

the mob made a demonstr toward him, but dick stood hi ground, and 
they paus again. 

"now, you'r a cowardli set," he said; "caus you'r disappointed, you 
want to come upon me. now, i'll just show what a littl thing will 
frighten you all again, and I warn beforehand it will, so you sha'n't 
say you didn't know it, and were taken by surprise." 

the mob look at him, wonder what he wa go to do. 

"once! twice! thrice!" he said, and then he flung the brick up into the 
air an immens height, and shout "heads," in a loud tone. 

A gener dispers of the crowd ensued, and the brick fell in the 
centr of a veri larg circl indeed. 

"there you are again," said dick; "why, what a nice act you are!" 

"what fun!" said the boy. "it' a famou coffin, this, dick," and he 
laid himself down in the butcher' last resting-place. "I never wa in a 
coffin before--it' snug enough." 

"ah, you'r a rum 'un," said dick; "you'r such a inquir genius, you 
is; you'll get your head into some hole one day, and not be abl to get 
it out again, and then I shall see you a kicking. hush! lay still--don't 
say anything." 

"good again," said the boy; "what shall I do?" 

"give a sort of a howl and a squeak, when they'v all come back again." 

"won't i!" said the boy; "pop on the lid." 

"there you are," said dick; "d----d if I don't adopt you, and bring you 
up to the scienc of nothing." 

"now, listen to me, good peopl all," ad dick; "I have realli got 
someth to say to you." 

At thi intim the peopl slowli gather again round the grave. 

"listen," said dick, solemnly; "it strike me there' some tremend do 
go on." 

"yes, there is," said sever who were foremost. 

"it won't be long befor you'll all of you be most d--nabli astonished; 
but let me beg of all you not to accus me of have anyth to do with 
it, provid I tell you all I know." 

"no, dick; we won't--w won't--w won't." 

"good; then, listen. I don't know anything, but i'll tell you what I 
think, and that' as good; I don't think that thi brick is the butcher; 
but I think, that when you least expect it--hush! come a littl closer." 

"yes, yes; we are closer." 

"well, then, I say, when you all least expect it, and when you ain't 
dream of such a thing, you'll hear someth of my fat friend as is 
dead and gone, that will astonish you all." 

dick paused, and he gave the coffin a slight kick, as intim to the 
boy that he might as well be do hi part in the drama, upon which 
that ingeni young gentleman set up such a howl, that even dick 
jumped, so unearthli did it sound within the confin of that receptacl 
of the dead. 

but if the effect upon him wa great, what must it have been upon those 
whom it took complet unawares? for a moment or two they seem 
complet paralysed, and then they frighten the boy, for the shout of 
terror that rose from so mani throat at onc wa posit alarming. 

thi jest of dick' wa final, for, befor three minut had elapsed, 
the churchyard wa clear of all human occup save himself and the 
boy, who had play hi part so well in the coffin. 

"get out," said dick, "it' all right--we'v done 'em at last; and now 
you may depend upon it they won't be in a hurri to come here again. you 
keep your own counsel, or els somebodi will serv you out for this. I 
don't think you'r altogeth avers to a bit of fun, and if you keep 
yourself quiet, you'll have the satisfact of hear what' said 
about thi affair in everi pot-hous in the village, and no mistake." 




chapter xlvi. 

the prepar for leav bannerworth hall, and the mysteri 
conduct OF the admir and mr. chillingworth. 


[illustration] 

It seem now, that, by the concurr of all parties, bannerworth hall 
wa to be abandoned; and, notwithstand henri wa loth--a he had, 
indeed, from the first shown himself--to leav the ancient abod of hi 
race, yet, as not onli flora, but the admir and hi friend mr. 
chillingworth seem to be of opinion that it would be a prudent cours 
to adopt, he felt that it would not becom him to oppos the measure. 

he, however, now made hi consent to depend wholli upon the full and 
free acquiesc of everi member of the family. 

"if," he said, "there be ani among us who will say to me 'continu to 
keep open the hous in which we have pass so mani happi hours, and let 
the ancient home of our race still afford a shelter to us,' I shall feel 
myself bound to do so; but if both my mother and my brother agre to a 
departur from it, and that it hearth shall be left cold and desolate, 
be it so. I will not stand in the way of ani unanim wish or 
arrangement." 

"we may consid that, then, as settled," said the admiral, "for I have 
spoken to your brother, and he is of our opinion. therefore, my boy, we 
may all be off as soon as we can conveni get under weigh." 

"but my mother? 

"oh, there, I don't know. you must speak to her yourself. I never, if I 
can help it, interfer with the women folks." 

"if she consent, then I am willing." 

"will you ask her?" 

"I will not ask her to leave, becaus I know, then, what answer she 
would at onc give; but she shall hear the proposition, and I will leav 
her to decid upon it, unbias in her judgment by ani state opinion of 
mine upon the matter." 

"good. that'll do; and the proper way to put it, too. there' no mistak 
about that, I can tell you." 

henry, although he went through the ceremoni of consult hi mother, 
had no sort of doubt befor he did so that she wa suffici awar of 
the feel and wish of flora to be prepar to yield a readi assent 
to the proposit of leav the hall. 

moreover, mr. marchdal had, from the first, been an advoc of such a 
cours of proceeding, and henri well knew how strong an influenc he had 
over mrs. bannerworth' mind, in consequ of the respect in which she 
held him as an old and valu friend. 

He was, therefore, prepar for what hi mother said, which was,-- 

"mi dear henry, you know that the wish of my children, sinc they have 
been grown up and capabl of come to a judgment for themselves, have 
ever been law to me. If you, among you all, agre to leav thi place, 
do so." 

"but will you leav it freely, mother?" 

"most freeli I go with you all; what is it that ha made thi hous and 
all it appurten pleasant in my eyes, but the presenc in it of 
those who are so dear to me? If you all leav it, you take with you the 
onli charm it ever possessed; so it becom in itself as nothing. I am 
quit readi to accompani you all anywhere, so that we do but keep 
together." 

"then, mother, we may consid that as settled." 

"a you please." 

"'it' scarc as I please. I must confess that I would fain have clung 
with a kind of superstiti rever to thi ancient abiding-plac of 
my race, but it may not be so. those, perchance, who are more 
practic abl to come to correct conclusions, in consequ of their 
feel not be suffici interest to lead them astray, have 
decid otherwise; and, therefore, I am content to leave." 

"do not griev at it, henry. there ha hung a cloud of misfortun over 
us all sinc the garden of thi hous becam the scene of an event which 
we can none of us rememb but with terror and shuddering." 

"two gener of our famili must live and die befor the remembr 
of that circumst can be obliterated. but we will think of it no 
more." 

there can no doubt but that the dread circumst to which both mrs. 
bannerworth and henri alluded, wa the suicid of the father of the 
famili in the garden which befor ha been hint at in the cours of 
thi narration, as be a circumst which had creat a great 
sensat at the time, and cast a great gloom for mani month over the 
family. 

the reader will, doubtless, too, recollect that, at hi last moments, 
thi unhappi individu wa said to have utter some incoher word 
about some hidden money, and that the rapid hand of death alon seem 
to prevent him from be explicit upon that subject, and left it mere 
a matter of conjecture. 

As year had roll on, thi affair, even as a subject of speculation, 
had ceas to occupi the mind of ani of the bannerworth family, and 
sever of their friends, among whom wa mr. marchdale, were decidedli 
of opinion that the appar point and mysteri word uttered, 
were but the disord wander of an intellect alreadi hover on 
the confin of eternity. 

indeed, far from ani money, of ani amount, be a disturb to the 
last moment of the dissolut man, whose vice and extravag had 
brought hi family, to such ruin, it wa pretti gener believ that 
he had commit suicid simpli from a convict of the imposs 
of rais ani more suppli of cash, to enabl him to carri on the 
career which he had pursu for so long. 

but to resume. 

henri at onc commun to the admir what hi mother had said, and 
then the whole question regard the remov be settl in the 
affirmative, noth remain to be done but to set about it as quickli 
as possible. 

the bannerworth live suffici distant from the town to be out of 
earshot of the disturb which were then take place; and so 
complet isol were they from all sort of society, that they had no 
notion of the popular disturb which varney the vampyr had given 
rise to. 

It wa not until the follow morn that mr. chillingworth, who had 
been home in the meantime, brought word of what had taken place, and 
that great commot wa still in the town, and that the civil 
authorities, find themselv by far too weak to contend against the 
popular will, had sent for assist to a garrison town, some twenti 
mile distant. 

It wa a great grief to the bannerworth famili to hear these tidings, 
not that they were in ani way, except as victims, accessori to creat 
the disturb about the vampyre, but it seem to promis a kind of 
notorieti which they might well shrink from, and which they were just 
the peopl to view with dislike. 

view the matter how we like, however, it is not to be consid as at 
all probabl that the bannerworth famili would remain long in ignor 
of what a great sensat they had creat unwittingli in the 
neighbourhood. 

the veri reason which had induc their servant to leav their 
establishment, and prefer throw themselv complet out of place, 
rather than remain in so ill-omen a house, were sure to be bruit 
abroad far and wide. 

and that, perhaps, when they came to consid of it, would suffic to 
form anoth good and substanti reason for leav the hall, and 
seek a refug in obscur from the extrem troublesom sort of 
popular incident to their peculiar situation. 

mr. chillingworth felt uncommonli chari of tell them all that had 
taken place; although he wa well awar that the proceed of the 
riotou mob had not termin with the littl disappoint at the old 
ruin, to which they had so effectu chase varney the vampyre, but to 
lose him so singularli when he got there. 

No doubt he possess the admir with the uproar that wa go on in 
the town, for the latter did hint a littl of it to henri bannerworth. 

"hilloa!" he said to henry, as he saw him walk in the garden; "it 
strike me if you and your ship' crew continu in these latitudes, 
you'll get as notori as the fli dutchman in the southern ocean." 

"how do you mean?" said henry. 

"why, it' a sure go proverb to say, that a nod' as good as a wink; 
but, the fact is, it' get rather too well known to be pleasant, 
that a vampyr ha struck up rather a close acquaint with your 
family. I understand there' a preciou row in the town." 

"indeed!" 

"yes; bother the particulars, for I don't know them; but, hark ye, by 
to-morrow i'll have found a place for you to go to, so pack up the 
sticks, get all your store readi to clear out, and make yourself scarc 
from thi place." 

"I understand you," said henry; "we have becom the subject of popular 
rumour; i'v onli to beg of you, admiral, that you'll say noth of 
thi to flora; she ha alreadi suffer enough, heaven knows; do not let 
her have the addit inflict of think that her name is made 
familiar in everi pothous in the town." 

"leav me alon for that," said the admiral. "do you think i'm an ass?" 

"ay, ay," said jack pringle, who came in at that moment, and thought the 
question wa address to him. 

"who spoke to you, you bad-look horse-marine?" 

"me a horse-marine! didn't you ask a plain question of a fellow, and get 
a plain answer?" 

"why, you son of a bad look gun, what do you mean by that? I tell you 
what it is, jack; i'v let you come sneak too often on the 
quarter-deck, and now you come poke your fun at your officers, you 
rascal!" 

"I poke fun!" said jack; "couldn't think of such a thing. I should 
just as soon think of you make a joke as me." 

"now, I tell you what it is, I shall just strike you off the ship' 
books, and you shall just go and cruis by yourself; i'v done with 
you." 

"go and tell that to the marines, if you like," said jack. "I ain't done 
with you yet, for a jolli long watch. why, what do you suppos would 
becom of you, you great babby, without me? ain't I alway a convey 
you from place to place, and steer you through all sort of 
difficulties?" 

"d---n your impudence!" 

"well, then, d---n yours." 

"shiver my timbers!" 

"ay, you may do what you like with your own timbers." 

"and you won't leav me?" 

"sartingli not." 

"come here, then?" 

jack might have expect a gratuity, for he advanc with alacrity. 

"there," said the admiral, as he laid hi stick across hi shoulders; 
"that' your last month' wages; don't spend it all at once." 

"well, i'm d----d!" said jack; "who'd have thought of that?--he' a 
turn rumgumtious, and no mistake. howsomdever, I must turn it over in 
my mind, and be even with him, somehow--i owe him one for that. I say, 
admiral." 

"what now, you lubber?" 

"nothing; turn that over in your mind;" and away jack walked, not quit 
satisfied, but feeling, at least, that he had made a demonstr of 
attack. 

As for the admiral, he consid that the thump he had given jack with 
the stick, and it wa no gentl one, wa a decid balanc of account 
up to that period, and as he remain likewis master of the field, he 
wa upon the whole veri well satisfied. 

these last few word which had been spoken to henri by admir bell, 
more than ani others, induc him to hasten hi departur from 
bannerworth hall; he had walk away when the alterc between jack 
pringl and the admir began, for he had seen suffici of those wordi 
conflict between those origin to be quit satisfi that neither of 
them meant what he said of a discourag charact toward the other, 
and that far from there be ani unfriendli feel conting upon 
those littl affairs, they were onli a speci of friendli sparring, 
which both parti enjoy extremely. 

He went direct to flora, and he said to her,-- 

"sinc we are all agre upon the necessity, or, at all events, upon the 
expedi of a departur from the hall, I think, sister, the sooner we 
carri out that determin the better and the pleasant for us all it 
will be. Do you think you could remov so hastili as to-morrow?" 

"to-morrow! that is soon indeed." 

"I grant you that it is so; but admir bell assur me that he will 
have everyth in readiness, and a place provid for us to go to by 
then." 

"would it be possibl to remov from a hous like thi so veri quickly?" 

"yes, sister. If you look around you, you will see that a great portion 
of the comfort you enjoy in thi mansion belong to it as a part of it 
veri structure, and are not remov at pleasure; what we realli have 
to take away is veri little. the urgent want of money dure our 
father' lifetim induc him, as you may recollect even, at variou 
time to part with much that wa ornamental, as well as useful, which 
wa in the hall. you will recollect that we seldom return from those 
littl continent tour which to us were so delightful, without find 
some old familiar object gone, which, upon inquiry, we found had been 
turn into money, to meet some more than usual press demand." 

"that is true, brother; I recollect well." 

"so that, upon the whole, sister, there is littl to remove." 

"well, well, be it so. I will prepar our mother for thi sudden step. 
believ me, my heart goe with it; and as a forc of veng 
circumst have induc us to remov from thi home, which wa onc 
so full of pleasant recollections, it is certainli better, as you say, 
that the act should be at onc consummated, than left hang in terror 
over our minds." 

"then i'll consid that as settled," said henry. 




chapter xlvii. 

the remov from the hall.--th night watch, and the alarm. 


[illustration] 

mrs. bannerworth' consent have been alreadi given to the removal, she 
said at once, when appeal to, that she wa quit readi to go at ani 
time her children thought expedient. 

upon this, henri sought the admiral, and told him as much, at the same 
time adding,-- 

"mi sister fear that we should have consider troubl in the 
removal, but I have convinc her that such will not be the case, as we 
are by no mean overburden with cumbrou property." 

"cumbrou property," said the admiral, "why, what do you mean? I beg 
leav to say, that when I took the house, I took the tabl and chair 
with it. d--n it, what good do you suppos an empti hous is to me?" 

"the tabl and chairs!" 

"yes. I took the hous just as it stands. don't tri and bamboozl me out 
of it. I tell you, you'v noth to move but yourselv and immedi 
person effects." 

"I wa not aware, admiral, that that wa your plan." 

"well, then, now you are, listen to me. i'v circumv the enemi too 
often not to know how to get up a plot. jack and I have manag it all. 
to-morrow evening, after dark, and befor the moon' got high enough to 
throw ani light, you and your brother, and miss flora and your mother, 
will come out of the house, and jack and I will lead you where you'r to 
go to. there' plenti of furnitur where you'r a-going, and so you will 
get off free, without anybodi know anyth about it." 

"well, admiral, i'v said it before, and it is the unanim opinion of 
us all, that everyth should be left to you. you have prove yourself 
too good a friend to us for us to hesit at all in obey your 
commands. arrang everything, I pray you, accord to your wish and 
feelings, and you will find there shall be no cavil on our parts." 

"that' right; there' noth like give a command to some one person. 
there' no good done without. now i'll manag it all. mind you, seven 
o'clock to-morrow even everyth is to be ready, and you will all be 
prepar to leav the hall." 

"it shall be so." 

"who' that give such a thunder ring at the gate?" 

"nay, I know not. We have few visitor and no servants, so I must e'en 
be my own gate porter." 

henri walk to the gate, and have open it, a servant in a handsom 
liveri step a pace or two into the garden. 

"well," said henry. 

"i mr. henri bannerworth within, or admir bell?" 

"both," cri the admiral. "i'm admir bell, and thi is mr. henri 
bannerworth. what do you want with us, you d----d gingerbread-look 
flunkey?" 

"sir, my master desir hi compliments--hi veri best compliments--and 
he want to know how you are after your flurry." 

"what?" 

"after your--a--a--flurri and excitement." 

"who is your master?" said henry. 

"sir franci varney." 

"the devil!" said the admiral; "if that don't beat all the impud I 
ever came near. our flurry! ah! I like that fellow. just go and tell 
him--" 

"no, no," said henry, interposing, "send back no message. say to your 
master, fellow, that mr. henri bannerworth feel that not onli ha he no 
claim to sir franci varney' courtesy, but that he would rather be 
without it." 

"oh, ha!" said the footman, adjust hi collar; "veri good. thi seem 
a d----d, old-fashioned, outlandish place of yours. ani ale?" 

"now, shiver my hulks!" said the admiral. 

"hush! hush!" said henry; "who know but there may be a design in this? 
We have no ale." 

"oh, ah! dem!--dri as dust, by god! what doe the old commodor say? ani 
message, my ancient greek?" 

"no, thank you," said the admiral; "bless you, nothing. what did you 
give for that waistcoat, d--n you? ha! ha! you'r a clever fellow." 

"ah! the old gentleman' ill. however, i'll take back hi compliments, 
and that he' much oblig at sir francis' condescension. At the same 
time, I suppos may place in my eye what I may get out of either of you, 
without hinder me see my way back. ha! ha! adieu--adieu." 

"bravo!" said the admiral; "that' it--go it--now for it. d--n it, it is 
a _do!_" 

the admiral' calm dure the latter part of the dialogu aros from 
the fact that over the flunkey' shoulder, and at some littl distanc 
off, he saw jack pringl take off hi jacket, and roll up hi 
sleev in that deliber sort of way that seem to impli a 
determin of set about some speci of work that combin the 
pleasant with the useful. 

jack execut mani nod to and wink at the livery-servant, and jerk 
hi thumb likewis in the direct of a pump near at hand, in a manner 
that spoke as plainli as possible, that john wa to be pump upon. 

and now the confer wa ended, and sir francis' messeng turn to 
go; but jack pringl bother him completely, for he danc round him in 
such a singular manner, that, turn which way he would, there stood jack 
pringle, in some grotesqu attitude, intercept him; and so he edg 
him on, till he got him to the pump. 

"jack," said the admiral. 

"ay, ay, sir." 

"don't pump on that fellow now." 

"ay, ay, sir; give us a hand." 

jack laid hold of him by the two ears, and hold him under the pump, 
kick hi shin until he complet gather himself beneath the spout. 
It wa in vain that he shout "murder! help! fire! thieves!" jack wa 
inexorable, and the admir pumped. 

jack turn the fellow' head about in a veri scientif manner, so as 
to give him a fair dose of hydropath treatment, and in a few minutes, 
never wa human be more thoroughli satur with moistur than wa 
sir franci varney' servant. He had left off halloo for aid, for he 
found that whenev he did so, jack held hi mouth under the spout, 
which wa decidedli unpleasant; so, with a patienc that look like 
heroic fortitude, he wa compel to wait until the admir wa tire 
of pumping. 

"veri good," at length he said. "now, jack, for fear thi fellow catcher 
cold, be so good as to get a horsewhip, and see him off the premis 
with it." 

"ay, ay, sir," said jack. "and I say, old fellow, you can take back all 
our bless compliment now, and say you'v been flurri a littl 
yourself; and if so be as you came here as dri as dust, d----e, you go 
back as wet as a mop. won't it do to kick him out, sir?" 

"veri well--a you please, jack." 

"then here goes;" and jack proceed to kick the shiver anim from 
the garden with a vehem that soon convinc him of the necess of 
get out of it as quickli as possible. 

how it wa that sir franci varney, after the fear race he had had, 
got home again across the fields, free from all danger, and back to hi 
own house, from whenc he sent so cool and insol a message, they 
could not conceive. 

but such must certainli be the fact; somehow or another, he had escap 
all danger, and, with a calm insol peculiar to the man, he had no 
doubt adopt the present mode of signifi as much to the 
bannerworths. 

the insol of hi servant was, no doubt, a matter of pre-arrang 
with that individual, howev he might have set about it con amore. As 
for the termin of the adventure, that, of course, had not been at 
all calcul upon; but, like most tool of other people' insol or 
ambition, the insol of the underl had receiv both hi own 
punish and hi master's. 

We know quit enough of sir franci varney to feel assur that he would 
rather consid it as a good jest than otherwis of hi footman, so that 
with the suffer he endur at the bannerworths', and the want of 
sympathi he wa like to find at home, that individu had certainli 
noth to congratul himself upon but the melancholi reminisc of 
hi own cleverness. 

but were the mob satisfi with what had occur in the churchyard? 
they were not, and that night wa to wit the perpetr of a 
melancholi outrage, such as the histori of the time present no parallel 
to. 

the find of a brick in the coffin of the butcher, instead of the bodi 
of that individual, soon spread as a piec of startl intellig all 
over the place; and the obviou deduct that wa drawn from the 
circumstance, seem to be that the deceas butcher wa unquestion 
a vampyre, and out upon some expedit at the time when hi coffin wa 
searched. 

how he had origin got out of that receptacl for the dead wa 
certainli a mystery; but the stori wa none the wors for that. indeed, 
an ingeni individu found a solut for that part of the business, 
for, as he said, noth wa more natural, when anybodi die who wa 
capabl of becom a vampyre, than for other vampyr who knew it to 
dig him up, and lay him out in the cold beam of the moonlight, until he 
acquir the same sort of vital they themselv possessed, and join 
their horribl fraternity. 

In lieu of a better explanation--and, after all, it wa no bad one--thi 
theori wa gener received, and, with a shudder horror, peopl 
ask themselves, if the whole of the churchyard were excavated, how 
mani coffin would be found tenantless by the dead which had been 
supposed, by simple-mind people, to inhabit them. 

the presence, however, of a bodi of dragoons, toward evening, 
effectu prevent ani renew attack upon the sacr precinct of 
the churchyard, and it wa a strang and startl thing to see that 
countri town under militari surveillance, and sentinel post at it 
princip buildings. 

thi measur smother the vengeanc of the crowd, and insured, for a 
time, the safeti of sir franci varney; for no consider bodi of 
person could assembl for the purpos of attack hi hous again, 
without be followed; so such a step wa not attempted. 

It had so happened, however, that on that veri day, the funer of a 
young man wa to have taken place, who had put up for a time at that 
same inn where admir bell wa first introduc to the reader. He had 
becom serious ill, and, after a few day of indisposition, which had 
puzzl the countri practitioners, breath hi last. 

He wa to have been buri in the villag churchyard on the veri day of 
the riot and confus incident to the exhum of the coffin of the 
butcher, and probabl from that circumst we may deduc the presenc 
of the clergyman in canon at the period of the riot. 

when it wa found that so disorderli a mob possess the churchyard, the 
idea of buri the stranger on that day wa abandoned; but still all 
would have gone on quietli as regard him, had it not been for the 
folli of one of the chamber-maid at the tavern. 

thi woman, with all the love of gossip incident to her class, had, 
from the first, enter so fulli into all the particular concern 
vampyres, that she fairli might be consid to be a littl derang on 
that head. her imagin had been so work upon, that she wa in an 
unfit state to think of anyth else, and if ever upon anybodi a stern 
and revolt superstit wa calcul to produc dire effects, it 
wa upon thi woman. 

the town wa toler quiet; the presenc of the soldieri had 
frighten some and amus others, and no doubt the night would have 
pass off serenely, had she not suddenli rush into the street, and, 
with bewild accent and frantic gestur shouted,-- 

"A vampyre--a vampyre--a vampyre!" 

these word soon collect a crowd around her, and then, with scream 
accents, which would have been quit enough to convinc ani reflect 
person that she had actual gone distract upon that point, she 
cried,-- 

"come into the house--com into the house! look upon the dead body, that 
should have been in it grave; it' fresher now than it wa the day on 
which it died, and there' a colour in it cheeks! A vampyre--a 
vampyre--a vampyre! heaven save us from a vampyre!" 

the strange, infuriated, maniac manner in which these word were 
uttered, produc an astonishingli excit effect among the mob. 
sever women screamed, and some few fainted. the torch wa laid again 
to the altar of popular feeling, and the fierc flame of superstit 
burnt brightli and fiercely. 

some twenti or thirti persons, with shout and exclamations, rush into 
the inn, while the woman who had creat the disturb still continu 
to rave, tear her hair, and shriek at intervals, until she fell 
exhaust upon the pavement. 

soon, from a hundr throats, rose the dread cri of "A vampyre--a 
vampyre!" the alarm wa given throughout the whole town; the bugl of 
the militari sounded; there wa a clash of arms--th shriek of women; 
altogether, the premonitori symptom of such a riot as wa not like to 
be quell without bloodsh and consider disaster. 

It is truli astonish the effect which one weak or vicious-mind 
person can produc upon a multitude. 

here wa a woman whose opinion would have been account valueless upon 
the most common-plac subject, and whose word would not have pass for 
twopence, set a whole town by the ear by forc of noth but her 
sheer brutal ignorance. 

It is a notori physiolog fact, that after four or five days, or 
even a week, the bodi of mani person assum an appear of 
freshness, such as might have been look for in vain immedi after 
death. 

It is one of the most insidi process of that decay which appear to 
regret with it 

"----------- offens fingers, To mar the line where beauti 
lingers." 

but what did the chamber-maid know of physiology? probably, she would 
have ask if it wa anyth good to eat; and so, of course, have her 
head full of vampyres, she must need produc so lament a scene of 
confusion, the result of which we almost sicken at detailing. 



chapter xlviii. 

the stake and the dead body. 


[illustration] 

the mob seem from the first to have an impress that, as regard 
the militari force, no veri seriou result would aris from that 
quarter, for it wa not to be suppos that, on an occas which could 
not possibl arous ani ill blood on the part of the soldiery, or on 
which they could have the least person feeling, they would like to get 
a bad name, which would stick to them for year to come. 

It wa no polit riot, on which men might be supposed, in consequ 
of differ in opinion, to have their passion inflamed; so that, 
although the call of the civil author for militari aid had been 
acced to, yet it wa hoped, and, indeed, almost understood by the 
officers, that their oper would lie confin more to a 
demonstr of power, than anyth else. 

besides, some of the men had got talk to the townspeople, and had 
heard all about the vampyr story, and not be of the most refin or 
educ class themselves, they felt rather interest than otherwis in 
the affair. 

under these circumstances, then, we are inclin to think, that the 
disorderli mob of that inn had not so wholesom a fear as it wa most 
certainli intend they should have of the redcoats. then, again, they 
were not attack the churchyard, which, in the first case, wa the 
main point in dispute, and about which the author had felt so veri 
sore, inasmuch as they felt that, if onc the common peopl found out 
that the sanctiti of such place could be outrag with impunity, they 
would lose their rever for the church; that is to say, for the host 
of person who live well and get fat in thi countri by the trade of 
religion. 

[illustration] 

consequently, thi churchyard wa the main point of defence, and it wa 
zealous look to when it need not have been done so, while the 
public-hous where there realli reign mischief wa half unguarded. 

there are alway in all communities, whether larg or small, a number of 
person who realli have, or fanci they have, someth to gain by 
disturbance. these people, of course, care not for what pretext the 
public peac is violated; so long as there is a row, and someth like 
an excus for run into other people' houses, they are satisfied. 

To get into a public-hous under such circumst is an unexpect 
treat; and thus, when the mob rush into the inn with such symptom of 
furi and excitement, there went with the leader of the disturb a 
number of person who never thought of get further than the bar, 
where they attack the spirit-tap with an alacr which show how 
great wa their love for ardent compounds. 

leav these person behind, however, we will follow those who, with a 
real superstition, and a furiou interest in the affair of the vampyre, 
made their way toward the upper chamber, determin to satisfi 
themselv if there were truth in the statement so alarmingli made by 
the woman who had creat such an emotion. 

It is astonish what peopl will do in crowds, in comparison with the 
act that they would be abl to commit individually. there is usual a 
calmness, a sanctity, a sublim about death, which irresist 
induc a respect for it presence, alik from the educ or from the 
illiterate; and let the object of the fell-destroyer' presenc be whom 
it may, the veri conscious that death ha claim it for it own, 
invest it with a halo of respect, that, in life, the individu could 
never aspir to probably. 

let us preced these furiou rioter for a few moments, and look upon 
the chamber of the dead--that chamber, which for a whole week, had been 
look upon with a kind of shudder terror--that chamber which had 
been darken by have it sourc of light closed, as if it were a 
kind of disrespect to the dead to allow the pleasant sunshin to fall 
upon the fade form. 

and everi inhabit of that house, upon ascend and descend it 
intric and ancient staircases, had walk with a quiet and subdu 
step past that one particular door. 

even the tone of voic in which they spoke to each other, while they 
knew that that sad remnant of mortal wa in the house, wa quiet and 
subdued, as if the repos of death wa but a mortal sleep, and could be 
broken by rude sounds. 

ay, even some of these veri persons, who now with loud and boister 
clamour, had rush into the place, had visit the hous and talk in 
whispers; but then they were alone, and men will do in throng act 
which, individually, they would shrink from with compunct or 
cowardice, call it which we will. 

the chamber of death is upon the second stori of the house. It is a back 
room, the window of which command a view of that half garden, half 
farm-yard, which we find gener belong to countri inns. 

but now the shutter were closed, with the except of one small 
opening, that, in daylight, would have admit a straggl ray of 
light to fall upon the corpse. now, however, that the sombr shade of 
even had wrap everyth in gloom, the room appear in total 
darkness, so that the most of those adventur who had ventur into 
the place shrunk back until light were procur from the lower part of 
the house, with which to enter the room. 

A dim oil lamp in a nich suffici light the staircase, and, by 
the friendli aid of it glimmer beams, they had found their way up to 
the land toler well, and had not thought of the necess of 
have light with which to enter the apartments, until they found them 
in utter darkness. 

these requisites, however, were speedili procur from the kitchen of 
the inn. indeed, anyth that wa want wa laid hold of without the 
least word of remark to the peopl of the place, as if might, from that 
even forthwith, wa understood to constitut right, in that town. 

Up to thi point no one had taken a veri promin part in the attack 
upon the inn if attack it could be called; but now the man whom chance, 
or hi own nimbleness, made the first of the throng, assum to himself 
a sort of control over hi companion and, turn to them, he said,-- 

"hark ye, my friends; we'll do everyth quietli and properly; so I 
think we'd better three or four of us go in at once, arm-in-arm." 

"psha!" cri one who had just arriv with a light; "it' your 
cowardic that speaks. i'll go in first; let those follow me who like, 
and those who are afraid may remain where they are." 

He at onc dash into the room, and thi immedi broke the spell of 
fear which wa begin to creep over the other in consequ of the 
timid suggest of the man who, up to that moment, had been first and 
foremost in the enterprise. 

In an instant the chamber wa half fill with persons, four or five of 
whom carri lights; so that, as it wa not of veri larg dimensions, it 
wa suffici illumin for everi object in it to be clearli 
visible. 

there wa the bed, smooth and unruffled, as if wait for some expect 
guest; while close by it side a coffin, support upon tressles, over 
which a sheet wa partial thrown, contain the sad remain of him who 
littl expect in life that, after death, he should be stigmatis as 
an exampl of one of the ghastliest superstit that ever found a home 
in the human imagination. 

It wa evid that some one had been in the room; and that thi wa the 
woman whose excit fanci had led her to look upon the face of the 
corps there could be no doubt, for the sheet wa drawn asid just 
suffici to discov the countenance. 

the fact wa that the stranger wa unknown at the inn, or probabl ere 
thi the coffin lid would have been screw on; but it wa hoped, up to 
the last moment, as advertis had been put into the counti papers, 
that some one would come forward to identifi and claim him. 

such, however, had not been the case, and so hi funer had been 
determin upon. 

the presenc of so mani person at onc effectu prevent ani 
individu from exhibiting, even if he felt ani superstiti fear 
about approach the coffin; and so, with one accord, they surround 
it, and look upon the face of the dead. 

there wa noth repuls in that countenance. the fact wa that 
decomposit had suffici advanc to induc a relax of the 
muscles, and a soften of the fibres, so that an appear of 
calm and repos had crept over the face which it did not wear 
immedi after death. 

It happened, too, that the face wa full of flesh--for the death had 
been sudden, and there had not been that wast away of the muscl and 
integu which make the skin cling, as it were, to the bone, when 
the ravag of long diseas have exhaust the physic frame. 

there was, unquestionably, a plumpness, a freshness, and a sort of 
vital about the counten that wa remarkable. 

for a few moment there wa a death-lik still in the apartment, and 
then one voic broke the silenc by exclaiming,-- 

"he' a vampyre, and ha come here to die. well he know he'd be taken 
up by sir franci varney, and becom one of the crew." 

"yes, yes," cri sever voic at once; "a vampyre! a vampyre!" 

"hold a moment," cri one; "let us find somebodi in the hous who ha 
seen him some day ago, and then we can ascertain if there' ani 
differ in hi looks." 

thi suggest wa agre to, and a coupl of stout men ran down 
stairs, and return in a few moment with a trembl waiter, whom they 
had caught in the passage, and forc to accompani them. 

thi man seem to think that he wa to be made a dread exampl of in 
some sort of way; and, as he wa drag into the room, he trembled, and 
look as pale as death. 

"what have I done, gentlemen?" he said; "I ain't a vampyre. don't be 
drive a stake through me. I assur you, gentlemen, i'm onli a waiter, 
and have been for a matter of five-and-twenti years." 

"you'll be done no harm to," said one of hi captors; "you'v onli got 
to answer a question that will be put to you." 

"oh, well, certainly, gentlemen; anyth you please. coming--coming, as 
I alway say; give your orders, the waiter' in the room." 

"look upon the fare of that corpse." 

"certainly, certainly--directly." 

"have you ever seen it before?" 

"seen it before! lord bless you! yes, a dozen of times. I seed him afor 
he died, and I seed him arter; and when the undertaker' men came, I 
came up with them and I seed 'em put him in hi coffin. you see I kept 
an eye on 'em, gentlemen, 'co know well enough what they is. A cousin 
of mine wa in the trade, and he assur me as one of 'em alway bring 
a tooth-draw concern in hi pocket, and look in the mouth of the 
bless corps to see if there' a bless tooth worth pull out." 

"hold your tongue," said one; "we want none of your nonsense. Do you see 
ani differ now in the face of the corps to what it wa some day 
since?" 

"well, I don't know; somehow, it don't look so rum." 

"doe it look fresher?" 

"well, somehow or another, now you mention it, it' veri odd, but it 
does." 

"enough," cri the man who had question him, with consider 
excit of manner. "neighbours, are we to have our wive and our 
children scare to death by vampyres?" 

"no--no!" cri everybody. 

"i not this, then, one of that dread order of beings?" 

"yes--yes; what' to be done?" 

"drive a stake through the body, and so prevent the possibl of 
anyth in the shape of a restoration." 

thi wa a terrif proposition; and even those who felt most strongli 
upon the subject, and had their fear most awakened, shrank from 
carri it into effect. others, again, applaud it, although they 
determined, in their own minds, to keep far enough off from the 
execut of the job, which they hope would devolv upon others, so 
that they might have all the secur of feel that such a process had 
been gone through with the suppos vampyre, without be in ani way 
commit by the dread act. 

noth wa easier than to procur a stake from the garden in the rear 
of the premises; but it wa one thing to have the mean at hand of 
carri into effect so dread a proposition, and anoth actual to 
do it. 

for the credit of human nature, we regret that even then, when 
civilis and popular educ had by no mean made such rapid 
stride as in our time they have, such a proposit should be 
entertain for a moment: but so it was; and just as an alarm wa given 
that a parti of the soldier had reach the inn and had taken 
possess of the doorway with a determin to arrest the rioters, a 
strong hedge-stak had been procured, and everyth wa in readi 
for the perpetr of the horribl deed. 

even then those in the room, for they were toler sober, would have 
revolted, probably, from the execut of so fear an act; but the 
entranc of a parti of the militari into the lower portion of the 
tavern, induc those who had been make free with the strong liquor 
below, to make a rush up-stair to their companion with the hope of 
escap detect of the petti larceny, if they got into troubl on 
account of the riot. 

these persons, infuri by drink, were capabl of anything, and to 
them, accordingly, the more sober parti gladli surrend the 
disagre job of render the suppos vampyr perfectli innoxious, 
by drive a hedge-stak through hi body--a proceed which, it wa 
current believed, inflict so much physic injuri to the frame, as 
to render hi resuscit out of the question. 

the cri of alarm from below, join now to the shout of those mad 
rioters, produc a scene of dread confusion. 

We cannot, for we revolt at the office, describ particularli the 
dread outrag which wa commit upon the corpse; suffic it that 
two or three, madden by drink, and incit by the others, plung the 
hedge-stak through the body, and there left it, a sicken and 
horribl spectacl to ani one who might cast hi eye upon it. 

with such violenc had the fright and inhuman deed been committed, 
that the bottom of the coffin wa perfor by the stake so that the 
corps wa actual nail to it last earthli tenement. 

some asserted, that at that moment an audibl groan came from the dead 
man, and that thi aros from the extinguish of that remnant of life 
which remain in him, on account of hi be a vampyre, and which 
would have been brought into full existence, if the bodi had been place 
in the ray of the moon, when at it full, accord to the popular 
superstit upon that subject. 

others, again, were quit readi to swear that at the moment the stake 
wa use there wa a visibl convuls of all the limbs, and that the 
countenance, befor so placid and so calm, becam immedi distorted, 
as if with agony. 

but we have done with these horribl surmises; the dread deed ha 
been committed, and wild, ungovern superstit ha had, for a time, 
it sway over the ignor and debased. 




chapter xlix. 

the mob' arriv AT sir franci varney's.--th attempt TO gain 
admission. 


[illustration] 

the soldieri had been sent for from their princip station near the 
churchyard, and had advanc with some degre of reluct to quell 
what they consid as noth better nor wors than a drunken brawl at 
a public-house, which they realli consid they ought not to be call 
to interfer with. 

when, however, the parti reach the spot, and heard what a confus 
there was, and saw in what number the rioter were assembling, it 
becam evid to them that the case wa of a more seriou complexion 
than they had at first imagined, and consequ they felt that their 
profession digniti wa not so much compromis with their interfer 
with the lawless proceedings. 

some of the constabulari of the town were there, and to them the 
soldier promis they would hand what prison they took, at the same 
time that they made a distinct condit that they were not to be 
troubl with their custody, nor in ani way further annoy in the 
busi beyond take care that they did not absolut escape, after 
be onc secured. 

thi wa all that the civil author of the town required, and, in 
fact, they hope that, after make prison of a few of the 
ringlead of the riotou proceedings, the rest would disperse, and 
prevent the necess of captur them. 

Be it known, however, that both militari and civil author were 
complet ignor of the dread outrag against all common decency, 
which had been commit within the public-house. 

the door wa well guarded, and the question now wa how the rioter were 
to be made to come down stairs, and be captured; and thi wa like to 
remain a question, so long as no mean were adopt to make them 
descend. So that, after a time, it wa agre that a coupl of trooper 
should march up stair with a constable, to enabl him to secur ani one 
who seem a princip in the riot. 

but thi onli had the effect of drive those who were in the 
second-floor, and saw the approach of the two soldiers, whom they 
thought were back by the whole of their comrades, up a narrow 
staircase, to a third-floor, rather consist of loft than of actual 
rooms; but still, for the time, it wa a refuge; and owe to the 
extrem narrow of the approach to it, which consist of nearli a 
perpendicular staircase, with ani degre of tact or method, it might 
have been admir defended. 

In the hurri and scramble, all the light were left behind; and when the 
two soldier and constabl enter the room where the corps had lain, 
they became, for the first time, awar of what a horribl purpos had 
been carri out by the infuri mob. 

the sight wa one of perfect horror, and harden to scene which might 
strike other peopl as be somewhat of the terrif as these soldier 
might be suppos to be by their veri profession, they actual sicken 
at the sight which the mutil corps presented, and turn asid with 
horror. 

these feel soon gave way to anger and animos against the crowd 
who could be guilti of such an atroci outrage; and, for the first 
time, a strong and interest vengeanc against the mob pervad the 
breast of those who were brought to act against it. 

one of the soldier ran down stair to the door, and report the scene 
which wa to be seen above. A determin wa instantli come to, to 
captur as mani as possibl of those who had been concern in so 
diabol an outrage, and leav a guard of five men at the door, the 
remaind of the parti ascend the staircase, determin upon storm 
the last refug of the rioters, and drag them to justice. 

the report, however, of these proceed that were take place at the 
inn, spread quickli over the whole town; and soon as larg a mob of the 
disorderli and the idl as the place could at all afford wa assembl 
outsid the inn. 

thi mob appeared, for a time, inertli to watch the proceedings. It 
seem rather a hazard thing to interfer with the soldiers, whose 
carbin look formid and troublesom weapons. 

with true mob courage, therefore, they left the minor of their 
comrades, who were within the house, to their fate; and after a 
whisper confer from one to the other, they suddenli turn in a 
body, and began to make for the outskirt of the town. 

they then separated, as if by common consent, and straggl out into the 
open countri by two and threes, consolid again into a mass when 
they had got some distanc off, and clear of ani exert that could be 
made by the soldieri to stay them. 

the cri then rose of "down with sir franci varney--slay him--burn hi 
house--death to all vampyres!" and, at a rapid pace, they proceed in 
the direct of hi mansion. 

We will leav thi mob, however, for the present, and turn our attent 
to those who are at the inn, and are certainli in a posit of some 
jeopardy. their number were not great, and they were unarmed; 
certainly, their best chanc would have been to have surrend at 
discretion; but that wa a measur which, if the sober one had felt 
inclin to, those who were infuri and half madden with drink 
would not have acced to on ani account. 

A furiou resist was, therefore, fairli to be expected; and what 
mean the soldieri were like to use for the purpos of storm thi 
last retreat wa a matter of rather anxiou conjecture. 

In the case of a regular enemy, there would not, perhaps, have been much 
difficulty; but here the captur of certain persons, and not their 
destruction, wa the object; and how that wa to be accomplish by fair 
means, certainli wa a question which nobodi felt veri compet to 
solve. 

determination, however, will do wonders; and although the rioter 
number over forty, notwithstand all their desertions, and not abov 
seventeen or eighteen soldier march into the inn, we shall perceiv 
that they succeed in accomplish their object without ani 
manoeuvr at all. 

the space in which the rioter were confin wa low, narrow, and 
inconvenient, as well as dark, for the light on the staircas cast up 
that height but veri insuffici rays. 

weapon of defenc they found but veri few, and yet there were some 
which, to do them but common credit, they use as effectu as 
possible. 

these attics, or lofts, were use as lumber-rooms, and had been so for 
years, so that there wa a collect of old boxes, broken piec of 
furniture, and other matters, which will, in defianc of everyth and 
everybody, collect in a house. 

these were formid mean of defence, if not of offence, down a veri 
narrow staircase, had they been use with judgment. 

some of the rioters, who were onli just drunk enough to be fool-hardy, 
collect a few of these articl at the top of the staircase, and swore 
they would smash anybodi who should attempt to come up to them, a threat 
easier utter than executed. 

and besides, after all, if their posit had been ever so impregnable, 
they must come down eventually, or be starv out. 

but the soldier were not at liberti to adopt so slow a process of 
overcom their enemy, and up the second-floor staircas they went, 
with a determin of make short work of the business. 

they paus a moment, by word of command, on the landing, and then, 
after thi slight pause, the word wa given to advance. 

now when men will advance, in spite of anyth and everything, it is no 
easi matter to stop them, and he who wa foremost among the militari 
would as soon thought of hesit to ascend the narrow staircas 
befor him, when order so to do, as pay the nation debt. On he 
went, and down came a great chest, which, fall against hi feet, 
knock him down as he attempt to scrambl over it. 

"fire," said the officer; and it appear that he had made some 
arrang as to how the order wa to be obeyed, for the second man 
fire hi carbine, and then scrambl over hi prostrat comrade; after 
which he stooped, and the third fire hi carbin likewise, and then 
hurri forward in the same manner. 

At the first sound of the fire arm the rioter were taken complet by 
surprise; they had not had the least notion of affair get to such a 
length. the smell of the powder, the loud report, and the sensat of 
posit danger that accompani these phenomena, alarm them most 
terrifically; so that, in point of fact, with the except of the empti 
chest that wa thrown down in the way of the first soldier, no further 
idea of defenc seem in ani way to find a place in the heart of the 
besieged. 

they scrambl one over the other in their eager to get as far as 
possibl from immedi danger, which, of course, they conceiv exist 
in the most immin degre the nearest to the door. 

such wa the state of terror into which they were thrown, that each one 
at the moment believ himself shot, and the soldier had overcom all 
the real difficulti in get possess of what might thu be call 
the citadel of the inn, befor those men who had been so valor a 
short time sinc recov from the tremend fright into which they 
had been thrown. 

We need hardli say that the carbin were loaded, but with blank 
cartridges, for there wa neither a disposit nor a necess for 
take the live of these misguid people. 

If wa the sudden and the steadi of the attack that had done all 
the mischief to their cause; and now, ere they recov from the 
surpris of have their posit so complet taken by storm, they 
were hand down stairs, one by one, from soldier to soldier, and into 
the custodi of the civil authorities. 

In order to secur the safe keep of larg a bodi of prisoners, the 
constables, who were in a great minority, place handcuff upon some of 
the most capabl of resistance; so what with those who were thu 
secured, and those who were terrifi into submission, there wa not a 
man of all the lot who had taken refug in the attic of the 
public-hous but wa a prisoner. 

At the sound of fire-arms, the women who were outsid the inn had, of 
course, rais a most prodigi clamour. 

they believ directli that everi bullet must have done some most 
seriou mischief to the townspeople, and it wa onli upon one of the 
soldiers, a non-commiss officer, who wa below, assur them of 
the innoxi natur of the proceed which restor anyth like 
equanimity. 

"silence!" he cried: "what are you howl about? Do you fanci that 
we'v noth better to do than to shoot a parcel of fellow that are 
not worth the bullet that would be lodg in their confound 
carcases?" 

"but we heard the gun," said a woman. 

"of cours you did; it' the powder that make the noise, not the 
bullet. you'll see them all brought out safe wind and limb." 

thi assur satisfi the women to a certain extent, and such had 
been their fear that they should have had to look upon the spectacl of 
death, or of grievou wounds, that they were compar quit 
satisfi when they saw husbands, fathers, and brothers, onli in the 
custodi of the town officers. 

and veri sheepish some of the fellow looked, when they were hand down 
and handcuffed, and the more especi when they had been rout onli 
by a few blank cartridges--that sixpenni worth of powder had defeat 
them. 

they were march off to the town gaol, guard by the military, who now 
probabl fanci that their night' work wa over, and that the most 
turbul and troublesom spirit in the town had been secured. 

such, however, wa not the case, for no sooner had compar order 
been restored, than common observ point to a dull red glare in 
the southern sky. 

In a few more minut there came in straggler from the open country, 
shout "fire! fire!" with all their might. 




chapter L. 

the mob' arriv AT sir franci varney's.--th attempt TO gain 
admission. 


[illustration] 

all eye were direct toward that southern sky which each moment wa 
becom more and more illumin by the lurid appear bespeak a 
conflagration, which if it wa not extensive, at all event wa rage 
fiercely. 

there came, too upon the wind, which set from that direction, strang 
sounds, resembl shout of triumph, combin occasion with sharper 
cries, indic of alarm. 

with so much system and so quietli had thi attack been made upon the 
hous of sir franci varney--for the consequ of it now exhibit 
themselv most unequivocally--that no one who had not actual 
accompani the expedit wa in the least awar that it had been at 
all undertaken, or that anyth of the kind wa on the tapis. 

now, however, it could be no longer kept a secret, and as the infuri 
mob, who had sought thi flagrant mean of give vent to their anger, 
saw the flame from the blaze hous rise high in the heavens, they 
felt convinc that further secreci wa out of the question. 

accordingly, in such cri and shout as--but for caution' sake--they 
would have indulg in from the veri first, they now gave utter to 
their feel as regard the man whose destruct wa aim at. 

"death to the vampyre!--death to the vampyre!" wa the princip shout, 
and it wa utter in tone which sound like those of rage and 
disappointment. 

but it is necessary, now that we have dispos of the smaller number of 
rioter who commit so seriou an outrag at the inn, that we should, 
with some degre of method, follow the proceed of the larger number, 
who went from the town toward sir franci varney's. 

these person either had inform of a veri posit nature, or a 
veri strong suspicion that, notwithstand the mysteri and most 
unaccount disappear of the vampyr in the old ruin, he would now 
be found, as usual, at hi own residence. 

perhap one of hi own servant may have thu play the traitor to him; 
but howev it was, there certainli wa an air of confid about some 
of the leader of the tumultu assemblag that induc a gener 
belief that thi time, at least, the vampyr would not escap popular 
vengeanc for be what he was. 

We have befor notic that these peopl went out of the town at 
differ points, and did not assembl into one mass until they were at 
a suffici distanc off to be free from all fear of observation. 

then some of the less observ and cautiou of them began to indulg in 
shout of rage and defiance; but those who place themselv foremost 
succeed in procur a halt, and one said,-- 

"good friend all, if we make ani noise, it can onli have one effect, 
and that is, to warn sir franci varney, and enabl him to escape. if, 
therefore, we cannot go on quietly, I propos that we return to our 
homes, for we shall accomplish nothing." 

thi advic wa suffici and evid reason to meet with no 
dissension; a death-lik still ensued, onli broken by some two or 
three voic saying, in subdu tones,-- 

"that' right--that' right. nobodi speak." 

"come on, then," said he who had given such judici counsel; and the 
dark mass of men move toward sir franci varney' house, as quietli as 
it wa possibl for such an assemblag to proceed. 

indeed, save the sound of the footsteps, noth could be heard of 
them at all; and that regular tramp, tramp, would have puzzl ani one 
listen to it from ani distanc to know in which direct it wa 
proceeding. 

In thi way they went on until sir franci varney' hous wa reached, 
and then a whisper word to halt wa given, and all eye were bent upon 
the building. 

from but one window out of the numer one with which the front of the 
mansion wa stud did there shine the least light, and from that there 
came rather an uncommonli bright reflection, probabl aris from a 
read lamp place close to the window. 

A gener impression, they knew not whi exactly, seem to pervad 
everybody, that in the room from whenc stream that bright light wa 
sir franci varney. 

"the vampyre' room!" said several. "the vampyre' room! that is it!" 

"yes," said he who had a kind of moral control over hi comrades; "I 
have no doubt but he is there." 

"what' to be done?" ask several. 

"make no nois whatever, but stand aside, so as not to be seen from the 
door when it is opened." 

"yes, yes." 

"I will knock for admittance, and, the moment it is answered, I will 
place thi stick in such a manner within, that the door cannot be close 
again. upon my say 'advance,' you will make a rush forward, and we 
shall have possess immedi of the house." 

all thi wa agre to. the mob slunk close to the wall of the house, 
and out of immedi observ from the hall door, or from ani of the 
windows, and then the leader advanced, and knock loudli for admission. 

the silenc wa now of the most complet charact that could be 
imagined. those who came there so bent upon vengeanc were thoroughli 
convinc of the necess of extrem caution, to save themselv even 
yet from be complet foiled. 

they had abund faith, from experience, of the resourc in the way of 
escap of sir franci varney, and not one among them wa there who 
consid that there wa ani chanc of captur him, except by 
surprise, and when onc they got hold of him, they determin he should 
not easili slip through their fingers. 

the knock for admiss produc no effect; and, after wait three or 
four minutes, it wa veri provok to find such a wonder amount of 
caution and cun complet thrown away. 

"tri again," whisper one. 

"well, have patience; I am go to tri again." 

the man had the ponder old-fashion knocker in hi hand, and wa 
about to make anoth appeal to sir franci varney' door, when a 
strang voic said,-- 

"perhap you may as well say at onc what you want, instead of knock 
there to no purpose." 

He gave a start, for the voic seem to come from the veri door itself. 

yet it sound decidedli human; and, upon a closer inspection, it wa 
seen that a littl wicket-gate, not larger than a man' face, had been 
open from within. 

thi wa terribl provoking. here wa an extent of caution on the part 
of the garrison quit unexpected. what wa to be done? 

"well?" said the man who appear at the littl opening. 

"oh," said he who had knocked; "i--" 

"well?" 

"i--that is to say--ahem! Is sir franci varney within?" 

"well?" 

"I say, is sir franci varney within?" 

"well; you have said it!" 

"ah, but you have not answer it." 

"no." 

"well, is he at home?" 

"I declin saying; so you had better, all of you, go back to the town 
again, for we are well provid with all materi to resist ani attack 
you may be fool enough to make." 

As he spoke, the servant shut the littl squar door with a bang that 
made hi question jump again. here wa a dilemma! 




chapter li. 

the attack upon the vampyre' house.--th stori OF the attack.--th 
forc OF the doors, and the struggle. 


[illustration] 

A council of war wa now call among the belligerents, who were 
somewhat taken aback by the steadi refus of the servant to admit them, 
and their appar determin to resist all endeavour on the part of 
the mob to get into and obtain possess of the house. It argu that 
they were prepar to resist all attempts, and it would cost some few 
live to get into the vampyre' house. thi pass through the mind of 
mani as they retir behind the angl of the wall where the council wa 
to be held. 

here they look in each others' face, as if to gather from that the 
gener tone of the feel of their companions; but here they saw 
noth that intim the least idea of go back as they came. 

"it' all veri well, mates, to take care of ourselves, you know," began 
one tall, brawni fellow; "but, if we bean't to be suck to death by a 
vampyre, whi we must have the life out of him." 

"ay, so we must." 

"jack hodg is right; we must kill him, and there' no sin in it, for he 
ha no right to it; he' rob some poor fellow of hi life to prolong 
hi own." 

"ay, ay, that' the way he does; bring him out, I say, then see what we 
will do with him." 

"yes, catch him first," said one, "and then we can dispos of him 
afterwards, I say, neighbours, don't you think it would be as well to 
catch him first?" 

"haven't we come on purpose?" 

"yes, but do it." 

"ain't we tri it?" 

"you will presently, when we come to get into the house." 

"well, what' to be done?" said one; "here we are in a fix, I think, and 
I can't see our way out veri clearly." 

[illustration] 

"I wish we could get in." 

"but how is a question I don't veri well see," said a larg specimen of 
humanity. 

"the best thing that can be done will be to go round and look over the 
whole house, and then we may come upon some part where it is far easier 
to get in at than by the front door." 

"but it won't do for us all to go round that way," said one; "a small 
parti onli should go, els they will have all their peopl station at 
one point, and if we can divid them, we shall beat them becaus they 
have not enough to defend more than one point at a time; now we are 
numer enough to make sever attacks." 

"oh! that' the way to bother them all round; they'll give in, and then 
the place is our own." 

"no, no," said the big countryman, "I like to make a good rush and drive 
all afor us; you know what ye have to do then, and you do it, ye know." 

"if you can." 

"ay, to be sure, if we can, as you say; but can't we? that' what I want 
to know." 

"to be sure we can." 

"then we'll do it, mate--that' my mind; we'll do it. come on, and let' 
have anoth look at the street-door." 

the big countryman left the main body, and resolut walk up to the 
main avenue, and approach the door, accompani by about a dozen or 
less of the mob. when they came to the door, they commenc knock and 
kick most violently, and assail it with all kind of thing they 
could lay their hand upon. 

they continu at thi violent exercis for some time--perhap for five 
minutes, when the littl squar hole in the door wa again opened, and a 
voic wa heard to say,-- 

"you had better ceas that kind of annoyance." 

"we want to get in." 

"it will cost you more live to do so than you can afford to spare. We 
are well armed, and are prepar to resist ani effort you can make." 

"oh! it' all veri well; but, an you won't open, whi we'll make you; 
that' all about it." 

thi wa said as the big countryman and hi companion were leav the 
avenu toward the rest of the body. 

"then, take this, as an earnest of what is to follow," said the man, and 
he discharg the content of a blunderbuss through the small opening, 
and it report sound to the rest of the mob like the report of a 
field-piece. 

fortun for the parti retir the man couldn't take ani aim, els 
it is question how mani of the parti would have got off unwounded. 
As it was, sever of them found stray slug were lodg in variou 
part of their persons, and acceler their retreat from the hous of 
the vampyre. 

"what luck?" inquir one of the mob to the others, as they came back; 
"i'm afraid you had all the honour." 

"ay, ay, we have, and all the lead too," repli a man, as he place hi 
hand upon a sore part of hi person, which bled in consequ of a 
wound. 

"well, what' to be done?" 

"dang if I know," said one. 

"give it up," said another. 

"no, no; have him out. i'll never give in while I can use a stick. they 
are in earnest, and so are we. don't let us be frighten becaus they 
have a gun or two--they can't have many; and besides, if they have, we 
are too mani for them. besides, we shall all die in our beds." 

"hurrah! down with the vampyre!" 

"so say I, lads. I don't want to be suck to death when i'm a-bed. 
better die like a man than such a dog' death as that, and you have no 
reveng then." 

"no, no; he ha the better of us then. we'll have him out--we'l burn 
him--that' the way we'll do it." 

"ay, so we will; onli let us get in." 

At that moment a chosen parti return who had been round the hous to 
make a reconnaissance. 

"well, well," inquir the mob, "what can be done now--wher can we get 
in?" 

"in sever places." 

"all right; come along then; the place is our own." 

"stop a minute; they are arm at all points, and we must make an attack 
on all points, els we may fail. A parti must go round to the 
front-door, and attempt to beat it in; there are plenti of pole and 
thing that could be use for such a purpose." 

"there is, besides, a garden-door, that open into the house--a kind of 
parlour; a kitchen-door; a window in the flower-garden, and an entranc 
into a store-room; thi place appear strong, and is therefor 
unguarded." 

"the veri point to make an attack." 

"not quite." 

"whi not?" 

"becaus it can easili be defended, and render useless to us. We must 
make an attack upon all place but that, and, while they are be at 
those points, we can then enter at that place, and then you will find 
them desert the other place when they see us inside." 

"hurrah! down with the vampyre!" said the mob, as they listen to thi 
advice, and appreci the plan. 

"down with the vampyre!" 

"now, then, lads, divide, and make the attack; never mind their guns, 
they have but veri few, and if you rush in upon them, you will soon have 
the gun yourselves." 

"hurrah! hurrah!" shout the mob. 

the mob now move away in differ bodies, each strong enough to carri 
the house. they seiz upon a varieti of pole and stones, and then made 
for the variou door and window that were point out by those who had 
made the discovery. each one of those who had form the parti of 
observation, form a leader to the others, and at onc proceed to the 
post assign him. 

the attack wa so sudden and so simultan that the servant were 
unprepared; and though they ran to the doors, and fire away, still they 
did but littl good, for the door were soon forc open by the enrag 
rioters, who proceed in a much more systemat operation, use long 
heavi piec of timber which were carri on the shoulder of sever 
men, and driven with the forc of battering-rams--which, in fact, they 
were--against the door. 

bang went the battering-ram, crash went the door, and the whole parti 
rush headlong in, carri forward by their own momentum and fell 
prostrate, engin and all, into the passage. 

"now, then, we have them," exclaim the servants, who began to belabour 
the whole parti with blows, with everi weapon they could secure. 

loudli did the fallen men shout for assistance, and but for their 
fellow who came rush in behind, they would have had but a sorri time 
of it. 

"hurrah!" shout the mob; "the hous is our own." 

"not yet," shout the servants. 

"we'll try," said the mob; and they rush forward to drive the servant 
back, but they met with a stout resistance, and as some of them had 
chopper and swords, there were a few wound given, and present bang 
went the blunderbuss. 

two or three of the mob reel and fell. 

thi produc a momentari panic, and the servant then had the whole of 
the victori to themselves, and were about to charge, and clear the 
passag of their enemies, when a shout behind attract their attention. 

that shout wa caus by an entranc be gain in anoth quarter, 
whenc the servant were flying, and all wa disorder. 

"hurrah! hurrah!" shout the mob. 

the servant retreat to the stairs, and here united, they made a 
stand, and resolv to resist the whole forc of the rioters, and they 
succeed in do so, too, for some minutes. blow were given and taken 
of a desper character. 

somehow, there were no deadli blow receiv by the servants; they were 
be forc and beaten, but they lost no life; thi may be account 
for by the fact that the mob use no more deadli weapon than sticks. 

the servant of sir franci varney, on the contrary, were mostli arm 
with deadli weapons, which, however, they did not use unnecessarily. 
they stood upon the hall steps--th grand staircase, with long pole or 
sticks, about the size of quarter-staves, and with these they belabour 
those below most unmercifully. 

certainly, the mob were by no mean cowards, for the struggl to close 
with their enemi wa as great as ever, and as firm as could well be. 
indeed, they rush on with a desper truli characterist of john 
bull, and defi the heaviest blows; for as fast as one wa stricken 
down anoth occupi hi place, and they insens press their close 
and compact front upon the servants, who were becom fatigu and 
harassed. 

"fire, again," exclaim a voic from among the servants. 

the mob made no retrogad movement, but still continu to press 
onwards, and in anoth moment a loud report rang through the house, and 
a smoke hung over the head of the mob. 

A long groan or two escap some of the men who had been wounded, and a 
still louder from those who had not been wounded, and a cri aros of,-- 

"down with the vampyre--pul down--destroy and burn the whole 
place--down with them all." 

A rush succeeded, and a few more discharg took place, when a shout 
abov attract the attent of both parti engag in thi fierc 
struggle. they paus by mutual consent, to look and see what wa the 
caus of that shout. 




chapter lii. 

the interview between the mob and sir franci varney.--th mysteri 
disappearance.--th wine cellars. 


[illustration] 

the shout that had so discompos the parti who were thu engag in a 
terrif struggl came from a parti above. 

"hurrah! hurrah!" they shout a number of times, in a wild strain of 
delight. "hurrah! hurrah! hurrah!" 

the fact was, a parti of the mob had clamber up a verandah, and 
enter some of the room upstairs, whenc they emerg just abov the 
land near the spot where the servant were resist in a mass the 
effort of the mob. 

"hurrah!" shout the mob below. 

"hurrah!" shout the mob above. 

there wa a momentari pause, and the servant divid themselv into 
two bodies, and one turn to face those above, and the other those who 
were below. 

A simultan shout wa given by both parti of the mob, and a sudden 
rush wa made by both bodies, and the servant of sir franci varney 
were broken in an instant. they were instantli separated, and knock 
about a good bit, but they were left to shift for themselves, the mob 
had a more import object in view. 

"down with the vampyre!" they shouted. 

"down with the vampyre!" shout they, and they rush helter skelter 
through the rooms, until they came to one where the door wa partial 
open, and they could see some person veri leisur seated. 

"here he is," they cried. 

"who? who?" 

"the vampire." 

"down with him! kill him! burn him!" 

"hurrah! down with the vampire!" 

these sound were shout out by a score of voices, and they rush 
headlong into the room. 

but here their violenc and headlong precipit were suddenli 
restrain by the impos and quiet appear of the individu who 
wa there seated. 

the mob enter the room, and there wa a sight, that if it did not 
astonish them, at least, it caus them to paus befor the individu 
who wa seat there. 

the room wa well fill with furniture, and there wa a curtain drawn 
across the room, and about the middl of it there wa a table, behind 
which sat sir franci varney himself, look all smile and courtesy. 

"well, dang my smock-frock!" said one, "who'd ha' thought of this? He 
don't seem to care much about it." 

"well, i'm d----d!" said another; "he seem pretti easy, at all events. 
what is he go to do?" 

"gentlemen," said sir franci varney, rising, with the blandest smiles, 
"pray, gentlemen, permit me to inquir the caus of thi condescens 
on your part. the visit is kind." 

the mob look at sir francis, and then at each other, and then at sir 
franci again; but nobodi spoke. they were awe by thi gentlemanli and 
collect behaviour. 

"if you honour me with thi visit from pure affect and neighbourli 
good-will, I thank you." 

"down with the vampyre!" said one, who wa conceal behind the rest, 
and not so much overawed, as he had not seen sir francis. 

sir franci varney rose to hi full height; a light gleam across hi 
features; they were strongli defin then. hi long front teeth, too, 
show most strongli when he smiled, as he did now, and said, in a bland 
voice,-- 

"gentlemen, I am at your service. permit me to say you are welcom to 
all I can do for you. I fear the interview will be somewhat inconveni 
and unpleas to you. As for myself, I am entir at your service." 

As sir franci spoke, he bowed, and fold hi hand together, and 
step forwards; but, instead of come onward to them, he walk 
behind the curtain, and wa immedi hid from their view. 

"down with the vampyre!" shout one. 

"down with the vampyre!" rang through the apartment; and the mob now, 
not awe by the cool and courtesi of sir francis, rush forward, 
and, overturn the table, tore down the curtain to the floor; but, to 
their amazement, there wa no sir franci varney present. 

"where is he?" 

"where is the vampyre?" 

"where ha he gone?" 

these were cri that escap everi one' lips; and yet no one could 
give an answer to them. 

there sir franci varney wa not. they were complet thunderstricken. 
they could not find out where he had gone to. there wa no possibl 
mean of escape, that they could perceive. there wa not an odd corner, 
or even anyth that could, by ani possibility, give even a suspicion 
that even a temporari conceal could take place. 

they look over everi inch of floor and of wainscoting; not the 
remotest trace could be discovered. 

"where is he?" 

"I don't know," said one--"i can't see where he could have gone. there 
ain't a hole as big as a keyhole." 

"mi eye!" said one; "I shouldn't be at all surprised, if he were to blow 
up the whole house." 

"you don't say go!" 

"I never heard as how vampyr could do so much as that. they ain't the 
sort of people," said another. 

"but if they can do one thing, they can do another." 

"that' veri true." 

"and what' more, I never heard as how a vampyr could make himself into 
noth before; yet he ha done so." 

"he may be in thi room now." 

"he may." 

"mi eyes! what preciou long teeth he had!" 

"yes; and had he fix one on 'em in to your arm, he would have drawn 
everi drop of blood out of your body; you may depend upon that," said an 
old man. 

"he wa veri tall." 

"yes; too tall to be ani good." 

"I shouldn't like him to have laid hold of me, though, tall as he is; 
and then he would have lift me up high enough to break my neck, when 
he let me fall." 

the mob rout about the room, tore everyth out of it place, and as 
the object of their search seem to be far enough beyond their reach, 
their courag rose in proportion, and they shout and scream with a 
proportion increas of nois and bustle; and at length they ran about 
mad with rage and vexation, do all the mischief that wa in their 
power to inflict. 

then they becam mischievous, and tore the furnitur from it place, and 
broke it in pieces, and then amus themselv with break it up, 
throw piec at the pier-glasses, in which they made dread holes; 
and when that wa gone, they broke up the frames. 

everi hole and corner of the hous wa searched, but there wa no sir 
franci varney to be found. 

"the cellars, the cellars!" shout a voice. 

"the cellars, the cellars!" re-echo nearli everi pair of lip in the 
whole place; in anoth moment, there wa crush and crowd to get 
down into the cellars. 

"hurray!" said one, as he knock off the neck of the bottl that first 
came to hand. 

"here' luck to vampyre-hunting! success to our chase!" 

"so say I, neighbour; but is that your manner to drink befor your 
betters?" 

So saying, the speaker knock the other' elbow, while he wa in the 
act of lift the wine to hi mouth; and thu he upset it over hi face 
and eyes. 

"d--n it!" cri the man; "how it make my eye smart! dang thee! if I 
could see, i'd ring thi neck!" 

"success to vampyre-hunting!" said one. 

"may we be lucki yet!" said another. 

"I wouldn't be luckier than this," said another, as he, too, empti a 
bottle. "we couldn't desir better entertainment, where the reckon is 
all paid." 

"excellent!" 

"veri good!" 

"capit wine this!" 

"I say, huggins!" 

"well," said huggins. 

"what are you drinking?" 

"wine." 

"what wine?" 

"dang if I know," wa the reply. "it' wine, I suppose; for I know it 
ain't beer nor spirits; so it must be wine." 

"are you sure it ain't bottl men' blood?" 

"eh?" 

"bottl blood, man! who know what a vampyr drinks? It may be hi 
wine. He may feast upon that befor he goe to bed of a night, drink 
anybody' health, and make himself cheer on bottl blood!" 

"oh, danged! i'm so sick; I wish I hadn't taken the stuff. It may be as 
you say, neighbour, and then we be cannibals." 

"or vampyres." 

"there' a pretti thing to think of." 

By thi time some were drunk, some were partial so, and the remaind 
were crowd into the cellar to get their share of the wine. 

the servant had now slunk away; they were no longer notic by the 
rioters, who, have nobodi to oppos them, no longer thought of 
anything, save the search after the vampyre, and the destruct of 
the property. sever hour had been spent in thi manner, and yet they 
could not find the object of their search. 

there wa not a room, or cupboard, or a cellar, that wa capabl of 
contain a cat, that they did not search, besid a part of the 
rioter keep a veri strict watch on the outsid of the hous and all 
about the grounds, to prevent the possibl of the escap of the 
vampyre. 

there wa a gener cessat of activ hostil at that moment; a 
reaction after the violent excit and exert they had made to get 
in. then the escap of their victim, and the mysteri manner in which 
he got away, wa also a caus of the reaction, and the rioter look in 
each others' counten inquiringly. 

abov all, the discoveri of the wine-cellar tend to withdraw them from 
violent measures; but thi could not last long, there must be an end to 
such a scene, for there never wa a larg bodi of men assembl for an 
evil purpose, who ever were, for ani length of time, peaceable. 

To prevent the more alarm effect of drunkenness, some few of the 
rioters, after have taken some small portion of the wine, became, from 
the peculiar flavour it possessed, imbu with the idea that it wa 
realli blood, and forthwith commenc an instant attack upon the wine 
and liquors, and they were soon mingl in one stream throughout the 
cellars. 

thi destruct wa loudli declaim against by a larg portion of the 
rioters, who were drinking; but befor they could make ani effort to 
save the liquor, the work of destruct had not onli been begun, but 
wa ended, and the consequ was, the cellar were veri soon evacu 
by the mob. 




chapter liii. 

the destruct OF sir franci varney' hous BY fire.--th arriv OF 
the military, and A second mob. 


[illustration] 

thu mani moment had not elaps ere the feel of the rioter becam 
direct into a differ channel from that in which it had so late 
flowed. when urg about the hous and ground for the vampyre, they 
becam impati and angri at not find him. mani believ that he wa 
yet about the house, while mani were of opinion that he had flown away 
by some mysteri mean onli possess by vampyr and such like 
people. 

"fire the house, and burn him out," said one. 

"fire the house!" 

"burn the den!" now aros in shout from all present, and then the mob 
were again anim by the love of mischief that seem to be the 
strongest feel that anim them. 

"burn him out--burn him out!" were the onli word that could be heard 
from ani of the mob. the word ran through the hous like wildfire, 
nobodi thought of anyth else, and all were seen run about in 
confusion. 

there wa no want of good will on the part of the mob to the 
undertaking; far from it, and they proceed in the work _con amore_. 
they work togeth with right good will, and the result wa soon seen 
by the heap of combust materi that were collect in a short 
time from all part of the house. 

all the old dri wood furnitur that could be found wa pile up in a 
heap, and to these were ad a number of faggots, and also some 
shave that were found in the cellar. 

"all right!" exclaim one man, in exultation. 

"yes," repli a second; "all right--al right! set light to it, and he 
will be smoke out if not burned." 

"let us be sure that all are out of the house," suggest one of the 
bystanders. 

"ay, ay," shout several; "give them all a chance. search through the 
hous and give them a warning." 

"veri well; give me the light, and then when I come back I will set 
light to the fire at once, and then I shall know all is empty, and so 
will you too." 

thi wa at onc agre to by all, with acclamations, and the light 
be hand to the man, he ascend the stairs, cri out in a loud 
voice,-- 

"come out--com out! the hous is on fire!" 

"fire! fire! fire!" shout the mob as a chorus, everi now and then at 
intervals. 

In about ten minut more, there came a cri of "all right; the hous is 
empty," from up the stairs, and the man descend in hast to the hall. 

"make haste, lads, and fire away, for I see the red coat are leav 
the town." 

"hurra! hurra!" shout the infuri mob. "fire--fire--fir the house! 
burn out the vampyre! burn down the house--burn him out, and see if he 
can stand fire." 

amidst all thi tumult there came a sudden blaze upon all around, for 
the pile had been fired. 

"hurra!" shout the mob--"hurra!" and they danc like maniac round 
the fire; looking, in fact, like so mani wild indians, danc round 
their roast victims, or some demon at an infern feast. 

the torch had been put to twenti differ places, and the flame unit 
into one, and suddenli shot up with a velocity, and roar with a sound 
that caus mani who were present to make a precipit retreat from the 
hall. 

thi soon becam a necessari measur of self-preservation, and it 
requir no urg to induc them to quit a place that wa burn 
rapidli and even furiously. 

"get the pole and firewood--get faggots," shout some of the mob, and, 
lo, it wa done almost by magic. they brought the faggot and wood pile 
up for winter use, and laid them near all the doors, and especi the 
main entrance. nay, everi gate or door belong to the outhous wa 
brought forward and place upon the fire, which now began to reach the 
upper stories. 

"hurra--fire! hurra--fire!" 

and a loud shout of triumph came from the mob as they view the 
progress of the flames, as they came roar and tear through the 
hous door and the windows. 

each new victori of the element wa a signal to the mob for a cheer; and 
a hearti cheer, too, came from them. 

"where is the vampyr now?" exclaim one. 

"ha! where is he?" said another. 

"if he be there," said the man, point to the flames, "I reckon he' 
got a warm berth of it, and, at the same time, veri littl water to boil 
in hi kettle." 

"ha, ha! what a funni old man is bob mason; he' alway poke fun; he'd 
joke if hi wife were dying." 

"there is mani a true word spoken in jest," suggest another; "and, to 
my mind, bob mason wouldn't be veri much griev if hi wife were to 
die." 

"die?" said bob; "she and I have live and quarrel daili a matter of 
five-and-thirti years, and, if that ain't enough to make a man sick of 
be married, and of hi wife, hand me, that' all. I say I am tired." 

thi wa said with much appar sincerity, and sever laugh at the 
old man' heartiness. 

"it' all veri well," said the old man; "it' all veri well to laugh 
about matter you don't understand, but I know it isn't a joke--not a 
bit on it. I tell you what it is, neighbour, I never made but one grand 
mistak in all my life." 

"and what wa that?" 

"to tie myself to a woman." 

"why, you'd get marri to-morrow if your wife were to die to-day," said 
one. 

"if I did, I hope I may marri a vampyre. I should have someth then to 
think about. I should know what' o'clock. but, as for my old woman, 
lord, lord, I wish sir franci varney had had her for life. i'll warrant 
when the next natur term of hi exist came round again, he 
wouldn't be in no hurri to renew it; if he did, I should say that 
vampyr had the happi lot of manag women, which I haven't got." 

"no, nor anybodi else." 

A loud shout now attract their attention, and, upon look in the 
quarter whenc it came, they descri a larg bodi of peopl come 
toward them; from one end of the mob could be seen a long string of red 
coats. 

"the red coats!" shout one. 

"the military!" shout another. 

It wa plain the militari who had been place in the town to quell 
disturbances, had been made acquaint with the proceed at sir 
franci varney' house, and were now march to reliev the place, and 
to save the property. 

they were, as we have stated, accompani by a vast concours of people, 
who came out to see what they were go to see, and see the flame 
at sir franci varney' house, they determin to come all the way, and 
be present. 

the military, see the disturb in the distance, and the flame 
issu from the windows, made the best of their way toward the scene 
of tumult with what speed they could make. 

"here they come," said one. 

"yes, just in time to see what is done." 

"yes, they can go back and say we have burn the vampyre' hous 
down--hurra!" 

"hurra!" shout the mob, in prolong accents, and it reach the ear 
of the military. 

the offic urg the men onwards, and they respond to hi words, by 
exert themselv to step out a littl faster. 

"oh, they should have been here befor this; it' no use, now, they are 
too late." 

"yes, they are too late." 

"I wonder if the vampyr can breath through the smoke, and live in 
fire," said one. 

"I should think he must be abl to do so, if he can stand shooting, as 
we know he can--you can't kill a vampyre; but yet he must be consumed, 
if the fire actual touch him, but not unless he can bear almost 
anything." 

"so he can." 

"hurra!" shout the mob, as a tall flame shot through the top window 
of the house. 

the fire had got the ascend now, and no hope could be entertained, 
howev extravagant, of save the smallest articl that had been left 
in the mansion. 

"hurra!" shout the mob with the military, who came up with them. 

"hurra!" shout the other in reply. 

"quick march!" said the officer; and then, in a loud, command tone, 
he shouted, "clear the way, there! clear the way." 

"ay, there' room enough for you," said old mason; "what are you make 
so much nois about?" 

there wa a gener laugh at the officer, who took no notic of the 
words, but order hi men up befor the burn pile, which wa now an 
immens mass of flame. 

the mob who had accompani the militari now mingl with the mob that 
had set the hous of sir franci varney on fire ere the militari had 
come up with them. 

"halt!" cri out the officer; and the men, obedi to the word of 
command, halted, and drew up in a doubl line befor the house. 

there were then some word of command issued, and some more given to 
some of the subalterns, and a parti of men, under the command of a 
sergeant, wa sent off from the main body, to make a circuit of the 
hous and grounds. 

the offic gaze for some moment upon the burn pile without 
speaking; and then, turn to the next in command, he said in low 
tones, as he look upon the mob,-- 

"we have come too late." 

"yes, much." 

"the hous is now nearli gutted." 

"it is." 

"and those who came crowd along with us are inextric mingl with 
the other who have been the caus of all thi mischief: there' no 
distinguish them one from another." 

"and if you did, you could not say who had done it, and who had not; you 
could prove nothing." 

"exactly." 

"I shall not attempt to take prisoners, unless ani act is perpetr 
beyond what ha been done." 

"it is a singular affair." 

"very." 

"thi sir franci varney is repres to be a courteous, gentlemanli 
man," said the officer. 

"no doubt about it, but he' beset by a parcel of peopl who do not mind 
cut a throat if they can get an opportun of do so." 

"and I expect they will." 

"yes, when there is a popular excit against ani man, he had better 
leav thi part at onc and altogether. It is danger to tamper with 
popular prejudices; no man who ha ani valu for hi life ought to do 
so. It is a sheer act of suicide." 




chapter liv. 

the burn OF varney' house.--a night scene.--popular superstition. 


[illustration] 

the offic ceas to speak, and then the parti whom he had sent round 
the hous and ground returned, and gain the main bodi orderli enough, 
and the sergeant went forward to make hi report to hi superior 
officer. 

after the usual salutation, he wait for the inquiri to be put to him 
as to what he had seen. 

"well, scott, what have you done?" 

"I went round the premises, sir, accord to your instructions, but saw 
no one either in the vicin of the house, or in the ground around 
it." 

"no strangers, eh?" 

"no, sir, none." 

"you saw noth at all like to lead to ani knowledg as to who it wa 
that ha caus thi catastrophe?" 

"no, sir." 

"have you learnt anyth among the peopl who are the perpetr of 
thi fire?" 

"no, sir." 

"well, then, that will do, unless there is anyth els that you can 
think of." 

"noth further, sir, unless it is that I heard some of them say that 
sir franci varney ha perish in the flames." 

"good heavens!" 

"so I heard, sir." 

"that must be impossible, and yet whi should it be so? Go back, scott, 
and bring me some person who can give me some inform upon thi 
point." 

the sergeant depart toward the people, who look at him without ani 
distrust, for he came single-handed, though they thought he came with 
the intent of learn what they knew of each other, and so stroll 
about with the intent of get up accus against them. but 
thi wa not the case, the offic didn't like the work well enough; 
he'd rather have been elsewhere. 

[illustration] 

At length the sergeant came to one man, whom he accosted, and said to 
him,-- 

"do you know anyth of yonder fire?" 

"yes: I do know it is a fire." 

"yes, and so do i." 

"mi friend," said the sergeant, "when a soldier ask a question he doe 
not expect an uncivil answer." 

"but a soldier may ask a question that may have an uncivil end to it." 

"he may; but it is easi to say so." 

"I do say so, then, now." 

"then i'll not troubl you ani more." 

the sergeant move on a pace or two more, and then, turn to the mob, 
he said,-- 

"i there ani one among you who can tell me anyth concern the fate 
of sir franci varney?" 

"burnt!" 

"did you see him burnt?" 

"no; but I saw him." 

"in the flames?" 

"no; befor the hous wa on fire." 

"in the house?" 

"yes; and he ha not been seen to leav it since, and we conclud he 
must have been burned." 

"will you come and say as much to my command officer? It is all I 
want." 

"shall I be detained?" 

"no." 

"then I will go," said the man, and he hobbl out of the crowd toward 
the sergeant. "I will go and see the officer, and tell him what I know, 
and that is veri little, and can prejudic no one." 

"hurrah!" said the crowd, when they heard thi latter assertion; for, at 
first, they began to be in some alarm lest there should be someth 
wrong about this, and some of them get identifi as be activ in the 
fray. 

the sergeant led the man back to the spot, where the offic stood a 
littl way in advanc of hi men. 

"well, scott," he said, "what have we here?" 

"A man who ha volunt a statement, sir." 

"oh! well, my man, can you say anyth concern all thi disturb 
that we have here?" 

"no, sir." 

"then what did you come here for?" 

"I understood the sergeant to want some one who could speak of sir 
franci varney." 

"well?" 

"I saw him." 

"where?" 

"in the house." 

"exactly; but have you not seen him out of it?" 

"not since; nor ani one else, I believe." 

"where wa he?" 

"upstairs, where he suddenli disappeared, and nobodi can tell where he 
may have gone to. but he ha not been seen out of the hous since, and 
they say he could not have gone bodili out if they had not seen him." 

"he must have been burnt," said the officer, musingly; "he could not 
escape, one would imagine, without be seen by some one out of such a 
mob." 

"oh, dear no, for I am told they place a watch at everi hole, window, 
or door howev high, and they saw noth of him--not even fli out!" 

"fli out! i'm speak of a man!" 

"and I of a vampire!" said the man carelessly. 

"A vampyre! pooh, pooh!" 

"oh no! sir franci varney is a vampyre! there can be no sort of doubt 
about it. you have onli to look at him, and you will soon be satisfi 
of that. see hi great sharp teeth in front, and ask yourself what they 
are for, and you will soon find the answer. they are to make hole with 
in the bodi of hi victims, through which he can suck their blood!" 

the offic look at the man in astonish for a few moments, as if 
he doubt hi own ears, and then he said,-- 

"are you serious?" 

"I am readi to swear to it." 

"well, I have heard a great deal about popular superstition, and thought 
I had seen someth of it; but thi is decidedli the worst case that 
ever I saw or heard of. you had better go home, my man, than, by your 
presence, counten such a gross absurdity." 

"for all that," said the man, "sir franci varney is a vampyre--a 
blood-sucker--a human blood-sucker!" 

"get away with you," said the officer, "and do not repeat such folli 
befor ani one." 

the man almost jump when he heard the tone in which thi wa spoken, 
for the offic wa both angri and contemptuous, when he heard the word 
of the man. 

"these people," he added, turn to the sergeant, "are ignor in the 
extreme. one would think we had got into the countri of vampires, 
instead of a civilis community." 

the day wa go down now; the last ray of the set sun glimmer 
upwards, and still shone upon the tree-tops. the dark of night wa 
still fast close around them. the mob stood a motley mass of human 
beings, wedg together, dark and sombre, gaze upon the mischief that 
had been done--th work of their hands. the militari stood at eas 
befor the burn pile, and by their order and regularity, present a 
contrast to the mob, as strongli by their bright gleam arms, as by 
their dress and order. 

the flame now envelop the whole mansion. there wa not a window or a 
door from which the fieri element did not burst forth in clouds, and 
fork flame came rush forth with a veloc truli wonderful. 

the red glare of the flame fell upon all object around for some 
distance--th more especi so, as the sun had sunk, and a bank of 
cloud rose from beneath the horizon and exclud all hi rays; there 
wa no twilight, and there was, as yet, no moon. 

the countri side wa envelop in darkness, and the burn hous could 
be seen for mile around, and form a rallying-point to all men' eyes. 

the engin that were within reach came tear across the country, and 
came to the fire; but they were of no avail. there wa no suppli of 
water, save from the ornament ponds. these they could onli get at by 
mean that were tediou and unsatisfactory, consid the emerg of 
the case. 

the hous wa a lone one, and it wa be entir consum befor they 
arrived, and therefor there wa not the remotest chanc of save the 
least article. had they ever such a suppli of water, noth could have 
been effect by it. 

thu the men stood idli by, pass their remark upon the fire and the 
mob. 

those who stood around, and within the influenc of the red glare of the 
flames, look like so mani demon in the infern regions, watch the 
progress of light the fire, which we are told by good christian is 
the doom of the unfortun in spirit, and the woefulli unlucki in 
circumstances. 

It wa a strang sight that; and there were mani person who would, 
without doubt, have rather been snug by their own fire-sid than they 
would have remain there but it happen that no one felt inclin to 
express hi inclin to hi neighbour, and, consequently, no one said 
anyth on the subject. 

none would ventur to go alon across the fields, where the spirit of 
the vampyr might, for all they knew to the contrary, be wait to 
pounc upon them, and worri them. 

no, no; no man would have quit that mob to go back alon to the 
village; they would sooner have stood there all night through. that wa 
an altern that none of the number would veri willingli accept. 

the hour pass away, and the hous that had been that morn a nobl 
and well-furnish mansion, wa now a smoulder heap of ruins. the 
flame had becom somewhat subdued, and there wa now more smoke than 
flames. 

the fire had exhaust itself. there wa now no more materi that could 
serv it for fuel, and the flame began to becom gradual enough 
subdued. 

suddenli there wa a rush, and then a bright flame shot upward for an 
instant, so bright and so strong, that it threw a flash of light over 
the countri for miles; but it wa onli momentary, and it subsided. 

the roof, which had been built strong enough to resist almost anything, 
after be burn for a consider time, suddenli gave way, and came 
in with a tremend crash, and then all wa for a moment darkness. 

after thi the fire might be said to be subdued, it have burn itself 
out; and the flame that could now be seen were but the result of so 
much char wood, that would probabl smoulder away for a day or two, 
if left to itself to do so. A dens mass of smoke aros from the ruins, 
and blacken the atmospher around, and told the spectat the work 
wa done. 




chapter lv. 

the return OF the mob and militari TO the town.--th mad OF the 
mob.--th grocer' revenge. 


[illustration] 

On the termin of the conflagration, or, rather, the fall of the 
roof, with the loss of grandeur in the spectacle, men' mind began to 
be free from the excit that chain them to the spot, watch the 
progress of that element which ha been truli describ as a veri good 
servant, but a veri bad master; and of the truth of thi everi one must 
be well satisfied. 

there wa now remain littl more than the livid glare of the hot and 
burn embers; and thi did not extend far, for the wall were too 
strongli built to fall in from their own weight; they were strong and 
stout, and intercept the littl light the ash would have given out. 

the mob now began to feel fatigu and chilly. It had been stand and 
walk about mani hours, and the approach of exhaust could not be 
put off much longer, especi as there wa no longer ani great 
excit to carri it off. 

the officer, see that noth wa to be done, collect hi men 
together, and they were soon seen in motion. He had been order to stop 
ani tumult that he might have seen, and to save ani property. but there 
wa noth to do now; all the properti that could have been save wa 
now destroyed, and the mob were begin to disperse, and creep toward 
their own houses. 

the order wa then given for the men to take close order, and keep 
together, and the word to march wa given, which the men obey with 
alacrity, for they had no good-wil in stop there the whole of the 
night. 

the return to the villag of both the mob and the militari wa not 
without it vicissitudes; accid of all kind were rife amongst them; 
the military, however, take the open paths, soon diminish the 
distance, and that, too, with littl or no accidents, save such as might 
have been expect from the state of the fields, after they had been so 
much trodden down of late. 

not so the townspeopl or the peasantry; for, by way of keep up their 
spirits, and amus themselv on their way home, they commenc 
larking, as they call it, which often meant the execut of practic 
jokes, and these sometim were of a seriou nature. 

the night wa dark at that hour, especi so when there wa a number 
of person travers about, so that littl or noth could be seen. 

the mistak and blunder that were made were numerous. In one place 
there were a number of peopl penetr a path that led onli to a 
hedg and deep ditch; inde it wa a brook veri deep and muddy. 

here they came to a stop and endeavour to ascertain it width, but the 
littl reflect light they had wa deceptive, and it did not appear so 
broad as it was. 

"oh, I can jump it," exclaim one. 

"and so can i," said another. "I have done so before, and whi should I 
not do so now." 

thi wa unanswerable, and as there were mani present, at least a dozen 
were eager to jump. 

"if thee can do it, I know I can," said a brawni countryman; "so i'll do 
it at once. 

"the sooner the better," shout some one behind, "or you'll have no 
room for a run, here' a lot of 'em come up; push over as quickli as 
you can." 

thu urged, the jumper at onc made a rush to the edg of the ditch, 
and mani jumped, and mani more, from the prevail darkness, did not 
see exactli where the ditch was, and take one or two step too many, 
found themselv up abov the waist in muddi water. 

nor were those who jump much better off, for nearli all jump short 
or fell backward into the stream, and were drag out in a terribl 
state. 

"oh, lord! oh, lord!" exclaim one poor fellow, drip wet and 
shiver with cold, "I shall die! oh, the rheumatiz, there'l be a 
pretti winter for me: i'm half dead." 

"hold your noise," said another, "and help me to get the mud out of my 
eye; I can't see." 

"never mind," ad a third, "consid how you jump, I don't think 
you want to see." 

"thi come a hunt vampyres." 

"oh, it' all a judgment; who know but he may be in the air: it is 
noth to laugh at as I shouldn't be surpris if he were: onli think 
how preciou pleasant." 

"howev pleasant it may be to you," remark one, "it' profit to a 
good many." 

"how so?" 

"why, see the numbers, of thing that will be spoiled, coat torn, hat 
crushed, head broken, and shoe burst. oh, it' an ill-wind that blow 
nobodi ani good." 

"so it is, but you may benefit anybodi you like, so you don't do it at 
my expence." 

In one part of a field where there were some stile and gates, a big 
countryman caught a fat shopkeep with the arm of the stile a terribl 
poke in the stomach; while the breath wa knock out of the poor man' 
stomach, and he wa gasp with agony, the fellow set to laughing, and 
said to hi companions, who were of the same class-- 

"I say, jim, look at the grocer, he hasn't got ani wind to spare, i'd 
run him for a wager, see how he gape like a fish out of water." 

the poor shopkeep felt inde like a fish out of water, and as he 
afterward declar he felt just as if he had had a red hot clock weight 
thrust into the midst of hi stomach and there left to cool. 

however, the grocer would be reveng upon hi tormentor, who had now 
lost sight of him, but the fat man, after a time, recov hi wind, 
and the pain in hi stomach becom less intense, he gather himself 
up. 

"mi name ain't jones," he muttered, "if I don't be one to hi one for 
that; i'll do someth that shall make him rememb what it is to 
insult a respect tradesman. i'll never forgiv such an insult. It is 
dark, and that' whi it is he ha dare to do this." 

fill with dire thought and a spirit of revenge, he look from side 
to side to see with what he could effect hi object, but could espi 
nothing. 

"it' shameful," he muttered; "what would I give for a littl retort. 
i'd plaster hi ugli countenance." 

As he spoke, he place hi hand on some pale to rest himself, when he 
found that they stuck to them, the pale had that day been newli 
pitched. 

A bright idea now struck him. 

"if I could onli get a hand of thi stuff," he thought, "I should be 
abl to serv him out for serv me out. I will, cost what it may; i'm 
resolv upon that. i'll not have my wind knock out, and my insid set 
on fire for nothing. no, no; i'll be reveng on him." 

with thi view he felt over the pales, and found that he could scrape 
off a littl only, but not with hi hands; indeed, it onli plaster 
them; he, therefore, march about for someth to scrape it off with. 

"ah; I have a knife, a larg pocket knife, that will do, that is the 
sort of thing I want." 

He immedi commenc feel for it, but had scarc got hi hand 
into hi pocket when he found there would be a great difficulti in 
either push it in further or withdraw it altogether, for the pitch 
made it difficult to do either, and hi pocket stuck to hi hand like a 
glove. 

"d--n it," said the grocer, "who would have thought of that? here' a 
pretti go, curs that fellow, he is the caus of all this; i'll be 
reveng upon him, if it' a year hence." 

the enrag grocer drew hi hand out, but wa unabl to effect hi 
object in withdraw the knife also; but he saw someth shining, he 
stoop to pick it up, exclaim as he did so, in a gratifi tone of 
voice, 

"ah, here' someth that will do better." 

As he made a grasp at it, he found he had insert hi hand into 
someth soft. 

"god bless me! what now?" 

He pull hi hand hastili away, and found that it stuck slightly, and 
then he saw what it was. 

"ay, ay, the veri thing. sure it must have been place here on purpos 
by the people." 

the fact was, he had place hi hand into a pot of pitch that had been 
left by the peopl who had been at work at pitch the pales, but had 
been attract by the fire at sir franci varney's, and to see which 
they had left their work, and the pitch wa left on a smoulder peat 
fire, so that when mr. jones, the grocer, accident put hi hand into 
it he found it just warm. 

when he made thi discoveri he dab hi hand again into the pitch-pot, 
exclaiming,-- 

"in for a penny, in for a pound." 

and he endeavour to secur as larg a hand of the slipperi and 
sticki stuff as he could, and thi done he set off to come up with the 
big countryman who had done him so much indign and made hi stomach 
uncomfortable. 

He soon came up with him, for the man had stop rather behind, and wa 
larking, as it is called, with some men, to whom he wa a companion. 

He had slip down a bank, and wa partial sit down on the soft 
mud. In hi bustle, the littl grocer came down with a slide, close to 
the big countryman. 

"ah--ah! my littl grocer," said the countryman, hold out hi hand to 
catch him, and draw him toward himself. "you will come and sit down 
by the side of your old friend." 

As he spoke, he endeavour to pull mr. jone down, too; but that 
individu onli repli by fetch the countryman a swing smack 
across the face with the hand of pitch. 

"there, take that; and now we are quits; we shall be old friend after 
this, eh? are you satisfied? you'll rememb me, i'll warrant." 

As the grocer spoke, he rub hi hand over the face of the fallen 
man, and then rush from the spot with all the hast he could make. 

the countryman sat a moment or two confounded, cursing, and swearing, 
and spluttering, vow vengeance, believ that it wa mud onli that 
had been plaster over hi face; but when he put hi hand up, and 
found out what it was, he roar and bellow like a town-bull. 

He cri out to hi companion that hi eye were pitched: but they onli 
laugh at him, think he wa have some foolish lark with them. 

It wa next day befor he got home, for he wander about all night: and 
it took him a week to wash the pitch off by mean of grease; and ever 
afterward he recollect the pitch of hi face; nor did he ever 
forget the grocer. 

thu it wa the whole parti return a long while after dark across the 
fields, with all the variou accid that were like to befal such an 
assemblag of people. 

the vampyr hunt cost mani of them dear, for cloth were injur on 
all sides: hat lost, and shoe miss in a manner that put some of the 
rioter to much inconvenience. soon afterwards, the militari retir to 
their quarters; and the townspeopl at length becam tranquil and 
noth more wa heard or done that night. 




chapter lvi. 

the departur OF the bannerworth from the hall.--th new abode.--jack 
pringle, pilot. 


[illustration] 

dure that veri evening, on which the hous of sir franci varney wa 
fire by the mob, anoth scene, and one of differ character, wa 
enact at bannerworth hall, where the owner of that ancient place were 
depart from it. 

It wa toward the latter part of the day, that flora bannerworth, mrs. 
bannerworth, and henri bannerworth, were prepar themselv to depart 
from the hous of their ancestors. the intend proprietor was, as we 
have alreadi been made acquaint with, the old admiral, who had taken 
the place somewhat mysteriously, consid the way in which he usual 
did business. 

the admir wa walk up and down the lawn befor the house, and 
look up at the window everi now and then; and turn to jack 
pringle, he said,-- 

"jack, you dog." 

"ay--ay, sir." 

"mind you convoy these women into the right port; do you hear? and no 
mistak the bearings; do you hear?" 

"ay, ay, sir." 

"these craft want care; and you are pilot, commander, and all; so mind 
and keep your weather eye open." 

"ay, ay, sir. I know the craft well enough, and I know the roads, too; 
there'l be no end of founder against the breaker to find where they 
lie." 

"no, no, jack; you needn't do that; but mind your bearings. jack, mind 
your bearings." 

"never fear; I know 'em, well enough; my eye ain't laid up in ordinari 
yet." 

"eh? what do you mean by that, you dog, eh?" 

"nothing; onli I can see without help to read, or glass either; so I 
know one place from another." 

there wa now some one move within; and the admiral, follow by jack 
pringle, enter the hall. henri bannerworth wa there. they were all 
readi to go when the coach came for them, which the admir had order 
for them. 

"jack, you lubber; where are you?" 

"ay, ay, sir, here am i." 

"go, and station yourself up in some place where you can keep a good 
look-out for the coach, and come and report when you see it." 

"ay--ay, sir," said jack, and away he went from the room, and station 
himself up in one of the trees, that command a good view of the main 
road for some distance. 

"admir bell," said henry, "here we are, trust implicitli to you; 
and in do so, I am sure I am do right." 

"you will see that," said the admiral. "all' fair and honest as yet; 
and what is to come, will speak for itself." 

"I hope you won't suffer from ani of these nocturn visits," said 
henry. 

"I don't much care about them; but old admir bell don't strike hi 
colour to an enemy, howev ugli he may look. no, no; it must be a 
better craft than hi own that'll take him; and one who won't run away, 
but that will grappl yard-arm and yard-arm, you know." 

"why, admiral, you must have seen mani danger in your time, and be use 
to all kind of disturb and conflicts. you have had a life of 
experience." 

"yes; and experi ha come pretti thick sometimes, I can tell you, 
when it come in the shape of frenchmen' broadsides." 

"I dare say, then, it must be rather awkward." 

"death by the law," said the admiral, "to stop one of them with your 
head, I assur you. I dare not make the attempt myself, though I have 
often seen it done." 

"I dare say; but here are flora and my mother." 

As he spoke, flora and her mother enter the apartment. 

"well, admiral, we are all ready; and, though I may feel somewhat sorri 
at leav the old hall, yet it aris from attach to the place, and 
not ani disinclin to be beyond the reach of these dread alarms." 

"and I, too, shall be by no mean sorry," said flora; "I am sure it is 
some gratif to know we leav a friend here, rather than some 
others, who would have had the place, if they could have got it, by ani 
means." 

"ah, that' true enough, miss flora," said the admiral; "but we'll run 
the enemi down yet, depend upon it. but onc away, you will be free from 
these terrors; and now, as you have promised, do not let yourselv be 
seen ani where at all." 

"you have our promises, admiral; and they shall be religi kept, I 
can assur you." 

"boat, ahoy--ahoy!" shout jack. 

"what boat?" said the admiral, surprised; and then he muttered, 
"confound you for a lubber! didn't I tell you to mind your bearings, you 
dog-fish you?" 

"ay, ay, sir--and so I did." 

"you did." 

"yes, here they are. squint over the larboard bulk-heads, as they call 
walls, and then atween the two tree on the starboard side of the 
course, then straight ahead for a few hundr fathoms, when you come to 
a funnel as is smoke like the crater of mount vesuvius, and then in a 
line with that on the top of the hill, come our boat." 

"well," said the admiral, "that'll do. now go open the gates, and keep a 
bright look out, and if you see anybodi near your watch, whi dous their 
glim." 

"ay--ay, sir," said jack, and he disappeared. 

"rather a lucid description," said henry, as he thought of jack' report 
to the admiral. 

"oh, it' a seaman' report. I know what he means; it' quicker and 
plainer than the land lingo, to my ears, and jack can't talk ani other, 
you see." 

By thi time the coach came into the yard, and the whole parti descend 
into the court-yard, where they came to take leav of the old place. 

"farewell, admiral." 

"good bye," said the admiral. "I hope the place you are go to will be 
such as pleas you--i hope it will." 

"I am sure we shall endeavour to be pleas with it, and I am pretti 
sure we shall." 

"good bye." 

"farewell, admir bell," said henry. 

"you rememb your promises?" 

"I do. good bye, mr. chillingworth." 

"good bye," said mr. chillingworth, who came up to bid them farewell; "a 
pleasant journey, and may you all be the happier for it." 

"you do not come with us?" 

"no; I have some busi of import to attend to, els I should have 
the greatest pleasur in do so. but good bye; we shall not be long 
apart, I dare say." 

"I hope not," said henry. 

the door of the carriag wa shut by the admiral, who look round, 
saying,-- 

"jack--jack pringle, where are you, you dog?" 

"here am i," said jack. 

"where have you been to?" 

"onli been for pigtail," said jack. "I forgot it, and couldn't set sail 
without it." 

"you dog you; didn't I tell you to mind your bearings?" 

"so I will," said jack, "fore and aft--for and aft, admiral." 

"you had better," said the admiral, who, however, relax into a broad 
grin, which he conceal from jack pringle. 

jack mount the coach-box, and away it went, just as it wa get 
dark. the old admir had lock up all the room in the presenc of 
henri bannerworth; and when the coach had gone out of sight, mr. 
chillingworth came back to the hall, where he join the admiral. 

"well," he said, "they are gone, admir bell, and we are alone; we have 
a clear stage and no favour." 

"the two thing of all other I most desire. now, they will be stranger 
where they are go to, and that will be someth gained. I will 
endeavour to do some thing if I get yard-arm and yard-arm with these 
pirates. i'll make 'em feel the weight of true metal; i'll board 
'em--d----e, i'll do everything." 

"everyth that can be done." 

"ay--ay." 

* * * * * 

the coach in which the famili of the bannerworth were carri away 
continu it cours without ani let or hindrance, and they met no one 
on their road dure the whole drive. the fact was, nearli everybodi wa 
at the conflagr at sir franci varney' house. 

flora knew not which way they were going, and, after a time, all trace 
of the road wa lost. dark set in, and they all sat in silenc in 
the coach. 

At length, after some time had been spent thus, flora bannerworth turn 
to jack pringle, and said,-- 

"are we near, or have we much further to go?" 

"not veri much, ma'am," said jack. "all' right, however--ship in the 
direct course, and no breaker ahead--no lookout necessary; howev 
there' a land-lubb aloft to keep a look out." 

As thi wa not veri intelligible, and jack seem to have hi own 
reason for silence, they ask him no further questions; but in about 
three-quart of an hour, dure which time the coach had been drive 
through the trees, they came to a standstil by a sudden pull of the 
check-str from jack, who said,-- 

"hilloa!--tak in sails, and drop anchor." 

"i thi the place?" 

"yes, here we are," said jack; "we'r in port now, at all events;" and 
he began to sing,-- 

"the trial and the danger of the voyag is past," 

when the coach door opened, and they all got out and look about them 
where they were. 

"up the garden if you please, ma'am--a quick as you can; the night air 
is veri cold." 

flora and her mother and brother took the hint, which wa meant by jack 
to mean that they were not to be seen outside. they at onc enter a 
pretti garden, and then they came to a veri neat and picturesqu 
cottage. they had no time to look up at it, as the door wa immedi 
open by an elderli female, who wa intend to wait upon them. 

soon after, jack pringl and the coachman enter the passag with the 
small amount of luggag which they had brought with them. thi wa 
deposit in the passage, and then jack went out again, and, after a few 
minutes, there wa the sound of wheels, which intim that the coach 
had driven off. 

jack, however, return in a few minut afterwards, have secur the 
wicket-g at the end of the garden, and then enter the house, 
shut the door care after him. 

flora and her mother look over the apart in which they were shown 
with some surprise. It was, in everything, such as they could wish; 
indeed, though it could not be term handsom or extravagantli 
furnished, or that the thing were new, yet, there wa all that 
conveni and comfort could require, and some littl of the luxuries. 

"well," said flora, "thi is veri thought of the admiral. the place 
will realli be charming, and the garden, too, delightful." 

"mustn't be made use of just now," said jack, "if you please, ma'am; 
them' the order at present." 

"veri well," said flora, smiling. "I suppose, mr. pringle, we must obey 
them." 

"jack pringle, if you please," said jack. "mi command onli temporary. I 
ain't got a commission." 




chapter lvii. 

the lone watch, and the adventur IN the desert house. 


[illustration] 

It is now quit night, and so peculiar and solemn a still reign in 
and about bannerworth hall and it surround grounds, that one might 
have suppos it a place of the dead, desert complet after sunset 
by all who would still hold kindr with the living. there wa not a 
breath of air stirring, and thi circumst ad greatli to the 
impress of profound repos which the whole scene exhibited. 

the wind dure the day had been rather of a squalli character, but 
toward nightfall, as is often usual after a day of such a character, it 
had complet lulled, and the seren of the scene wa unbroken even 
by the faintest sigh from a wander zephyr. 

the moon rose late at that period, and as is alway the case at that 
interv between sunset and the rise of that luminari which make the 
night so beautiful, the dark wa of the most profound character. 

It wa one of those night to produc melancholi reflections--a night on 
which a man would be apt to review hi past life, and to look into the 
hidden recess of hi soul to see if conscienc could make a coward of 
him in the loneli and still that breath around. 

It wa one of those night in which wander in the solitud of natur 
feel that the eye of heaven is upon them, and on which there seem to be 
a more visibl connect between the world and it great creator than 
upon ordinari occasions. 

the solemn and melancholi appear place onc instinct with life, when 
desert by those familiar form and face that have long inhabit 
them. there is no desert, no uninhabit isl in the far ocean, no wild, 
barren, pathless tract of unmitig sterility, which could for one 
moment compar in point of loneli and desol to a desert city. 

strip london, mighti and majest as it is, of the busi swarm of 
human that throng it streets, it suburbs, it temples, it public 
edifices, and it privat dwellings, and how aw would be the walk of 
one solitari man throughout it noiseless thoroughfares. 

[illustration] 

If mad seiz not upon him ere he had been long the sole survivor of 
a race, it would need be cast in no common mould. 

and to descend from great thing to smaller--from the huge leviathan 
citi to one mansion far remov from the nois and bustl of 
convent life, we may imagin the sort of desol that reign 
through bannerworth hall, when, for the first time, after nearli a 
hundr and fifti year of occupation, it wa desert by the 
repres of that family, so mani member of which had live and 
die beneath it roof. the house, and everyth within, without, and 
around it, seem actual to sympath with it own desol and 
desertion. 

It seem as if twenti year of continu occup could not have 
produc such an effect upon the ancient edific as had those few hour 
of neglect and desertion. 

and yet it wa not as if it had been strip of those time-worn and 
ancient relic of ornament and furnish that so long had appertain 
to it. no, noth but the absenc of those form which had been 
accustom quietli to move from room to room, and to be met here upon a 
staircase, there upon a corridor, and even in some of the ancient 
panel apartments, which give it an air of dreari repos and 
listlessness. 

the shutters, too, were all closed, and that circumst contribut 
larg to the product of that gloomi effect which otherwis could 
not have ensued. 

In fact, what could be done without attract veri special observ 
wa done to prove to ani casual observ that the hous wa untenanted. 

but such wa not realli the case. In that veri room where the much 
dread varney the vampyr had made one of hi dread appear to 
flora bannerworth and her mother, sat two men. 

It wa from that apart that flora had discharg the pistol, which 
had been left to her by her brother, and the shot from which it wa 
believ by the whole famili had most certainli taken effect upon the 
person of the vampyre. 

It wa a room peculiarli access from the gardens, for it had long 
french window open to the veri ground, and but a stone step 
interven between the floor of the apart and a broad gravel walk 
which wound round that entir portion of the house. 

It wa in thi room, then, that two men sat in silence, and nearli in 
darkness. 

befor them, and on a table, were sever articl of refreshment, as 
well of defenc and offence, accord as their intent might be. 

there were a bottl and three glasses, and lie near the elbow of one 
of the men wa a larg pair of pistols, such as might have adorn the 
belt of some desper character, who wish to instil an opinion of hi 
prowess into hi foe by the magnitud of hi weapons. 

close at hand, by the same party, lay some more modern fire arms, as 
well as a long dirk, with a silver mount handle. 

the light they had consist of a larg lantern, so construct with a 
slide, that it could be complet obscur at a moment' notice; but 
now as it wa placed, the ray that were allow to come from it were 
direct as much from the window of the apartment, as possible, and fell 
upon the face of the two men, reveal them to be admir bell and dr. 
chillingworth. 

It might have been the effect of the particular light in which he sat, 
but the doctor look extrem pale, and did not appear at all at hi 
ease. 

the admiral, on the contrary, appear in as placabl a state of mind as 
possibl and had hi arm fold across hi breast, and hi head shrunk 
down between hi shoulder as if he had made up hi mind to someth 
that wa to last a long time, and, therefor he wa make the best of 
it. 

"I do hope," said mr. chillingworth, after a long pause, "that our 
effort will be crown with success--y know, my dear sir, that I have 
alway been of your opinion, that there wa a great deal more in thi 
matter than met the eye." 

"to be sure," said the admiral, "and as to our effort be crown 
with success, why, i'll give you a toast, doctor, 'may the morning' 
reflect provid for the evening' amusement.'" 

"ha! ha!" said chillingworth, faintly; "i'd rather not drink ani more, 
and you seem, admiral, to have transpos the toast in some way. I 
believ it runs, 'may the evening' amus bear the morning' 
reflection.'" 

"transpos the devil!" said the admiral; "what do I care how it runs? I 
gave you my toast, and as to that you mention, it' anoth one 
altogether, and a sneaking, shore-go one too: but whi don't you 
drink?" 

"why, my dear sir, medic speaking, I am strongli of opinion that, 
when the human stomach is made to contain a larg quantiti of alcohol, 
it produc bad effect upon the system. now, i'v certainli taken one 
glass of thi infern strong hollands, and it is now lie in my 
stomach like the red-hot heater of a tea-urn." 

"i it? put it out with another, then." 

"ay, i'm afraid that would not answer, but do you realli think, admiral, 
that we shall effect anyth by wait here, and keep watch and 
ward, not under the most comfort circumstances, thi first night of 
the hall be empty." 

"well, I don't know that we shall," said the admiral; "but when you 
realli want to steal a march upon the enemy, there is noth like 
begin betimes. We are both of opinion that varney' great object 
throughout ha been, by some mean or another, to get possess of the 
house." 

"yes; true, true." 

"we know that he ha been unceas in hi endeavour to get the 
bannerworth famili out of it; that he ha offer them their own price 
to becom it tenant, and that the whole gist of hi quiet and placid 
interview with flora in the garden, wa to suppli her with a new set of 
reason for urg her mother and brother to leav bannerworth hall, 
becaus the old one were certainli not found sufficient." 

"true, true, most true," said mr. chillingworth, emphatically. "you 
know, sir, that from the first time you broach that view of the 
subject to me, how entir I coincid with you." 

"of cours you did, for you are a honest fellow, and a right-think 
fellow, though you are a doctor, and I don't know that I like doctor 
much better than I like lawyers--they'r onli humbug in a differ 
sort of way. but I wish to be liberal; there is such a thing as an 
honest lawyer, and, d----e, you'r an honest doctor!" 

"of cours i'm much obliged, admiral, for your good opinion. I onli wish 
it had struck me to bring someth of a solid natur in the shape of 
food, to sustain the wast of the anim economi dure the hour we 
shall have to wait here." 

"don't troubl yourself about that," said the admiral. "do you think i'm 
a donkey, and would set out on a cruis without victual my ship? I 
should think not. jack pringl will be here soon, and he ha my order 
to bring in someth to eat." 

"well," said the doctor, "that' veri provid of you, admiral, and I 
feel person obliged; but tell me, how do you intend to conduct the 
watch?" 

"what do you mean?" 

"why, I mean, if we sit here with the window fasten so as to prevent 
our light from be seen, and the door closed, how are we by ani 
possibl to know if the hous is attack or not?" 

"hark'ee, my friend," said the admiral; "i'v left a weak point for the 
enemy." 

"A what, admiral?" 

"A weak point. i'v taken good care to secur everyth but one of the 
window on the ground floor, and that i'v left open, or so nearli open, 
that it will look like the most natur place in the world to get in at. 
now, just insid that window, i'v place a lot of the famili crockery. 
i'll warrant, if anybodi so much as put hi foot in, you'll hear the 
smash;--and, d----e, there it is!" 

there wa a loud crash at thi moment, follow by a success of 
similar sounds, but of a lesser degree; and both the admir and mr. 
chillingworth sprung to their feet. 

"come on," cri the former; "here'l be a preciou row--tak the 
lantern." 

mr. chillingworth did so, but he did not seem possess of a great deal 
of presenc of mind; for, befor they got out of the room, he twice 
accident put on the dark slide, and produc a total darkness. 

"d--n!" said the admiral; "don't make it wink and wink in that way; hold 
it up, and run after me as hard as you can." 

"i'm coming, i'm coming," said mr. chillingworth. 

It wa one of the window of a long room, contain five, front the 
garden, which the admir had left purpos unguarded; and it wa not 
far from the apart in which they had been sitting, so that, 
probably, not half a minute' time elaps between the moment of the 
first alarm, and their reach the spot from whenc it wa presum to 
arise. 

the admir had arm himself with one of the huge pistols, and he 
dash forward, with all the vehem of hi character, toward the 
window, where he knew he had place the famili crockery, and where he 
fulli expect to meet the reward of hi exert by discov some 
one lie amid it fragments. 

In this, however, he wa disappointed; for, although there wa evid 
a great smash amongst the plate and dishes, the window remain closed, 
and there wa no indic whatev of the presenc of ani one. 

"well, that' odd," said the admiral; "I balanc them up amazingli 
careful, and two of 'em edgeways--d---e, a fli would have knock them 
down." 

"mew," said, a great cat, emerg from under a chair. 

"curs you, there you are," said the admiral. "put out the light, put 
out the light; here we'r illumin the whole hous for nothing." 

with, a click went the darken slide over the lantern, and all wa 
obscurity. 

At that instant a shrill, clear whistl came from the garden. 




chapter lviii. 

the arriv OF jack pringle.--midnight and the vampyre.--th mysteri 
hat. 


[illustration] 

"bless me! what is that?" said mr. chillingworth; "what a veri singular 
sound." 

"hold your noise," said the admiral; "did you never hear that before?" 

"no; how should i?" 

"lor, bless the ignor of some people, that' a boatswain' call." 

"oh, it is," said mr. chillingworth; "i he go to call again?" 

"d----e, I tell ye it' a boatswain' call." 

"well, then, d----e, if it come to that," said mr. chillingworth, "what 
doe he call here for?" 

the admir disdain an answer; but demand the lantern, he open 
it, so that there wa a suffici glimmer of light to guid him, and 
then walk from the room toward the front door of the hall. 

He ask no question befor he open it, because, no doubt, the signal 
wa preconcerted; and jack pringle, for it wa he inde who had 
arrived, at onc walk in, and the admir bar the door with the 
same precis with which it wa befor secured. 

"well, jack," he said, "did you see anybody?" 

"ay, ay, sir," said jack. 

"why, ye don't mean that--where?" 

"where I bought the grub; a woman--" 

"d----e, you'r a fool, jack." 

"you'r another." 

"hilloa, ye scoundrel, what d'ye mean by talk to me in that way? is 
thi your respect for your superiors?" 

"ship' been paid off long ago," said jack, "and I ain't got no 
superiors. I ain't a marin or a frenchman." 

"why, you'r drunk." 

"I know it; put that in your eye." 

"there' a scoundrel. why, you know-nothing-lubber, didn't I tell you to 
be careful, and that everyth depend upon secreci and caution? and 
didn't I tell you, abov all this, to avoid drink?" 

"to be sure you did." 

"and yet you come here like a rum cask." 

"yes; now you'v had your say, what then?" 

"you'd better leav him alone," said mr. chillingworth; "it' no use 
argu with a drunken man." 

"harkye, admiral," said jack, steadi himself as well as he could. 
"i'v put up with you a preciou long while, but I won't no longer; 
you'r so drunk, now, that you keep bob up and down like the 
mizen gaff in a storm--that' my opinion--tol de rol." 

"let him alone, let him alone," urg mr. chillingworth. 

"the villain," said the admiral; "he' enough to ruin everything; now, 
who would have thought that? but it' alway been the way with him for a 
matter of twenti years--h never had ani judgment in hi drink. when it 
wa all smooth sailing, and noth to do, and the fellow might have got 
an extra drop on board, which nobodi would have care for, he' as sober 
as a judge; but, whenev there' anyth to do, that want a littl 
cleverness, confound him, he ship rum enough to float a seventy-four." 

"are you go to stand anyth to drink," said jack, "mi old buffer? 
Do you recollect where you got your knob scuttl off beyrout--how you 
fell on your latter end and tri to recollect your church cateckis, you 
old brute?--i' asham of you. Do you recollect the brown girl you 
bought for thirteen bob and a tanner, at the bless societi islands, 
and sold her again for a dollar, to a nigger seven feet two, in hi 
natur pumps? you'r a nice article, you is, to talk of marin and 
swabs, and shore-go lubbers, blow yer. Do you recollect the littl 
frenchman that told ye he'd pull your bless nose, and I advis you to 
soap it? do you recollect sall at spithead, as you got in at a port hole 
of the state cabin, all but her behind?" 

"death and the devil!" said the admiral, break from the grasp of mr. 
chillingworth. 

"ay," said jack, "you'll come to 'em both one of these days, old cock, 
and no mistake." 

"i'll have hi life, i'll have hi life," roar the admiral. 

"nay, nay, sir," said mr. chillingworth, catch the admir round the 
waist. "mi dear sir, recollect, now, if I may ventur to advis you, 
admir bell, there' a lot of that fieri holland you know, in the next 
room; set firm down to that, and finish him off. i'll warrant him, he'll 
be quiet enough." 

"what' that you say?" cri jack--"hollands!--who' got any?--next to 
rum and elizabeth baker, if I ha an affection, it' hollands." 

"jack!" said the admiral. 

"ay, ay, sir!" said jack, instinctively. 

"come thi way." 

jack stagger after him, and they all reach the room where the 
admir and mr. chillingworth had been sit befor the alarm. 

"there!" said the admiral, put the light upon the table, and 
point to the bottle; "what do you think of that?" 

"I never think under such circumstances," said jack. "here' to the 
wooden wall of old england!" 

He seiz the bottle, and, put it neck into hi mouth, for a few 
moment noth wa heard but a gurgl sound of the liquor pass 
down hi throat; hi head went further and further back, until, at last, 
over he went, chair and bottl and all, and lay in a helpless state of 
intox on the floor. 

"so far, so good," said the admiral. "he' out of the way, at all 
events." 

"i'll just loosen hi neckcloth," said mr. chillingworth, "and then 
we'll go and sit somewher else; and I should recommend that, if 
anywhere, we take up our station in that chamber, onc flora's, where 
the mysteri panel portrait hangs, that bear so strong a 
resembl to varney, the vampyre." 

"hush!" said the admiral. "what' that?" 

they listen for a moment intently; and then, distinctly, upon the 
gravel path outsid the window, they heard a footstep, as if some person 
were walk along, not altogeth heedlessly, but yet without ani veri 
great amount of caution or attent to the nois he might make. 

"hist!" said the doctor. "not a word. they come." 

"what do you say they for?" said the admiral. 

"becaus someth seem to whisper me that mr. marchdal know more of 
varney, the vampyre, than ever he ha chosen to reveal. put out the 
light." 

"yes, yes--that'l do. the moon ha risen; see how it stream through 
the chink of the shutters." 

"no, no--it' not in that direction, or our light would have betray 
us. Do you not see the beam come from that half glass-door lead to 
the greenhouse?" 

"yes; and there' the footstep again, or another." 

tramp, tramp came a footfal again upon the gravel path, and, as before, 
die away upon their listen ears. 

"what do you say now," said mr. chillingworth--"ar there not two?" 

"if they were a dozen," said the admiral, "although we have lost one of 
our force, I would tackl them. let' creep on through the room in the 
direct the footstep went." 

"mi life on it," said mr. chillingworth as they left the apartment, "if 
thi be varney, he make for that apart where flora slept, and which 
he know how to get admiss to. i'v studi the hous well, admiral, 
and to get to that window ani one from here outsid must take a 
consider round. come on--w shall be beforehand." 

"A good idea--a good idea. Be it so." 

just allow themselv suffici light to guid them on the way from 
the lantern, they hurri on with as much precipit as the 
intricaci of the passag would allow, nor halt till they had reach 
the chamber were hung the portrait which bore so strike and remark 
a like to varney, the vampyre. 

they left the lamp outsid the door, so that not even a straggl beam 
from it could betray that there were person on the watch; and then, as 
quietli as foot could fall, they took up their station among the 
hang of the antiqu bedstead, which ha been befor allud to in 
thi work as a remark piec of furnitur appertain to that 
apartment. 

"do you think," said the admiral, "we'v distanc them?" 

"certainli we have. it' unlucki that the blind of the window is down." 

"i it? By heaven, there' a d----d strange-look shadow creep over 
it." 

mr. chillingworth look almost with suspend breath. even he could not 
altogeth get rid of a tremul feeling, as he saw that the shadow of 
a human form, appar of veri larg dimensions, wa on the outside, 
with the arm spread out, as if feel for some mean of open the 
window. 

It would have been easi now to have fire one of the pistol direct upon 
the figure; but, somehow or another, both the admir and mr. 
chillingworth shrank from that course, and they felt much rather 
inclin to captur whoever might make hi appearance, onli use their 
pistol as a last resource, than gratuit and at onc to resort to 
violence. 

"who should you say that was?" whisper the admiral. 

"varney, the vampyre." 

"d----e, he' ill-look and big enough for anything--there' a noise!" 

there wa a strang crack sound at the window, as if a pane of glass 
wa be veri stealthili and quietli broken; and then the blind wa 
agit slightly, confus much the shadow that wa cast upon it, as 
if the hand of some person wa introduc for the purpos of effect a 
complet entranc into the apartment. 

"he' come in," whisper the admiral. 

"hush, for heaven' sake!" said mr. chillingworth; "you will alarm him, 
and we shall lose the fruit of all the labour we have alreadi bestow 
upon the matter; but did you not say something, admiral, about lie 
under the window and catch him by the leg?" 

"why, yes; I did." 

"go and do it, then; for, as sure as you are a live man, hi leg will 
be in in a minute." 

"here goes," said the admiral; "I never suggest anyth which i'm 
unwil to do myself." 

whoever it wa that now wa make such strenuou exert to get into 
the apart seem to find some difficulti as regard the fasten 
of the window, and as thi difficulti increased, the patienc of the 
party, as well as hi caution desert him, and the casement wa rattl 
with violence. 

with a far greater amount of caution than ani one from a knowledg of 
hi charact would have given him credit for, the admir crept forward 
and laid himself exactli under the window. 

the depth of wood-work from the floor to the lowest part of the 
window-fram did not exceed abov two feet; so that ani one could 
conveni step in from the balconi outrid on to the floor of the 
apartment, which wa just what he who wa attempt to effect an 
entranc wa desir of doing. 

It wa quit clear that, be he who he might, mortal or vampyre, he had 
some acquaint with the fasten of the window; for now he succeed 
in move it, and the sash wa thrown open. 

the blind wa still an obstacle; but a vigor pull from the intrud 
brought that down on the prostrat admiral; and then mr. chillingworth 
saw, by the moonlight, a tall, gaunt figur stand in the balcony, as 
if just hesit for a moment whether to get head first or feet first 
into the apartment. 

had he chosen the former altern he would need, indeed, to have been 
endow with more than mortal power of defenc and offenc to escap 
capture, but hi lucki star wa in the ascendancy, and he put hi foot 
in first. 

He turn hi side to the apart and, as he did so, the blight 
moonlight fell upon hi face, enabl mr. chillingworth to see, without 
the shadow of a doubt, that it was, indeed, varney, the vampyre, who wa 
thu stealthili make hi entranc into bannerworth hall, accord to 
the calcul which had been made by the admir upon that subject. 
the doctor scarc knew whether to be pleas or not at thi discovery; 
it wa almost a terrifi one, sceptic as he wa upon the subject of 
vampyres, and he wait breathless for the issu of the singular and 
peril adventure. 

No doubt admir bell deepli congratul himself upon the success 
which wa about to crown hi stratagem for the captur of the intruder, 
be he who he might, and he writh with impati for the foot to come 
suffici near him to enabl him to grasp it. 

hi patienc wa not sever tried, for in anoth moment it rest 
upon hi chest. 

"boarder a hoy!" shout the admiral, and at onc he laid hold of the 
trespasser. "yard-arm to yard-arm, I think i'v got you now. here' a 
prize, doctor! he shall go away without hi leg if he goe away now. eh! 
what! the light--d----e, he has--doctor, the light! the light! whi 
what' this?--hilloa, there!" 

dr. chillingworth sprang into the passage, and procur the light--in 
anoth moment he wa at the side of the admiral, and the lantern slide 
be thrown back, he saw at onc the dilemma into which hi friend had 
fallen. 

there he lay upon hi back, grasping, with the vehem of an embrac 
that had in it much of the ludicrous, a long boot, from which the 
intrud had cleverli slip hi leg, leav it as a poor trophi in 
the hand of hi enemies. 

"whi you'v onli pull hi boot off," said the doctor; "and now he' 
gone for good, for he know what we'r about, and ha slip through 
your fingers." 

admir bell sat up and look at the boot with a rueful countenance. 

"done again!" he said. 

"yes, you are done," said the doctor; "whi didn't you lay hold of the 
leg while you were about it, instead of the boot? admiral, are these 
your tactics?" 

"don't be a fool," said the admiral; "put out the light and give me the 
pistols, or blaze away yourself into the garden; a chanc shot may do 
something. it' no use run after him; a stern chase is a long chase; 
but fire away." 

As if some parti below had heard him give the word, two loud report 
from the garden immedi ensued, and a crash of glass testifi to 
the fact that some deadli missil had enter the room. 

"murder!" said the doctor, and he fell flat upon hi back. "I don't like 
thi at all; it' all in your line, admiral, but not in mine." 

"all' right, my lad," said the admiral; "now for it." 

He saw lie in the moonlight the pistol which he and the doctor had 
brought into the room, and in anoth moment he, to use hi own words, 
return the broadsid of the enemy. 

"d--n it!" he said, "thi put me in mind of old times. blaze away, you 
thieves, while I load; broadsid to broadside. it' your turn now; I 
scorn to take an advantage. what the devil' that?" 

someth veri larg and veri heavi came bang against the window, 
send it all into the room, and nearli smother the admir with the 
fragments. anoth shot wa then fired, and in came someth else, 
which hit the wall on the opposit side of the room, rebound from 
thenc on to the doctor, who gave a yell of despair. 

after that all wa still; the enemi seem to be satisfi that they had 
silenc the garrison. and it took the admir a great deal of kick 
and plung to rescu himself from some superincumb mass that wa 
upon him, which seem to him to be a consider size tree. 

"call thi fair fighting," he shouted--"get a man' leg and arm 
tangl up like a piec of indian mat in the branch of a tree? 
doctor, I say! hilloa! where are you?" 

"I don't know," said the doctor; "but there' somebodi get into the 
balcony--now we shall be murder in cold blood!" 

"where' the pistols?" 

"fire off, of course; you did it yourself." 

bang came someth els into the room, which, from the sound it made, 
close resembl a brick, and after that somebodi jump clean into the 
centr of the floor, and then, after roll and writh about in a 
most singular manner, slowli got up, and with variou preliminari 
hiccups, said,-- 

"come on, you lubbers, mani of you as like. i'm the tar for all 
weathers." 

"why, d----e," said the admiral, "it' jack pringle." 

"yes, it is," said jack, who wa not suffici sober to recognis the 
admiral' voice. "I see as how you'v heard of me. come on, all of 
you." 

"why, jack, you scoundrel," roar the admiral, "how came you here? 
don't you know me? i'm your admiral, you horse-marine." 

"eh?" said jack. "ay--ay, sir, how came you here?" 

"how came you, you villain?" 

"board the enemy." 

"the enemi who you board wa us; and hang me if I don't think you 
haven't been pour broadsid into us, while the enemi were scud 
befor the wind in anoth direction." 

"lor!" said jack. 

"explain, you scoundrel, directly--explain." 

"well, that' onli reasonable," said jack; and give a heavier lurch 
than usual, he sat down with a great bounc upon the floor. "you see 
it' just thi here,--when I wa a come of cours I heard, just as I 
wa a going, that ere as made me come all in consequ of somebodi a 
going, or for to come, you see, admiral." 

"doctor," cri the admiral, in a great rage, "just help me out of thi 
entangl of branches, and i'll rid the world from an encumbr by 
smash that fellow." 

"smash yourself!" said jack. "you know you'r drunk." 

"mi dear admiral," said mr. chillingworth, lay hold of one of hi 
legs, and pull it veri hard, which brought hi face into a lot of 
brambles, "we'r make a mess of thi business." 

"murder!" shout the admiral; "you are indeed. Is that what you call 
pull me out of it? you'v stuck me fast." 

"i'll manag it," said jack. "i'v seed him in mani a scrape, and i'v 
seed him out. you pull me, doctor, and i'll pull him. Yo hoy!" 

jack laid hold of the admir by the scuff of the neck, and the doctor 
laid hold of jack round the waist, the consequ of which wa that he 
wa drag out from the branch of the tree, which seem to have been 
thrown into the room, and down fell both jack and the doctor. 

At thi instant there wa a strang hiss sound heard below the 
window; then there wa a sudden, loud report, as if a hand-grenad had 
gone off. A spectral sort of light gleam into the room, and a tall, 
gaunt-look figur rose slowli up in the balcony. 

"bewar of the dead!" said a voice. "let the live contend with the 
living, the dead with the dead. beware!" 

the figur disappeared, as did also the strange, spectral-look light. 
A death-lik silenc ensued, and the cold moonbeam stream in upon the 
floor of the apartment, as if noth had occur to disturb the 
wrap repos and seren of the scene. 




chapter lix. 

the warning.--th new plan OF operation.--th insult messag from 
varney. 


[illustration] 

So much of the night had been consum in these operations, that by the 
time they were over, and the three personag who lay upon the floor of 
what might be call the haunt chamber of bannerworth hall, even had 
they now been dispos to seek repose, would have had a short time to do 
so befor the daylight would have stream in upon them, and rous them 
to the bustl of wake existence. 

It may be well believ what a vast amount of surpris came over the 
three person in that chamber at the last littl circumst that had 
occur in connect with the night' proceedings. 

there wa noth which had preced that, that did not resembl a 
genuin attack upon the premises; but about that last mysteri 
appearance, with it curiou light, there wa quit enough to bother the 
admir and jack pringl to a consider effect, whatev might be the 
effect upon mr. chillingworth, whose profess better enabl him to 
comprehend, chemically, what would produc effect that, no doubt, 
astonish them amazingly. 

what with hi intox and the violent exercis he had taken, jack 
wa again thoroughli prostrate; while the admir could not have look 
more astonish had the evil one himself appear in _propria persona_ 
and given him notic to quit the premises. 

He was, however, the first to speak, and the word he spoke were 
address to jack, to whom he said,-- 

"jack, you lubber, what do you think of all that?" 

jack, however, wa too far gone even to say "ay, ay, sir;" and mr. 
chillingworth, slowli get himself up to hi feet, approach the 
admiral. 

"it' hard to say so much, admir bell," he said, "but it strike me 
that whatev object thi sir franci varney, or varney, the vampyre, 
ha in come into bannerworth hall, it is, at all events, of suffici 
import to induc him to go ani length, and not to let even a life to 
stand in the way of it accomplishment." 

"well, it seem so," said the admiral; "for i'll be hang if I can make 
head or tail of the fellow." 

"if we valu our person safety, we shall hesit to continu a 
peril adventur which I think can end onli in defeat, if not in 
death." 

"but we don't valu our person safety," said the admiral. "we'v got 
into the adventure, and I don't see whi we shouldn't carri it out. It 
may be grow a littl serious; but what of that? for the sake of that 
young girl, flora bannerworth, as well as for the sake of my nephew, 
charl holland, I will see the end of thi affair, let it be what it 
may; but mind you, mr. chillingworth, if one man choos to go upon a 
desper service, that' no reason whi he should ask anoth to do so." 

"I understand you," said mr. chillingworth; "but, have commenc the 
adventur with you, I am not the man to desert you in it. We have 
commit a great mistake." 

"A mistake! how?" 

"why, we ought to have watch outsid the house, instead of within it. 
there can be no doubt that if we had lain in wait in the garden, we 
should have been in a better posit to have accomplish our object." 

"well, I don't know, doctor, but it seem to me that if jack pringl 
hadn't made such a fool of himself, we should have manag veri well: 
and I don't know now how he came to behav in the manner he did." 

"nor i," said mr. chillingworth. "but, at all events, so far as the 
result goes, it is quit clear that ani further watching, in thi house, 
for the appear of sir franci varney, will now be in vain. He ha 
noth to do now but to keep quiet until we are tire out--a fact, 
concern which he can easili obtain information--and then he 
immediately, without trouble, walk into the premises, to hi own 
satisfaction." 

"but what the deuc can he want upon the premises?" 

"that question, admiral, induc me to think that we have made anoth 
mistake. We ought not to have attempt to surpris sir franci varney 
in come into bannerworth hall, but to catch him as he came out." 

[illustration] 

"well, there' someth in that," said the admiral. "thi is a pretti 
night' business, to be sure. however, it can't be helped, it' done, 
and there' an end on't. and now, as the morn is near at hand, I 
certainli must confess I should like to get some breakfast, although I 
don't like that we should all leav the hous together" 

"why," said mr. chillingworth, "a we have now no secret to keep with 
regard to our be here, becaus the princip person we wish to keep 
it from is awar of it, I think we cannot do better than send at onc 
for henri bannerworth, tell him of the non-success of the effort we have 
made in hi behalf, and admit him at onc into our consult of what 
is next to be done." 

"agreed, agreed, I think that, without troubl him, we might have 
captur thi varney; but that' over now, and, as soon as jack pringl 
choos to wake up again, i'll send him to the bannerworth with a 
message." 

"ay, ay, sir," said jack, suddenly; "all' right." 

"why, you vagabond," said the admiral, "I do believ you'v been 
shamming!" 

"sham what?" 

"be drunk, to be sure." 

"lor! couldn't do it," said jack; "i'll just tell you how it was. I 
waken up and found myself shut in somewhere; and, as I couldn't get 
out of the door, I thought i'd tri the window, and there I did get out. 
well, perhap I wasn't quit the thing, but I see two peopl in the 
garden a look up at thi ere room; and, to be sure, I thought it wa 
you and the doctor. well, it warn't no busi of mine to interfere, so 
I seed one of you climb up the balcony, as I thought, and then, after 
which, come down head over heel with such a run, that I thought you 
must have broken your neck. well, after that you fire a coupl of shot 
in, and then, after that, I made sure it wa you, admiral." 

"and what made you make sure of that?" 

"why, becaus you scuttl away like an empti tar-barrel in full tide." 

"confound you, you scoundrel!" 

"well, then, confound you, if it come to that. I thought I wa do 
you good sarvice, and that the enemi wa here, when all the while it 
turn out as you wa and the enemi wasn't, and the enemi wa outsid 
and you wasn't." 

"but who threw such a confound lot of thing into the room?" 

"why, I did, of course; I had but one pistol, and, when I fire that 
off, I wa forc to make up a broadsid with what I could." 

"wa there ever such a stupid!" said the admiral; "doctor, doctor, you 
talk of us make two mistakes; but you forgot a third and wors one 
still, and that wa the bring such a lubberli son of a sea-cook into 
the place as thi fellow." 

"you'r another," said jack; "and you know it." 

"well, well," said mr. chillingworth, "it' no use continu it, 
admiral; jack, in hi way, did, I dare say, what he consid for the 
best." 

"I wish he'd do, then, what he consid for the worst, next time." 

"perhap I may," said jack, "and then you will be serv out abov a 
bit. what 'ud becom of you, I wonder, if it wasn't for me? i'm as good 
as a mother to you, you know that, you old babby." 

"come, come, admiral," said mr. chillingworth: "come down to the 
garden-gate; it is now just upon daybreak, and the probabl is that 
we shall not be long there befor we see some of the countri people, who 
will get us anyth we requir in the shape of refreshment; and as for 
jack, he seem quit suffici recov now to go to the 
bannerworths'." 

"oh! I can go," said jack; "a for that, the onli thing as put me out 
of the way is the want of someth to drink. My constitut won't 
stand what they call temper living, or noth with the chill off." 

"go at once," said the admiral, "and tell mr. henri bannerworth that we 
are here; but do not tell him befor hi sister or hi mother. If you 
meet anybodi on the road, send them here with a cargo of victuals. It 
strike me that a good, comfort breakfast wouldn't be at all amiss, 
doctor." 

"how rapidli the day dawns," remark mr. chillingworth, as he walk 
into the balconi from whenc varney, the vampire, had attempt to make 
good hi entranc to the hall. 

just as he spoke, and befor jack pringl could get half way over to the 
garden gate, there came a tremend ring at the bell which wa 
suspend over it. 

A view of that gate could not be command from the window of the 
haunt apartment, so that they could not see who it wa that demand 
admission. 

As jack pringl wa go down at ani rate, they saw no necess for 
person interference; and he prove that there wa not, by present 
return with a note which he said had been thrown over the gate by a 
lad, who then scamper off with all the speed he could make. 

the note, exteriorly, wa well got up, and had all the appear of 
great care have been bestow upon it fold and sealing. 

It wa duli address to "admir bell, bannerworth hall," and the word 
"immediate" wa written at one corner. 

the admiral, after look at it for some time with veri great wonder, 
came at last to the conclus that probabl to open it would be the 
shortest way of arriv at a knowledg of who had sent it, and he 
accordingli did so. 

the note wa as follows:-- 

"mi dear sir,--feel assur that you cannot be surround 
with those mean and applianc for comfort in the hall, in it 
now desert condition, which you have a right to expect, and so 
emin deserve, I flatter myself that I shall receiv an 
answer in the affirmative, when I request the favour of your 
compani to breakfast, as well as that of your learn friend. 
mr. chillingworth. 

"in consequ of a littl accid which occur last even 
to my own residence, I am, _ad interim_, until the counti build 
it up for me again, stay at a hous call walmesley lodge, 
where I shall expect you with all the impati of one 
solicit an honour, and hope that it will be confer upon 
him. 

"I trust that ani littl differ of opinion on other subject 
will not interfer to prevent the harmoni of our morning' meal 
together. 

"believ me to be, my dear sir, with the greatest possibl 
consideration, your veri obedient, humbl servant, 

"franci varney." 

the admir gasp again, and look at mr. chillingworth, and then at 
the note, and then at mr. chillingworth again, as if he wa perfectli 
bewildered. 

"that' about the coolest piec of business," said mr. chillingworth, 
"that ever I heard of." 

"hang me," said the admiral, "if I sha'n't like the fellow at last. It 
is cool, and I like it becaus it is cool. where' my hat? where' my 
stick!" 

"what are you go to do?" 

"accept hi invitation, to be sure, and breakfast with him; and, my 
learn friend, as he call you, I hope you'll come likewise. i'll take 
the fellow at hi word. By fair means, or by foul, i'll know what he 
want here; and whi he persecut thi family, for whom I have an 
attachment; and what hand he ha in the disappear of my nephew, 
charl holland; for, as sure as there' a heaven abov us, he' at the 
bottom of that affair. where is thi walmesley lodge?" 

"just in the neighbourhood; but--" 

"come on, then; come on." 

"but, really, admiral, you don't mean to say you'll breakfast 
with--with--" 

"A vampyre? yes, I would, and will, and mean to do so. here, jack, you 
needn't go to mr. bannerworth' yet. come, my learn friend, let' take 
time by the forelock." 




chapter lx. 

the interrupt breakfast AT sir franci varney's. 


[illustration] 

notwithstand all mr. chillingworth could say to the contrary, the 
admir realli meant to breakfast with sir franci varney. 

the worthi doctor could not for some time believ but that the admir 
must be joking, when he talk in such a strain; but he wa veri soon 
convinc to the contrary, by the latter actual walk out and onc 
more ask him, mr. chillingworth, if he meant to go with him, or not. 

thi wa conclusive, so the doctor said,-- 

"well, admiral, thi appear to me rather a mad sort of freak; but, as I 
have begun the adventur with you, I will conclud it with you." 

"that' right," said the admiral; "i'm not deceiv in you, doctor; so 
come along. hang these vampyres, I don't know how to tackl them, 
myself. I think, after all, sir franci varney is more in your line than 
line is in mine." 

"how do you mean?" 

"why, couldn't you persuad him he' ill, and want some physic? that 
would soon settl him, you know." 

"settl him!" said mr. chillingworth; "I beg to say that if I did give 
him ani physic, the dose would be much to hi advantage; but, however, 
my opinion is, that thi invit to breakfast is, after all, a mere 
piec of irony; and that, when we get to walmesley lodge, we shall not 
see anyth of him; on the contrary, we shall probabl find it' a 
hoax." 

"I certainli shouldn't like that, but still it' worth the trying. the 
fellow ha realli behav himself in such an extraordinari manner, that, 
if I can make term with him I will; and there' one thing, you know, 
doctor, that I think we may say we have discovered." 

"and what may that be? Is it, not to make too sure of a vampyre, even 
when you have him by the leg?" 

"no, that ain't it, though that' a veri good thing in it way: but it 
is just this, that sir franci varney, whoever he is and whatev he is, 
is after bannerworth hall, and not the bannerworth family. If you 
recollect, mr. chillingworth, in our conversation, I have alway 
insist upon that fact." 

"you have; and it seem to me to be complet verifi by the 
proceed of the night. there, then, admiral, is the great 
mystery--what can he want at bannerworth hall that make him take such a 
world of trouble, and run so mani fear risk in tri to get at it?" 

"that is, indeed, the mystery; and if he realli mean thi invit to 
breakfast, I shall ask him plumply, and tell him, at the same time, that 
possibl hi veri best way to secur hi object will be to be candid, 
vampyr as he is." 

"but really, admiral, you do not still cling to that foolish 
superstit of believ that sir franci varney is in realiti a 
vampyre?" 

"I don't know, and I can't say; if anybodi wa to give me a descript 
of a strang sort of fish that I had never seen, I wouldn't take upon 
myself to say there wasn't such a thing; nor would you, doctor, if you 
had realli seen the mani odd one that I have encount at variou 
times." 

"well, well, admiral, i'm certainli not belong to that school of 
philosophi which declar the imposs to be what it don't understand; 
there may be vampyres, and there may be apparitions, for all I know to 
the contrary; I onli doubt these things, becaus I think, if they were 
true, that, as a phenomena of nature, they would have been by thi time 
establish by repeat instanc without the possibl of doubt or 
cavil." 

"well, there' someth in that; but how far have we got to go now?" 

"no further than to yon enclosur where you see those park-lik look 
gates, and that cedar-tre stretch it dark-green foliag so far into 
the road; that is walmesley lodge, whither you have been invited." 

"and you, my learn friend, recollect that you were invit too; so 
that you are no intrud upon the hospit of varney the vampyre." 

"I say, admiral," said mr. chillingworth, when they reach the gates, 
"you know it is not quit the thing to call a man a vampyr at hi own 
breakfast-table, so just oblig me by promis not to make ani such 
remark to sir francis." 

"A like thing!" said the admiral; "he know I know what he is, and he 
know i'm a plain man and a blunt speaker; however, i'll be civil to 
him, and more than that I can't promise. I must wring out of him, if I 
can, what ha becom of charl holland, and what the deuc he realli 
want himself." 

"well, well; come to no collis with him, while we'r hi guests." 

"not if I can help it." 

the doctor rang at the gate bell of walmesley lodge, and wa in a few 
moment answer by a woman, who demand their business. 

"i sir franci varney here?" said the doctor. 

"oh, ah! yes," she replied; "you see hi hous wa burnt down, for 
someth or other--i'm sure I don't know what--bi some people--i'm sure 
I don't know who; so, as the lodg wa to let, we have took him in till 
he can suit himself." 

"ah! that' it, is it?" said the admiral--"tel him that admir bell 
and dr. chillingworth are here." 

"veri well," said the woman; "you may walk in." 

"thank ye; you'r vastli obliging, ma'am. Is there anyth go on in 
the breakfast line?" 

"well, yes; I am get him some breakfast, but he didn't say as he 
expect company." 

the woman open the garden gate, and they walk up a trimli laid out 
garden to the lodge, which wa a cottage-lik structur in extern 
appearance, although within it boast of all the comfort of a 
toler extens house. 

she left them in a small room, lead from the hall, and wa absent 
about five minutes; then she returned, and, mere say that sir 
franci varney present hi compliments, and desir them to walk up 
stairs, she preced them up a handsom flight which led to the first 
floor of the lodge. 

Up to thi moment, mr. chillingworth had expect some excuse, for, 
notwithstand all he had heard and seen of sir franci varney, he 
could not believ that ani amount of impud would suffic to enabl 
him to receiv peopl as hi guests, with whom he must feel that he wa 
at such posit war. 

It wa a singular circumstance; and, perhaps, the onli thing that 
match the cool impertin of the invitation, wa the accept of 
it under the circumst by the admiral. 

sir franci varney might have intend it as a jest; but if he did so, 
in the first instance, it wa evid he would not allow himself to be 
beaten with hi own weapons. 

the room into which they were shown wa a longish narrow one; a veri 
wide door gave them admiss to it, at the end, nearest the staircase, 
and at it other extrem there wa a similar door open into some 
other apart of the house. 

sir franci varney sat with hi back toward thi second door, and a 
table, with some chair and other articl of furniture, were so 
arrang befor him, that while they seem but to be carelessli place 
in the posit they occupied, they realli form a pretti good barrier 
between him and hi visitors. 

the admiral, however, wa too intent upon get a sight of varney, to 
notic ani prepar of thi sort, and he advanc quickli into the 
room. 

and there, indeed, wa the much dreaded, troublesome, persevering, and 
singular look be who had caus such a world of annoy to the 
famili of the bannerworths, as well as disturb the peac of the whole 
district, which had the misfortun to have him as an inhabitant. 

If anything, he look thinner, taller, and paler than usual, and there 
seem to be a slight nervous of manner about him, as he slowli 
inclin hi head toward the admiral, which wa not quit intelligible. 

"well," said admir bell, "you invit me to breakfast, and my learn 
friend; here we are." 

"no two human beings," said varney, "could be more welcom to my 
hospit than yourself and dr. chillingworth. I pray you to be 
seated. what a pleasant thing it is, after the toil and struggl of 
thi life, occasion to sit down in the sweet companionship of such 
dear friends." 

He made a hideou face as he spoke, and the admir look as if he were 
half inclin to quarrel at that earli stage of the proceedings. 

"dear friends!" he said; "well, well--it' no use squabbl about a 
word or two; but I tell you what it is, mr. varney, or sir franci 
varney, or whatev your d----d name is--" 

"hold, my dear sir," said varney--"aft breakfast, if you please--aft 
breakfast." 

He rang a hand-bel as he spoke, and the woman who had charg of the 
hous brought in a tray toler cover with the materi for a 
substanti morning' meal. she place it upon the table, and certainli 
the variou articl that smoke upon it did great credit to her 
culinari powers. 

"deborah," said sir varney, in a mild sort of tone, "keep on continu 
bring thing to eat until thi old brutal sea ruffian ha satiat 
hi disgust appetite." 

the admir open hi eye an enorm width, and, look at sir 
franci varney, he place hi two fist upon the table, and drew a long 
breath. 

"did you address those observ to me," he said, at length, "you 
blood-suck vagabond?" 

"eh?" said sir franci varney, look over the admiral' head, as if he 
saw someth interest on the wall beyond. 

"mi dear admiral," said mr. chillingworth, "come away." 

"i'll see you d----d first!" said the admiral. "now, mr. vampyre, no 
shuffling; did you address those observ to me?" 

"deborah," said sir franci varney, in silveri tones, "you can remov 
thi tray and bring on the next." 

"not if I know it," said the admir "I came to breakfast, and i'll have 
it; after breakfast i'll pull your nose--ay, if you were fifti vampyres, 
i'd do it." 

"dr. chillingworth," said varney, without pay the least attent to 
what the admir said, "you don't eat, my dear sir; you must be fatigu 
with your night' exertions. A man of your age, you know, cannot be 
suppos to roll and tumbl about like a fool in a pantomim with 
impunity. onli think what a calam it would be if you were laid up. 
your patient would all get well, you know." 

"sir franci varney," said mr. chillingworth, "we'r your guests; we 
come here at your invit to partak of a meal. you have wantonli 
attack both of us. I need not say that by so do you cast a far 
greater slur upon your own tast and judgment than you can upon us." 

"admir spoken," said sir franci varney, give hi hand a clap 
togeth that made the admir jump again. "now, old bell, i'll fight 
you, if you think yourself aggrieved, while the doctor see fair play." 

"old who?" shout the admiral. 

"bell, bell--i not your name bell?--a famili cognomen, I presume, on 
account of the infern clack, clack, without ani sens in it, that is 
the characterist of your race." 

"you'll fight me?" said the admiral, jump up. 

"yes; if you challeng me." 

"bi jove I do; of course" 

"then I accept it; and the challeng party, you know well, or ought to 
know, can make hi own term in the encounter." 

"make what term you please; I care not what they are. onli say you will 
fight, and that' sufficient." 

"it is well," said sir franci varney, in a solemn tone. 

"nay, nay," interrupt mr. chillingworth; "thi is boyish folly." 

"hold your row," said the admiral, "and let' hear what he' got to 
say." 

"in thi mansion," said sir franci varney--"for a mansion it is, 
although under the unpretend name of a lodge--in thi mansion there 
is a larg apart which wa origin fit up by a scientif 
proprietor of the place, for the purpos of microscop and other 
experiments, which requir a dark total and complete, such a 
dark as seem as if it could be felt--palpable, thick, and obscur 
as the dark of the tomb, and I know what that is." 

"the devil you do!" said thi admir "it' damp, too, ain't it?" 

"the room?" 

"no; the grave." 

"oh! uncommonly, after autumn rains. but to resume--thi room is 
large, lofty, and perfectli empty." 

"well?" 

"I propos that we procur two scythes." 

"two what?" 

"scythes, with their long handles, and their conveni hold places." 

"well, i'll be hanged! what next do you propose?" 

"you may be hanged. the next is, that with these scyth we be both of 
us place in the darken room, and the door closed, and doubli lock 
upon us for one hour, and that then and there we do our best each to cut 
the other in two. If you succeed in dismemb me, you will have won 
the day; but I hope, from my superior agility"--her sir franci jump 
upon hi chair, and sat upon the back of it--"to get the better of you. 
how do you like the plan I have proposed? doe it meet your wishes?" 

"curs your impudence!" said the admiral, place hi elbow upon the 
tabl and rest hi chin in astonish upon hi two hands. 

"nay," interrupt sir francis, "you challeng me; and, besides, you'll 
have an equal chance, you know that. If you succeed in strike me 
first, down I go; wherea it I succeed in strike you first, down you 
go." 

As he spoke, sir franci varney stretch out hi foot, and close a 
small bracket which held out the flap of the tabl on which the admir 
wa leaning, and, accordingly, down the admir went, tea-tray and all. 

mr. chillingworth ran to help him up, and, when they both recov 
their feet, they found they were alone. 




chapter lxi. 

the mysteri stranger.--th particular OF the suicid AT bannerworth 
hall. 


[illustration] 

"hilloa where the deuc is he?" said the admiral. "wa there ever such a 
confound take-in?" 

"well, I realli don't know," said mr. chillingworth; "but it seem to me 
that he must have gone out of that door that wa behind him: I begin, do 
you know, admiral, to wish--" 

"what?" 

"that we had never come here at all; and I think the sooner we get out 
of it the better." 

"yes; but I am not go to be hoax and humbug in thi way. I will 
have satisfaction, but not with those confound scyth and thing he 
talk about in the dark room. give me broad daylight and no favour; 
yardarm and yardarm; broadsid and broadside; hand-grenad and 
marling-spikes." 

"well, but that' what he won't do. now, admiral, listen to me." 

"well, go on; what next?" 

"come away at once." 

"oh, you said that before." 

"yes; but i'm go to say someth else. look round you. don't you 
think thi a large, scientific-look room?" 

"what of that?" 

"why, what if suppos it wa to becom as dark as the grave, and varney 
wa to enter with hi scythe, that he talk of, and begin mow about 
our legs." 

"the devil! come along!" 

the door at which they enter wa at thi moment opened, and the old 
woman made her appearance. 

"please, sir," she said, "here' a mr. mortimer," in a loud voice. "oh, 
sir franci ain't here! where' he gone, gentlemen?" 

"to the devil!" said the admiral. "who may mr. mortim be?" 

there walk past the woman a stout, portly-look man, well dressed, 
but with a veri odd look upon hi face, in consequ of an obliqu 
of vision, which prevent the possibl of know which way he wa 
looking. 

"I must see him," he said; "I must see him." 

mr. chillingworth start back as if in amazement. 

"good god!" he cried, "you here!" 

"confusion!" said mortimer; "are you dr.---- dr.----" 


"the same. hush! there is no occas to betray--that is, to state my 
secret." 

"and mine, too," said chillingworth. "but what bring you here?" 

"I cannot and dare not tell you. farewell!" 

He turn abruptly, and wa leav the room; but he ran against some 
one at the entrance, and in anoth moment henri bannerworth, heat and 
almost breathless by evid haste, made hi appearance. 

"hilloa! bravo!" cri the admiral; "the more the merrier! here' a 
combin squadron! why, how came you here, mr. henri bannerworth?" 

"bannerworth!" said mortimer; "i that young man' name bannerworth?" 

"yes," said henry. "do you know me, sir?" 

"no, no; onli i--i--must be off. doe anybodi know anyth of sir 
franci varney?" 

"we did know someth of him," said the admiral, "a littl while ago; 
but he' taken himself off. don't you do so likewise. If you'v got 
anyth to say, stop and say it, like an englishman." 

"stuff! stuff!" said mortimer, impatiently. "what do you all want here?" 

"why, sir franci varney," said henry,--"and I care not if the whole 
world heard it--i the persecutor of my family." 

"how? in what way?" 

"he ha the reput of a vampyre; he ha hunt me and mine from 
hous and home." 

"indeed!" 

"yes," cri dr. chillingworth; "and, by some mean or another, he seem 
determin to get possess of bannerworth hall." 

"well, gentlemen," said mortimer, "I promis you that I will inquir 
into this. mr. chillingworth, I did not expect to meet you. perhap the 
least we say to each other is, after all, the better." 

"let me ask but one question," said dr. chillingworth, imploringly. 

"ask it." 

"did he live after--" 

"hush! he did." 

"you alway told me to the contrary." 

"yes; I had an object; the game is up. farewell; and, gentlemen, as I am 
make my exit, let me do so with a sentiment:--societi at larg is 
divid into two great classes." 

"and what may they be?" said the admiral. 

"those who have been hanged, and those who have not. adieu!" 

He turn and left the room; and mr. chillingworth sunk into a chair, 
and said, in a low voice,-- 

"it' uncommonli true; and i'v found out an acquaint among the 
former." 

"-d--n it! you seem all mad," said the admiral. "I can't make out what 
you are about. how came you here, mr. henri bannerworth?" 

"bi mere accid I heard," said henry, "that you were keep watch and 
ward in the hall. admiral, it wa cruel, and not well done of you, to 
attempt such an enterpris without acquaint me with it. did you 
suppos for a moment that I, who had the greatest interest in thi 
affair, would have shrunk from danger, if danger there be; or lack 
perseverance, if that qualiti were necessari in carri out ani plan by 
which the safeti and honour of my famili might be preserved?" 

"nay, now, my young friend," said mr. chillingworth. 

"nay, sir; but I take it ill that I should have been kept out of thi 
affair; and it should have been sedulously, as it were, kept a secret 
from me." 

"let him go on as he likes," said the admiral; "boy will be boys. after 
all, you know, doctor, it' my affair, and not yours. let him say what 
he likes; where' the odds? it' of no consequence." 

"I do not expect. admir bell," said henry, "that it is to you; but it 
is to me." 

"psha!" 

"respect you, sir, as I do--" 

"gammon!" 

"I must confess that I did expect--" 

"what you didn't get; therefore, there' an end of that. now, I tell you 
what, henry, sir franci varney is within thi house; at least, I have 
reason to suppos so." 

"then," exclaim henry, impetuously, "I will wring from him answer to 
variou question which concern my peac and happiness." 

"please, gentlemen," said the woman deborah, make her appearance, "sir 
franci varney ha gone out, and he say i'm to show you all the door, 
as soon as it is conveni for you all to walk out of it." 

"I feel convinced," said mr. chillingworth, "that it will be a useless 
search now to attempt to find sir franci varney here. let me beg of you 
all to come away; and believ me that I do not speak lightly, or with a 
view to get you from here, when I say, that after I have heard someth 
from you, henry, which I shall ask you to relat to me, pain though 
it may be, I shall be abl to suggest some explan of mani thing 
which appear at present obscure, and to put you in a cours of free 
you from the difficulti which surround you, which, heaven knows, I 
littl expect I should have it in my power to propos to ani of you." 

"I will follow your advice, mr. chillingworth," said henry; "for I have 
alway found that it ha been dictat by good feel as well as 
correct judgment. admir bell, you will oblig me much by come away 
with me now and at once." 

"well," remark the admiral, "if the doctor ha realli someth to 
say, it alter the appear of things, and, of course, I have no 
objection." 

upon this, the whole three of them immedi left the place, and it 
wa evid that mr. chillingworth had someth of an uncomfort 
charact upon hi mind. He wa unusu silent and reserved, and, when 
he did speak, he seem rather inclin to turn the convers upon 
indiffer topics, than to add anyth more to what he had said upon 
the deepli interest one which held so foremost a place in all their 
minds. 

"how is flora, now," he ask of henry, "sinc her removal?" 

"anxiou still," said henry; "but, I think, better." 

"that is well. I perceiv that, naturally, we are all three walk 
toward bannerworth hall, and, perhaps, it is as well that on that spot 
I should ask of you, henry, to indulg me with a confid such as, 
under ordinari circumstances, I should not at all feel myself justifi 
in requir of you." 

"to what doe it relate?" said henry. "you may be assured, mr. 
chillingworth, that I am not like to refus my confid to you, whom 
I have so much reason to respect as an attach friend of myself and my 
family." 

"you will not object, likewise, I hope," ad mr. chillingworth, "to 
extend that confid to admir bell; for, as you well know, a truer 
and more warm-heart man than he doe not exist." 

"what do you expect for that, doctor?" said the admiral. 

"there is nothing," said henry, "that I could relat at all, that I 
should shrink from relat to admir bell." 

"well, my boy," said the admiral, "and all I can repli to that is, you 
are quit right; for there can be noth that you need shrink from 
tell me, so far as regard the fact of trust me with it goes." 

"I am assur of that." 

"A british officer, onc pledg hi word, prefer death to break 
it. whatev you wish kept secret in the commun you make to me, 
say so, and it will never pass my lips." 

"why, sir, the fact is," said henry, "that what I am about to relat to 
you consist not so much of secret as of matter which would be pain 
to my feel to talk of more than may be absolut required." 

"I understand you." 

"let me, for a moment," said Mr chillingworth, "put myself right. I do 
not suspect, mr. henri bannerworth, that you fanci I ask you to make a 
recit of circumst which must be pain to you from ani idl 
motive. but let me declar that I have now a stronger impulse, which 
induc me to wish to hear from your own lip those matter which 
popular rumour may have greatli exagger or vitiated." 

"it is scarc possible," remark henry, sadly, "that popular rumour 
should exagger the facts." 

"indeed!" 

"no. they are, unhappily, of themselves, in their bare truthfulness, so 
full of all that can be grievou to those who are in ani way connect 
with them, that there need no exagger to invest them with more 
terror, or with more of that sad which must ever belong to a 
recollect of them in my mind." 

In suchlik discours as this, the time wa passed, until henri 
bannerworth and hi friend onc more reach the hall, from which he, 
with hi family, had so recent removed, in consequ of the fear 
persecut to which they had been subjected. 

they pass again into the garden which they all knew so well, and then 
henri paus and look around him with a deep sigh. 

In answer to an inquir glanc from mr. chillingworth, he said,-- 

"i it not strange, now, that I should have onli been away from here a 
space of time which may be count by hours, and yet all seem changed. 
I could almost fanci that year had elaps sinc I had look at it." 

"oh," remark the doctor, "time is alway by the imagin measur 
by the number of event which are crowd into a given space of it, and 
not by it actual duration. come into the house; there you will find all 
just as you left it, henry, and you can tell us your stori at leisure." 

"the air," said henry, "about here is fresh and pleasant. let us sit 
down in the summer-hous yonder, and there I will tell you all. It ha a 
local interest, too, connect with the tale." 

thi wa agre to, and, in a few moments, the admiral, mr. 
chillingworth, and henri were seat in the same summer-hous which had 
wit the strang interview between sir franci varney and flora 
bannerworth, in which he had induc her to believ that he felt for the 
distress he had occas her, and wa strongli impress with the 
injustic of her sufferings. 

henri wa silent for some few moments, and then he said, with a deep 
sigh, as he look mourn around him,-- 

[illustration] 

"it wa on thi spot that my father breath hi last, and henc have I 
said that it ha a local interest in the tale I have to tell, which 
make it the most fit place in which to tell it." 

"oh," said the admiral, "he die here, did he?" 

"yes, where you are now sitting." 

"veri good, I have seen mani a brave man die in my time, and I hope to 
see a few more, although, I grant you, the death in the heat of 
conflict, and fight for our country, is a vastli differ thing to 
some shore-go mode of leav the world." 

"yes," said henry, as if pursu hi own meditations, rather than 
listen to the admiral. "yes, it wa from thi precis spot that my 
father took hi last look at the ancient hous of hi race. what we can 
now see of it, he saw of it with hi die eye and mani a time I have 
sat here and fanci the world of terribl thought that must at such a 
moment have come across hi brain." 

"you might well do so," said the doctor. 

"you see," ad henry, "that from here the fullest view you have of ani 
of the window of the hous is of that of flora' room, as we have 
alway call it, becaus for year she had had it as her chamber; and, 
when all the veget of summer is in it prime, and the vine which 
you perceiv crawl over thi summer-hous is full of leaf and fruit, 
the view is so much hinder that it is difficult, without make an 
artifici gap in the cluster foliage, to see anyth but the 
window." 

"so I should imagine," repli mr. chillingworth. 

"you, doctor," ad henry, "who know much of my family, need not be 
told what sort of man my father was." 

"no, indeed." 

"but you, admir bell, who do not know, must be told, and, howev 
grievou it may be to me to have to say so, I must inform you that he 
wa not a man who would have merit your esteem." 

"well," said the admiral, "you know, my boy, that can make no differ 
as regard you in anybody' mind, who ha got the brain of an owl. 
everi man' credit, character, and honour, to my thinking, is in hi own 
most special keeping, and let your father be what he might, or who he 
might, I do not see that ani conduct of hi ought to rais upon your 
cheek the flush of shame, or cost you more uneasi than ordinari good 
feel dictat to the error and feel of a fellow creature." 

"if all the world," said henry, "would take such liber and 
comprehens view as you do, admiral, it would be much happier than it 
is; but such is not the case, and peopl are but too apt to blame one 
person for the evil that anoth ha done." 

"ah, but," said mr. chillingworth, "it so happen that those are the 
peopl whose opinion are of the veri least consequence." 

"there is some truth in that," said henry, sadly; "but, however, let me 
proceed; sinc I have to tell the tale, I could wish it over. My father, 
then, admir bell, although a man not taint in earli life with vices, 
became, by the forc of bad associates, and a sort of want of 
congeni and sentiment that sprang up between him and my mother, 
plung into all the excess of hi age." 

"these excess were all of that charact which the most readili lay 
hold strongli of an unreflect mind, becaus they all present 
themselv in the garb of sociality. 

"the wine cup is drain in the name of good fellowship; money which is 
want for legitim purpos is squander under the mask of a nobl 
and free generosity, and all that the small imagin of a number of 
person of pervert intellect could enabl them to do, ha been done 
from time to time, to impart a kind of lustr to intemper and all 
it dread and crimin consequences. 

"mi father, have onc got into the compani of what he consid wit 
and men of spirit, soon becam thoroughli vitiated. He wa almost the 
onli one of the set among whom he pass what he consid hi highli 
convivi existence, who wa realli worth anything, pecuniarili 
speaking. there were some among them who might have been respect 
men, and perchanc carv their way to fortune, as well as some other 
who had start in life with good patrimonies; but he, my father, at the 
time he becam associ with them, wa the onli one, as I say, who, to 
use a phrase I have heard myself from hi lip concern them, had got 
a feather to fli with. 

"the consequ of thi was, that hi society, mere for the sake of 
the anim gratif of drink at hi expens wa courted, and he 
wa much flattered, all of which he laid to the score of hi own merits, 
which had been found out, and duli appreci by these _bon vivants_, 
while he consid that the grave admonit of hi real friend 
proceed from noth in the world but downright envi and malice. 

"such a state of thing as thi could not last veri long. the associ 
of my father want money as well as wine, so they introduc him to the 
gaming-table, and he becam fascin with the fear vice to an 
extent which predict hi own destruct and the ruin of everi one who 
wa in ani way depend upon him. 

"he could not absolut sell bannerworth hall, unless I had given my 
consent, which I refused; but he accumul debt upon debt, and from 
time to time strip the mansion of all it most costli contents. 

"with variou mutat of fortune, he continu thi horribl and 
bane career for a long time, until, at last, he found himself utterli 
and irretriev ruined, and he came home in an agoni of despair, be 
so weak, and utterli ruin in constitution, that he kept hi bed for 
mani days. 

"it appeared, however, that someth occur at thi junctur which 
gave him actually, or all event awaken a hope that he should possess 
some money, and be again in a posit to tri hi fortun at the 
gaming-table. 

"he rose, and, fortifi himself onc more with the strong stimul of 
wine and spirits, he left hi home, and wa absent for about two months. 

"what occur to him dure that time we none of us ever knew, but late 
one night he came home, appar much flurri in manner, and seem 
as if someth had happen to drive him half mad. 

"he would not speak to ani one, but he shut himself up the whole of the 
night in the chamber where hang the portrait that bear so strong a 
resembl to sir franci varney, and there he remain till the 
morning, when he emerged, and said briefli that he intend to leav the 
country. 

"he wa in a most fear state of nervousness, and my mother tell me 
that he shook like one in an ague, and start at everi littl sound 
that occur in the house, and glare about him so wildli that it wa 
horribl to see him, or to sit in the same apart with him. 

"she say that the whole morn pass on in thi way till a letter 
came to him, the content of which appear to throw him into a perfect 
convuls of terror, and he retir again to the room with the 
portrait, where he remain some hours, and then he emerged, look 
like a ghost, so dread pale and haggard wa he. 

"he walk into the garden here, and wa seen to sit down in thi 
summer-house, and fix hi eye upon the window of that apartment." 

henri paus for a few moments, and then he added,-- 

"you will excus me from enter upon ani detail of what next ensu 
in the melancholi history. My father here commit suicide. He wa 
found dying, and all I he word he spoke were, 'the money is hidden!' 
death claim hi victim, and, with a convuls spasm, he resign hi 
spirit, leav what he had intend to say hidden in the oblivion of 
the grave." 

"that wa an odd affair," said the admiral. 

"it was, indeed. We have all ponder deeply, and the result was, that, 
upon the whole, we were inclin to come to an opinion that the word he 
so utter were but the result of the mental disturb that at such a 
moment might well be suppos to be ensu in the mind, and that they 
relat realli to no foregon fact ani more than some incoher word 
utter by a man in a dream might be suppos to do." 

"it may be so." 

"I do not mean," remark mr. chillingworth, "for one moment to attempt 
to dispute, henry, the ration of such an opinion as you have just 
given utter to; but you forget that anoth circumst occurred, 
which gave a colour to the word use by your father." 

"yes; I know to what you allude." 

"be so good as to state it to the admiral." 

"I will. On the even of that same day there came a man here, who, in 
seem ignor of what had occurred, although by that time it wa 
well known to all the neighbourhood, ask to see my father. 

"upon be told that he wa dead, he start back, either with well 
act or with real surprise, and seem to be immens chagrined. He 
then demand to know if he had left ani disposit of hi property; 
but he got no information, and depart mutter the most diabol 
oath and curs that can be imagined. He mount hi horse, for he had 
ridden to the hall and hi last word were, as I am told-- 

"'where, in the name of all that' damnable, can he have put the 
money!'" 

"and did you never find out who thi man was?" ask the admiral. 

"never." 

"it is an odd affair." 

"it is," said mr. chillingworth, "and full of mystery. the public mind 
wa much taken up at the time with some other matters, or it would have 
made the death of mr. bannerworth the subject of more prolif comment 
than it did. As it was, however, a great deal wa said upon the subject, 
and the whole comiti wa in a state of commot for week afterwards." 

"yes," said henry; "it so happen that about that veri time a murder 
wa commit in the neighbourhood of london, which baffl all the 
exert of the author to discov the perpetr of. It wa the 
murder of lord lorne." 

"oh! I remember," said the admiral; "the newspap were full of it for 
a long time." 

"they were; and so, as mr. chillingworth says, the more excit 
interest which that affair creat drew off public attention, in a great 
measure, from my father' suicide, and we did not suffer so much from 
public remark and from impertin curios as might have been 
expected." 

"and, in addition," said mr. chillingworth, and he chang colour a 
littl as he spoke, "there wa an execut shortli afterwards." 

"yes," said henry, "there was." 

"the execut of a man name angerstein," ad mr. chillingworth, "for 
a highway robbery, attend with the most brutal violence." 

"true; all the affair of that period of time are strongli impress 
upon my mind," said henry; "but you do not seem well, mr. 
chillingworth." 

"oh, yes; I am quit well--you are mistaken." 

both the admir and henri look scrutinizingli at the doctor, who 
certainli appear to them to be labour under some great mental 
excitement, which he found it almost beyond hi power to repress. 

"I tell you what it is, doctor," said the admiral; "I don't pretend, and 
never did, to see further through a tar-barrel than my neighbours; but I 
can see far enough to feel convinc that you have got someth on your 
mind, and that it somehow concern thi affair." 

"i it so?" said henry. 

"I cannot if I would," said mr. chillingworth; "and I may with truth 
add, that I would not, if I could, hide from you that I have someth 
on my mind connect with thi affair; but let me assur you it would be 
prematur of me to tell you of it." 

"prematur be d----d!" said the admiral; "out with it." 

"nay, nay, dear sir; I am not now in a posit to say what is pass 
through my mind." 

"alter your position, then, and be blowed!" cri jack pringle, suddenli 
step forward, and give the doctor such a push, that he nearli went 
through one of the side of the summer-house. 

"why, you scoundrel!" cri the admiral, "how came you here?" 

"on my legs," said jack. "do you think nobodi want to know noth but 
yourself? i'm as fond of a yarn as anybody." 

"but if you are," said mr. chillingworth, "you had no occas to come 
against me as if you want to move a house." 

"you said as you wasn't in a posit to say someth as I want to 
hear, so I thought i'd alter it for you." 

"i thi fellow," said the doctor, shake hi head, as he accost the 
admiral, "the most art or stupid?" 

"A littl of both," said admir bell--"a littl of both, doctor. he' a 
great fool and a great scamp." 

"the same to you," said jack; "you'r another. I shall hate you 
presently, if you go on make yourself so ridiculous. now, mind, i'll 
onli give you a trial of anoth week or so, and if you don't be more 
purlit in your d--n language, i'll leav you." 

away stroll jack, with hi hand in hi pockets, toward the house, 
while the admir wa half choke with rage, and could onli glare after 
him, without the abil to say a word. 

under ani other circumst than the present one of trouble, and 
difficulty; and deep anxiety, henri bannerworth must have laugh at 
these singular littl episod between jack and the admiral; but hi 
mind wa now by far too much harass to permit him to do so. 

"let him go, let him go, my dear sir," said mr. chillingworth to the 
admiral, who show some sign of an intent to pursu jack; "he no 
doubt ha been drink again." 

"i'll turn him off the first moment I catch him sober enough to 
understand me," said the admiral. 

"well, well; do as you please; but now let me ask a favour of both of 
you." 

"what is it?" 

"that you will leav bannerworth hall to me for a week." 

"what for?" 

"I hope to make some discoveri connect with it which shall well 
reward you for the trouble." 

"it' no trouble," said henry; "and for myself, I have ampli suffici 
faith, both in your judgment and in your friendship, doctor, to acced 
to ani request which you may make to me." 

"and i," said the admiral. "be it so--b it so. for one week, you say?" 

"yes--for one week. I hope, by the end of that time, to have achiev 
someth worth the tell you of; and I promis you that, if I am at 
all disappoint in my expectation, that I will frankli and freeli 
commun to you all I know and all I suspect." 

"then that' a bargain." 

"it is." 

"and what' to be done at once?" 

"why, nothing, but to take the greatest possibl care that bannerworth 
hall is not left anoth hour without some one in it; and in order that 
such should be the case, I have to request that you two will remain here 
until I go to the town, and make prepar for take quiet 
possess of it myself, which I will do in the cours of two hours, at 
most." 

"don't be longer," said the admiral, "for I am so desper hungry, 
that I shall certainli begin to eat somebody, if you are." 

"depend upon me." 

"veri well," said henry; "you may depend we will wait here until you 
come back." 

the doctor at onc hurri from the garden, leav henri and the 
admir to amus themselv as best they might, with conjectur as to 
what he wa realli about, until hi return. 




chapter lxii. 

the mysteri meet IN the ruin again.--th vampyre' attack upon the 
constable. 


[illustration] 

It is now necessari that we return onc more to that mysteri ruin, in 
the intricaci of which varney, when pursu by the mob, had succeed 
in find a refug which defi all the exert which were made for 
hi discovery. our reader must be well aware, that, connect with that 
ruin, are some secret of great import to our story; and we will 
now, at the solemn hour of midnight, take anoth glanc at what is 
do within it recesses. 

At that solemn hour it is not probabl that ani one would seek that 
gloomi place from choice. some lover of the picturesqu certainli might 
visit it; but such wa not the incit caus of the pilgrimag with 
those who were soon to stand within it gloomi precincts. 

other motiv dictat their presenc in that spot--mot of rapine; 
peradventur of murder itself. 

As the neighbour clock sound the hour of twelve, and the faint 
stroke were born gentli on the wind to that isol ruin, there might 
have been seen a tall man stand by the porch of what had onc been a 
larg doorway to some portion of the ruin. 

hi form wa envelop in a larg cloak, which wa of such ampl 
materi that he seem well abl to wrap it sever time around him, 
and then leav a consider portion of it float idli in the gentl 
wind. 

He stood as still, as calm, and as motionless as a statue, for a 
consider time, befor ani degre of impati began to show itself. 

then he took from hi pocket a larg antiqu watch, the white face of 
which just enabl him to see what the time was, and, in a voic which 
had in it some amount of petul and anger, he said,-- 

"not come yet, and nearli half an hour beyond the time! what can have 
detain him? thi is, indeed, trifl with the most import moment 
of a man' existence." 

even as he spoke, he heard, from some distanc off, the sound of a 
short, quick footstep. He bent forward to listen, and then, in a tone 
of satisfaction, he said,-- 

"he comes--h comes!" 

but he who thu wait for some confeder among these dim and old grey 
ruins, advanc not a step to meet him. On the contrary, such seem the 
amount of cold-blood caution which he possessed, that the nearer the 
man--who wa evid advancing--got to the place, the further back did 
he who had preced him shrink into the shadow of the dim and crumbl 
walls, which had, for some year now past, seem to bend to the pass 
blast, and to be on the point of yield to the destroy hand of 
time. 

and yet, sure he need not have been so cautious. who wa likely, at 
such an hour as that, to come to the ruins, but one who sought it by 
appointment? 

and, moreover, the manner of the advanc man should have been quit 
suffici to convinc him who waited, that so much caution wa 
unnecessary; but it wa a part and parcel of hi nature. 

about three minut more suffic to bring the second man to the ruin, 
and he, at once, and fearlessly, plung into it recesses. 

"who comes?" said the first man, in a deep, hollow voice. 

"he whom you expect," wa the reply. 

"good," he said, and at onc he now emerg from hi hiding-place, and 
they stood togeth in the nearli total dark with which the place 
wa enshrouded; for the night wa a cloudi one, and there appear not a 
star in the heavens, to shed it faint light upon the scene below. 

for a few moment they were both silent, for he who had last arriv had 
evid made great exert to reach the spot, and wa breath 
laboriously, while he who wa there first appeared, from some natur 
taciturn of character, to declin open the conversation. 

At length the second comer spoke, saying,-- 

"I have made some exert to get here to my time, and yet I am beyond 
it, as you are no doubt aware." 

"yes, yes." 

"well, such would not have been the case; but yet, I stay to bring you 
some news of importance." 

"indeed!" 

"it is so. thi place, which we have, now for some time had as a quiet 
and perfectli elig one of meeting, is about to be invad by one of 
those restless, troublesom spirits, who are never happi but when they 
are contriv someth to the annoy of other who do not interfer 
with them." 

"explain yourself more fully." 

"I will. At a tavern in the town, there ha happen some strang scene 
of violence, in consequ of the gener excit into which the 
common peopl have been thrown upon the dread subject of vampyres." 

"well." 

"the consequ is, that numer arrest have taken place, and the 
place of confin for offend against the law are now full of 
those whose heat and angri imagin have induc them to take 
violent step to discov the realiti or the falsehood of rumour which 
so much affect them, their wives, and their families, that they fear 
to lie down to their night' repose." 

the other laugh a short, hollow, restless sort of laugh, which had not 
one particl of real mirth in it. 

"go on--go on," he said. "what did they do?" 

"immens excess have been committed; but what made me, first of all, 
stay beyond my time, wa that I overheard a man declar hi intent 
thi night, from twelv till the morning, and for some night to come, 
to hold watch and ward for the vampyre." 

"indeed!" 

"yes. He did but stay, at the earnest solicit of hi comrades, to 
take yet anoth glass, ere he came upon hi expedition." 

"he must be met. the idiot! what busi is it of his?" 

"there are alway peopl who will make everyth their business, 
whether it be so or not." 

"there are. let us retir further into the recess of the ruin, and 
there consid as well what is to be done regard more import 
affairs, as with thi rash intrud here." 

they both walk for some twenti paces, or so, right into the ruin, and 
then he who had been there first, said, suddenly, to hi companion,-- 

"I am annoyed, although the feel reach no further than annoyance, 
for I have a natur love of mischief, to think that my reput ha 
spread so widely, and made so much noise." 

"your reput as a vampyre, sir franci varney, you mean?" 

"yes; but there is no occas for you to utter my name aloud, even here 
where we are alon together." 

"it came out unawares." 

"unawares! can it be possibl that you have so littl command over 
yourself as to allow a name to come from your lip unawares?" 

"sometimes." 

"I am surprised." 

"well, it cannot be helped. what do you now propos to do?" 

"nay, you are my privi councillor. have you no deep-laid, art project 
in hand? can you not plan and arrang someth which may yet have the 
effect of accomplish what at first seem so veri simple, but which 
has, from one unfortun circumst and another, becom full of 
difficulti and pregnant with all sort of dangers?" 

"I must confess I have no plan." 

"I listen with astonishment." 

"nay, now, you are jesting." 

"when did you ever hear of me jesting?" 

"not often, I admit. but you have a fertil genius, and I have always, 
myself, found it easier to be the execut than to plan an elabor 
cours of action for others." 

"then you throw it all on me?" 

"I throw a weight, natur enough, upon the shoulder which I think 
the best adapt to sustain it." 

"be it so, then--b it so." 

"you are, I presume, from what you say, provid with a scheme of action 
which shall present better hope of success, at less risk, I hope. look 
what great danger we have alreadi pass through." 

"yes, we have." 

"I pray you avoid that in the next campaign." 

"it is not the danger that annoy and troubl me, but it is that, 
notwithstand it, the object is as far off as ever from be 
attained." 

"and not onli so, but, as is invari the case under such 
circumstances, we have made it more difficult of execut becaus we 
have put those upon their guard thoroughli who are the most like to 
oppos us." 

"we have--w have." 

"and place the probabl of success afar off indeed." 

"and yet I have set my life upon the cast, and I will stand the hazard. 
I tell you I will accomplish thi object, or I will perish in the 
attempt." 

"you are too enthusiastic." 

"not at all. noth ha been ever done, the execut of which wa 
difficult, without enthusiasm. I will do what I intend, or bannerworth 
hall shall becom a heap of ruins, where fire shall do it worst work of 
devastation, and I will myself find a grave in the midst." 

"well, I quarrel with no man for chalk out the cours he intend to 
pursue; but what do you mean to do with the prison below here?" 

"kill him." 

"what?" 

"I say kill him. Do you not understand me?" 

"I do, indeed." 

"when everyth els is secured, and when the whole of that which I so 
much court, and which I will have, is in my possession, I will take hi 
life, or you shall. ay, you are just the man for such a deed. A 
smooth-faced, speciou sort of roan are you, and you like not danger. 
there will be none in take the life of a man who is chain to the 
floor of a dungeon." 

"I know not why," said the other, "you take a pleasur on thi 
particular night, of all others, in say all you can which you think 
will be offens to me." 

"now, how you wrong me. thi is the reward of confidence." 

"I don't want such confidence." 

"why, you sure don't want me to flatter you." 

"no; but--" 

"psha! hark you. that admir is the great stumbling-block in my way. I 
should ere thi have had undisturb possess of bannerworth hall but 
for him. He must be got out of the way somehow." 

"A short time will tire him out of watching. He is one of those men of 
impuls who soon becom weari of inaction." 

"ay, and then the bannerworth return to the hall." 

"it may be so." 

"I am certain of it. We have been out-general in thi matter, 
although I grant we did all that men could do to give us success." 

"in what way would you get rid of thi troublesom admiral?" 

"I scarc know. A letter from hi nephew might, if well put together, 
get him to london." 

"I doubt it. I hate him mortally. He ha offend me more than onc most 
grievously." 

"I know it. He saw through you." 

"I do not give him so much credit. He is a suspici man, and a vain 
and a jealou one." 

"and yet he saw through you. now, listen to me. you are complet at 
fault, and have no plan of oper whatev in your mind. what I want 
you to do is, to disappear from the neighbourhood for a time, and so 
will I. As for our prison here below, I cannot see what els can be 
done with him than--than--" 

"than what? Do you hesitate?" 

"I do." 

"then what is it you were about to say?" 

"I cannot but feel that all we have done hitherto, as regard thi young 
prison of ours, ha failed. He has, with a determin obstinacy, set 
at naught, as well you know, all threats." 

"he has." 

"he ha refus to do one act which could in ani way aid me in my 
objects. In fact, from the first to the last, he ha been noth but an 
expens and an encumbr to us both." 

"all that is strictli true." 

"and yet, although you, as well as I, know of a marvel readi way 
of get rid of such encumbrances, I must own, that I shrink with more 
than a feel of reluct from the murder of the youth." 

"you contempl it then?" ask the other. 

"no; I cannot be said to have contempl it. that is not the proper 
sort of express to use." 

"what is then?" 

"to contempl a deed seem to me to have some close connexion to the 
wish to do it." 

"and you have no such wish?" 

"I have no such wish, and what is more I will not do it." 

"then that is sufficient; and the onli question that remain for you to 
confide, is, what you will do. It is far easier in all enterpris to 
decid upon what we will not do, than upon what we will. for my own part 
I must say that I can perceiv no mode of extric ourselv from 
thi involv with anyth like safety." 

"then it must be done with someth like danger." 

"a you please." 

"you say so, and your word bear a clear enough signification; but from 
your tone I can guess how much you are dissatisfi with the aspect of 
affairs." 

"dissatisfied!" 

"yes; I say, dissatisfied. Be frank, and own that which it is in vain to 
conceal from me. I know you too well; arch hypocrit as you are, and 
fulli capabl of easili deceiv many, you cannot deceiv me." 

"I realli cannot understand you." 

"then I will take care that you shall." 

"how?" 

"listen. I will not have the life of charl holland taken." 

"who wish to take it?" 

"you." 

"there, indeed, you wrong me. unless you yourself thought that such an 
act wa imper call for by the state of affairs, do you think 
that I would needlessli bring down upon my head the odium as well as the 
danger of such a deed? no, no. let him live, if you are willing; he may 
live a thousand year for all I care." 

"'ti well. I am, mark me, not onli willing, but I am determin that he 
shall live so far as we are concerned. I can respect the courag that, 
even when he consid that hi life wa at stake, enabl him to say 
no to a propos which wa cowardli and dishonourable, although it went 
far to the defeat of my own plan and ha involv me in much trouble." 

"hush! hush!" 

"what is it?" 

"I fanci I hear a footstep." 

"indeed; that were a novelti in such a place as this." 

"and yet not more than I expected. have you forgotten what I told you 
when I reach here to-night after the appoint hour?" 

"truly; I had for the moment. Do you think then that the footstep which 
now meet our ears, is that of the adventur who boast that he could 
keep watch for the vampyre?" 

"in faith do I. what is to be done with such a meddl fool?" 

"he ought certainli to be taught not to be so fond of interf with 
other people' affairs." 

"certainly." 

"perchanc the lesson will not be wholli thrown away upon others. It may 
be worth while to take some troubl with thi poor valiant fellow, and 
let him spread hi news so as to stop ani one els from be equal 
ventur and troublesome." 

"A good thought." 

"shall it be done?" 

"yes; if you will arrang that which shall accomplish such a result." 

"be it so. the moon rise soon." 

"it does." 

"ah, alreadi I fanci I see a brighten of the air as if the mellow 
radianc of the queen of night were alreadi quietli diffus itself 
throughout the realm of space. come further within the ruins." 

they both walk further among the crumbl wall and fragment of 
column with which the place abounded. As they did so they paus now 
and then to listen, and more than onc they both heard plainli the sound 
of certain footstep immedi outsid the onc handsom and spaciou 
building. 

varney, the vampyre, who had been hold thi convers with no 
other than marchdale, smile as he, in a whisper voice, told the 
latter what to do in order to frighten away from the place the foolhardi 
man who thought that, by himself, he should be abl to accomplish 
anyth against the vampyre. 

It was, indeed, a hair-brain expedition, for whether sir franci 
varney wa realli so aw and preternatur a be as so mani 
concurr circumst would seem to proclaim, or not, he wa not a 
like be to allow himself to be conquer by anyon individual, let 
hi power or hi courag be what they might. 

what induc thi man to becom so ventursom we shall now proceed to 
relate, as well as what kind of recept he got in the old ruins, 
which, sinc the mysteri disappear of sir franci varney within 
their recesses, had possess so increas a share of interest and 
attract so much popular attent and speculation. 




chapter lxiii. 

the guest AT the inn, and the stori OF the dead uncle. 


[illustration] 

As had been truli state by mr. marchdale, who now stand out in hi 
true colour to the reader as the confid and abettor of sir franci 
varney, there had assembl on that even a curiou and a gossip 
parti at the inn where such dread and such riotou proceed had 
taken place, which, in their proper place, we have alreadi duli and at 
length recorded. 

It wa not veri like that, on that evening, or for mani and mani an 
even to come, the convers in the parlour of the inn would be 
upon ani other subject than that of the vampyre. 

indeed, the strange, mysterious, and horribl circumst which had 
occurred, bade fair to be gossip stock in trade for mani a year. 

never befor had a subject present so mani curiou featur arisen. 
never, within the memori of that personag who is suppos to know 
everything, had there occur ani circumst in the county, or set of 
circumstances, which afford such abund scope for conjectur and 
speculation. 

everybodi might have hi individu opinion, and be just as like to be 
right as hi neighbours; and the beauti of the affair was, that such wa 
the interest of the subject itself, that there wa sure to be a kind of 
reflect interest with everi surmis that at all bore upon it. 

[illustration] 

On thi particular night, when marchdal wa prowl about, gather 
what news he could, in order that he might carri it to the vampyre, a 
more than usual strong muster of the gossip of the town took place. 

indeed, all of ani note in the talk way were there, with the 
except of one, and he wa in the counti gaol, be one of the 
prison apprehend by the militari when they made the success 
attack upon the lumber-room of the inn, after the dread desecr 
of the dead which had taken place. 

the landlord of the inn wa like to make a good thing of it, for 
talk make peopl thirsty; and he began to consid that a vampyr 
about onc a-year would be no bad thing for the blue lion. 

"it' shocking," said one of the guests; "it' shock to think of. 
onli last night, I am quit sure I had such a fright that it ad at 
least ten year to my age." 

"A fright!" said several. 

"I believ I speak english--i said a fright." 

"well, but had it anyth to do with the vampyre?" 

"everything." 

"oh! do tell us; do tell us all about it. how wa it? did he come to 
you? Go on. well, well." 

the first speaker becam immedi a veri import personag in the 
room; and, when he saw that, he becam at onc a veri import 
personag in hi own eye likewise; and, befor he would speak anoth 
word, he fill a fresh pipe, and order anoth mug of ale. 

"it' no use tri to hurri him," said one. 

"no," he said, "it isn't. i'll tell you in good time what a dread 
circumst ha made me sixty-thre to-day, when I wa onli fifty-thre 
yesterday." 

"wa it veri dreadful?" 

"rather. you wouldn't have surviv it at all." 

"indeed!" 

"no. now listen. I went to bed at a quarter after eleven, as usual. I 
didn't notic anyth particular in the room." 

"did you peep under the bed?" 

"no, I didn't. well, as I wa a-saying, to bed I went, and I didn't 
fasten the door; because, be a veri sound sleeper, in case there wa 
a fire, I shouldn't hear a word of it if I did." 

"no," said another. "I recollect once--" 

"be so good as allow me to finish what I know, befor you begin to 
recollect anything, if you please. As I wa saying, I didn't lock the 
door, but I went to bed. somehow or another, I did not feel at all 
comfortable, and I toss about, first on one side, and then on the 
other; but it wa all in vain; I onli got, everi moment, more and more 
fidgetty." 

"and did you think of the vampyre?" said one of the listeners. 

"I thought of noth els till I heard my clock, which is on the 
land of the stair abov my bed-room, begin to strike twelve." 

"ah! I like to hear a clock sound in the night," said one; "it put one 
in mind of the rest of the world, and let one know one isn't all 
alone." 

"veri good. the strike of the clock I should not at all have object 
to; but it wa what follow that did the business." 

"what, what?" 

"fair and softly; fair and softly. just hand me a light, mr. sprigs, if 
you please. i'll tell you all, gentlemen, in a moment or two." 

with the most provok deliberation, the speaker re-lit hi pipe, which 
had gone out while he wa talking, and then, after a few whiffs, to 
assur himself that it content had thoroughli ignited, he resumed,-- 

"no sooner had the last sound of it die away, than I heard someth on 
the stairs." 

"yes, yes." 

"it wa as if some man had given hi foot a hard blow against one of the 
stairs; and he would have need to have had a heavi boot on to do it. I 
start up in bed and listened, as you may well suppose, not in the most 
tranquil state of mind, and then I heard an odd, gnaw sort of noise, 
and then anoth dab upon one of the stairs." 

"how dreadful!" 

"it was. what to do I knew not, or what to think, except that the 
vampyr had, by some means, got in at the attic window, and wa come 
down stair to my room. that seem the most likely. then there wa 
anoth groan, and then anoth heavi step; and, as they were evid 
come toward my door, I felt accordingly, and got out of bed, not 
know hardli whether I wa on my head or my heels, to tri and lock my 
door." 

"ah, to be sure." 

"yes; that wa all veri well, if I could have done it; but a man in such 
a state of mind as I wa in is not a veri sharp hand at do anything. 
I shook from head to foot. the room wa veri dark, and I couldn't, for a 
moment or two, collect my sens suffici realli to know which way the 
door lay." 

"what a situation!" 

"it was. dab, dab, dab, came these horrid footsteps, and there wa I 
grope about the room in an agony. I heard them come nearer and 
nearer to my door. anoth moment, and they must have reach it, when 
my hand struck against the lock." 

"what an escape!" 

"no, it wa not." 

"no?" 

"no, indeed. the key wa on the outside, and you may well guess I wa 
not over and abov dispos to open the door to get at it." 

"no, no." 

"I felt regularli bewildered, I can tell you; it seem to me as if the 
veri devil himself wa come down stair hop all the way upon one 
leg." 

"how terrific!" 

"I felt my sens almost leav me; but I did what I could to hold the 
door shut just as I heard the strang step come from the last stair on 
to the landing. then there wa a horrid sound, and some one began tri 
the lock of my door." 

"what a moment!" 

"yes, I can tell you it wa a moment. such a moment as I don't wish to 
go through again. I held the door as close as I could, and did not 
speak. I tri to cri out help and murder, but I could not; my tongu 
stuck to the roof of my mouth, and my strength wa fast fail me." 

"horrid, horrid!" 

"take a drop of ale." 

"thank you. well, I don't think thi went on abov two or three minutes, 
and all the while some one tri might and main to push open the door. 
My strength left me all at once; I had onli time to stagger back a step 
or two, and then, as the door opened, I faint away." 

"well, well!" 

"ah, you wouldn't have said well, if you had been there, I can tell 
you." 

"no; but what becom of you. what happen next? how did it end? what 
wa it?" 

"why, what exactli happen next after I faint I cannot tell you; but 
the first thing I saw when I recov wa a candle." 

"yes, yes." 

"and then a crowd of people." 

"ah, ah!" 

"and then dr. web." 

"gracious!" 

"and. mrs. bulk, my housekeeper. I wa in my own bed, and when I open 
my eye I heard dr. webb say,-- 

"'he will be better soon. can no one form ani idea of what it is all 
about. some sudden fright sure could alon have produc such an 
effect.'" 

"'the lord have merci upon me!' said I. 

"upon thi everybodi who had been call in got round the bed, and 
want to know what had happened; but I said not a word of it; but 
turn to mrs. bulk, I ask her how it wa she found out I had 
fainted. 

"'why, sir,' say she, 'I wa come up to bed as softli as I could, 
becaus I knew you had gone to rest some time before. the clock wa 
strike twelve, and as I went past it some of my clothes, I suppose, 
caught the larg weight, but it wa knock off, and down the stair it 
rolled, go with such a lump from one to the other, and I couldn't 
catch it becaus it roll so fast, that I made sure you would be 
awakened; so I came down to tell you what it was, and it wa some time 
befor I could get your room door open, and when I did I found you out 
of bed and insensible.'" 

there wa a gener look of disappoint when thi explan wa 
given, and one said,-- 

"then it wa not the vampire?" 

"certainli not." 

"and, after all, onli a clock weight." 

"that' about it." 

"whi didn't you tell us that at first?" 

"becaus that would have spoilt the story." 

there wa a gener murmur of discontent, and, after a few moment one 
man said, with some vivacity,-- 

"well, although our friend' vampyr ha turn out, after all, to be 
noth but a confound clock-weight, there' no disput the fact 
about sir franci varney be a vampyre, and not a clock-weight." 

"veri true--veri true." 

"and what' to be done to rid the town of such a man?" 

"oh, don't call him a man." 

"well, a monster." 

"ah, that' more like. I tell you what, sir, if you had got a light, 
when you first heard the nois in your room, and gone out to see what it 
was, you would have spare yourself much fright." 

"ah, no doubt; it' alway easi afterward to say, if you had done this, 
and if you had done the other, so and so would have been the effect; but 
there is someth about the hour of midnight that make men tremble." 

"well," said one, who had not yet spoken, "I don't see whi twelv at 
night should be a whit more disagre than twelv at day." 

"don't you?" 

"not i." 

"now, for instance, mani a parti of pleasur goe to that old ruin where 
sir franci varney so unaccount disappear in broad daylight. but 
is there ani one here who would go to it alone, and at midnight?" 

"yes." 

"who?" 

"I would." 

"what! and after what ha happen as regard the vampyr in connect 
with it?" 

"yes, I would." 

"i'll bet you twenti shill you won't." 

"and i--and i," cri several. 

"well, gentlemen," said the man, who certainli shew no sign of fear, 
"I will go, and not onli will I go and take all your bets, but, if I do 
meet the vampyre, then i'll do my best to take him prisoner." 

"and when will you go?" 

"to-night," he cried, and he sprang to hi feet; "hark ye all, I don't 
believ one word about vampyres. i'll go at once; it' get late, and 
let ani one of you, in order that you may be convinc I have been to 
the place, give me ani article, which I will hide among the ruins; and 
tell you where to find it to-morrow in broad daylight." 

"well," said one, "that' fair, tom eccles. here' a handkerchief of 
mine; I should know it again among a hundr others." 

"agreed; i'll leav it in the ruins." 

the wager were fairli agre upon; sever handkerchief were hand to 
tom eccles; and at eleven o'clock he fairli started, through the murki 
dark of the night, to the old ruin where sir franci varney and 
marchdal were hold their most unholi conference. 

It is one thing to talk and to accept wager in the snug parlour of an 
inn, and anoth to go alon across a tract of countri wrap in the 
profound still of night to an ancient ruin which, in addit to the 
natur gloom which might well be suppos to surround it, ha 
superad associ which are anyth but of a pleasant character. 

tom eccles, as he wa named, wa one of those individu who act 
greatli from impulse. He wa certainli not a coward, and, perhaps, 
realli as free from superstit as most persons, but he wa human, and 
consequ he had nerves, and he had likewis an imagination. 

He went to hi hous first befor he start on hi errand to the ruins. 
It wa to get a horse-pistol which he had, and which he duli load and 
place in hi pocket. then he wrap himself up in a great-coat, and 
with the air of a man quit determin upon someth desper he left 
the town. 

the guest at the inn look after him as he walk from the door of 
that friendli establishment, and some of them, as they saw hi resolv 
aspect, began to quak for the amount of the wager they had laid upon 
hi non-success. 

however, it wa resolv among them, that they would stay until 
half-past twelve, in the expect of hi return, befor they 
separated. 

To while away the time, he who had been so faceti about hi stori of 
the clock-weight, volunt to tell what happen to a friend of hi 
who went to take possess of some famili properti which he becam 
possess of as heir-at-law to an uncl who had die without a will, 
have an illegitim famili unprovid for in everi shape. 

"ah! nobodi care for other people' illegitim children, and, if 
their parent don't provid for them, why, the workhous is open for 
them, just as if they were someth differ from other people." 

"so they are; if their parent don't take care of them, and provid for 
them, nobodi els will, as you say, neighbour, except when they have a 
fitz put to their name, which tell you they are royal bastards, and of 
cours unlik anybodi else's." 

"but go on--let' know all about it; we sha'n't hear what he ha got to 
say at all, at thi rate." 

"well, as I wa saying, or about to say, the nephew, as soon as he heard 
hi uncl wa dead, come and clap hi seal upon everyth in the 
house." 

"but, could he do so?" inquir one of the guests. 

"I don't see what wa to hinder him," repli a third. "he could do so, 
certainly." 

"but there wa a son, and, as I take it, a son' nearer than a nephew 
ani day." 

"but the son is illegitimate." 

"legitimate, or illegitimate, a son' a son; don't bother me about 
distinct of that sort; why, now, there wa old weatherbit--" 

"order, order." 

"let' hear the tale." 

"veri good, gentlemen, i'll go on, if I ain't to be interrupted; but 
i'll say this, that an illegitim son is no son, in the eye of the 
law; or at most he' an accid quite, and ain't what he is, and so 
can't inherit." 

"well, that' what I call make matter plain," said one of the guests, 
who took hi pipe from hi mouth to make room for the remark; "now that 
is what I likes." 

"well, as I have prove then," resum the speaker, "the nephew wa the 
heir, and into the hous he would come. A fine affair it wa too--th 
illegitim look the colour of sloes; but he knew the law, and 
would have it put in force." 

"law' law, you know." 

"uncommonli true that; and the nephew stuck to it like a cobbler to hi 
last--h said they should go out, and they did go out; and, say what 
they would about their natur claims, he would not listen to them, but 
bundl them out and out in a pretti short space of time." 

"it wa tri to them, mind you, to leav the hous they had been born 
in with veri differ expect to those which now appear to be 
their fate. poor things, they look ruefulli enough, and well they 
might, for there wa a wide world for them, and no prospect of a warm 
corner. 

"well, as I wa saying, he had them all out and the hous clear to 
himself. 

"now," said he, "I have an open field and no favour. I don't care for 
no--eh! what?" 

"there wa a sudden knocking, he thought, the door, and went and open 
it, but noth wa to be seen. 

"oh! I see--somebodi next door; and if it wasn't, it don't matter. 
there' nobodi here. i'm alone, and there' plenti of valuabl in the 
house. that is what I call veri good company. I wouldn't wish for 
better." 

He turn about, look over room after room, and satisfi himself that 
he wa alone--that the hous wa empty. 

At everi room he enter he paus to think over the value--what it wa 
worth, and that he wa a veri fortun man in have drop into such 
a good thing. 

"ah! there' the old boy' secretary, too--hi bureau--there'l be 
someth in that that will amus me mightily; but I don't think I shall 
sit up late. He wa a rum old man, to say the least of it--a veri odd 
sort of man." 

with that he gave himself a shrug, as if some veri uncomfort feel 
had come over him. 

"i'll go to bed early, and get some sleep, and then in daylight I can 
look after these papers. they won't be less interest in the morn 
than they are now." 

there had been some rum stori about the old man, and now the nephew 
seem to think he might have let the famili sleep on the premis for 
that night; yes, at that moment he could have found it in hi heart to 
have paid for all the expens of their keep, had it been possibl to 
have had them back to remain the night. 

but that wasn't possible, for they would not have done it, but sooner 
have remain in the street all night than stay there all night, like 
so mani house-dogs, employ by one who step in between them and 
their father' goods, which were their inheritance, but for one trifl 
circumstance--a mere ceremony. 

the night came on, and he had lights. true it wa he had not been down 
stairs, onli just to have a look. He could not tell what sort of a place 
it was; there were a good mani odd sort of passages, that seem to end 
nowhere, and other that did. 

there were larg doors; but they were all locked, and he had the keys; 
so he didn't mind, but secur all place that were not fastened. 

He then went up stair again, and sat down in the room where the bureau 
wa placed. 

"i'll be bound," said one of the guests, "he wa in a bit of a stew, 
notwithstand all hi brag." 

"oh! I don't believe," said another, "that anyth done that is 
dangerous, or suppos to be dangerous, by the bravest man, is ani way 
wholli without some uncomfort feelings. they may not be strong 
enough to prevent the thing propos to be done from be done, but 
they give a disagre sensat to the skin." 

"you have felt it, then?" 

"ha! ha! ha!" 

"why, at that time I slept in the churchyard for a wager, I must say I 
felt cold all over, as if my skin wa walk about me in an 
uncomfort manner." 

"but you won your wager?" 

"I did." 

"and of cours you slept there?" 

"to be sure I did." 

"and met with nothing?" 

"nothing, save a few bump against the gravestones." 

"those were hard knocks, I should say." 

"they were, I assur you; but I lay there, and slept there, and won my 
wager." 

"would you do it again?" 

"no." 

"and whi not?" 

"becaus of the rheumatism." 

"you caught that?" 

"I did; I would give ten time my wager to get rid of them. I have them 
veri badly." 

"come, order, order--th tale; let' hear the end of that, sinc it ha 
begun." 

"with all my heart. come, neighbour." 

"well, as I said, he wa fidgetty; but yet he wa not a man to be veri 
easili frighten or overcome, for he wa stout and bold. 

"when he shut himself up in the room, he took out a bottl of some good 
wine, and help himself to drink; it wa good old wine, and he soon 
felt himself warm and, comforted. He could have face the enemy. 

"if one bottl produc such an effect," he muttered, "what will two 
do?" 

thi wa a question that could onli be solv by tri it, and thi he 
proceed to do. 

but first he drew a brace of long barrel pistol from hi coat 
pocket, and take a powder-flask and bullet from hi pocket also, he 
load them veri carefully. 

"there," said he, "are my bull-dogs; and rare watch-dog they are. they 
never bark but they bite. now, if anybodi doe come, it will be all up 
with them. trick upon travel ain't a safe game when I have these; 
and now for the other bottle." 

He drew the other bottle, and thought, if anything, it wa better than 
the first. He drank it rather quick, to be sure, and then he began to 
feel sleepi and tired. 

"I think I shall go to bed," he said; "that is, if I can find my way 
there, for it doe seem to me as if the door wa travelling. never mind, 
it will make a call here again presently, and then i'll get through." 

So say he arose. take the candl in hi hand, he walk with a 
better step than might have been expect under the circumstance. true 
it wa the candl wag to and fro, and hi shadow danc upon the 
wall; but still, when he got to the bed, he secur hi door, put the 
light in a safe place, threw himself down, and wa fast asleep in a few 
moments, or rather he fell into a doze instantaneously. 

how long he remain in thi state he knew not, but he wa suddenli 
awaken by a loud bang, as though someth heavi and flat had fallen 
upon the floor--such, for instance, as a door, or anyth of that sort. 
He jump up, rub hi eyes, and could even then hear the 
reverber through the house. 

"what is that?" he muttered; "what is that?" 

He listened, and thought he could hear someth move down stairs, and 
for a moment he wa seiz with an agu fit; but recollecting, I 
suppose, that there were some valuabl down stair that were worth 
fight for, he care extinguish the light that still burned, and 
softli crept down stairs. 

when he got down stair he thought he could hear some one scrambl up 
the kitchen stairs, and then into the room where the bureau was. 
listen for a moment to ascertain if there were more than one, and 
then feel convinc there wa not, he follow into the parlour, when 
he heard the cabinet open by a key. 

thi wa a new miracle, and one he could not understand; and then he 
heard the paper begin to rattl and rustle; so, draw out one of the 
pistols, he cock it, and walk in. 

the figur instantli began to jump about; it wa dress in white--in 
grave-clothes. He wa terribl nervous, and shook, so he fear to fire 
the pistol; but at length he did, and the report wa follow by a fall 
and a loud groan. 

thi wa veri dreadful--veri dreadful; but all wa quiet, and he lit the 
candl again, and approach the bodi to examin it, and ascertain if he 
knew who it was. A groan came from it. the bureau wa open, and the 
figur clutch firmli a will in hi hand. 

the figur wa dress in grave-clothes, and he start up when he saw 
the form and featur of hi own uncle, the man who wa dead, who 
somehow or other had escap hi confinement, and found hi way up, 
here. He held hi will firmly; and the nephew wa so horrifi and 
stunned, that he threw down the light, and rush out of the room with a 
shout of terror, and never return again. 

* * * * * 

the narrat concluded, and one of the guest said,-- 

"and do you realli believ it?"--"no, no--to be sure not." 

"you don't?"--"whi should I? My friend was, out of all hand, one of the 
greatest liar I ever came near; and why, therefore, should I believ 
him? I don't, on my conscience, believ one word of it." 

It wa now half-past twelve, and, as tom eccl came not back, and the 
landlord did not feel dispos to draw ani more liquor, they left the 
inn, and retir to their separ hous in a great state of anxieti to 
know the fate of their respect wagers. 




chapter lxiv. 

the vampir IN the moonlight.--th fals friend. 


[illustration] 

part of the distanc be accomplish toward the old ruins, tom 
eccl began to feel that what he had undertaken wa not altogeth such 
child's-play as he had at first imagin it to be. somehow or another, 
with a singular and uncomfort sort of distinctness, there came 
across hi mind everi stori that he had rememb of the wild and the 
wonderful. all the long-sinc forgotten tale of superstit that in 
earli childhood he had learned, came now back upon him, suggest to 
hi mind a thousand uncomfort fanci of the strangest description. 

It wa not like that when onc a man, under such circumstances, got 
into such a frame of mind, he would readili get out of it again, while 
he continu surround by such scene as had first call them into 
existence. 

No doubt, had he turn about, and face the inn again instead of the 
old ruin he would soon have shaken off these "thick come fancies;" 
but such a result wa no to be expected, so long as he kept on toward 
the dismal place he had pledg himself to reach. 

As he travers meadow after meadow he began to ask himself some 
question which he found that he could not answer exactli in a 
consolatori manner, under the present state of things. 

among these question wa the veri pertin one of,--"it' no argument 
against vampyres, becaus I don't see the use of 'em--i it?" thi he 
wa compel to answer as he had put it; and when, in addition, he 
began to recollect that, without the shadow of a doubt, sir franci 
varney the suppos vampyre, had been chase across the field to that 
veri ruin whither he wa bound, and had then and there disappeared, he 
certainli found himself in decidedli uncomfort and most unpromis 
situation. 

"no," he said, "no. hang it, I won't go back now, to be made the 
laughing-stock of the whole town, which I should be. come what may of 
it, I will go on as I have commenced; so I shall put on as stout a heart 
as I can." 

then, have come to thi resolve, he strove might and main to banish 
from hi mind those disagre reminisc that had been oppress 
him, to turn hi attent to subject of a differ complexion. 

dure the progress of make thi endeavour, which wa rather futile, 
he came within sight of the ruins. then he slacken hi pace a little, 
tell himself, with a pardon self-deceit, that it wa common, 
ordinari caution only, which induc him to do so, and noth at all in 
the shape of fear. 

"time enough," he remarked, "to be afraid, when I see anyth to be 
afraid of, which I don't see as yet. so, as all' right, I may as well 
put a good face upon the matter." 

He tri to whistl a tune, but it turn out onli a melancholi failure; 
so he gave that up in despair, and walk on until he got within a 
hundr yards, or thereabouts, of the old ruins. 

He thu proceeded, and bend hi ear close to the ground, he listen 
attent for sever minutes. somehow, he fanci that a strange, 
murmur sound came to hi ears; but he wa not quit sure that it 
proceed from the ruins, becaus it wa just that sort of sound that 
might come from a long way off, be mellow by distance, although, 
perhaps, loud enough at it source. 

"well, well," he whisper to himself, "it don't matter much, after all. 
Go I must, and hide the handkerchief somewhere, or els be laugh at, 
besid lose my wages. the former I don't like, and the latter I 
cannot afford." 

thu clinch the matter by such knock-down arguments, he walk on 
until he wa almost within the veri shadow of the ruins, and, probably, 
it wa at thi junctur that hi footstep may have been heard by 
marchdal and sir franci varney. 

then he paus again; but all wa profoundli still, and he began to 
think that the strang sort of murmur nois which he had heard must 
have come from far off and not at all from ani person or person within 
the ruins. 

"let me see," he said to himself; "I have five handkerchief to hide 
among the old ruin somewhere, and the sooner I do so the better, 
becaus then I will get away; for, as regard stay here to watch, 
heaven know how long, for sir franci varney, I don't intend to do it, 
upon second thought and second thoughts, they say, are gener best." 

with the most care footstep now, as if he were tread upon some 
fragil substance, which he fear to injure, he advanc until he wa 
fairli within the precinct of the ancient place, which now bore so ill 
a reputation. 

He then made to himself much the same remark that sir franci varney had 
made to marchdale, with respect to the brighten up of the sky, in 
consequ of it be near the time for the moon to rise from the 
horizon, and he saw more clearli around him, although he could not find 
ani good place to hide the handkerchief in. 

"I must and will," he said, "hide them securely; for it would, indeed, 
be remark unpleasant, after come here and win my wages, to 
have the proof that I had done so taken away by some chanc visitor to 
the place." 

He at length saw a toler larg stone, which stood, in a slant 
position, up against one of the walls. it size attract him. He 
thought, if hi strength wa suffici to move it, that it would be a 
good thing to do so, and to place the handkerchief beneath it; for, at 
all events, it wa so heavi that it could not be kick aside, and no 
one, without some sort of motiv to do so, beyond the mere love of 
labour, would set about move it from it position. 

"I may go further and fare worse," he said to himself; "so here shall 
all the handkerchief lie, to afford a proof that I have been here." 

He pack them into a small compass, and then stoop to roll asid the 
heavi stone, when, at the moment, befor he could appli hi strength to 
that purpose, he heard some one, in hi immedi neighbourhood, 
say,--"hist!" 

thi wa so sudden, and so utterli unexpected, that he not onli ceas 
hi exert to move the stone, but he nearli fell down in hi 
surprise. 

"hist--hist!" said the voic again. 

"what--what," gasp tom eccles--"what are you?"--"hush--hush--hush!" 

the perspir broke out upon hi brow, and he lean against the wall 
for support, as he manag to say, faintly,-- 

"well, hush--what then?"--"hist!" 

"well, I hear you. where are you?" 

"here at hand. who are you?" 

"tom eccles. who are you?"--"a friend. have you seen anything?" 

"no; I wish I could. I should like to see you if I could."--"i'm 
coming." 

there wa a slow and cautiou footstep, and marchdal advanc to where 
tom eccl wa standing. 

"come, now," said the latter, when he saw the dusky-look form 
stalk toward him; "till I know you better, i'll be oblig to you to 
keep off. I am well armed. keep your distance, be you friend or foe." 

"armed!" exclaim marchdale, and he at onc paused.--"yes, I am." 

"but I am a friend. I have no sort of object frankli to tell you my 
errand. I am a friend of the bannerworth family, and have kept watch 
here now for two nights, in the hope of meet with varney, the 
vampyre." 

"the deuc you have: and pray what may your name be?"--"marchdale." 

"if you be mr. marchdale, I know you by sight: for I have seen you with 
mr. henri bannerworth sever times. come out from among the shadows, 
and let us have a look at you; but, till you do, don't come within arm' 
length of me. I am not natur suspicious; but we cannot be too 
careful." 

"oh! certainly--certainly. the silver edg of the moon is now just 
peep up from the east, and you will be abl to see me well, if you 
step from the shadow of the wall by which you now are." 

thi wa a reason enough proposition, and tom eccl at onc acced 
to it, by step out boldli into the partial moonlight, which now 
began to fall upon the open meadows, tint the grass with a silveri 
refulgence, and render even minut object visible. the moment he saw 
marchdal he knew him, and, advanc frankli to him, he said,-- 

"I know you, sir, well." 

"and what bring you here?"--"a wager for one thing, and a wish to see 
the vampyr for another." 

"indeed!"--"yes; I must own I have such a wish, along with a still 
stronger one, to captur him, if possible; and, as there are now two of 
us, whi may we not do it?" 

"a for captur him," said marchdale, "I should prefer shoot 
him."--"you would?" 

"I would, indeed. I have seen him onc shot down, and he is now, I have 
no doubt, as well as ever. what were you do with that huge stone I 
saw you bend over?"--"i have some handkerchief to hide here, as a 
proof that I have to-night realli been to thi place." 

"oh, I will show you a better spot, where there is a crevic in which 
you can place them with perfect safety. will you walk with me into the 
ruins?"--"willingly." 

"it' odd enough," remark marchdale, after he had shown tom eccl 
where to hide the handkerchiefs, "that you and I should both be here 
upon so similar an errand."--"i'm veri glad of it. It rob the place of 
it gloom, and make it ten time more endur than it otherwis would 
be. what do you propos to do if you see the vampyre?" 

"I shall tri a pistol bullet on him. you say you are armed?"--"yes." 

"with pistols?"--"one. here it is." 

"A huge weapon; load well, of course?"--"oh, yes, I can depend upon 
it; but I did not intend to use it, unless assailed." 

"'ti well. what is that?"--"what--what?" 

"don't you see anyth there? come farther back. look--look. At the 
corner of that wall there I am certain there is the flutter of a human 
garment."--"ther is--ther is." 

"hush! keep close. It must be the vampyre."--"g me my pistol. what 
are you do with it?" 

"onli ram down the charg more firmli for you. take it. If that be 
varney the vampyre, I shall challeng him to surrend the moment he 
appears; and if he doe not, I will fire upon him, and do you do so 
likewise."--"well, i--i don't know." 

"you have scruples?"--"i certainli have." 

"well, well--don't you fire, then, but leav it to me. there; 
look--look. now have you ani doubt? there he goes; in hi cloak. It 
is--it is----"--"varney, by heavens!" cri tom eccles. 

[illustration] 

"surrender!" shout marchdale. 

At the instant sir franci varney sprang forward, and made off at a 
rapid pace across the meadows. 

"fire after him--fire!" cri marchdale, "or he will escape. My pistol 
ha miss fire. He will be off." 

On the impuls of the moment, and thu urg by the voic and the 
gestur of hi companion, tom eccl took aim as well as he could, and 
fire after the retreat form of sir franci varney. hi conscienc 
smote him as he heard the report and saw the flash of the larg pistol 
amid the half sort of dark that wa still around. 

the effect of the shot wa then to him pain apparent. He saw varney 
stop instantly; then make a vain attempt to stagger forward a little, 
and final fall heavili to the earth, with all the appear of one 
kill upon the spot. 

"you have hit him," said marchdale--"y have hit him. bravo!"--"i 
have--hit him." 

"yes, a capit shot, by jove!"--"i am veri sorry." 

"sorry! sorri for rid the world of such a being! what wa in your 
pistol?"--"a coupl of slugs." 

"well, they have made a lodgment in him, that' quit clear. let' go up 
and finish him at once."--"h seem finished." 

"I beg your pardon there. when the moonbeam fall upon him he'll get up 
and walk away as if noth wa the matter."--"wil he?" cri tom, with 
animation--"wil he?" 

"certainli he will."--"thank god for that. now, hark you, mr. marchdale: 
I should not have fire if you had not at the moment urg me to do so. 
now, I shall stay and see if the effect which you talk of will ensue; 
and although it may convinc me that he is a vampyre, and that there are 
such things, he may go off, scot free, for me." 

"go off?"--"yes; I don't want to have even a vampyre' blood upon my 
hands." 

"you are exceedingli delicate."--"perhap I am; it' my way, though. I 
have shot him--not you, mind; so, in a manner of speaking, he belong to 
me. now, mark, me: I won't have him touch ani more to-night, unless 
you think there' a chanc of make a prison of him without 
violence." 

"there he lies; you can go and make a prison of him at once, dead as 
he is; and if you take him out of the moonlight--" 

"I understand; he won't recover."--"certainli not." 

"but, as I want him to recover, that don't suit me."--"well, I cannot 
but honour your scruples, although I do not actual share in them; but 
I promis you that, sinc such is your wish, I will take no step 
against the vampyre; but let us come up to him and see if he be realli 
dead, or onli badli wounded." 

tom eccl hang back a littl from thi proposal; but, upon be urg 
again by marchdale, and told that he need not go closer than he chose, 
he consented, and the two of them approach the prostrat form of sir 
franci varney, which lay upon it face in the faint moonlight, which 
each moment wa gather strength and power. 

"he lie upon hi face," said marchdale. "will you go and turn him 
over?"--"who--i? god forbid I should touch him." 

"well--well, I will. come on." 

they halt within a coupl of yard of the body. tom eccl would not 
go a step farther; so marchdal advanc alone, and pretend to be, 
with great repugnance, examin for the wound. 

"he is quit dead," he said; "but I cannot see the hurt."--"i think he 
turn hi head as I fired." 

"did he? let us see." 

marchdal lift up the head, and disclos such a mass of 
clotted-look blood, that tom eccl at onc took to hi heels, nor 
stop until he wa nearli as far off as the ruins. marchdal follow 
him more slowly, and when he came up to him, he said,-- 

"the slug have taken effect on hi face."--"i know it--i know it. don't 
tell me." 

"he look horrible."--"and I am a murderer." 

"psha! you look upon thi matter too seriously. think of who and what he 
was, and then you will soon acquit yourself of be open to ani such 
charge."--"i am bewildered, mr. marchdale, and cannot now know whether 
he be a vampyr or not. If he be not, I have murdered, most 
unjustifiably, a fellow-creature." 

"well, but if he be?"--"why, even then I do not know but that I ought to 
consid myself as guilty. He is one of god' creatur if he were ten 
time a vampyre." 

"well, you realli do take a seriou view of the affair."--"not more 
seriou than it deserves." 

"and what do you mean to do?"--"i shall remain here to await the result 
of what you tell me will ensue, if he be a real vampire. even now the 
moonbeam are full upon him, and each moment increas in intensity. 
think you he will recover?" 

"I do indeed."--"then here will I wait." 

"sinc that is you resolve, I will keep you company. We shall easili 
find some old stone in the ruin which will serv us for a seat, and 
there at leisur we can keep our eye upon the dead body, and be abl to 
observ if it make the least movement." 

thi plan wa adopted, and they sat down just within the ruins, but in 
such a place that they had a full view of the dead body, as it appear 
to be, of sir franci varney, upon which the sweet moonbeam shone full 
and clear. 

tom eccl relat how he wa incit to come upon hi expedition, but 
he might have spare himself that trouble, as marchdal had been in a 
retir corner of the inn parlour befor he came to hi appoint with 
varney, and heard the busi for the most part proposed. 

half-an-hour, certainli not more, might have elapsed; when suddenli tom 
eccl utter an exclamation, partli of surpris and partli of 
terror,-- 

"he moves; he moves!" he cried. "look at the vampyre' body." 

marchdal affect to look with an all-absorb interest, and there wa 
sir franci varney, rais slowli one arm with the hand outstretch 
toward the moon, as if invok that luminari to shed more of it beam 
upon him. then the bodi move slowly, like some one writh in pain, 
and yet unabl to move from the spot on which it lay. from the head to 
the foot, the whole frame seem to be convulsed, and now and then as 
the ghastli object seem to be gather more strength, the limb were 
thrown out with a rapid and a fright look violence. 

It wa truli to one, who might look upon it as a realiti and no juggle, 
a fright sight to see, and although marchdale, of course, toler 
well preserv hi equanimity, onli now and then, for appear sake, 
affect to be wonder shocked, poor tom eccl wa in such a state 
of horror and fright that he could not, if he would, have flown from the 
spot, so fascin wa he by the horribl spectacle. 

thi wa a state of thing which continu for mani minutes, and then 
the bodi show evid symptom of so much return animation, that it 
wa about to rise from hi gori bed and mingl onc again with the 
living. 

"behold!" said marchdale--"behold!"--"heaven have merci upon us!" 

"it is as I said; the beam of the moon have reviv the vampyre. you 
perceiv now that there can be no doubt."--"yes, yes, I see him; I see 
him." 

sir franci varney now, as if with a great struggle, rose to hi feet, 
and look up at the bright moon for some moment with such an air and 
manner that it would not have requir ani veri great amount of 
imagin to conceiv that he wa return to it some sort of 
thanksgiv for the good that it had done to him. 

He then seem for some moment in a state of consider indecis as 
to which way he should proceed. He turn round sever times. then he 
advanc a step or two toward the house, but appar hi resolut 
chang again, and cast hi eye upon the ruins, he at onc made 
toward them. 

thi wa too much for the philosophi as well as for the courag of tom 
eccles. It wa all veri well to look on at some distance, and observ 
the wonder and inexplic proceed of the vampyre; but when he 
show symptom of make a nearer acquaintance, it wa not to be borne. 

"why, he' come here," said tom.--"h seem so indeed," remark 
marchdale. 

"do you mean to stay?"--"i think I shall." 

"you do, do you?"--"yes, I should much like to question him, and as we 
are two to one I think we realli can have noth to fear." 

"do you? i'm altogeth of a differ opinion. A man who ha more live 
than a cat don't much mind at what odd he fights. you may stay if you 
like."--"y do not mean to say that you will desert me?" 

"I don't see a bit how you call it desert you; if we had come out 
togeth on thi adventure, I would have stay it out with you; but as 
we came separ and independent, we may as well go back so."--"well, 
but--" 

"good morning?" cri tom, and he at onc took to hi heel toward the 
town, without stay to pay ani attent to the remonstr of 
marchdale, who call after him in vain. 

sir franci varney, probably, had tom eccl not gone off so rapidly, 
would have yet taken anoth thought, and gone in anoth direct than 
that which led him to the ruins, and tom, if he had had hi sens fulli 
about him, as well as all hi power of perception, would have seen that 
the progress of the vampyr wa veri slow, while he continu to 
convers with marchdale, and that it wa onli when he went off at good 
speed that sir franci varney likewis thought it prudent to do so. 

"i he much terrified?" said varney, as he came up to marchdale.--"yes, 
most completely." 

"thi then, will make a good stori in the town."--"it will, indeed, and 
not a littl enhanc your reputation." 

"well, well; it don't much matter now; but if by terrifi peopl I can 
purchas for myself anyth like immun for the past, I shall be 
satisfied."--"i think you may now safe reckon that you have done so. 
thi man who ha fled with so much precipitation, had courage." 

"unquestionably."--"or els he would have shrunk from come here at 
all." 

"true, but hi courag and presenc aros from hi strong doubt as to 
the exist of such be as vampyres."--"yes, and now that he is 
convinced, hi braveri ha evapor along with hi doubts; and such a 
tale as he ha now to tell, will be found suffici to convert even the 
most sceptic in the town." 

"I hope so."--"and yet it cannot much avail you." 

"not personally, but I must confess that I am not dead to all human 
opinions, and I feel some desir of reveng against those dastard who 
by hundr have hunt me, burnt down my mansion, and sought my 
destruction."--"that I do not wonder at." 

"I would fain leav among them a legaci of fear. such fear as shall 
haunt them and their children for year to come. I would wish that the 
name of varney, the vampire, should be a sound of terror for 
generations."--"it will be so." 

"it shall."--"and now, then, for a consider of what is to be done 
with our prisoner. what is your resolv upon that point?" 

"I have consid it while I wa lie upon yon green sward wait for 
the friendli moonbeam to fall upon my face, and it seem to me that 
there is no sort of resourc but to----"--"kil him?" 

"no, no."--"what then?" 

"to set him free."--"nay, have you consid the immens hazard of 
do so? think again; I pray you think again. I am decidedli of opinion 
that he more than suspect who are hi enemies; and, in that case, you 
know what consequ would ensue; besides, have we not enough alreadi 
to encounter? whi should we add anoth young, bold, determin spirit 
to the band which is alreadi array against us?" 

"you talk in vain, marchdale; I know to what it all tends; you have a 
strong desir for the death of thi young man."--"no; there you wrong 
me. I have no desir for hi death, for it own sake; but, where great 
interest are at stake, there must be sacrific made." 

"so there must; therefore, I will make a sacrifice, and let thi young 
prison free from hi dungeon."--"if such be your determination, I know 
well it is useless to combat with it. when do you purpos give him hi 
freedom?" 

"I will not act so heedlessli as that your principl of caution shall 
blame me. I will attempt to get from him some promis that he will not 
make himself an activ instrument against me. perchance, too, as 
bannerworth hall, which he is sure to visit, wear such an air of 
desertion, I may be abl to persuad him that the bannerworth family, as 
well as hi uncle, have left thi part of the countri altogether; so 
that, without make ani inquiri for them about the neighbourhood, he 
may be induc to leav at once."--"that would be well." 

"good; your prudenc approv of the plan, and therefor it shall be 
done."--"i am rather inclin to think," said marchdale, with a slight 
tone of sarcasm, "that if my prudenc did not approv of the plan, it 
would still be done." 

"most probably," said varney, calmly.--"wil you releas him to-night?" 

"it is morning, now, and soon the soft grey light of day will tint the 
east. I do not think I will releas him till sunset again now. ha he 
provis to last him until then?"--"h has." 

"well, then, two hour after sunset I will come here and releas him 
from hi weari bondage, and now I must go to find some place in which to 
hide my proscrib head. As for bannerworth hall, I will yet have it in 
my power; I have sworn to do so, I will keep my oath."--"th 
accomplish of our purpose, I regret to say, seem as far off as 
ever." 

"not so--not so. As I befor remarked, we must disappear, for a time, so 
as to lull suspicion. there will then aris a period when bannerworth 
hall will neither be watched, as it is now, nor will it be inhabited,--a 
period befor the bannerworth famili ha made up it mind to go back to 
it, and when long watch without a result ha becom too tiresom to 
be continu at all; then we can at onc pursu our object."--"b it 
so." 

"and now, marchdale, I want more money."--"mor money!" 

"yes; you know well that I have had larg demand of late."--"but I 
certainli had an impress that you were possessed, by the death of 
some one, with veri ampl means." 

"yes, but there is a mean by which all is taken from me. I have no real 
resourc but what are rapidli use up, so I must come upon you 
again."--"i have alreadi complet crippl myself as regard money 
matter in thi enterprise, and I do certainli hope that the fruit will 
not be far distant. If they be much longer delayed, I shall realli not 
know what to do. however, come to the lodg where you have been staying, 
and then I will give you, to the extent of my ability, whatev sum you 
think your present exig require." 

"come on, then, at once. I would certainly, of course, rather leav thi 
place now, befor daybreak. come on, I say, come on." 

sir franci varney and marchdal walk for some time in silenc across 
the meadows. It wa evid that there wa not between these associ 
the veri best of feelings. marchdal wa alway smart under an 
assumpt of author over him, on the part of sir franci varney, 
while the latter scarc care to conceal ani portion of the contempt 
with which he regard hi hypocrit companion. 

some veri strong band of union, indeed, must sure bind these two 
strang person together! It must be someth of a more than common 
natur which induc marchdal not onli to obey the behest of hi 
mysteri companion, but to suppli him so readili with money as we 
perceiv he promis to do. 

and, as regard varney, the vampyre, he, too, must have some great 
object in view to induc him to run such a world of risk, and take so 
much troubl as he wa do with the bannerworth family. 

what hi object is, and what is the object of marchdale, will, now that 
we have progress so far in our story, soon appear, and then much that 
is perfectli inexplicable, will becom clear and distinct, and we shall 
find that some strong human motiv are at the bottom of it all. 




chapter lxv. 

varney' visit TO the dungeon OF the lone prison IN the ruins. 


[illustration] 

evid it wa that marchdal wa not near so scrupul as sir franci 
varney, in what he chose to do. He would, without hesitation, have 
sacrif the life of that prison in the lone dungeon, whom it 
would be an insult to the understand of our readers, not to presum 
that they had, long ere this, establish in their mind to be charl 
holland. 

hi own safeti seem to be the paramount consider with marchdale, 
and it wa evid that he care for noth in comparison with that 
object. 

It say much, however, for sir franci varney, that he did not give in 
to such a blood-thirsti feeling, but rather chose to set the prison 
free, and run all the chanc of the danger to which he might expos 
himself by such a cours of conduct, than to insur safety, 
comparatively, by hi destruction. 

sir franci varney is evid a charact of strang mix feelings. 
It is quit evid that he ha some great object in view, which he 
wish to accomplish almost at ani risk; but it is equal evident, at 
the same time, that he wish to do so with the least possibl injuri to 
others, or els he would never have behav as he had done in hi 
interview with the beauti and persecut flora bannerworth, or now 
suggest the idea of set charl holland free from the dreari 
dungeon in which he had been so long confined. 

We are alway anxiou and will to give everi one credit for the good 
that is in them; and, hence, we are pleas to find that sir franci 
varney, despit hi singular, and appar preternatur capabilities, 
ha someth suffici human about hi mind and feelings, to induc 
him to do as littl injuri as possibl to other in the pursuit of hi 
own objects. 

Of the two, vampyr as he is, we prefer him much to the despic and 
hypocritical, marchdale, who, under the pretenc of be the friend of 
the bannerworth family, would freeli have inflict upon them the most 
deadli injuries. 

It wa quit clear that he wa most dread disappoint that sir 
franci varney, would not permit him to take the life of charl 
holland, and it wa with a gloomi and dissatisfi air that he left the 
ruin to proceed toward the town, after what we may almost term the 
alterc he had had with varney the vampyr upon that subject. 

It must not be suppos that sir franci varney, however, wa blind to 
the danger which must inevit accru from permit charl holland 
onc more to obtain hi liberty. 

what the latter would be abl to state would be more than suffici to 
convinc the bannerworths, and all interest in their fortunes, that 
someth wa go on of a character, which, however, supernatur it 
might seem to be, still seem to have some human and ordinari object 
for it ends. 

sir franci varney thought over all thi befor he proceeded, accord 
to hi promise, to the dungeon of the prisoner; but it would seem as if 
there wa consider difficulty, even to an individu of hi long 
practic in all kind of chicaneri and deceit, in arriv at ani 
satisfactori conclusion, as to a mean of make charl holland' 
releas a matter of less danger to himself, than it would be like to 
be, if, unfett by obligation, he wa at onc set free. 

At the solemn hour of midnight, while all wa still, that is, to say, on 
the night succeed the one, on which he had had the interview with 
marchdale, we have recorded, sir franci varney alon sought the silent 
ruins. He wa attired, as usual, in hi huge cloak, and, indeed, the 
chilli air of the even warrant such protect against it numer 
discomforts. 

had ani one seen him, however, that evening, they would have observ an 
air of great doubt, and irresolut upon hi brow, as if he were 
struggl with some impuls which he found it extrem difficult to 
restrain. 

"I know well," he muttered, as he walk among the shadow of the ruins, 
"that marchdale' reason is coldli and horribl correct, when he say 
that there is danger in set thi youth free; but, I am about to 
leav thi place, and not to show myself for some time, and I cannot 
reconcil myself to inflict upon him the horror of a death by 
starvation, which must ensue." 

It wa a night of more than usual dullness, and, as sir franci varney 
remov the massi stone, which hid the narrow and tortuou entranc to 
the dungeons, a chilli feel crept over him, and he could not help 
supposing, that even then marchdal might have play him false, and 
neglect to suppli the prison food, accord to hi promise. 

hastili he descend to the dungeons, and with a step, which had in it 
far less of caution, than had usual characteris hi proceedings, he 
proceed onward until he reach that particular dungeon, in which our 
young friend, to whom we wish so well, had been so long confin from 
the beauti and cheer light of day, and from all that hi heart' 
best affect most cling to. 

"speak," said sir franci varney, as he enter the dungeon--"if the 
occup of thi dreari place live, let him answer one who is as much 
hi friend as he ha been hi enemy." 

"I have no friend," said charl holland, faintly; "unless it be one who 
would come and restor me to liberty." 

"and how know you that I am not he?" 

"your voic sound like that of one of my persecutors. whi do you not 
place the climax to your injuri by at onc take away life. I should 
be better pleas that you would do so, than that I should wear out the 
useless struggl of exist in so dreari and wretch an abod as 
this." 

"young man," said sir franci varney, "I have come to you on a greater 
errand of merci than, probably, you will ever give me credit for. there 
is one who would too readili have grant your present request, and who 
would at onc have taken that life of which you profess to be so 
wearied; but which may yet present to you some of it sunniest and most 
beauti aspects." 

"your tone are friendly," said charles; "but yet I dread some new 
deception. that you are one of those who consign me by stratagem, and 
by brute force, to thi place of durance, I am perfectli well assured, 
and, therefore, ani good that may be promis by you, present itself to 
me in a veri doubt character." 

"I cannot be surprised," said sir franci varney, "at such sentiment 
aris from your lips; but, nevertheless, I am inclin to save you. 
you have been detain here becaus it wa suppos by be so, a 
particular object would be best obtain by your absence. that object, 
howev ha failed, notwithstanding, and I do not feel further inclin 
to protract your sufferings. have you ani guess as to the parti who 
have thu confin you?"--"i am unaccustom to dissemble, and, 
therefor I will say at onc that I have a guess." 

"in which way doe it tend?"-- 

"against sir franci varney, call the vampyre." 

"doe it not strike you that thi may be a danger candour?"--"it may, 
or it may not be; I cannot help it. I know I am at the merci of my foes, 
and I do not believ that anyth I can say or do will make my 
situat wors or better." 

"you are much mistaken there. In other hand than mine, it might make it 
much worse; but it happen to be one of my weaknesses, that I am charg 
with candour, and that I admir bold of disposition."--"indeed! and 
yet can behav in the manner you have done toward me." 

"yes. there are more thing in heaven and on earth than are dreamt of in 
your philosophy. I am the more encourag to set you free, because, if I 
procur from you a promise, which I intend to attempt, I am inclin to 
believ that you will keep it."--"i shall assuredli keep whatev 
promis I may make. propound your conditions, and if they be such as 
honour and honesti will permit me to acced to, I will do so willingli 
and at once. heaven know I am weari enough of thi miser 
imprisonment." 

"will you promis me then, if I set you free, not to mention your 
suspicion that it is to sir franci varney you owe thi ill turn, and 
not to attempt ani act of vengeanc against him as a retali for 
it."--"i cannot promis so much as that. freedom, indeed, would be a 
poor boon, if I were not permit freeli to convers of some of the 
circumst connect with my captivity." 

"you object?"--"i do to the former of your propositions, but not to the 
latter. I will promis not to go at all out of my way to execut ani 
vengeanc upon you; but I will not promis that I will not commun 
the circumst of my forc absenc from them, to those friend whose 
opinion I so much value, and to return to whom is almost as dear to me 
as liberti itself." 

sir franci varney wa silent for a few moments, and then he said, in a 
tone of deep solemnity,-- 

"there are ninety-nin person out of a hundr who would take your life 
for the independ of your tongue; but I am as the hundredth one, who 
look with a benevol eye at your proceedings. will you promis me, if 
I remov the fetter which now bind your limbs, that you will make no 
person attack upon me; for I am weari of person contention, and I 
have no disposit to endur it. will you make me thi promise?"--"i 
promise?"--"i will." 

without anoth word, but trust implicitli to the promis which had 
been given to him, sir franci varney produc a small key from hi 
pocket, and unlock with it a padlock which confin the chain about 
the prisoner. 

with ease, charl holland wa then enabl to shake them off, and then, 
for the first time, for some weeks, he rose to hi feet, and felt all 
the exquisit relief of be compar free from bondage. 

"thi is delightful, indeed," he said. 

"it is," said sir franci varney--"it is but a foretast of the 
happi you will enjoy when you are entir free. you see that I have 
trust you." 

"you have trust me as you might trust me, and you perceiv that I have 
kept my word." 

"you have; and sinc you declin to make me the promis which I would 
fain have from you, to the effect that you would not mention me as one 
of the author of your calamity, I must trust to your honour not to 
attempt reveng for what you have suffered." 

"that I will promise. there can be but littl difficulti to ani gener 
mind in give up such a feeling. In consequ of your spare me what 
you might still further have inflicted, I will let the past rest, and as 
if it had never happen realli to me; and speak of it to others, but as 
a circumst which I wish not to revert to, but prefer should be 
buri in oblivion." 

"it is well; and now I have a request to make of you, which, perhaps, 
you will consid the hardest of all." 

"name it. I feel myself bound to a consider extent to compli with 
whatev you may demand of me, that is not contrari to honour 
principle." 

"then it is this, that, compar free as you are, and in a 
condition, as you are, to assert your own freedom, you will not do so 
hastily, or for a consider period; in fact, I wish and expect that 
you should wait yet awhile, until it shall suit me to say that it is my 
pleasur that you shall be free." 

"that is, indeed, a hard condit to man who feels, as you yourself 
remark, that he can assert hi freedom. It is one which I have still a 
hope you will not persever in. 

"nay, young man, I think that I have treat you with generosity, to 
make you feel that I am not the worst of foe you could have had. all I 
requir of you is, that you should wait here for about an hour. It is 
now nearli one o'clock; will you wait until you hear it strike two 
befor you actual make a movement to leav thi place?" 

charl holland hesit for some moments, and then he said,-- 

"do not fanci that I am not one who appreci the singular trust you 
have repos in me; and, howev repugn to me it may be to remain 
here, a voluntari prisoner, I am inclin to do so, if it be but to 
convinc you that the trust you have repos in me is not in vain, and 
that I can behav with equal generos to you as you can to me." 

"be it so," said sir franci varney; "I shall leav you with a full 
relianc that you will keep your word; and now, farewell. when you think 
of me, fanci me rather one unfortun than criminal, and tell yourself 
that even varney the vampyr had some trait in hi character, which, 
although they might not rais your esteem, at all event did not loudli 
call for your reprobation." 

"I shall do so. oh! flora, flora, I shall look upon you onc again, 
after believ and think that I had bidden you a long and last 
adieu. My own beauti flora, it is joy inde to think that I shall 
look upon that face again, which, to my perception, is full of all the 
majesti of loveliness." 

sir franci varney look coldli on while charl utter thi 
enthusiast speech. 

"remember," he said, "till two o'clock;" and he walk toward the door 
of the dungeon. "you will have no difficulti in find your way out 
from thi place. doubtless you alreadi perceiv the entranc by which I 
gain admission." 

"had I been free," said charles, "and had the use of my limbs, I should, 
long ere this, have work my way to life and liberty." 

"'ti well. goodnight." 

varney walk from the place, and just close the door behind him. with 
a slow and state step he left the ruins, and charl holland found 
himself onc more alone, but in a much more enviabl condit than for 
mani week he could have call his. 




chapter lxvi. 

flora bannerworth' appar inconsistency.--th admiral' circumst 
and advice.--mr. chillingworth' mysteri absence. 


[illustration] 

for a brief space let us return to flora bannerworth, who had suffer 
so much on account of her affections, as well as on account of the 
mysteri attack that had been made upon her by the reput vampyre. 

after leav bannerworth hall for a short time, she seem to recov 
her spirits; but thi wa a state of thing which did not last, and onli 
show how fallaci it wa to expect that, after the grievou thing 
that had happened, she would rapidli recov her equanimity. 

It is said, by learn physiologists, that two bodili pain cannot 
endur at the same space of time in the system; and, whether it be so or 
not, is a question concern which it would be foreign to the natur of 
our work, to enter into anyth like an elabor disquisition. 

certainly, however, so far as flora bannerworth wa concerned, she 
seem inclin to show that, mentally, the observ wa a true one, 
for that, now she becam releas from a continu dread of the visit 
of the vampyre, her mind would, with more pain interest than ever, 
recur to the melancholi condition, probably, of charl holland, if he 
were alive, and to soul-harrow reflect concern him, if he were 
dead. 

she could not, and she did not, believe, for one moment, that hi 
desert of her had been of a voluntari character. she knew, or fanci 
she knew, him by far too well for that; and she more than onc express 
her opinion, to the effect that she wa perfectli convinc hi 
disappear wa a part and parcel of all that train of circumst 
which had so recent occurred, and produc such a world of unhappi 
to her, as well as to the whole of the bannerworth family. 

"if he had never love me," she said to her brother henry, "he would 
have been aliv and well; but he ha fallen a victim to the truth of a 
passion, and to the constanc of an affect which, to my die day, I 
will believ in." 

now that mr. marchdal had left the place there wa no one to disput 
thi proposit with flora, for all, as well as she, were fulli 
inclin to think well of charl holland. 

It wa on the veri morn which preced that even when sir franci 
varney call upon charl holland in the manner we have related, with 
the gratifi news that, upon certain conditions, he might be released, 
that flora bannerworth, when the admir came to see them, spoke to him 
of charl holland, saying,-- 

"now, sir, that I am away from bannerworth hall, I do not, and cannot 
feel satisfied; for the thought that charl may eventu come back, 
and seek us there, still haunt me. fanci him, sir, do so, and see 
the place complet deserted." 

"well, there' someth in that," said the admiral; "but, however, he' 
hardli such a goose, if it were so to happen, to give up the chase--he'd 
find us out somehow." 

"you think he would, sir? or, do you not think that despair would seiz 
upon him, and that, fanci we had all left the spot for ever, he might 
likewis do so; so that we should lose him more effectu than we have 
done at present?" 

"no; hardly," said the admiral; "he couldn't be such a goos as that. 
why, when I wa of hi age, if I had secur the affect of a young 
girl like you, i'd have gone over all the world, but i'd have found out 
where she was; and what I mean to say is, if he' half such a goos as 
you think him, he deserv to lose you." 

"did you not tell me something, sir, of mr. chillingworth talk of 
take possess of the hall for a brief space of time?" 

"why, yes, I did; and I expect he is there now; in fact, i'm sure he' 
there, for he said he would be." 

"no, he ain't," said jack pringle, at that moment enter the room; 
"you'r wrong again, as you alway are, somehow or other." 

"what, you vagabond, are you here, you mutin rascal?"--"ay, ay, sir; 
go on; don't mind me. I wonder what you'd do, sir, if you hadn't 
somebodi like me to go on talk about." 

"why, you infern rascal, I wonder what you'd do if you had not an 
indulg commander, who put up even with real mutiny, and say noth 
about it. but where have you been? did you go as I direct you, and 
take some provis to bannerworth hall?" 

"yes, I did; but I brought them back again; there' nobodi there, and 
don't seem like to be, except a dead body." 

"A dead body! whose bodi can that be!"--"tom somebody; for i'm d----d if 
it ain't a great he cat." 

"you scoundrel, how dare you alarm me in such a way? but do you mean to 
tell me that you did not see dr. chillingworth at the hall?"--"how could 
I see him, if he wasn't there?" 

"but he wa there; he said he would be there."--"then he' gone again, 
for there' nobodi there that I know of in the shape of a doctor. I went 
through everi part of the ship--i mean the house--and the deuc a soul 
could I find; so as it wa rather lone and uncomfortable, I came away 
again. 'who knows,' thought I, 'but some bless vampyr or anoth may 
come across me.'" 

"thi won't do," said the old admiral, button up hi coat to the 
chin; "bannerworth hall must not be desert in thi way. It is quit 
clear that sir franci varney and hi associ have some particular 
object in view in get possess of the place. here, you 
jack."--"ay, ay, sir." 

[illustration] 

"just go back again, and stay at the hall till somebodi come to you. 
even such a stupid hound as you will be someth to scare away 
unwelcom visitors. Go back to the hall, I say. what are you stare 
at?"--"back to bannerworth hall!" said jack. "what! just where i'v come 
from; all that way off, and noth to eat, and, what' worse, noth 
to drink. i'll see you d----d first." 

the admir caught up a table-fork, and made a rush at jack; but henri 
bannerworth interfered. 

"no, no," he said, "admiral; no, no--not that. you must recollect that 
you yourself have given this, no doubt, faith fellow of your' 
liberti to do and say a great mani thing which don't look like good 
service; but I have no doubt, from what I have seen of hi disposition, 
that he would risk hi life rather than, that you should come to ani 
harm." 

"ay, ay," said jack; "he quit forget when the bullet were scuttl 
our nob off cape ushant, when that big frenchman had hold of him by the 
_skirf_ of hi neck, and began pummel hi head, and the lee scupper 
were run with blood, and a bit of joe wiggins' brain had come slap 
in my eye, while some of jack marling' gut wa hang round my neck 
like a nosegay, all in consequ of grape-shot--then he didn't say as 
I wa a swab, when I came up, and bore a hole in the frenchman' back 
with a pike. ay, it' all veri well now, when there' peace, and no 
danger, to call jack pringl a lubberli rascal, and mutinous. i'm 
bless if it ain't enough to make an old pair of shoe faint away." 

"why, you infern scoundrel," said the admiral, "noth of the sort 
ever happened, and you know it. jack, you'r no seaman."--"werri good," 
said jack; "then, if I ain't no seaman, you are what shore-go peopl 
call a jolli fat old humbug." 

"jack, hold your tongue," said henri bannerworth; "you carri these 
thing too far. you know veri well that your master esteem you, and you 
should not presum too much upon that fact."--"mi master!" said jack; 
"don't call him my master. I never had a master, and don't intend. he' 
my admiral, if you like; but an english sailor don't like a master." 

"I tell you what it is, jack," said the admiral; "you'v got your good 
qualities, I admit."--"ay, ay, sir--that' enough; you may as well leav 
off well while you can." 

"but i'll just tell you what you resembl more than anyth 
else."--"chew me up! what may that be, sir?" 

"A french marine."--"a what! A french marine! good-bye. I wouldn't say 
anoth word to you, if you wa to pay me a dollar a piece. Of all the 
bless insult roll into one, thi here' the worstest. you might 
have call me a marine, or you might have call me a frenchman, but to 
make out that i'm both a marin and a frenchman, d--me, if it isn't 
enough to make human natur stand on an end! now, i'v done with you." 

"and a good job, too," said the admiral. "I wish i'd thought of it 
before. you'r wors than a third day' ague, or a hot and a cold fever 
in the tropics."--"veri good," said jack; "I onli hope provid will 
have merci upon you, and keep an eye upon you when i'm gone, otherwise, 
I wonder what will becom of you? It wasn't so when young belinda, who 
you took off the island of antiggy, in the ingies, jump overboard, and 
I went after her in a heavi swell. howsomdever, never mind, you shook 
hand with me then; and while a bushel of the brini wa weep out of 
the corner of each of your blinkers, you says, say you,--" 

"hold!" cri the admiral, "hold! I know what I said, jack. it' cut a 
fathom deep in my memory. give us your fist, jack, and--and--"--"hold 
yourself," said jack; "I know what you'r go to say, and I won't hear 
you say it--so there' an end of it. lor bless you! I know you. I ain't 
a go to leav you. don't be afraid; I onli work you up, and work 
you down again, just to see if there' ani of that old spirit in you 
when we wa aboard the victory. don't you recollect, admiral?" 

"yes--yes; enough, jack."--"why, let me see--that wa a matter of forti 
year ago, nearly, when I wa a youngster." 

"there--there, jack--that'l do. you bring the event of other year 
fresh upon my memory. peace--peace. I have not forgotten; but still, to 
hear what you know of them, if recited, would give the old man a 
pang."--"a pang," said jack; "I suppos that' some dictionari word for 
a punch in the eye. that would be mutini with a vengeance; so i'm off." 

"go, go."--"i'm a going; and just to pleas you, i'll go to the hall, so 
you sha'n't say that you told me to do anyth that I didn't." 

away went jack, whistl an air, that might have been popular when he 
and the admir were young, and henri bannerworth could not but remark 
that an appear of great sad came over the old man, when jack wa 
gone. 

"I fear, sir," he said, "that heedless sailor ha touch upon some 
episod in your existence, the wound of which are still fresh enough to 
give you pain."--"it is so," said the old admiral; "just look at me, 
now. Do I look like the hero of a romant love story?" 

"not exactly, I admit."--"well, notwithstand that, jack pringl ha 
touch a chord that vibrat in my heart yet," repli the admiral. 

"have you ani object to tell me of it?"--"none, whatever; and 
perhaps, by the time I have done, the doctor may have found hi way back 
again, or jack may bring us some news of him. So here goe for a short, 
but a true yarn." 




chapter lxvii. 

the admiral' stori OF the beauti belinda. 


[illustration] 

just at thi moment flora bannerworth stole into the room from whenc 
she had depart a short time since; but when she saw that old admir 
bell wa look so exceedingli serious, and appar about to address 
henri upon some veri import subject, she would have retired, but he 
turn toward her, and said,-- 

"mi story, my dear, i'v no object to your hearing, and, like all 
women folks, a love stori never come amiss to you; so you may as well 
stay and hear it."--"a love story," said flora; "you tell a love story, 
sir?" 

"yes, my dear, and not onli tell it, but be the hero of it, likewise; 
ain't you astonished?"--"i am, indeed." 

"well, you'll be more astonish then befor i'v done; so just listen. 
As jack pringl says, it wa the matter of about somewher forti year 
ago, that I wa in command of the victori frigate, which wa place upon 
the west indian station, dure a war then raging, for the protect of 
our port and harbour in that vicinity. we'd not a strong forc in that 
quarter, therefore, I had to cut about from place to place, and do the 
best I could. after a time, though, I rather think that we frighten 
off the enemy, dure which time I chiefli anchor off the island of 
antigua, and wa hospit receiv at the hous of a planter, of the 
name of marchant, who, in fact, made hi hous my home, and introduc 
me to all the _elite_ of the societi of the island. ah! miss flora, 
you'v no idea, to look at me now, what I wa then; I held a captain' 
commission, and wa nearli the youngest man in the service, with such a 
rank. I wa as slender, ay, as a danc master. these wither and 
bleach lock were black as the raven' plume. ay, ay, but no matter: 
the planter had a daughter." 

"and you love her?" said flora--"lov her," said the old man, and the 
flush of youth anim come to hi countenance; "love her, do you 
say! I ador her; I worship her; she wa to me--but what a d----d 
old fool, I am; we'll skip that if you please." 

"nay, nay," said flora; "that is what I want to hear."--"i haven't the 
least doubt of that, in the world; but that' just what you won't hear; 
none of your nonsense, miss flora; the old man may be a fool, but he 
isn't quit an idiot." 

"he' neither," said flora; "true feel can never disgrac ani 
one."--"perhap not; but, however, to make a long stori short, somehow 
or other, one day, belinda wa sit alone, and I rude pounc upon 
her; I rather think then I must have said someth that I oughtn't to 
have said, for it took her so aback; I wa forced, somehow or other, to 
hold her up, and then i--i--yes; i'm sure I kiss her; and so, I told 
her I love her; and then, what do you think she said?" 

"why," said flora, "that she reciproc the passion."--"d--n my rags," 
said jack, who at the moment came into the room, "I suppos that' the 
name of some shell or other." 

"you here, you villain!" said the admiral; "I thought you were 
gone."--"so I was," said jack, "but I came back for my hat, you see." 

away he went again, and the admir resum hi story. 

"well, miss flora," he said, "you haven't made a good guess, as she 
didn't say anyth at all, she onli clung to me like some wild bird to 
it mother' breast, and cri as if her heart would break."--"indeed!" 

"yes; I didn't know the caus of her emotion, but at last I got it out 
of her."--"what wa it?" 

"oh, a mere trifle; she wa alreadi marri to somebodi else, that' 
all; some d----d fellow, who had gone trade about the islands, a 
fellow she didn't care a straw about, that wa old enough to be her 
father." 

"and you left her?"--"no, I didn't. guess again. I wa a mad-head 
youngster. I onli felt--i didn't think. I persuad her to come away 
with me. I took her aboard my ship, and set sail with her. A few week 
flew like hours; but one day we were hail by a vessel, and when we 
near her, she man a boat and brought a letter on board, address 
to belinda. It wa from her father, written in hi last moments. It 
began with a curs and end with a blessing. there wa a postscript in 
anoth hand, to say the old man die of grief. she read it by my side 
on the quarter-deck. It drop from her grasp, and she plung into the 
sea. jack pringl went after her; but I never saw her again." 

"graciou heavens! what a tragedy!"--"yes, tolerable," said the old man. 

He aros and took hi hat and place it on hi head. He gave the crown 
of it a blow that sent it nearli over hi eyes. He thrust hi hand deep 
into hi breech pockets, clench hi teeth, and mutter someth 
inaud as he strode from the apartment. 

"who would have thought, henry," said flora, "that such a man as admir 
bell had been the hero of such an adventure?"--"ay, who indeed; but it 
show that we never can judg from appearances, flora; and that those 
who seem to us the most heart-whol may have experienc the wildest 
vicissitud of passion." 

"and we must remember, likewise, that thi wa forti year ago, henry, 
which make a materi differ in the state of the case as regard 
admir bell." 

"it doe indeed--mor than half a lifetime; and yet how evid it wa 
that hi old feel clung to him. I can well imagin the mani hour of 
bitter regret which the memori of thi hi lost love must have given 
him." 

"true--true. I can feel someth for him; for have I not lost one who 
love me--a wors loss, too, than that which admir bell relates; for 
am I not a prey to all the horror of uncertainty? wherea he knew the 
worst, and that, at all events, death had claim it victim, leav 
noth to conjectur in the shape of suffering, so that the mind had 
noth to do but to recov slowly, but surely, as it would from the 
shock which it had received." 

"that is wors than you, flora; but rather would I have you cherish hope 
of soon behold charl holland, probabl aliv and well, than fanci 
ani great disast ha come over him." 

"I will endeavour to do so," repli flora. 

"I long to hear what ha becom of dr. chillingworth. hi disappear 
is most singular; for I fulli suspect that he had some particular 
object in view in get possess for a short time of bannerworth 
hall; but now, from jack pringle' account, he appear not to be in it, 
and, in fact, to have disappear complet from the sight of all who 
knew him." 

"yes," said flora; "but he may have done that, brother, still in 
further of hi object." 

"it may be so, and I will hope that it is so. keep yourself close, 
sister, and see no one, while I proceed to hi hous to inquir if they 
have heard anyth of him. I will return soon, be assured; and, in the 
meantime, should you see my brother, tell him I shall be at home in an 
hour or so, and not to leav the cottage; for it is more than like 
that the admir ha gone to bannerworth hall, so that you may not see 
anyth of him for some time." 




chapter lxviii. 

marchdale' attempt villany, and the result. 


[illustration] 

varney the vampyr left the dungeon of charl holland amid the grey 
ruins, with a perfect confid the young man would keep hi word, and 
not attempt to escap from that place until the time had elaps which 
he had dictat to him. 

and well might he have that confidence, for have onc given hi word 
that he would remain until he heard the clock strike two from a 
neighbour church, charl holland never dreamt for a moment of 
break it. 

To be sure it wa a weari time to wait when liberti appear befor him; 
but he wa the soul of honour, and the least like man in all the world 
to infring in the slightest upon the condit which he had, of hi own 
free will, acced to. 

sir franci varney walk rapidli until he came nearli to the outskirt 
of the town, and then he slacken hi pace, proceed more cautiously, 
and look care about him, as if he fear to meet ani one who 
might recognis him. 

He had not proceed far in thi manner, when he becam consciou of the 
cautiou figur of a man glide along in the opposit direct to that 
which he wa taking. 

A suspicion struck him, from the gener appearance, that it wa 
marchdale, and if so he wonder to see him abroad at such a time. still 
he would not be quit certain; but he hurri forward, so as to meet the 
advanc figure, and then hi suspicion were confirmed; and marchdale, 
with some confus in hi look and manners, accost him. 

"ah, sir franci varney," he said, "you are out late."-- 

"why, you know I should be out late," said varney, "and you likewis 
know the errand upon which I wa to be out." 

"oh, I recollect; you were to releas your prisoner."-- 

"yes, I was." 

"and have you done so?"-- 

"oh, no." 

"oh, indeed. i--i am glad you have taken better thought of it. good 
night--good night; we shall meet to-morrow."-- 

"adieu," said sir franci varney; and he watch the retreat figur 
of marchdale, and then he added, in a low tone to himself,-- 

"I know hi object well. hi craven spirit shrink at the notion, a 
probabl enough one, I will admit, that charl holland ha recognis 
him, and that, if onc free, he would denounc him to the bannerworths, 
hold him up to scorn in hi true colours, and bring down upon hi 
head, perhaps, someth more than detest and contempt. the 
villain! he is go now to take the life of the man whom he consid 
chain to the ground. well, well, they must fight it out together. 
charl holland is suffici free to take hi own part, although 
marchdal littl think that such is the case." 

marchdal walk on for some littl distance, and then he turn and 
look after sir franci varney. 

"indeed!" he said; "so you have not releas him to-night, but I know 
well will do so soon. I do not, for my part, admir thi romant 
generos which set a fox free at the moment that he' the most 
dangerous. it' all veri well to be generous, but it is better to be 
just first, and that I consid mean look after one' self first. I 
have a poniard here which will soon put an end to the troubl of the 
prison in hi dungeon--it edg is keen and sharp, and will readili 
find a way to hi heart." 

He walk on quit exultingli and carelessli now, for he had got into 
the open country, and it wa extrem unlik that he would meet 
anybodi on hi road to the ruins. 

It did not take mani minutes, sharp walk now to bring him close to 
the spot which he intend should becom such a scene of treacher 
slaughter, and just then he heard from afar off someth like the 
mutter of thunder, as if heaven itself wa proclaim it vengeanc 
against the man who had come out to slay one of it best and noblest 
creatures. 

"what is that'" said marchdale, shrink back a moment; "what is 
that--an approach storm? It must be so, for, now I recollect me, the 
sun set behind a bank of cloud of a fieri redness, and as the even 
drew in there wa everi appear in the heaven of some ensu strife 
of the elements." 

He listen for a few moments, and fix hi eye intent in the 
direct of the horizon from where the mutter sound had proceeded. 

He had not long to wait befor he saw a bright flash of blue lightning, 
which for one instant illumin the sky; then by the time he could have 
count twelv there came the thunder which the flash preceded, and he 
felt terribl anxiou to complet hi enterprize, so that he might get 
back to the town and be safe hous befor the storm, which wa 
evid approaching, should burst upon him. 

"it is sweep on apace," he said; "whi did I not come earlier?" 

even as he spoke he plung among the recess of the ruins, and 
search about for the old stone which cover the entranc to the 
dungeon, he wa surpris to find it roll from it place, and the 
apertur open. 

"what is the mean of this?" he said; "how neglig of sir franci 
varney; or perhaps, after all, he wa onli jest with me, and let the 
prison go. If that should be the case, I am foil indeed; but sure 
he could not be so full of indiscretion." 

again came a dazzl flash of lightning, which now, surround by the 
ruin as he was, made him shrink back and cover hi eye for a moment; 
and then follow a peal of thunder with not half the durat of time 
between it and the flash which had character the previou electr 
phenomenon. 

"the storm approach fast," said marchdale; "I must get my work done 
quickly, if inde my victim be here, which I begin serious to doubt." 

He descend the intric wind passag to the vault below, which 
serv the purpos of a dungeon, and when he got veri nearli into the 
depth of it recesses, he call aloud, saying,-- 

"ho! what ho! is there ani one here?"--"yes," said charl holland, who 
fanci it might be hi former visitor returned. "have you come to 
repent of your purpose?" 

"ah!" said marchdal to himself, "sir francis, after all, ha told me 
the truth--th prison is still here." 

the light from without wa not near suffici to send the least ray 
into the depth of that dungeon; so that marchdale, when he enter the 
place, could see noth but an absolut blackness. 

It wa not so, however, with charl holland, whose eye had been now so 
long accustom to the place that he could see in it as if a dim 
twilight irradi it, and he at once, in hi visitor, saw hi worst 
foe, and not the man who had compar set him free. 

He saw, too, that the hand of hi visitor grasp a weapon, which 
marchdal thought that, favour by the darkness, he might carri openli 
in perfect security. 

"where are you?" said marchdale; "I cannot see you."--"here!" said 
charles, "you may feel my grip;" and he sprung upon him in an instant. 

the attack wa so sudden and so utterli unexpected, that marchdal wa 
thrown backwards, and the dagger wrest from hi grasp, dure the 
first impuls which charl holland had thrown into hi attack. 

moreover, hi head struck with such violenc against the earthern floor, 
that it produc a temporari confus of hi faculties, so that, had 
charl holland been so inclined, he might, with marchdale' own weapon, 
have easili taken hi life. 

the young man did, on the impuls of the moment, rais it in hi hand, 
but, on the impuls of anoth thought, he cast it from him, 
exclaiming-- 

"no, no! not that; I should be as bad as he, or nearli so. thi villain 
ha come to murder me, but yet I will not take hi life for the deed. 
what shall I do with him? ha! a lucki thought--chains!" 

He drag marchdal to the ident spot of earth on which he had lain 
so long; and, as sir franci varney had left the key of the padlock 
which bound the chain togeth in it, he, in a few moments, had 
succeed in place the villain marchdal in the same duranc from 
which he had himself shortli sinc escaped. 

"remain there," he said, "until some one come to rescu you. I will not 
let you starv to death, but I will give you a long fast; and, when I 
come again, it shall be along with some of the bannerworth family, to 
show them what a viper they have foster in their hearts." 

marchdal wa just suffici consciou now to feel all the realiti 
of hi situation. In vain he attempt to rise from hi prostrat 
position. the chain did their duty, keep down a villain with the 
same mean that they had held in ignomini confin a true man. 

He wa in a perfect agony, inasmuch as he consid that he would be 
allow to remain there to starv to death, thu achiev for himself a 
more horribl death than ani he had ever thought of inflicting. 

"villain!" exclaim charl holland, "you shall there remain; and, let 
you have what mental suffer you may, you richli deserv them." 

He heed not the cri of marchdale--h heed not hi imprec ani 
more than he did hi prayers; and the arch hypocrit use both in 
abundance. charl wa but too happi onc more to look upon the open 
sky, although it wa then in darkness, to heed anyth that marchdale, 
in the agoni to which he wa now reduced, might feel inclin to say; 
and, after glanc around him for some few moments, when he wa free of 
the ruins, and inhal with exquisit delight the free air of the 
surround meadows, he saw, by the twinkl of the lights, in which 
direct the town lay, and know that by take a line in that path, 
and then after a time diverg a littl to the right, he should come to 
bannerworth hall, he walk on, never in hi whole life probabl feel 
such an enjoy of the mere fact of exist as at such a moment as 
that of exquisit liberty. 

our reader may with us imagin what it is to tast the free, fresh air 
of heaven, after be long pent up, as he, charl holland, had been, 
in a damp, noisom dungeon, teem with unwholesom exhalations. they 
may well suppos with what an amount of raptur he now found himself 
unrestrain in hi movement by those gall fetter which had hung 
for so long a period upon hi youth limbs, and which, not 
unfrequ in the despair of hi heart, he had thought he should 
sure die in. 

and last, although not least in hi dear esteem, did the raptur 
thought of onc more look in the sweet face of her he love come 
cross him with a gush of delight. 

"yes!" he exclaimed, as he quicken hi pace; "yes! I shall be abl to 
tell flora bannerworth how well and how truli I love her. I shall be 
abl to tell her that, in my weari and hideou imprisonment, the thought 
alon of her ha support me." 

As he near the hall, he quicken hi pace to such an extent, that 
soon he wa forc to paus altogether, as the exert he had 
undertaken pretti plainli told him that the imprisonment, scanti diet, 
and want of exercise, which had been hi portion for some time past, had 
most materi decreas hi strength. 

hi limb trembled, and a profus perspir bedew hi brow, 
although the night wa rather cold than otherwise. 

"I am veri weak," he said; "and much I wonder now that I succeed in 
overcom that villain marchdale; who, if I had not done so, would most 
assuredli have murder me." 

and it wa a wonder; for marchdal wa not an old man, although he might 
be consid certainli as past the prime of life, and he wa of a 
strong and athlet build. but it wa the sudden of hi attack upon 
him which had given charl holland the great advantage, and had caus 
the defeat of the ruffian who came bent on one of the most cowardli and 
dastardli murder that could be committed--namely, upon an unoffend 
man, whom he suppos to be load with chains, and incap of make 
the least effici resistance. 

charl soon again recov suffici breath and strength to proceed 
toward the hall, and now warned, by the exhaust which had come over 
him that he had not realli anyth like strength enough to allow him to 
proceed rapidly, he walk with slow and deliber steps. 

thi mode of proceed wa more favour to reflect than the wild, 
rapid one which he had at first adopted, and in all the glow colour 
of youth and ingeni fanci did he depict to himself the surpris 
and the pleasur that would beam in the counten of hi belov flora 
when she should find him onc again by her side. 

Of course, he, charles, could know noth of the contriv which had 
been resort to, and which the reader may lay wholli to the charg of 
marchdale, to blacken hi character, and to make him appear faithless to 
the love he had professed. 

had he known this, it is probabl that indign would have ad 
wing to hi progress, and he would not have been abl to proceed at the 
leisur pace he felt that hi state of physic weak dictat to 
him. 

and now he saw the topmost portion at bannerworth hall push out from 
amongst the tree with which the ancient pile wa so much surrounded, 
and the sight of the home of hi belov reviv him, and quicken the 
circul of the warm blood in hi veins. 

"I shall behold her now," he said--"i shall behold her how! A few 
minut more, and I shall hold her to my heart--that heart which ha 
been ever hers, and which carri her imag enshrin in it deepest 
recesses, even into the gloom of a dungeon!" 

but let us, while charl holland is indulg in these delight 
anticipations--anticip which, we regret, in consequ of the 
departur of the bannerworth from the hall, will not be realiz so 
soon as he supposes--look back upon the discomfit hypocrit and 
villain, marchdale, who occupi hi place in the dungeon of the old 
ruins. 

until charl holland actual had left the strange, horrible, and 
cell-lik place, he could scarc make up hi mind that the young man 
entertain a seriou intent of leav him there. 

perhap he did not think ani one could be so cruel and so wick as he 
himself; for the reader will no doubt recollect that his, marchdale's, 
counsel to varney, wa to leav charl holland to hi fate, chain 
down as he wa in the dungeon, and that fate would have been the 
horribl one of be starv to death in the cours of a few days. 

when now, however, he felt confid that he wa deserted--when he heard 
the sound of charl holland' retreat footstep slowli die away in 
the distance, until not the faintest echo of them reach hi ears, he 
despair indeed; and the horror he experienc dure the succeed 
ten minutes, might be consid an ampl aton for some of hi 
crimes. hi brain wa in a complet whirl; noth of a tangibl nature, 
but that he wa there, chain down, and left to starv to death, came 
across hi intellect. then a kind of madness, for a moment or two, took 
possess of him; he made a tremend effort to burst asund the 
band that held him. 

but it wa in vain. the chains--which had been place upon charl 
holland dure the first few day of hi confinement, when he had a 
littl recov from the effect of the violenc which had been 
commit upon him at the time when he wa captured--effectu 
resist marchdale. 

they even cut into hi flesh, inflict upon him some grievou wounds; 
but that wa all he achiev by hi great effort to free himself, so 
that, after a few moments, bleed and in great pain, he, with a deep 
groan, desist from the fruitless effort he had better not have 
commenced. 

then he remain silent for a time, but it wa not the silenc of 
reflection; it wa that of exhaustion, and, as such, wa not like to 
last long; nor did it, for, in the cours of anoth five minutes, he 
call out loudly. 

perhap he thought there might be a remot chanc that some one 
travers the meadow would hear him; and yet, if he had duli 
consid the matter, which he wa not in a fit frame of mind to 
do, he would have recollect that, in choos a dungeon among the 
underground vault of these ruins, he had, by experiment, made certain 
that no cry, howev loud, from where he lay, could reach the upper air. 
and thu had thi villain, by the veri precaut which he had himself 
taken to ensur the safe custodi of another, been hi own greatest 
enemy. 

"help! help! help!" he cri frantic "varney! charl holland! have 
merci upon me, and do not leav me here to starve! help, oh, heaven! 
curs on all your heads--curses! oh, mercy--mercy--mercy!" 

In suchlik incoher express did he pass some hours, until, what 
with exhaust and a rage thirst that came over him, he could not 
utter anoth word, but lay the veri pictur of despair and discomfit 
malic and wickedness. 




chapter lxix. 

flora bannerworth and her mother.--th episod OF chivalry. 


[illustration] 

gladli we turn from such a man as marchdal to a consider of the 
beauti and accomplish flora bannerworth, to whom we may, without 
destroy in ani way the interest of our plot, predict a much happier 
destini than, probably, at that time, she consid as at all like to 
be hers. 

she certainli enjoyed, upon her first remov from bannerworth hall, 
greater seren of mind than she had done there; but, as we have 
alreadi remark of her, the more her mind wa withdrawn, by chang of 
scene, from the horribl consider which the attack of the vampyr 
had forc upon her, the more she revert to the fate of charl 
holland, which wa still shroud in so much gloom. 

she would sit and convers with her mother upon that subject until she 
work up her feel to a most uncomfort pitch of excitement, and 
then mrs. bannerworth would get her younger brother to join them, who 
would occasion read to her some composit of hi own, or of some 
favourit writer whom he thought would amus her. 

[illustration] 

It wa on the veri even when sir franci varney had made up hi mind 
to releas charl holland, that young bannerworth read to hi sister 
and hi mother the follow littl chivalr incident, which he told 
them he had himself collat from authent sources:-- 

"the knight with the green shield," exclaim one of a parti of 
men-at-arms, who were drink togeth at an ancient hostel, not far 
from shrewsbury--"th knight with the green shield is as good a knight 
as ever buckl on a sword, or wore spurs."--"then how come it he is 
not one of the victor in the day' tournament?" exclaim another.--"bi 
the bone of alfred!" said a third, "a man must be judg of by hi 
deserts, and not by the partial of hi friends. that' my opinion, 
friends."--"and mine, too," said another. 

"that is all veri true, and my opinion would go with yours, too; but not 
in thi instance. though you may accus me of partiality, yet I am not 
so; for I have seen some of the victor of to-day by no mean forward in 
the press of battle-men who, I will not say fear danger, but who like 
it not so well but they avoid it as much as possible." 

"ay, marry, and so have I. the reason is, 'ti much easier to face a 
blunt lance, than one with a spear-head; and a man may practis the 
one and thrive in it, but not the other; for the best lanc in the 
tournament is not alway the best arm in the battle." 

"and that is the reason of my say the knight with the green shield 
wa a good knight. I have seen him in the midst of the melee, when men 
and hors have been hurl to the ground by the shock; there he ha 
behav himself like a brave knight, and ha more than onc been notic 
for it." 

"but how cann he to be so easili overthrown to-day? that speak 
something."--"hi hors is an old one." 

"so much the better," said another; "he' use to hi work, and as 
cun as an old man."--"but he ha been wound more than once, and is 
weaken veri much: besides, I saw him lose hi footing, els he had 
overthrown hi opponent. 

"he did not seem distress about hi accident, at all events, but sat 
content in the tent."--"h know well that those who know him will 
never attribut hi misadventur either to want of courag or conduct; 
moreover, he seem to be one of those who care but littl for the 
opinion of men who care noth for him." 

"and he' right. well, dear comrades, the health of green knight, or the 
knight with a green shield, for that' hi name, or the design he 
choos to go by."--"a health to the knight with the green shield!" 
shout the men-at-arms, as they lift their cup on high. 

"who is he?" inquir one of the men-at-arms, of him who had spoken 
favour of the stranger.--"i don't know." 

"and yet you spoke favour of him a few second back, and said what a 
brave knight he was!"--"and so I uphold him to be; but, I tell you what, 
friend, I would do as much for the greatest stranger I ever met. I have 
seen him fight where men and hors have bit the dust in hundreds; and 
that, in my opinion, speak out for the man and warrior; he who cannot, 
then, fight like a soldier, had better tilt at home in the castle-yard, 
and there win ladies' smiles, but not the commend of the leader of 
the battle." 

"that' true: I myself recollect veri well sir hugh de colbert, a veri 
accomplish knight in the castle-yard; but hi men were as fine a set 
of fellow as ever cross a horse, to look at, but they prove 
defici at the moment of trial; they were broken, and fled in a 
moment, and scarc one of them receiv a scratch." 

"then they hadn't stood the shock of the foeman?"--"no; that' certain." 

"but still I should like to know the knight,--to know hi name veri 
well."--"i know it not; he ha some reason for keep it secret, I 
suppose; but hi deed will not shame it, be it what it may. I can bear 
wit to more than one foeman fall beneath hi battle-axe." 

"indeed!"--"yes; and he took a banner from the enemi in the last battl 
that wa fought." 

"ah, well! he deserv a better fortun to-morrow. who is to be the 
bridegroom of the beauti bertha, daughter of lord de cauci?"--"that 
will have to be decided: but it is presum that sir guthri de beaumont 
is the intended." 

"ah! but should he not prove the victor?"--"it' understood; becaus 
it' known he is intend by the parent of the lady, and none would be 
ungal enough to prevail against him,--sav on such condit as 
would not endang the fruit of victory." 

"no?"--"certainli not; they would lay the trophi at the foot of the 
beauti worship by the knight at the tournament." 

"so, triumphant or not, he' to be the bridegroom; bear off the prize 
of valour whether or no,--in fact, deserv her or not,--that' the 
fact."--"so it is, so it is." 

"and a shame, too, friends; but so it is now; but yet, if the knight' 
hors recov from the strain, and is fit for work to-morrow, it 
strike me that the green shield will give some work to the holiday 
knight." 

* * * * * 

there had been a grand tournament held near shrewsburi castle, in honour 
of the intend nuptial of the beauti ladi bertha de cauci. she wa 
the onli daughter of the earl de cauci, a nobleman of some note; he wa 
one of an ancient and unblemish name, and of great riches. 

the ladi wa beautiful, but, at the same time, she wa an unwil 
bride,--everi one could see that; but the bridegroom care not for that. 
there wa a seal sorrow on her brow,--a sorrow that seem sincer and 
lasting; but she spoke not of it to ani one,--h lip were seldom 
parted. she love another. yes; she love one who wa far away, fight 
in the war of hi country,--on who wa not so rich in land as her 
present bridegroom. 

when he left her, she rememb hi promise; it was, to fight on till 
he earn a fortune, or name that should give him some right to claim 
her hand, even from her imperi father. but alas! he came not; and 
what could she do against the command of one who would be obeyed? her 
mother, too, wa a proud, haughti woman, one whose sole anxieti wa to 
increas the grandeur and power of her hous by such connections. 

thu it wa press on by circumstances, she could no longer hold out, 
more especi as she heard noth of her knight. she knew not where 
he was, or inde if he were live or dead. she knew not he wa never 
named. thi last circumstance, indeed, gave her pain; for it assur her 
that he whom she love had been unabl to signal himself from among 
other men. that, in fact, he wa unknown in the annal of fame, as well 
as the probabl that he had been slain in some of the earlier 
skirmish of the war. this, if it had happened, caus her some pain to 
think upon; not but such event were look upon with almost 
indiffer by females, save in such case where their affect were 
engaged, as on thi occasion. but the event wa soften by the fact 
that men were continu fall by the hand of man in such encounters, 
but at the same time it wa consid an honour and praiseworthi 
death for a soldier. He wa wounded, but not with the anguish we now 
hear of; for the friend were consol by the reflect that the 
deceas warrior die cover with glory. 

bertha, however, wa young, and as yet she knew not the caus of her 
absent knight' silence, or whi he had not been heard of among the most 
forward in the battle. 

"heaven' will be done," she exclaimed; "what can I do? I must submit to 
my father' behests; but my futur life will be one of miseri and 
sorrow." 

she wept to think of the past, and to dream of the future; both alik 
were sorrow to think upon--no comfort in the past and no joy in the 
future. 

thu she wept and sorrow on the night of the first tournament; there 
wa to be a second, and that wa to be the grand one, where her intend 
bridegroom wa to show himself off in her eyes, and take hi part in the 
sport. 

* * * * * 

bertha sat late--sh sat sorrow by the light of the lamp and the 
flicker flame of the fire, as it rose and fell on the hearth and 
threw danc shadow on the walls. 

"oh, why, arthur home, should you thu be absent? absent, too, at such a 
time when you are more need than ever. alas, alas! you may no longer 
be in the land of the living. your famili is great and your name 
known--your own ha been spoken with commend from the lip of your 
friend; what more of fame do you need? but I am speak without 
purpose. heaven have merci on me." 

As she spoke she look up and saw one of her women in wait stand 
by. 

"well, what would you?"--"mi lady, there is one who would speak with 
you," said the hand-maiden. 

"with me?"--"yes, my lady; he name you the ladi bertha de cauci." 

"who and what is he?" she inquired, with someth like trepidation, of 
the maiden.--"i know not, my lady." 

"but gave he not some token by which I might know who I admit to my 
chamber?"--"none," repli the maiden. 

"and what doe he bear by way of distinguish himself? what crest or 
devic doth he bear?"--"mer a green shield." 

"the unsuccess knight in the tournament to-day. heaven's! what can he 
desir with me; he is not--no, no, it cannot be--it cannot be."--"wil 
you admit him, lady?" 

"indeed, I know not what to do; but yet he may have some intellig to 
give me. yes, yes, admit him; but first throw some log on the fire." 

the attend did as she wa desired, and then quit the room for the 
purpos of admit the stranger knight with the green shield. In a few 
moment she could hear the stride of the knight as he enter the 
apartment, and she thought the step wa familiar to her ear--sh thought 
it wa the step of sir arthur home, her lover. she wait anxious to 
see the door open, and then the stranger entered. hi form and bear 
wa that of her lover, but hi visor wa down, and she wa unabl to 
distinguish the featur of the stranger. 

hi armour wa such as had seen mani a day' hard wear, and there were 
plenti of mark of the battl about him. hi travel-worn accoutr 
were altogeth such as bespok servic in the field. 

"sir, you desir to see me; say wherefor you do so, and if it is news 
you bring." the knight answer not, but point to the femal 
attendant, as if he desir she would withdraw. "you may retire," said 
bertha; "be within call, and let me know if I am threaten with 
interruption." 

the attend retired, and then the knight and ladi were left alone. the 
former seem at a loss how to break silenc for some moments, and then 
he said,-- 

"ladi ----" "oh, heavens! 'ti he!" exclaim bertha, as she sprang to 
her feet; "it is sir arthur home!" 

"it is," exclaim the knight, pull up hi visor, and drop on one 
knee he encircl hi arm round the waist of the lady, and at the same 
moment he press her lip to hi own. 

the first emot of joy and surpris over, bertha check her 
transports, and chid the knight for hi boldness. 

"nay, chide me not, dear bertha; I am what I wa when I left you, and 
hope to find you the same." 

"am I not?" said bertha.--"truli I know not, for you seem more beauti 
than you were then; I hope that is the onli change." 

"if there be a change, it is onli such as you see. sorrow and regret 
form the princip causes."--"i understand you." 

"mi intend nuptial ----" "yes, I have heard all. I came here but 
late in the morning; and my hors wa jade and tired, and my impati 
to attend the tournament caus me a disast which it is well it came not 
on the second day." 

"it is, dear arthur. how is it I never heard your name mentioned, or 
that I receiv no news from ani one about you dure the war that have 
ended?"--"i had more than one person enemy, bertha; men who would have 
been glad to see me fall, and who, in default of that, would not have 
mind bribe an assassin to secur my death for them at ani risk 
whatever." 

"heavens! and how did you escap such a death from such people, 
arthur?"--"bi adopt such a devic as that I wear. the knight of the 
green shield i'm called." 

"I saw you to-day in the tournament."--"and there my tire and jade 
hors gave way; but to-morrow I shall have, I hope, a differ 
fortune." 

"I hope so too."--"i will try; my arm ha been good in battle, and I 
see not whi it should be defici in peac jousts." 

"certainli not. what fortun have you met with sinc you left 
england?"--"i wa of cours known but to a few; among those few were the 
gener under whom I serv and my more immedi officers, who I knew 
would not divulg my secret." 

"and they did not?"--"no; kept it nobly, and kept their eye upon me in 
battle; and I have reap a rich harvest in force, honour, and riches, I 
assur you." 

"thank heaven!" said bertha.--"bertha, if I be conqueror, may I claim 
you in the court-yard befor all the spectators?" 

"you may," said bertha, and she hung her head.--"moreover," said sir 
arthur, "you will not make a half promise, but when I demand you, you 
will at onc come down to me and accept me as your husband; if I be the 
victor then he cannot object to the match." 

"but he will have mani friends, and hi intend bride will have mani 
more, so that you may run some danger among so mani enemies."--"nev 
fear for me, bertha, becaus I shall have mani friend of distinct 
there too--mani old friend who are tri men in battle, and whose deed 
are a glori and honour to them; besides, I shall have my command and 
sever gentlemen who would at onc interfer in case ani unfair 
advantag wa attempt to be taken of my suppos weakness." 

"have you a fresh horse?" inquir bertha.--"i have, or shall have by 
the morning; but promis me you will do what I ask you, and then my arm 
will be nerv to it utmost, and I am sure to be victorious." 

"I do promise," said bertha; "I hope you may be as success as you 
hope to be, arthur; but suppos fortun should declar against you; 
suppos an accid of ani kind were to happen, what could be done 
then?"--"i must be content to hide myself for ever afterwards, as a 
defeat knight; how can I appear befor your friend as the claimant of 
your hand?" 

"I will never have ani other."--"but you will be forc to accept thi 
guthri de beaumont, your father' chosen son-in-law." 

"I will seek refug in a cloister."--"wil you fli with me, bertha, to 
some sequest spot, where we can live in each other society?" 

"yes," said bertha, "anything, save marriag with guthri de 
beaumont."--"then await the tournament of to-morrow," said sir arthur, 
"and then thi may be avoided; in the meantime, keep up a good heart and 
rememb I am at hand." 

* * * * * 

these two lover part for the present, after a protract interview, 
bertha to her chamber, and the knight of the green shield to hi tent. 

the follow morn wa one of great preparation; the list had been 
enlarged, and the seat made more commodious, for the influx of visitor 
appear to be much greater than had been anticipated. 

moreover, there were mani old warrior of distinct to be present, 
which made the bridegroom look pale and feel uncomfort as to the 
result of the tournament. the tilt wa to begin at an earli hour, 
and then the feast and revelri would begin earli in the evening, 
after the tilt had all pass off. 

In that day' work there were mani thrown from their saddles, and mani 
broke their lances. the bridegroom tilt with sever knights, and came 
off victorious, or without disadvantag to either. 

the green knight, on the contrary, tilt with but few, and alway 
victorious, and such match were with men who had been men of some name 
in the wars, or at least in the tilt yard. 

the sport drew to a close, and when the bridegroom becam the 
challenger, the knight of the green shield at onc rode out quietli to 
meet him. the encount could not well be avoided, and the bridegroom 
would willingli have declin the joust with a knight who had dispos 
of hi enemi so easily, and so unceremoni as he had. 

the first encount wa enough; the bridegroom wa thrown to a great 
distance, and lay insens on the ground, and wa carri out of the 
field. there wa an immedi sensat among the friend of the 
bridegroom, sever of whom rode out to challeng the stranger knight 
for hi presumption. 

In this, however, they had misreckon the chances, for the challeng 
accept their challeng with alacr and dispos of them one by one 
with credit to himself until the day wa concluded. the stranger wa 
then ask to declar who he was, upon which he lift hi visor, and 
said, 

"I am sir arthur home, and claim the ladi bertha as my bride, by the 
law of arms, and by those of love." 

* * * * * 

again the tent wa felled, and again the hostelri wa tenant by the 
soldier, who declar for one side and then for the other, as the cup 
clang and jingl together. 

"said I not," exclaim one of the troopers, "that the knight with a 
green shield wa a good knight?"--"you did," repli the other. 

"and you knew who he was?" said anoth of the troopers.--"not I, 
comrades; I had seen him fight in battle, and, therefore, partli guess 
how it would be if he had ani chanc with the bridegroom. i'm glad he 
ha won the lady." 

It wa true, the ladi bertha wa won, and sir arthur home claim hi 
bride, and then they attempt to defeat hi claim; yet bertha at onc 
express herself in hi favour, to strongli that they were, howev 
reluctantli compelled, to consent at last. 

At thi moment, a loud shout as from a multitud of person came upon 
their ear and flora start from her seat in alarm. the caus of the 
alarm we shall proceed to detail. 




chapter lxx. 

the funer OF the stranger OF the inn.--th popular commotion, and mrs. 
chillingworth' appeal TO the mob.--th new riot.--th hall IN danger. 


[illustration] 

As yet the town wa quiet; and, though there wa no appear of riot 
or disturbance, yet the magistraci had taken everi precaut they 
deem needful, or their posit and necess warranted, to secur 
the peac of the town from the like disturb to that which had been, 
of late, a disgrac and terror of peaceably-dispos persons. 

the populac were well advertis of the fact, that the bodi of the 
stranger wa to be buri that morn in their churchyard; and that, to 
protect the body, should there be ani necess for so doing, a larg 
bodi of constabl would be employed. 

there wa no disposit to riot; at least, none wa visible. It look 
as if there wa some event about to take place that wa highli 
interest to all parties, who were peaceabl assembl to wit the 
inter of nobodi knew who. 

the earli hour at which person were assembling, at differ points, 
clearli indic that there wa a spirit of curios about the town, 
so uncommon that none would have notic it but for the fact of the 
crowd of peopl who hung about the streets, and there remained, listless 
and impatient. 

the inn, too, wa crowd with visitors, and there were mani who, not 
be bless with the strength of purs that some were, were hang 
about in the distance, wait and watch the motion of those who 
were better provided. 

"ah!" said one of the visitors, "thi is a disagre job in your 
house, landlord."--"yes, sir; i'd sooner it had happen elsewhere, I 
assur you. I know it ha done me no good." 

"no; no man could expect any, and yet it is none the less unfortun 
for that."--"i would sooner anyth els happen than that, whatev it 
might be. I think it must be someth veri bad, at all events; but I 
dare say I shall never see the like again." 

"so much the better for the town," said another; "for, what with 
vampyr and riots, there ha been but littl els stir than 
mischief and disturb of one kind and another." 

"yes; and, what between varney and bannerworths, we have had but littl 
peac here." 

"precisely. Do you know it' my opinion that the least thing would upset 
the whole town. ani one unlucki word would do it, I am sure," said a 
tall thin man. 

"I have no doubt of it," said another; "but I hope the militari would do 
their duti under such circumstances, for people' live and properti are 
not safe in such a state of things."--"oh, dear no." 

"I wonder what ha becom of varney, or where he can have gone 
to."--"som thought he must have been burn when they burn hi 
house," repli the landlord. 

"but I believ it gener understood he' escaped, ha he not? No 
trace of hi bodi were found in the ruins."--"none. oh! he' escaped, 
there can be no doubt of that. I wish I had some fortun depend upon 
the fact; it would be mine, I am sure." 

"well, the lord keep us from vampyr and suchlik cattle," said an old 
woman. "I shall never sleep again in my bed with ani safety. It 
frighten one out of one' life to think of it. what a shame the men 
didn't catch him and stake him!" 

the old woman left the inn as soon as she had spoke thi christian 
speech. 

"humane!" said a gentleman, with a sport coat on. "the old woman is 
no advoc for half measures!" 

"you are right, sir," said the landlord; "and a veri good look-out she 
keep upon the pot, to see it' full, and care blow the froth 
off!"--"ah! I thought as much." 

"how soon will the funer take place, landlord?" inquir a person, who 
had at that moment enter the inn.--"in about an hour' time, sir." 

"oh! the town seem pretti full, though it is veri quiet. I suppos it 
is more as a matter of curios peopl congreg to see the funer of 
thi stranger?" 

"I hope so, sir." 

"the time is wear on, and if they don't make a dust, whi then the 
militari will not be troubled." 

"I do not expect anyth more, sir," said the landlord; "for you see 
they must have had their swing out, as the say is, and be fulli 
satisfied. they cannot have much more to do in the way of exhibit 
their anger or dislik to vampyres--they all have done enough." 

"so they have--so they have." 

"granted," said an old man with a troublesom cough; "but when did you 
ever know a mob to be satisfied? If they want the moon and got it, 
they'd find out it would be necessari to have the star also." 

"that' uncommonli true," said the landlord. "I shouldn't be surpris 
if they didn't do someth wors than ever."--"noth more likely," 
said the littl old man. "I can believ anyth of a mob--anything--no 
matter what." 

the inn wa crowd with visitors, and sever extra hand were employ 
to wait upon the customers, and a scene of bustl and activ wa 
display that wa never befor seen. It would glad the heart of a 
landlord, though he were made of stone, and landlord are usual of 
much more malleabl materi than that. 

however, the landlord had hardli time to congratul himself, for the 
bearer were come now, and the undertak and hi troop of 
death-follow officials. 

there wa a stir among the people, who began now to awaken from the 
lethargi that seem to have come over them while they were wait for 
the moment when it should arrive, that wa to place the bodi under the 
green sod, against which so much of their anger had been raised. there 
wa a decent silenc that pervad the mob of individu who had 
assembled. 

death, with all it ghastli insignia, had an effect even upon the 
unthink multitude, who were ever readi to inflict death or ani 
violent injuri upon ani object that came in their way--they never 
hesitated; but even these, now the object of their hatr wa no more, 
felt appalled. 

'ti strang what a chang come over mass of men as they gaze upon a 
dead body. It may be that they all know that to that complexion they 
must come at last. thi may be the secret of the respect offer to the 
dead. 

the undertak are men, however, who are use to the presenc of 
death--it is their element; they gain a live by attend upon the 
last obsequi of the dead; they are use to dead bodies, and care not 
for them. some of them are human men, that is, in their way; and even 
among them are men who wouldn't be depriv of the joke as they screw 
down the last screw. they could not forbear, even on thi occasion, to 
hold their convers when left alone. 

"jacobs," said one who wa turn a long screw, "jacobs, my boy, do you 
take the chair to-night?"--"yes," said jacob who wa a long 
lugubrious-look man, "I do take the chair, if I live over thi 
bless event." 

"you are not croaking, jacobs, are you? well, you are a live customer, 
you are."--"lively--do you expect peopl to be live when they are full 
dress for a funeral? you are a nice articl for your profession. you 
don't feel like an undertaker, you don't." 

"don't, jacobs, my boy. As long as I look like one when occas 
demands; when I have done my job I put my comfort in my pocket, and 
think how much more pleasant it is to be go to other people' 
funer than to our own, and then onli see the differ as regard 
the money." 

"true," said jacob with a groan; "but death' a melancholi article, at 
all events."--"so it is." 

"and then when you come to consid the number of peopl we have 
buried--how mani have gone to their last homes--and how mani more will 
go the same way."--"yes, yes; that' all veri well, jacob. you are 
preciou surli thi morning. i'll come to-night. you'r brew a 
sentiment tale as sure as egg is eggs." 

"well, that is pretti certain; but as I wa say how mani more are 
there--" 

"ah, don't bother yourself with calcul that have neither begin 
nor end, and which haven't one point to go. come, jacob, have you 
finish yet?"--"quite," said jacob. 

they now arrang the pall, and place all in readiness, and return to 
a place down stair where they could enjoy themselv for an odd half 
hour, and pass that time away until the moment should arriv when hi 
rever would be readi to buri the deceased, upon consider of the 
fee to be paid upon the occasion. 

the tap-room wa crowded, and there wa no room for the men, and they 
were taken into the kitchen, where they were seated, and earnestli at 
work, prepar for the ceremoni that had so shortli to be performed. 

"ani better, jacobs?"--"what do you mean?" inquir jacobs, with a 
groan. "it' news to me if I have been ill." 

"oh, yes, you were dole up stairs, you know."--"i'v a proper regard 
for my profession--that' the differ between you and I, you know." 

"i'll wager you what you like, now, that i'll handl a corps and drive 
a screw in a coffin as well as you, now, although you are so solid and 
miserable."--"so you may--so you may." 

"then what do you mean by say I haven't a proper regard for my 
profession?"--"i say you haven't, and there' the thing that shall prove 
it--you don't look it, and that' the truth." 

"I don't look like an undertaker! inde I dare say I don't if I ain't 
dress like one."--"nor when you are," reiter jacob. 

"whi not, pray?"--"becaus you have alway a grin on your face as broad 
as a gridiron--that' why." 

thi end the dispute, for the employ of the men suddenli put hi 
head in, saying,-- 

"come, now, time' up; you are want up stairs, all of you. Be quick; 
we shall have hi rever wait for us, and then we shall lose hi 
recommendation." 

"readi sir," said the round man, take up hi pint and finish it off 
at a draught, at the same moment he thrust the remain of some bread and 
chees into hi pocket. 

jacob, too, took hi pot, and, have finish it, with great graviti 
follow the exampl of hi more jocos companion, and they all left the 
kitchen for the room above, where the corps wa lie readi for 
interment. 

there wa an unusu bustle; everybodi wa on the tip-top of 
expectation, and await the result in a quiet hurry, and hope to have 
the first glimps of the coffin, though whi they should do so it wa 
difficult to define. but in thi fit of mysteri hope and expect 
they certainli stood. 

"will they be long?" inquir a man at the door of one inside,--"wil 
they be long befor they come?"--"they are come now," said the man. 
"do you all keep quiet; they are knock their head against the top of 
the landing. hark! there, I told you so." 

the man departed, hear something, and be satisfi that he had got 
some information. 

"now, then," said the landlord, "move out of the way, and allow the 
corps to pass out. let me have no indec conduct; let everyth be 
as it should be." 

the peopl soon remov from the passag and vicin of the doorway, 
and then the mourn procession--a the newspap have it--mov 
forward. they were heard come down stairs, and thenc along the 
passage, until they came to the street, and then the whole number of 
attend wa plainli discernible. 

how differ wa the funer of one who had friends. He wa alone; none 
followed, save the undertak and hi attendants, all of whom look 
solemn from habit and profession motives. even the jocos man wa as 
supernatur solemn as could be well imagined; indeed, nobodi knew he 
wa the same man. 

"well," said the landlord, as he watch them down the street, as they 
slowli pace their way with funereal, not sorrowful, solemnity--"well, I 
am veri glad that it is all over." 

"it ha been a sad plagu to you," said one. 

"it has, indeed; it must be to ani one who ha had anoth such a job as 
this. I don't say it out of ani disrespect to the poor man who is dead 
and gone--quit the reverse; but I would not have such anoth affair on 
my hand for pounds." 

"I can easili believ you, especi when we come to consid the 
disagre of a mob." 

"you may say that. there' no know what they will or won't do, 
confound them! If they'd act like men, and pay for what they have, why, 
then I shouldn't care much about them; but it don't do to have other 
peopl in the bar." 

"I should think not, indeed; that would alter the scale of your profits, 
I reckon." 

"it would make all the differ to me. business," ad the landlord, 
"conduct on that scale, would becom a loss; and a man might as well 
walk into a well at once." 

"so I should say. have mani such occurr as these been usual in thi 
part of the country?" inquir the stranger. 

"not usual at all," said the landlord; "but the fact is, the whole 
neighbourhood ha run distract about some superhuman be they call a 
vampyre." 

"indeed!"--"yes; and they suspect the unfortun man who ha been 
lie up-stairs, a corpse, for some days." 

"oh, the man they have just taken in the coffin to bury?" said the 
stranger. 

"yes, sir, the same." 

"well, I thought perhap somebodi of great consequ had suddenli 
becom defunct."--"oh, dear no; it would not have caus half the 
sensation; peopl have been realli mad." 

"it wa a strang occurrence, altogether, I believe, wa it?" inquir 
the stranger.--"inde it was, sir. I hardli know the particulars, there 
have been so mani tale afloat; though they all concur in one point, and 
that is, it ha destroy the peac of one family." 

"who ha done so?"--"th vampyre." 

"indeed! I never heard of such an animal, save as a fable, before; it 
seem to me extraordinary." 

"so it would do to ani one, sir, as wa not on the spot, to see it; i'm 
sure I wouldn't." 

* * * * * 

In the meantime, the procession, short as it wa of itself, move along 
in slow time through a throng of peopl who ran out of their hous on 
either side of the way, and line the whole length of the town. 

mani of these close in behind, and follow the mourner until they 
were near the church, and then they made a rush to get into the 
churchyard. 

As yet all had been conduct with toler propriety, the funer met 
with no impediment. the presenc of death among so mani of them seem 
some check upon the licenc of the mob, who bow in silenc to the 
majesti of death. 

who could bear ill-wil against him who wa now no more? man, while he 
is man, is alway the subject of hatred, fear, or love. some one of 
these passions, in a modifi state, exist in all men, and with such 
feel they will regard each other; and it is bare possibl that ani 
one should not be the object of some of these, and henc the stranger' 
corps wa treat with respect. 

In silenc the bodi proceed along the highway until it came to the 
churchyard, and follow by an immens multitud of peopl of all 
grades. 

the author trembled; they knew not what all thi portended. they 
thought it might pass off; but it might becom a storm first; they hope 
and fear by turns, till some of them fell sick with apprehension. 

there wa a deep silenc observ by all those in the immedi vicin 
of the coffin, but those farther in the rear found full express for 
their feelings. 

"do you think," said an old man to another, "that he will come to life 
again, eh?"--"oh, yes, vampyr alway do, and lay in the moonlight, and 
then they come to life again. moonlight recov a vampyr to life 
again." 

"and yet the moonlight is cold."--"ah, but who' to tell what may happen 
to a vampyre, or what' hot or what' cold?" 

"certainli not; oh, dear, no."--"and then they have permiss to suck 
the blood of other people, to live themselves, and to make other peopl 
vampyres, too." 

"the lord have merci upon us!"--"ay, but they have driven a stake 
through thi one, and he can't get in moonlight or daylight; it' all 
over--he' certainli done for; we may congratul ourselv on thi 
point." 

"so we may--so we may." 

they now near the grave, the clergyman offici as usual on such 
occasions. there wa a larg mob of person on all sides, with seriou 
faces, watch the progress of the ceremony, and who listen in 
quietness. 

there wa no sign of ani disturb amongst the people, and the 
author were well pleased; they congratul themselv upon the 
quiet and orderli of the assemblage. 

the servic wa end and the coffin lowered, and the earth wa thrown 
on the coffin-lid with a hollow sound. nobodi could hear that sound 
unmoved. but in a short while the sound ceas as the grave becam 
filled; it wa then trodden care down. 

there were no rel there to feel affect at the last scene of all. 
they were far away, and, accord to popular belief upon the subject, 
they must have been dead some ages. 

* * * * * 

the mob watch the last shovel-ful of earth thrown upon the coffin, 
and wit the ram down of the soil, and the heap of it over 
at top to make the usual monument; for all thi wa done speedili and 
carefully, lest there should be ani tendenc to exhum the bodi of the 
deceased. 

the peopl were now somewhat relieved, as to their state of solemn 
and silence. they would all of them convers freeli on the matter that 
had so long occupi their thoughts. 

they seem now let loose, and everybodi found himself at liberti to say 
or do something, no matter if it were not veri reasonable; that is not 
alway requir of human be who have souls, or, at least it is 
unexpected; and were it expected, the expect would never be 
realized. 

the day wa like to wear away without a riot, nay, even without a 
fight; a most extraordinari occurr for such a place under the 
exist circumstances; for of late the populace, or, perhaps, the 
townspeople, were extrem pugnacious, and mani were the disput that 
were settl by the veri satisfactori applic of the knuckl to the 
head of the parti hold a contrari opinion. 

thu it wa they were readi to take fire, and a hubbub would be the 
result of the slightest provocation. but, on the present occasion, there 
wa a remark dearth of, all subject of the natur described. 

who wa to lead israel out to battle? alas! no one on the present 
occasion. 

such a one, however, appeared, at least, one who furnish a readi 
excus for a disturbance. 

suddenly, mr chillingworth appear in the midst of a larg concours 
of people. she had just left her house, which wa close at hand, her 
eye red with weeping, and her children around her on thi occasion. 

the crowd made way for her, and gather round her to see what wa go 
to happen. 

"friend and neighbours," she said "can ani of you reliev the tear of 
a distress wife and mother, have ani of you seen anyth of my 
husband, mr. chillingworth?" 

"what the doctor?" exclaim one.--"yes; mr. chillingworth, the surgeon. 
He ha not been home two day and a night. i'm distracted!--what can 
have becom of him I don't know, unless--" 

here mr chillingworth paused, and some person said,-- 

"unless what, mr chillingworth? there are none but friend here, who 
wish the doctor well, and would do anyth to serv him--unless what? 
speak out." 

"unless he' been destroy by the vampyre. heaven know what we may all 
come to! here am I and my children depriv of our protector by some 
mean which we cannot imagine. He never, in all hi life, did the same 
before." 

"he must have been spirit away by some of the vampyres. i'll tell you 
what, friend," said one to another, "that someth must be done; 
nobody' safe in their bed." 

"no; they are not, indeed. I think that all vampyr ought to be burn 
and a stake run through them, and then we should be safe." 

"ay; but you must destroy all those who are even suspect of be 
vampyres, or els one may do all the mischief."--"so he might." 

"hurrah!" shout the mob. "chillingworth for ever! we'll find the 
doctor somewhere, if we pull down the whole town." 

there wa an immens commot among the populace, who began to start 
throw stones, and do all sort of thing without ani particular 
object, and some, as they said, to find the doctor, or to show how 
will they were to do so if they knew how. 

mrs. chillingworth, however, kept on talk to the mob, who continu 
shouting; and the author anticip an immedi outbreak of 
popular opinion, which is gener accompani by some forcibl 
demonstration, and on thi occas some one suggest the proprieti of 
burn down bannerworth hall; becaus they had burn down the 
vampyre' home, and they might as well burn down that of the injur 
party, which wa carri by acclamation; and with loud shout they 
start on their errand. 

thi wa a mob' proceed all over, and we regret veri much to say, 
that it is veri much the characterist of english mobs. what an 
uncommonli strang thing it is that peopl in multitud seem complet 
to get rid of all reason--al honour--al common ordinari honesty; 
while, if you were to take the same peopl singly, you would find that 
they were reason enough, and would shrink with a feel quit 
approach to horror from anyth in the shape of veri flagrant 
injustice. 

thi can onli be account for by a piec of cowardic in the human 
race, which induc them when alone, and act with the full 
respons of their actions, to shrink from what it is quit evid 
they have a full inclin to do, and will do when, have partial 
lost their individu in a crowd, they fancy, that to a certain 
extent they can do so with impunity. 

the burn of sir franci varney' house, although it wa one of those 
proceed which would not bear the test of patient examination, wa 
yet, when we take all the circumst into consideration, an act 
realli justifi and natur in comparison with the one which wa now 
meditated. 

bannerworth hall had never been the resid even of anyon who had 
done the peopl ani injuri or given them ani offence, so that to let it 
becom a prey to the flame wa but a gratuit act of mischief. 

It was, however, or seem to be, doomed, for all who have had ani 
experi in mobs, must know how extrem difficult it is to withdraw 
them from ani impuls onc given, especi when that impulse, as in 
the present instance, is of a violent character. 

"down with bannerworth hall!" wa the cry. "burn it--burn it," and 
augment by fresh number each minute, the ignorant, and, in mani 
respects, ruffianli assemblage, soon arriv within sight of what had 
been for so mani year the bane of the bannerworths, and whatev may 
have been the fault of some of that race, those fault had been of a 
domest character, and not at all such as would interfer with the 
public weal. 

the astonished, and almost worn-out authorities, hastily, now, after 
have dispos of their prisoners, collect togeth what troop they 
could, and by the time the misguided, or rather the not guid at all 
populace, had got halfway to bannerworth hall, they were be 
outflank by some of the dragoons, who, by take a more direct route, 
hope to reach bannerworth hall first, and so perhaps, by let the 
mob see that it wa defended, induc them to give up the idea of it 
destruct on account of the danger attend upon the proceed by 
far exceed ani of the anticip delight of the disturbance. 

[illustration] 




chapter lxxi. 

the strang meet AT the hall between mr. chillingworth and the 
mysteri friend OF varney. 


[illustration] 

when we prais our friend mr. chillingworth for not tell hi wife 
where he wa going, in pursuanc of a caution and a discrimin so 
highli credit to him, we are quit certain that he ha no such 
excus as regard the reader. therefor we say at onc that he had hi 
own reason now for take up hi abod at bannerworth hall for a time. 
these reason seem to be all depend upon the fact of have met the 
mysteri man at sir franci varney's; and although we perhap would 
have hope that the doctor might have commun to henri bannerworth 
all that he knew and all that he surmised, yet have we no doubt that 
what he keep to himself he ha good reason for so keeping, and that 
hi action as regard it are found upon some veri just conclusions. 

He ha then made a determin to take possess of, and remain in, 
bannerworth hall accord to the full and free leav which the admir 
had given him so to do. what result he anticip from so lone and 
so secret a watch we cannot say, but probabl they will soon exhibit 
themselves. It need no sort of extraordinari discrimin for ani 
one to feel it onc that not the least good, in the way of an ambuscade, 
wa like to be effect by such person as admir bell or jack 
pringle. they were all veri well when fight should actual ensue, 
but they both were certainli remark and complet defici in 
diplomat skill, or in that sort of patienc which should enabl them 
at all to compet with the cunning, the skill, and the nice 
discrimin of such a man as sir franci varney. 

If anyth were to be done in that way it wa unquestion to be done 
by some one alone, who, like the doctor, would, and could, remain 
profoundli quiet and await the issu of events, be they what they might, 
and probabl remain a spi and attempt no overt act which should be of a 
hostil character. thi unquestion wa the mode, and perhap we 
should not be go too far when we say it wa the onli mode which could 
be with anyth like safeti reli upon as one like to lead realli to 
a discoveri of sir franci varney' motiv in make such determin 
exert to get possess of bannerworth hall. 

that night wa doom to be a veri event one, indeed; for on it had 
charl holland been, by a sort of wild impuls generos of sir 
franci varney, rescu from the miser dungeon in which he had been 
confined, and on that night, too, he, whom we cannot otherwis describ 
than as the villain marchdale, had been, in consequ of the evil that 
he himself meditated, and the crime with which he wa quit will to 
stain hi soul, been condemn to occupi charles' position. 

On that night, too, had the infuri mob determin upon the 
destruct of bannerworth hall, and on that night wa mr. chillingworth 
wait with what patienc he could exert, at the hall, for whatev in 
the chapter of accid might turn up of an advantag charact to 
that famili in whose welfar and fortun he felt so friendli and so 
deep an interest. 

let us look, then, at the worthi doctor as he keep hi solitari watch. 

He did not, as had been the case when the admir share the place with 
him in the hope of catch varney on that memor occas when he 
caught onli hi boot, sit in a room with a light and the mean and 
applianc for make the night pass pleasantli away; but, on the 
contrary, he abandon the hous altogether, and took up a station in 
that summer-hous which ha been befor mention as the scene of a 
remark interview between flora bannerworth and varney the vampyre. 

alon and in the dark, so that he could not be probabl seen, he watch 
that one window of the chamber where the first appear of the hideou 
vampyr had taken place, and which seem ever sinc to be the special 
object of hi attack. 

By remain from twilight, and get accustom to the gradual 
increas dark of the place, no doubt the doctor wa abl to see 
well enough without the aid of ani artifici light whether ani one wa 
in the place besid himself. 

"night after night," he said, "will I watch here until I have succeed 
in unravel thi mystery; for that there is some fear and undreamt 
of mysteri at the bottom of all these proceed I am well convinced." 

when he made such a determin as this, dr. chillingworth wa not at 
all a like man to break it, so there, look like a modern statu in 
the arbour, he sat with hi eye fix upon the balconi and the window 
of what use to be call flora' room for some hours. 

the doctor wa a contempl man, and therefor he did not so acut 
feel the loneli of hi posit as mani person would have done; 
moreover, he wa decidedli not of a superstiti turn of mind, although 
certainli we cannot deni an imagin to him. however, if he realli 
had harbour some strang fear and terror they would have been 
excusable, when we consid how mani circumst had combin to make 
it almost a matter of demonstr that sir franci varney wa 
someth more than mortal. 

what quantiti of subject the doctor thought over dure hi vigil in 
that garden it is hard to say, but never in hi whole life, probably, 
had he such a gloriou opportun for the most undisturb 
contempl of subject requir deep thought to analyze, than as he 
had then. At least he felt that sinc hi marriag he had never been so 
thoroughli quiet, and left so complet to himself. 

It is to be hope that he succeed in settl ani medic point of a 
knotti charact that might be hover in hi brain, and certain it is 
that he had becom quit absorb in an abstrus matter connect with 
physiology, when hi ear were startled, and he wa at onc arous to a 
full conscious of where he was, and whi he had come there, by the 
distant sound of a man' footstep. 

It wa a footstep which seem to be that of a person who scarc 
thought it at all necessari to use ani caution, and the doctor' heart 
leap within him as in the lowest possibl whisper he said to 
himself,-- 

"I am successful--i am successful. It is believ now that the hall is 
deserted, and no doubt that is sir franci varney come with confidence, 
to carri out hi object in so sedul attack it, be that object 
what it may." 

elat with thi idea, the doctor listen intent to the advanc 
footstep, which each moment sound more clearli upon hi ears. 

It wa evid approach from the garden entranc toward the house, 
and he thought, by the occasion deaden sound of the person' feet, 
be he whom he might, that he could not see hi way veri well, and, 
consequently, frequent stray from the path, on to some of the 
numer flower-b which were in the way. 

"yes," said the doctor, exultingly, "it must be varney; and now I have 
but to watch him, and not to resist him; for what good on earth is it to 
stop him in what he wish to do, and, by such means, never wrest hi 
secret from him. the onli way is to let him go on, and that will I do, 
most certainly." 

now he heard the indistinct mutter of the voic of some one, so low 
that he could not catch what word were uttered; but he fanci that, in 
the deep tones, he recognised, without ani doubt, the voic of sir 
franci varney. 

"it must be he," he said, "it sure must be he. who els would come 
here to disturb the solitud of an empti house? He comes! he comes!" 

now the doctor could see a figur emerg from behind some thick beeches, 
which had befor obstruct hi vision, and he look scrutinisingli 
about, while some doubt stole slowli over hi mind now as to whether it 
wa the vampyr or not. the height wa in favour of the supposit that 
it wa none other than varney; but the figur look so much stouter, 
that mr. chillingworth felt a littl stagger upon the subject, and 
unabl wholli to make up hi mind upon it. 

the paus of thi visitor, too, opposit that window where sir franci 
varney had made hi attempts, wa anoth strong reason whi the doctor 
wa inclin to believ it must be him, and yet he could not quit make 
up hi mind upon the subject, so as to speak with certainty. 

A veri short time, however, indeed, must have suffic to set such a 
question as that at rest; and patienc seem the onli qualiti of mind 
necessari under those circumst for mr. chillingworth to exert. 

the visitor continu gaze either at that window, or at the whole 
front of the house, for sever minutes, and then he turn away from a 
contempl of it, and walk slowli along, parallel with the window 
of that dining-room, one of which had been broken so complet on the 
occas of the admiral' attempt to take the vampyr prisoner. 

the moment the stranger alter hi position, from look at the 
window, and commenc walk away from it, mr. chillingworth' mind wa 
made up. It wa not varney--of that he felt now most posit assured, 
and could have no doubt whatev upon the subject. 

the gait, the gener air, the walk, all were different; and then aros 
the anxiou question of who could it be that had intrud upon that 
lone place, and what could be the object of ani one els but varney 
the vampyr to do so. 

the stranger look a power man, and walk with a firm tread, and, 
altogeth he wa an oppon that, had the doctor been ever so 
belliger inclined, it would have been the height of indiscret 
for him to attempt to cope with. 

It wa a veri vexati thing, too, for ani one to come there at such a 
juncture, perhap onli from motiv of curiosity, or possibl just to 
endeavour to commit some petti depred upon the desert building, 
if possible; and most heartili did the doctor wish that, in some way, he 
could scare away the intruder. 

the man walk along veri slowly, indeed, and seem to be quit take 
hi time in make hi observ of the building; and thi wa the 
more provoking, as it wa get late, and if have project a visit 
at all, it would sure soon be made, and then, when he found ani one 
there, of course, he would go. 

amaz beyond expression, the doctor felt about on the ground at hi 
feet, until he found a toler larg stone, which he threw at the 
stranger with so good an aim, that it hit him a smart blow on the back, 
which must have been anyth but a pleasant surprise. 

that it wa a surprise, and that, too, a most complet one, wa evid 
from the start which the man gave, and then he utter a furiou oath, 
and rub hi back, as he glanc about him to endeavour to ascertain 
from whenc the missil had come. 

"i'll tri him again with that," thought the doctor; "it may succeed in 
scare him away;" and he stoop to watch for anoth stone. 

It wa well that he did so at that precis moment; for, befor he rose 
again, he heard the sharp report of a pistol, and a crash sound among 
some of the old wood work of which the summer-hous wa composed, told 
him that a shot had there taken effect. affair were now get much 
too serious; and, accordingly, dr. chillingworth thought that, rather 
than stay there to be made a target of, he would face the intruder. 

"hold--hold!" he cried. "who are you, and what do you mean by 
that?"--"oh! somebodi is there," cri the man, as he advanced. "mi 
friend, whoever you are, you were veri foolish to throw a stone at me." 

"and, my friend, whoever you are," respond the doctor, "you were veri 
spite to fire a pistol bullet at me in consequence."-- 

"not at all." 

"but I say yes; for, probably, I can prove a right to be here, which you 
cannot."--"ah!" said the stranger, "that voice--why--y are dr. 
chillingworth?" 

"I am; but I don't know you," said the doctor, as he emerg now from 
the summer-house, and confront the stranger who wa within a few pace 
of the entranc to it. then he started, as he added,-- 

"yes, I do know you, though. how, in the name of heaven, came you here, 
and what purpos have you in so coming?" 

"what purpos have you? sinc we met at varney's, I have been make 
some inquiri about thi neighbourhood, and learn strang 
things."--"that you may veri easili do here; and, what is more 
extraordinary, the strang thing are, for the most part, I can assur 
you, quit true." 

the reader will, from what ha been said, now readili recognis thi man 
as sir franci varney' mysteri visitor, to whom he gave, from some 
hidden caus or another, so larg a sum of money, and between whom and 
dr. chillingworth a mutual recognit had taken place, on the occas 
when sir franci varney had, with such cool assurance, invit the 
admir to breakfast with him at hi new abode. 

"you, however," said the man, "I have no doubt, are fulli qualifi to 
tell me of more than I have been abl to learn from other people; and, 
first of all, let me ask you whi you are here?"--"befor I answer you 
that question, or ani other," said the doctor, "let me beg of you to 
tell me truly, is sir franci varney--" 

the doctor whisper in the ear of the stranger some name, as if he 
feared, even there, in the silenc of that garden, where everyth 
conspir to convinc him that he could not be overheard, to pronounc 
it in an audibl tone. 

"he is," said the other.--"y have no manner of doubt of it?" 

"doubt?--certainli not. what doubt can I have? I know it for a posit 
certainty, and he knows, of course, that I do know it, and ha purchas 
my silenc pretti handsomely, although I must confess that noth but 
my posit necess would have induc me to make the larg demand 
upon him that I have, and I hope soon to be abl to releas him 
altogeth from them." 

the doctor shook hi head repeatedly, as he said,-- 

"I suspect it; I suspect it, do you know, from the first moment that 
I saw you there in hi house. hi face haunt me ever since--aw 
haunt me; and yet, although I felt certain that I had onc seen it 
under strang circumstances, I could not identifi it with--but no 
matter, no matter. I am wait here for him." 

"indeed!"--"ay, that I am; and I flung a stone at you, not know you, 
with hope that you would be, by such means, perhaps, scare away, and so 
leav the coast clear for him." 

"then you have an appoint with him?"--"bi no means; but he ha made 
such repeat and determin attack upon thi hous that the famili who 
inhabit it were compel to leav it, and I am here to watch him, and 
ascertain what can possibl be hi object." 

"it is as I suspected, then," mutter thi man. "confound him! now can 
I read, as if in a book, most clearly, the game that he is playing!" 

"can you?" cri the doctor, energetically--"can you? what is it? tell 
me, for that is the veri thing I want to discover."--"y don't say so?" 

"it is, indeed; and I assur you that it concern the peac of a whole 
famili to know it. you say you have made inquiri about thi 
neighbourhood, and, if you have done so, you have discov how the 
famili of the bannerworth have been persecut by varney, and how, in 
particular, flora bannerworth, a beauti and intellig girl, ha 
been most cruelli made to suffer." 

"I have heard all that, and I dare say with mani exaggerations."--"it 
would be difficult for ani one realli to exagger the horror that 
have taken place in thi house, so that ani inform which you can 
give respect the motiv of varney will tend, probably, to restor 
peac to those who have been so cruelli persecuted, and be an act of 
kind which I think not altogeth inconsist with your nature." 

"you think so, and yet know who I am."--"i do, indeed." 

"and what I am. why, if I were to go into the market-plac of yon town, 
and proclaim myself, would not all shun me--ay, even the veri lowest and 
vilest; and yet you talk of an act of kind not be altogeth 
inconsist with my nature!"--"i do, becaus I know someth more of 
you than many." 

there wa a silenc of some moments' duration, and then the stranger 
spoke in a tone of voic which look as if he were struggl with some 
emotion. 

"sir, you do know more of me than many. you know what I have been, and 
you know how I left an occup which would have made me loathed. but 
you--even you--do not know what made me take to so terribl a 
trade."--"i do not." 

"would it suit you for me now to tell you?"--"wil you first promis me 
that you will do all you can for thi persecut famili of the 
bannerworths, in whom I take so strang an interest?" 

"I will. I promis you that freely. Of my own knowledge, of course, I 
can say but littl concern them, but, upon that warranting, I well 
believ they deserv abund sympathy, and from me they shall have it." 

"A thousand thanks! with your assistance, I have littl doubt of be 
abl to extric them from the tangl web of dread incid which 
ha turn them from their home; and now, whatev you may choos to 
tell me of the caus which drove you to be what you became, I shall 
listen to with abund interest. onli let me beseech you to come into 
thi summer-house, and to talk low." 

"I will, and you can pursu your watch at the same time, while I beguil 
it weariness."--"b it so." 

"you knew me year ago, when I had all the chanc in the world of 
becom respect and respected. I did, indeed; and you may, 
therefore, judg of my surpris when, some year since, be in the 
metropolis, I met you, and you shun my company."--"yes; but, at last, 
you found out whi it wa that I shun your company." 

"I did. you yourself told me onc that I met you, and would not leav 
you, but insist upon your dine with me. then you told me, when you 
found that I would take no other cours whatever, that you were no other 
than the--the----"-- 

"out with it! I can bear to hear it now better than I could then! I told 
you that I wa the common hangman of london!" 

"you did, I must confess, to my most intens surprise." 

"yes, and yet you kept to me; and, but that I respect you too much to 
allow you to do so, you would, from old associations, have countenanc 
me; but I could not, and I would not, let you do so. I told you then 
that, although I held the terribl office, that I had not been yet 
call upon to perform it loathsom functions. soon--soon--com the 
first effort--it wa the last!" 

"indeed! you left the dread trade?" 

"I did--i did. but what I want to tell you, for I could not then, wa 
whi I went ever to it. the wound my heart had receiv were then too 
fresh to allow me to speak of them, but I will tell you now. the stori 
is a brief one, mr. chillingworth. I pray you be seated." 




chapter lxxii. 

the strang story.--th arriv OF the mob AT the hall, and their 
dispersion. 


[illustration] 

"you will find that the time which elaps sinc I last saw you in 
london, to have been spent in an eventful, vari manner."--"y were in 
good circumst then," said mr. chillingworth.--"i was, but mani 
event happen after that which alter the prospect; made it even more 
gloomi than you can well imagine: but I will tell you all candidly, and 
you can keep watch upon bannerworth hall at the same time. you are well 
awar that I wa well to do, and had ampl funds, and inclin to 
spend them."--"i recollect: but you were marri then, surely?"--"i 
was," said the stranger, sadly, "I wa marri then."--"and now?"--"i am 
a widower." the stranger seem much moved, but, after a moment or so, 
he resumed--"i am a widow now; but how that event came about is partli 
my purpos to tell you. I had not marri long--that is veri long--for I 
have but one child, and she is not old, or of an age to know much more 
than what she may be taught; she is still in the cours of education. I 
wa earli addict to gamble; the dice had it charms, as all those who 
have ever engag in play but too well know; it is perfectli 
fascinating."--"so I have heard," said mr. chillingworth; "though, for 
myself, I found a wife and profession pursuit quit incompat with 
ani pleasur that took either time or resources."-- 

"it is so. I would I had never enter one of those hous where men are 
depriv of their money and their own free will, for at the 
gambling-t you have no liberty, save that in glide down the stream 
in compani with others. how few have ever escap destruction--none, I 
believe--men are perfectli fascinated; it is ruin alon that enabl a 
man to see how he ha been hurri onward without thought or 
reflection; and how fallaci were all the hope he ever entertained! 
yes, ruin, and ruin alone, can do this; but, alas! 'ti then too 
late--th evil is done. soon after my marriag I fell in with a 
chevali st. john. He wa a man of the world in everi sens of the 
word, and one that wa well vers in all the way of society. I never 
met with ani man who wa so perfectli master of himself, and of perfect 
eas and self-confid as he was. He wa never at a loss, and, come 
what would, never betray surpris or vexation--two qualities, he 
thought, never ought to be shown by ani man who move in society."-- 

"indeed!"--"h wa a strang man--a veri strang man."-- 

"did he gamble?"-- 

"it is difficult to give you a correct and direct answer. I should say 
he did, and yet he never lost or won much; but I have often thought he 
wa more connect with those who did than wa believed."-- 

"wa that a fact?" inquir mr. chillingworth.-- 

"you shall see as we go on, and be abl to judg for yourself. I have 
thought he was. well, he first took me to a handsom saloon, where 
gambl wa carri on. We had been to the opera. As we came out, he 
recommend that we should sup at a hous where he wa well known, and 
where he wa in the habit of spend hi even after the opera, and 
befor he retired. I agre to this. I saw no reason whi I should not. 
We went there, and bitterli have I repent of so do for year since, 
and do to thi day."-- 

"your repent ha been sincer and lasting," said mr. chillingworth; 
"the one prove the other."--"it does; but I thought not so then. the 
place wa glittering, and the wine good. It wa a kind of earthli 
paradise; and when we had taken some wine, the chevali said to me,-- 

"'i am desir of see a friend backwards; he is at the hazard-table. 
will you go with me?'--i hesitated. I fear to see the place where a 
vice wa carri on. I knew myself inclin to prudenti motives. I 
said to him,--'no, st. john, i'll wait here for you; it may be as 
well--th wine is good, and it will content me?' 

"'do so,' he said, smiling; 'but rememb I seldom or never play myself, 
nor is there ani reason whi you should.'--'i'l go, but I will not 
play.'--'certainli not; you are free alik to look on, play, or quit the 
place at ani moment you please, and not be noticed, probably, by a 
singl soul.' 

"I arose, and we walk backwards, have call one of the men who were 
wait about, but who were watcher and door-keep of the 'hell.' We 
were led along the passage, and pass through the pair of doors, which 
were well secur and render the possibl of a surpris almost 
impossible. after these dark places, we were suddenli let into a place 
where we were dazzl by the light and brillianc of the saloon. It wa 
not so larg as the one we left, but it wa superior to it in all it 
appointments. 

"at first I could not well see who was, or who wa not, in the room 
where we were. As soon, however, as I found the use of my eyes, I 
notic mani well-dress men, who were busili engag in play, and who 
took no notic of ani one who entered. We walk about for some minut 
without speak to ani one, but mere look on. I saw men engag in 
play; some with earnestness, other again with great nonchalance, and 
money chang hand without the least remark. there were but few who 
spoke, and onli those in play. there wa a hum of conversation; but you 
could not distinguish what wa said, unless you paid some attent to, 
and wa in close vicin with, the individu who spoke. 

"'well,' said st. john, 'what do you think of thi place?'--'why,' I 
replied, 'I had no notion of see a place fit up as thi is.' 

"'no; isn't it superb?'--'it is beauti done. they have mani 
visitors,' said I, 'mani more than I could have believed.' 

"'yes, they are all _bona fide_ players; men of stamp and rank--non of 
your seedi leg who have onli what they can cheat you out 
of.'--'ah!'--'and besides,' he added, 'you may often form friendship 
here that lead to fortun hereafter. I do not mean in play, becaus 
there is no necess for your do so, or, if you do so, in go 
abov a stake which you know won't hurt you.'--'exactly.' 

"'mani men can never approach a tabl like this, and sit down to an 
hour' play, but, if they do, they must stake not onli more than they 
can afford, but all their property, leav themselv beggars.' 'they 
do?" said I. 

"'but men who know themselves, their resources, and choos to indulg 
for a time, may often come and lay the foundat to a veri pretti 
fortune.' 

"'do you see your friend?' I inquired.--'no, I do not; but I will 
inquir if he ha been here--if not, we will go.' 

"he left me for a moment or two to make some inquiry, and I stood 
look at the table, where there were four players, and who seem to 
be engag at a friendli game; and when one parti won they look grave, 
and when the other parti lost they smile and look happy. I walk 
away, as the chevali did not return immedi to me; and then I saw 
a gentleman rise up from a table. He had evid lost. I wa stand 
by the seat, unconsci hold the back in my hand. I sat down 
without think or without speaking, and found myself at the hazard 
table. 

"'do you play, sir?'--'yes,' I said. I had hardli utter the word when 
I wa sorri for them; but I could not recal them. I sat down, and play 
at onc commenced. 

"in about ten or fifteen minutes, often lose and then winning, I found 
myself about a hundr and twenti pound in pocket, clear gain by the 
play. 

"'ah!' said the chevalier, who came up at that moment, 'I thought you 
wouldn't play.'--'i realli don't know how it happened,' said I, 'but I 
suddenli found myself here without ani previou intention.' 

"'you are not a loser, I hope?'--'inde I am not,' I replied; 'but not 
much a gainer.' 

"'nor need you desir to be. Do you desir to give your adversari hi 
reveng now, or take anoth opportunity.'--'at anoth time,' I 
replied. 

"'you will find me here the day after to-morrow, when I shall be at your 
service;' then bowing, he turn away. 

"'he is a veri rich man whom you have been play with,' said the 
chevalier.--" 

"indeed!" 

"'yes, and I have known him to lose for three day together; but you may 
take hi word for ani amount; he is a perfect gentleman and man of 
honour.'--''ti well to play with such,' I replied; 'but I suppos you 
are about to leave.' 

"'yes, it grow late, and I have some busi to transact to-morrow, so 
I must leave.'--'i will accompani you part of the way home,' said I, 
'and then I shall have finish the night.' 

"I did leav with him, and accompani him home, and then walk to my 
own home." 

* * * * * 

"thi wa my first visit, and I thought a propiti beginning, but it 
wa the more dangerous. perhap a loss might have effectu deter 
me, but it is doubt to tell how certain event might have been 
altered. It is just possibl that I might have been urg on by my 
desir to retriev ani loss I might have incurred, and so made myself at 
onc the miser be it took month to accomplish in bring me to. 

"I went the day but one after this, to meet the same individu at the 
gambling-table, and play some time with vari success, until I left 
off with a trifl loss upon the night' play, which wa noth of ani 
consequence. 

[illustration] 

"thu matter went on; I sometim won and sometim lost, until I won a 
few hundreds, and thi determin me to play for higher stake than ani 
I had yet play for. 

"it wa no use go on in the peddl style I had been go on; I had 
won two hundr and fifti pound in three months, and had I been less 
fear I might have had twenty-f thousand pounds. ah! i'll tri my 
fortun at a higher game. 

"have onc made thi resolution, I wa anxiou to begin my new plan, 
which I hope would have the effect of place me far abov my then 
present posit in society, which wa good, and with a littl attent 
it would have made me an independ man; but then it requir patience, 
and noth more. however, the other method wa so superior sinc it 
might all be done with good luck in a few months. ah! good luck; how 
uncertain is good luck; how chang is fortune; how soon is the best 
prospect blight by the frost of adversity. In less than a month I had 
lost more than I could pay, and then I gambl on for a living. 

"mi wife had but one child; her first and onli one; an infant at her 
breast; but there wa a chang came over her; for one had come over 
me--a fear one it wa too--on not onli in manner but in fortun too. 
she would beg me to come home early; to attend to other matters, and 
leav the dread life I wa then leading. 

"'lizzy,' said I, 'we are ruined.'--'ruined!' she exclaimed, and 
stagger back, until she fell into a seat. 'ruined!' 

"'ay, ruined. It is a short word, but expressive.'--'no, no, we are not 
ruined. I know what you mean, you would say, we cannot live as we have 
lived; we must retrench, and so we will, right willingly.' 

"'you must retrench most wonderfully,' I said, with desper calmness, 
'for the murder must out.'--'and so we will; but you will be with us; 
you will not go out night after night, ruin your health, our 
happiness, and destroy both peac and prospects.' 

"'no, no, lizzy, we have no chanc of recov ourselves; hous and 
home--al gone--all, all.'--'mi god!' she exclaimed. 

"'ay, rail on,' said I; 'you have caus enough; but, no matter--w have 
lost all.'--'how--how?' 

"'it is useless to ask how; I have done, and there is an end of the 
matter; you shall know more anoth day; we must leav thi hous for a 
lodging.'--'it matter little,' she said; 'all may be won again, if you 
will but say you will quit the societi of those who have ruin you.' 

"'no one,' said I, 'ha ruin me; I did it; it wa no fault of ani one 
else's; I have not that excuse.'--'i am sure you can recover.' 

"'i may; some day fortun will shower her favour upon me, and I live on 
in that expectation.'--'y cannot mean that you will chanc the 
gaming-table? for I am sure you must have lost all there?' 

"'i have.'--'god help me,' she said; 'you have done your child a wrong, 
but you may repair it yet.' 

"'never!'--''ti a long day! let me implor you, on my knees, to leav 
thi place, and adopt some other mode of life; we can be careful; a 
littl will do, and we shall, in time, be equal to, and better than what 
we have been.' 

"'we never can, save by chance.'--'and by chanc we never shall,' she 
replied; 'if you will exert yourself, we may yet retriev ourselves.' 

"'and exert myself I will.'--'and quit the gaming-table?' 

"'ask me to make no promises,' said I; 'I may not be abl to keep them; 
therefore, ask me to make none.'--'i do ask you, beg of, entreat of you 
to promise, and solemnli promis me that you will leav that fear 
place, where men not onli lose all their goods, but the feel of 
natur also.' 

"'say no more, lizzy; if I can get a live elsewher I will, but if 
not, I must get it there.' 

"she seem to be cast down at this, and she shed tears. I left the 
room, and again went to the gambling-house, and there that night, I won 
a few pounds, which enabl me to take my wife and child away from the 
hous they had so long live in, and took them afterward to a miser 
place,--on room, where, indeed, there were a few articl of furnitur 
that I had save from the gener wreck of my own property. 

"she took thing much less to heart than I could have anticipated; she 
seem cheer and happy,--sh endeavour to make my home as 
comfort as she could. 

"her whole endeavour wa to make me as much as possible, forget the 
past. she wanted, as much as possible, to wean me away from my gambl 
pursuits, but that wa impossible. I had no hope, no other prospect. 

"thu she strove, but I could see each day she wa get paler, and 
more pale; her figure, befor round, wa more thin, and betray sign 
of emaciation. thi prey upon me; and, when fortun deni me the 
mean of carri home that which she so much wanted, I could never 
return for two day at a time. then I would find her shed tears, and 
sighing; what could I say? If I had anyth to take her, then I use to 
endeavour to make her forget that I had been away. 

"'ah!' she would exclaim, 'you will find me dead one of these days; what 
you do now for one or two days, you will do by-and-by for mani days, 
perhap weeks.'--'do not anticip evil.' 

"'i cannot do otherwise; were you in ani other kind of employ but 
that of gambling,' she said, 'I should have some hope of you; but, as it 
is, there is none.'--'speak not of it; my chanc may turn out 
favour yet, and you may be again as you were.' 

"'never.'--'but fortun is inconstant, and may chang in my favour as 
much as she ha done in others.' 

"'fortun is inde constant, but misfortun is as inconstant.'--'y 
are prophet of evil." 

"'ah! I would to heaven I could predict good; but who ever yet heard of 
a ruin gambler be abl to retriev himself by the same mean that 
he wa ruined?' 

"thu we use to converse, but our convers wa usual of but 
littl comfort to either of us, for we could give neither ani comfort to 
the other; and as that wa usual the case, our interview becam less 
frequent, and of less duration. My answer wa alway the same. 

"'i have no other chance; my prospect are limit to that one place; 
depriv me of that, and I never more should be abl to bring you a 
mouth of bread.' 

"day after day,--day after day, the same result followed, and I wa as 
far from success as ever I was, and ever should be; I wa yet a beggar. 

"the time flew by; my littl girl wa nearli four year old, but she 
knew not the miseri her father and mother had to endure. the poor littl 
thing sometim went without more than a meal a day; and while I wa 
live thu upon the town, upon the chanc of the gaming-table, mani a 
pang did she caus me, and so did her mother. My constant consol 
wa this,-- 

"'it is bad luck now,' I would say; 'but will be better by-and-bye; 
thing cannot alway continu thus. It is all for them--al for them.' 

"I thought that by continu constantli in one course, I must be at 
land at the ebb of the tide. 'it cannot alway flow one way,' I thought. 
I had often heard peopl say that if you could but have the resolut 
to play on, you must in the end seiz the turn of fortune. 

"'if I could but onc do that, I would never enter a hell again as long 
as I drew breath.' 

"thi wa a resolv I could not onli make but keep, becaus I had 
suffer so much that I would never run through the same miseri again 
that I had alreadi gone through. however, fortun never seem inclin 
to take the turn I had hope for; fortun wa as far off as ever, and 
had in no case given me ani opportun of recov myself. 

"A few pound were the utmost I could at ani time muster, and I had to 
keep up someth of an appearance, and seem as if I had a thousand a 
year; when, god knows, I could not have muster a thousandth part of 
that sum, were all done and paid for. 

"day after day pass on, and yet no change. I had almost given myself 
up to despair, when one night when I went home I saw my wife wa more 
than usual melancholi and sad, and perhap ill; I didn't look at 
her--i seldom did, becaus her look were alway a reproach to me; I 
could not help feel them so. 

"'well,' said I, 'I have come home to you becaus I have someth to 
bring you; not what I ought--but what I can--you must be satisfied!'--'i 
am,' she said. 

"'i know also you want it; how is the child, is she quit well?'--'yes, 
quite.' 

"'where is she?' inquir I, look round the room, but I didn't see 
her; she use to be up.--'sh ha gone to bed,' she said. 

"'it is veri early.'--'yes, but she cri so for food that I wa oblig 
to get her to sleep to forget her hunger: poor thing, she ha want 
bread veri badly.' 

"'poor thing!' I said, 'let her be awaken and partak of what I have 
brought home.' 

"with that my wife wake her up, and the moment she open her eye she 
again began to cri for food, which I immedi gave her and saw her 
devour with the utmost hast and hunger. the sight smote my heart, and 
my wife sat by watching, and endeavour to prevent her from eat so 
fast. 

"'thi is bad,' I said.--'yes, but I hope it may be the worst,' she 
replied, in a deep and hollow voice. 

"'lizzy,' I exclaimed, 'what is the matter--ar you ill?'--'yes, veri 
ill.' 

"'what is the matter with you? for god' sake tell me,' I said, for I 
wa alarmed.--'i am veri ill,' she said, 'veri ill indeed; I feel my 
strength decreas everi day. I must drink.' 

"you, too, want food?'--'i have and perhap do, though the desir to eat 
seem almost to have left me.' 

"'for heaven' sake eat,' said I; 'I will bring you home someth more 
by to-morrow; eat and drink lizzy. I have suffered; but for you and your 
child' sake, I will do my best.'--'your best,' she said, 'will kill us 
both; but, alas, there is no other aid at hand. you may one day, 
however, come here too late to find us living.' 

"'say no more, lizzy, you know not my feel when you speak thus; 
alas, I have no hope--no aid--no friend.'--'no,' she replied, 'your love 
of game drove them from you, becaus they would not aid a gambler.' 

"'say no more, lizzy,' I said; 'if there be not an end to thi life 
soon, there will be an end to me. In two day more I shall return to 
you. good bye; god bless you. keep up your heart and the child.'--'good 
bye,' she said, sorrowfully. she shed tears, and wrung her hand 
bitterly. I hasten away--mi heart wa readi to burst, and I could not 
speak. 

"I walk about to recov my serenity, but could not do so suffici 
well to secur anyth like an appear that would render me fit to 
go to the gaming-house. that night I remain away, but I could not 
avoid fall into a debauch to drown my misfortunes, and shift the 
scene of miseri that wa continu befor my eyes." 

* * * * * 

"the next night I wa at the gaming-house. I went there in better than 
usual spirits. I saw, I thought, a chang in fortune, and hail that as 
the propiti moment of my life, when I wa to rise abov my present 
misfortunes. 

"I play and won--play and lost--play and won, and then lost again; 
thu I went on, fluctuat more and more, until I found I wa get 
money in my pocket. I had, at one moment more than three hundr pound 
in my pocket, and I felt that then wa my happi moment--then the tide of 
fortun wa go in my favour. I ought to have left off with that--to 
have been satisfi with such an amount of money; but the demon of 
avaric seem to have possess me, and I went on and on with 
fluctuat fortune, until I lost the whole of it. 

"I wa mad--desperate, and could have destroy myself; but I thought of 
the state my wife and child were in; I thought that that night they 
would want food; but they could not hurt for one day--they must have 
some, or would procur some. 

"I wa too far gone to be abl to go to them, even if I were possess 
of means; but I had none, and daylight saw me in a deep sleep, from 
which I awok not until the next even let in, and then I onc more 
determin that I would make a desper attempt to get a littl money. 
I had alway paid, and thought my word would be taken for once; and, if 
I won, all well and good; if not, then I wa no wors off than before. 

"thi wa easi to plan, but not to execute. I went there, but there were 
none present in whom I had suffici interest to dare make the attempt. 
I walk about, and felt in a most uncomfort state. I fear I 
should not succeed at all, then what wa to becom of me--of my wife and 
child? thi render me almost mad. I could not understand what I wa to 
do, what to attempt, or where to go. one or two person came up, and 
ask me if I were ill. My answer were, that I wa well enough. good 
god! how far from the truth wa that; but I found I must place more 
control on my feelings, els I should caus much conversation, and then 
I should lose all hope of recov myself, and all prospect of living, 
even. 

"at length some one did come in, and I remark I had been there all the 
even and had not played. I had an invit to play with him, which 
ended, by a littl sleight of hand, in my favour; and on that I had 
calcul as much as on ani good fortun I might meet. the person I 
play with observ it not, and, when we left off playing, I had some 
six or seven pound in pocket. this, to me, wa a veri great sum; and, 
the moment I could decent withdraw myself, I ran off home. 

"I wa fear of the scene that await me. I expect something; wors 
than I had yet seen. possibl lizzi might be angry, and scold as well 
as complain. I therefor tap at the door gently, but heard no one 
answer; but of thi I took no notice, as I believ that they might be, 
and were, most probably, fast asleep. I had provid myself with a 
light, and I therefor open the door, which wa not fastened. 

"'lizzy!' said I, 'lizzy!' there wa no answer given, and I paused. 
everyth wa as still as death. I look on the bed--ther lay my wife 
with her cloth on. 

"'lizzy! lizzy!' said I. but still she did not answer me. 

"'well,' said I, 'she sleep sound;' and I walk toward the bed, and 
place my hand upon her shoulder, and began to shake her, saying, as I 
did so,-- 

"'lizzy! lizzy! i'm come home.' but still no answer, or sign of 
awaking. 

"I went on the other side of the bed to look at her face, and some 
misgiv overtook me. I trembl much. she lay on the bed, with her 
back toward the spot where I stood. 

"I came toward her face. My hand shook violent as I endeavour to 
look at her. she had her eye wide open, as if stare at me. 

"'lizzy,' said I. No answer wa returned. I then place my hand upon her 
cheek. It wa enough, and I start back in great horror. she wa dead! 

"thi wa horror itself. I stagger back and fell into a chair. the 
light I place down, heaven know how or why; but there I sat stare at 
the corps of my unfortun wife. I can hardli tell you the tremend 
effect thi had upon me. I could not move. I wa fascin to the spot. 
I could not move and could not turn." 

* * * * * 

"it wa morning, and the ray of the sun illumin the apartment; but 
there sat I, still gaze upon the face of my unfortun wife, I saw, I 
knew she wa dead; but yet I had not spoken, but sat look at her. 

"I believ my heart wa as cold as she was; but extrem horror and dread 
had dri up all the warm blood in my body, and I hardli think there wa 
a pulsat left. the thought of my child never onc seem to cross my 
mind. I had, however, sat there long--som hour befor I wa 
discovered, and thi wa by the landlady. 

"I had left the door open behind me, and she, in pass down, had the 
curios to peep, and saw me sit in what she thought to be a veri 
strang attitude, and could hear no sounds. 

"after some time she discov my wife wa dead, and, for some time, 
she thought me so, too. however, she wa convinc to the contrary, and 
then began to call for assistance. thi awok the child, which wa 
nearli famished. the landlady, to becom useful, and to awaken me from 
my lethargy, place the child in my hands, tell me I wa the best 
person now to take care of it. 

"and so I was; there wa no doubt of the truth of that, and I wa 
compel to acknowledg it. I felt much pride and pleasur in my 
daughter, and determin she should, if I starved, have the benefit of 
all I could do for her in the way of care, &c." 

* * * * * 

"the funer over, I took my child and carri it to a school, where I 
left her, and paid in advance, promis to do so as often as the 
quarter came round. My wife I had seen buri by the hand of man, and I 
swore I would do the best for my child, and to keep thi oath wa a work 
of pleasure. 

"I determin also I would never more enter a gaming-house, be the 
extrem what it might; I would suffer even death befor I would permit 
myself to enter the hous in which it took place. 

"'i will,' I thought, 'obtain some employ of some kind or other. I 
could sure obtain that. I have onli to ask and I have it, 
surely--something, howev menial, that would keep me and my child. yes, 
yes--sh ought, she must have her charg paid at once." 

"the effect of my wife' death wa a veri great shock to me, and such a 
one I could not forget--on I shall ever remember, and one that at least 
made a last impress upon me." 

* * * * * 

"strange, but true, I never enter a gambling-house; it wa my horror 
and my aversion. and yet I could obtain no employment. I took my 
daughter and place her at a boarding-school, and tri hard to obtain 
bread by labour; but, do what would, none could be had; if my soul 
depend upon it, I could find none. I care not what it was--anyth 
that wa honest. 

"I wa reduc low--veri low; gaunt starvat show itself in my 
cheeks; but I wander about to find employment; none could be found, 
and the world seem to have conspir togeth to throw me back to the 
gaming-table. 

"but thi I would not. At last employ wa offered; but what wa it? 
the situat of common hangman wa offer me. the employ wa 
disgust and horrible; but, at the same time, it wa all I could get, 
and that wa a suffici induc for me to accept of it. I was, 
therefore, the common executioner; and in that employ for some time 
earn a living. It wa terrible; but necess compel me to accept 
the onli thing I could obtain. you now know the reason whi I becam what 
I have told you." 




chapter lxxiii. 

the visit OF the vampire.--th gener meeting. 


[illustration] 

the mysteri friend of mr. chillingworth finish hi narrative, and 
then the doctor said to him,-- 

"and that, then, is the real caus whi you, a man evid far abov 
the posit of life which is usual that of those who occupi the 
dread post of executioner, came to accept of it."--"th real reason, 
sir. I considered, too, that in hold such a humili situat 
that I wa justli serv for the barbar of which I had been guilty; 
for what can be a greater act of cruelti than to squander, as I did, in 
the pursuit of mad excitement, those mean which should have render my 
home happy, and conduc to the welfar of those who were depend upon 
me?" 

"I do not mean to say that your self-reproach are unjust altogether, 
but--what nois is that? do you hear anything?"-- 

"yes--yes." 

"what do you take it to be?"--"it seem like the footstep of a number 
of persons, and it evid approach nearer and nearer. I know not 
what to think." 

"shall I tell you?" said a deep-ton voice, and some one, through the 
orific in the back of the summer-house, which, it will be recollected, 
sustain some damag at the time that varney escap from it, laid a 
hand upon mr. chillingworth' shoulder. "god bless me!" exclaim the 
doctor; "who' that?" and he sprang from hi seat with the greatest 
perturb in the world. 

"varney, the vampyre!" ad the voice, and then both the doctor and hi 
companion recognis it, and saw the strange, haggard features, that now 
they knew so well, confront them. there wa a paus of surprise, for 
a moment or two, on the part of the doctor, and then he said, "sir 
franci varney, what bring you here? I conjur you to tell me, in the 
name of common justic and common feeling, what bring you to thi hous 
so frequently? you have dispossess the family, whose properti it is, 
of it, and you have caus great confus and dismay over a whole 
county. I implor you now, not in the languag of menac or as an enemy, 
but as the advoc of the oppressed, and one who desir to see justic 
done to all, to tell me what it is you require." 

"there is no time now for explanation," said varney, "if explan 
were my full and free intent. you wish to know what nois wa that you 
heard?" 

"I did; can you inform me?"--"i can. the wild and lawless mob which you 
and your friend first induc to interfer in affair far beyond their 
or your control, are now flush with the desir of riot and of plunder. 
the nois you hear is that of their advanc footsteps; they come to 
destroy bannerworth hall." 

"can that be possible? the bannerworth famili are the suffer from all 
that ha happened, and not the inflictor of suffering."--"ay, be it so; 
but he who onc rais a mob ha rais an evil spirit, which, in the 
major of cases, it requir a far more potent spell than he is master 
of to quell again." 

"it is so. that is a melancholi truth; but you address me, sir franci 
varney, as if I led on the mob, when in realiti I have done all that lay 
in my power, from the veri first moment of their rise on account of 
thi affair, which, in the first instance, wa your work, to prevent 
them from proceed to act of violence."--"it may be so; but if you 
have now ani regard for your own safeti you will quit thi place. It 
will too soon becom the scene of a bloodi contention. A larg parti of 
dragoon are even now by anoth rout come toward it, and it will be 
their duti to resist the aggress of the mob; then should the rioter 
persevere, you can guess the result."--"i can, indeed." 

"retir then while you may, and against the bad deed of sir franci 
varney at all event place some of hi good ones, that he may not seem 
wholli without one redeem trait."--"i am not accustomed," said the 
doctor, "to paint the devil blacker than he realli is; but yet the cruel 
persecut that the bannerworth famili have endur call aloud for 
justice. you still, with a persever which show you regardless of 
what other suffer so that you compass your own ends, hover round a spot 
which you have render desolate." 

"hark, sir; do you not hear the tramp of horses' feet?"--"i do." 

the nois made by the feet of the insurg wa now almost drown in 
the louder and more rapid tramp of the horses' feet of the advanc 
dragoons, and, in a few moment more, sir franci varney wave hi arm, 
exclaiming,-- 

"they are here. will you not consult your safeti by flight?"--"no," said 
mr. chillingworth' companion; "we prefer remain here at the risk 
even of whatev danger may accru to us." 

"fools, would you die in a chanc _melee_ between an infuri populac 
and soldiery?"--"do not leave," whisper the ex-hangman to mr. 
chillingworth; "do not leave, I pray you. He onli want to have the hall 
to himself." 

there could be no doubt now of the immedi appear of the cavalry, 
and, befor sir franci varney could utter anoth word, a coupl of the 
foremost of the soldier clear the garden fenc at a part where it wa 
low, and alight not mani feet from the summer-hous in which thi 
short colloquy wa take place. sir franci varney utter a bitter 
oath, and immedi disappear in the gloom. 

"what shall we do?" said the hangman.--"y can do what you like, but I 
shall avow my presenc to the military, and claim to be on their side in 
the approach contest, if it should come to one, which I sincer 
hope it will not." 

the militari detach consist of about twenty-f dragoons, who now 
were all in the gardens. An order wa given by the offic in command 
for them to dismount, which wa at onc obeyed, and the hors were 
fasten by their bridl to the variou tree with which the place 
abounded. 

"they are go to oppos the mob on foot, with their carbines," said 
the hangman; "there will be sad work here I am afraid."--"well, at all 
events," said mr. chillingworth, "I shall declin act the part of a 
spi here ani longer; so here goes." 

"hilloa! a friend,--a friend here, in the summer-house!" 

"make it two friends," cri the hangman, "if you please, while you are 
about it." 

A coupl of the dragoon immedi appeared, and the doctor, with hi 
companion, were marched, as prisoners, befor the offic in command. 

"what do you do here?" he said; "I wa inform that the hall wa 
deserted. here, orderly, where is mr. adamson, the magistrate, who came 
with me?"--"clos at hand sir, and he say he' not well." 

"well, or ill, he must come here, and do someth with these people." 

A magistr of the district who had accompani the troops, and been 
accommod with a seat behind one of the dragoons, which seem veri 
much to have disagre with him, for he wa as pale as death, now 
step forward. 

"you know me, mr. adamson?" said the doctor; "I am mr. 
chillingworth."--"oh! yes; lord bless you! how came you here?" 

"never mind that just now; you can vouch for my have no connect 
with the rioters."--"oh! dear, yes; certainly. thi is a respect 
gentleman, captain richardson, and a person friend of mine." 

"oh! veri good."--"and i," said the doctor' companion, "am likewis a 
respect and use member of society, and a great friend of mr. 
chillingworth." 

"well, gentlemen," said the captain in command, "you may remain here, if 
you like, and take the chances, or you may leave." 

they intim that they prefer remaining, and, almost at the moment 
that they did so, a loud shout from mani throat announc the near 
approach of the mob.--"now, mr. magistrate, if you please," said the 
officer; "you will be so good as to tell the mob that I am here with my 
troop, under your orders, and strongli advis them to be off while they 
can, with whole skins, for if they persever in attack the place, we 
must persever in defend it; and, if they have half a grain of sens 
among them, they can sure guess what the result of that will be." 

"I will do the best I can, as heaven is, my judge," said the magistrate, 
"to produc a peaceabl recall,--mor no man can do." 

"hurrah! hurrah!"' shout the mob, "down with the vampyre! down with 
the hall!" and then one, more candid than hi fellows, shouted,--"down 
with everyth and everybody!" 

"ah!" remark the officer; "that fellow now know what he came about." 

A great number of torch and link were light by the mob, but the 
moment the glare of light fell upon the helmet and accoutr of the 
military, there wa a paus of constern on the part of the 
multitude, and mr. adamson, urg on by the officer, who, it wa 
evident, by no mean like the servic he wa on, took advantag of the 
opportunity, and, step forward, he said,-- 

"mi good people, and fellow townsmen, let me implor you to listen to 
reason, and go to your home in peace. If you do not, but, on the 
contrary, in defianc of law and good order, persist in attack thi 
house, it will becom my pain duti to read the riot act, and then the 
militari and you will have to fight it out together, which I beg you 
will avoid, for you know that some of you will be killed, and a lot more 
of you receiv pain wounds. now disperse, let me beg of you, at 
once." 

there seem for a moment a disposit among the mob to give up the 
contest, but there were other among them who were infuri with 
drink, and so regardless of all consequences. those set up a shout of 
"down with the red coats; we are englishmen, and will do what we like." 
some one then threw a heavi stone, which struck one of the soldiers, and 
brought blood from hi cheek. the offic saw it, but he said at once,-- 

"stand firm, now, stand firm. No anger--steady." 

"twenti pound for the man who threw that stone," said the 
magistrate.--"twenti pound ten for old adamson, the magistrate," cri a 
voic in the crowd, which, no doubt came from him who had cast the 
missile. 

then, at least fifti stone were thrown, some of which hit the 
magistrate, and the remaind came rattl upon the helmet of the 
dragoons, like a hail shower. 

"I warn you, and beg of you to go," said mr. adamson; "for the sake of 
your wive and families, I beg of you not to pursu thi desper 
game." 

loud cri now aros of "down with the soldiers; down with the vampyre. 
he' in bannerworth hall. smoke him out." and then one or two link were 
hurl among the dismount dragoons. all thi wa put up with 
patiently; and then again the mob were implor to leave, which be 
answer by fresh taunts, the magistr proceed to read the riot act, 
not one word of which wa audibl amid the tumult that prevailed. 

"put out all the lights," cri a voic among the mob. the order wa 
obeyed, and the same voic added; "they dare not fire on us. come on:" 
and a rush wa made at the garden wall. 

"make ready--present," cri the officer. and then he added, in an under 
tone, "abov their heads, now--fire." 

there wa a blaze of light for a moment, a stun noise, a shout of 
dismay from the mob, and in anoth moment all wa still. 

"there," said dr. chillingworth, "that thi is, at all events, a 
bloodless victory." 

"you may depend upon that," said hi companion; "but is not there some 
one yet remaining? look there, do you not see a figur clamber over 
the fence?" 

"yes, I do, indeed. ah, they have him a prisoner, at all events. those 
two dragoon have him, fast enough; we shall now, perhaps, hear from 
thi fellow who is the actual ringlead in such an affair, which, but 
for the pusillanim of the mob, might have turn out to be realli 
most disastrous." 

It wa strang how one man should think it expedi to attack the 
militari post after the mob had been so complet rout at the first 
discharg of fire-arms, but so it was. one man did make an attempt to 
enter the garden, and it wa so rapid and so desper an one, that he 
rather seem to throw himself bodili at the fence, which separ it 
from the meadow without, than to clamber over it, as ani one under 
ordinari circumstances, who might wish to effect an entranc by that 
means, would have done. 

He wa no sooner, however, perceived, than a coupl of the dismount 
soldier step forward and made a prison of him. 

"good god!" exclaim mr. chillingworth, as they approach nearer with 
him. "good god! what is the mean of that? Do my eye deceiv me, or 
are they, indeed, so blessed?" 

"bless by what?" exclaim the hangman. 

"bi a sight of the long lost, deepli regret charl holland. 
charles--charles, is that inde you, or some unsubstanti form in your 
likeness?" 

charl holland, for it was, indeed, himself, heard the friendli voic 
of the doctor, and he call out to him. 

"speak to me of flora. oh, speak to me of flora, if you would not have 
me die at onc of suspense, and all the tortur of apprehension." 

"she live and is well." 

"thank heaven. Do with me what you please." 

dr. chillingworth sprang forward, and address the magistrate, he 
said,-- 

"sir, I know thi gentleman. He is no one of the rioters, but a dear 
friend of the famili of the bannerworths. charl holland, what in the 
name of heaven had becom of you so long, and what brought you here at 
such a junctur as this?" 

"I am faint," said charles; "i--i onli arriv as the crowd did. I had 
not strength to fight my way through them, and wa compel to paus 
until they had dispers can--can you give me water?" 

"here' someth better," said one of the soldiers, as he hand a 
flask to charles, who partook of some of the contents, which greatli 
reviv him, indeed. 

"I am better now," he said. "thank you kindly. take me into the house. 
good god! whi is it made a point of attack? where are flora and henry? 
are they all well? and my uncle? oh! what must you all have thought of 
my absence! but you cannot have endur a hundredth part of what I have 
suffered. let me look onc again upon the face of flora. take me into 
the house." 

"releas him," said the officer, as he point to hi head, and look 
significantly, as much as to say, "some mad patient of yours, I 
suppose." 

"you are much mistaken, sir," said dr. chillingworth; "thi gentleman 
ha been cruelli used, I have no doubt. He has, I am inclin to 
believe, been made the victim, for a time, of the intrigu of that veri 
sir franci varney, whose conduct ha been the real caus of all the 
seriou disturb that have taken place in the country." 

"confound sir franci varney," mutter the officer; "he is enough to 
set a whole nation by the ears. however, mr. magistrate, if you are 
satisfi that thi young man is not one of the rioters, I have, of 
course, no wish to hold him a prisoner." 

"I can take mr. chillingworth' word for more than that," said the 
magistrate. 

charl holland wa accordingli released, and then the doctor, in 
hurri accents, told him the princip outlin of what had occurred. 

"oh! take me to flora," he said; "let me not delay anoth moment in 
seek her, and convinc her that I could not have been guilti of the 
base of desert her." 

"hark you, mr. holland, I have quit made up my mind that I will not 
leav bannerworth hall yet; but you can go alone, and easili find them 
by the direct which I will give you; onli let me beg of you not to 
go abruptli into the presenc of flora. she is in an extrem delic 
state of health, and although I do not take upon myself to say that a 
shock of a pleasur natur would prove of ani paramount bad 
consequ to her, yet it is as well not to risk it." 

"I will be most careful, you may depend." 

At thi moment there wa a loud ring at the garden bell, and, when it 
wa answer by one of the dragoons, who wa order to do so by hi 
officer, he came back, escort no other than jack pringle, who had 
been sent by the admir to the hall, but who had solac himself so 
much on the road with diver potations, that he did not reach it till 
now, which wa a full hour after the reason time in which he ought 
to have gone the distance. 

[illustration] 

jack wa not to say dumb, but he had had enough to give him a veri jolli 
sort of feel of independence, and so he came along quarrel with 
the soldier all the way, the latter onli laugh and keep hi temper 
admir well, under a great deal of provocation. 

"why, you land lubbers," cri jack, "what do you do here, all of you, I 
wonder! you are all wamphighers, i'll be bound, everi one of you. you 
mind me of marines, you do, and that' quit enough to turn a proper 
seaman' stomach, ani day in the week." 

the soldier onli laughed, and brought jack up to the littl group of 
person consist of dr. chillingworth, the hangman, charl holland, 
and the officer. 

"why, jack pringle," said dr. chillingworth, step befor charles, so 
that jack should not see him,--"why, jack pringle, what bring you 
here?" 

"A slight squall, sir, to the nor'west. brought you someth to eat." 

jack produc a bottle. 

"to drink, you mean?" 

"well, it' all one; onli in thi here shape, you see, it goe down 
better, i'm thinking, which doe make a littl differ somehow." 

"how is the admiral?" 

"oh, he' as stupid as ever; lord bless you, he'd be like a ship without 
a rudder without me, and would go sway about at the merci of wind 
and waves, poor old man. he' bad enough as it is, but if so be I wasn't 
to give the eye to him as I does, bless my heart if I think as he'd be 
abov hatch long. here' to you all." 

jack took the cork from the bottl he had with him, and there came from 
it a strong odour of rum. then he place it to hi lips, and wa 
enjoy the pleasant gurgl of the liquor down hi throat, when charl 
step up to him, and lay hold of the lower end of the bottle, he 
drag it from hi mouth, saying,-- 

"how dare you talk in the way you have of my uncle, you drunken, 
mutin rascal, and behind hi back too!" 

the voic of charl holland wa as well known to jack pringl as that 
of the admiral, and hi intens astonish at hear himself so 
suddenli address by one, of whose proxim he had not the least idea, 
made some of the rum go, what is popularli termed, the wrong way, and 
nearli choke him. 

He reel back, till he fell over some obstruction, and then down he sat 
on a flower bed, while hi eye seem readi to come out of hi head. 

"avast heavings," he cried, "who' that?" 

"come, come," said charl holland, "don't pretend you don't know me; I 
will not have my uncl spoken of in a disrespect manner by you." 

"well, shiver my timbers, if that ain't our nevey. why, charley, my boy, 
how are you? here we are in port at last. won't the old commodor pipe 
hi eye, now. whew! here' a go. i'v found our nevey, after all." 

"you found him," said dr. chillingworth; "now, that is as great a piec 
of impud as ever I heard in all my life. you mean that he ha found 
you, and found you out, too, you drunken fellow. jack, you get wors and 
wors everi day." 

"ay, ay, sir." 

"what, you admit it?" 

"ay, ay, sir. now, master charley, I tell you what it is, I shall take 
you off to your old uncle, you shore go sneak and you'll have to 
report what cruis you'v been upon all thi while, leav the ship to 
look after itself. lord love you all, if it hadn't been for me I don't 
know what anybodi would have done." 

"I onli know of the result," said Dr chillingworth, "that would ensue, 
if it were not for you, and that would consist in a great injuri to the 
revenue, in consequ of the much less consumpt of rum and other 
strong liquors." 

"i'll be hang up at the yard if I understand what you mean," said 
jack; "a if I ever drunk anything--i, of all peopl in the world. I am 
asham of you. you are drunk." 

sever of the dragoon had to turn asid to keep themselv from 
laughing, and the offic himself could not forbear from a smile as he 
said to the doctor,-- 

"sir, you seem to have mani acquaintances, and by some mean or anoth 
they all have an inclin to come here to-night. if, however, you 
consid that you are bound to remain here from a feel that the hall 
is threaten with ani danger, you may dismiss that fear, for I shall 
leav a picquet here all night." 

"no, sir," repli dr. chillingworth, "it is not that I fear now, after 
the manner in which they have been repulsed, ani danger to the hall from 
the mob; but I have reason for wish to be in it or near it for some 
time to come." 

"a you please." 

"charles, do not wait for or accept the guidanc of that drunken fellow, 
but go yourself with a direct which I will write down for you in a 
leaf of my pocket-book." 

"drunken fellow," exclaim jack, who had now scrambl to hi feet, 
"who do you call a drunken fellow?" 

"whi you, unquestionably." 

"well, now, that is hard. come along, nevey; i'll shew you where they 
all are. I could walk a plank on ani deck with ani man in the service, I 
could. come along, my boy, come along." 

"you can accept of him as a guid if you like, of course," said the 
doctor; "he may be sober enough to conduct you." 

"I think he can," said charles. "lead on, jack; but mark me, I shall 
inform my uncl of thi intemperance, as well as of the manner in which 
you let your tongu wag about him behind hi back, unless you promis to 
reform." 

"he is long past all reformation," remark dr. chillingworth; "it is 
out of the question." 

"and I am afraid my uncl will not have courag to attempt such an 
ungrat task, when there is so littl chanc of success," repli 
charl holland, shake the worthi doctor by the hand. "farewell, for 
the present, sir; the next time I see you, I hope we shall both be more 
pleasantli situated." 

"come along, nevey," interrupt jack pringle; "now you'v found your 
way back, the first thing you ought to do, is to report yourself as 
have come aboard. follow me, and i'll soon show yer the port where the 
old hulk' laid hisself up." 

jack walk on first, toler steady, if one may take into account hi 
diver deep potations, and charl holland, anticip with delight 
again look upon the face of hi much love flora, follow close 
behind him. 

We can well imagin the world of delight thought that came crowd 
upon him when jack, after rather a long walk, announc that they were 
now veri near the resid of the object of hi soul' adoration. 

We trust that there is not one of our reader who, for one moment, will 
suppos that charl holland wa the sort of man to leav even such a 
villain and double-fac hypocrit as marchdale, to starv amid the 
gloomi ruin where he wa immured. 

far from charles' intent wa ani such thing; but he did think that 
a night pass there, with no other compani than hi own reflections, 
would do him a world of good, and was, at all events, no veri great 
modicum of punish for the rascal with which he had behaved. 

besides, even dure that night there were refresh in the shape of 
bread and water, such as had been present to charl himself, within 
marchdale' reach as they had been within his. 

that individu now, charl thought, would have a good opportun of 
test the qualiti of that kind of food, and of find out what an 
extrem light diet it wa for a strong man to live upon. 

but in the morn it wa charles' intent to take henri bannerworth 
and the admir with him to the ruins, and then and there releas the 
wretch from hi confinement, on condit that he made a full confess 
of hi villani befor those persons. 

oh, how gladli would marchdal have exchang the fate which actual 
befel him for ani amount of person humiliation, alway provid that 
it brought with it a commensur amount of person safety. 

but that fate wa one altogeth undreamt of by charl holland, and 
wholli without hi control. 

It wa a fate which would have been his, but for the murder purpos 
which had brought marchdal to the dungeon, and those happi accid 
which had enabl charl to chang place with him, and breath the 
free, cool, fresh air; while he left hi enemi load with the same 
chain that had encumb hi limb so cruelly, and lie on that same 
damp dungeon floor, which he thought would be hi grave. 

We mention that as charl left the ruins, the storm, which had been 
give variou indic of it coming, seem to be rapidli 
approaching. 

It wa one of these extrem local tempest which expend all their 
princip furi over a small space of country; and, in thi instance, the 
space seem to includ littl more than the river, and the few meadow 
which immedi surround it, and lent it so much of it beauty. 

marchdal soon found that hi cri were drown by the louder voic of 
the elements. the wail of the wind among the ancient ruin wa much 
more full of sound than hi cries; and, now and then, the full-mouth 
thunder fill the air with such a volum of roaring, and awaken so 
mani echo among the ruins, that, had he possess the voic of fifti 
men, he could not have hope to wage war with it. 

and then, although we know that charl holland would have encount 
death himself, rather than he would have willingli left anyth human 
to expir of hunger in that dungeon, yet marchdale, judg of other by 
himself, felt by no mean sure of ani such thing, and, in hi horror of 
apprehension, fanci that that wa just the sort of easy, and pleasant, 
and complet reveng that it wa in charl holland' power to take, and 
just the one which would suggest itself, under the circumstances, to hi 
mind. 

could anyth be possibl more full of horror than such a thought? 
death, let it come in ani shape it may, is yet a most repuls and 
unwelcom guest; but, when it comes, so unit with all that can add to 
it terrors, it is enough to drive reason from it throne, and fill the 
mind with imag of absolut horror. 

tire of shrieking, for hi parch lip and clog tongu would 
scarc now permit him to utter a sound higher than a whisper. 
marchdal lay, listen to the furiou storm without, in the last 
abandon of despair. 

"oh! what a death is this," he groaned. "here, alone--al alone--and 
starvat to creep on me by degrees, sap life' energi one by 
one. alreadi do I feel the dread sicken weak grow on me. 
help, oh! help me heav--no, no! dare I call on heaven to help me? Is 
there no fiend of dark who now will bid me a price for a human soul? 
Is there not one who will do so--not one who will rescu me from the 
horror that surround me, for heaven will not? I dare not ask merci 
there." 

the storm continu louder and louder. the wind, it is true, wa nearli 
hushed, but the roar and the rattl of the echo-awaken thunder fulli 
made up for it cessation, while, now and then, even there, in that 
underground abode, some sudden reflect of the vivid lightning' light 
would find it way, lending, for a fleet moment, suffici light to 
marchdale, wherewith he could see the gloomi place in which he was. 

At time he wept, and at time he raved, while ever and anon he made 
such frantic effort to free himself from the chain that were around 
him, that, had they not been strong, he must have succeeded; but, as it 
was, he onli made deep indent into hi flesh, and gave himself 
much pain. 

"charl holland!" he shouted; "oh! releas me! varney! varney! whi do 
you not come to save me? I have toil for you most unrequitedly--i have 
not had my reward. let it all consist in my releas from thi dread 
bondage. help! help! oh, help!" 

there wa no one to hear him. the storm continued, and now, suddenly, a 
sudden and a sharper sound than ani awaken by the thunder' roar came 
upon hi startl ear, and, in increas agony, he shouted,-- 

"what is that? oh! what is that? god of heaven, do my fear translat 
that sound aright? can it be, oh! can it be, that the ruin which have 
stood for so mani a year are now crumbl down befor the storm of 
to-night?" 

the sound came again, and he felt the wall of the dungeon in which he 
wa shake. now there could be no doubt but that the lightn had struck 
some part of the building, and so endang the safeti of all that wa 
abov ground. for a moment there came across hi brain such a rush of 
agony, that he neither spoke nor moved. had that dread feel 
continu much longer, he must have laps into insanity; but that 
amount of mercy--for merci it would have been--wa not shown to him. He 
still felt all the accumul horror of hi situation, and then, with 
such shriek as noth but a full appreci of such horror could 
have given him strength to utter, he call upon earth, upon heaven and 
upon all that wa infernal, to save him from hi impend doom. 

all wa in vain. It wa an impend doom which noth but the direct 
interposit of heaven could have at all averted; and it wa not like 
that ani such pervers of the regular law of natur would take place 
to save such a man as marchdale. 

again came the crash sound of fall stones, and he wa certain that 
the old ruins, which had stood for so mani hundr year the storm, and 
the utmost wrath of the elements, wa at length yielding, and crumbl 
down. 

what els could he expect but to be engulph among the 
fragments--frag still weighti and destructive, although in decay. 
how fear now did hi horrifi imagin take in at one glance, 
as it were, a panoram view of all hi past life, and how absolut 
contemptible, at that moment, appear all that he had been strive 
for. 

but the wall shake again, and thi time the vibrat is more fear 
than before. there is a tremend uproar abov him--th roof yield to 
some superincumb pressure--ther is one shriek, and marchdal lie 
crush beneath a mass of masonri that it would take men and machineri 
day to remov from off him. 

all is over now. that bold, bad man--that accomplish hypocrite--that 
mendacious, would-b murder wa no more. He lie but a mangled, 
crushed, and fester corpse. 

may hi soul find merci with hi god! 

the storm, from thi moment, seem to relax in it violence, as if it 
had accomplish a great purpose, and, consequently, now, need no longer 
"vex the air with it boister presence." gradual the thunder die 
away in the distance. the wind no longer blew in blustrou gusts, but, 
with a gentl murmuring, swept around the ancient pile, as if sing 
the requiem of the dead that lay beneath--that dead which mortal eye 
were never to look upon. 




chapter lxxiv. 

the meet OF charl and flora. 


[illustration] 

charl holland follow jack pringl for some time in silenc from 
bannerworth hall; hi mind wa too full of thought concern the past 
to allow him to indulg in much of that kind of convers in which 
jack pringl might be fulli consid to be a proficient. 

As for jack, somehow or another, he had felt hi digniti offend in the 
garden of bannerworth hall, and he had made up hi mind, as he 
afterward state in hi own phraseology, not to speak to nobodi till 
somebodi spoke to him. 

A grow anxiety, however, to ascertain from one who had seen her 
lately, how flora had born hi absence, at length induc charl 
holland to break hi self-impos silence. 

"jack," he said, "you have had the happi of see her lately, tell 
me, doe flora bannerworth look as she wa wont to look, or have all the 
rose fade from her cheeks?" 

"why, as for the roses," said jack, "i'm blow if I can tell, and 
see as how she don't look at me much, I doesn't know noth about 
her; I can tell you something, though, about the old admir that will 
make you open your eyes." 

"indeed, jack, and what may that be?" 

"why, he' took to drink, and get groggi about everi day of hi life, 
and the most singular thing is, that when that' the case with the old 
man, he say it' me." 

"indeed, jack! taken to drink ha my poor old uncle, from grief, I 
suppose, jack, at my disappearance." 

"no, I don't think it' grief," said jack; "it strike me it' 
rum-and-water." 

"alas, alas, I never could have imagin he could have fallen into that 
habit of yours; he alway seem so far from anyth of thi kind." 

"ay, ay, sir," said jack, "I know'd you'd be astonished. It will be the 
death of him, that' my opinion; and the idea, you know, master charles, 
of accus me when he get drunk himself." 

"I believ that is a common delus of intemper persons," said 
charles. 

"i it, sir; well, it' a veri awkward I thing, becaus you know, sir, 
as well as most people, that i'm not the fellow to take a drop too 
much." 

"I cannot say, jack, that I know so much, for I have certainli heard my 
uncl accus you of intoxication." 

"lor', sir, that wa all just on account of hi tri it hisself; he 
wa a think on it then, and want to see how i'd take it." 

"but tell me of flora; are you quit certain that she ha had no more 
alarm from varney?" 

"what, that ere vampyr fellow? not a bit of it, your honour. lor' bless 
you, he must have found out by some mean or anoth that I wa on the 
look out, and that did the business. he'll never come near miss flora 
again, i'll be bound, though to be sure we move away from the hall on 
account of him; but not that I saw the good of cruis out of one' own 
latitude, but somehow or anoth you see the doctor and the admir got 
it into their head to establish a sort of blockade, and the idea of the 
thing wa to sail away in the night quit quiet, and after that take up 
a posit that would come across the enemi on the larboard tack, if so 
be as he made hi appearance." 

"oh, you allud to watch the hall, I presume?" 

"ay, ay, sir, just so; but would you believ it, master charlie, the 
admir and the doctor got so bless drunk that I could do noth with 
'em." 

"indeed!" 

"yes, they did indeed, and made all kind of queer mistakes, so that the 
end of all that was, that the vampyr did come; but he got away again." 

"he did come then; sir franci varney came again after the hous wa 
presum to be deserted?" 

"he did, sir." 

"that is veri strange; what on earth could have been hi object? thi 
affair is most inexplic mysterious. I hope the distance, jack, is 
not far that you'r take me, for i'm incap of endur much 
fatigue." 

"not a great way, your honour; keep two point to the westward, and sail 
straight on; we'll soon come to port. My eye, won't there be a squall 
when you get in. I expect as miss flora will drop down as dead as a 
herring, for she doesn't think you'r abov the hatches." 

"A good thought, jack; my sudden appear may produc alarm. when we 
reach the place of abod of the bannerworths, you shall preced me, and 
prepar them in some measur for my reception." 

"veri good, sir; do you see that there littl white cottag a-head, 
there in the offing?" 

"yes, yes; is that the place?" 

"yes, your honour, that' the port to which we are bound." 

"well, then, jack, you hasten a-head, and see miss flora, and be sure 
you prepar her gentli and by degrees, you know, jack, for my 
appearance, so that she shall not be alarmed." 

"ay, ay, sir, I understand; you wait here, and i'll go and do it; there 
would be a squall if you were to make your appearance, sir, all at once. 
she look upon you as safe lodg in davy' locker; she mind me, all 
the world, of a girl I knew at portsmouth, call bet bumplush. she wa 
one of your delic littl creatur as don't live long in thi here 
world; no, blow me; when I came home from a eighteen months' cruise, 
onc I seed her drink rum out of a quart pot, so I says, 'hilloa, 
what cheer?' and onli to think now of the wonder effect that there 
had upon her; with that veri pot she give the fellow as wa stand 
treat a knobber on the head as last him three weeks. she wa too good 
for thi here world, she was, and too rummantic. 'go to blazes,' she 
say to him, 'here' jack pringl come home.'" 

"veri romant indeed," said charles. 

"yes, I believ you, sir; and that put me in mind of miss flora and 
you." 

"an extrem flatter comparison. Of cours I feel much obliged." 

"oh, don't name it, sir. the british tar as can't oblig a feller-cretor 
is unworthi to tread the quarter-deck, or to bear a hand to the distress 
of a woman." 

"veri well," said charles. "now, as we are here, preced me, if you 
please, and let me beg of you to be especi cautiou in your manner 
of announc me." 

"ay, ay, sir," said jack: and away he walk toward the cottage, 
leav charl some distanc behind. 

flora and the admir were sit togeth conversing. the old man, who 
love her as if she had been a child of hi own, wa endeavouring, to 
the extent of hi ability, to assuag the anguish of her thoughts, which 
at that moment chanc to be bent upon charl holland. 

"nevermind, my dear," he said; "he'll turn up some of these days, and 
when he does, I sha'n't forget to tell him that it wa you who stood out 
for hi honesti and truth, when everi one els wa against him, 
includ myself, an old wretch that I was." 

"oh, sir, how could you for one moment believ that those letter could 
have been written by your nephew charles? they carried, sir, upon the 
face of them their own refutation; and i'm onli surpris that for one 
instant you, or ani one who knew him, could have believ him capabl of 
write them." 

"avast, there," said the admiral; "that'll do. I own you got the better 
of the old sailor there. I think you and jack pringl were the onli two 
person who stood out from the first." 

"then I honour jack for do so." 

"and here he is," said the admiral, "and you'd better tell him. the 
mutin rascal! he want all the honour he can get, as a set-off 
against hi drunken and other bad habits." 

jack walk into the room, look about him in silenc for a moment, 
thrust hi hand in hi breech pockets, and gave a long whistle. 

"what' the matter now?" said the admiral. 

"d--me, if charl holland ain't outside, and i'v come to prepar you 
for the bless shock," said jack. "don't faint either of you, becaus 
i'm onli go to let you know it by degrees, you know." 

A shriek burst from flora' lips, and she sprung to the door of the 
apartment. 

"what!" cri the admiral, "mi nephew--mi nephew charles! jack, you 
rascal, if you'r joking, it' the last joke you shall make in thi 
world; and if it' true, i--i--i'm an old fool, that' all." 

"ay, ay, sir," said jack; "didn't you know that afore?" 

"charles--charles!" cri flora. He heard the voice. her name escap 
hi lips, and rang with a pleasant echo through the house. 

In anoth moment he wa in the room, and had clasp her to hi breast. 

"mi own--mi beautiful--mi true!" 

"charles, dear charles!" 

"oh, flora, what have I not endur sinc last we met; but thi repay 
me--mor than repay me for all." 

"what is the past now," cri flora--"what are all it miseri place 
against thi happy, happi moment?" 

"d--me, nobodi think of me," said the admiral. 

"mi dear uncle," said charles, look over flora' shoulder, as he 
still held her in hi arms, "i that you?" 

"yes, yes, swab, it is me, and you know it; but give us your five, you 
mutin vagabond; and I tell you what, i'll do you the greatest favour 
i'v had an opportun of do you some time--i'l leav you alone, 
you dog. come along, jack." 

"ay, ay, sir," said jack; and away they went out of the apartment. 

and now those two love heart were alone--they who had been so long 
separ by malign destiny, onc again were heart to heart, look 
into each other' face with all the beam tender of an affect 
of the truest, holiest character. 

the admir had done a favour to them both to leav them alone, although 
we much doubt whether hi presence, or the presenc of the whole world, 
would have had the effect of control one gener sentiment of nobl 
feeling. 

they would have forgotten everyth but that they were together, and 
that onc again each look into the other' eye with all the 
tender of a love purer and higher than ordinarili belong to mortal 
affections. 

languag wa weak to give utter to the full gust of happi feel 
that now were theirs. It wa ecstasi enough to feel, to know that the 
evil fortun which had so long separ them, depriv each exist 
of it sunniest aspect, wa over. It wa enough for charl holland to 
feel that she love him still. It wa enough for flora bannerworth to 
know, as she look into hi beam countenance, that that love wa not 
misplaced, but wa met by feel such as she herself would have 
dictat to be the inhabit of the heart of him whom she would have 
chosen from the mass of mankind as her own. 

"flora--dear flora," said charles, "and you have never doubt me?" 

"i'v never doubted, charles, heaven or you. To doubt one would have 
been, to doubt both." 

"gener and best of girls, what must you have thought of my enforc 
absence! oh! flora, I wa unjust enough to your truth to make my 
greatest pang the thought that you might doubt me, and cast me from your 
heart for ever." 

"ah! charles, you ought to have known me better. I stood amid sore 
temptat to do so much. there were those who would have urg me on to 
think that you had cast me from your heart for ever. there were those 
readi and will to place the worst construct upon your conduct, and 
with a devilish ingenu to strive to make me particip in such a 
feeling; but, no, charles, no--i love you, and I trust you, and I 
could not so far beli my own judgment as to tell you other than what 
you alway seem to my young fancy." 

"and you are right, my flora, right; and is it not a gloriou triumph to 
see that love--that sentiment of passion--ha enabl you to have so 
endur and so nobl a confid in aught human?" 

"ay, charles, it is the sentiment of passion, for our love ha been more 
a sentiment than a passion. I would fain think that we had love each 
other with an affect not usual known, appreciated, or understood, 
and so, in the vaniti of my best affections, I would strive to think 
them someth exclusive, and beyond the common feel of humanity." 

"and you are right, my flora; such love as your is the exception; there 
may be preferences, there may be passions, and there may be sentiments, 
but never, never, surely, wa there a heart like yours." 

"nay, charles, now you speak from a too poetic fancy; but is it 
possibl that I have had you here so long, with your hand clasp in 
mine, and ask you not the caus of your absence?" 

"oh, flora, I have suffer much--much physically, but more mentally. It 
wa the thought of you that wa at onc the bane and the antidot of my 
existence." 

"indeed, charles! did I present myself in such contradictori colour to 
you?" 

"yes, dearest, as thus. when I thought of you, sometimes, in the deep 
seclus of a dungeon, that thought almost goad me to madness, 
becaus it brought with it the conviction--a convict peculiar to a 
lover--that none could so effectu stand between you and all evil as 
myself." 

"yes, yes, charles; most true." 

"it seem to me as if all the world in arm could not have protect 
you so well as thi one heart, clad in the tripl steel of it 
affections, could have shield you from evil." 

"ay, charles; and then I wa the bane of your existence, becaus I 
fill you with apprehension?" 

"for a time, dearest; and then came the antidote; for when exhaust 
alik in mind and body--when lie helpless, with chain upon my 
limbs--when expect death at everi visit of those who had drag me 
from light and from liberty, and from love; it wa but the thought of 
thi beauti and thi affect that nerv me, and gave me a hope even 
amidst the cruellest disaster." 

"and then--and then, charles?" 

"you were my blessing, as you have ever been--a you are, and as you 
will ever be--mi own flora, my beautiful--mi true!" 

We won't go so far as to say it is the fact; but, from a seri of 
singular sound which reach even to the passag of the cottage, we 
have our own privat opinion to the effect, that charl began kiss 
flora at the top of her forehead, and never stopped, somehow or another, 
till he got down to her chin--no, not her chin--her sweet lips--h could 
not get past them. perhap it wa wrong; but we can't help it--w are 
faith chroniclers. reader, if you be of the sterner sex, what would 
you have done?--if of the gentler, what would you have permitted? 




chapter lxxv. 

mutual explanations, and the visit TO the ruins. 


[illustration] 

dure the next hour, charl inform flora of the whole particular of 
hi forcibl abduction; and to hi surpris he heard, of course, for the 
first time, of those letters, purport to be written by him, which 
endeavour to give so bad an aspect to the fact of hi sudden 
disappear from bannerworth hall. 

flora would insist upon the admiral, henry, and the rest of the family, 
hear all that charl had to relat concern mr. marchdale; for 
well she knew that her mother, from earli associations, wa so far 
impress in the favour of that hypocrit personage, that noth but 
damn facts, much to hi prejudice, would suffic to convinc her of 
the charact he realli was. 

but she wa open to conviction, and when she realli found what a villain 
she had cherish and given her confid to, she shed abund of 
tears, and blame herself exceedingli as the caus of some of the 
misfortun which had fallen upon her children. 

"veri good," said the admiral; "I ain't surpris a bit. I knew he wa a 
vagabond from the first time I clap eye upon him. there wa a down 
look about the fellow' figure-head that I didn't like, and be hang to 
him, but I never thought he would have gone the length he ha done. and 
so you say you'v got him safe in the ruins, charles?" 

"I have, indeed, uncle." 

"and then there let him remain, and a good place, too, for him." 

"no, uncle, no. i'm sure you speak without thought. I intend to releas 
him in a few hours, when I have rest from my fatigues. He could not 
come to ani harm if he were to go without food entir for the time 
that I leav him; but even that he will not do, for there is bread and 
water in the dungeon." 

"bread and water! that' too good for him. but, however, charles, when 
you go to let him out, i'll go with you, just to tell him what I think 
of him, the vagabond." 

"he must suffer amazingly, for no doubt know well, as he does, hi 
own infam intentions, he will consid that if I were to leav him to 
starv to death, I should be but retail upon him the injuri he 
would have inflict upon me." 

"the worst of it is," said the admiral, "I can't think what to do with 
him." 

"do nothing, uncle, but just let him go; it will be a suffici 
punish for such a man to feel that, instead of succeed in hi 
designs, he ha onli brought upon himself the bitterest contempt of 
those whom he would fain have injured. I can have no desir for reveng 
on such a man as marchdale." 

"you are right, charles," said flora; "let him go, and let him go with a 
feel that he ha acquir the contempt of those whose best opinion 
might have been hi for a far less amount of troubl than he ha taken 
to acquir their worst." 

excit had kept up charl to thi point, but now, when he aros and 
express hi intent of go to the ruins, for the purpos of 
releas marchdale, he exhibit such unequivoc symptom of 
exhaust and fatigu that neither hi uncl nor flora would permit him 
to go, so, in defer to them, he gave up the point, and commiss 
the admir and jack, with henry, to proceed to the place, and give the 
villain hi freedom; littl suspect what had occur sinc he had 
himself left the neighbourhood of those ruins. 

Of cours charl holland couldn't be at all account for the work of 
the elements, and it wa not for him to imagin that when he left 
marchdal in the dungeon that so aw a catastroph as that we have 
record to the reader wa to ensue. 

the distanc to the ruin wa not so great from thi cottag even as it 
wa from bannerworth hall, provid those who went knew the most direct 
and best road to take; so that the admir wa not gone abov a coupl 
of hours, and when he return he sat down and look at charl with 
such a peculiar expression, that the latter could not for the life of 
him tell what to make of it. 

[illustration] 

"someth ha happened, uncle," he said, "I am certain; tell me at onc 
what it is." 

"oh! nothing, nothing," said the admiral, "of ani importance." 

"i that what you call your feelings?" said jack pringle. "can't you 
tell him as there came on a squall last night, and the ruin have come 
in with a dab upon old marchdale, crush hi guts, so that we smelt 
him as soon as we got nigh at hand?" 

"good god!" said charles, "ha such a catastroph occurred?" 

"yes, charles, that' just about the catastroph that ha occurred. he' 
dead; and rum enough it is that it should happen on the veri night that 
you escaped." 

"rum!" said jack, suddenly; "mi eye, who mention rum? what a singular 
sort of liquor rum must be. I heard of a chap as use to be fond of it 
onc on board a ship; I wonder if there' ani in the house." 

"no!" said the admiral; "but there' a fine pump of spring water outsid 
if you feel a littl thirsty, jack; and i'll engag it shall do you more 
good than all the rum in the world." 

"uncle," said charles, "i'm glad to hear you make that observation." 

"what for?" 

"why, to deal candidli with you, uncle, jack inform me that you had 
late taken quit a predilect for drinking." 

"me!" cri the admiral; "whi the infern rascal, i'v had to threaten 
him with hi discharg a dozen times, at least, on that veri ground, and 
no other." 

"there' somebodi call me," said jack. "i'm a coming! i'm a coming!" 
and, so he bolt out of the room, just in time to escap an inkstand, 
which the admir caught up and flung after him. 

"i'll strike that rascal off the ship' book thi veri day," mutter 
admir bell. "the drunken vagabond, to pretend that I take anything, 
when all the while it' himself!" 

"well, well, I ought certainli to have suspect the quarter from whenc 
the intellig came; but he told it to me so circumstantially, and 
with such an appar feel of regret for the weak into which he 
said you had fallen, that I realli thought there might be some truth in 
it." 

"the rascal! i'v done with him from thi moment; I have put up with too 
much from him for year past." 

"I think now that you have given him a great deal of liberty, and that, 
with a great deal more he ha taken, make up an amount which you find 
it difficult to endure." 

"and I won't endur it." 

"let me talk to him, and I dare say I shall be abl to convinc him that 
he goe too far, and when he find that such is the case he will mend." 

"speak to him, if you like, but I have done with such a mutin rascal, 
I have. you can take him into your service, if you like, till you get 
tire of him; and that won't be veri long." 

"well, well, we shall see. jack will apologis to you I have no doubt; 
and then I shall interced for him, and advis you to give him anoth 
trial." 

"if you get him into the apology, then there' no doubt about me give 
him anoth trial. but I know him too well for that; he' as obstin 
as a mule, he is, and you won't get a civil word out of him; but never 
mind that, now. I tell you what, master charley, it will take a good lot 
of roast beef to get up your good look again." 

"it will, indeed, uncle; and I require, now, rest, for I am thoroughli 
exhausted. the great privat I have undergone, and the amount of 
mental excit which I have experienced, in consequ of the sudden 
and unexpect releas from a fear confinement, have greatli weaken 
all my energies. A few hours' sleep will make quit a differ be of 
me." 

"well, my boy, you know best," return the admiral; "and i'll take 
care, if you sleep till to-morrow, that you sha'n't be disturbed. So now 
be off to bed at once." 

the young man shook hi uncle' hand in a cordial manner, and then 
repair to the apart which had been provid for him. 

charl holland did, indeed, stand in need of repose; and for the first 
time now for mani day he laid down with seren at hi heart, and 
slept for mani hours. and wa there not now a great and a happi chang 
in flora bannerworth! As if by magic, in a few short hours, much of the 
bloom of her before-fad beauti return to her. her step again 
recov it springi lightness; again she smile upon her mother, and 
suffer herself to talk of a happi future; for the dread even of the 
vampyre' visit had fade into compar insignific against 
the heart' deep deject which had come over her at the thought that 
charl holland must sure be murdered, or he would have contriv to 
come to her. 

and what a gloriou recompens she had now for the trust confid 
with which she had clung to a convict of hi truth! wa it not great, 
now, to feel that when he wa condemn by others, and when strong and 
unimpeach evid seem to be against him, she had clung to him 
and declar her faith in hi honour, and wept for him instead of 
condemning? 

yes, flora; you were of that order of nobl mind that, where onc 
confid is given, give it fulli and completely, and will not harbour 
a suspicion of the faith of the love one, a happi disposit when 
verified, as in thi instance, by an answer truthfulness. 

but when such a heart trust not with judgment--when that pure, exalted, 
and nobl confid is given to an object unworthi of it--then comes, 
indeed, the most fear of all mental struggles; and if the fond heart, 
that ha hug to it inmost core so worthless a treasure, do not break 
in the effort to discard it, we may well be surpris at the amount of 
fortitud that ha endur so much. 

although the admir had said but littl concern the fear end 
marchdal had come to, it realli did make some impress upon him; and, 
much as he held in abhorr the villani of marchdale' conduct, he 
would gladli in hi heart have avert the fate from him that he had 
brought upon himself. 

On the road to the ruins, he calcul upon take a differ kind of 
vengeance. 

when they had got some distanc from the cottage, admir bell made a 
propos to henri to be hi second while he fought marchdale, but henri 
would not hear of it for a moment. 

"mi dear sir," he said, "could I, do you think, stand by and see a 
valuable, revered, and a respect life like your expos to ani hazard 
mere upon the chanc of punish a villain? no, no; marchdal is too 
base now to be met in honour encounter. If he is dealt with in ani 
way let it be by the laws." 

thi wa reason enough, and after some argument the admir 
coincid in it, and then they began to wonder how, without charles, 
they should be abl to get an entranc to the dungeons, for it had been 
hi intent originally, had he not felt so fatigued, to go with them. 

As soon, however, as they got toler near to the ruins, they saw what 
had happened. neither spoke, but they quicken their pace, and soon 
stood close to the mass of stone-work which now had assum so differ 
a shape to what it had a few short hour before. 

It need littl examin to let them feel certain that whoever might 
have been in ani of the underground dungeon must have been crush to 
death. 

"heaven have merci upon hi soul!" said henry. 

"amen!" said the admiral. 

they both turn away, and for some time they neither of them spoke, for 
their thought were full of reflect upon the horribl death which 
marchdal must have endured. At length the admir said-- 

"shall we tell thi or not?" 

"tell it at once," said henry; "let us have no secrets." 

"good. then I will not make one you may depend. I onli wish that while 
he wa about it, charley could have pop that rascal varney as well in 
the dungeon, and then there would have been an end and a good riddanc 
of them both." 




chapter lxxvi. 

the second night-watch OF mr. chillingworth AT the hall. 


[illustration] 

the militari parti in the morn left bannerworth hall, and the old 
place resum it wont quiet. but dr. chillingworth found it difficult 
to get rid of hi old friend, the hangman, who seem quit dispos to 
share hi watch with him. 

the doctor, without be at all accus of be a prejud man, 
might well object to the continu companionship of one, who, accord 
to hi own account, wa decidedli no better than he should be, if he 
were half so good. 

moreover, it materi interf with the proceed of our medic 
friend, whose object wa to watch the vampyr with all imagin 
quiet and secrecy, in the event of hi again visit bannerworth 
hall. 

"sir," he said, to the hangman, "now that you have so obligingli relat 
to me your melancholi history, I will not detain you." 

"oh, you are not detain me." 

"yes, but I shall probabl remain here for a consider time." 

"I have noth to do; and one place is about the same as anoth to 
me." 

"well, then, if I must speak plainly, allow me to say, that as I came 
here upon a veri import and special errand, I desir most 
particularli to be left alone. Do you understand me now?" 

"oh! ah!--i understand; you want me to go?" 

"just so." 

"well, then, dr. chillingworth, allow me to tell you, I have come here 
on a veri special errand likewise." 

"you have?" 

"I have. I have been put one circumst to another, and draw a 
varieti of conclus from a varieti of facts, so that I have come to 
what I consid an import resolve, namely, to have a good look at 
bannerworth hall, and if I continu to like it as well as I do now, I 
should like to make the bannerworth famili an offer for the purchas of 
it." 

"the devil you would! whi all the world seem mad upon the project of 
buy thi old building, which realli is get into such a state of 
dilapidation, that it cannot last mani year longer." 

"it is my fancy." 

"no, no; there is someth more in thi than meet the eye. the same 
reason, be it what may, that ha induc varney the vampyr to becom so 
desir of possess the hall, actuat you." 

"possibly." 

"and what is that reason? you may as well be candid with me." 

"yes, I will, and am. I like the picturesqu aspect of the place." 

"no, you know that that is a disingenu answer, that you know well. It 
is not the aspect of the old hall that ha charm for you. but I feel, 
onli from your conduct, more than ever convinced, that some plot is 
go on, have the accomplish of some great object as it climax, 
a someth of which you have guessed." 

"how much you are mistaken!" 

"no, I am certain I am right; and I shall immedi advis the 
bannerworth famili to return, and to take up their abod again here, in 
order to put an end to the hope which you, or varney, or ani one els 
may have, of get possess of the place." 

"if you were a man," said the hangman, "who care a littl more for 
yourself, and a littl less for others, I would make a confid of 
you." 

"what do you mean?" 

"why, I mean, candidly, that you are not selfish enough to be entitl 
to my confidence." 

"that is a strang reason for withhold confid from ani man." 

"it is a strang reason; but, in thi case, a most abundantli true one. 
I cannot tell you what I would tell you, becaus I cannot make the 
agreement with you that I would fain make." 

"you talk in riddles." 

"to explain which, then, would be to tell my secret." 

dr. chillingworth was, evidently, much annoyed, and yet he wa in an 
extrem helpless condition; for as to forc the hangman to leav the 
hall, if he did not feel dispos to do so, that wa complet out of 
the question, and could not be done. In the first place, he wa a much 
more power man than the doctor, and in the second, it wa quit 
contrari to all mr. chillingworth' habits, to engag in anyth like 
person warfare. 

He could only, therefore, look hi vexation, and say,-- 

"if you are determin upon remaining, I cannot help it; but, when some 
one, as there assuredli will, come from the bannerworths, here, to me, 
or I shall be under the necess of state candidli that you are 
intruding." 

"veri good. As the morn air is keen, and as we now are not like to 
be as good compani to each other as we were, I shall go insid the 
house." 

thi wa a proposit which the doctor did not like, but he wa 
compel to submit to it; and he saw, with feel of uneasiness, the 
hangman make hi way into the hall by one of the windows. 

then dr. chillingworth sat down to think. much he wonder what could be 
the secret of the great desir which varney, marchdale, and even thi 
man had, all of them to be possessor of the old hall. 

that there wa some power incent he felt convinced, and he long 
for some convers with the bannerworths, or with admir bell, in 
order that he might state what had now taken place. that some one would 
soon come to him, in order to bring fresh provis for the day, he wa 
certain, and all he could do, in the interim, was, to listen to what the 
hangman wa about in the hall. 

not a sound, for a consider time, disturb the intens still of 
the place; but, now, suddenly, mr. chillingworth thought he heard a 
hammering, as if some one wa at work in one of the room of the hall. 

"what can be the mean of that?" he said, and he wa about to proceed 
at onc to the interior of the building, through the same window which 
had enabl the hangman to gain admittance, when he heard hi own name 
pronounc by some one at the back of the garden fence, and upon cast 
hi eye in that direction, he, to hi great relief, saw the admir and 
henri bannerworth. 

"come round to the gate," said the doctor. "I am more glad to see you 
than I can tell you just now. Do not make more nois than you can help; 
but, come round to the gate at once." 

they obey the injunct with alacrity, and when the doctor had 
admit them, the admir said, eagerly,-- 

"you don't mean to tell us that he is here?" 

"no, no, not varney; but he is not the onli one who ha taken a great 
affect for bannerworth hall; you may have anoth tenant for it, and 
I believ at ani price you like to name." 

"indeed!" 

"hush! creep along close to the house, and then you will not be seen. 
there! do you hear that nois in the hall?" 

"whi it sounds," said the admiral, "like the ship' carpent at work." 

"it does, indeed, sound like a carpenter; it' onli the new tenant 
making, I dare say, some repairs." 

"d--n hi impudence!" 

"why, it certainli doe look like a veri cool proceeding, I must admit." 

"who, and what is he?" 

"who he is now, I cannot tell you, but he wa onc the hangman of 
london, at a time when I wa practis in the metropolis, and so I 
becam acquaint with him. He know sir franci varney, and, if I 
mistak not, ha found out the caus of that mysteri personage' 
great attach to bannerworth hall, and ha found the reason so 
cogent, that he ha got up an affect for it himself." 

"to me," said henry, "all thi is as incomprehens as anyth can 
possibl be. what on earth doe it all mean?" 

"mi dear henry," said the doctor, "will you be rule by me?" 

"I will be rule by ani one whom I know I can trust; for I am like a man 
grope hi way in the dark." 

"then allow thi gentleman who is carpent away so pleasantli within 
the house, to do so to hi heart' content, but don't let him leav it. 
show yourselv now in the garden, he ha suffici prudenc to know 
that three constitut rather fear odd against one, and so he will be 
careful, and remain where he is. If he should come out, we need not let 
him go until we thoroughli ascertain what he ha been about." 

"you shall command the squadron, doctor," said the admiral, "and have it 
all your own way, you know, so here goes! come along, henry, and let' 
show ourselves; we are both arm too!" 

they walk out into the centr of the garden, and they were soon 
convinc that the hangman saw them, for a face appear at the window, 
and wa as quickli withdrawn again. 

"there," said the doctor, "now he know he is a prisoner, and we may as 
well place ourselv in some posit which command a good view of the 
house, as well as of the garden gate, and so see if we cannot starv him 
out, though we may be starv out ourselves." 

"not at all!" said admir bell, produc from hi ampl pocket 
variou parcels,--"w came to bring you ampl supplies." 

"indeed!" 

"yes; we have been as far as the ruins." 

"oh, to releas marchdale. charl told me how the villain had fallen 
into the trap he had laid for him." 

"he has, indeed, fallen into the trap, and it' one he won't easili get 
out of again. he' dead." 

"dead!--dead!" 

"yes; in the storm of last night the ruin have fallen, and he is by 
thi time as flat as a pancake." 

"good god! and yet it is but a just retribut upon him. He would have 
assassin poor charl holland in the cruelest and most cold-blood 
manner, and, howev we may shudder at the manner of hi death, we 
cannot regret it." 

"except that he ha escap your friend the hangman," said the admiral. 

"don't call him my friend, if you please," said dr. chillingworth, "but, 
hark how he is work away, as if he realli intend to carri the hous 
away piec by piece, as opportun may serve, if you will not let it to 
him altogether, just as it stands." 

"confound him! he is evid work on hi own account," said the 
admiral, "or he would not be half so industrious." 

there was, indeed, a tremend amount of hammer and noise, of one 
sort and another, from the house, and it wa quit clear that the 
hangman wa too heart and soul in hi work, whatev may have been the 
object of it, to care who wa listen to him, or to what conjectur he 
gave rise. 

He thought probabl that he could but he stop in what he wa about, 
and, until he wa so, that he might as well go on. 

and on he went, with a vengeance, vex the admir terribly, who 
propos so repeatedli to go into the hous and insist upon know what 
he wa about, that his, wish were upon the point of be conced to 
by henry, although they were combat by the doctor, when, from the 
window at which he had entered, out step the hangman. 

"good morning, gentlemen! good morning," he said, and he move toward 
the garden gate. "I will not troubl you ani longer. good morning!" 

"not so fast," said the admiral, "or we may bring you up with a round 
turn, and I never miss my mark when I can see it, and I shall not let it 
get out of sight, you may depend." 

He drew a pistol from hi pocket, as he spoke, and point it at the 
hangman, who, thereupon paus and said:-- 

"what! am I not to be permit to go in peace? whi it wa but a short 
time sinc the doctor wa quarrel with me becaus I did not go, and 
now it seem that I am to be shot if I do." 

"yes," said the admiral, "that' it." 

"well! but,--" 

"you dare," said he, "stir anoth inch toward the gate, and you are a 
dead man!" 

the hangman hesit a moment, and look at admir bell; appar 
the result of the scrutini was, that he would keep hi word, for he 
suddenli turn and dive in at the window again without say anoth 
word. 

"well; you have certainli stop him from leaving," said henry; "but 
what' to be done now?" 

"let him be, let him be," said the doctor; "he must come out again, for 
there are no provis in the place, and he will be starv out." 

"hush! what is that?" said henry. 

there wa a veri gentl ring at the bell which hung over the garden 
gate. 

"that' an experiment, now, i'll be bound," said the doctor, "to 
ascertain if ani one is here; let us hide ourselves, and take no 
notice." 

the ring in a few moment wa repeated, and the three confeder hid 
themselv effectu behind some thick laurel bush and await with 
expect what might next ensue. 

not long had they occupi their place of concealment, befor they heard 
a heavi fall upon the gravel pathway, immedi within the gate, as 
if some one had clamber to the top from the outside, and then jump 
down. 

that thi wa the case the sound of footstep soon convinc them, and 
to their surpris as well as satisfaction, they saw through the 
interstic of the laurel bush behind which they were concealed, no less 
a personag that sir franci varney himself. 

"it is varney," said henry. 

"yes, yes," whisper the doctor. "let him be, do not move for ani 
consideration, for the first time let him do just what he likes." 

"d--n the fellow!" said the admiral; "there are some point about him 
that like, after all, and he' quit an angel compar to that rascal 
marchdale." 

"he is,--h save charles." 

"he did, and not if I know it shall ani harm come to him, unless he were 
terribl to provok it by becom himself the assailant." 

"how sad he looks!" 

"hush! he come nearer; it is not safe to talk. look at him." 




chapter lxxvii. 

varney IN the garden.--th commun OF dr. chillingworth TO the 
admir and henry. 


[illustration] 

kind reader, it wa inde varney who had clamber over the garden 
wall, and thu made hi way into the garden of bannerworth hall; and 
what fill those who look at him with the most surpris was, that he 
did not seem in ani particular way to make a secret of hi presence, but 
walk on with an air of bold which either aros from a feel of 
absolut impunity, from hi think there wa no one there, or from an 
audac which none but he could have compassed. 

As for the littl parti that wa there assembled, and who look upon 
him, they seem thunderstricken by hi presence; and henry, probably, 
as well as the admiral, would have burst out into some sudden 
exclamation, had they not been restrain by dr. chillingworth, who, 
suspect that they might in some way give an alarm, hasten to speak 
first, say in a whisper,-- 

"for heaven' sake, be still, fortune, you see, favour us most 
strangely. leav varney alone. you have no other mode whatev of 
discov what he realli want at bannerworth hall." 

"I am glad you have spoken," said henry, as he drew a long breath. "if 
you had not, I feel convinc that in anoth moment I should have 
rush forward and confront thi man who ha been the veri bane of my 
life." 

"and so should i," said the admiral; "although I protest against ani 
harm be done to him, on account of some sort of good feel that he 
ha displayed, after all, in releas charl from that dungeon in 
which marchdal ha perished." 

"at the moment," said henry, "I had forgotten that; but I will own that 
hi conduct ha been tinctur by a strang and wild kind of generos 
at times, which would seem to bespeak, at the bottom of hi heart, some 
good feelings, the impuls of which were onli quench by 
circumstances." 

"that is my firm impress of him, I can assur you," said dr. 
chillingworth. 

they watch varney now from the leafi covert in which they were 
situated, and, indeed, had they been less effectu concealed, it did 
not seem like that the much dread vampyr would have perceiv them; 
for not onli did he make no effort at conceal himself, but he took 
no pain to see if ani one wa watch him in hi progress to the 
house. 

hi footstep were more rapid than they usual were, and there wa 
altogeth an air and manner about him, as if he were move to some 
purpos which of itself wa suffici import to submerg in it 
consequ all ordinari risk and all ordinari cautions. 

He tri sever window of the hous along that terrac of which we 
have more than onc had occas to speak, befor he found one that 
opened; but at length he did succeed, and step at onc into the hall, 
leav those, who now for some moment in silenc had regard hi 
movements, to lose themselv in a fear sea of conjectur as to what 
could possibl be hi object. 

"at all events," said the admiral, "i'm glad we are here. If the vampyr 
should have a fight with that other fellow, that we heard do such a 
lot of carpent work in the house, we ought, I think, to see fair 
play." 

"i, for one," said the doctor, "would not like to stand by and see the 
vampyr murdered; but I am inclin to think he is a good match for ani 
mortal opponent." 

"you may depend he is," said henry. 

"but how long, doctor, do you purpos that we should wait here in such a 
state of suspens as to what is go on within the house?" 

"I hope not long; but that someth will occur to make us have food for 
action. hark! what is that?" 

there wa a loud crash within the building, as of broken glass. It 
sound as if some window had been complet dash in; but although 
they look care over the front of the building, they could see no 
evid of such a thing have happened, and were compelled, 
consequently, to come to the opinion that varney and the other man must 
have met in one of the back rooms, and that the crash of glass had 
arisen from some person conflict in which they had engaged. 

"I cannot stand this," said henry. 

"nay, nay," said the doctor; "be still, and I will tell you something, 
than which there can be no more fit time than thi to reveal it." 

"refer it to the vampyre?" 

"it does--it does." 

"be brief, then; I am in an agoni of impatience." 

"it is a circumst concern which I can be brief; for, horribl as 
it is, I have no wish to dress it in ani adventiti colours. sir 
franci varney, although under anoth name, is an old acquaint of 
mine." 

"acquaintance!" said henry. 

"why, you don't mean to say you are a vampyre?" said the admiral; "or 
that he ha ever visit you?" 

"no; but I knew him. from the first moment that I look upon him in 
thi neighbourhood, I thought I knew him; but the circumst which 
induc me to think so wa of so terrif a character, that I made some 
effort to chase it from my mind. It has, however, grown upon me day by 
day, and, lately, I have had proof suffici to convinc me of hi 
ident with one whom I first saw under most singular circumst of 
romance." 

"say on,--you are agitated." 

"I am, indeed. thi revel ha sever times, within the last few 
days, trembl on my lips, but now you shall have it; becaus you ought 
to know all that it is possibl for me to tell you of him who ha caus 
you so seriou an amount of disturbance." 

"you awaken, doctor," said henry, "all my interest." 

"and mine, too," remark the admiral. "what can it be all about? and 
where, doctor, did you first see thi varney the vampyre?" 

"in hi coffin." 

both the admir and henri gave start of surpris as, with one accord, 
they exclaimed,-- 

"did you say coffin?" 

"yes: I tell you, on my word of honour, that the first time in my life I 
saw ever sir franci varney, wa in hi coffin." 

"then he is a vampyre, and there can be no mistake," said the admiral. 

"go on, I pray you, doctor, go on," said henry, anxiously. 

"I will. the reason whi he becam the inhabit of a coffin wa simpli 
this:--h had been hanged,--execut at the old bailey, in london, 
befor ever I set eye upon that strang counten of his. you know 
that I wa practis surgeri at the london school some year ago, and 
that, consequently, as I commenc the profess rather late in life, I 
wa extrem anxiou to do the most I could in a veri short space of 
time." 

"yes--yes." 

"arrived, then, with plenti of resources, which I did not, as the young 
men who affect to be studi in the same class as myself, spend in 
the pursuit of what they consid life in london, I wa 
indefatig in my profession labours, and there wa noth 
connect with them which I did not tri to accomplish. 

"at that period, the difficulti of get a subject for anatom 
wa veri great, and all sort of scheme had to be put into requisit 
to accomplish so desirable, and, indeed, absolut necessari a purpose. 

"I becam acquaint with the man who, I have told you, is in the hall, 
at present, and who then fill the unenvi post of public 
executioner. It so happened, too, that I had read a learn treatise, by 
a frenchman, who had made a vast number of experi with galvan and 
other apparatus, upon person who had come to death in differ ways, 
and, in one case, he assert that he had actual recov a man who 
had been hanged, and he had live five week afterwards. 

"young as I then was, in comparison to what I am now, in my profession, 
thi inflam my imagination, and noth seem to me so desir as 
get hold of some one who had onli recent been put to death, for 
the purpos of tri what I could do in the way of attempt a 
resuscit of the subject. It wa precis for thi reason that I 
sought out the public executioner, and made hi acquaintance, whom everi 
one els shunned, becaus I thought he might assist me by hand over 
to me the bodi of some condemn and execut man, upon whom I could tri 
my skill. 

"I broach the subject to him, and found him not averse. He said, that 
if I would come forward and claim, as next of kin and allow the bodi to 
be remov to hi house, the bodi of the crimin who wa to be execut 
the first time, from that period, that he could give me a hint that I 
should have no real next of kin opponents, he would throw everi facil 
in my way. 

"thi wa just what I wanted; and, I believe, I wait with impati 
for some poor wretch to be hurri to hi last account by the hand of 
my friend, the public executioner. 

"at length a circumst occur which favour my design most 
effectually,--a man wa apprehend for a highway robberi of a most 
aggrav character. He wa tried, and the evid against him wa so 
conclusive, that the defenc which wa attempt by hi counsel, becam 
a mere matter of form. 

"he wa convicted, and sentenced. the judg told him not to flatter 
himself with the least notion that merci would be extend to him. the 
crime of which he had been found guilti wa on the increas it wa 
highli necessari to make some great public example, to show evil doer 
that they could not, with impunity, thu trampl upon the liberti of the 
subject, and had suddenly, just as it were, in the veri nick of time, 
commit the veri crime, attend with all the aggrav circumst 
which made it easi and desir to hang him out of hand. 

"he heard hi sentence, they tell me unmoved. I did not see him, but he 
wa repres to me as a man of a strong, and well-knit frame, with 
rather a strange, but what some would have consid a handsom 
express of countenance, inasmuch as that there wa an express of 
much haughti resolut depict on it. 

"I flew to my friend the executioner. 

"'can you,' I said, 'get me that man' body, who is to be hang for the 
highway robbery, on monday?' 

"'yes,' he said; 'I see noth to prevent it. not one soul ha offer 
to claim even common companionship with him,--far less kindred. I think 
if you put in your claim as a cousin, who will bear the expens of hi 
decent burial, you will have everi chanc of get possess of the 
body.' 

"I did not hesitate, but, on the morn befor the execution, I call 
upon one of the sheriffs. 

"I told him that the condemn man, I regret to say, wa relat to 
me; but as I knew noth could be done to save him on the trial, I had 
abstain from come forward; but that as I did not like the idea of 
hi be rude inter by the authorities, I had come forward to ask 
for the body, after the execut should have taken place, in order that 
I might, at all events, bestow upon it, in some sequest spot, a 
decent burial, with all the rite of the church. 

"the sheriff wa a man not overburthen with penetration. He applaud 
my piou feelings, and actual gave me, without ani inquiry, a written 
order to receiv the bodi from the hand of the hangman, after it had 
hung the hour prescrib by the law. 

"I did not, as you may well suppose, wish to appear more in the busi 
than wa absolut necessary; but I gave the execution the sheriff' 
order for the body, and he promis that he would get a shell readi to 
place it in, and four stout men to carri it at onc to hi house, when 
he should cut it down. 

"'good!' I said; 'and now as I am not a littl anxiou for the success 
of my experiment, do you not think that you can manag so that the fall 
of the crimin shall not be so sudden as to break hi neck?' 

"'i have thought of that,' he said, 'and I believ that I can manag to 
let him down gently, so that he shall die of suffocation, instead of 
have hi neck put out of joint. I will do my best." 

"'if you can but succeed in that,' said I, for I wa quit in a state of 
mania upon the subject, 'I shall be much indebt to you, and will 
doubl the amount of money which I have alreadi promised.' 

"thi was, as I believ it would be, a power stimulu to him to do 
all in hi power to meet my wishes, and he took, no doubt, activ 
measur to accomplish all that I desired. 

"you can imagin with what intens impati I wait the result. He 
resid in an old ruinou look house, a short distanc on the surrey 
side of the river, and there I had arrang all my apparatu for make 
experi upon the dead man, in an apart the window of which 
command a view of the entrance." 

[illustration] 

"I wa complet readi by half-past eight, although a moment' 
consider of cours told me that at least anoth hour must elaps 
befor there could be the least chanc of my see him arrive, for whom 
I so anxious longed. 

"I can safe say so infatu wa I upon the subject, that no fond 
lover ever look with more nervou anxieti for the arriv of the 
chosen object of hi heart, than I did for that dead body, upon which I 
propos to exert all the influenc of profession skill, to recal 
back the soul to it earthli dwelling-place. 

"at length I heard the sound of wheels. I found that my friend the 
hangman had procur a cart, in which he brought the coffin, that be 
a much quicker mode of convey than by bearer so that about a 
quarter past nine o'clock the vehicle, with it ghastli content, stop 
at the door of hi house. 

"in my impati I ran down stair to meet that which ninety-nin men 
out of a hundr would have gone some distanc to avoid the sight of, 
namely, a corpse, livid and fresh from the gallows. I, however, herald 
it as a great gift, and already, in imagin I saw myself imit 
the learn frenchman, who had publish such an elabor treatis on 
the mode of restor life under all sort of circumstances, to those 
who were alreadi pronounc by unscientif person to be dead. 

"to be sure, a sort of feel had come over me at times, know as I 
did that the french are a nation that do not scrupl at all to sacrific 
truth on the altar of vanity, that it might be after all a mere 
rhodomontade; but, however, I could onli ascertain so much by actual 
trying, so the suspicion that such might, by a possibility, be the end 
of the adventure, did not deter me. 

"I offici assist in have the coffin brought into the room where 
I had prepar everyth that wa necessari in the conduct of my 
grand experiment; and then, when no one wa there with me but my friend 
the executioner, I, with hi help, the one of us take the head and the 
other the feet, took the bodi from the coffin and laid it upon a table. 

"hastili I place my hand upon the region of the heart, and to my great 
delight I found it still warm. I drew off the cap that cover the face, 
and then, for the first time, my eye rest upon the counten of him 
who now call himself--heaven onli know why--sir franci varney." 

"good god!" said henry, "are you certain?" 

"quite." 

"it may have been some other rascal like him," said the admiral. 

"no, I am quit sure now; I have, as I have befor mention to you, 
tri to get out of my own convict upon the subject, but I have been 
actual assur that he is the man by the veri hangman himself." 

"go on, go on! your tale certainli is a strang one, and I do not say it 
either to compliment you or to cast a doubt upon you, but, except from 
the lip of an old, and valu friend, such as you yourself are, I 
should not believ it.' 

"I am not surpris to hear you say that," repli the doctor; "nor 
should I be offend even now if you were to entertain a belief that I 
might, after all, be mistaken." 

"no, no; you would not be so posit upon the subject, I well know, if 
there wa the slightest possibl of an error." 

"inde I should not." 

"let us have the sequel, then." 

"it is this. I wa most anxiou to effect an immedi resuscitation, if 
it were possible, of the hang man. A littl manipul soon 
convinc me that the neck wa not broken, which left me at onc everi 
thing to hope for. the hangman wa more prudent than I was, and befor I 
commenc my experiments, he said,-- 

"'doctor, have you duli consid what you mean to do with thi fellow, 
in case you should be success in restor him to life?' 

"'not i,' said I. 

"'well,' he said, 'you can do as you like; but I consid that it is 
realli worth think of.' 

"I wa headstrong on the matter, and could think of noth but the 
success or the non-success, in a physiolog point of view, of my plan 
for restor the dead to life; so I set about my experi without 
ani delay, and with a complet and a vigour that promis the most 
complet success results, if success could at all be an ingredi 
in what sober judgment would doubtless have denomin a mad-head and 
wild scheme. 

"for more than half an hour I tri in vain, by the assist of the 
hangman, who act under my directions. not the least symptom of 
vital present itself; and he had a smile upon hi countenance, as 
he said in a banter tone,-- 

"'i am afraid, sir, it is much easier to kill than to restor their 
patient with doctors.' 

"befor I could make him ani reply, for I felt that hi observ had 
a good amount of truth in it, join to it sarcasm the hang man 
utter a loud scream, and open hi eyes. 

"I must own I wa myself rather startled; but I for some moment longer 
continu the same mean which had produc such an effect, when 
suddenli he sprang up and laid hold of me, at the same time 
exclaiming,-- 

"'death, death, where is the treasure?' 

"I had fulli succeeded--too fully; and while the execution look on 
with horror depict in hi countenance, I fled from the room and the 
house, take my way home as fast as I possibl could. 

"A dread came over me, that the restor man would follow me if he 
should find out, to whom it wa he wa indebt for the rather 
question boon of a new life. I pack up what articl I set the 
greatest store by, bade adieu to london, and never have I sinc set foot 
within that city." 

"and you never met the man you had so resuscitated?" 

"not till I saw varney, the vampyre; and, as I tell you, I am now 
certain that he is the man." 

"that is the strangest yarn that ever I heard," said the admiral. 

"A most singular circumstance," said henry. 

"you may have notic about hi countenance," said dr. chillingworth, "a 
strang distort look?" 

"yes, yes." 

"well, that ha arisen from a spasmod contract of the muscles, in 
consequ of hi have been hanged. He will never lose it, and it ha 
not a littl contribut to give him the horribl look he has, and to 
invest him with some of the seem outward attribut of the vampyre." 

"and that man who is now in the hall with him, doctor," said henry, "i 
the veri hangman who execut him?" 

"the same. He tell me that after I left, he paid attent to the 
restor man, and complet what I had nearli done. He kept him in hi 
hous for a time, and then made a bargain with him, for a larg sum of 
money per annum, all of which he ha regularli been paid, although he 
tell me he ha no more idea where varney get it, than the man in the 
moon." 

"it is veri strange; but, hark! do you not hear the sound of voic in 
angri altercation?" 

"yes, yes, they have met. let us approach the window now. We may chanc 
to hear someth of what they say to each other." 




chapter lxxviii. 

the alterc between varney and the execution IN the hall.--th 
mutual agreement. 


[illustration] 

there wa certainli a loud wrangl in the hall, just as the doctor 
finish hi most remark revel concern sir franci varney, a 
revel which by no mean attack the fact of hi be a vampyr or 
not; but rather on the contrary, had a tendenc to confirm ani opinion 
that might aris from the circumst of hi be restor to life 
after hi execution, favour to that belief. 

they all three now care approach the window of the hall, to 
listen to what wa go on, and after a few moment they distinctli 
heard the voic of the hangman, say in loud and rather angri 
accents,-- 

"I do not deni but that you have kept your word with me--our bargain ha 
been, as you say, a profit one: but, still I cannot see whi that 
circumst should give you ani sort of control over my actions." 

"but what do you here?" said varney, impatiently. 

"what do you?" cri the other. 

"nay, to ask anoth question, is not to answer mine. I tell you that I 
have special and most import busi in thi house; you can have no 
motiv but curiosity." 

"can I not, indeed? what, too, if I have seriou and import busi 
here?" 

"impossible." 

"well, I may as easili use such a term as regard what you call 
import business, but here I shall remain." 

"here you shall not remain." 

"and will you make the somewhat hazard attempt to forc me to leave?" 

"yes, much as I dislik lift my hand against you, I must do so; I 
tell you that I must be alon in thi house. I have most special 
reasons--reason which concern my continu existence. 

"your continu exist you talk of.--tel me, now, how is it that you 
have acquir so fright a reput in thi neighbourhood? Go where 
I will, the theme of convers is varney, the vampyre! and it is 
implicitli believ that you are one of those dread charact that 
feed upon the life-blood of others, onli now and then revisit the 
tomb to which you ought long sinc to have gone in peace." 

"indeed!" 

"yes; what, in the name of all that' inexplicable, ha induc you to 
enact such a character?" 

"enact it! you say. can you, then, from all you have heard of me, and 
from all you know of me, not conceiv it possibl that I am not enact 
ani such character? whi may it not be real? look at me. Do I look like 
one of the inhabit of the earth?" 

"in sooth, you do not." 

"and yet I am, as you see, upon it. Do not, with an affect philosophy, 
doubt all that may happen to be in ani degre repugn to your usual 
experiences." 

"I am not one dispos to do so; nor am I prepar to deni that such 
dread be may exist as vampyres. however, whether or not you 
belong to so fright a class of creatures, I do not intend to leav 
here; but, I will make an agreement with you." 

varney wa silent; and after a few moments' pause, the other 
exclaimed,-- 

"there are people, even now, watch the place, and no doubt you have 
been seen come into it." 

"no, no, I wa satisfi no one wa here but you." 

"then you are wrong. A doctor chillingworth, of whom you know something, 
is here; and him, you have said, you would do no harm to, even to save 
your life." 

"I do know him. you told me that it wa to him that I wa mainli 
indebt for my mere existence; and although I do not consid human 
life to be a great boon, I cannot bring myself to rais my hand against 
the man who, whatev might have been the motiv for the deed, at all 
events, did snatch me from the grave." 

"upon my word," whisper the admiral, "there is someth about that 
fellow that I like, after all." 

"hush!" said henry, "listen to them. thi would all have been 
unintellig to us, if you had not relat to us what you have." 

"I have just told you in time," said chillingworth, "it seems." 

"will you, then," said the hangman, "listen to proposals?" 

"yes," said varney. 

"come along, then, and I will show you what I have been about; and I 
rather think you have alreadi a shrewd guess as to my motive. thi 
way--thi way." 

they move off to some other part of the mansion, and the sound of their 
voic gradual die away, so that after all, the friend had not got 
the least idea of what that motiv was, which still induc the vampyr 
and the hangman, rather than leav the other on the premises, to make an 
agreement to stay with each other. 

"what' to be done now?" said henry. 

"wait," said dr. chillingworth, "wait, and watch still. I see noth 
els that can be done with ani degre of safety." 

"but what are we to wait for?" said the admiral. 

"bi waiting, we shall, perhaps, find out," wa the doctor' reply; "but 
you may depend that we never shall by interfering." 

"well, well, be it so. It seem that we have no other resource. and when 
either or both of those fellow make their appearance, and seem about to 
leave, what is to be done with them?" 

"they must be seiz then, and in order that that may be done without 
ani bloodshed, we ought to have plenti of forc here. henry, could you 
get your brother, and charles, if he be suffici recovered, to 
come?" 

"certainly, and jack pringle." 

"no," said the admiral, "no jack pringl for me; I have done with him 
completely, and I have made up my mind to strike him off the ship' 
books, and have noth more to do with him." 

"well, well," ad the doctor, "we will not have him, then; and it is 
just as well, for, in all likelihood, he would come drunk, and we shall 
be--let me see--fiv strong without him, which ought to be enough to 
take prison two men." 

"yes," said henry, "although one of them may be a vampyre." 

"that make no difference," said the admiral. "i'd as soon take a ship 
man with vampyr as with frenchmen." 

henri start off upon hi errand, certainli leav the admir and the 
doctor in rather a critic situat while he wa gone; for had varney 
the vampyr and the hangman chosen, they could certainli easili have 
overcom so ineffici a force. 

the admir would, of course, have fought, and so might the doctor, as 
far as hi hand would permit him; but if the other had realli been 
intent upon mischief, they could, from their downright superior physic 
power, have taken the live of the two that were oppos to them. 

but somehow the doctor appear to have a great confid in the 
affair. whether that confid aros from what the vampyr had said 
with regard to him, or from ani hidden convict of hi own that they 
would not yet emerg from the hall, we cannot say; but certain it is, he 
wait the cours of event with great coolness. 

No nois for some time came from the house; but then the sounds, as if 
workmen were busi within it, were suddenli resumed, and with more vigour 
than before. 

It wa nearli two hour befor henri made the privat signal which had 
been agre upon as that which should proclaim hi return; and then he 
and hi brother, with charles, who, when he heard of the matter, would, 
notwithstand the persuas of flora to the contrary, come, got 
quietli over the fenc at a part of the garden which wa quit hidden 
from the hous by abund vegetation, and the whole three of them took 
up a posit that toler well command a view of the house, while 
they were themselv extrem well hidden behind a dens mass of 
evergreens. 

"did you see that rascal, jack pringle?" said the admiral. 

"yes," said henry; "he is drunk." 

"ah, to be sure." 

"and we had no littl difficulti in shake him off. He suspect where 
we were going; but I think, by be peremptory, we got fairli rid of 
him." 

"the vagabond! if he come here, i'll brain him, I will, the swab. why, 
late he' done noth but drink. that' the way with him. he'll go on 
sometim for a year and more, and not take more than enough to do him 
good, and then all at once, for about six or eight weeks, he doe 
noth but drink." 

"well, well, we can do without him," said henry. 

"without him! I should think so. Do you hear those fellow in the hall 
at work? d--n me, if I haven't all of a sudden thought what the reason 
of it all is." 

"what--what?" said the doctor, anxiously. 

"why, that rascal varney, you know, had hi hous burnt down." 

"yes; well?" 

"yes, well. I dare say he didn't think it well. but, however, he no 
doubt want another; so, you see, my idea is, that he' steal the 
materi from bannerworth hall." 

"oh, is that your notion?" 

"yes, and a veri natur one, I think, too, master doctor, whatev you 
may think of it. come, now, have you a better?" 

"oh, dear, no, certainli not; but I have a notion that someth to eat 
would comfort the inward man much." 

"and so would someth to drink, blow me if it wouldn't," said jack 
pringle, suddenli make hi appearance. 

the admir made a rush upon him; but he wa restrain by the others, 
and jack, with a look of triumph, said,-- 

"why, what' amiss with you now? I ain't drunk now. come, come, you have 
someth danger in the wind, I know, so i'v made up my mind to be 
in it, so don't put yourself out of the way. If you think I don't know 
all about it, you are mistaken, for I do. the vampyr is in the hous 
yonder, and i'm the fellow to tackl him, I believ you, my boys." 

"good god!" said the doctor, "what shall we do?" 

"nothing," said jack, as he took a bottl from hi pocket and appli 
the neck of it to hi lips--"nothing--noth at all." 

"there' someth to begin with," said the admiral, as with hi stick 
he gave the bottl a sudden blow that broke it and spilt all it 
contents, leav jack petrified, with the bit of the neck of it still 
in hi mouth. 

"mi eye, admiral," he said, "wa that done like a british seaman? My 
eye--wa that the trick of a lubber, or of a thorough-go first-rater? 
first-rater? My eye--" 

"hold your noise, will you; you are not drunk yet, and I wa determin 
that you should not get so, which you soon would with that rum-bottle, 
if I had not come with a broadsid across it. now you may stay; but, 
mark me, you are on activ servic now, and must do noth without 
orders." 

"ay, ay, your honour," said jack, as he drop the neck of the bottle, 
and look ruefulli upon the ground, from whenc aros the aroma of 
rum--"ay, ay; but it' a hard case, take it how you will, to have your 
grog stopped; but, d--n it, I never had it stop yet when it wa in my 
mouth." 

henri and charl could not forbear a smile at jack' discomfiture, 
which, however, they were veri glad of, for they knew full well hi 
failing, and that in the cours of anoth half hour he would have been 
drunk, and incap of be controlled, except, as on some former 
occasions, by the exercis of brute force. 

but jack wa evid displeased, and consid himself to be 
grievous insulted, which, after all, wa the better, inasmuch as, 
while he wa brood over hi wrongs, he wa quiet; when, otherwise, it 
might have been a veri difficult matter to make him so. 

they partook of some refreshments, and, as the day advanced, the 
brother bannerworth, as well as charl holland, began to get veri 
anxiou upon the subject of the proceed of sir franci varney in the 
hall. 

they convers in low tones, exhaust every, as they considered, 
possibl conjectur to endeavour to account for hi mysteri 
predilect for that abode, but noth occur to them of a 
suffici probabl motiv to induc them to adopt it as a conclusion. 

they more than suspect dr. chillingworth, becaus he wa so silent, 
and hazard no conjectur at all of know something, or of have 
form to himself some highli probabl hypothesi upon the subject; but 
they could not get him to agre that such wa the case. 

when they challeng him upon the subject, all he would say was,-- 

"mi good friends, you perceiv that, there is a great mysteri somewhere, 
and I do hope that to-night it will be clear up satisfactorily." 

with thi they were compel to be satisfied; and now the soft and 
sombr shade of even began to creep over the scene, envelop all 
object in the dim and repos of earli night. 

the nois from the hous had ceased, and all wa profoundli still. but 
more than onc henri fanci he heard footstep outsid the garden. 

He mention hi suspicion to charl holland, who immedi said,-- 

"the same thing ha come to my ears." 

"indeed! then it must be so; we cannot both of us have mere imagin 
such a thing. you may depend that thi place is beleagu in some way, 
and that to-night will be product of event which will throw a great 
light upon the affair connect with thi vampyr that have hitherto 
baffl conjecture." 

"hush!" said charles; "there, again; I am quit confid I heard a 
sound as of a broken twig outsid the garden-wall. the doctor and the 
admir are in deep discuss about something,--shal we tell them?" 

"no; let us listen, as yet." 

they bent all their attent to listening, inclin their ear toward 
the ground, and, after a few moments, they felt confid that more than 
one footstep wa creep along, as cautious as possible, under the 
garden wall. after a few moments' consultation, henri made up hi 
mind--h be the best acquaint with the local of the place--to 
go and reconnoitre, so he, without say anyth to the doctor or the 
admiral, glide from where he was, in the direct of a part of the 
fenc which he knew he could easili scale. 




chapter lxxix. 

the vampyre' danger.--th last refuge.--th ruse OF henri bannerworth. 


[illustration] 

yet know to what deed of violenc the passion of a lawless mob will 
sometim lead them, and have the experi of what had been 
attempt by the alarm and infuri populac on a former occasion, 
against the hall, henri bannerworth was, reason enough, not without 
hi fear that someth might occur of a natur yet highli danger to 
the stabil of hi ancient house. 

He did not actual surmount the fence, but he crept so close to it, 
that he could get over in a moment, if he wished; and, if ani one should 
move or speak on the other side, he should be quit certain to hear 
them. 

for a few moment all wa still, and then suddenli he heard some one 
say, in a low voice, 

"hist! hist! did you hear nothing?" 

"I thought I did," said another; "but I now am doubtful." 

"listen again." 

"what," thought henry, "can be the motiv of these men lie secret 
here? It is most extraordinari what they can possibl want, unless they 
are brew danger for the hall." 

most cautious now he rais himself, so that hi eye could just look 
over the fence, and then, indeed, he wa astonished. 

He had expect to see two or three persons, at the utmost; what wa hi 
surprise! to find a compact mass of men crouch down under the garden 
wall, as far as hi eye could reach. 

for a few moments, he wa so surprised, that he continu to gaze on, 
heedless of the danger there might be from a discoveri that he wa 
play the part of a spi upon them. 

when, however, hi first sensat of surpris were over, he cautious 
remov to hi former position, and, just as he did, so, he heard those 
who had befor spoken, again, in low tones, break the still of 
the night. 

"I am resolv upon it," said one; "I am quit determined. I will, 
pleas god, rid the countri of that dread man." 

"don't call him a man," said the oilier. 

"well, well; it is a wrong name to appli to a vampyre." 

"it is varney, after all, then," said henry. bannerworth, to 
himself;--"it is hi life that they seek. what can be done to save 
him?--for save he shall be if I can compass such an object. I feel that 
there is yet a someth in hi charact which is entitl to 
consideration, and he shall not be savag murder while I have an arm 
to rais in hi defence. but if anyth is now to be done, it must be 
done by stratagem, for the enemi are, by far, in too great forc to be 
person combat with." 

henri resolv to take the advic of hi friends, and with that view he 
went silent and quietli back to where they were, and commun to 
them the news that he had so unexpectedli discovered. 

they were all much surprised, and then the doctor said, 

"you may depend, that sinc the disappoint of the mob in the 
destruct of thi place, they have had their eye upon varney. He ha 
been dog here by some one, and then by degre that assemblag ha 
sought the spot." 

"he' a doom man, then," remark the admiral; "for what can save him 
from a determin number of persons, who, by main force, will overcom 
us, let us make what stand we may in hi defence." 

"i there no hiding-plac in the house," said charles, "where you might, 
after warn him of hi danger, conceal him?" 

"there are plenty, but of what avail would that be, if they burn down 
the hall, which in all probabl they will!" 

"none, certainly." 

"there is but one chance," said henry, "and that is to throw them off 
the scent, and induc them to think that he whom they seek is not here; 
I think that may possibl be done by boldness." 

"but how!" 

"I will go among them and make the effort." 

He at onc left the friends, for he felt that there might be no time to 
lose, and hasten to the same part of the wall, over which he had 
look so short a time before, he clamber over it, and cried, in a 
loud voice, 

"stop the vampyre! stop the vampyre!" 

"where, where?" shout a number of person at once, turn their eye 
eagerli toward the spot where henri stood. 

"there, across the fields," cri henry. "I have lain in wait for him 
long; but he ha elud me, and is make hi way again toward the old 
ruins, where I am sure he ha some hiding-plac that he think will 
elud all search. there, I see hi duski form speed onwards." 

"come on," cri several; "to the ruins! to the ruins! we'll smoke him 
out if he will not come by fair means: we must have him, dead or alive." 

"yes, to the ruins!" shout the throng of persons, who up to thi time 
had preserv so cautiou a silence, and, in a few moment more, henri 
bannerworth had the satisfact of find that hi ruse had been 
perfectli successful, for bannerworth hall and it vicin were 
complet deserted, and the mob, in a straggl mass, went over hedg 
and ditch toward those ruin in which there wa noth to reward the 
exert they might choos to make in the way of an explor of 
them, but the dead bodi of the villain marchdale, who had come there to 
so dreadful, but so deserv a death. 




chapter lxxx. 

the discoveri OF the bodi OF marchdal IN the ruin BY the mob.--th 
burn OF the corpse.--th murder OF the hangman. 


[illustration] 

the mob reach the ruin of bannerworth hall, and crowd round it on 
all sides, with the view of ascertain if a human creature, dead or 
alive, were there; variou surmis were afloat, and some were for 
consid that everybodi but themselves, or their friends, must be 
noth less than vampyres. indeed, a strang man, suddenli appear 
among them, would have caus a sensation, and a ring would no doubt 
have been form round him, and then a hasti council held, or, what wa 
more probable, some shout, or word utter by some one behind, who could 
not understand what wa go on in front, would have determin them to 
commit some desper outrage, and the sacrific of life would have been 
the inevit result of such an unfortun concurr of 
circumstances. 

there wa a paus befor anyon ventur among the ruins; the wall were 
care look to, and in more than one instance, but they were found 
dangerous, what were remaining; some part had been so complet 
destroyed, that there were noth but heap of rubbish. 

however, curios wa exert to such an extraordinari pitch that it 
overcam the fear of danger, in search of the horrible; for they 
believ that if there were ani one in the ruin he must be a vampyre, 
of course, and they were somewhat cautiou in go near such a 
creature, lest in so do they should meet with some accident, and 
becom vampyr too. 

thi wa a dread reflection, and one that everi now and then 
impress itself upon the individu compos the mob; but at the same 
time ani new impulse, or a shout, and they immedi becam insens 
to all fear; the mere impuls is the domin one, and then all is 
forgotten. 

the scene wa an impress one; the beauti hous and ground look 
desol and drear; mani of the tree were strip and broken down, and 
mani scorch and burned, while the garden and flower beds, the delight 
of the bannerworth family, were rude trodden under foot by the rabble, 
and all those littl beauti so much admir and tend by the 
inhabitants, were now utterli destroyed, and in such a state that their 
site could not even be detect by the former owners. 

It wa a sad sight to see such a sacrileg committed,--such violenc 
done to privat feelings, as to have all these place thrown open to the 
scrutini of the brutal and vulgar, who are incap of appreci or 
understand the pleasur of a refin taste. 

the ruin present a remark contrast to what the place had been but 
a veri short time before; and now the scene of desol wa complete, 
there wa no one spot in which the most wretch could find shelter. 

To be sure, under the lee of some broken and crumbl wall, that 
tottered, rather than stood, a huddl wretch might have found shelter 
from the wind, but it would have been at the risk of hi life, and not 
there complete. 

the mob becam quiet for some moments, but wa not so long; indeed, a 
mob of people,--which is, in fact, alway compos of the most 
disorderli charact to be found in a place, is not exactli the 
assembl that is most calcul for quietness; somebodi gave a shout, 
and then somebodi els shouted, and the one wide throat of the whole 
concours wa opened, and sent forth a mighti yell. 

after thi exhibit of power, they began to run about like 
mad,--travers the ground from one end to the other, and then the ruin 
were in progress of be explored. 

thi wa a tender affair, and had to be done with some care and caution 
by those who were so engaged; and they walk over crumbl and decay 
masses. 

In one or two places, they saw what appear to be larg holes, into 
which the build materi had been sunk, by their own weight, through 
the flooring, that seem as roof to some cellar or dungeons. 

see this, they knew not how soon some other part might sink in, and 
carri their preciou bodi down with the mass of rubbish; thi gave an 
interest to the scene,--a littl danger is a sort of salt to an 
adventure, and enabl those who have taken part in it to talk of their 
exploits, and of their dangers, which is pleasant to do, and to hear in 
the ale-house, and by the inglenook in the winter. 

however, when a few had gone some distance, other followed, when they 
saw them enter the place in safety: and at length the whole ruin were 
cover with live men, and not a few women, who seem necessari to 
make up the element of mischief in thi case. 

there were some shout and halloo from one to the other as they 
hurri about the ruins. 

At length they had explor the ruin nearli all over, when one man, who 
had stood a few minut upon a spot, gaze intent upon something, 
suddenli exclaimed,-- 

"hilloa! hurrah! here we are, altogether,--com on,--i'v found 
him,--i'v found--recollect it' me, and nobodi els ha 
found,--hurrah!" 

then, with a wild kind of frenzy, he threw hi hat up into the air, as 
if to attract attention, and call other round him, to see what it wa 
he had found. 

"what' the matter, bill?" exclaim one who came up to him, and who had 
been close at hand. 

"the matter? why, i'v found him; that' the matter, old man," repli 
the first. 

"what, a whale? 

"no, a wampyre; the bless wampyre! there he is,--don't you see him 
under them ere bricks?" 

"oh, that' not him; he got away." 

"I don't care," repli the other, "who got away, or who didn't; I know 
thi much, that he' a wampyre,--h wouldn't be there if he warn't." 

thi wa an unanswer argument, and nobodi could deni it; 
consequently, there wa a cessat of talk, and the peopl then came 
up, as the two first were look at the body. 

"whose is it?" inquir a dozen voices. 

[illustration] 

"not sir franci varney's!" said the second speaker; "the cloth are not 
his--" 

"no, no; not sir francis's" 

"but I tell you what, mates," said the first speaker; "that if it isn't 
sir franci varney's, it is somebodi else' as bad. I dare say, now, 
he' a wictim." 

"A what!" 

"A wictim to the wampyre; and, if he see the bless moonlight, he will 
be a wampyr hisself, and so shall we be, too, if he put hi teeth into 
us." 

"so we shall,--so we shall," said the mob, and their flesh begin to run 
cold, and there wa a feel of horror creep over the whole bodi of 
person within hearing. 

"I tell you what it is; our onli plan will be to get him out of the 
ruins, then, remark another. 

"what!" said one; "who' go to handl such cattle? if you'v a sore 
about you, and hi blood touch you, who' to say you won't be a 
vampyre, too!" 

"no, no you won't," said an old woman. 

"I won't try," wa the happi rejoinder; "I ain't a-go to carri a 
wampyr on my two leg home to my wife and small famili of seven 
children, and anoth a-coming." 

there wa a paus for a few moments, and then one man more adventur 
than the rest, exclaimed,-- 

"well, vampyre, or no vampyre, hi dead bodi can harm no one; so here 
goe to get it out, help me who will; onc have it out, and then we can 
prevent ani evil, by burn it, and thu destroy the whole body. 

"hurrah!" shout three or four more, as they jump down into the hole 
form by the fall in of the materi which had crush marchdal to 
death, for it wa hi bodi they had discovered. 

they immedi set to work to displac such of the materi as lay on 
the body, and then, have clear it of all superincumb rubbish, 
they proceed to lift it up, but found that it had got entangled, as 
they call it, with some chains: with some troubl they got them off, 
and the bodi wa lift out to a higher spot. 

"now, what' to be done?" inquir one. 

"burn it," said another. 

"hurrah!" shout a femal voice; "we'v got the wampyre! run a stake 
through hi body, and then place him upon some dri wood,--there' plenti 
to be had about here, I am sure,--and then burn him to a cinder." 

"that' right, old woman,--that' right," said a man; "noth better: 
the devil must be in him if he come to life after that, I should say." 

there might be someth in that, and the mob shout it approbation, 
as it wa sure to do as anyth stupid or senseless, and the propos 
might be said to have been carri by acclamation, and it requir onli 
the execution. 

thi wa soon done. there were plenti of lath and rafters, and the 
adjoin wood furnish an abund suppli of dri sticks, so there wa 
no want of fuel. 

there wa a loud shout as each access of stick took place, and, as 
each individu threw hi bundl into the heap, each man felt all the 
self-devot to the task as the scottish chieftain who sacrif 
himself and seven son in the battl for hi superior; and, when one son 
wa cut down, the man fill up hi place with the exclamation,--"anoth 
for hector," until he himself fell as the last of hi race. 

soon now the heap becam prodigious, and it requir an effort to get 
the mangl corps upon thi funer bier; but it wa then a shout from 
the mob that rent the air announced, both the fact and their 
satisfaction. 

the next thing to be done wa to light the pile--thi wa no easi task; 
but like all others, it wa accomplished, and the dead bodi of the 
vampyre' victim wa thrown on to prevent that becom a vampyr too, 
in it turn. 

"there, boys," said one, "he'll not see the moonlight, that' certain, 
and the sooner we put a light to thi the better; for it may be, the 
soldier will be down upon us befor we know anyth of it; so now, 
who' got a light?" 

thi wa a question that requir a deal of searching; but, at length 
one wa found by one of the mob come forward, and after draw hi 
pipe vigor for some moments, he collect some scrap of paper upon 
which he empti the content of the pipe, with the hope they would take 
fire. 

In this, however, he wa doom to disappointment; for it produc 
noth but a deal of smoke, and the paper burn without produc ani 
flame. 

thi act of disinterestedness, howev wa not without it due 
consequences, for there were sever who had pipes, and, fire with the 
hope of emul the first projector of the scheme for rais the 
flame, they join together, and pot the content of their pipe 
togeth on some paper, straw, and chips, they produced, after some 
littl trouble, a flame. 

then there wa a shout, and the burn mass wa then place in a 
favour posit nearer the pile of materi collect for burning, 
and then, in a few moments, it began to take light; one piec 
commun the fire to another, until the whole wa in a blaze. 

when the first flame fairli reach the top, a loud and tremend shout 
aros from the mob, and the veri welkin re-echo with it fulness. 

then the fork flame rush through the wood, and hiss and crackl 
as they flew, throw up huge mass of black smoke, and cast a 
peculiar reflect around. not a sound wa heard save the hiss and 
roar of the flames, which seem like the approach of a furiou 
whirlwind. 

At length there wa noth to be seen but the blacken mass; it wa 
envelop in one huge flame, that threw out a great heat, so much so, 
that those nearest to it felt induc to retir from befor it. 

"I reckon," said one, "that he' pretti well done by thi time--he' had 
a warm berth of it up there." 

"yes," said another, "farmer walkings' sheep he roast whole at last 
harvest-hom hadn't such a fire as this, i'll warrant; there' no such 
fire in the county--why, it would prevent a frost, I do believ it 
would." 

"so it would, neighbour," answer another. 

"yes," repli a third, "but you'd want such a one corner of each field 
though." 

* * * * * 

there wa much talk and joke go on among the men who stood around, 
in the midst of which, however, they were disturb by a loud shout, and 
upon look in the quarter whenc it came, they saw steal from among 
the ruins, the form of a man. 

He wa a strange, odd look man, and at the time it wa veri doubt 
among the mob as to whom it was--nobodi could tell, and more than one 
look at the burn pile, and then at the man who seem to be so 
mysteri present, as if they almost imagin that the bodi had got 
away. 

"who is it?" exclaim one. 

"dang if I knows," said another, look veri hard, and veri white at 
the same time;--"i hope it ain't the chap what we'v burn here jist 
now." 

"no," said the female, "that you may be sure of, for he' had a stake 
through hi body, and as you said, he can never get over that, for as 
the stake is consumed, so are hi vitals, and that' a sure sign he' 
done for." 

"yes, yes, she' right--a vampyr may live upon blood, but cannot do 
without hi inside." 

thi wa so obviou to them all, that it wa at onc conceded, and a 
gener impress pervad the mob that it might be sir franci varney: 
a shout ensued. 

"hurrah!--aft him--there' a vampyre--ther he goes!--aft him--catch 
him--burn him!" 

and a varieti of other exclam were uttered, at the same time; the 
victim of popular wrath seem to be awar that he wa now discovered, 
and made off with all possibl expedition, toward some wood. 

away went the mob in pursuit, hoot and halloo like demons, and 
denounc the unfortun be with all the terror that could be 
imagined, and which natur ad greater speed to the unfortun 
man. 

however, some among the mob, see that there wa everi probabl of 
the stranger' escap at a mere match of speed, brought a littl 
cun to bear upon matter, and took a circuit round, and thu 
intercept him. 

thi wa not accomplish without a desper effort, and by the best 
runners, who thu reach the spot he made for, befor he could get 
there. 

when the stranger saw himself thu intercepted, he endeavour to fli in 
a differ direction; but wa soon secur by the mob, who made 
somewhat free with hi person, and commenc knock him about. 

"have merci on me," said the stranger. "what do you want? I am not rich; 
but take all I have." 

"what do you do here?" inquir twenti voices. "come, tell us that--what 
do you do here, and who are you?" 

"A stranger, quit a stranger to these parts." 

"oh, yes! he' a stranger; but that' all the wors for him--he' a 
vampyre--there' no doubt about that." 

"good god," said the man, "I am a live and breath man like 
yourselves. I have done no wrong, and injur no man--b merci unto 
me; I intend no harm." 

"of cours not; send him to the fire--tak him back to the ruins--to the 
fire." 

"ay, and run a stake through hi body, and then he' safe for life. I am 
sure he ha someth to do with the vampyre; and who knows, if he ain't 
a vampyre, how soon he may becom one?" 

"ah! that' veri true; bring him back to the fire, and we'll tri the 
effect of the fire upon hi constitution." 

"I tell you what, neighbour, it' my opinion, that as one fool make 
many, so one vampyr make many." 

"so it does, so it does; there' much truth and reason in that 
neighbour; I am decidedli of that opinion, too." 

"come along then," cri the mob, cuf and pull the unfortun 
stranger with them. 

"mercy, mercy!" 

but it wa useless to call for merci to men whose superstiti feel 
urg them on; for when the demon of superstit is active, no matter 
what form it may take, it alway result in cruelti and wicked to 
all. 

variou were the shout and menac of the mob, and the stranger saw no 
hope of life unless he could escap from the hand of the peopl who 
surround him. 

they had now nearli reach the ruins, and the stranger, who wa 
certainli a somewhat odd and remark look man, and who appear in 
their eye the veri imperson of their notion of a vampyre, wa 
thrust from one to the other, kick by one, and then cuf by the 
other, as if he wa doom to run the gauntlet. 

"down with the vampyre!" said the mob. 

"I am no vampyre," said the stranger; "I am new to these parts, and I 
pray you have merci upon me. I have done you no wrong. hear me,--i know 
noth of these peopl of whom you speak." 

"that won't do; you'v come here to see what you can do, I dare say; 
and, though you may have been hurt by the vampyre, and may be onli your 
misfortune, and not your fault, yet the mischief is as great as ever it 
wa or can be, you become, in spite of yourself, a vampyre, and do the 
same injuri to other that ha been done to you--there' no help for 
you." 

"no help,--w can't help it," shout the mob; "he must die,--throw him 
on the pile." 

"put a stake through him first, though," exclaim the human female; 
"put a stake through him, and then he' safe." 

thi horribl advic had an electr effect on the stranger, who jump 
up, and elud the grasp of sever hand that were stretch forth to 
seiz him. 

"throw him upon the burn wood!" shout one. 

"and a stake through hi body," suggest the human femal again, who 
seem to have thi one idea in her heart, and no other, and, upon everi 
avail opportunity, she seem to be anxiou to give utter to the 
comfort notion. 

"seiz him!" exclaim one. 

"never let him go," said another; "we'v gone too far to hang back now; 
and, if he escape, he will visit us in our sleep, were it onli out of 
spite." 

the stranger made a dash among the ruins, and, for a moment, 
out-strip hi pursuers; but a few, more adventur than the rest, 
succeed in drive him into an angl form by two walls, and the 
consequ was, he wa compel to come to a stand. 

"seiz him--seiz him!" exclaim all those at a distance. 

the stranger, see he wa now nearli surrounded, and had no chanc of 
escape, save by some great effort, seiz a long piec of wood, and 
struck two of hi assail down at once, and then dash through the 
opening. 

He immedi made for anoth part of the ruins, and succeed in 
make hi escap for some short distance, but wa unabl to keep up the 
speed that wa required, for hi great exert befor had nearli 
exhaust him, and the fear of a cruel death befor hi eye wa not 
enough to give him strength, or lend speed to hi flight. He had 
suffer too much from violence, and, though he ran with great speed, 
yet those who follow were uninjured, and fresher,--h had no chance. 

they came veri close upon him at the corner of a field, which he 
endeavour to cross, and had succeed in doing, and he made a 
desper attempt to scrambl up the bank that divid the field from 
the next, but he slip back, almost exhausted, into the ditch, and the 
whole mob came up. 

however, he got on the bank, and leap into the next field, and then he 
wa immedi surround by those who pursu him, and he wa struck 
down. 

"down with the vampyre!--kil him,--he' one of 'em,--run a stake 
through him!" were a few of the cri of the infuri mob of people, 
who were onli infuri becaus he attempt to escap their murder 
intentions. 

It wa strang to see how they collect in a ring as the unfortun 
man lay on the ground, pant for breath, and hardli abl to 
speak--their infuri counten plainli show the mischief they 
were intent upon. 

"have merci upon me!" he exclaimed, as he lay on the earth; "I have no 
power to help myself." 

the mob return no answer, but stood collect their number as they 
came up. 

"have merci on me! it cannot be ani pleasur to you to spill my blood. I 
am unabl to resist--i am one man among many,--y sure cannot wish to 
beat me to death?" 

"we want to hurt no one, except in our own defence, and we won't be made 
vampyr of becaus you don't like to die." 

"no, no; we won't be vampyres," exclaim the mob, and there aros a 
great shout from the mob. 

"are you men--fathers?--hav you families? if so, I have the same tie 
as you have; spare me for their sakes,--do not murder me,--you will 
leav one an orphan if you do; besides, what have I done? I have injur 
no one." 

"I tell you what, friends, if we listen to him we shall all be vampyres, 
and all our children will all be vampyr and orphans." 

"so we shall, so we shall; down with him!" 

the man attempt to get up, but, in do so, he receiv a heavi blow 
from a hedge-stake, wield by the herculean arm of a peasant. the sound 
of the blow wa heard by those immedi around, and the man fell 
dead. there wa a pause, and those nearest, appar fear of the 
consequences, and hardli expect the catastrophe, began to disperse, 
and the remaind did so veri soon afterwards. 




chapter lxxxi. 

the vampyre' flight.--hi danger, and the last place OF refuge. 


[illustration] 

leav the disorderli and viciou mob, who were thu sacrif human 
life to their excit passions, we return to the brother bannerworth 
and the doctor, who togeth with admir bell, still held watch over 
the hall. 

No indic of the come forth of varney present itself for some 
time longer, and then, at least they thought, they heard a window open; 
and, turn their eye in the direct whenc the sound proceeded, 
they could see the form of a man slowli and cautious emerg from it. 

As far as they could judge, from the distanc at which they were, that 
form partook much of the appear and the gener aspect of sir 
franci varney, and the more they look and notic it movements, the 
more they felt convinc that such wa the fact. 

"there come your patient, doctor," said the admiral. 

"don't call him my patient," said the doctor, "if you please." 

"whi you know he is; and you are, in a manner of speaking, bound to look 
after him. well, what is to be done?" 

"he must not, on ani account," said dr. chillingworth, "be allow to 
leav the place. believ me, I have the veri strongest reason for 
say so." 

"he shall not leav it then," said henry. 

even as he spoke, henri bannerworth dart forward, and sir franci 
varney drop from the window, out of which he had clambered, close to 
hi feet. 

"hold!" cri henry, "you are my prisoner." 

with the most imperturb cool in the world, sir franci varney 
turn upon him, and replied,-- 

"and pray, henri bannerworth, what have I done to provok your wrath?" 

"what have you done?--hav you not, like a thief, broken into my house? 
can you ask what you have done?" 

"ay," said the vampyre, "like a thief, perchance, and yet no thief. may 
I ask you, what there is to steal, in the house?" 

By the time thi short dialogu had been uttered, the rest of the parti 
had come up, and varney was, so far as regard numbers, a prisoner. 

"well, gentlemen," he said, with that strang contort of counten 
which, now they all understood, aros from the fact of hi have been 
hanged, and restor to life again. "well, gentlemen, now that you have 
beleagu me in such a way, may I ask you what it is about?" 

"if you will step asid with me, sir franci varney, for a moment," said 
dr. chillingworth, "I will make to you a commun which will enabl 
you to know what it is all about." 

"oh, with pleasure," said the vampyre. "I am not ill at present; but 
still, sir, I have no object to hear what you have to say." 

He step a few pace on one side with the doctor, while the other 
waited, not without some amount of impati for the result of the 
communication. all that they could hear was, that varney said, 
suddenly-- 

"you are quit mistaken." 

and then the doctor appear to be insist upon something, which the 
vampyr listen to patiently; and, at the end, burst out with,-- 

"why, doctor, you must be dreaming." 

At this, dr. chillingworth at onc left him, and advanc to hi 
friends, he said,-- 

"sir franci varney deni in toto all that I have relat to you 
concern him; therefore, I can say no more than that I earnestli 
recommend you, befor you let him go, to see that he take noth of 
valu with him." 

"why, what can you mean?" said varney. 

"search him," said the doctor; "I will tell you why, veri shortly." 

"indeed--indeed!" said sir franci varney. "now, gentlemen, I will give 
you a chanc of behav justli and quietly, so save yourself the 
danger of act otherwise. I have made repeat offer to take thi 
house, either as a tenant or as a purchaser, all of which offer have 
been declined, upon, I dare say, a common enough principle, namely, one 
which induc peopl to enhanc the valu of anyth they have for 
disposal, if it be unique, by make it difficult to come at. see 
that you had desert the place, I could make no doubt but that it wa 
to be had, so I came here to make a thorough examin of it 
interior, to see if it would suit me. I find that it will not; 
therefore, I have onli to apologis for the intrusion, and to wish you a 
remark good evening." 

"that won't do," said the doctor. 

"what won't do, sir?" 

"thi excus will not do, sir franci varney. you are, although you deni 
it, the man who wa hang in london some year ago for a highway 
robbery." 

varney laughed, and held up hi hands, exclaiming,-- 

"alas! alas! our good friend, the doctor, ha studi too hard; hi 
wits, probably, at the best of times, none of the clearest, have becom 
hopelessli entangled." 

"do you deny," said henry, "then, that you are that man?" 

"most unequivocally." 

"I assert it," said the doctor, "and now, I will tell you all, for I 
perceiv you hesit about searching, sir franci varney, I tell you 
all whi it is that he ha such an affect for bannerworth hall." 

"befor you do," said varney, "there is a pill for you, which you may 
find more nauseou and harder of digestion, than ani your shop can 
furnish." 

As varney utter these words, he suddenli drew from hi pocket a 
pistol, and, level it at the unfortun doctor, he fire it full at 
him. 

the act wa so sudden, so utterli unexpected, and so stunning, that it 
wa done befor ani one could move hand or foot to prevent it. henri 
bannerworth and hi brother were the furthest off from the vampyre; and, 
unhappily, in the rush which they, as soon us possible, made toward 
him, they knock down the admiral, who imped them much; and, befor 
they could spring over, or past him, sir franci varney wa gone. 

So sudden, too, had been hi departure, that they had not the least idea 
in which direct he had gone; so that to follow him would have been a 
work of the greatest possibl difficulty. 

notwithstanding, however, both the difficulti and the danger, for no 
doubt the vampyr wa well enough armed, henri and hi brother both 
rush after the murderer, as they now believ him to be, in the rout 
which they thought it wa most probabl he would take, namely, that 
which led toward the garden gate. 

they reach that spot in a few moments, but all wa profoundli still. 
not the least trace of ani one could be seen, high or low, and they were 
compelled, after a cursori examination, to admit that sir franci varney 
had again made hi escape, despit the great odd that were against him 
in point of numbers. 

"he ha gone," said henry. "let us go back, and see into the state of 
poor dr. chillingworth, who, I fear, is a dead man." 

they hurri back to the spot, and there they found the admir look 
as compos as possible, and solac himself with a pinch of snuff, as 
he gaze upon the appar lifeless form at hi feet. 

"i he dead?" said henry. 

"I should say he was," repli the admiral; "such a shot as that wa 
don't want to be repeated. well, I like the doctor with all hi faults. 
He onli had one foolish way with him, and that was, that he shirk hi 
grog." 

"thi is an aw catastrophe," said henry, as he knelt down by the side 
of the body. "assist me, some of you. where is charles?" 

"i'll be hanged," said the admiral, "if I know. He disappear 
somewhere." 

"thi is a night of mysteri as well as terror. alas! poor dr. 
chillingworth! I littl thought that you would have fallen a victim to 
the man whom you preserv from death. how strang it is that you should 
have snatch from the tomb the veri individu who was, eventually, to 
take your own life." 

the brother gentli rais the bodi of the doctor, and carri it on to 
the glass plot, which wa close at hand. 

"farewell, kind and honest-heart chillingworth," said henry; "I shall, 
mani and mani a time, feel your loss; and now I will rest not until I 
have deliv up to justic your murderer. all consideration, or 
feeling, for what seem to be latent virtu in that strang and 
inexplic man, varney, shall vanish, and he shall reap the 
consequ of the crime he ha now committed." 

"it wa a cold blooded, cowardli murder," said hi brother. 

"it was; but you may depend the doctor wa about to reveal someth to 
us, which varney so much dreaded, that he took hi life as the onli 
effectu way, at the moment, of stop him." 

"it must be so," said henry. 

"and now," said the admiral, "it' too late, and we shall not know it at 
all. that' the way. A fellow save up what he ha got to tell till it 
is too late to tell it, and down he goe to davi jones' locker with all 
hi secret aboard." 

"not always," said dr. chillingworth, suddenli sit bolt 
upright--"not always." 

henri and hi brother start back in amazement, and the admir wa so 
taken by surprise, that had not the resuscit doctor suddenli 
stretch out hi hand and laid hold of him by the ankle, he would have 
made a precipit retreat. 

"hilloa! murder!" he cried. "let me go! how do I know but you may be a 
vampyr by now, as you were shot by one." 

henri soonest recov from the surpris of the moment, and with the 
most unfeign satisfaction, he cried,-- 

"thank god you are unhurt, dr. chillingworth! whi he must have miss 
you by a miracle." 

"not at all," said the doctor. "help me up--thank you--al right. i'm 
onli a littl sing about the whiskers. He hit me safe enough." 

"then how have you escaped?" 

"whi from the want of a bullet in the pistol, to be sure. I can 
understand it all well enough. He want to creat suffici confus 
to cover a desper attempt to escape, and he thought that would be 
best done by seem so shoot me. the sudden of the shock, and the 
full belief, at the moment, that he had sent a bullet into my brains, 
made me fall, and produc a temporari confus of ideas, amount to 
insensibility." 

"from which you are happili recovered. thank heaven that, after all, he 
is not such a villain as thi act would have made him." 

"ah!" said the admiral, "it take peopl who have live a littl in 
these affair to know the differ in sound between a firearm with a 
bullet in it, and one without. I knew it wa all right." 

"then whi did you not say so, admiral?" 

"what wa the use? I thought the doctor might be amus to know what you 
should say of him, so you see I didn't interfere; and, as I am not a 
good hand at gallop after anybody, I didn't tri that part of the 
business, but just remain where I was." 

"alas! alas!" cri the doctor, "I much fear that, by hi going, I have 
lost all that I expect to be abl to do for you, henry. it' of not 
the least use now tell you or troubl you about it. you may now 
sell or let bannerworth hall to whomev you please, for I am afraid it 
is realli worthless." 

"what on earth do you mean?" said henry. "why, doctor, will you keep up 
thi mysteri among us? If you have anyth to say, whi not say it at 
once?" 

"because, I tell you it' of no use now. the game is up, sir franci 
varney ha escaped; but still I don't know that I need exactli 
hesitate." 

"there can be no reason for your hesit about make a commun 
to us," said henry. "it is unfriendli not to do so." 

"mi dear boy, you will excus me for say that you don't know what you 
are talk about." 

"can you give ani reason?" 

"yes; respect for the living. I should have to relat someth of the 
dead which would be hurt to their feelings." 

henri wa silent for a few moments, and then he said,-- 

"what dead? and who are the living?" 

"anoth time," whisper the doctor to him; "anoth time, henry. Do 
not press me now. but you shall know all anoth time." 

"I must be content. but now let us rememb that anoth man yet linger 
in bannerworth hall. I will endur suspens on hi account no longer. He 
is an intrud there; so I go at onc to dislodg him." 

No one made ani opposit to thi move, not even the doctor; so henri 
preced them all to the house. they pass through the open window into 
the long hall, and from thenc into everi apart of the mansion, 
without find the object of their search. but from one of the window 
up to which there grew great mass of ivy, there hung a rope, by which 
ani one might easili have let himself down; and no doubt, therefore, 
exist in all their mind that the hangman had suffici profit by 
the confus incident to the suppos shoot of the doctor, to make 
good hi escap from the place. 

"and so, after all," said henry, "we are complet foiled?" 

"we may be," said dr. chillingworth; "but it is, perhaps, go too far 
to say that we actual are. one thing, however, is quit clear; and 
that is, no good can be done here." 

"then let us go home," said the admiral. "I did not think from the first 
that ani good would be done here." 

they all left the garden togeth now; so that almost for the first 
time, bannerworth hall wa left to itself, unguard and unwatch by 
ani one whatever. It wa with an evid and a mark melancholi that 
the doctor proceed with the parti to the cottage-hous of the 
bannerworths; but, as after what he had said, henri forbor to question 
him further upon those subject which he admit he wa keep secret; 
and as none of the parti were much in a cue for gener conversation, 
the whole of them walk on with more silenc than usual characteris 
them. 




chapter lxxxii. 

charl holland' pursuit OF the vampyre.--th danger interview. 


[illustration] 

It will be recollect that the admir had made a remark about charl 
holland have suddenli disappeared; and it is for us now to account for 
that disappear and to follow him to the pathway he had chosen. 

the fact was, that he, when varney fire the shot at the doctor, or what 
wa the suppos shot, wa the farthest from the vampyre; and he, on 
that veri account, had the clearest and best opportun of mark 
which rout he took when he had discharg the pistol. 

He wa not confus by the smoke, as the other were; nor wa he stun 
by the nois of the discharge; but he distinctli saw varney dart across 
one of the garden beds, and make for the summer-house, instead of for 
the garden gate, as henri had suppos wa the most probabl path he had 
chosen. 

now, charl holland either had an inclination, for some reason of hi 
own, to follow the vampyr alone; or, on the spur of the moment, he had 
not time to give an alarm to the others; but certain it is that he did, 
unaided, rush after him. He saw him enter the summer-house, and pass out 
of it again at the back portion of it, as he had onc befor done, when 
surpris in hi interview with flora. 

but the vampyr did not now, as he had done on the former occasion, hide 
immedi behind the summer-house. He seem to be well awar that 
that expedi would not answer twice; so he at onc sped onwards, 
clear the garden fence, and take to the meadows. 

It form evid no part of the intent of charl holland to come 
up with him. He wa resolv upon dog hi footsteps, to know where 
he should go; so that he might have a knowledg of hi hiding-place, if 
he had one. 

"I must and will," said charl to himself, "penetr the mysteri that 
hang about thi most strang and inexplic being. I will have an 
interview with him, not in hostility, for I forgiv him the evil he ha 
done me, but with a kindli spirit; and I will ask him to confid in me." 

charles, therefore, did not keep so close upon the heel of the vampyr 
as to excit ani suspicion of hi intent to follow him; but he 
wait by the garden pale long enough not onli for varney to get some 
distanc off, but long enough likewis to know that the pistol which had 
been fire at the doctor had produc no real bad effects, except 
sing some curiou tuft of hair upon the side of hi face, which the 
doctor wa pleas to call whiskers. 

"I thought as much," wa charles' exclam when he heard the 
doctor' voice. "it would have been strikingli at varianc with all 
varney' other conduct, if he had commit such a deliber and 
heartless murder." 

then, as the form of the vampyr could be but dimli seen, charl ran on 
for some distanc in the direct he had taken, and then paus again; 
so that if varney heard the sound of footsteps, and paus to listen 
they had ceas again probably, and noth wa discernible. 

In thi manner he follow the mysteri individual, if we may realli 
call him such, for abov a mile; and then varney made a rapid detour, 
and took hi way toward the town. 

He went onward with wonder precis now in a right line, not 
stop at ani obstruction, in the way of fences, hedges, or ditches, 
so that it took charl some exertion, to which, just then, he wa 
scarc equal, to keep up with him. 

At length the outskirt of the town were gained, and then varney paused, 
and look around him, scarc allow charles, who wa now closer to 
him than he had been, time to hide himself from observation, which, 
however, he did accomplish, by cast himself suddenli upon the ground, 
so that he could not be detect against the sky, which then form a 
back ground to the spot where he was. 

appar satisfi that he had complet now elud the pursuit, if 
ani had been attempted, of those whom he had led in such a state of 
confusion, the vampyr walk hastili toward a hous that wa to let, 
and which wa onli to be reach by go up an avenu of trees, and 
then unlock a gate in a wall which bound the premis next to the 
avenue. but the vampyr appear to be possess of everi facil for 
effect an entranc to the place and, produc from hi pocket a key, 
he at onc open the gate, and disappear within the precinct of 
those premises. 

he, no doubt, felt that he wa hunt by the mob of the town, and henc 
hi frequent chang of residence, sinc hi own had been burnt down, 
and, indeed, situat as he was, there can be no manner of doubt that he 
would have been sacrif to the superstiti furi of the populace, if 
they could but have got hold of him. 

He had, from hi knowledge, which wa no doubt accur and complete, of 
what had been done, a good idea of what hi own fate would be, were he 
to fall into the hand of that feroci multitude, each individu 
compos which, felt a convict that there would be no peace, nor 
hope of prosper or happiness, on the place, until he, the arch 
vampyr of all the suppos vampyres, wa destroyed. 

[illustration] 

charl did paus for a few moments, after have thu becom roused, to 
consid whether he should then attempt to have the interview he had 
resolv upon have by some mean or another, or defer it, now that he 
knew where varney wa to be found, until anoth time. 

but when he came to consid how extrem like it wa that, even in 
the cours of a few hours, varney might shift hi abod for some good 
and substanti reasons, he at onc determin upon attempt to see 
him. 

but how to accomplish such a purpos wa not the easiest question in the 
world to answer. If he rung the bell that present itself abov the 
garden gate, wa it at all like that varney, who had come there for 
concealment, would pay ani attent to the summons? 

after some consideration, he did, however, think of a plan by which, at 
all events, he could ensur effect an entranc into the premises, and 
then he would take hi chanc of find the mysteri be whom he 
sought, and who probabl might have no particular object to meet 
with him, charl holland, becaus their last interview in the ruin 
could not be said to be otherwis than of a peaceabl and calm enough 
character. 

He saw by the board, which wa nail in the front of the house, that 
all applic to see it were to be made to a mr. nash, resid close 
at hand; and, as charl had the appear of a respect person, he 
thought he might possibl have the key entrust to him, ostens to 
look at the house, preparatori possibl to take it, and so he should, 
at all events, obtain admission. 

he, accordingly, went at onc to thi mr. nash, and ask about the 
house; of cours he had to affect an interest in it rental and 
accommodations, which he did not feel, in order to lull ani suspicion, 
and, finally, he said,-- 

"I should like to look over it if you will lend me the key, which I will 
shortli bring back to you." 

there wa an evid hesit about the agent when thi propos wa 
commun by charl holland, and he said,-- 

"I dare say, sir, you wonder that I don't say yes, at once; but the fact 
is there came a gentleman here one day when I wa out, and got a key, 
for we have two to open the house, from my wife, and he never came back 
again." 

that thi wa the mean by which varney, the vampyre, had obtain the 
key, by the aid of which charl had seen him effect so immedi an 
entranc to the house, there could be no doubt. 

"how long ago were you serv that trick?" he said. 

"about two day ago, sir." 

"well, it onli show how, when one person act wrongly, anoth is at 
onc suspect of a capabl to do so likewise. there is my name and 
my address; I should like rather to go alon to see the house, becaus I 
alway fanci I can judg better by myself of the accommodation, and I 
can stay as long as I like, and ascertain the size of all the room 
without the disagre feel upon my mind, which no amount of 
complais on your part, could ever get me over, that I wa most 
unaccount detain somebodi from more import busi of their 
own." 

"oh, I assur you, sir," said mr. nash, "that I should not be at all 
impatient. but if you would rather go alone--" 

"inde I would." 

"oh, then, sir, there is the key. A gentleman who leav hi name and 
address, of course, we can have no object to. I onli told you of what 
happened, sir, in the mere way of conversation, and I hope you won't 
imagin for a moment that I meant to insinu that you were go to 
keep the key." 

"oh, certainli not--certainli not," said charles, who wa onli too glad 
to get the key upon ani terms. "you are quit right, and I beg you will 
say no more about it; I quit understand." 

He then walk off to the empti hous again, and, proceed to the 
avenue, he fit the key to the lock, and had the satisfact of 
find the gate instantli yield to him. 

when he pass through it, and close the door after him, which he did 
carefully, he found himself in a handsom laid-out garden, and saw the 
hous a short distanc in front of him, stand upon a well got-up 
lawn. 

He care not if varney should see him befor he reach the house, 
becaus the fact wa suffici evid to himself that after all he 
could not actual enforc an interview with the vampyre. He onli hope 
that as he had found him out it would be conced to him. 

he, therefore, walk up the lawn without make the least attempt at 
concealment, and when he reach the hous he allow hi footstep to 
make what nois they would upon the stone step which led up to it. but 
no one appeared; nor wa there, either by sight or by sound, ani 
indic of the presenc of ani live be in the place besid 
himself. 

insensibly, as he contempl the desert place around him, the solemn 
sort of still began to have it effect upon hi imagination, and, 
without be awar that he did so, he had, with soft and caution, 
glide onwards, as if he were bent on some errand requir the utmost 
amount of caution and discrimin in the conduct of it. 

and so he enter the hall of the house, where he stood some time, and 
listen with the greatest attention, without, however, be abl to 
hear the least sound throughout the whole of the house. 

"and yet he must be here," thought charl to himself; "I wa not gone 
mani minutes, and it is extrem unlik that in so short a space of 
time he ha left, after take so much trouble, by make such a detour 
around the meadow to get here, without be observed. I will examin 
everi room in the place, but I will find him." 

charl immedi commenc go from room to room of that hous in 
hi search for the vampyre. there were but four apart upon the 
ground floor, and these, of course, he quickli ran through. noth 
whatev at all indic of ani one have been there met hi gaze, 
and with a feel of disappoint creep over him, he commenc the 
ascent of the staircase. 

the day had now fairli commenced, so that there wa abund of light, 
although, even for the country, it wa an earli hour, and probabl mr. 
nash had been not a littl surpris to have a call from one whose 
appear bespok no necess for rise with the lark at such an 
hour. 

all these considerations, however, sank into insignific in charles' 
mind, compar with the object he had in view, namely, the unravel 
the mani mysteri that hung around that man. He ascend to the land 
of the first story, and then, as he could have no choice, he open the 
first door that hi eye fell upon, and enter a toler larg 
apartment. It wa quit destitut of furniture, and at the moment 
charl wa about to pronounc it empty; but then hi eye fell upon a 
larg black-look bundl of something, that seem to be lie jam 
up under the window on the floor--that be the place of all other in 
the room which wa envelop in the most shadow. 

He start back involuntarili at the moment, for the appear wa one 
so shapeless, that there wa no such thing as defining, from even that 
distance, what it realli was. 

then he slowli and cautious approach it, as we alway approach that 
of the charact of which we are ignorant, and concern the power of 
which to do injuri we can consequ have no defin idea. 

that it wa a human form there, wa the first tangibl opinion he had 
about it; and from it profound stillness, and the manner in which it 
seem to be laid close under the window, he thought that he wa sure 
upon the point of find out that some deed of blood had been 
committed, the unfortun victim of which wa now lie befor him. 

upon a nearer examination, he found that the whole body, includ the 
greater part of the head and face, wa wrap in a larg cloak; and 
there, as he gazed, he soon found caus to correct hi first opinion at 
to the form belong to the dead, for he could distinctli hear the 
regular breathing, as of some one in a sound and dreamless sleep. 

closer he went, and closer still. then, as he clasp hi hands, he 
said, in a voic scarc abov a whisper,-- 

"it is--it is the vampyre." 

yes, there could be no doubt of the fact. It wa sir franci varney who 
lay there, envelop in the huge horseman' cloak, in which, on two or 
three occas dure the progress of thi narrative, he had figured. 
there he lay, at the merci complet of ani arm that might be rais 
against him, appar so overcom by fatigu that no ordinari nois 
would have awaken him. 

well might charl holland gaze at him with mingl feelings. there lay 
the be who had done almost enough to drive the beauti flora 
bannerworth distracted--th be who had compel the bannerworth 
famili to leav their ancient house, to which they had been bound by 
everi descript of association. the same mysteri existence, too, 
who, the better to carri on hi plot and plans, had, by dint of 
violence, immur him, charles, in a dungeon, and load him with 
chains. there he lay sleeping, and at hi mercy. 

"shall I awaken him," said charles, "or let him sleep off the fatigue, 
which, no doubt, is weigh down hi limbs, and set heavili on hi 
eyelids. no, my busi with him is too urgent." 

He then rais hi voice, and cried,-- 

"varney, varney, awake!" 

the sound disturbed, without altogeth break up, the deep slumber of 
the vampyre, and he utter a low moan, and move one hand restlessly. 
then, as if that disturb of the calm and deep repos which had sat 
upon him, had given at onc the rein to fancy, he begin to mutter 
strang word in hi sleep, some of which could be heard by charl 
distinctly, while other were too incoher utter to be clearli 
understood. 

"where is it?" he said; "where--wher hidden?--pul the hous 
down!--murder! no, no, no! no murder!--i will not, I dare not. blood 
enough is upon my hands.--th money!--th money! down, villains! down! 
down! down!" 

what these incoher word allud to specifically, charles, of course, 
could not have the least idea, but he listen attentively, with a hope 
that someth might fall from hi lip that would afford a key to some 
of the mysteri circumst with which he wa so intim 
connected. 

now, however, there wa a longer silenc than before, onli broken 
occasion by low moans; but suddenly, as charl wa think of 
again speaking, he utter some more disjoint sentences. 

"no harm," he said, "no harm,--marchdal is a villain!--not a hair of 
hi head injured--no, no. set him free--yes, I will set him free. 
beware! beware, marchdale! and you mortimer. the scaffold! ay, the 
scaffold! but where is the bright gold? the memori of the deed of blood 
will not cling to it. where is it hidden? the gold! the gold! the gold! 
It is not in the grave--it cannot be there--no, no, no!--not there, not 
there! load the pistols. there, there! down, villain, down!--down, 
down!" 

despairing, now, of obtain anyth like tangibl inform from 
these ravings, which, even if they did, by accident, so connect 
themselv togeth as to seem to mean something, charl again cri 
aloud,-- 

"varney, awake, awake!" 

but, as before, the sleep man wa suffici deaf to the cri to 
remain, with hi eye closed, still in a disturb slumber, but yet a 
slumber which might last for a consider time. 

"I have heard," said charles, "that there are mani person whom no nois 
will awaken, while the slightest touch rous them in an instant. I will 
tri that upon thi slumber being." 

As he spoke, he advanc close to sir franci varney, and touch him 
slightli with the toe of hi boot. 

the effect wa as startl as it wa instantaneous. the vampyr sprang 
to hi feet, as he had been suddenli impel up by some power 
machinery; and, cast hi cloak away from hi arms, so as to have them 
at liberty, he sprang upon charl holland, and hurl him to the 
ground, where he held him with a giant' gripe, as he cried,-- 

"rash fool! be you whom you may. whi have you troubl me to rid the 
world of your intrus existence?" 

the attack wa so sudden and so terrific, that resist to it, even if 
charl had had the power, wa out of the question. all he could say, 
was,-- 

"varney, varney! do you not know me? I am charl holland. will you now, 
in your mad rage, take the life you might more easili have taken when I 
lay in the dungeon from which you releas me?" 

the sound of hi voic at onc convinc sir franci varney of hi 
identity; and it wa with a voic that had some tone of regret in it, 
that he replied,-- 

"and wherefor have you thought proper, when you were onc free and 
unscathed, to cast yourself into such a posit of danger as to follow 
me to my haunt?" 

"I contempl no danger," said charles, "becaus I contempl no 
evil. I do not know whi you should kill me." 

"you came here, and yet you say you do not know whi I should kill you. 
young man, have you a dozen live that you can afford to tamper with 
them thus? I have, at much chanc of immin to myself, alreadi onc 
save you, when another, with a sterner feeling, would have gladli taken 
your life; but now, as if you were determin to goad me to an act which 
I have shun committing, you will not let me close my eye in peace." 

"take your hand from off my throat, varney, and I will then tell you 
what brought me here." 

sir franci varney did so. 

"rise," he said--"rise; I have seen blood enough to be sicken at the 
prospect of more; but you should not have come here and tempt me." 

"nay, believ me, I came here for good and not for evil. sir franci 
varney, hear me out, and then judg for yourself whether you can blame 
the persever which enabl me to find out thi secret place of 
refuge; but let me first say that now it is as good a place of 
conceal to you as befor it was, for I shall not betray you." 

"go on, go on. what is it you desire?" 

"dure the long and weari hour of my captivity, I thought deeply, and 
pain too, as may be well imagined, of all the circumst 
connect with your appear at bannerworth hall, and your subsequ 
conduct. then I felt convinc that there wa someth far more than 
met the eye, in the whole affair, and, from what I have been inform of 
since, I am the more convinc that some secret, some mystery, which it 
is in your power onli perhap to explain, lurk at the bottom of all 
your conduct." 

"well, proceed," said varney. 

"have I not said enough now to enabl you to divin the object of my 
visit? It is that you should shake off the trammel of mysteri in which 
you have shroud yourself, and declar what it is you want, what it is 
you desire, that ha induc you to set yourself up as such a determin 
foe of the bannerworth family." 

"and that, you say, is the modest request that bring you here?" 

"you speak as if you thought it wa idl curios that prompt me, but 
you know it is not. your languag and manner are those of a man of too 
much sagac not to see that I have higher notions." 

"name them." 

"you have yourself, in more than one instance, behav with a strang 
sort of romant generosity, as if, but for some great object which you 
felt impel to seek by ani means, and at ani sacrifice, you would be a 
someth in charact and conduct veri differ from what you are. one 
of my objects, then, is to awaken that better natur which is slumber 
within you, onli now and then rous itself to do some deed which 
should be the charact of all your actions--for your own sake I have 
come." 

"but not wholly?" 

"not wholly, as you say. there is anoth than whom, the whole world is 
not so dear to me. that other one wa seren as she wa beautiful. 
happi danc in her eyes, and she ought--for not more love is the 
mind that she possess than the gloriou form that enshrin it--to be 
happy. her life should have pass like one long summer' day of beauty, 
sunshine, and pure heavenli enjoyment. you have poison the cup of joy 
that the great god of natur had permit her to place to her lip and 
tast of mistrustingly. whi have you done this? I ask you--whi have you 
done this?" 

"have you said all that you came to say?" 

"I have spoken the substanc of my message. much could I elabor upon 
such a theme; but it is not one, varney, which is congeni to my heart; 
for your sake, however, and for the sake of those whom I hold most 
dear, let me implor you to act in thi matter with a kindli 
consideration. proclaim your motives; you cannot say that they are not 
such as we may aid you in." 

varney wa silent for sever moments; he seem percept move by 
the manner of the young man, as well as by the matter of hi discourse. 
In fact, one would suppos that charl holland had succeed in 
invest what he said with some sort of charm that won much upon the 
fanci of sir franci varney, for when he ceas to speak, the latter 
said in a low voice,-- 

"go on, go on; you have sure much more to say." 

"no, varney; I have said enough, and not thu much would I have said had 
I not been aware, most certainli and truli aware, without the shadow of 
a doubt, by your manner, that you were most access to human 
feeling." 

"I access to human feeling! know you to whom you speak? Am I not he 
befor whom all men shudder, whose name ha been a terror and a 
desolation; and yet you can talk of my human feelings. nay, if I had had 
any, be sure they would have been extinguish by the persecut I 
have endur from those who, you know, with savag feroc have sought 
my life." 

"no, varney; I give you credit for be a subtler reason than thu to 
argue; you know well that you were the aggressor to those parti who 
sought your life; you know well that with the greatest imagin pain 
you held yourself up to them as a thing of great terror." 

"I did--i did." 

"you cannot, then, turn round upon ignor persons, and blame them 
becaus your exert to make yourself seem what you wish were but too 
successful." 

"you use the word _seem_," said varney, with a bitter of aspect, "a 
if you would impli a doubt that I am that which thousands, by their 
fears, would testifi me to be." 

"thousand might," said charl holland; "but not among them am I, 
varney; I will not be made the victim of superstition. were you to enact 
befor my veri eye some of those feat which, to the sens of others, 
would stamp you as the preternatur be you assum to be, I would 
doubt the evid of my own sens ere I permit such a bugbear to 
oppress my brain." 

"go," said sir franci varney, "go: I have no more word for you; I have 
noth to relat to you." 

"nay, you have alreadi listen suffici to me to give me a hope 
that I had awaken some of the human that wa in your nature. Do 
not, sir franci varney, crush that hope, even as it wa bud forth; 
not for my own sake do I ask you for revelations; that may, 
perhaps--must be pain for you; but for the sake of flora bannerworth, 
to whom you owe abund of reparation." 

"no, no." 

"in the name of all that is great, and good, and just, I call upon you 
for justice." 

"what have I to do with such an invocation? utter such a sentiment to 
men who, like yourself, are invest with the realiti as well as the 
outward show of human nature." 

"nay, sir franci varney, now you beli yourself. you have pass 
through a long, and, perchance, a stormi life. can you look back upon 
your career, and find no reminisc of the past that shall convinc 
you that you are of the great famili of man, and have had abund of 
human feel and of human affections?" 

"peace, peace!" 

"nay, sir franci varney, I will take your word, and if you will lay 
your hand upon your heart, and tell me truli that you never felt what it 
wa to love--to have all feeling, all taste, and all hope of futur joy, 
concentr in one individual, I will despair, and leav you. If you 
will tell me that never, in your whole life, you have felt for ani fair 
and gloriou creature, as I now feel for flora bannerworth, a be for 
whom you could have sacrif not onli existence, but all the hope of 
a gloriou futur that bloom around it--if you will tell me, with the 
calm, dispassion aspect of truth, that you have held yourself aloof 
from such human feelings, I will no longer press you to a disclosur 
which I shall bring no argument to urge." 

the agit of sir franci varney' counten wa perceptible, and 
charl holland wa about to speak again, when, strike him upon the 
breast with hi clinch hand, the vampyr check him, saying-- 

"do you wish to drive me mad, that you thus, from memory' hidden cells, 
conjur up imag of the past?" 

"then there are such imag to conjur up--ther are such shadow onli 
sleeping, but which requir only, as you did even now, but a touch to 
awaken them to life and energy. oh, sir franci varney, do not tell me 
that you are not human." 

the vampyr made a furiou gesture, as if he would have attack charl 
holland; but then he sank nearli to the floor, as if soul-stricken by 
some recollect that unnerv hi arm; he shook with unwont emotion, 
and, from the fright livid aspect of hi countenance, charl dread 
some seriou access of indisposition, which might, if noth els 
did, prevent him from make the revel he so much sought to hear 
from hi lips. 

"varney," he cried, "varney, be calm! you will be listen to by one who 
will draw no harsh--no hasti conclusions; by one, who, with that 
charity, I griev to say, is rare, will place upon the word you utter 
the most favour construction. tell me all, I pray you, tell me all." 

"thi is strange," said the vampyre. "I never thought that aught human 
could thu have move me. young man, you have touch the chord of 
memory; they vibrat throughout my heart, produc cadenc and sound 
of year long past. bear with me awhile." 

"and you will speak to me?" 

"I will." 

"have your promise, then, I am content, varney." 

"but you must be secret; not even in the wildest wast of nature, where 
you can well presum that naught but heaven can listen to your 
whisperings, must you utter one word of that which I shall tell to you." 

"alas!" said charles, "I dare not take such a confidence; I have said 
that it is not for myself; I seek such knowledg of what you are, and 
what you have been, but it is for anoth so dear to me, that all the 
charm of life that make up other men' delights, equal not the witcheri 
of one glanc from her, speak as it doe of the gloriou light from 
that heaven which is eternal, from whenc she sprung." 

"and you reject my communication," said varney, "becaus I will not give 
you leav to expos it to flora bannerworth?" 

"it must be so." 

"and you are most anxiou to hear that which I have to relate?" 

"most anxious, indeed--indeed, most anxious." 

"then have I found in that scrupl which beset your mind, a better 
argument for trust you, than had ye been loud in protestation. had 
your promis of secreci been but those which come from the lip, and not 
from the heart, my confid would not have been reject on such 
grounds. I think that I dare trust you." 

"with leav to tell to flora that which you shall communicate." 

"you may whisper it to her, but to no one else, without my special leav 
and licence." 

"I agre to those terms, and will religi preserv them." 

"I do not doubt you for one moment; and now I will tell to you what 
never yet ha pass my lip to mortal man. now will I connect togeth 
some matter which you may have heard piecem from others." 

"what other are they?" 

"dr. chillingworth, and he who onc offici as a london hangman." 

"I have heard someth from those quarters." 

"listen then to me, and you shall better understand that which you have 
heard. some year ago, it matter not the number, on a stormi night, 
toward the autumn of the year, two men sat alon in poverty, and that 
speci of distress which beset the haughty, profligate, dare man, who 
ha been accustom all hi life to it most entic enjoyments, but 
never to that industri which alon ought to produc them, and render 
them great and magnificent." 

"two men; and who were they?" 

"I wa one. look upon me! I wa of those men; and strong and evil 
passion were battl in my heart." 

"and the other!" 

"wa marmaduk bannerworth." 

"graciou heaven! the father of her whom I adore; the suicide." 

"yes, the same; that man stain with a thousand vices--blast by a 
thousand crimes--th father of her who partak noth of hi nature, 
who borrow noth from hi memori but hi name--wa the man who there 
sat with me, plot and contriv how, by fraud or violence, we were 
to lead our usual life of revelri and wild audaci debauch." 

"go on, go on; believ me, I am deepli interested." 

"I can see as much. We were not nice in the variou scheme which our 
prolif fanci engendered. If trickery, and the fals dice at the 
gaming-table, suffic not to fill our purses, we were bold enough for 
violence. If simpl robberi would not succeed, we could take a life." 

"murder?" 

"ay, call it by it proper name, a murder. We sat till the midnight hour 
had passed, without arriv at a definit conclusion; we saw no plan of 
practic operation, and so we wander onward to one of those deep 
den of iniquity, a gaming-house, wherein we had won and lost thousands. 

"we had no money, but we stake largely, in the shape of a wager, upon 
the success of one of the players; we knew not, or care not, for the 
consequence, if we had lost; but, as it happened, we were larg 
successful, and beggar as we had walk into that place, we might have 
left it independ men. 

"but when doe the gambler know when to paus in hi career? If defeat 
awaken all the rage passion of human within hi bosom, success 
but feed the great vice that ha been there engendered. To the dawn of 
morn we played; the bright sun shone in, and yet we played--th midday 
came, and went--th stimul of wine support us, and still we played; 
then came the shadow of evening, steal on in all their beauty. but 
what were they to us, amid those mutat of fortune, which, at one 
moment, made us princes, and place palac at our control, and, at 
another, debas us below the veriest beggar, that crave the stint 
alm of chariti from door to door. 

"and there wa one man who, from the first to the last, stay by us 
like a veri fiend; more than man, I thought he wa not human. We won of 
all, but of him. peopl came and brought their bright red gold, and laid 
it down befor us, but for us to take it up, and then, by a cruel stroke 
of fortune, he took it from us. 

"the night came on; we won, and he won of us; the clock struck 
twelve--w were beggars. god know what wa he. 

"we saw him place hi win about hi person--w saw the smile that 
curv the corner of hi lips; he wa calm, and we were maddened. the 
blood flow temper through hi veins, but in our it wa burn 
lava, scorch as it went through everi petti artery, and dri up all 
human thought--al human feeling. 

"the winner left, and we track hi footsteps. when he reach the open 
air, although he had taken much less than we of the intox 
beverag that are suppli grati to those who frequent those haunt of 
infamy, it wa evid that some sort of inebri attack him; hi 
step were disord and unsteady, and, as we follow him, we could 
perceive, by the deviou track that he took, that he wa somewhat 
uncertain of hi route. 

"we had no fix motiv in so pursu thi man. It wa but an impuls 
proceed at the best; but as he still went on and clear the streets, 
get into the wild and open country, and among the hedge-rows, we 
began to whisper together, and to think that what we did not owe to 
fortune, we might to our own energi and courag at such a moment. 

"I need not hesit to say so, since, to hide the most import 
featur of my revel from you, would be but to mock you; we resolv 
upon rob him. 

"and wa that all?" 

"it wa all that our resolut went to. We were not anxiou to spill 
blood; but still we were resolv that we would accomplish our purpose, 
even if it requir murder for it consummation. have you heard enough?" 

"I have not heard enough, although I guess the rest." 

"you may well guess it, from it preface. He turn down a lone 
pathway, which, had we chosen it ourselves, could not have been more 
suitabl for the attack we meditated. 

"there were tall tree on either side, and a hedge-row stretch high 
up between them. We knew that that lane led to a suburban village, 
which, without a doubt, wa the object of hi destination. 

"then marmaduk bannerworth spoke, saying,-- 

"'what we have to do, must be done now or never. there need not two in 
thi adventure. shall you or I requir him to refund what he ha won 
from us?' 

"'i care not,' I said; 'but if we are to accomplish our purpos without 
arous even a shadow of resistance, it is better to show him it 
futil by both appearing, and take a share in the adventure.' 

"thi wa agre upon, and we hasten forward. He heard footstep 
pursu him and quicken hi pace. I wa the fleetest runner, and 
overtook him. I pass him a pace or two, and then turning, I face him, 
and imped hi progress. 

"the lane wa narrow, and a glanc behind him show him marmaduk 
bannerworth; so that he wa hem in between two enemies, and could 
move neither to the right nor to the left, on account of the thick 
brushwood that interven between the trees. 

"then, with an assum courage, that sat but ill upon him, he demand 
of us what we wanted, and proclaim hi right to pass despit the 
obstruct we place in hi way. 

"the dialogu wa brief. I, be foremost, spoke to him. 

"'your money,' I said; 'your win at the gaming-table. We cannot, 
and we will not lose it.' 

"so suddenly, that he had nearli taken my life, he drew a pistol from 
hi pocket, and level it at my head, he fire upon me. 

"perhaps, had I moved, it might have been my death; but, as it was, the 
bullet furrow my cheek, leav a scar, the path of which is yet 
visibl in a white cicatrix. 

"I felt a stun sensation, and thought myself a dead man. I cri 
aloud to marmaduk bannerworth, and he rush forward. I knew not that 
he wa armed, and that he had the power about him to do the deed which 
he then accomplished; but there wa a groan, a slight struggle, and the 
success gamest fell upon the green sward, bath in hi blood." 

"and thi is the father of her whom I adore?" 

"it is. are you shock to think of such a neat relationship between so 
much beauti and intellig and a midnight murderer? Is your philosophi 
so poor, that the daughter' beauti suffer from the commiss of a 
father' crime?" 

"no, no, It is not so. Do not fanci that, for one moment, I can 
entertain such unworthi opinions. the thought that cross me wa that I 
should have to tell one of such a gentl natur that her father had done 
such a deed." 

"on that head you can use your own discretion. the deed wa done; there 
wa suffici light for us to look upon the featur of the die man. 
ghastli and terrif they glare upon us; while the glaze eyes, as they 
were upturn to the bright sky, seem appeal to heaven for 
vengeanc against us, for have done the deed. 

"mani a day and mani an hour sinc at all time and all seasons, I have 
seen those eyes, with the glaze of death upon them, follow me, and 
gloat over the miseri they had the power to make. I think I see them 
now." 

"indeed!" 

"yes; look--look--se how they glare upon me--with what a fix and 
fright stare the bloodshot pupil keep their place--there, there! oh! 
save me from such a visit again. It is too horrible. I dare not--i 
cannot endur it; and yet whi do you gaze at me with such an aspect, 
dread visitant? you know that it wa not my hand that did the deed--who 
laid you low. you know that not to me are you abl to lay the heavi 
charg of your death!" 

"varney, you look upon vacancy," said charl holland. 

"no, no; vacanc it may be to you, but to me 'ti full of horribl 
shapes." 

"compos yourself; you have taken me far into your confid already; I 
pray you now to tell me all. I have in my brain no room for horribl 
conjectur such as those which might els torment me." 

varney wa silent for a few minutes, and then he wipe from hi brow the 
heavi drop of perspir that had there gathered, and heav a deep 
sigh. 

"speak to me," ad charles; "noth will so much reliev you from the 
terror of thi remembr as make a confid which reflect will 
approv of, and which you will know that you have no reason to repent." 

"charl holland," said varney, "I have alreadi gone too far to 
retract--much too far, I know, and can well understand all the danger of 
half confidence. you alreadi know so much, that it is fit you should 
know more." 

"go on then, varney, I will listen to you." 

"I know not if, at thi juncture, I can command myself to say more. I 
feel that what next ha to be told will be most horribl for me to 
tell--most sad for you to hear told." 

"I can well believe, varney, from your manner of speech, and from the 
word you use, that you have some secret to relat beyond thi simpl 
fact of the murder of thi gamest by marmaduk bannerworth." 

"you are right--such is the fact; the death of that man could not have 
move me as you now see me moved. there is a secret connect with hi 
fate which I may well hesit to utter--a secret even to whisper to the 
wind of heaven--i--although I did not do the deed, no, no--i--i did not 
strike the blow--not i--not i!" 

[illustration] 

"varney, it is astonish to me the pain you take to assur yourself 
of your innoc of thi deed; no one accus you, but still, were it 
not that I am impress with a strong convict that you'r speak to 
me noth but the truth, the veri fact of your extrem anxieti to 
acquit yourself, would engend suspicion." 

"I can understand that feeling, charl holland; I can fulli understand 
it. I do not blame you for it--it is a most natur one; but when you 
know all, you will feel with me how necessari it must have been to my 
peac to seiz upon everi trivial circumst that can help me to a 
belief in my own innocence." 

"it may be so; as yet, you well know, I speak in ignorance. but what 
could there have been in the charact of that gambler, that ha made 
you so sympathet concern hi decease?" 

"nothing--noth whatev in hi character. He wa a bad man; not one 
of those free, open spirit which are seduc into crime by 
thoughtlessness--not one of those whom we pity, perchance, more than we 
condemn; but a man without a redeem trait in hi disposition--a man 
so heap up with vice and iniquities, that societi gain much by hi 
decease, and not an individu could say that he had lost a friend." 

"and yet the mere thought of the circumst connect with hi death 
seem almost to drive you to the verg of despair." 

"you are right; the mere thought ha that effect." 

"you have arous all my curios to know the caus of such a 
feeling." 

varney pace the apart in silenc for mani minutes. He seem to be 
endur a great mental struggle, and at length, when he turn to 
charl holland and spoke, there were upon hi counten trace of 
deep emotion. 

"I have said, young man, that I will take you into my confidence. I have 
said that I will clear up mani seem mysteries, and that I will enabl 
you to understand what wa obscur in the narr of dr. 
chillingworth, and of that man who fill the offic of public 
executioner, and who ha haunt me so long." 

"it is true, then, as the doctor states, that you were execut in 
london?" 

"I was." 

"and resuscit by the galvan process, put into oper by dr. 
chillingworth?" 

"a he supposed; but there are truth connect with natur philosophi 
which he dream not of. I bear a charm life, and it wa but accid 
which produc a similar effect upon the latent spring of my exist 
in the hous to which the execution conduct me, to what would have 
been produc had I been sufficed, in the free and open air, to wait 
until the cool moonbeam fell upon me." 

"varney, varney," said charl holland, "you will not succeed in 
convinc me of your supernatur powers. I hold such feel and 
sensat at arm' length. I will not--i cannot assum you to be what 
you affect." 

"I ask for no man' belief. I know that which I know, and, gather 
experi from the coincid of differ phenomena, I am compel 
to arriv at certain conclusions. believ what you please, doubt what 
you please; but I say again that I am not as other men." 

"I am in no condit to deput your proposition; I wish not to disput 
it; but you are wandering, varney, from the point. I wait anxious for 
a continu of your narrative." 

"I know that I am wander from it--i know well that I am wander 
from it, and that the reason I do so is that I dread that continuation." 

"that dread will nor be the less for it postponement." 

"you are right; but tell me, charl holland, although you are young you 
have been about in the great world suffici to form correct 
opinions, and to understand that which is relat to you, draw proper 
deduct from certain facts, and arriv possibl at more correct 
conclus than some of matur year with less wisdom." 

"I will freeli answer, varney, ani question you may put to me." 

"I know it; tell me then what measur of guilt you attach to me in the 
transact I have notic to you." 

"it seem then to me that, not contempl the man' murder, you 
cannot be accus of the act, although a set of fortuit circumst 
made you appear an accomplic to it commission." 

"you think I may be acquitted?" 

"you can acquit yourself, know that you did not contempl the 
murder." 

"I did not contempl it. I know not what desper deed I should have 
stop short at then, in the height of my distress, but I neither 
contempl take that man' life, nor did I strike the blow which 
sent him from existence." 

"there is even some excus as regard the higher crime for marmaduk 
bannerworth." 

"think you so?" 

"yes; he thought that you were killed, and impuls he might have 
struck the blow that made him a murderer." 

"be it so. I am willing, extrem will that anyth should occur 
that should remov the odium of guilt from ani man. Be it so, I say, 
with all my heart; but now, charl holland, I feel that we must meet 
again ere I can tell you all; but in the meantim let flora bannerworth 
rest in peace--sh need dread noth from me. avaric and revenge, the 
two passion which found a home in my heart, are now stifl for ever." 

"revenge! did you say revenge?" 

"I did; whenc the marvel, am I not suffici human for that?" 

"but you coupl it with the name of flora bannerworth." 

"I did, and that is part of my mystery." 

"A mystery, indeed, to imagin that such a be as flora could awaken 
ani such feel in your heart--a most abund mystery." 

"it is so. I do not affect to deni it: but yet it is true, although so 
greatli mysterious, but tell her that although at one time I look upon 
her as one whom I care not if I injured, her beauti and distress 
chang the current of my thoughts, and won upon me greatly, from the 
moment I found I had the power to becom the bane of her existence, I 
ceas to wish to be so, and never again shall she experi a pang of 
alarm from varney, the vampyre." 

"your messag shall be faith delivered, and doubt not that it will 
be receiv with grate feelings. nevertheless I should have much 
wish to have been in a posit to inform her of more particulars." 

"come to me here at midnight to-morrow, and you shall know all. I will 
have no reserv with you, no concealments; you shall know whom I 
have had to battl against, and how it is that a world of evil passion 
took possess of my heart and made me what I am." 

"are you firm in thi determination, varney--wil you inde tell me no 
more to-night?" 

"no more, I have said it. leav me now. I have need of more repose, for 
of late sleep ha seldom close my eyelids." 

charl holland wa convinced, from the posit manner in which he 
spoke, that noth more in the shape of information, at that time, wa 
to be expect from varney; and be fear that if he urg thi 
strang be too far, at a time when he did not wish it, he might 
refus all further communication, he thought it prudent to leav him, so 
he said to him,-- 

"be assured, varney, I shall keep the appoint you have made, with an 
expect when we do meet of be reward by a recit of some full 
particulars." 

"you shall not be disappointed; farewell, farewell!" 

charl holland bade him adieu, and left the place. 

although he had now acquir all the inform he hope to take away 
with him when varney first began to be communicative, yet, when he came 
to consid how strang and unaccount a be he had been in 
commun with, charl could not but congratul himself that he 
had heard so much, for, from the manner of varney, he could well suppos 
that that was, indeed, the first time he had been so commun upon 
subject which evid held so conspicu a place in hi heart. 

and he had abund of hope, likewise, from what had been said by 
varney, that he would keep hi word, and commun to him fulli all 
els that he requir to know; and when he recollect those word which 
varney had used, signifi that he knew the danger of half confidences, 
that hope grew into a certainty, and charl began to have no doubt but 
that on the next even all that wa mysteri in the variou affair 
connect with the vampyr would becom clear and open to the light of 
day. 

He stroll down the lane in which the lone hous wa situated, 
revolv these matter in hi mind, and when he arriv at it 
entrance, he wa rather surpris to see a throng of person hastili 
move onward, with come appear of dismay about them, and anxieti 
depict upon their countenances. 

He stop a lad, and inquir of him the caus of the seem tumult. 

"why, sir, the fact is," said the boy, "a crowd from the town' been 
burn down bannerworth hall, and they'v kill a man." 

"bannerworth hall! you must be mistaken." 

"well, sir, I ought not to call it bannerworth hall, becaus I mean the 
old ruin in the neighbourhood that are suppos to have been origin 
bannerworth hall befor the hous now call such wa built; and, 
moreover, as the bannerworth have alway had a garden there, and two or 
three old sheds, the peopl in the town call it bannerworth hall in 
common with the other building." 

"I understand. and do you say that all have been destroyed?" 

"yes, sir. all that wa capabl of be burnt ha been burnt, and, what 
is more, a man ha been kill among the ruins. We don't know who he is, 
but the folk said he wa a vampyre, and they left him for dead." 

"when will these terribl outrag cease? oh! varney, varney, you have 
much to answer for; even if in your conscienc you succeed in acquit 
yourself of the murder, some of the particular concern which you 
have inform me of." 




chapter lxxxiii. 

the mysteri arriv AT the inn.--th hungarian nobleman.--th letter 
TO varney. 


[illustration] 

while these affair are proceeding, and when there seem everi 
appear of sir franci varney himself quickli put an end to some 
of the vexati circumst connect with himself and the 
bannerworth family, it is necessari that we should notic an occurr 
which took place at the same inn which the admir had made such a scene 
of confus upon the occas of hi first arriv in the town. 

not sinc the admir had arriv with jack pringle, and so disturb 
the whole economi of the household, wa there so much curios excit 
as on the morn follow the interview which charl holland had had 
with varney, the vampyre. 

the inn wa scarc opened, when a stranger arrived, mount on a 
coal-black horse, and, alighting, he surrend the bridl into the 
hand of a boy who happen to be at the inn-door, and stalk slowli 
and solemnli into the building. 

He wa tall, and of a cadaver aspect; in attir he wa plainli 
apparelled, but there wa no appear of poverti about him; on the 
contrary, what he realli had on wa of a rich and costli character, 
although destitut of ornament. 

He sat down in the first room that present itself, and await the 
appear of the landlord, who, upon be inform that a guest of 
appar ampl means, and of some consequence, had enter the place, 
hastili went to him to receiv hi commands. 

with a profus of bows, our old friend, who had been so obsequi to 
admir bell, enter the room, and beg to know what order the 
gentleman had for him. 

"I presume," said the stranger, in a deep, solemn voice, "I presum that 
you have no objection, for a few day that I shall remain in thi town, 
to board and lodg me for a certain price which you can name to me at 
once?" 

"certainly, sir," said the landlord; "ani way you please; without wine, 
sir, I presume?" 

"a you please; make your own arrangements." 

"well, sir, as we can't tell, of course, what wine a gentleman may 
drink, but when we come to consid breakfast, dinner, tea, and supper, 
and a bed, and all that sort of thing, and a privat sitting-room, I 
suppose, sir?" 

"certainly." 

"you would not, then, think, sir, a matter of four guinea a week will 
be too much, perhaps." 

"I told you to name your own charge. let it be four guineas; if you had 
said eight I should have paid it." 

"good god!" said the publican, "here' a damn fool that I am. I beg 
your pardon, sir, I didn't mean you. now I could punch my own head--wil 
you have breakfast at once, sir, and then we shall begin regular, you 
know, sir?" 

"have what?" 

"breakfast, breakfast, you know, sir; tea, coffee, cocoa, or chocolate; 
ham, eggs, or a bit of grill fowl, cold sirloin of roast beef, or a 
red herring--anyth you like, sir." 

"I never take breakfast, so you may spare yourself the troubl of 
provid anyth for me." 

"not take breakfast, sir! not take breakfast! would you like to take 
anyth to drink then, sir? peopl say it' an odd time, at eight 
o'clock in the morning, to drink; but, for my part, I alway have 
thought that you couldn't begin a good thing too soon." 

"I live upon drink," said the stranger; "but you have none in the cellar 
that will suit me." 

"indeed, sir." 

"no, no, I am certain." 

"why, we'v got some claret now, sir," said the landlord. 

"which may look like blood, and yet not be it." 

"like what, sir?--damn my rags!" 

"begone, begone." 

the stranger utter these word so peremptorili that the landlord 
hastili left the room, and go into hi own bar, he gave himself so 
small a tap on the side of the head, that it would not have hurt a fly, 
as he said,-- 

"I could punch myself into bits, I could tear my hair out by the roots;" 
and then he pull a littl bit of hi hair, so gentli and tenderli that 
it show what a man of discret he was, even in the worst of all hi 
agoni of passion. 

"the idea," he added, "of a fellow come here, pay four guinea a 
week for board and lodging, tell me he would not have mind eight, 
and then not want ani breakfast; it' enough to aggrav half a 
dozen saints; but what an odd fish he looks." 

At thi moment the ostler came in, and, stand at the bar, he wipe 
hi mouth with hi sleeve, as he said,-- 

"I suppos you'll stand a quart for that, master?" 

"A quart for what, you vagabond? A quart becaus i'v done myself up in 
heaps; a quart becaus i'm fit to pull myself into fiddlestrings?" 

"no," said the ostler; "becaus i'v just put up the gentleman' horse." 

"what gentleman' horse?" 

"why, the big-look fellow with the white face, now in the parlour." 

"what, did he come on a horse, sam? what sort of a look creatur is 
it? you may judg of a man from the sort of horse-compani he keeps." 

"well, then, sir, I hardli know. it' coal black, and look as know 
as possible; it' tri twice to get a kick at me, but I wa down upon 
him, and put the bucket in hi way. howsomdever, I don't think it' a 
bad animal, as a animal, mind you, sir, though a littl bit wiciou or 
so." 

"well," said the publican, as he drew the ostler half a pint instead of 
a quart, "you'r alway drinking; take that." 

"blow me," said the ostler, "half a pint, master!" 

"plagu take you, I can't stand parley with you, there' the parlour 
bell; perhaps, after all, he will have some breakfast." 

while the landlord wa away the ostler help himself to a quart of the 
strongest ale, which, by a singular faculti that he had acquired, he 
pour down hi throat without ani effort at swallowing, hold hi 
head back, and the jug at a littl distanc from hi mouth. 

have accomplish thi feat, he revers the jug, give it a know 
tap with hi knuckl as though he would have signifi to all the world 
that it wa empty, and that he had accomplish what he desired. 

In the meantime, the landlord had made hi way to hi strang guest, who 
said to him, when he came into the room, 

"i there not one sir franci varney resid in thi town?" 

"the devil!" thought the landlord; "thi is anoth of them, i'll bet a 
guinea. sir franci varney, sir, did you say? why, sir, there wa a sir 
franci varney, but folk seem to think as how he' no better than he 
should be--a sort of vampyre, sir, if you know what that is." 

"I have, certainly, heard of such things; but can you not tell me 
varney' address? I wish to see him." 

"well, then, sir, I cannot tell it to you, for there' realli been such 
a commot and such a riot about him that he' taken himself off, I 
think, altogether, and we can hear noth of him. lord bless you, sir, 
they burnt down hi house, and hunt him about so, that I don't think 
that he'll ever show hi face here again." 

"and cannot you tell me where he wa seen last?" 

"that I cannot, sir; but, if anybodi know anyth about him, it' mr. 
henri bannerworth, or perhap dr. chillingworth, for they have had more 
to do with him than anybodi else." 

"indeed; and can you tell me the address of the former individual?" 

"that I can't, sir, for the bannerworth have left the hall. As for the 
doctor, sir, you'll see hi hous in the high-street, with a larg brass 
plate on the door, so that you cannot mistak it. it' no. 9, on the 
other side of the way." 

"I thank you for so much information," said the stranger, and rising, he 
walk to the door. before, however, he left, he turned, and 
added,--"y can say, if you should by chanc meet mr. bannerworth, that 
a hungarian nobleman wish to speak to him concern sir franci 
varney, the vampyre?" 

"A what, sir?" 

"A nobleman from hungary," wa the reply. 

"the deuce!" said the landlord, as he look after him. "he don't seem 
at all hungri here, not thirsti neither. what doe he mean by a nobleman 
from hungary? the idea of a man talk about hungry, and not take ani 
breakfast. he' queer me. i'll be hang if i'll stand it. here I 
clearli lose four guinea a week, and then get made game of besides. A 
nobleman, indeed! I think I see him. why, he isn't quit so big as old 
slaney, the butcher. it' a do. i'll have at him when he come back." 

meanwhile, the unconsci object of thi soliloquy pass down the 
high-street, until he came to dr. chillingworth's, at whose door he 
knocked. 

now mrs. chillingworth had been wait the whole night for the return 
of the doctor, who had not yet made hi appearance, and, consequently, 
that lady' temper had becom acidul to an uncommon extent and when 
she heard a knock at the door, someth possess her that it could be 
no other than her spouse, and she prepar to give him that warm 
recept which she consid he had a right, as a marri man, to 
expect after such conduct. 

she hurriedli fill a toler size hand-basin with not the cleanest 
water in the world, and then, open the door hurriedli with one hand, 
she slouc the content into the face of the intruder, exclaiming,-- 

"now you'v caught it!" 

"d--n!" said the hungarian nobleman, and then mrs. chillingworth utter 
a scream, for she fear she had made a mistake. 

"oh, sir! i'm veri sorry: but I thought it wa my husband." 

"but if you did," said the stranger, "there wa no occas to drown him 
with a basin of soap-suds. It is your husband I want, madam, if he be 
dr. chillingworth." 

"then, indeed, you must go on want him, sir, for he' not been to hi 
own home for a day and a night. He take up all hi time in hunt 
after that beastli vampyre." 

"ah! sir franci varney, you mean." 

"I do; and i'd varney him if I caught hold of him." 

"can you give me the least idea of where he can be found?" 

"of cours I can." 

"indeed! where?" said the stranger, eagerly. 

"in some churchyard, to be sure, gobbl up the dead bodies." 

with thi mrs. chillingworth shut the door with a bang that nearli 
flatten the hungarian' nose with hi face, and he wa fain to walk 
away, quit convinc that there wa no inform to be had in that 
quarter. 

He return to the inn, and have told the landlord that he would give 
a handsom reward to ani one who would discov to him the retreat of 
sir franci varney, he shut himself up in an apart alone, and wa 
busi for a time in write letters. 

although the sum which the stranger offer wa an indefinit one, the 
landlord mention the matter across the bar to sever persons; but all 
of them shook their heads, believ it to be a veri peril adventur 
inde to have anyth to do with so troublesom a subject as sir 
franci varney. As the day advanced, however, a young lad present 
himself, and ask to see the gentleman who had been inquir for 
varney. 

the landlord sever question and cross-quest him, with the hope 
of discov if he had ani information: but the boy wa quit 
obdurate, and would speak to no one but the person who had offer the 
reward, so that mine host wa compel to introduc him to the 
hungarian nobleman, who, as yet, had neither eaten nor drunk in the 
house. 

the boy wore upon hi counten the veri express of juvenil 
cunning, and when the stranger ask him if he realli wa in possess 
of ani inform concern the retreat of sir franci varney, he 
said,-- 

"I can tell you where he is, but what are you go to give?" 

"what sum do you require?" said the stranger. 

"A whole half-crown." 

"it is your's; and, if your inform prove correct, come to-morrow, 
and i'll add anoth to it, alway provided, likewise, you keep the 
secret from ani one else." 

"trust me for that," said the boy. "I live with my grandmother; she' 
preciou old, and ha got a cottage. We sell milk and cakes, sticki 
stuff, and pennywinkles." 

"A goodli collection. Go on." 

"well, sir, thi morning, there come a man in with a bottle, and he 
buy a bottl full of milk and a loaf. I saw him, and I knew it wa 
varney, the vampyre." 

"you follow him?" 

"of cours I did, sir; and he' stay at the hous that' to let down 
the lane, round the corner, by mr. biggs's, and past lee' garden, 
leav old slaney' stack on your right hand, and so cut on till 
you come to grants' meadow, when you'll see old madhunt a brick-field 
stare of you in the face; and, arter that--" 

"peace--peace!--y shall yourself conduct me. come to thi place at 
sunset; be secret, and, probably, ten time the reward you have alreadi 
receiv may be yours," said the stranger. 

"what, ten half-crowns?" 

"yes, I will keep my word with you." 

"what a go! I know what i'll do. i'll set up as a show man, and what a 
gloriou treat it will be, to peep through one of the hole all day 
myself, and get somebodi to pull the string up and down, and when i'm 
tire of that, I can blaze away upon the trumpet like one o'clock. I 
think I see me. here you see the duke of marlborough a whop of 
everybody, and here you see the frenchmen fli about like parch pea 
in a sifter." 




chapter lxxxiv. 

the excit populace.--varney hunted.--th place OF refuge. 


[illustration] 

there seemed, now a complet lull in the proceed as connect with 
varney, the vampyre. We have reason to believ that the execution who 
had been as solicit as varney to obtain undisput possess of 
bannerworth hall, ha fallen a victim to the indiscrimin rage of 
the mob. varney himself is a fugitive, and bound by the most solemn tie 
to charl holland, not onli to commun to him such particular of 
the past, as will bring satisfact to hi mind, but to abstain from 
ani act which, for the future, shall exercis a disastr influenc 
upon the happi of flora. 

the doctor and the admiral, with henry, had betaken themselv from the 
hall as we had recorded, and, in due time, reach the cottag where 
flora and her mother had found a temporari refuge. 

mrs. bannerworth wa up; but flora wa sleeping, and, although the 
tide they had to tell were of a curiou and mix nature, they would 
not have her disturb to listen to them. 

and, likewise, they were rather pleas than otherwise, sinc they knew 
not exactli what had becom of charl holland, to think that they would 
probabl be spare the necess of say they could not account for 
hi absence. 

that he had gone upon some expedition, probabl dangerous, and so one 
which he did not wish to commun the particular of to hi friends, 
lest they should make a strong attempt to dissuad him from it, they 
were induc to believe. 

but yet they had that confid in hi courag and activ intellectu 
resources, to believ that he would come through it unscathed, and, 
probably, shortli show himself at the cottage. 

In thi hope they were not disappointed, for in about two hour charl 
made hi appearance; but, until he began to be question concern hi 
absenc by the admiral, he scarc consid the kind of dilemma he 
had put himself into by the promis of secreci he had given to varney, 
and wa a littl puzzl to think how much he might tell, and how much 
he wa bound in honour to conceal. 

"avast there!" cri the admiral; "what' becom of your tongue, 
charles? you'v been on some cruize, i'll be bound. haul over the ship' 
books, and tell us what' happened." 

"I have been upon an adventure," said charles, "which I hope will be 
product of benefici result to us all; but, the fact is, I have 
made a promise, perhap incautiously, that I will not commun what I 
know." 

"whew!" said the admiral, "that' awkward; but, however, if a man said 
under seal instructions, there' an end of it. I rememb when I wa 
off candia once---" 

"ha!" interpos jack, "that wa the time you tumbl over the bless 
binnacle, all in consequ of take too much madeira. I rememb it, 
too--it' an out and out good story, that 'ere. you took a rope' end, 
you know, and laid into the bowsprit; and, say you, 'get up, you 
lubber,' say you, all the while a thinking, I supposes, as it wa long 
jack ingram, the carpenter' mate, lay asleep. what a lark!" 

"thi scoundrel will be the death of me," said the admiral; "there isn't 
one word of truth in what he says. I never got drunk in all my life, as 
everybodi knows. jack, affair are get seriou between you and i--w 
must part, and for good. it' a good mani time that i'v told you 
you'v forgot the differ between the quarter-deck and the caboose. 
now, i'm serious--you'r off the ship' books, and there' an end of 
you." 

"veri good," said jack; "i'm will i'll leav you. Do you think I want 
to keep you ani longer? good bye, old bloak--i'l leav you to repent, 
and when old grim death come yard-arm and yard-arm with you, and you 
can't shake off hi boarding-tackle, you'll say, 'where' jack pringle?' 
say you; and then what' hi mane--oh ah! echo you call it--echo'l 
say, it' d----d if it knows." 

jack turn upon hi heel, and, befor the admir could make ani repli 
he left the place. 

"what' the rascal up to now?" said the admiral. "I realli didn't think 
he'd have taken me at my word." 

"oh, then, after all, you didn't mean it, uncle?" said charles. 

"what' that to you, you lubber, whether I mean it, or not, you 
shore-go squab? Of cours I expect everybodi to desert an old hulk, 
rat and all--and now jack pringle' gone; the vagabond, couldn't he 
stay, and get drunk as long as he liked! didn't he say what he pleased, 
and do what he pleased, the mutin thief? didn't he say I run away 
from a frenchman off cape ushant, and didn't I put up with that?" 

"but, my dear uncle, you sent him away yourself." 

"I didn't, and you know I didn't; but I see how it is, you'v disgust 
jack among you. A better seaman never trod the deck of a man-of-war." 

"but hi drunkenness, uncle?" 

"it' a lie. I don't believ he ever got drunk. I believ you all 
invent it, and jack' so good-natured, he tumbl about just to keep 
you in countenance." 

"but hi insolence, uncle; hi gross insol toward you--hi 
inventions, hi exagger of the truth?" 

"avast, there--avast, there--non of that, master charlie; jack couldn't 
do anyth of the sort; and I mean to say this, that if jack wa here 
now, i'd stick up for him, and say he wa a good seaman. 

"tip us your fin, then," said jack, dart into the room; "do you think 
i'd leav you, you d----d old fool? what would becom of you, I wonder, 
if I wasn't to take you in to dri nurse? why, you bless old babby, 
what do you mean by it?" 

"jack, you villain!" 

"ah! go on and call me a villain as much as you like. don't you rememb 
when the bullet were scuttl our nobs?" 

"I do, I do, jack; tip us your fin, old fellow. you'v save my life 
more than once." 

"it' a lie." 

"it ain't. you did, I say." 

"you bed----d!" 

and thu wa the most seriou misunderstand that these two worthi 
ever had togeth made up. the real fact is, that the admir could as 
littl do without jack, as he could have done without food; and as for 
pringle, he no more thought of leav the old commodore, than of--what 
shall we say? forswear him. jack himself could not have taken a 
stronger oath. 

but the old admir had suffer so much from the idea that jack had 
actual left him, that although he abus him as usual often enough, he 
never again talk of take him off the ship' books; and, to the 
credit of jack be it spoken, he took no advantag of the circumstance, 
and onli got drunk just as usual, and call hi master an old fool 
whenev it suit him. 




chapter lxxxv. 

the hungarian nobleman get into danger.--h IS fire at, and show some 
OF hi quality. 


[illustration] 

consider delight wa the hungarian, not onli at the news he had 
receiv from the boy, but as well for the cheap of it. probabl he 
did not conceiv it possibl that the secret of the retreat of such a 
man as varney could have been attain so easily. 

He wait with great impati for the evening, and stir not from 
the inn for sever hours; neither did he take ani refreshment, 
notwithstand he had made so liber an arrang with the landlord 
to be supplied. 

all thi wa a matter of great excit and specul in the inn, so 
much so, indeed, that the landlord sent for some of the oldest custom 
of hi house, regular topers, who sat there everi evening, indulg in 
strong drinks, and pipe and tobacco, to ask their seriou advic as to 
what he should do, as if it were necessari he should do anyth at all. 

but, somehow or another, these wiseacr who assembl at the landlord' 
bidding, and sat down, with someth strong befor them, in the bar 
parlour, never onc seem to think that a man might, if he choosed, 
come to an inn, and agre to pay four guinea a week for board and 
lodging, and yet take noth at all. 

no; they could not understand it, and therefor they would not have it. 
It wa quit monstrou that anybodi should attempt to do anyth so 
complet out of the ordinari cours of proceeding. It wa not to be 
borne; and as in thi countri it happens, free and enlighten as we 
are, that no man can commit a greater social offenc than do 
someth that hi neighbour never thought of do themselves, the 
hungarian nobleman wa vote a most danger character, and, in fact, 
not to be put up with. 

"I shouldn't have thought so much of it" said the landlord; "but onli 
look at the aggrav of the thing. after I have ask him four 
guinea a week, and expect to be beaten down to two, to be then told 
that he would not have care if it had been eight. It is enough to 
aggrav a saint." 

"well, I agre with you there," said another; "that' just what it is, 
and I onli wonder that a man of your sagac ha not quit understood 
it before." 

"understood what?" 

"why, that he is a vampyre. He ha heard of sir franci varney, that' 
the fact, and he' come to see him. bird of a feather, you know, flock 
together, and now we shall have two vampyr in the town instead of 
one." 

[illustration] 

the parti look rather blank at thi suggestion, which, indeed, seem 
rather uncomfort probably. the landlord had just open hi mouth to 
make some remark, when he wa stop by the violent ring of what he 
now call the vampyre' bell, sinc it proceed from the room where 
the hungarian nobleman was. 

"have you an almanack in the house?" wa the question of the mysteri 
guest. 

"an almanack, sir? well, I realli don't know. let me see, an almanack." 

"but, perhaps, you can tell me. I wa to know the moon' age." 

"the devil!" thought the landlord; "he' a vampyre, and no mistake. why, 
sir, as to the moon' age, it wa a full moon last night, veri bright 
and beautiful, onli you could not see it for the clouds." 

"A full moon last night," said the mysteri guest, thoughtfully; "it 
may shine, then, brightly, to-night, and if so, all will be well. I 
thank you,--leav the room." 

"do you mean to say, sir, you don't want anyth to eat now?" 

"what I want i'll order." 

"but you have order nothing." 

"then presum that I want nothing." 

the discomfit landlord wa oblig to leav the room, for there wa no 
such a thing as make ani answer to this, and so, still further 
confirm in hi opinion that the stranger wa a vampyr that came to 
see sir franci varney from a sympathet feel toward him, he again 
reach the bar-parlour. 

"you may depend," he said, "a sure as egg is eggs, that he is a 
vampyre. hilloa! he' go off,--aft him--aft him; he think we 
suspect him. there he goes--down the high-street." 

the landlord ran out, and so did those who were with him, one of whom 
carri hi brandi and water in hi hand, which, be too hot for him 
to swallow all at once, he still could not think of leav behind. 

It wa now gell rapidli dark, and the mysteri stranger wa 
actual proceed toward the lane to keep hi appoint with the 
boy who had promis to conduct him to the hiding-plac of sir franci 
varney. 

He had not proceed far, however, befor he began to suspect that he 
wa followed, as it wa evid on the instant that he alter hi 
course; for, instead of walk down the lane, where the boy wa wait 
for him, he went right on, and seem desir of make hi way into 
the open countri between the town and bannerworth hall. 

hi pursuers--for they assum that character--when they saw thi becam 
anxiou to intercept him; and think that the greater forc they had 
the better, they call out aloud as they pass a smithy, where a man 
wa shoe a horse,-- 

"jack burdon, here is anoth vampyre!" 

"the deuc there is!" said the person who wa addressed. "i'll soon 
settl him. here' my wife get no sleep of a night as it is, all owe 
to that varney, who ha been plagu us so long. I won't put up with 
another." 

So saying, he snatch from a hook on which it hung, an old 
fowling-piece, and join the pursuit, which now requir to be 
conduct with some celerity, for the stranger had struck into the open 
country, and wa get on at good speed. 

the last remnant of the twilight were fade away, and although the 
moon had actual risen, it ray were obscur by a number of light, 
fleeci clouds, which, although they did not promis to be of long 
continuance, as yet certainli imped the light. 

"where is he going?" said the blacksmith. "he seem to be make hi way 
toward the mill-stream." 

"no," said another; "don't you see he is strike higher up toward the 
old ford, where the stepping-ston are!" 

"he is--h is," cri the blacksmith. "run on--run on; don't you see he 
is cross it now? tell me, all of you, are you quit sure he is a 
vampyre, and no mistake? He ain't the exciseman, landlord, now, is he?" 

"the exciseman, the devil! Do you think I want to shoot the exciseman?" 

"veri good--then here goes," exclaim the smith. 

He stooped, and just as the brisk night air blew asid the cloud from 
befor the face of the moon, and as the stranger wa cross the 
slipperi stones, he fire at him. 

* * * * * 

how silent and sweetli the moon' ray fall upon the water, upon the 
meadows, and upon the woods. the sceneri appear the work of 
enchantment, some fairi land, wait the appear of it inhabitants. 
No sound met the ear; the veri wind wa hushed; noth wa there to 
distract the sens of sight, save the power of reflection. 

this, indeed, would aid the effect of such a scene. A cloudless sky, the 
star all radiant with beauty, while the moon, rise higher and higher 
in the heavens, increas in the strength and refulg of her light, 
and dim the veri stars, which seem to grow gradual invis as 
the majesti of the queen of night becam more and more manifest. 

the dark wood and the open meadow contrast more and more strongly; 
like light and shade, the earth and sky were not more distinct and 
apart; and the ripl stream, that rush along with all the 
impetuos of uneven ground. 

the bank are cloth with verdure; the tall sedges, here and there, 
line the sides; bed of bulrush rais their head high abov all 
else, and threw out their round clump of blossom like tufts, and 
look strang in the light of the moon. 

here and there, too, the willow bent grace over the stream, and 
their long leav were waft and born up and down by the gentler forc 
of the stream. 

below, the stream widened, and ran foam over a hard, stoni bottom, 
and near the middl is a heap of stones--of larg stones, that form the 
bed of the river, from which the water ha wash away all earthi 
particles, and left them by themselves. 

these stone in winter could not be seen, they were all under water, and 
the stream wash over in a turbul and tumultu manner. but now, 
when the water wa clear and low, they are mani of them posit out 
of the water, the stream run around and through their interstices; 
the water-we here and there lie at the top of the stream, and 
blossom beautifully. 

the daisy-lik blossom danc and wave gentli on the move flood, at 
the same time they shone in the moonlight, like fairi face rise from 
the depth of the river, to receiv the principl of life from the 
moon' rays. 

'ti sweet to wander in the moonlight at such an hour, and it is sweet 
to look upon such a scene with an unruffl mind, and to give way to the 
feel that are engend by a walk by the river side. 

see, the moon is rise higher and higher, the shadow grow shorter and 
shorter; the river, which in place wa altogeth hidden by the tall 
willow trees, now gradual becom less and less hidden, and the water 
becom more and more lit up. 

the moonbeam play grace on the rippl surface, here and there 
appear like liquid silver, that each instant chang it posit and 
surfac expos to the light. 

such a moment--such a scene, were by far too well calcul to caus 
the most solemn and seriou emot of the mind, and he must have been 
but at best insensible, who could wander over meadow and through grove, 
and yet remain untouch by the scene of poetri and romanc in which he 
breath and moved. 

At such a time, and in such a place, the world is aliv with all the 
finer essenc of mysteri life. 'ti at such an hour that the spirit 
quit their secret abodes, and visit the earth, and whirl round the 
enchant trees. 

'ti now the spirit of earth and air danc their giddi flight from 
flower to flower. 'ti now they collect and exchang their greetings; 
the wood is fill with them, the meadow teem with them, the hedg at 
the river side have them hidden among the deep green leav and blades. 

but what is that yonder, on the stones, partial out of the water--what 
can it be? the more it is look at, the more it resembl the human 
form--and yet it is still and motionless on the hard stones--and yet it 
is a human form. the leg are lie in the water, the arm appear to be 
partial in and partial out, they seem move by the stream now and 
then, but veri gently--so slightly, indeed, that it might well be 
question if it move at all. 

the moon' ray had not yet reach it; the bank on the opposit side of 
the stream wa high, and some tall tree rose up and obscur the moon. 
but she wa rise higher and higher each moment, and, finally, when it 
ha reach the top of those trees, then the ray will reach the middl 
of the river, and then, by degrees, it will reach the stone in the 
river, and, finally, the bodi that lie there so still and so 
mysteriously. 

how it came there it would be difficult to say. It appear as though, 
when the water were high, the bodi had float down, and, at the 
subsid of the waters, it had been left upon the stones, and now it 
wa expos to view. 

It wa strang and mysterious, and those who might look upon such a 
sight would feel their blood chill, and their bodi creep, to contempl 
the remain of human in such a place, and in such a condit as that 
must be in. 

A human life had been taken! how? who could tell? perhap accid alon 
wa the caus of it; perhap some one had taken a life by violent means, 
and thrown the bodi in the water to conceal the fact and the crime. 

the water had brought it down, and deposit it there in the middl of 
the river, without ani human creatur be acquaint with the fact. 

but the moon rises--th beam come trembl through the tree top and 
straggl branches, and fall upon the opposit bank, and there lie the 
body, mid stream, and in compar darkness. 

By the time the river is lit up by the moon' rays, then the object on 
the stone will be visible, then it can be ascertain what appear now 
onli probable, namely, is the dark object a human form or not? 

In the absenc of light it appear to be so, but when the flood of 
silver light fall upon it, it would be place then beyond a doubt. 

the time is approaching--th moon each moment approach her meridian, 
and each moment do the ray increas in number and in strength, while 
the shadow shorten. 

the opposit bank each moment becom more and more distinct, and the 
side of the stream, the green rush and sedges, all by degre come 
full into view. 

now and then a fish leap out of the stream, and just exhibit itself, 
as much as to say, "there are thing live in the stream, and I am one 
of them." 

the moment is one of awe--th presenc of that mysteri and 
dreadful-look object, even while it ident remain doubt, chill 
the heart--it contract the expand thought to that one object--al 
interest in the scene lie center in that one point. 

what could it be? what els but a human body? what els could assum 
such a form? but see, nearli half the stream is lit by the moonbeam 
struggl through the tree tops, and now rise abov them. the light 
increases, and the shadow shorten. 

the edg of the bed of stone now becom lit up by the moonlight; the 
rippl stream, the bubbles, and the tini spray that wa caus by the 
rush of water against the stones, seem like sparkl flash of 
silver fire. 

then came the moonbeam upon the body, for it wa rais abov the level 
of the water, and shew conspicuously; for the moonbeam reach the 
bodi befor they fell on the surround water; for that reason then it 
wa the bodi present a strang and ghastli object against a deep, dark 
background, by which it wa surrounded. 

but thi did not last long--th water in anoth minut wa lit up by 
the moon' pale beams, and then inde could be plainli enough seen the 
bodi of a man lie on the heap of stone motionless and ghastly. 

the colourless hue of the moonlight gave the object a most horrif and 
terribl appearance! the face of the dead man wa turn toward the 
moon' rays, and the bodi seem to receiv all the light that could 
fall upon it. 

It wa a terribl object to look upon, and one that ad a new and 
singular interest to the scene! the world seem then to be compos 
almost exclus of still life, and the bodi wa no impedi to the 
still of the scene. 

It was, all els considered, a calm, beauti scene, love the night, 
gorgeou the silveri ray that lit up the face of nature; the hill and 
dale, meadow, and wood, and river, all afford contrast strong, 
striking, and strange. 

but strange, and more strang than ani contrast in nature, wa that 
afford to the calm beauti of the night and place by the deep still 
and quietud impos upon the mind by that motionless human body. 

the moon' ray now fell upon it full length; the feet were lie in 
the water, the head lay back, with it featur turn toward the 
quarter of the heaven where the moon shone from; the hair float on 
the shallow water, while the face and bodi were expos to all 
influences, from it rais and promin position. 

the moonbeam had scarc settl upon it--scarc a few minutes--when 
the bodi moved. wa it the water that move it? it could not be, surely, 
that the moonbeam had the power of recal life into that inanim 
mass, that lay there for some time still and motionless as the veri 
stone on which it lay. 

It wa endu with life; the dead man gradual rose up, and lean 
himself upon hi elbow; he paus a moment like one newli recal to 
life; he seem to becom assur he did live. He pass one hand 
through hi hair, which wa wet, and then rose higher into a sit 
posture, and then he lean on one hand, inclin himself toward the 
moon. 

hi breast heav with life, and a kind of deep inspiration, or groan, 
came from him, as he first awok to life, and then he seem to paus 
for a few moments. He turn gradual over, till hi head inclin down 
the stream. 

just below, the water deepened, and ran swiftli and silent on amid 
mead and grove of trees. the vampyr wa revived; he awok again to a 
ghastli life; he turn from the heap of stones, he gradual allow 
himself to sink into deep water, and then, with a loud plunge, he swam 
to the centr of the river. 

slowli and sure did he swim into the centr of the river, and down the 
stream he went. He took long, but easi strokes, for he wa go down 
the stream, and that aid him. 

for some distanc might he be heard and seen through the open in the 
trees, but he becam gradual more and more indistinct, till sound and 
sight both ceased, and the vampyr had disappeared. 

dure the continu of thi singular scene, not one word had pass 
between the landlord and hi companions. when the blacksmith fire the 
fowling-piece, and saw the stranger fall, appar lifeless, upon the 
stepping-ston that cross the river, he becam terrifi at what he 
had done, and gaze upon the seem lifeless form with a face on which 
the utmost horror wa depicted. 

they all seem transfix to the spot, and although each would have 
given world to move away, a kind of nightmar seem to possess them, 
which stun all their faculties, and brought over them a torpid 
from which they found it imposs to arous themselves. 

but, when the appar dead man move again, and when, finally, the 
body, which appear so destitut of life, roll into the stream, and 
float away with the tide, their fright might be consid to have 
reach it climax. the absenc of the body, however, had seemingly, at 
all events, the effect of releas them from the mental and physic 
thraldom in which they were, and they were enabl to move from the 
spot, which they did immediately, make their way toward the town with 
great speed. 

As they got near, they held a sort of council of war as to what they 
should do under the circumstances, the result of which was, that they 
came to a conclus to keep all that they had done and seen to 
themselves; for, if they did not, they might be call upon for some 
veri troublesom explan concern the fate of the suppos 
hungarian nobleman whom they had taken upon themselv to believ wa a 
vampyre, and to shoot accordingly, without take the troubl to inquir 
into the legal of such an act. 

how such a secret wa like to be kept, when it wa share amongst 
seven people, it is hard to say; but, if it were so kept, it could onli 
be under the pressur of a strong feel of self-preservation. 

they were forc individually, of course, to account for their absenc 
dure the night at their respect homes, and how they manag to do 
that is best known to themselves. 

As to the landlord, he felt compel to state that, have hi 
suspicion of hi guest aroused, he follow him on a walk that he 
pretend to take, and he had gone so far, that at length he had given 
up the chase, and lost hi own way in returning. 

thu wa it, then, that thi affair still preserv all it mystery, 
with a larg superad amount of fear attend upon it; for, if the 
mysteri guest were realli anyth supernatural, might he not come 
again in a much more fear shape, and aveng the treatment he had 
received? 

the onli person who fell ani disappoint in the affair, or whose 
expect were not realised, wa the boy who had made the appoint 
with the suppos vampyr at the end of the lane, and who wa to have 
receiv what he consid so larg a reward for point out the 
retreat of sir franci varney. 

He wait in vain for the arriv of the hungarian nobleman, and, at 
last, indign got the better of him, and he walk away. feel 
that he had been jilted, he resolv to proceed to the public-hous and 
demand the half-crown which had been so liber promis him; but 
when he reach there he found that the parti whom he sought wa not 
within, nor the landlord either, for that wa the precis time when that 
worthi individu wa pursu hi guest over meadow and bill, through 
brake and through briar, toward the step stone on the river. 

what the boy further did on the follow day, when he found that he wa 
to reap no more benefit for the adventure, we shall soon perceive. 

As for the landlord, he did endeavour to catch a few hours' brief 
repose; but as he dream that the hungarian nobleman came in the 
like of a great toad, and sat upon hi chest, feel like the 
weight of a mountain, while he, the landlord, tri to scream and cri 
for help, but found that he could neither do one thing nor the other, we 
may guess that hi repos did not at all invigor him. 

As he himself express it, he got up all of a shake, with a strong 
impress that he wa a veri ill-us individual, indeed, to have had 
the nightmar in the day time. 

and now we will return to the cottag where the bannerworth famili were 
at all events, make themselv quit as happi as they did at their 
ancient mansion, in order to see what is there passing, and how dr. 
chillingworth made an effort to get up some evid of someth that 
the bannerworth famili knew noth of, therefor could not veri well be 
expect to render him much assistance. that he did, however, make what 
he consid an import discovery, we shall perceiv in the cours of 
the ensu chapter, in which it will be seen that the best hidden 
thing will, by the merest accident, sometim come to light, and that, 
too, when least expect by ani one at all connect with the result. 




chapter lxxxvi. 

the discoveri OF the pocket book OF marmaduk bannerworth.--it 
mysteri contents. 


[illustration] 

the littl episod had just taken place which we have record between 
the old admir and jack pringle, when henri bannerworth and charl 
holland step asid to converse. 

"charles," said henry, "it ha becom absolut necessari that I should 
put an end to thi state of depend in which we all live upon your 
uncle. It is too bad to think, that because, through fight the 
battl of hi country, he ha amass some money, we are to eat it up." 

"mi dear friend," said charles, "doe it not strike you, that it would 
be a great deal wors than too bad, if my uncl could not do what he 
like with hi own?" 

"yes; but, charles, that is not the question." 

"I think it is, though I know not what other question you can make of 
it." 

"we have all talk it over, my mother, my brother, and flora; and my 
brother and I have determined, if thi state of thing should last much 
longer, to find out some mean of honour exert by which we may, 
at all events, maintain ourselv without be burdensom to any." 

"well, well, we will talk of that anoth time." 

"nay, but hear me; we were think that if we went into some branch of 
the public service, your uncl would have the pleasure, such we are 
quit sure it would be to him, of assist us greatli by hi name and 
influence." 

"well, well, henry, that' all veri well; but for a littl time do not 
throw up the old man and make him unhappy. I believ I am hi onli 
rel in the world, and, as he ha often said, he intend leav me 
heir to all he possesses, you see there is no harm done by you receiv 
a small portion of it beforehand." 

"and," said henry, "bi that line of argument, we are to find an excus 
for rob your uncle; in the fact, that we are rob you likewise." 

"no, no; indeed, you do not view the matter rightly." 

"well, all I can say is, charles, that while I feel, and while we all 
feel, the deepest debt of gratitud toward your uncle, it is our duti 
to do something. In a box which we have brought with us from the hall, 
and which ha not been open sinc our father' death, I have stumbl 
over some articl of ancient jewelleri and plate, which, at all events, 
will produc something." 

"but which you must not part with." 

"nay, but, charles, these are thing I knew not we possessed, and most 
ill-suit do they happen to be to our fallen fortunes. It is money we 
want, not the gewgaw of a former state, to which we can have now no 
sort of pretension." 

"nay, I know you have all the argument; but still is there someth sad 
and uncomfort to one' feel in part with such thing as those 
which have been in famili for mani years." 

"but we knew not that we had them; rememb that, charles. come and look 
at them. those relic of a bygon age may amus you, and, as regard 
myself, there are no circumst whatev associ with them that 
give them ani extrins value; so laugh at them or admir them, as you 
please, I shall most like be abl to join with you in either feeling." 

"well, be it so--i will come and look at them; but you must think better 
of what you say concern my uncle, for I happen to know--which you 
ought likewis by thi time--how serious the old man would feel ani 
reject on your part of the good he fanci he is do you. I tell 
you, henry, it is complet hi hobby, and let him have earn hi 
money with ten time the danger he has, he could not spend it with 
anyth like the satisfact that he does, unless he were allow to 
dispos of it in thi way." 

"well, well; be it so for a time." 

"the fact is, hi attach to flora is so great--which is a most 
fortun circumst for me--that I should not be at all surpris 
that she cut me out of one half my estate, when the old man dies. but 
come, we will look at your ancient bijouterie." 

henri led charl into an apart of the cottag where some of the few 
thing had been place that were brought from bannerworth hall, which 
were not like to be in constant and daili use. 

among these thing happen to be the box which henri had mentioned, and 
from which he had taken a miscellan assort of thing of an 
antiqu and singular character. 

there were old dress of a season and of a tast long gone by; ancient 
articl of defence; some curious wrought daggers; and a few 
ornaments, pretty, but valueless, along with other of more sterl 
pretensions, which henri point out to charles. 

"I am almost inclin to think," said the latter, "that some of these 
thing are realli of consider value; but I do not I profess to be an 
accur judge, and, perhaps, I am more taken with the beauti of an 
article, than the intrins worth. what is that which you have just 
taken from the box?" 

"it seem a half-mask," said henry, "made of silk; and here are initi 
letter within it--m. b." 

"to what do they apply?" 

"marmaduk bannerworth, my father." 

"I regret I ask you." 

"nay, charles, you need not. year have now elaps sinc that misguid 
man put a period to hi own existence, in the garden of bannerworth 
hall. Of course, the shock wa a great one to us all, although I must 
confess that we none of us knew much of a father' affections. but time 
reconcil one to these dispensations, and to a friend, like yourself, I 
can talk upon these subject without a pang." 

He laid down the mask, and proceed further in hi search in the old 
box. 

toward the bottom of it there were some books, and, crush in by the 
side of them, there wa an ancient-look pocket-book, which charl 
point out, saying,-- 

"there, henry, who know but you may find a fortun when you least 
expect it?" 

"those who expect nothing," said henry, "will not be disappointed. At 
all events, as regard thi pocket-book, you see it is empty." 

"not quite. A card ha fallen from it." 

charl took up the card, and read upon it the name of count barrare. 

"that name," he said, "seem familiar to me. ah! now I recollect, I have 
read of such a man. He flourish some twenty, or five-and-twenti year 
ago, and wa consid a _roue_ of the first water--a finish 
gamester; and, in a sort of brief memoir I read onc of him, it said 
that he disappear suddenli one day, and wa never again heard of." 

"indeed! i'm not puzzl to think how hi card came into my father' 
pocket-book. they met at some gaming-house; and, if some old pocket-book 
of the count barrare' were shaken, there might fall from it a card, 
with the name of mr. marmaduk bannerworth upon it." 

"i there noth further in the pocket-book--no memoranda?" 

"I will look. stay! here is someth upon one of the leaves--let me 
see--'mem., twenty-f thousand pounds! He who rob the robber, steal 
little; it wa not meant to kill him: but it will be unsaf to use the 
money for a time--mi brain seem on fire--th remotest hiding-plac in 
the hous is behind the picture." 

"what do you think of that?" said charles. 

"I know not what to think. there is one thing though, that I do know." 

"and what is that?" 

"it is my father' handwriting. I have mani scrap of his, and hi 
peculiar hand is familiar to me." 

"it' veri strange, then, what it can refer to." 

"charles--charles! there is a mysteri connect with our fortunes, that 
I never could unravel; and onc or twice it seem as if we were upon 
the point of discov all; but someth ha ever interf to 
prevent us, and we have been thrown back into the realm of conjecture. 
My father' last word were, 'the money is hidden;' and then he tri to 
add something; but death stop hi utterance. now, doe it not almost 
seem that thi memorandum allud to the circumstance?" 

"it does, indeed." 

"and then, scarc had my father breath hi last, when a man come 
and ask for him at the garden-gate, and, upon hear that he is dead, 
utter some imprecations, and walk away." 

"well, henry, you must trust to time and circumst to unravel these 
mysteries. for myself, I own that I cannot do so; I see no earthli way 
out of the difficulti whatever. but still it doe appear to me as if dr. 
chillingworth knew someth or had heard something, with which he 
realli ought to make you acquainted." 

"do not blame the worthi doctor; he may have made an error of judgment, 
but never one of feeling; and you may depend, if he is keep anyth 
from me, that he is do so from some excel motive: most probabl 
becaus he think it will give me pain, and so will not let me endur 
ani unhappi from it, unless he is quit certain as regard the 
facts. when he is so, you may depend he will be communicative, and I 
shall know all that he ha to relate. but, charles, it is evid to me 
that you, too, are keep something." 

"i!" 

"yes; you acknowledg to have had an interview, and a friendli one, 
with varney; and you likewis acknowledg that he had told you thing 
which he ha compel you to keep secret." 

"I have promis to keep them secret, and I deepli regret the promis 
that I have made. there cannot be anyth to my mind more essenti 
disagre than to have one' tongu tie in one' interview with 
friends. I hate to hear anyth that I may not repeat to those whom I 
take into my own confidence." 

"I can understand the feeling; but here come the worthi doctor." 

"show him the memorandum." 

"I will." 

As dr. chillingworth enter the apart henri hand him the 
memorandum that had been found in the old pocket-book, say as he did 
so,-- 

"look at that, doctor, and give us your candid opinion upon it." 

dr. chillingworth fit on hi spectacles, and read the paper 
carefully. At it conclusion, he screw up hi mouth into an extrem 
small compass, and doubl up the paper, he put it into hi capaci 
waistcoat pocket, say as he did so,-- 

"oh! oh! oh! oh! hum!" 

"well, doctor," said henry; "we are wait for your opinion." 

"mi opinion! well, then, my dear boy, I must say, my opinion, to the 
best of my belief is, that I realli don't know anyth about it." 

"then, perhaps, you'll surrend us the memorandum," said charles; 
"because, if you don't know anything, we may as well make a littl 
inquiry." 

"ha!" said the worthi doctor; "we can't put old head upon young 
shoulders, that' quit clear. now, my good young men, be patient and 
quiet; recollect, that what you know you'r acquaint with, and that 
that which is hidden from you, you cannot veri well come to ani veri 
correct conclus upon. there' a right side and a wrong one you may 
depend, to everi question; and he who walk heedlessli in the dark, is 
veri apt to run hi head against a post. good evening, my boys--good 
evening." 

away bustl the doctor. 

"well," said charles, "what do you think of that, mr. henry?" 

"I think he know what he' about." 

"that may be; but i'll be hang if anybodi els does. the doctor is by 
no mean favour to the march of popular information; and I realli 
think he might have given us some food for reflection, instead of 
leav us so utterli and entir at fault as he has; and you know he' 
taken away your memorandum even." 

"let him have it, charles--let him have it; it is safe with him. the old 
man may be, and I believ is, a littl whimsic and crotchety; but he 
mean abundantli well, and he' just one of those sort of persons, and 
alway was, who will do good hi own way, or not at all; so we must take 
the good with the bad in those cases, and let dr. chillingworth do as he 
pleases." 

"I cannot say it is noth to me, although those word were rise to 
my lips, becaus you know, henry, that everyth which concern you or 
your is someth to me; and therefor it is that I feel extrem 
anxiou for the solut of all thi mystery. befor I hear the sequel 
of that which varney, the vampyre, ha so strongli made me a confid 
of, I will, at all events, make an effort to procur hi permiss to 
commun it to all those who are in ani way benefici interest 
in the circumstances. should he refus me that permission, I am almost 
inclin myself to beg him to withhold hi confidence." 

"nay, do not do so, charles--do not do that, I implor you. recollect, 
although you cannot make us joint recipi with you in your knowledge, 
you can make use of it, probably, to our advantage, in save us, 
perchance, from the differ consequences, so that you can make what 
you know in some way benefici to us, although not in everi way." 

"there is reason in that, and I give in at once. Be it so, henry. I will 
wait on him, and if I cannot induc him to chang hi determination, and 
allow me to tell some other as well as flora, I must give in, and take 
the thing as a secret, although I shall not abandon a hope, even after 
he ha told me all he ha to tell, that I may induc him to permit me to 
make a gener confidence, instead of the partial one he ha empow 
me to do." 

"it may be so; and, at all events, we must not reject a proffer good 
becaus it is not quit so complet as it might be." 

"you are right; I will keep my appoint with him, entertain the 
most sanguin hope that our troubl and disasters--i say our, becaus I 
consid myself quit associ in thought, interest, and feel with 
your family--may soon be over." 

"heaven grant it may be so, for your' and flora' sake; but I feel that 
bannerworth hall will never again be the place it wa to us. I should 
prefer that we sought for new associations, which I have no doubt we may 
find, and that among us we get up some other home that would be happier, 
becaus not associ with so mani sad scene in our history." 

"be it so; and I am sure that the admir would gladli give way to such 
an arrangement. He ha often intim that he thought bannerworth hall 
a dull place; consequently, although he pretend to have purchas it of 
you, I think he will be veri glad to leav it." 

[illustration] 

"be it so, then. If it should realli happen that we are upon the eve of 
ani circumst that will realli tend to reliev us from our miseri 
and embarrassments, we will seek for some pleasant abod than the 
hall, which you may well imagine, sinc it becam the scene of that 
dread tragedi that left us fatherless, ha born but a distast 
appear to all our eyes." 

"I don't wonder at that, and am onli surpris that, after such a thing 
had happen ani of you like to inhabit the place." 

"we did not like, but our poverti forc us. you have no notion of the 
difficulti through which we have struggled; and the fact that we had a 
home rent free wa one of so much import to us, that had it been 
surround by a thousand more disagre than it was, we must have 
put up with it; but now that we owe so much to the generos of your 
uncle, I suppos we can afford to talk of what we like and of what we 
don't like." 

"you can, henry, and it shall not be my fault if you do not alway 
afford to do so; and now, as the time is draw on, I think I will 
proceed at onc to varney, for it is better to be soon than late, and 
get from him the remaind of hi story." 

* * * * * 

there were activ influenc at work, to prevent sir franci varney from 
so quickli as he had arrang to do, carri out hi intent of 
make charl holland acquaint with the histori of the event 
period of hi life, which had been associ with marmaduk 
bannerworth. 

one would have scarc thought it possibl that anyth now would have 
prevent varney from conclud hi strang narrative; but that he wa 
prevented, will appear. 

the boy who had been promis such liber payment by the hungarian 
nobleman, for betray the place of varney' concealment, we have 
alreadi stated, felt bitterli the disappoint of not be met, 
accord to promise, at the corner of the lane, by that individual. 

It not onli depriv him of the half-crowns, which alreadi in 
imagin he had laid out, but it wa a great blow to hi own 
importance, for after hi discoveri of the resid of the vampyre, he 
look upon himself as quit a public character, and expect great 
applaus for hi cleverness. 

but when the hungarian nobleman came not, all these dream began to 
vanish into thin air, and, like the unsubstanti fabric of a vision, to 
leav no trace behind them. 

He got dread aggravated, and hi first thought wa to go to varney, 
and see what he could get from him, by betray the fact that some one 
wa activ in search of him. 

that seemed, however, a doubt good, and perhap there wa some 
person dread of the vampyr mix up with the reject of thi 
proposition. but reject it he did, and then he walk moodili into the 
town without ani fix resolut of what he should do. 

all that he thought of wa a gener idea that he should like to creat 
some mischief, if possible--what it wa he care not, so long as it made 
a disturbance. 

now, he knew well that the most troublesom and fidgetti man in the town 
wa tobia philpots, a saddler, who wa alway full of everybody' 
busi but hi own, and ever readi to hear ani scandal of hi 
neighbours. 

"I have a good mind," said the boy, "to go to old philpots, and tell him 
all about it, that I have." 

the good mind soon strengthen itself into a fix resolution, and full 
of disdain and indign at the suppos want of faith of the 
hungarian nobleman, he paus opposit the saddler' door. 

could he but for a moment have suspect the real reason whi the 
appoint had not been kept with him, all hi curios would have 
been doubli aroused, and he would have follow the landlord of the inn 
and hi associ upon the track of the second vampyr that had visit 
the town. 

but of thi he knew nothing, for that proceed had been conduct with 
amaz quietness; and the fact of the hungarian nobleman, when he found 
that he wa followed, take a contrari cours to that in which varney 
wa concealed, prevent the boy from know anyth of hi movements. 

henc the thing look to him like a piec of sheer neglect and 
contemptu indifference, which he felt bound to resent. 

He did not paus long at the door of the saddler's, but, after a few 
moments, he walk boldli in, and said,-- 

"master philpots, I have got someth extraordinari to tell you, and 
you may give me what you like for tell you." 

"go on, then," said the saddler, "that' just the price I alway like 
to pay for everything." 

"will you keep it secret?" said the boy. 

"of cours I will. when did you ever hear of me tell anyth to a 
singl individual?" 

"never to a singl individual, but I have heard you tell thing to the 
whole town." 

"confound your impudence. get out of my shop directly." 

"oh! veri good. I can go and tell old mitchell, the pork-butcher." 

"no, I say--stop; don't tell him. If anybodi is to know, let it be me, 
and i'll promis you i'll keep it secret." 

"veri good," said the boy, returning, "you shall know it; and, mind, you 
have promis me to keep it secret, so that if it get known, you know 
it cannot be ani fault of mine." 

the fact was, the boy wa anxiou it should be known, onli that in case 
some consequ might arise, he thought he would quiet hi own 
conscience, by get a promis of secreci from tobia philpots, which 
he well knew that individu would not think of keeping. 

He then relat to him the interview he had had with the hungarian 
nobleman at the inn, how he had promis a number of half-crowns, but a 
veri small instal of which he had received. 

all thi master philpot care veri littl for, but the inform that 
the dread varney, the vampyre, wa conceal so close to the town wa 
a matter of great and abound interest, and at that part of the stori 
he suddenli prick up hi ear amazingly. 

"why, you don't mean to say that?" he exclaimed. "are you sure it wa 
he?" 

"yes, I am quit certain. I have seen I him more than once. It wa sir 
franci varney, without ani mistake." 

"why, then you may depend he' onli wait until it' veri dark, and 
then he will walk into somebody, and suck hi blood. here' a horrid 
discovery! I thought we had had enough of master varney, and that he 
would hardli show himself here again, and now you tell me he is not ten 
minutes' walk off." 

"it' a fact," said the boy. "I saw him go in, and he look thinner and 
more horrid than ever. I am sure he want a dollop of blood from 
somebody." 

"I shouldn't wonder." 

"now there is mrs. philpots, you know, sir; she' rather big, and seem 
most readi to burst always; I shouldn't wonder if the vampyr came to 
her to-night." 

"wouldn't you?" said mrs. philpots, who had walk into the shop, and 
overheard the whole conversation; "wouldn't you, really? i'll vampyr 
you, and teach you to make these remark about respect marri 
women. you young wretch, take that, will you!" 

she gave the boy such a box on the ears, that the place seem to spin 
round with him. As soon as he recov suffici to be enabl to 
walk, he made hi way from the shop with abund of precipitation, 
much regret that he had troubl himself to make a confid of 
master philpots. 

but, however, he could not but tell himself that if hi object wa to 
make a gener disturb through the whole place, he had certainli 
succeed in do so. 

He slunk home perhap with a feel that he might be call upon to 
take part in someth that might ensue, and at all event be compel 
to becom a guid to the place of sir franci varney' retreat, in which 
case, for all he knew, the vampyr might, by some more than mortal 
means, discov what a hand he had had in the matter, and punish him 
accordingly. 

the moment he hid left the saddler' mrs. philpots, after use some 
bitter reproach to her husband for not at onc sacrif the boy 
upon the spot for the disrespect manner in which he had spoken of 
her, hastili put on her bonnet and shawl, and the saddler, although it 
wa a full hour befor the usual time, began put up the shutter of 
hi shop. 

"why, my dear," he said to mrs. philpots, when she came down stair 
equip for the streets, "why, my dear, where are you going?" 

"and pray, sir, what are you shut up the shop for at thi time of 
the evening!" 

"oh! why, the fact is, I thought i'd just go to the rose and crown, and 
mention that the vampyr wa so near at hand." 

"well, mr. philpots, and in that case there can be no harm in my call 
upon some of my acquaint and mention it likewise." 

"why, I don't suppos there would be much harm; onli remember, mrs. 
philpots, rememb if you please---" 

"rememb what?" 

"to tell everybodi to keep it secret." 

"oh, of cours I will; and mind you do it likewise." 

"most decidedly." 

the shop wa closed, mr. philpot ran off to the rose and crown, and 
mrs, philpots, with as much expedit as she could, purpos make the 
grand tour of all her femal acquaint in the town, just to tell 
them, as a great secret, that the vampyre, sir franci varney, as he 
call himself, had taken refug at the hous that wa to let down the 
lane lead to higgs' farm. 

"but by no means," she said, "let it go no further, becaus it is a veri 
wrong thing to make ani disturbance, and you will understand that it' 
quit a secret." 

she wa listen to with breathless attention, as may well be supposed, 
and it wa a singular circumst that at everi hous she left some 
other ladi put on her bonnet and shawl, and ran out to make the circl 
of her acquaintance, with precis the same story, and precis the 
same injunct to secrecy. 

and, as mr. philpot pursu an extrem similar course, we are not 
surpris that in the short space of one hour the news should have 
spread through all the town, and that there wa scarc a child old 
enough to understand what wa be talk about, who wa ignor of 
the fact, that sir franci varney wa to be found at the empti hous 
down the lane. 

It wa an unlucki time, too, for the night wa creep on, a period at 
which people' apprehens of the supernatur becom each moment 
stronger and more vivid--a period at which a number of idler are let 
loos for differ employments, and when anyth in the shape of a row 
or a riot present itself in pleasant colour to those who have noth 
to lose and who expect, under the cover of darkness, to be abl to 
commit outrag they would be afraid to think of in the daytime, when 
recognit would be more easy. 

thu wa it that sir franci varney' position, although he knew it not, 
becam momentarili one of extrem peril, and the danger he wa about to 
run, wa certainli greater than ani he had as yet experienced. had 
charl holland but known what wa go on, he would undoubtedli have 
done someth to preserv the suppos vampyr from the mischief that 
threaten him, but the time had not arriv when he had promis to pay 
him a second visit, so he had no idea of anyth seriou have 
occurred. 

perhaps, too, mr. and mrs. philpot scarc anticip creat so 
much confusion, but when they found that the whole place wa in an 
uproar, and that a tumultu assemblag of person call aloud for 
vengeanc upon varney, the vampyre, they made their way home again in no 
small fright. 

and, now, what wa the result of all these proceed will be best 
known by our introduc the reader to the interior of the hous in 
which varney had found a temporari refuge, and follow in detail hi 
proceed as he wait for the arriv of charl holland. 




chapter lxxxvii. 

the hunt for varney.--th house-tops.--th miracul escape.--th last 
place OF refuge.--th cottage. 


[illustration] 

On the tree top the moon shine brightly, and the long shadow are 
shoot it ray down upon the waters, and the green field appear 
cloth in a flood of silver light; the littl town wa quiet and 
tranquil--natur seem at rest. 

the old mansion in which sir franci varney had taken refuge, stood 
empti and solitary; it seem as though it were not associ with the 
other by which it wa surrounded. It wa gloomy, and in the moonlight 
it remind one of thing long gone by, exist that had onc been, 
but now no longer of thi present time--a mere memento of the past. 

sir franci varney reclin upon the house-top; he gaze upon the sky, 
and upon the earth; he saw the calm tranquil that reign around, 
and could not but admir what he saw; he sighed, he seem to sigh, from 
a pleasur he felt in the fact of hi security; he could repos there 
without fear, and breath the balmi air that fan hi cheek. 

"certainly," he muttered, "thing might have been worse, but not much 
worse; however, they might have been much better; the ignor are 
away--th most to be feared, becaus they have no guid and no control, 
save what can be exert over them by their fear and their passions." 

He paus to look again over the scene, and, as far as the eye could 
reach, and that, moonlight as it was, wa mani miles, the countri wa 
diversifi with hill and dale, meadow and plough land; the open 
fields, and the darker woods, and the silveri stream that ran at no 
great distance, all present a scene that wa well calcul to warm 
the imagination, and to give the mind that charm which a cultiv 
understand is capabl of receiving. 

there wa but one thing want to make such a scene one of pure 
happiness, and that wa all absenc of care of fear for the futur and 
the want of life. 

suddenli there wa a slight sound that came from the town. It wa veri 
slight, but the ear of sir franci varney were pain acut of late; 
the least sound that came across him wa heard in a moment, and hi 
whole visag wa chang to one of listen interest. 

the sound wa hushed; but hi attent wa not lulled, for he had been 
place in circumst that made all hi vigil necessari for hi 
own preservation. henc it was, what anoth would have pass over, or 
not heard at all, he both heard and noticed. He wa not sure of the 
natur of the sound, it wa so slight and so indistinct. 

there it wa again! some person were move about in the town. the 
sound that came upon the night air seem to say that there wa an 
unusu bustl in the town, which was, to sir franci varney, omin in 
the extreme. 

what could peopl in such a quiet, retir place requir out at such an 
hour at night? It must be someth veri unusual--someth that must 
excit them to a great degree; and sir franci began to feel veri 
uneasy. 

"they surely," he mutter to himself--"they sure cannot have found 
out my hide place, and intend to hunt me from it, the blood-thirsti 
hounds! they are never satisfied. the mischief they are permit to do 
on one occas is but the precursor to another. the tast ha caus 
the appetit for more, and noth short of hi blood can satisfi it." 

the sound increased, and the nois came nearer and nearer, and it 
appear as though a number of men had collect togeth and were 
come toward him. yes, they were come down the lane toward the 
desert mansion where he was. 

for onc in hi life, sir franci varney trembled; he felt sick at 
heart, though no man wa less like to give up hope and to despair than 
he; yet thi sign of unrel hatr and persecut wa too 
unequivoc and too stern not to produc it effect upon even hi mind; 
for he had no doubt but that they were come with the express purpos 
of seek him. 

how they could have found him out wa a matter he could not imagine. the 
bannerworth could not have betray him--h wa sure of that; and yet 
who could have seen him, so cautiou and so care as he had been, and 
so veri spare had he lived, becaus he would not give the slightest 
caus for all that wa about to follow. He hope to have hidden himself; 
but now he could hear the tramp of men distinctly, and their voic came 
now on the night air, though it wa in a subdu tone, as if they were 
desir of approach unheard and unseen by their victim. 

sir franci varney stir not from hi position. He remain silent and 
motionless. He appear not to heed what wa go on; perhap he hope 
to see them go by--to be upon some fals scent; or, if they saw no sign 
of life, they might leav the place, and go elsewhere. 

hark! they stop at the house--they go not by; they seem to pause, and 
then a thunder knock came at the door, which echo and re-echo 
through the empti and desert house, on the top of which sat, in silent 
expectation, the almost motionless sir franci varney, the redoubt 
vampyre. 

the knock which came so loud and so hard upon the door caus sir 

franci to start visibly, for it seem hi own knell. then, as if the 
mob were satisfi with their knowledg of hi presence, and of their 
victory, and of hi inabl to escap them, they sent up a loud shout 
that fill the whole neighbourhood with it sound. 

It seem to come from below and around the house; it rose from all 
sides, and that told sir franci varney that the hous wa surround 
and all escap wa cut off; there wa no chanc of hi be abl to 
rush through such a multitud of men as that which now encircl him. 

with the calmest despair, sir franci varney lay still and motionless on 
the house-top, and listen to the sound that proceed from below. 
shout after shout aros on the still, calm air of the night; knock after 
knock came upon the stout old door, which awaken respons echo 
throughout the hous that had for mani year lain dormant, and which now 
seem disturbed, and resound in hollow murmur to the voic from 
without. 

then a loud voic shout from below, as if to be heard by ani one who 
might be within,-- 

"sir franci varney, the vampyre, come out and give yourself up at 
discretion! If we have to search for you, you may depend it will be to 
punish you; you will suffer by burning. come out and give yourself up." 

there wa a pause, and then a loud shout. 

sir franci varney paid no attent to thi summons, but sat, 
motionless, on the house-top, where he could hear all that pass below 
in the crowd. 

"he will not come out," said one. 

"ah! he' much too cun to be caught in such a trap. why, he know 
what you would do with him; he know you would stake him, and make a 
bonfir about him." 

"so he ha no tast for roasting," remark another; "but still, it' no 
use hiding; we have too mani hands, and know the hous too well to be 
easili baffled." 

"that may be; and, although he don't like burning, yet we will unearth 
the old fox, somehow or other; we have discov hi haunt at last, and 
certainli we'll have him out." 

"how shall we get in?" 

"knock in the door--break open the door! the front door--that is the 
best, becaus it lead to all part of the house, and we can secur ani 
one who attempt to move from one to the other, as they come down." 

"hurrah!" shout sever men in the crowd. 

"hurrah!" echo the mob, with one accord, and the shout rent the air, 
and disturb the quietud and seren that scarc five minut befor 
reign through the place. 

then, as if actuat by one spirit, they all set to work to forc the 
door in. It wa strong, and capabl of great defence, and employ them, 
with some labour, for fifteen or twenti minutes, and then, with a loud 
crash, the door fell in. 

"hurrah!" again shout the crowd. 

these shout announc the fall of the door, and then, and not until 
then, did sir franci varney stir. 

"they have broken in the door," he muttered, "well, if die I must, I 
will sell my life dearly. however, all is not yet lost, and, in the 
struggl for life, the loss is not so much felt." 

He got up, and crept toward the trap that led into the house, or out of 
it, as the occas might require. 

"the vampyre! the vampyre!" shout a man who stood on a garden wall, 
hold on by the arm of an apple-tree. 

"varney, the vampyre!" shout a second. 

"hurrah! boys, we are on the right scent; now for a hunt; hurrah! we 
shall have him now." 

they rush in a tumultu riot up the stone steps, and into the hall. 
It wa a large, spaciou place, with a grand staircas that led up to 
the upper floor, but it had two ends, and then termin in a gallery. 

It could not be defend by one man, save at the top, where it could not 
long be held, becaus the assail could unite, and throw their whole 
weight against the entrance, and thu storm it. thi actual happened. 

they look up, and, see nobody, they rush up, some by one stair, 
and some by the other; but it wa dark; there were but few of the moon' 
ray that pierc the gloom of that place, and those who first reach 
the place which we have named, were seiz with astonishment, staggered, 
and fell. 

sir franci varney had met them; he stood there with a staff--someth 
he had found about the house--not quit so long as a broom-handle, but 
somewhat thicker and heavier, be made of stout ash. 

thi formid weapon, sir franci varney wield with strength and 
resolution; he wa a tall man, and one of no mean activ and person 
strength, and such a weapon, in hi hands, wa one of a most fear 
character, and, for the occasion, much better than hi sword. 

man after man fell beneath the fear brace of these blows, for though 
they could not see sir francis, yet he could see them, or the 
hall-light were behind them at the time, while he stood in the dark, 
and took advantag of thi to deal murder blow upon hi assailants. 

thi continu for some minutes, till they gave way befor such a 
vigor defence, and paused. 

"on, neighbours, on," cri one; "will you be beaten off by one man? 
rush in at onc and you must forc him from hi position--push him hard, 
and he must give way." 

"ay," said one fellow who sat upon the ground rub hi head; "it' 
all veri well to say push him hard, but if you felt the weight of that 
d----d pole on your head, you wouldn't be in such a bless hurry." 

howev true that might be, there wa but littl attent paid to it, 
and a determin rush wa made at the entranc to the gallery, and they 
found that it wa unoccupied; and that wa explain by the slam of 
a door, and it be immedi lock upon them; and when the mob 
came to the door, they found they had to break their way through anoth 
door. 

thi did not take long in effecting; and in less than five minut they 
had broken through that door which led into anoth room; but the first 
man who enter it fell from a crash blow on the head from the ashen 
staff of sir franci varney, who hurri and fled, close pursued, 
until he came to anoth door, through which he dashed. 

here he endeavour to make a stand and close it, but wa immedi 
struck and grappl with; but he threw hi assailant, and turn and 
fled again. 

hi object had been to defend each inch of the ground as long as he wa 
able; but he found they came too close upon hi steps, and prevent hi 
turn in time to tri the strength of hi staff upon the foremost. 

He dash up the first staircas with surpris rapidity, leav hi 
pursuer behind; and when he had gain the first landing, he turn 
upon those who pursu him, who could hardli follow him two abreast. 

"down with the vampyre!" shout the first, who rush up heedless of 
the staff. 

"down with a fool!" thunder varney, as he struck the fellow a terrif 
blow, which cover hi face with blood, and he fell back into the arm 
of hi companions. 

A bitter groan and execr aros from them below, and again they 
shouted, and rush up headlong. 

"down with the vampyre!" wa again shouted, and met by a corresponding, 
but deep guttur sound of-- 

"down with a fool!" 

and sure enough the first again came to the earth without ani 
preparation, save the applic of an ashen stick to hi skull, which, 
by-the-bye, no mean aid the oper of thinking. 

sever more share a similar fate; but they press hard, and sir 
franci wa compel to give ground to keep them at the necessari 
length from him, as they rush on regardless of hi blows, and if he 
had not he would soon have been engag in a person struggle, for they 
were get too close for him to use the staff. 

"down with the vampyre!" wa the renew cry, as they drove him from 
spot to spot until he reach the roof of the house, and then he ran up 
the step to the loft, which he had just reach when they came up to 
the bottom. 

varney attempt to draw the ladder up but four or five stout men held 
that down; then by a sudden turn, as they were get up, he turn it 
over, threw those on it down, and the ladder too, upon the head of 
those who were below. 

"down with the vampyre!" shout the mob, as they, with the most 
untir energy, set the ladder, or steps, against the loft, and as mani 
as could held it, while other rush up to attack varney with all the 
feroc and courag of so mani bull dogs. 

It wa strange, but the more they were baffl the more enrag and 
determin they rush on to a new attack, with greater resolut than 
ever. 

On thi occasion, however, they were met with a new kind of missile, for 
sir franci had either collect and place there for the occasion, or 
they had been left there for years, a number of old bricks, which lay 
close at hand. these he took, one by one, and deliber took aim at 
them, and flung them with great force, strike down everi one they hit. 

thi caus them to recoil; the brick caus fear gash in their 
heads, and the wound were serious, the flesh being, in mani places, 
torn complet off. they however, onli paused, for one man said,-- 

"be of good heart, comrades, we can do as he does; he ha furnish us 
with weapons, and we can thu attack him in two ways, and he must give 
way in the end." 

"hurrah! down with the vampyre!" sound from all sides, and the shout 
wa answer by a correspond rush. 

It wa true; sir franci had furnish them with weapon to attack 
himself, for they could throw them back at him, which they did, and 
struck him a sever blow on the head, and it cover hi face with blood 
in a moment. 

"hurrah!" shout the assailants; "anoth such a blow, and all will be 
over with the vampyre." 

"he' got--" 

"press him sharp, now," cri anoth man, as he aim anoth blow with 
a brick, which struck varney on the arm, caus him to drop the brick 
he held in hi hand. He stagger back, appar in great pain. 

"up! up! we have him now; he cannot get away; he' hurt; we have him--w 
have him." 

and up they went with all the rapid they could scrambl up the steps; 
but thi had given varney time to recov himself; and though hi right 
arm wa almost useless, yet he contrived, with hi left, to pitch the 
brick so as to knock over the first three or four, when, see that he 
could not maintain hi posit to advantage, he rush to the outsid 
of the house, the last place he had capabl of defence. 

there wa a great shout by those outside, when they saw him come out and 
stand with hi staff, and those who came first got first served, for the 
blow resounded, while he struck them, and sent them over below. 

then came a great shout from within and without, and then a desper 
rush wa made at the door, and, in the next instant, varney wa seen 
flying, follow by hi pursuers, one after the other, some tumbl 
over the tiles, to the immin hazard of their necks. 

sir franci varney rush along with a speed that appear by far too 
great to admit of be safe followed, and yet those who follow 
appear infect by hi example, and appear heedless of all 
consequ by which their pursuit might be attend to themselves. 

"hurrah!" shout the mob below. 

"hurrah!" answer the mob on the tiles. 

then, over sever housetop might be seen the fli figur of sir 
franci varney, pursu by differ men at a pace almost equal to hi 
own. 

they, however, could keep up the same speed, and not improv upon it, 
while he kept the advantag he first obtain in the start. 

then suddenli he disappeared. 

It seem to the spectat below that he had drop through a house, 
and they immedi surround the house, as well as they could, and 
then set up anoth shout. 

thi took place sever times, and as often wa the miser man hunt 
from hi place of refug onli to seek another, from which he wa in like 
manner hunt by those who thirst for hi blood. 

On one occasion, they drove him into a hous which wa surrounded, save 
at one point, which had a long room, or build in it, that ran some 
distanc out, and about twenti feet high. 

At the entranc to the roof of thi place, or leads, he stood and 
defend himself for some moment with success; but have receiv a 
blow himself, he wa compel to retire, while the mob behind forc 
those in front forward faster than he could by ani exert wield the 
staff that had so much befriend him on thi occasion. 

He was, therefore, on the point of be overwhelm by numbers, when he 
fled; but, alas! there wa no escape; a bare cope stone and rail ran 
round the top of that. 

there wa not much time for hesitation, but he jump over the rail and 
look below. It wa a great height, but if he fell and hurt himself, he 
knew he wa at the merci of the bloodhound behind him, who would do 
anyth but show him ani mercy, or spare him a singl pang. 

He look round and beheld hi pursuer close upon him, and one wa so 
close to him that he seiz upon hi arm, saying, as he shout to hi 
companions,-- 

"hurrah, boys! I have him." 

with an execration, sir franci wield hi staff with such force, that 
he struck the fellow on the head, crush in hi hat as if it had been 
onli so much paper. the man fell, but a blow follow from some one els 
which caus varney to relax hi hold, and find himself falling, he, 
to save himself, sprang away. 

the rails, at that moment, were crowd with men who lean over to 
ascertain the effect of the leap. 

"he'll be killed," said one. 

"he' sure to be smashed," said another. 

"i'll lay ani wager he'll break a limb!" said a third. 

varney came to the earth--for a moment he lay stunned, and not abl to 
move hand or foot. 

"hurrah!" shout the mob. 

their triumph wa short, for just as they shout varney arose, and 
after a moment or two' stagger he set off at full speed, which produc 
anoth shout from the mob; and just at that moment, a bodi of hi 
pursuer were seen scale the wall after him. 

there wa now a hunt through all the adjoin fields--from cover after 
cover they pursu him until he found no rest from the hungri wolv 
that beset him with cries, resembl beast of prey rather than ani 
human multitude. 

sir franci heard them, at the same time, with the despair of a man who 
is struggl for life, and yet know he is struggl in vain; he knew 
hi strength wa decaying--hi immens exert and the blow he had 
received, all weaken him, while the number and strength of hi foe 
seem rather to increas than to diminish. 

onc more he sought the houses, and for a moment he believ himself 
safe, but that wa onli a momentari deception, for they had trace him. 

He arriv at a garden wall, over which he bounded, and then he rush 
into the house, the door of which stood open, for the nois and 
disturb had awaken most of the inhabitants, who were out in all 
directions. 

He took refug in a small closet on the stairs, but wa seen to do so by 
a girl, who scream out with fear and fright, 

"murder! murder!--th wampyre!--th wampyre!" with all her strength, and 
in the way of scream that wa no little, and then she went off into a 
fit. 

thi wa signal enough, and the hous wa at onc entered, and beset on 
all side by the mob, who came impati of obtain their victim who 
had so often baffl them. 

"there he is--ther he is," said the girl, who came to as soon as other 
peopl came up. 

"where?--where?" 

"in that closet," she said, point to it with her finger. "I see'd him 
go in the way above." 

sir francis, find himself betrayed, immedi came out of the 
closet, just as two or three were advanc to open it, and dealt so 
hard a blow on the head of the first that came near him that he fell 
without a groan, and a second share the same fate; and then sir franci 
found himself grappl with, but with a violent effort he reliev 
himself and rush up stairs. 

"oh! murder--th wampyre! what shall I do--fire--fire!" 

these exclam were utter in consequ of varney in hi hast to 
get up stairs, have inadvert step into the girl' lap with one 
foot, while he kick her in the chin with the other, besid scratch 
her nose till it bled. 

"after him--stick to him," shout the mob, but the girl kick and 
sprawl so much they were impeded, till, regardless of her cries, they 
ran over her and pursu varney, who wa much distress with the 
exert he had made. 

after about a minute' race he turn upon the head of the stair, not so 
much with the hope of defend it as of take some breath time: but 
see hi enemi so close, he drew hi sword, and stood panting, but 
prepared. 

"never mind hi toasting-fork," said one bulki fellow, and, as he spoke, 
he rush on, but the point of the weapon enter hi heart and he fell 
dead. 

there wa a dread execr utter by those who came up after him, 
and there wa a momentari pause, for none like to rush on to the bloodi 
sword of sir franci varney, who stood so will and so capabl of 
use it with the most deadli effect. they paused, as well they might, 
and thi paus wa the most welcom thing next to life to the 
unfortun fugitive, for he wa dread distress and bleeding. 

"on to him boys! He can hardli stand. see how he pants. On to him, I 
say--push him hard." 

"he push hard, I tell you," said another. "I felt the point of hi 
sword, as it came through giles' back.". 

"i'll tri my luck, then," said another, and he rush up; but he wa met 
by the sword of sir francis, who pierc it through hi side, and he 
fell back with a groan. 

sir francis, fear of stop ani longer to defend that point, 
appear desir of make good hi retreat with some littl advantage, 
and he rush up stair befor they had recov from the momentari 
constern into which they had been thrown by the sudden disast 
they had received. 

[illustration] 

but they were quickli after him, and befor he, weari as he was, could 
gain the roof, they were up the ladder after him. 

the first man who came through the trap wa again set upon by varney, 
who made a desper thrust at him, and it took effect; but the sword 
snap by the handle. 

with an execration, sir franci threw the hilt at the head of the next 
man he saw; then rushing, with headlong speed, he distanc hi pursuer 
for some hous tops. 

but the row of hous end at the one he wa then at, and he could go 
no further. what wa to be done? the height wa by far too great to be 
jumped; death wa certain. A hideou heap of crush and mangl bone 
would be the extent of what would remain of him, and then, perhaps, life 
not extinct for some hour afterwards. 

He turn round; he saw them come halloo over the hous tops, like 
a pack of hounds. sir franci struck hi hand together, and groaned. He 
look round, and perceiv some ivi peep over the coping-stone. A 
thought struck him, and he instantli ran to the spot and lean over. 

"saved--saved!" he exclaimed. 

then, place hi hand over, he felt for the ivy; then he got over, and 
hung by the coping-stone, in a peril position, till he found a spot 
on which he could rest hi foot, and then he grasp the ivi as low down 
as he could, and thu he lower himself a short way, till he came to 
where the ivi wa stronger and more secur to the wall, as the upper 
part wa veri danger with hi weight attach to it. 

the mob came on, veri sure of have sir franci varney in their power, 
and they did not hurri on so violently, as their posit wa danger 
at that hour of the night. 

"easy, boys, easy," wa the cry. "the bird is our own; he can't get 
away, that' veri certain." 

they, however, came on, and took no time about it hardly; but what wa 
their amaz and rage at find he had disappeared. 

"where is he?" wa the univers inquiry, and "I don't know," an almost 
univers answer. 

there wa a long pause, while they search around; but they saw no 
vestig of the object of their search. 

"there' no trap door open," remark one; "and I don't think he could 
have got in at ani one." 

"perhaps, find he could not get away, he ha taken the desper 
expedi of jump over, and commit suicide, and so escap the 
doom he ought to be subject to." 

"probabl he has; but then we can run a stake through him and burn him 
all the same." 

they now approach the extrem verg of the houses, and look over the 
sides, but they could see nothing. the moon wa up, and there wa light 
enough to have seen him if he had fallen to the earth, and they were 
quit sure that he could not have got up after such a fall as he must 
have received. 

"we are beaten after all, neighbours." 

"I am not so sure of that," wa the reply. "he may now be hidden about, 
for he wa too far spent to be abl to go far; he could not do that, I 
am sure." 

"I think not either." 

"might he not have escap by mean of that ivy, yonder?" said one of 
the men, point to the plant, as it climb over the coping-ston of 
the wall. 

"yes; it may be possible," said one; "and yet it is veri dangerous, if 
not certain destruct to get over." 

"oh, yes; there is no possibl of escap that way. why, it wouldn't 
bear a cat, for there are no nail driven into the wall at thi height." 

"never mind," said another, "we may as well leav no stone unturned, as 
the say is, but at onc set about look out for him." 

the individu who spoke now leant over the cope stone, for some 
moments, in silence. He could see nothing, but yet he continu to gaze 
for some moments. 

"do you see him?" inquir one. 

"no," wa the answer. 

"ay, ay, I thought as much," wa the reply. "he might as well have got 
hold of a corner of the moon, which, I believe, is more likely--a great 
deal more likely." 

"hold still a moment," said the man, who wa look over the edg of 
the house. 

"what' the matter now? A gnat flew into your eye?" 

"no; but I see him--bi jove, I see him!" 

"see who--se who?" 

"varney, the vampyre!" shout the man. "I see him about half-way down 
clinging, like a fly, to the wall. odd zounds! I never saw the like 
afore!" 

"hurrah! after him then, boys!" 

"not the same way, if you please. Go yourself, and welcome; but I won't 
go that way." 

"just as you please," said the man; "but what' good for the goos is 
good for the gander is an old saying, and so is jack as good as hi 
master." 

"so it may be; but cuss me if you ain't a fool if you attempt that!" 

the man made no reply, but did as varney had done before, got over the 
cope stone, and then laid hold of the ivy; but, whether hi weight wa 
heavier than varney's, or whether it wa that the latter had loosen 
the hold of the ivi or not, but he had no sooner left go of the cope 
stone than the ivi gave way, and he wa precipit from the height of 
about fifti feet to the earth--a dread fall! 

there wa a pause--no one spoke. the man lay motionless and dead--h had 
disloc hi neck! 

the fall had not, however, been without it effect upon varney, for the 
man' heel struck him so forcibl on hi head as he fell, that he wa 
stunned, and let go hi hold, and he, too, fell to the earth, but not 
mani feet. 

He soon recov himself, and wa stagger away, when he wa assail 
by those abov with groans, and curs of all kinds, and then by stones, 
and tiles, and whatev the mob could lay their hand upon. 

some of these struck him, and he wa cut about in variou places, so 
that he could hardli stand. 

the hoot and shout of the mob abov had now attract those below to 
the spot where sir franci varney wa tri to escape, but he had not 
gone far befor the loud yell of those behind him told him that he wa 
again pursued. 

half dead, and almost wholli spent, unarmed, and defenceless, he scarc 
knew what to do; whether to fly, or to turn round and die as a refug 
from the greater evil of endeavour to prolong a struggl which seem 
hopeless. instinct, however, urg him on, at all risks, and though he 
could not go veri far, or fast, yet on he went, with the crowd after 
him. 

"down with the vampyre!--s him--hold him--burn him! he must be down 
presently, he can't stand!" 

thi gave them new hopes, and render varney' fate almost certain. 
they renew their exert to overtak him, while he exert himself 
anew, and with surpris agility, consid how he had been employ 
for more than two hours. 

there were some tree and hedg now that oppos the progress of both 
parties. the height of sir franci varney gave him a great advantage, 
and, had he been fresh, he might have shown it to advantag in vault 
over the hedg and ditches, which he jump when obliged, and walk 
through when he could. 

everi now and then, the parti in pursuit, who had been behind him some 
distance, now they gain on him; however, they kept, everi now and 
then, lose sight of him among the tree and shrubs, and he made direct 
for a small wood, hope that when there, he should to be abl to 
conceal himself for some time, so as to throw hi pursuer off the 
track. 

they were well awar of this, for they increas their speed, and one or 
two swifter of foot than the others, got a-head of them and cri out 
aloud as they ran,-- 

"keep up! keep up! he' make for the wood." 

"he can't stop there long; there are too mani of us to beat that cover 
without find our game. push, lads, he' our own now, as sure as we 
know he' on a-head." 

they did push on, and came in full sight as they saw sir franci enter 
the wood, with what speed he could make; but he wa almost spent. thi 
wa a cheer sight to them, and they were pretti certain he would not 
leav the wood in the state he wa then--h must seek concealment. 

however, they were mistaken, for sir franci varney, as soon as he got 
into the wood, plung into the thickest of it, and then paus to gain 
breath. 

"so far safe," he muttered; "but I have had a narrow escape; they are 
not yet done, though, and it will not be safe here long. I must away, 
and seek shelter and safeti elsewhere, if I can;--curs on the hound 
that run yelp over the fields!" 

He heard the shout of hi pursuers, and prepar to quit the wood when 
he thought the first had enter it. 

"they will remain here some time in beat about," he muttered; "that 
is the onli chanc I have had sinc the pursuit; curs them! I say 
again. I may now get free; thi delay must save my life, but noth 
els will." 

He move away, and, at a slow and lazi pace, left the wood, and then 
made hi way across some fields, toward some cottages, that lay on the 
left. 

the moon yet shone on the fields; he could hear the shout of the mob, 
as variou parti went through the wood from one covert to another, and 
yet unabl to find him. 

then came a great shout upon hi ears, as though they had found out he 
had left the wood. thi caus him to redoubl hi speed, and, fear 
lest he should be seen in the moonlight, he leap over the first fenc 
that he came to, with almost the last effort he could make, and then 
stagger in at an open door--through a passage--into a front parlour, 
and there fell, faint, and utterli spent and speechless, at the feet of 
flora bannerworth. 




chapter lxxxviii. 

the recept OF the vampyr BY flora.--varney subdued. 


[illustration] 

We must say that the irrupt into the hous of the bannerworth by sir 
franci varney, wa certainli unpremedit by him, for he knew not 
into whose hous he had thu suddenli rush for refug from the 
numer foe who were pursu him with such veng ire. It wa a 
strang and singular incident, and one well calcul to caus the mind 
to paus befor it pass it by, and consid the mean to an end which 
are sometim as wide of the mark, as it is in natur possibl to be. 

but truth is stronger than fiction by far, and the end of it was, that, 
press on all side by danger, bleeding, faint, and exhausted, he 
rush into the first hous he came to, and thu place himself in the 
veri hous of those whom he had brought to such a state of misfortune. 

flora bannerworth wa seat at some embroidery, to pass away an hour or 
so, and thu get over the tedium of time; she wa not thinking, either, 
upon the unhappi past; some trifl object or other engag her 
attention. but what wa her anguish when she saw a man stagger into 
the room bleeding, and bear the mark of a bloodi contest, and 
sink at her feet. 

her astonish wa far greater yet, when she recognis that man to be 
sir franci varney. 

"save me!--sav me! miss bannerworth, save me!--onli you can save me 
from the ruthless multitud which follows, cri aloud for my blood." 

As he spoke, he sank down speechless. flora wa so much amazed, not to 
say terrified, that she knew not what to do. she saw sir franci a 
suppliant at her feet, a fugit from hi enemies, who would show him 
no mercy--sh saw all thi at a moment' glance; and yet she had not 
recov her speech and presenc of mind enough to enabl her to make 
ani repli to him. 

"save me! miss flora bannerworth, save me!" he again said, rais 
himself on hi hands. "I am beset, hunt like a wild beast--they seek 
my life--they have pursu me from one spot to another, and I have 
unwittingli intrud upon you. you will save me: I am sure your kind 
and good of heart will never permit me to be turn out among such a 
crew of blood-thirsti butcher as those who pursu me are." 

"rise, sir franci varney," said flora, after a moment' hesitation; "in 
such an extrem as that which you are in, it would be inhuman inde 
to thrust you out among your enemies." 

"oh! it would," said varney. "I had thought, until now, I could have 
face such a mob, until I wa in thi extremity; and then, disarm and 
thrown down, bruised, beaten, and incap of stem such a torrent, 
I fled from one place to another, till hunt from each, and then 
instinct alon urg me to greater exert than before, and here I 
am--thi is now my last and onli hope." 

"rise, sir francis." 

"you will not let me be torn out and slaughter like an ox. I am sure 
you will not." 

"sir francis, we are incap of such conduct; you have sought refug 
here, and shall find it as far as we are abl to afford it to you." 

"and your brother--and--" 

"yes--yes--al who are here will do the same; but here they come to 
speak for themselves." 

As she spoke, mrs. bannerworth entered, also charl holland, who both 
start on see the vampyr present, sir franci varney, who wa too 
weak to rise without assistance. 

"sir franci varney," said flora, speak to them as they entered, "ha 
sought refug here; hi life is in peril, and he ha no other hope left; 
you will, I am sure, do what can be done for him." 

"mr. holland," said sir francis, "I am, as you may see by my condition, 
a fugitive, and have been beaten almost to death; instinct alon urg 
me on to save my life, and I, unknowingly, came in here." 

"rise, sir francis," said charl holland; "I am not one who would feel 
ani pleasur in see you becom the victim of ani brutal mob. I am 
sure there are none amongst us who would willingli do so. you have 
trust to those who will not betray you." 

"thank you," said sir francis, faintly. "I thank you; your conduct is 
noble, and miss bannerworth' especi so." 

"are you much hurt, sir francis?" inquir charles. 

"I am much hurt, but not serious or dangerously; but I am weak and 
exhausted." 

"let me assist you to rise," said charl holland. 

"thank you," said sir francis, as he accept of the assistance, and 
when he stood up, he found how incap he realli was, for a child 
might have grappl with him. 

"I have been sore beset, mrs. bannerworth," he said, endeavour to bow 
to that lady; "and I have suffer much ill-usage. I am not in such a 
plight as I could wish to be seen in by ladies; but my reason for 
come will be an excus for my appear in such disorder." 

"we will not say anyth about that," said charl holland; "under the 
circumstances, it could not be otherwise." 

"it could not," said sir francis, as he took the chair miss flora 
bannerworth place for him. 

"I will not ask you for ani explan as to how thi came about; but 
you need some restor and rest." 

"I think I suffer more from exhaust than anyth else. the bruis I 
have, of course, are not dangerous." 

"can you step asid a few moments?" said mrs. bannerworth. "I will show 
you where you can remov some of those stains, and make yourself more 
comfortable." 

"thank you, madam--thank you. It will be most welcom to me, I assur 
you." 

sir franci rose up, and, with the aid of charl holland, he walk to 
the next room, where he wash himself, and arrang hi dress as well 
as it would admit of it be done. 

"mr. holland," he said, "I cannot tell you how grate I feel for this. 
I have been hunt from the hous where you saw me. from what sourc 
they learn my abode--mi place of concealment--i know not; but they 
found me out." 

"I need hardli say, sir francis, that it could not have occur through 
me," said charl holland. 

"mi young friend," said sir francis, "I am quit sure you were not; and, 
moreover, I never, for one moment, suspect you. no, no; some 
accident circumst alon ha been the cause. I have been veri 
cautious--i may say extrem so--but at the same time, living, as I 
have, surround by enemi on all sides, it is not to be wonder at 
that I should be seen by some one, and thu trace to my lair, whither 
they follow me at their leisure." 

"they have been but too troublesom in thi matter. when they becom a 
littl reasonable, it will be a great miracle; for, when their passion 
and fear are excited, there is no end to the extrem they will 
perpetrate." 

"it is so," said varney, "a the histori of these last few day ampli 
testifi to me. I could never have credit the extent to which popular 
excit could be carried, and the result it wa like to produce." 

"it is an engin of veri difficult control," pursu charl holland; 
"but what will rais it will not allay it, but add fuel to the fire that 
burn so fierc already." 

"true enough," said sir francis. 

"if you have done, will you again step thi way?" 

sir franci varney follow charl holland into the sitting-room, and 
sat down with them, and befor him wa spread a light supper, with some 
good wine. 

"eat, sir francis," said mrs. bannerworth. "such a state as that in 
which you are, must, of necessity, produc great exhaustion, and you 
must requir food and drink." 

sir franci bow as well as he wa able, and even then, sore and 
bruis as he was, fugit as he had been, he could not forget hi 
courtesy; but it wa not without an effort. hi equanim was, however, 
much disturbed, by find himself in the midst of the bannerworths. 

"I owe you a relation," he said, "of what occur to drive me from my 
place of concealment." 

"we should like to hear it, if you are not too far fatigu to relat 
it," said charles. 

"I will. I wa sit at the top of that hous in which I sought to 
hide myself, when I heard sound come that were of a veri suspici 
nature; but did not believ that it could happen that they had 
discov my lurking-place; far from it; though, of late, I had been 
habitu cautiou and suspicious, yet I thought I wa safe, till I 
heard the nois of a multitud come toward me. I could not be 
mistaken in it, for the sound are so peculiar that they are like 
noth else. I heard them coming. 

"I move not; and when they surround the hous as far as wa 
practicable, they gave an immens shout, and made the welkin ring with 
the sound." 

"I heard a confus nois at a distance," remark flora; "but I had no 
idea that anyth seriou wa contemplated. I imagin it wa some 
festiv among some trade, or portion of the townspeople, who were 
shout from joy." 

"oh, dear no," said sir francis; "but I am not surpris at the mistake, 
becaus there are such occurr occasionally; but whenev the mob 
gain ani advantag upon me they shouted, and when I wa abl to oppos 
them with effect, they groan at me most horribly." 

"the deuce," said charles; "the sound, suppose, serv to express their 
feelings, and to encourag each other." 

"someth of the sort, I dare say," said varney: "but at length, after 
defend the hous with all the desper that despair impart to 
me, I wa compel to fli from floor to floor, until I had reach the 
roof; there they follow me, and I wa compel again to fly. hous 
after hous they follow me to, until I could go no farther," said 
varney. 

"how did you escape?" 

"fortun I saw some ivi grow and creep over the coping-stones, 
and by grasp that I got over the side, and so let myself down by 
degrees, as well as I wa able." 

"good heavens! what a dread situation," exclaim flora; "it is 
realli horrible!" 

"I could not do it again, under, I think, ani circumstances." 

"not the same?" said mrs. bannerworth. 

"I realli doubt if I could," said varney. "the truth is, the excit 
of the moment wa great, and I at that moment thought of noth but 
get away. 

"the same circumstances, the same fear of death, could hardli be 
produc in me again, and I am unabl to account for the phenomenon on 
thi occasion." 

"your escap wa veri narrow indeed," said flora; "it make me shudder 
to think of the danger you have gone through; it is realli terribl to 
think of it." 

"you," said sir francis, "are young and susceptible, and gener in 
your disposition, you can feel for me, and do; but how littl I could 
have expect it, it is imposs to say; but your sympathi sink into 
my mind and caus such emot as never can be eras from my soul. 

"but to proceed. you may guess how dread wa my position, by the fact 
that the first man who attempt to get over tore the ivi away and fell, 
strike me in hi fall; he wa killed, and I thrown down and stunned. I 
then made for the wood, close pursu and got into it; then I baffl 
them: they search the wood, and I went through it. I then ran across 
the countri to these hous here; I got over the fence, and in at the 
back door." 

"did they see you come?" inquir charl holland. 

"I cannot say, but I think that they did not; I heard them give a loud 
shout more than onc when on thi side of the wood." 

"you did? how far from here were you when you heard the shouts?" 
inquir mrs. bannerworth. 

"I wa close here; and, as I jump over the fence, I heard them shout 
again; but I think they cannot see so far; the night wa moonlight, to 
be sure, but that is all; the shadow of the hedge, and the distanc 
together, would make it, if not impossible, at least veri improbable." 

"that is veri likely," said mrs. bannerworth. 

"in that case," said charl holland, "you are safe here; for none will 
suspect your be conceal here." 

"it is the last place I should myself have thought of," said varney; 
"and I may say the last place I would knowingli have come to; but had I 
befor known enough of you, I should have been well assur of your 
generosity, and have freeli come to claim your aid and shelter, which 
accid ha so strang brought me to be a candid for, and which you 
have so kindli award me." 

"the night is wear away," said flora, "and sir franci is doubtless 
fatigu to an excess; sleep, I dare say, will be most welcom to him." 

"it will indeed, miss bannerworth," said varney; "but I can do that 
under ani circumstances; do not let me put you to ani inconvenience; a 
chair, and at ani hour, will serv me for sleep." 

"we cannot do for you what we would wish," said flora, look at her 
mother; "but someth better than that, at all events, we can and will 
provid for you." 

"I know not how to thank you," said sir franci varney; "I assur you, 
of late I have not been luxuri lodged, and the less troubl I give 
you the greater I shall esteem the favour." 

the hour wa late, and sir franci varney, befor anoth half hour had 
elapsed, wa consign to hi own reflections, in a small but neat room, 
there to repos hi bruis and batter carcass, and court the 
refresh influenc of sleep. 

hi reflect were, for nearli an hour, of the most contradictori 
character; some one passion wa tri to overcom the other; but he 
seem quit subdued. 

"I could not have expect this," he muttered; "flora bannerworth ha 
the soul of a heroine. I deserv not such a recept from them; and 
yet, in my hour of utmost need, they have receiv me like a favour 
friend; and yet all their misfortun have taken their origin from me; I 
am the caus of all." 

fill with these thoughts, he fell asleep; he slept till morn broke. 
He wa not disturbed; it seem as though the influenc of sleep wa 
sweeter far there, in the cottag of the bannerworths, than ever he had 
befor received. 

It wa late on that morn befor sir franci rose, and then onli 
through hear the famili about, and, have perform hi toilet, so 
far as circumst permitted, he descended, and enter the 
front-parlour, the room he had been in the night before. 

flora bannerworth wa alreadi there; indeed, breakfast wa wait the 
appear of sir franci varney. 

"good morning, miss bannerworth," said sir francis, bow with hi 
usual dignifi manner, but in the kindest and sincerest way he wa abl 
to assume. 

"good morning, sir francis," said flora, rise to receiv him; and she 
could not avoid look at him as he enter the room. "I hope you have 
had a pleasant night?" 

"it ha been the best night' rest I have had for some time, miss 
bannerworth. I assur you I have to express my gratitud to you for so 
much kindness. I have slept well, and soundly." 

"I am glad to hear it." 

"I think yet I shall escap the search of these peopl who have hunt 
me from so mani places." 

"I hope you may, indeed, sir francis." 

"you, miss bannerworth! and do you hope I may escap the vengeanc of 
these people--th populace?" 

"I do, sir francis, most sincer hope so. whi should I wish evil to 
you, especi at their hands?" 

sir franci did not speak for a minut or two, and then he said, turn 
full upon flora-- 

"I don't know why, miss bannerworth, that I should think so, but perhap 
it is becaus there are peculiar circumst connect with myself, 
that have made me feel consciou that I have not deserv so much 
good at your hands." 

"you have not deserv ani evil. sir francis, we could not do that if it 
were in our power; we would do you a servic at ani time." 

"you have done so, miss bannerworth--th greatest that can be performed. 
you have save my life." 

At that moment charl holland entered, and sir franci bowed, as he 
said,-- 

"I hope you, mr. holland, have slept as well, and pass as good a night 
as I have passed?" 

"I am glad you, at least, have pass a quiet one," said charl 
holland; "you, I dare say, feel all the better for it? how do you feel 
yourself? are you much hurt?" 

"not at all, not at all," said sir franci varney. "onli a few bruises, 
and so forth, some of which, as you may perceive, do not add to one' 
person appearance. A week or two' quiet would rid me of them. At all 
events, I would it may do the same with my enemies." 

"I wish they were as easili gotten rid of myself," said charles; "but as 
that cannot be, we must endeavour to baffl them in the best way we 
may." 

"I owe a debt to you I shall never be abl to repay; but where there is 
a will, they say there is a way; and if the old say be good for 
anything, I need not despair, though the way is by no mean appar at 
present." 

"time is the magician," said flora, "whose wand chang all things--th 
young to the aged, and the age to nothing." 

"certainly, that is true," said varney, "and mani such chang have I 
seen. My mind is store with such events; but thi is sadness, and I 
have caus to rejoice." 

* * * * 

the breakfast wa pass off in pleas conversation, and varney found 
himself much at home with the bannerworths, whose calm and even tenour 
wa quit new to him. 

He could not but admit the charm of such a life as that led by the 
bannerworths; but what it must have been when they were suppli by 
ampl means, with noth to prey upon their minds, and no fear 
mysteri to hang on and weigh down their spirits, he could scarc 
imagine. 

they were amiable, accomplished; they were in the same mind at all times, 
and noth seem to ruffl them; and when night came, he could not but 
acknowledg to himself that he had never form half the opinion of them 
they were deserv of. 

Of cours dure that day he wa compel to lie close, so as not to be 
seen by ani one, save the family. He sat in a small room, which wa 
overlook by no other in the neighbourhood, and he remain quiet, 
sometim conversing, and sometim reading, but at the same time ever 
attent to the least sound that appear at all of a charact to 
indic the approach of person for ani purpos whatever. 

At supper time he spoke to flora and to charl holland, saying,-- 

"there are certain matter connect with myself--i may say with you 
now--sur all that ha happen will make it so--of which you would be 
glad to hear some thing." 

"you mean upon the same subject upon which I had some convers with 
you a day or two back?" 

"yes, the same. allow me one week, and you shall know all. I will then 
relat to you that which you so much desir to know--on week, and all 
shall be told." 

"well," said charl holland, "thi ha not been exact from you as the 
price of your safety, but you can choos your own time, of course; what 
you promis is most desired, for it will render those happi who now are 
much wors than they were befor these occurr took place." 

"I am awar of all that; grant me but one week, and then you shall be 
made acquaint with all." 

"I am satisfied, sir francis," said flora; "but while here under our 
roof, we should never have ask you a question." 

"of this, miss bannerworth, the littl I have seen of you assur me you 
would not do so; however, I am the more inclin to make it--i am under 
so deep an oblig to you all, that I can never repay it." 

* * * * * 

sir franci varney retir to rest that night--hi promis to the 
bannerworth fill hi mind with mani reflections--th insecur of 
hi own position, and the frail tenur which he even held in the hand 
of those whom he had most injured. 

thi produc a seri of reflect of a grave and melancholi nature, 
and he sat by hi window, watch the progress of the clouds, as they 
appear to chase each other over the face of the scene--now cast a 
shade over the earth, and then banish the shadows, and throw a 
gentl light over the earth' surface, which wa again chase away, and 
shadow again fell upon the scene below. 

how long he had sat there in melancholi muse he knew not; but suddenli 
he wa arous from hi dream by a voic that shook the skies, and 
caus him to start to hi feet. 

"hurrah!--hurrah!--hurrah!" shout the mob, which had silent 
collect around the cottag of the bannerworths. 

"curses!" mutter sir francis, as he again sank in hi chair, and 
struck hi head with hi hand. "I am hunt to death--they will not 
leav me until my bodi ha grace a cross-road." 

"hurrah!--down with the vampyre--pul him out!" 

then came an instant knock at the doors, and the peopl on the 
outsid made so great a din, that it seem as though they contempl 
knock the hous down at once, without warn the inmat that they 
wait there. 

there wa a cessat for about a minute, when one of the famili 
hasten to the door, and inquir what wa wanted. 

"varney, the vampyre," wa the reply. 

"you must seek him elsewhere." 

"we will search thi place befor we go further," repli a man. 

"but he is not here." 

"we have reason to believ otherwise. open the door, and let us in--no 
one shall be hurt, or one singl object in the house; but we must come 
in, and search for the vampyre." 

"come to-morrow, then." 

"that will not do," said the voice; "open, or we forc our way in 
without more notice." 

At the same a tremend blow wa bestow upon the door, and then much 
forc wa use to thrust it in. A consult wa suddenli held among 
the inmates, as to what wa to be done, but no one could advise, and 
each wa well awar of the utter imposs of keep the mob out. 

"I do not see what is to becom of me," said sir franci varney, 
suddenli appear befor them. "you must let them in; there is no 
chanc of keep them off, neither can you conceal me. you will have no 
place, save one, that will be sacr from their profanation." 

"and which is that?" 

"flora' own room." 

all start at the thought that flora' chamber could in ani way be 
profan by ani such presenc as sir franci varney's. 

however, the door below were suddenli burst open, amid loud cri from 
the populace, who rush in in great numbers, and began to search the 
lower rooms, immediately. 

"all is lost!" said sir franci varney, as he dash away and rush to 
the chamber of flora, who, alarm at the sound that were now fill 
the house, stood listen to them. 

"miss bannerworth--" began varney. 

"sir francis!" 

"yes, it is inde I, miss bannerworth; hear me, for one moment." 

"what is the matter?" 

"I am again in peril--in more immin peril than before; my life is not 
worth a minute' purchase, unless you save me. you, and you alone, can 
now save me. oh! miss bannerworth, if ever piti touch your heart, save 
me from those onli whom I now fear. I could meet death in ani shape but 
that in which they will inflict it upon me. hear their execr 
below!" 

"death to the vampyre! death to varney! burn him! run a stake through 
hi body!" 

[illustration] 

"what can I do, sir francis?" 

"admit me to your chamber." 

"sir francis, are you awar of what you are saying?" 

"I am well. It is a request which you would justli scorn to repli to, 
but now my life--recollect you have save me once--mi life,--do not now 
throw away the boon you have so kindli bestowed. save me, miss 
bannerworth." 

"it is not possible. i--" 

"nay, miss bannerworth, do you imagin thi is a time for ceremony, or 
the observ of polish life! On my honour, you run no risk of 
censure." 

"where is varney? where is the vampyre? He ain't far off." 

"hear--hear them, miss bannerworth. they are now at the foot of the 
stairs. not a moment to lose. one minut more, and I am in the hand of 
a crew that ha no mercy." 

"hurrah! upstairs! he' not below. upstairs, neighbours, we shall have 
him yet!" 

these word sound on the stairs: half-a-dozen more steps, and varney 
would be seen. It wa a miracl he wa not heard beg for hi life. 

varney cast a look of despair at the stairhead and felt for hi sword, 
but it wa not there, he had lost it. He struck hi head with hi 
clench hand, and wa about to rush upon hi foes, when he heard the 
lock turn; he looked, and saw the door open gently, and flora stood 
there; he pass in, and sank cower into a chair, at the other end of 
the room, behind some curtains. 

the door wa scarc shut ere some tri to forc it, and then a loud 
knock came at the door. 

"open! open! we want varney, the vampyre. open! or we will burst it 
open." 

flora did open it, but stood resolut in the opening, and held up her 
hand to impos silence. 

"are you men, that you can come thu to forc yourselv upon the 
privaci of a female? Is there noth in the town or house, that you 
must intrud in number into a privat apartment? Is no place sacr 
from you?" 

"but, ma'am--miss--w onli want varney, the vampyre." 

"and can you find him nowher but in a female' bedroom? shame on you! 
shame on you! have you no sisters, wives, or mothers, that you act 
thus?" 

"he' not there, you may be sure of that, jack," said a gruff voice. 
"let the ladi be in quiet; she' had quit enough troubl with him to 
sicken her of a vampyre. you may be sure that' the last place to find 
him in." 

with thi they all turn away, and flora shut the door and lock it 
upon them, and varney wa safe. 

"you have save me," said varney. 

"hush!" said flora. "speak not; there mayb some one listening." 

sir franci varney stood in the attitud of one listen most anxious 
to catch some sounds; the moon fell across hi face, and gave it a 
ghastli hue, that, ad to hi natur pale and wounds, gave him an 
almost unearthli aspect. 

the sound grew more and more distant; the shout and nois of men 
travers the apart subsided, and gradual the place becam 
restor to it origin silence. the mob, after have search everi 
other part of the house, and not find the object of their search, 
they conclud that he wa not there, but must have made hi escap 
before. 

* * * * * 

thi most desper peril of sir franci varney seem to have more 
effect upon him than anyth that had occur dure hi most strang 
and most event career. 

when he wa assur that the riotou mob that had been so intent upon 
hi destruct wa gone, and that he might emerg from hi place of 
concealment, he did so with an appear of such utter exhaust that 
the bannerworth famili could not but look upon him as a be who wa 
near hi end. 

At ani time hi countenance, as we long have had occas to remark, wa 
a strang and unearthli look one; but when we come to superadd to the 
strang of hi ordinari appear the trace of deep mental 
emotion, we may well say that varney' appear wa posit of the 
most alarm character. 

when he wa seat in the ordinari sit apart of the 
bannerworths, he drew a long sigh breath, and place hi hand upon 
hi heart, he said, in a faint tone of voice,-- 

"it beat now laboriously, but it will soon ceas it pulsat for 
ever." 

these word sound absolut prophetic, there wa about them such a 
solemn aspect, and he look at the same time that he utter them so 
much like one whose mortal race wa run, and who wa now a candid for 
the grave. 

"do not speak so despairingly," said charl holland; "remember, that if 
your life ha been one of error hitherto, how short a space of time may 
suffic to redeem some of them at least, and the commun to me 
which you have not yet complet may to some extent have such an 
effect." 

"no, no. It may contribut to an act of justice, but it can do no good 
to me. and yet do not suppos that becaus such is my impress that I 
mean to hesit in finish to you that communication." 

"I rejoic to hear you say so, and if you would, now that you must be 
awar of what good feel toward you we are all anim with, remov 
the bar of secreci from the communication, I should esteem it a great 
favour." 

varney appear to be consid for a few moments, and then he said,-- 

"well, well. let the secreci no longer exist. have it remov at once. I 
will no longer seek to maintain it. tell all, charl holland--tel 
all." 

thu empow by the mysteri being, charl holland relat briefli 
what varney had alreadi told him, and then conclud by saying,-- 

"that is all that I have myself as yet been made awar of, and I now 
call upon sir franci varney to finish hi narration." 

"I am weak," said varney, "and scarc equal to the task; but yet I 
will not shrink from the promis that I have made. you have been the 
preserv of my life, and more particularli to you, flora bannerworth, 
am I indebt for an existence, which otherwis must have been 
sacrif upon the altar of superstition." 

"but you will recollect, master varney," said the admiral, who had sat 
look on for some time in silent wonder, "you must recollect, master 
varney, that the peopl are, after all, not so much to blame for their 
superstition, because, whether you are a vampyr or not, and I don't 
pretend to come to a posit opinion now, you took good care to 
persuad them you were." 

"I did," said varney, with a shudder; "but whi did i?" 

"well, you know best." 

"it was, then, becaus I did believe, and do believe, that there is 
someth more than natur about my strang protract existence; but 
we will waiv that point, and, befor my fail strength, for it 
appear to me to be failing, complet prevent me from do so, let 
me relat to you the continu particular of the circumst that 
made me what I am." 

flora bannerworth, although she had heard befor from the lip of 
charl holland the to her dread fact, that her father, in addit 
to have laid violent hand upon hi own life, wa a murderer, now that 
that fear circumst wa relat more publicly, felt a greater pang 
than she had done when it wa whisper to her in the accent of pure 
affection, and soften down by a gentl of tone, which charl 
holland' natur delicaci would not allow him to use even to her whom 
he love so well in the presenc of others. 

she let her beauti face be hidden by her hands, and she wept as she 
listen to the sad detail. 

varney look inquiringli in the counten of charl holland, 
because, have given him leav to make flora acquaint with the 
circumstance, he wa rather surpris at the amount of emot which it 
produc in her. 

charl holland answer the appeal look by saying,-- 

"flora is alreadi awar of the facts, but it natur affect her much 
to hear them now repeat in the presenc of others, and those too, 
toward whom she cannot feel--" 

what charl holland wa go to say wa abruptli stop short by the 
admiral, who interposed, exclaiming,-- 

"why, what do you mean, you son of a sea cook? the presenc of who do 
you mean? Do you mean to say that I don't feel for miss flora, bless her 
heart! quit as much as a white-fac look swab like you? why, I 
shall begin to think you are onli fit for a marine." 

"nay, uncle, now do not put yourself out of temper. you must be well 
awar that I could not mean anyth disrespect to you. you should 
not suppos such a state of thing possible; and although, perhaps, I 
did not express myself so felicit as I might, yet what I intend 
to say, was--" 

"oh, bother what you intend to say. you go on, mr. vampyre, with your 
story. I want to know what becam of it all; just you get on as quick as 
you can, and let us know what you did after the man wa murdered." 

"when the dread deed wa committed," said varney, "and our victim lay 
welter in hi blood, and had breath hi last, we stood like men who 
for the first time were awaken to the fright consequ of what 
they had done. 

"I saw by the dim light that hover round us a great chang come over 
the counten of marmaduk bannerworth, and he shook in everi limb. 

"thi soon pass away, however, and the power and urgent necess 
which aros of avoid the consequ of the deed that we had done, 
restor us to ourselves. We stoop and took from the bodi the 
ill-gotten gain of the gambler. they amount to an immens sum, and I 
said to marmaduk bannerworth,-- 

"'take you the whole of thi money and proceed to your own home with it, 
where you will be least suspected. hide it in some place of great 
secrecy, and to-morrow I will call upon you, when we will divid it, and 
will consid of some mean of safe exchang the note for gold.' 

"he agre to this, and place the money in hi pocket, after which it 
becam necessari that we should dispos of the body, which, if we did 
not quickli remove, must in a few hour be discovered, and so, 
perchance, accompani by other crimin circumstances, becom a 
fright evid against us, and entail upon us all those consequ 
of the deed which we were so truli anxiou to escap from. 

"it is ever the worst part of the murderer' task, that after he ha 
struck the blow that ha depriv hi victim of existence, it becom 
hi fright duti to secret the corpse, which, with it dead eyes, 
ever seem to be glare upon him such a world of reproach. 

"that it is which should make peopl paus ere they dip their hand 
in the blood of others, and that it is which becom the first 
retribut that the murder ha to endur for the deep crime that he 
ha committed. 

"we tore two stake from a hedge, and with their assist we contriv 
to dig a veri superfici hole, such a hole as wa onli sufficient, by 
place a thin coat of earth over it, to conceal the bodi of the 
murder man. 

"and then came the loathsom task of drag him into it--a task full 
of horror, and from which we shrunk aghast; but it had to be done, and, 
therefore, we stooped, and grasp the cloth as best we might, we 
drag the bodi into the chasm we had prepar for it reception. glad 
were we then to be enabl to throw the earth upon it and to stamp upon 
it with such vehem as might well be suppos to actuat men deepli 
anxiou to put out of sight some danger and loathsom object. 

"when we had complet this, and likewis gather handsful of dust 
from the road, and dri leaves, and such other matter, to sprinkl upon 
the grave, so as to give the earth an appear of not have been 
disturbed, we look at each other and breath from our toil. 

"then, and not till then, wa it that we rememb that among other 
thing which the gambler had won of marmaduk were the deed belong 
to the dearbrook property." 

"the dearbrook property!" exclaim henri bannerworth; "I know that 
there wa a small estat go by that name, which belong to our 
family, but I alway understood that long ago my father had part with 
it." 

"yes; it wa mortgag for a small sum--a sum not a fourth part of it 
value--and it had been redeem by marmaduk bannerworth, not for the 
purpos of keep it, but in order that he might sell it outright, and 
so partial remedi hi exhaust finances." 

"I wa not awar of that," return henry. 

"doubtless you were not, for of late--i mean for the twelv month or so 
preced your father' death--you know he wa much estrang from all 
the family, so that you none of you knew much of what he wa doing, 
except that he wa carri on a veri wild and reckless career, such as 
wa sure to end in dishonour and poverty; but I tell you he had the 
titl deed of the dearbrook property, and that they were onli got from 
him, along with everyth els of valu that he possessed, at the 
gaming-table, by the man who paid such a fear penalti for hi 
success. 

"it wa not until after the bodi wa complet buried, and we had 
complet all our precaut for more effectu hide it from 
observation, that we recollect the fact of those import paper 
be in hi possession. It wa marmaduk bannerworth who first 
rememb it, and he exclaimed,-- 

"'bi heaven, we have buri the titl deed of the property, and we 
shall have again to exhum the corps for the purpos of procur 
them.' 

"now those deed were noth to me, and repugn as I had felt from 
the first to have anyth whatev to do with the dead body, it wa 
not like that I would again drag it from the earth for such an object. 

"'marmaduk bannerworth,' I said, 'you can do what you please, and take 
the consequ of what you do, but I will not again, if I can help it, 
look upon the face of that corpse. It is too fear a sight to 
contempl again. you have a larg sum of money, and what need you care 
now for the titl deed of a properti compar insignificant?' 

"'well, well,' he said, 'I will not, at the present time, disturb the 
remains; I will wait to see if anyth should aris from the fact of 
the murder; if it should turn out that no suspicion of ani kind is 
excited, but that all is still and quiet, I can then take measur to 
exhum the corpse, and recov those papers, which certainli are 
important.' 

"bi thi time the morn wa creep on apace, and we thought it 
prudent to leav the spot. We stood at the end of the lane for a few 
moment conversing, and those moment were the last in which I ever saw 
marmaduk bannerworth." 

"answer me a question," said henry. 

"I will; ask me what you please, I will answer it." 

"wa it you that call at bannerworth hall, after my father' 
melancholi death, and inquir for him?" 

"I did; and when I heard of the deed that he had done, I at onc left, 
in order to hold counsel with myself as to what I should do to obtain at 
least a portion of the property, one-half of which, it wa understood, 
wa to have been mine. I heard what had been the last word use by 
marmaduk bannerworth on the occas of hi death, and they were ampli 
suffici to let me know what had been done with the money--at all 
events, so far as regard the bestow of it in some secret place; and 
from that moment the idea of, by some mean or another, get the 
exclus possess of it, never forsook my mind. 

"I thought over the matter by day and, by night; and with the except 
of have a knowledg of the actual hiding-plac of the money, I could 
see, in the clearest possibl manner, how the whole affair had been 
transacted. there can be no doubt but that marmaduk bannerworth had 
reach home safe with the larg sum of which he had becom possessed, 
and that he had hidden it securely, which wa but an ordinari measur of 
precaution, when we come to consid how the properti had been obtained. 

"then I suspect that, be alone, and left to the gloom of hi own 
miser thoughts, they revert so pain to the past that he wa 
compel to drink deepli for the purpos of drown reflection. 

"the natur consequ of this, in hi state, was, that partial 
insan supervened, and at a moment when frenzi rose far abov 
reflection, he must have commit the dread act which hurri him 
instantan to eternity." 

"yes," said henry; "it must have been so; you have guess truly. He did 
on that occas drink an immens quantiti of wine; but instead of 
still the pang of remors it must have increas them, and place 
him in such a frenzi condit of intellect, that he found it 
imposs to withstand the impuls of it, unless by the terrif act 
which end hi existence." 

"yes, and which at onc crush all my expect of the larg fortun 
which wa to have been mine; for even the one-half of the sum which had 
been taken from the gamester' pocket would have been suffici to have 
enabl me to live for the futur in affluence. 

"I becam perfectli madden at the idea that so larg a sum had pass 
out of my hands. I constantli hover about bannerworth hall, hope and 
expect that someth might aris which would enabl me to get 
admitt to it, and make an activ search through it recess for the 
hidden treasure. 

"all my exert were in vain. I could hit upon no scheme whatever; and 
at length, weari and exhausted, I wa compel to proceed to london 
for the sake of a subsistence. It is onli in that great metropoli that 
such person as myself, destitut of real resources, but infinit 
reckless as regard the mean by which they acquir a subsistence, can 
hope to do so. onc again, therefore, I plung into the vortex of 
london life, and proceeded, heedless of the crimin of what I wa 
about, to cater for myself by robbery, or, indeed, in ani manner which 
present a prospect of success. It wa dure thi career of mine, that 
I becam associ with some of the most desper charact of the 
time; and the offenc we commit were of that dare charact that 
it could not be wonder at eventu so formid a gang of 
desperado must be by forc broken up. 

"it so occurred, but unknown to us, that the polic resolv upon make 
one of the most vigor effort to put an end to the affair, and in 
consequ a watch wa set upon everi one of our movements. 

"the result of thi was, as might have been expected, our complet 
dispersion, and the arrest of some our members, and among them myself. 

"I knew my fate almost from the first. our depred had creat such 
a sensation, that the legislature, even, had made it a matter of 
import that we should be suppressed, and it wa an understood thing 
among the judges, that the severest penalti of the law should be 
inflict upon ani one of the gang who might be apprehend and 
convicted. 

"mi trial scarc occupi an hour, and then I wa convict and 
sentenc to execution, with an intim from the judg that it would 
be perfectli absurd of me to dream, for one moment, of a remiss of 
that sentence. 

"in thi state of affairs, and see noth but death befor me, I 
gave myself up to despair, and narrowli miss cheat the hangman of 
hi victim. 

"more dead than alive, I was, however, drag out to be judici 
murdered, and I shall never forget the crowd of fright sensat 
that came across my mind upon that terrif occasion. 

"it seem as if my fate had then reach it climax, and I have realli 
but a dim recollect of the terribl scene. 

"I rememb someth of the confus murmur aris from an immens 
throng of persons. I rememb look about me, and see noth but 
what appear to me an immens sea of human heads, and then suddenli I 
heard a loud roar of execr burst from the multitude. 

"I shrunk back terrified, and it did, indeed, seem to me a brutal thing 
thu to roar and shout at a man who wa brought out to die. I soon, 
however, found that the mob who came to see such a spectacl wa not so 
debas as I imagined, but that it wa at the hangman, who had suddenli 
made hi appear on the scaffold, at whom they rais that fear 
yell. 

"some one--i think it wa one of the sheriffs--must have notic that I 
wa labour under the impress that the cri from the mob wa 
level at me, for he spoke, saying,-- 

"'it is at the hangman they shout,' and he indic with hi finger 
that public functionary. In my mind' eye I think I see him now, and I 
am certain that I shall never forget the express of hi face. It wa 
perfectli fearful; and afterwards, when I learn who and what he was, I 
wa not surpris that he should feel so acut the pain degrad 
offic which he had to perform. 

"the fatal rope wa in a few minut adjust to my neck. I felt it 
pressure, and I heard the confus sound of the monoton voic of the 
clergyman, as he mutter some prayers, that I must confess sound to 
me at the time like a mockeri of human suffering. 

"then suddenli there wa a loud shout--i felt the platform give way 
beneath my feet--i tri to utter a yell of agony, but could not--it 
seem to me as if I wa encompass by fire, and then sensat left 
me, and I knew no more. 

* * * * * 

"the next feel of exist that came over me consist in a 
fright tingl sensat throughout my veins, and I felt myself 
make vain effort to scream. all the sensat of a person suffer 
from a sever attack of nightmar came across me, and I wa in such an 
agony, that I inwardli pray for death to releas me from such a cruel 
state of suffering. then suddenli the power to utter a sound came to me, 
and I made use of it well, for the pierc shriek I uttered, must have 
struck terror into the heart of all who heard it, sinc it appal 
even myself. 

"then I suppos I must have fainted, but when I recov conscious 
again, I found myself upon a couch, and a man present some stimulu 
to me in a cup. I could not distinguish object distinctly, but I heard 
him say, 'drink, and you will be better.' 

"I did drink, for a rage thirst consum me, and then I fell into a 
sound sleep, which, I wa afterward told, last nearli twenty-four 
hours, and when I recov from that, I heard again the same voic that 
had befor spoken to me, ask me how I was. 

"I turn in the direct of the sound, and, as my vision wa now 
clearer, I could see that it wa the hangman, whose face had made upon 
the scaffold such an impress upon me--an impress which I then 
consid my last in thi world, but which turn out not to be such by 
mani a mingl one of pain and pleasur since. 

"it wa some time befor I could speak, and when I did, it wa onli in a 
few mutter words, to ask what had happened, and where I was. 

"'do you not remember,' he said, 'that you were hanged?' 

"'i do--i do,' wa my reply. 'i thi the region of damn souls?' 

"'no; you are still in thi world, howev strang you may think it. 
listen to me, and I will briefli tell you how it is that you have come 
back again, as it were, from the veri grave, to live and walk about 
among the living." 

"I listen to him with a strang and rapt attention, and then he told 
how a young and enthusiast medic man had been anxiou to tri some 
experi with regard to the restor of person appar dead, 
and he proceed to relat how it wa that he had given ear to the 
solicit of the man, and had consent to bring my bodi after it 
wa hung for him to experi upon. He relat how the doctor had been 
successful, but how he wa so terrifi at hi own success, that he 
hastili fled, and had left london, no one know whither he had gone. 

"I listen to thi with the most profound attention, and then he 
concluded, by say to me,-- 

"'there can be no doubt but my duti requir of me to give you up again 
to the offend law of your country. I will not, however, do that, if 
you will consent to an arrang that I shall propos to you.' 

"I ask him what the arrang was, and he said that if I would 
solemnli bind myself to pay to him a certain sum per annum, he would 
keep my secret, and forsak hi call as hangman, endeavour to do 
someth that should bring with it pleasant results. I did so 
solemnli promis him, and I have kept my word. By one mean or anoth I 
have succeed in procur the requir amount, and now he is no more." 

"I believe," cri henry, "that he ha fallen a victim to the blind furi 
of the populace." 

"you are right, he ha so, and accordingli I am reliev from the burden 
of those payments; but it matter little, for now I am so near the tomb 
myself, that, togeth with all my obligations, I shall soon be beyond 
the reach of mortal cavilling." 

"you need not think so, varney; you must rememb that you are at 
present suffer from circumstances, the pressur of which will soon 
pass away, and then you will resum your wont habits." 

"what did you do next?" said the admiral.--"let' know all while you are 
about it." 

"I remain at the hangman' hous for some time, until all fear of 
discoveri wa over, and then he remov me to a place of greater 
security, provid me from hi own resourc with the mean of 
existence, until I had fulli recov my health, and then he told me to 
shift for myself. 

"dure my confin though, I had not been idl mentally, for I 
concoct a plan, by which I should be enabl not onli to live well 
myself, but to pay to the hangman, whose name wa mortimore, the annual 
sum I had agre upon. I need not go into the detail of thi plan. Of 
cours it wa neither an honest nor respect one, but it succeeded, 
and I soon found myself in a posit to enabl me therebi to keep my 
engagement, as well as to suppli me with mean of plot and plan 
for my futur fortunes. 

"I had never for a moment forgotten that so larg a sum of money wa 
somewher conceal about bannerworth hall, and I still look forward 
to obtain it by some mean or another. 

"it wa in thi junctur of affairs, that one night I wa ride on 
horseback through a desol part of england. the moon wa shine 
sweetly, as I came to a broad stream of water, across which, about a 
mile further on, I saw that there wa a bridge, but be unwil to 
wast time by ride up to it, and fancying, by the lazi rippl of the 
waters, that the river wa not shallow, I plung my hors boldli into 
the stream. 

"when we reach it centre, some sudden indisposit must have seiz 
the horse, for instead of swim on well and gallantli as it had done 
before, it paus for a moment, and then plung headlong into the 
torrent. 

"I could not swim, and so, for a second time, death, with all it 
terrors, appear to be take possess of me. the water roll over 
my head, gurgl and hiss in my ears, and then all wa past. I know 
no more, until I found myself lie upon a bright green meadow, and the 
full beam of the moon shine upon me. 

"I wa giddi and sick, but I rose, and walk slowli away, each moment 
gather fresh strength, and from that time to this, I never discov 
how I came to be rescu from the water, and lie upon that green bank. 
It ha ever been a mysteri to me, and I expect it ever will. 

"then from that moment the idea that I had a sort of charm life came 
across me, and I walk about with an impress that such wa the case, 
until I came across a man who said that he wa a hungarian, and who wa 
full of strang stori of vampyres. among other things, he told me that 
a vampyr could not be drowned, for that the water would cast him upon 
it banks, and, if the moonbeam fell upon him, he would be restor to 
life. 

"thi wa precis my story, and from that moment I believ myself to 
be one of those horrible, but charm beings, doom to such a 
protract existence. the notion grew upon me day by day, and hour by 
hour, until it becam quit a fix and strong belief, and I wa 
deceiv no one when I play the horribl part that ha been 
attribut to me." 

"but you don't mean to say that you believ you are a vampyr now?" said 
the admiral. 

"I say nothing, and know not what to think. I am a desper man, and 
what there is at all human in me, strang to say, all of you whom I 
sought to injure, have awakened." 

"heed not that," said henry, "but continu your narrative. We have 
forgiven everything, and that ought to suffic to quiet your mind upon 
such a subject." 

"I will continue; and, believ me, I will conceal noth from you. I 
look upon the word I am now utter as a full, candid, and free 
confession; and, therefore, it shall be complete. 

"the idea struck me that if, by take advantag of my suppos 
preternatur gifts, I could drive you from bannerworth hall, I should 
have it to myself to hunt through at my leisure, and possibl find the 
treasure. I had heard from marmaduk bannerworth some slight allus to 
conceal the money behind a pictur that wa in a bed-room call the 
panel chamber. By inquiry, I ascertain that in that bed-room slept 
flora bannerworth. 

"I had resolved, however, at first to tri pacif measures, and 
accordingly, as you are well aware, I made variou propos to you to 
purchas or to rent bannerworth hall, the whole of which you rejected; 
so that I found myself compel to adopt the origin mean that had 
suggest themselv to me, and endeavour to terrifi you from the house. 

"bi prowl about, I made myself familiar with the grounds, and with 
all the plan of the residence, and then one night made my appear in 
flora' chamber by the window." 

"but how do you account," said charl holland, "for your extraordinari 
like to the portrait?" 

"it is partli natural, for I belong to a collater branch of the 
family; and it wa previous arranged. I had seen the portrait in 
marmaduk bannerworth' time, and I knew some of it peculiar and 
dress suffici well to imit them. I calcul upon produc a 
much greater effect by such an imitation; and it appear that I wa not 
wrong, for I did produc it to the full." 

"you did, indeed," said henry; "and if you did not bring convict to 
our mind that you were what you repres yourself to be, you at 
least stagger our judgment upon the occasion, and left us in a 
posit of great doubt and difficulty." 

"I did; I did all that, I know I did; and, by pursu that line of 
conduct, I, at last, I presume, entir forc you from the house." 

"that you did." 

"flora faint when I enter her chamber; and the moment I look upon 
her sweet counten my heart smote me for what I wa about; but I 
solemnli aver, that my lip never touch her, and that, beyond the 
fright, she suffer noth from varney, the vampyre." 

"and have you succeeded," said henry, "in your object now?" 

"no; the treasur ha yet to be found. mortimore, the hangman, follow 
me into the house, guess my intention, and indulg a hope that he 
would succeed in share with me it proceeds. but he, as well as 
myself, wa foiled, and noth came of the toilsom and anxiou search 
but disappoint and bitterness." 

"then it is suppos that the money is still concealed?" 

"I hope so; I hope, as well, that it will be discov by you and 
yours; for sure none can have a better right to it than you, who have 
suffer so much on it account." 

"and yet," remark henry, "I cannot help think it is too secur 
hidden from us. the pictur ha been repeatedli remov from it place, 
and produc no results; so that I fear we have littl to expect from 
ani further or more protract research." 

"I think," said varney, "that you have everyth to expect. the word 
of the die marmaduk bannerworth, you may depend, were not spoken in 
vain; and I have everi reason to believ that, sooner or later, you 
must, without question, becom the possessor of that sum." 

"but ought we rightli to hold it?" 

"who ought more rightli to hold it?" said varney; "answer me that." 

"that' a sensibl enough idea of your's," said the admiral; "and if you 
were twice over a vampyre, I would tell you so. it' a veri sensibl 
idea; I should like to know who ha more right to it than those who have 
had such a world of troubl about it." 

"well, well," said henry, "we must not dispute, as yet, about a sum of 
money that may realli never come to hand. for my own part, I have littl 
to hope for in the matter; but, certainly, noth shall be spared, on 
my part, to effect such a thorough search of the hall as shall certainli 
bring it to light, if it be in existence." 

"I presume, sir franci varney," said charl holland, "that you have 
now complet your narrative?" 

"I have. after event are well known to you. and, now, I have but to lie 
down and die, with the hope of find that rest and consol in the 
tomb which ha been deni me hitherto in thi world. My life ha been a 
stormi one, and full of the result of angri passions. I do hope now, 
that, for the short time I have to live, I shall know someth like 
serenity, and die in peace." 

"you may depend, varney, that, as long as you have an asylum with us," 
said the admiral--"and that you may have as long as you like,--y may 
be at peace. I consid that you have surrend at discretion, and, 
under such circumstances, an enemi alway deserv honour treatment, 
and alway get it on board such a ship as this." 

"there you go again," said jack, "call the hous a ship." 

"what' that to you, if I were to call it a bowsprit? ain't I your 
captain, you lubber, and so, sure to be right, while you are wrong, in 
the natur order of things? but you go and lay down, master varney, and 
rest yourself, for you seem complet done up." 

varney did look fear exhausted; and, with the assist of henri 
and charles, he went into anoth apartment, and laid down upon a couch, 
show great symptom of debil and want of power. 

and now it wa a calm; varney' stay at the cottag of the bannerworth 
wa product of a differ mood of mind than ever he had possess 
before. He look upon them in a veri differ manner to what he had 
been use to. He had, moreover, consider alter prospects; there 
could not be the same hope and expect that he onc had. He wa an 
alter man. He saw in the bannerworth those who had save hi life, 
and who, without doubt, had possess an opinion, not mere obnoxi 
to him, but must have had some fear misgiv concern hi 
character, and that, too, of a natur that usual shut out all hope of 
be receiv into ani family. 

but, in the hour of hi need, when hi life wa in danger, no one els 
would have done what they had done for him, especi when so 
rel placed. 

moreover, he had been concealed, when to do so wa both danger and 
difficult; and then it wa done by flora bannerworth herself. 

time flew by. the mode of pass time at the cottag wa calm and 
serene. varney had seldom wit anyth like it; but, at the same 
time, he felt more at eas than ever he had; he wa charm with the 
societi of flora--in fact, with the whole of the littl knot of 
individu who there collect together; from what he saw he wa 
gratifi in their society; and it seem to allevi hi mental 
disquiet, and the sens he must feel of hi own peculiar position. but 
varney becam ill. the state of mind and bodi he had been in for some 
time past might be the caus of it. He had been much harassed, and 
hunt from place to place. there wa not a moment in which hi life wa 
not in danger, and he had, moreover, more than one case, receiv some 
bodili injuries, bruises, and contus of a desper character; and 
yet he would take no notic of them, but allow them to get well again, 
as best they could. 

[illustration] 

hi escap and injuri had made a deep impress upon hi mind, and 
had no doubt a correspond effect upon hi body, and varney becam 
veri ill. 

flora bannerworth did all that could be done for one in hi pain 
position, and thi greatli ad to the depth of thought that 
occasion beset him, and he could scarc draw one limb after the 
other. 

He walk from room to room in the twilight, at which time he had more 
liberti permit him than at ani other, becaus there wa not the same 
danger in hi do so; for, if onc seen, there could be no manner of 
doubt but he would have been pursu until he wa destroyed, when no 
other mean of escap were at hand; and varney himself felt that there 
could be no chanc of hi again escap from them, for hi physic 
power were fast decaying; he wa not, in fact, the same man. 

He came out into the parlour from the room in which he had been seat 
dure the day. flora and her mother were there, while charl holland 
and henri bannerworth had both at that moment enter the apartment. 

"good evening, miss bannerworth," said sir francis, bow to her, and 
then to her mother, mrs. bannerworth; "and you, mr. holland, I see, have 
been out enjoy the free breez that play over the hot fields. It 
must be refreshing." 

"it is so, sir," said charles. "I wish we could make you a partak in 
our walks." 

"I wish you could with all my heart," said varney. 

"sir francis," said flora, "must be a prison for some short time 
longer yet." 

"I ought not to consid it in ani such light. It is not imprisonment. I 
have taken sanctuary. It is the well spring of life to me," said varney. 

"I hope it may prove so; but how do you find yourself thi evening, sir 
franci varney?" 

"really, it is difficult to say--i fluctuate. At times, I feel as though 
I should drop insens on the earth, and then I feel better than I 
have done for some time previously." 

"doctor chillingworth will be here bye and bye, no doubt; and he must 
see what he can do for you to reliev you of these symptoms," said 
flora. 

"I am much beholden to you--much beholden to you; but I hope to be abl 
to do without the good doctor' aid in thi instance, though I must 
admit I may appear ungrateful." 

"not at all--not at all." 

"have you heard ani news abroad to-day?" inquir varney. 

"none, sir francis--none; there is noth appar stirring; and now, 
go out when you would, you would find noth but what wa old, quiet, 
and familiar." 

"we cannot wish to look upon anyth with mere charm for a mind at 
ease, than we can see under such circumstances; but I fear there are 
some few old and familiar featur that I should find sad havoc in." 

"you would, certainly, for the burn and raze to the ground of 
some places, have made some dismal appearances; but time may effac 
that, and then the evil may die away, and the futur will becom the 
present, should we be abl to allay popular feeling." 

"yes," said sir francis; "but popular prejudices, or justice, or 
feeling, are thing not easili assuaged. the peopl when onc arous go 
on to commit all kind of excess, and there is no one point at which 
they will step short of the complet extirp of some one object or 
other that they have taken a fanci to hunt." 

"the hubbub and excit must subside." 

"the greater the ignor the more persev and the more brutal they 
are," said sir francis; "but I must not complain of what is the 
necessari consequ of their state." 

"it might be otherwise." 

"so it might, and no mischief aris either; but as we cannot divert the 
stream, we may as well bend to the forc of a current too strong to 
resist." 

"the moon is up," said flora, who wish to turn the convers from 
that to anoth topic. "I see it yonder through the trees; it rise red 
and large--it is veri beautiful--and yet there is not a cloud about to 
give it the colour and appear it now wears." 

"exactli so," said sir franci varney; "but the reason is the air is 
fill with a light, invis vapour, that ha the effect you perceive. 
there ha been much evapor go on, and now it show itself in 
give the moon that peculiar larg appear and deep colour." 

"ay, I see; it peep through the trees, the branch of which cut it up 
into variou portions. It is singular, and yet beautiful, and yet the 
earth below seem dark." 

"it is dark; you would be surpris to find it so if you walk about. 
It will soon be lighter than it is at thi present moment." 

"what sound are those?" inquir sir franci varney, as he listen 
attentively. 

"sounds! what sounds?" return henry. 

"the sound of wheel and horses' feet," said varney. 

"I cannot even hear them, much less can I tell what they are," said 
henry. 

"then listen. now they come along the road. cannot you hear them now?" 
said varney. 

"yes, I can," said charl holland; "but I realli don't know what they 
are, or what it can matter to us; we don't expect ani visitors." 

"certainly, certainly," said varney. "I am somewhat apprehens of the 
approach of strang sounds." 

"you are not like to be disturb here," said charles. 

"indeed; I thought so when I had succeed in get into the hous 
near the town, and so far from believ it wa like I should be 
discovered, that I sat on the house-top while the mob surround it." 

"did you not hear them coming?" 

"I did." 

"and yet you did not attempt to escap from them?" 

"no, I could not persuad them I wa not there save by my utter silence. 
I allow them to come too close to leav myself time to 
escape--besides, I could hardli persuad myself there could be ani 
necess for so doing." 

"it wa fortun it wa as it happen afterwards, that you were abl 
to reach the wood, and get out of it unperceiv by the mob." 

"I should have been in an unfortun condit had I been in their 
hand long. A man made of iron would not be abl to resist the brutal 
of those people." 

As they were speaking, a gig, with two men, drove up, follow by one on 
horseback. they stop at the garden-gate, and then tarri to consult 
with each other, as they look at the house. 

"what can they want, I wonder?" inquir henry; "I never saw them 
before." 

"nor i," said charl holland. 

"do you not know them at all?" inquir varney. 

"no," repli flora; "I never saw them, neither can I imagin what is 
their object in come here." 

"did you ever see them before?" inquir henri of hi mother, who held 
up her hand to look more care at the strangers; then, shake her 
head, she declar she had never seen such person as those. 

"I dare say not," said charl holland. "they certainli are not 
gentlemen; but here they come; there is some mistake, I daresay--they 
don't want to come here." 

As they spoke, the two stranger got down; after pick up a topcoat 
they had let fall, they turn round, and deliber put it into the 
chais again; they walk up the path to the door, at which they 
knocked. 

the door wa open by the old woman, when the two men entered. 

"doe franci beauchamp live here?" 

"eh?" said the old woman, who wa a littl deaf, and she put her hand 
behind her ear to catch the sound more distinctly--"eh?--who did you 
say?" 

sir franci varney start as the sound came upon hi ear, but he sat 
still an attent listener. 

"are there ani stranger in the house?" inquir the other officer, 
impatiently. "who is here?" 

"strangers!" said the old woman; "you are the onli stranger that I have 
seen here." 

"come," said the offic to hi companion, "come thi way; there are 
peopl in thi parlour. our busi must be an apolog for ani rude 
we may commit." 

As he spoke he step by the old woman, and lay hi hand upon the 
handl of the door, enter the apartment, at the same time look 
care around the room as if he expect some one. 

"ladies," said the stranger, with an off-hand polit that had 
someth repuls in it, though it wa meant to convey a notion that 
civil wa intended; "ladies, I beg pardon for intruding, but I am 
look for a gentleman." 

"you shall hear from me again soon," said sir francis, in an almost 
impercept whisper. 

"what is the object of thi intrusion?" demand henri bannerworth, 
rise and confront the stranger. "thi is a strang introduction." 

"yes, but not an unusu one," said the stranger, "in these cases--b 
unavoidable, at the least." 

"sir," said charl holland, "if you cannot explain quickli your 
busi here, we will proceed to take those measur which will at 
least rid ourselv of your company." 

"softly, sir. I mean no offence--not the least; but I tell you I do not 
come for ani purpos that is at all conson to my wishes. I am a 
bow-street offic in the execut of my duty--excus me, therefore." 

"whom do you want?" 

"franci beauchamp; and, from the peculiar of the appear of thi 
individu here, I think I may safe request the pleasur of hi 
company." 

varney now rose, and the offic made a rush at him, when he saw him do 
so, saying,-- 

"surrend in the king' name." 

varney, however, paid no attent to that, but rush past, throw 
hi chair down to imped the officer, who could not stay himself, but 
fell over it, while varney made a rush toward the window, which he 
clear at one bound, and cross the road, wa lost to sight in a few 
seconds, in the tree and hedg on the other side. 

"accid will happen," said the officer, as he rose to hi feet; "I 
did not think the fellow would have taken the window in that manner; but 
we have him in view, and that will be enough." 

"in heaven' name," said henry, "explain all about this; we cannot 
understand one word of it--i am at a loss to understand one word of it." 

"we will return and do so presently," said the offic as he dash out 
of the hous after the fugit at a rapid and reckless speed, follow 
by hi companion. 

the man who had been left with the chaise, however, wa the first in the 
chase; see an escap from the window, he immedi guess that he 
wa the man wanted, and, but for an accident, he would have met varney 
at the gate, for, as he wa get out in a hurry, hi foot becam 
entangl with the reins, and he fell to the ground, and varney at the 
same moment step over him. 

"curs hi infern impudence, and d--n these reins!" mutter the man 
in a furi at the accident, and the aggrav circumst of the 
fugit walk over him in such a manner, and so coolli too--it wa 
vexing. 

the man, however, quickli releas himself, and rush after varney 
across the road, and kept on hi track for some time. the moon wa still 
rising, and shed but a gloomi light around. everyth wa almost 
invis until you came close to it. thi wa the reason whi varney and 
hi pursuer met with sever sever accidents--fumbl and hard knock 
against impedi which the light and the rapid flight they were 
take did not admit of their avoid veri well. 

they went on for some time, but it wa evid varney knew the place 
best, and could avoid what the man could not, and that wa the tree and 
the natur impedi of the ground, which varney wa acquaint with. 

for instance, at full speed across a meadow, a hollow would suddenli 
present itself, and to an accustom eye the moonlight might enabl it 
to be distinguish at a glanc what it was, while to one wholli 
unaccustom to it, the hollow would often look like a hillock by such a 
light. thi varney would clear at a bound, which a less agil and 
heavier person would step into, lift up hi leg to meet an 
impediment, when he would find it come down suddenli some six or eight 
inch lower than he anticipated, almost disloc hi leg and neck, 
and produc a correspond loss of breath, which wa not regain by 
the mutter curs upon such a countri where the place were so uneven. 

have come to one of these places, which wa a littl more percept 
than the others, he made a desper jump, but he jump into the middl 
of the hole with such forc that he sprain hi ankle, besid sink 
into a small pond that wa almost dry, be overgrown with rush and 
aquat plants. 

"well?" said the other offic come up--"well?" 

"well, indeed!" said the one who came first; "it' anyth but well. 
d--n all countri excurs say i." 

"why, bob, you don't mean to say as how you are caught in a rat-trap?" 

"oh, you be d----d! I am, ain't i?" 

"yes; but are you go to stop there, or come out, eh? you'll catch 
cold." 

"I have sprain my ankle." 

"well?" 

"it ain't well, I tell you; here have I a sprain foot, and my wind 
broken for a month at least. whi were you not quicker? If you had been 
sharper we should have had the gentleman, i'll swear!" 

"I tumbl down over the chair, and he got out of the window, and I come 
out of the door." 

"well, I got entangl in the reins; but I got off after him, onli hi 
long leg carri him over everything. I tell you what, wilkinson, if I 
were to be born again, and intend to be a runner, I would bespeak a 
pair of long legs." 

"why?" 

"becaus I should be abl to get along better. you have no idea of how 
he skim along the ground; it wa quit beautiful, onli it wasn't good 
to follow it." 

"A regular sky scraper!" 

"yes, or someth of that sort; he look like a patent fli shadow." 

"well, get up and lead the way; we'll follow you." 

"I dare say you will--when I lead the way back there; for as to go 
out yonder, it is quit out of the question. I want supper to-night and 
breakfast to-morrow morning." 

"well, what ha that to do with it?" 

"just thi much: if you follow ani farther, you'll get into the woods, 
and there you'll be, go round and round, like a squirrel in a cage, 
without be abl to get out, and you will there get none of the good 
thing includ under the head of those meals." 

"I think so too," said the third. 

"well, then, let' go back; we needn't run, though it might be as well 
to do so." 

"it would be anyth but well. I don't gallop back, depend upon it." 

the three men now slowli return from their useless chase, and re-trod 
the way they had pass onc in such a hurri that they could hardli 
recogn it. 

"what a dread bump I came against that pole stand there," said 
one. 

"yes, and I came against a hedge-stake, that wa place so as the moon 
didn't show ani light on it. It came into the pit of my stomach. I never 
recollect such a pain in my life; for all the world like a hot coal 
be suddenli and forcibl intrud into your stomach." 

"well, here' the road. I must go up to the hous where I start him 
from. I promis them some explanation. I may as well go and give it to 
them at once." 

"do as you will. I will wait with the horse, else, perhaps, that 
beauchamp will again return and steal him." 

the offic who had first enter the hous now return to the 
bannerworths, saying, 

"I promis you I would give you some explan as to what you have 
witnessed." 

"yes," said henry; "we have been await your return with some anxieti 
and curiosity. what is the mean of all this? I am, as we are all, in 
perfect ignor of the mean of what took place." 

"I will tell you. the person whom you have had here, and goe by the 
name of varney, is name franci beauchamp." 

"indeed! are you assur of this?" 

"yes, perfectli assur of it; I have it in my warrant to apprehend him 
by either name." 

"what crime had he been guilti of?" 

"I will tell you: he ha been _hanged_." 

"hanged!" exclaim all present. 

"what do you mean by that?" ad henry; "I am at a loss to understand 
what you can mean by say he wa hanged." 

"what I say is liter true." 

"pray tell us all about it. We are much interest in the fact; go on, 
sir." 

"well, sir, then I believ it wa for murder that franci beauchamp wa 
hanged--yes, hanged; a common execution, befor a multitud of people, 
collect to wit such an exhibition." 

"good god!" exclaim henri bannerworth. "and was--but that is 
impossible. A dead man come to life again! you must be amus yourself 
at our expense." 

"not i," repli the officer. "here is my warrant; they don't make these 
out in a joke." 

and, as he spoke, he produc the warrant, when it wa evid the 
offic spoke the truth. 

"how wa this?" 

"I will tell you, sir. you see that thi varney wa a regular scamp, 
gamester, rogue, and murderer. He wa hanged, and hung about the usual 
time; he wa cut down and the bodi wa given to some one for dissection, 
when a surgeon, with the hangman, one montgomery, succeed in restor 
the crimin to life." 

"but I alway thought they broke the neck when they were hanged; the 
weight of the bodi would alon do that." 

"oh, dear, no, sir," said the officer; "that is one of the common everi 
day mistakes; they don't break the neck onc in twenti times." 

"indeed!" 

"no; they die of suffoc only; thi man, beauchamp, wa hang thus, 
but they contriv to restor him, and then he assum a new name, and 
left london." 

"but how came you to know all this?" 

"oh! it came to us, as mani thing usual do, in a veri extraordinari 
manner, and in a manner that appear most singular and out of the way; 
but such it was. 

"the execution who wa the mean of hi be restored, or one of 
them, wish to turn him to account, and use to draw a yearli sum of 
money from him, as hush money, to induc them to keep the secret; else, 
the fact of hi have escap punish would subject him to a 
repetit of the same punishment; when, of course, a littl more care 
would be taken that he did not escap a second time." 

"I dare say not." 

"well, you see, varney, or rather beauchamp, wa to pay a heavi sum to 
thi man to keep him quiet, and to permit him to enjoy the life he had 
so strang becom possess of." 

"I see," said holland. 

"well, thi man, montgomery, had alway some kind of suspicion that 
varney would murder him." 

"murder him! and be the mean of save hi life; sure he could not be 
so bad as that." 

"why, you see, sir, thi hangman drew a heavi sum yearli from him; thu 
make him onli a mine of wealth to himself; this, no doubt, would 
rankl in the other' heart, to think he should be so beset, and hold 
life upon such terms." 

"I see, now." 

"yes; and then came the consider that he did not do it from ani 
good motive, mere a selfish one, and he wa consequ under no 
oblig to him for what he had done; besides, self-preserv might 
urg him on, and tell him to do the deed. 

"howev that may be, montgomeri dread it, and wa resolv to punish 
the deed if he could not prevent it. he, therefore, left gener order 
with hi wife, whenev he went on a journey to varney, if he should be 
gone beyond a certain time, she wa to open a certain drawer, and take 
out a seal packet to the magistr at the chief office, who would 
attend to it. 

"he ha been missing, and hi wife did as she wa desired, and now we 
have found what he there mention to be true; but, now, sir, I have 
satisfi you and explain to you whi we intrud upon you, we must now 
leav and seek for him elsewhere." 

"it is most extraordinary, and that is the reason whi hi complexion is 
so singular." 

"veri likely." 

they pour out some wine, which wa hand to the officers, who drank 
and then quit the house, leav the inmat in a state of 
stupefaction, from surpris and amaz at what they had heard from 
the officers. 

there wa a strang feel came over them when they recollect the 
mani occurr they had witnessed, and even the explan of the 
officers; it seem as if some mist had envelop object and render 
them indistinct, but which wa fast rising, and they were becom 
plainer and more distinct everi moment in which they were regarded. 

there wa a long pause, and flora wa about to speak, when suddenli 
there came the sound of a footstep across the garden. It wa slow but 
unsteady, and paus between while until it came close beneath the 
windows. they remain silent, and then some one wa heard to climb up 
the rail of the veranda, and then the curtain were thrust aside, but 
not till after the person outsid had paus to ascertain who wa there. 

then the curtain were opened, and the visag of sir franci varney 
appeared, much altered; in fact, complet worn and exhausted. 

It wa useless to deni it, but he look ghastly--terrific; hi singular 
visag wa as pallid as death; hi eye almost protruding, hi mouth 
opened, and hi breath short, and labour in the extreme. 

He climb over with much difficulty, and stagger into the room, and 
would have spoken, but he could not; befel senseless upon the floor, 
utterli exhaust and motionless. 

there wa a long pause, and each one present look at each other, and 
then they gaze upon the inanim bodi of sir franci varney, which lay 
supin and senseless in the middl of the floor. 

* * * * 

the import of the document, said to be on the dead body, wa such 
that it would admit of no delay befor it wa obtained, and the parti 
determin that it should be commenc instanter. lost time would be an 
object to them; too much hast could hardli be made; and now came the 
question of, "should it be to-night, or not?" 

"certainly," said henri bannerworth; "the sooner we can get it, the 
sooner all doubt and distress will be at an end; and, consid the 
turn of events, that will be desir for all our sakes; besides, we 
know not what unlucki accid may happen to depriv us of what is so 
necessary." 

"there can be none," said mr. chillingworth; "but there is thi to be 
said, thi ha been such an event history, that I cannot say what 
might or what might not happen." 

"we may as well go thi veri night," said charl holland. "I give my 
vote for an immedi exhum of the body. the night is somewhat 
stormy, but noth more; the moon is up, and there will be plenti of 
light." 

"and rain," said the doctor. 

"littl or none," said charl holland. "A few gust of wind now and 
then drive a few heavi plash of rain against the windows, and that 
give a fear sound, which is, in fret, nothing, when you have to 
encount it; but you will go, doctor?" 

"yes, most certainly. We must have some tools." 

"those may be had from the garden," said henry. "tool for the 
exhumation, you mean?" 

"yes; pickaxe, mattocks, and a crowbar; a lantern, and so forth," said 
the doctor. "you see I am at home in this; the fact is, I have had more 
than one affair of thi kind on my hand befor now, and whilst a 
student I have had more than one adventur of a strang character." 

"I dare say, doctor," said charl holland, "you have some sad prank to 
answer for; you don't think of it then, onli when you find them 
accumul in a heap, so that you shall not be abl to escap them; 
becaus they come over your sens when you sleep at night." 

"no, no," said chillingworth; "you are mistaken in that. I have long 
sinc settl all my account of that nature; besides, I never took a 
dead bodi out of a grave but in the name of science, and never for my 
own profit, see I never sold one in my life, or got anyth by it." 

"that is not the fact," said henry; "you know, doctor, you improv your 
own talent and knowledge." 

"yes, yes; I did." 

"well, but you profit by such improvements?" 

"well, granted, I did. how much more did the public not benefit then," 
said the doctor, with a smile. 

"ah, well, we won't argu the question," said charles; "onli it strike 
me that the doctor could never have been a doctor if he had not 
determin upon follow a profession." 

"there may be a littl truth in that," said chillingworth; "but now we 
had better quit the house, and make the best of our way to the spot 
where the unfortun man lie buri in hi unhallow grave." 

"come with me into the garden," said henri bannerworth; "we shall there 
be abl to suit ourselv to what is required. I have a coupl of 
lanterns." 

"one is enough," said chillingworth; "we had better not burden ourselv 
more than we are oblig to do; and we shall find enough to do with the 
tools." 

"yes, they are not light; and the distanc is by far too great to make 
walk agreeabl and easy; the wind blow strong, and the rain appear 
to be come up afresh, and, by the time we have done, we shall find the 
ground will becom slippy, and bad for walking." 

"can we have a conveyance?" 

"no, no," said the doctor; "we could, but we must troubl the turnpik 
man; besides, there is a shorter way across some fields, which will be 
better and safer." 

"well, well," said charl holland; "I do not mind which way it is, as 
long as you are satisfi yourselves. the hors and cart would have 
settl it all better, and done it quicker, besid carri the tools." 

"veri true, veri true," said the doctor; "all that is not without it 
weight, and you shall choos which way you would have it done; for my 
part, I am persuad the expedit on foot is to be prefer for two 
reasons." 

"and what are they?" 

"the first is, we cannot obtain a hors and cart without give some 
detail as to what you want it for, which is awkward, on account of the 
hour. moreover, you could not get one at thi moment in time." 

"that ought to settl the argument," said henri bannerworth; "an 
impossibility, under the circumstances, at onc is a clincher, and one 
that may be allow to have some weight." 

"you may say that," said charles. 

"besid which, you must go a greater distance, and that, too, along the 
main road, which is objectionable." 

"then we are agreed," said charl holland, "and the sooner we are off 
the better; the night grow more and more gloomi everi hour, and more 
inclement." 

"it will serv our purpos the better," said chillingworth. "what we do, 
we may as well do now." 

"come with me to the garden," said henry, "and we will take the tools. 
We can go out the back way; that will preclud ani observ be 
made." 

they all now left the apartment, wrap up in great overcoats, to 
secur themselv against the weather, and also for the purpos of 
conceal themselv from ani chanc passenger. 

In the garden they found the tool they required, and have chosen 
them, they took a lantern, with the mean of get a light when they 
got to their journey' end, which they would do in less than an hour. 

after have duli inspect the state of their efficiency, they start 
away on their expedition. 

the night had turn gloomi and windy; heavi drive mass of cloud 
obscur the moon, which onli now and then wa to be seen, when the 
cloud permit her to peep out. At the same time, there were mani 
drift showers, which last but a few minutes, and then the cloud 
were carri forward by some sudden gust of wind so that, altogether, 
it wa a most uncomfort night as well could be imagined. 

however, there wa no time to lose, and, under all circumstances, they 
could not have chosen a better night for their purpos than the one they 
had; indeed, they could not desir anoth night to be out on such a 
purpose. 

they spoke not while they were within sight of the houses, though at the 
distanc of mani yards, and, at the same time, there wa a nois through 
the tree that would have carri their voic past everi object, 
howev close; but they would make assur doubli sure. 

"I think we are fairli away now," said henry, "from all fear of be 
recognized." 

"to be sure you are. who would recogn us now, if we were met?" 

"no one." 

"I should think not; and, moreover, there would be but small chanc of 
ani evil come from it, even if it were to happen that we were to be 
seen and known. nobodi know what we are go to do, and, if they did, 
there is no illeg in the question." 

"certainli not; but we wish the matter to be quit secret, therefore, we 
don't wish to be seen by ani one while upon thi adventure." 

"exactly," said chillingworth; "and, if you'll follow my guidance, you 
shall meet nobody." 

"we will trust you, most worthi doctor. what have you to say for our 
confidence?" 

"that you will find it is not misplaced." 

just as the doctor had utter the last sound, there came a hearti laugh 
upon the air, which, indeed, sound but a few pace in advanc of them. 
the wind blew toward them, and would, therefore, caus the sound to 
come to them, but not to go away in the direct they were going. 

the whole parti came to a sudden stand still; there wa someth so 
strang in hear a laugh at that moment, especi as chillingworth 
was, at that moment, boast of hi knowledg of the ground and the 
certainti of their meet no one. 

"what is that?" inquir henry. 

"some one laughing, I think," said chillingworth. 

"of that there can be littl or no doubt," said charl holland; "and, 
as peopl do not usual laugh by themselv so heartily, it may be 
presum there are, at least, two." 

"no doubt of it." 

"and, moreover, their purpos cannot be a veri good one, at thi hour of 
the night, and of such a night, too. I think we had better be cautious." 

"hush! follow me silently," said henry. 

As he spoke, he move cautious from the spot where he stood, and, at 
the same time, he wa follow by the whole party, until they came to 
the hedg which skirt a lane, in which were seat three men. 

they had a sort of tent erected, and that wa hung upon a part of the 
hedg which wa to windward of them, so that it shelter them from wind 
and rain. 

henri and chillingworth both peep over the bank, and saw them seat 
beneath thi kind of canopy. they were shabby, gipsy-look men, who 
might be someth else--sheep-stealers, or horse-stealers, in fact, 
anything, even to beggars. 

"I say, jack," said one; "it' no bottl to-night." 

"no; there' nobodi about these part to-night. We are safe, and so are 
they." 

"exactly." 

"besides, you see, those who do happen to be out are not worth talk 
to." 

"no cash." 

"none, not enough to pay turnpik for a walking-slick, at the most." 

"besides, it doe us no good to take a few shill from a poor wretch, 
who ha more in famili than he ha shill in pocket." 

"ay, you are right, quit right. I don't like it myself, I don't; 
besid that, there' fresh risk in everi man you stop, and these poor 
fellow will fight hard for a few shillings, and there is no know 
what an unlucki blow may do for a man." 

"that is veri true. ha anyth been done to-night?" 

"nothing," said one. 

"onli three half crowns," said the other; "that is the extent of the 
common purs to-night." 

"and i," said the third, "I have got a bottl of bad gin from the cat 
and cabbage-stump." 

"how did you manag it?" 

"why, thi way. I went in, and had some beer, and you know I can give a 
long yarn when I want; but it want onli a littl care to deceiv these 
know countrymen, so I talk and talked, until they got quit chatty, 
and then I put the gin in my pocket." 

"good." 

"well, then, the loaf and beef I took out of the safe as I came by, and 
I dare say they know they have lost it by thi time." 

"yes, and so do we. I expect the gin will help to digest the beef, so we 
mustn't complain of the goods." 

"no; give us anoth glass, jim." 

jim held the glass toward him, when the doctor, anim by the spirit 
of mischief, took a good size pebble, and threw it into the glass, 
smash it, and spill the contents. 

In a moment there wa a chang of scene; the men were all terrified, and 
start to their feet, while a sudden gust of wind caus their light to 
go out; at the same time their tent-cloth wa thrown down by the wind, 
and fell across their heads. 

"come along," said the doctor. 

there wa no need of say so, for in a moment the three were as if 
anim by one spirit, and away they scud across the fields, with 
the speed of a race horse. 

In a few minut they were better than half a mile away from the spot. 

"in absenc of all authent information," said the doctor, speak as 
well as he could, and blow prodigi between each word, as though 
he were fetch breath all the way from hi heels, "I think we may 
conclud we are safe from them. We ought to thank our star we came 
across them in the way we did." 

"but, doctor, what in the name of heaven induc you to make such a 
noise, to frighten them, in fact, and to tell them some one wa about?" 

"they were too much terrifi to tell whether it wa one, or fifty. By 
thi time they are out of the county; they knew what they were talk 
about." 

"and perhap we may meet them on the road where we are going, think 
it a rare lone spot where they can hide, and no chanc of their be 
found out." 

[illustration] 

"no," said the doctor; "they will not go to such a place; it ha by far 
too bad a name for even such men as those to go near, much less stop 
in." 

"I can hardli think that," said charl holland, "for these fellow are 
too terrifi for their person safety, to think of the superstiti 
fear with which a place may be regarded; and these men, in such a place 
as the one you speak of, they will be at home." 

"well, well, rather than be done, we must fight for it; and when you 
come to consid we have one pick and two shovels, we shall be in full 
force." 

"well said, doctor; how far have we to go?" 

"not more than a quarter of a mile." 

they pursu their way through the fields, and under the hedge-rows, 
until they came to a gate, where they stop awhile, and began to 
consult and to listen. 

"A few yard up here, on the left," said the doctor; "I know the spot; 
besides, there is a particular mark. now, then, are you all ready?" 

"yes, all." 

"here," said the doctor, point out the mark by which the spot might 
be recognized; "here is the spot, and I think we shall not be half a 
foot out of our reckoning." 

"then let us begin instanter," said henry, as he seiz hold of the 
pickaxe, and began to loosen the earth by mean of the sharp end. 

"that will do for the present," said chillingworth; "now let me and 
charl take a turn with our shovels, and you will get on again 
presently. throw the earth up on the bank in one heap, so that we can 
put it on again without attract ani attent to the spot by it 
be left in clod and uneven." 

"exactly," said henry, "els the bodi will be discovered." 

they began to shovel away, and continu to do so, after it had been 
pick up, work alternately, until at length charl stuck hi 
pick-ax into someth soft, and upon pull it up, he found it wa 
the body. 

A dread odour now aros from the spot, and they were at no loss to 
tell where the bodi lay. the pick-ax had stuck into the deceased' rib 
and clothing, and thu lift it out of it place. 

"here it is," said the doctor; "but I needn't tell you that; the 
charnel-hous smell is enough to convinc you of the fact of where it 
is." 

"I think so; just show a light upon the subject, doctor, and then we can 
see what we are about--do you mind, doctor--y have the manag of 
the lantern, you know?" 

"yes, yes," said chillingworth; "I see you have it--don't be in a hurry, 
but do thing deliber and coolli whatev you do--you will not be 
so liabl to make mistakes, or to leav anyth undone." 

"there will be noth of ani use to you here, doctor, in the way of 
dissection, for the flesh is one mass of decay. what a horribl sight, 
to be sure!" 

"it is; but hasten the search." 

"well, I must; though, to confess the truth, i'd sooner handl anyth 
than this." 

"it is not the most pleasant thing in the world, for there is no know 
what may be the result--what creep thing ha made a home of it." 

"don't mention anyth about it." 

henri and charl holland now began to search the pocket of the cloth 
of the dead body, in one of which wa someth hard, that felt like a 
parcel. 

"what have you got there?" said chillingworth, as he held hi lantern up 
so that the light fell upon the ghastli object that they were handling. 

"I think it is the prize," said charl holland; "but we have not got it 
out yet, though I dare say it won't be long first, if thi wind will but 
hold good for about five minutes, and keep the stench down." 

they now tore open the packet and pull out the papers, which appear 
to have been secret upon hi person. 

"be sure there are none on ani other part of the body," said 
chillingworth, "becaus what you do now, you had better do well, and 
leav noth to after thought, becaus it is frequent impracticable." 

"the advic is good," said henry, who made a second search, but found 
nothing. 

"we had better re-buri him," said the doctor; "it had better be done 
cleanly. well, it is a sad hole for a last resting-place, and yet I do 
not know that it matters--it is all a matter of taste--th fashion of 
the class, or the particular custom of the country." 

there wa but littl to be said against such an argument, though the 
custom of the age had caus them to look upon it more as a matter of 
feel than in such a philosoph sens as that in which the doctor 
had put it. 

"well, there he is now--shovel the earth in, charles," said henri 
bannerworth, as he himself set the example, which wa speedili and 
vigor follow by charl holland, when they were not long befor 
the earth wa thrown in and cover up with care, and trodden down so 
that it should not appear to be moved. 

"thi will do, I think," said henry. 

"yes; it is not quit the same, but I dare say no one will tri to make 
ani discoveri in thi place; besides, if the rain continu to come 
down veri heavy, why, it will wash much of it away, and it will make it 
look all alike." 

there wa littl induc to hover about the spot, but henri could not 
forbear hold up the paper to the light of the lantern to ascertain 
what they were. 

"are they all right?" inquir the doctor. 

"yes," repli henry, "yes. the dearbrook estate. oh! yes; they are the 
paper I am in want of." 

"it is singularli fortunate, at least, to be success in secur 
them. I am veri glad a live person ha possess of them, els it 
would have been veri difficult to have obtain it from them." 

"so it would; but now homeward is the word, doctor; and on my word there 
is reason to be glad, for the rain is come on veri fast now, and there 
is no moon at all--w had better step out." 

they did, for the three walk as fast as the natur of the soil would 
permit them, and the dark of the night. 




chapter lxxxix. 

tell what becam OF the second vampyr who sought varney. 


[illustration] 

We left the hungarian nobleman swim down the stream; he swam slowly, 
and use but littl exert in do so. He appear to use hi hand 
onli as a mean of assistance. 

the stream carri him onwards, and he aid himself so far that he kept 
the middl of the stream, and float along. 

where the stream wa broad and shallow, it sometim left him a moment 
or two, without be strong enough to carri him onwards; then he would 
pause, as if gain strength, and final he would, when he had rested, 
and the water came a littl faster, and lift him, make a desper 
plunge, and swim forward, until he again came in deep water, and then he 
went slowli along with the stream, as he support himself. 

It wa strang thu to see a man go down slowly, and without ani 
effort whatever, pass through shade and through moonlight--now lost 
in the shadow of the tall trees, and now emerg into that part of the 
stream which ran through meadow and cornfields, until the stream 
widened, and then, at length, a ferry-hous wa to be seen in the 
distance. 

then came the ferryman out of hi hut, to look upon the beauti 
moonlight scene. It wa cold, but pure, and brilliantli light. the 
chast moon wa sail through the heavens, and the star diminish in 
their lustr by the power of the lumin goddess of night. 

there wa a small cottage--true, it wa somewhat larger than wa 
gener suppos by ani casual observ who might look at it. the 
place wa rambling, and built chiefli of wood; but in it live the 
ferryman, hi wife, and family; among these wa a young girl about 
seventeen year of age, but, at the same time, veri beautiful. 

they had been prepar their supper, and the ferryman himself walk 
out to look at the river and the shadow of the tall tree that stood on 
the hill opposite. 

while thu employed, he heard a plash in the water, and on turn 
toward the quarter whenc the sound proceed for a few yards, he came 
to the spot where he saw the stranger struggl in the stream. 

"good god!" he mutter to himself, as he saw the struggl continued; 
"good god! he will sink and drown." 

As he spoke, he jump into hi boat and push it off, for the purpos 
of stop the descent of the bodi down the stream, and in a moment or 
two it came near to him. He muttered,-- 

"come, come--h tri to swim; life is not gone yet--h will do now, if 
I can catch hold of him. swim with one' face under the stream 
doesn't say much for hi skill, though it may account for the fact that 
he don't cri out." 

As the drown man neared, the ferryman held on by the boat-hook, and 
stoop down, he seiz the drown man by the hair of the head, and 
then paused. 

after a time, he lift him up, and place him across the edg of the 
boat, and then, with some struggl of hi own, he wa roll over into 
the boat. 

"you are safe now," mutter the ferryman. 

the stranger spoke not, but sat or lean against the boat' head, 
sob and catch at hi breath, and spit off hi stomach the 
water it might be presum he had swallowed. 

the ferryman put back to the shore, when he paused, and secur hi 
boat, and then pull the stranger out, saying,-- 

"do you feel ani better now?" 

"yes," said the stranger; "I feel I am living--thank to you, my good 
friend; I owe you my life." 

"you are welcom to that," repli the ferryman; "it cost me nothing; 
and, as for my littl trouble, I should be sorri to think of that, when 
a fellow-being' life wa in danger." 

"you have behav veri well--veri well, and I can do littl more now 
than thank you, for I have been rob of all I possess about me at 
the moment." 

"oh! you have been robbed?" 

"aye, truly, I have, and have been thrown into the water, and thu I 
have been nearli murdered." 

"it is lucki you escap from them without further injury," said the 
ferryman; "but come in doors, you must be mad to stand here in the 
cold." 

"thank you; your hospit is great, and, at thi moment, of the 
greatest import to me." 

"such as we have," said the honest ferryman, "you shall be welcom to. 
come in--com in." 

He turn round and led the way to the house, which he entered, 
saying--a he open the small door that led into the main apartment, 
where all the famili were assembled, wait for the almost onli meal 
they had had that day, for the ferryman had not the means, befor the 
sun had set, of send for food, and then it wa a long way befor it 
could be found, and then it wa late befor they could get it,-- 

"wife, we have a stranger to sleep with us to-night, and for whom we 
must prepar a bed." 

"A stranger!" echo the wife--"a stranger, and we so poor!" 

"yes; one whose life I have saved, and who wa nearli drowned. We cannot 
refus hospit upon such an occas as that, you know, wife." 

the wife look at the stranger as he enter the room, and sat down by 
the fire. 

"I am sorry," he said, "to intrud upon you; but I will make you amend 
for the interrupt and inconveni I may caus you; but it is too 
late to appli elsewhere, and yet I am doubtful, if there were, whether I 
could go ani further." 

"no, no," said the ferryman; "I am sure a man who ha been beaten and 
robbed, and thrown into a rapid and, in some parts, deep stream, is not 
fit to travel at thi time of night." 

"you are lone about here," said the stranger, as he shiver by the 
fire. 

"yes, rather; but we are use to it." 

"you have a family, too; that must help to lighten the hour away, and 
help you over the long evenings." 

"so you may think, stranger, and, at times, so it is; but when food run 
short, it is a long while to daylight, befor ani more money can be had. 
To be sure, we have fish in the river, and we have what we can grow in 
the garden; but these are not all the want that we feel, and those 
other are sometim pinching. however, we are thank for what we 
have, and complain but littl when we can get no more; but sometim we 
do repine--though I cannot say we ought--but I am mere relat the 
fact, whether it be right or wrong." 

"exactly. how old is your daughter?" 

"she is seventeen come allhallow' eve." 

"that is not far hence," said the stranger. "I hope I may be in thi 
part of the country--and I think I shall--i will on that eve pay you a 
visit; not one on which I shall be a burden to you, but one more use 
to you, and more conson to my character." 

"the futur will tell us all about that," said the ferryman; "at present 
we will see what we can do, without complaining, or tax anybody." 

the stranger and the ferryman sat convers for some time befor the 
fire, and then the latter point out to him which wa hi bed--on made 
up near the fire, for the sake of it warmth; and then the ferryman 
retir to the next room, a place which wa mere divid by an 
imperfect partition. 

however, they all fell soundli asleep. the hour on that day had been 
longer than usual; there wa not that buoyanc of spirit; when they 
retired, they fell off into a heavy, deep slumber. 

from thi they were suddenli arous by loud cri and pierc scream 
from one of the family. 

So loud and shrill were the cries, that they all start up, terrifi 
and bewild beyond measure, unabl to appli their faculti to ani 
one object. 

"help--help, father!--help!" shriek the voic of the young girl whom 
we have befor noticed. 

the ferryman jump up, and rush to the spot where hi daughter lay. 

"fanny," he said--"fanny, what ail thee--what ail thee? tell me, my 
dear child." 

"oh!" she exclaimed, almost choked--"oh, father! are we all alone? I am 
terrified." 

"what ail thee--what ail thee? tell me what caus you to scream out 
in such a manner?" 

"i--i--that is I, father, thought--but no, I am sure it wa reality. 
where is the stranger?" 

"A light--a light!" shout the fisherman. 

In anoth moment a light wa brought him, and he discov the 
stranger reclin in hi bed, but awake, and look around him, as if 
in the utmost amazement. 

"what ha happened?" he said--"what ha happened?" 

"that is more than I know as yet," the man replied. "come, fanny," he 
added, "tell me what it is you fear. what caus you to scream out in 
that dread manner?" 

"oh, father--th vampyre!" 

"great god! what do you mean, fanny, by that?" 

"I hardli know, father. I wa fast asleep, when I thought I felt 
someth at my throat; but be veri sound asleep, I did not 
immedi awake. present I felt the sharp pang of teeth be driven 
into the flesh of my neck--i awoke, and found the vampyr at hi repast. 
oh, god! oh, god! what shall I do?" 

"stay, my child, let us examin the wound," said the fisherman, and he 
held the candl to the spot where the vampyre' teeth had been applied. 
there, sure enough, were teeth marks, such as a human being' would make 
were they applied, but no blood had been drawn therefrom. 

"come, come, fanny; so far, by divin providence, you are not injured; 
anoth moment, and the mischief would have been done entir and 
complete, and you would have been hi victim." 

then turn to the stranger, he said,-- 

"you have had some hand in this. No human be but you could come into 
thi place. the cottag door is secured. you must be the vampyre." 

"i!" 

"yes; who els could?" 

"i!--a heaven' my judge--but there, it' useless to speak of it; I 
have not been out of my bed. In thi place, dark as it is, and less use 
to dark than you, I could not even find my way about.--it is 
impossible." 

"get out of your bed, and let me feel," said the ferryman, 
peremptorily--"get out, and I will soon tell." 

the stranger arose, and began to dress himself, and the ferryman 
immedi felt the bed on which he had been lying; but it wa ice 
cold--so cold that he start upon hi leg in an instant, exclaim 
with vehemence,-- 

"it is you, vile wretch! that ha attempt to steal into the cottag of 
the poor man, and then to rob him of hi onli child, and that child of 
her heart' blood, base ingrate!" 

"mi friend, you are wrong, entir wrong. I am not the creatur you 
believ me. I have slept, and slept soundly, and awok not until your 
daughter screamed." 

"scoundrel!--liar!--bas wretch! you shall not remain aliv to injur 
those who have but one life to lose." 

As he spoke, the ferryman made a desper rush at the vampyre, and 
seiz him by the throat, and a violent struggl ensued, in which the 
superior strength of the ferryman prevailed, and he brought hi 
antagonist to the earth, at the same time bestow upon him some 
desper blows. 

"thou shall go to the same element from which I took thee," said the 
ferryman, "and there swim or sink as thou wilt until some one shall drag 
thee ashore, and when they do, may they have a better return than i." 

As he spoke, he drag along the stranger by main forc until they came 
to the bank of the river, and then pausing, to observ the deepest part, 
he said,-- 

"here, then, you shall go." 

the vampyr struggled, and endeavour to speak, but he could not; the 
grasp at hi throat prevent all attempt at speech; and then, with a 
sudden exert of hi strength, the ferryman lift the stranger up, 
and heav him some distanc into the river. 

then in deep water sank the body. 

the ferryman watch for some moments, and farther down the stream he 
saw the bodi again rise upon the current and struggl slightly, as for 
life--now whirl around and around, and then carri forward with the 
utmost velocity. 

thi continu as far as the moonlight enabl the ferryman to see, and 
then, with a slow step and cloud brow, he return to hi cottage, 
which he entered, and close the door. 




chapter xc. 

dr. chillingworth AT the hall.--th encount OF mystery.--th 
conflict.--th rescue, and the picture. 


[illustration] 

there have been mani event that have pass rapidli in thi our 
narrative; but more have yet to come befor we can arriv at that point 
which will clear up much that appear to be most mysteri and 
unaccountable. 

doctor chillingworth, but ill satisfi with the event that had yet 
taken place, determin onc more upon visit the hall, and there to 
attempt a discoveri of someth respect the mysteri apart in 
which so much ha alreadi taken place. 

He commun hi design to no one; he resolv to prosecut the 
inquiri alone. He determin to go there and await whatev might turn 
up in the shape of events. He would not for onc take ani companion; 
such adventur were often best prosecut alone--they were most easili 
brought to someth like an explanatori position, one person can often 
consid matter more coolli than more. At all events, there is more 
secreci than under ani other circumstances. 

perhap thi often is of greater consequ than mani others; and, 
moreover, when there is more than one, someth is usual overdone. 
where one adventur individu will rather draw back in a pursuit, 
more than one would induc them to urg each other on. 

In fact, one in such a case could act the part of a spy--a secret 
observer; and in that case can catch peopl at time when they could not 
under ani other circumst be caught or observ at all. 

"I will go," he muttered; "and should I be compel to run away again, 
why, nobodi know anyth about it and nobodi will laugh at me." 

thi wa all veri well; but mr. chillingworth wa not the man to run 
away without suffici cause. but there wa so much mysteri in all thi 
that he felt much interest in the issu of the affair. but thi issu 
he could not command; at the same time he wa determin to sit and 
watch, and thu becom certain that either someth or noth wa to 
take place. 

even the knowledg of that much--that some inexplic action wa still 
go on--wa far prefer to the uncertainti of not know whether 
what had onc been go on wa still so or not, because, if it had 
ceased, it wa probabl that noth more would ever be known concern 
it, and the mysteri would still be a mysteri to the end of time. 

"it shall be fathom if there be ani possibl of it be 
discovered," mutter chillingworth. "who would have thought that so 
quiet and orderli a spot as this, our quiet village, would have suffer 
so much commot and disturbance? far from everi caus of nois and 
strife, it is quit as great a matter of mysteri as the vampyr busi 
itself. 

"I have been so mix up in thi busi that I must go through with 
it. By the way, of the mysteries, the greatest that I have met with is 
the fact of the vampyr have anyth to do with so quiet a famili as 
the bannerworths." 

mr. chillingworth ponder over the thought; but yet he could make 
noth of it. It in no way tend to elucid anyth connect with 
the affair, and it wa much too strang and singular in all it part to 
be submit to ani process of thought, with ani hope of come to 
anyth like a conclus upon the subject--that must remain until some 
fact were ascertained, and to obtain them mr. chillingworth now 
determin to try. 

thi wa precis what wa most desir in the present state of 
affairs; while thing remain in the present state of uncertainty, 
there would be much more of mysteri than could ever be brought to light. 

one or two circumst clear up, the minor one would follow in the 
same train, and they would be explain by the others; and if ever that 
happi state of thing were to come about, why, then there would be a 
perfect calm in the town. 

As mr. chillingworth wa go along, he thought he observ two men 
sit insid a hedge, close to a hay-rick, and think neither of 
them had ani busi there, he determin to listen to their 
conversation, and ascertain if it had ani evil tendency, or whether it 
concern the late event. 

have approach near the gate, and they be on the other side, he 
got over without ani noise, and, unperceiv by either of them, crept 
close up to them. 

"so you haven't long come from sea?" 

"no; I have just landed." 

"how is it you have thrown asid your seaman' cloth and taken to 
these?" 

"just to escap be found out." 

"found out! what do you mean by that? have you been up to anything?" 

"yes, I have, jack. I have been up to something, wors luck to me; but 
i'm not to be blame either." 

"what is it all about?" inquir hi companion. "I alway thought you 
were such a steady-go old file that there wa no go out of the 
even path with you." 

"nor would there have been, but for one simpl circumstance." 

"what wa that?" 

"I will tell you, jack--i will tell you; you will never betray me, I am 
sure." 

"never, by heavens!" 

"well, then, listen--it wa this. I had been some time aboard our 
vessel. I had sail before, but the captain never show ani sign of 
be a bad man, and I wa will enough to sail with him again. 

"he knew I wa engag to a young woman in thi country, and that I wa 
will to work hard to save money to make up a comfort home for us 
both, and that I would not sail again, but that I intend to remain 
ashore, and make up my mind to a shore life." 

"well, you would have a hous then?" 

"exactly; and that' what I wish to do. well, I made a small ventur 
in the cargo, and thought, by so doing, that I should have a chanc of 
realiz a sum of money that would put us both in a comfort line of 
business. 

"well, we went on veri smoothli until we were come back. We had 
dispos of the cargo, and I had receiv some money, and thi seem to 
caus our captain to hate me, becaus I had been successful; but I 
thought there wa someth els in it than that, but I could not tell 
what it wa that made him so intoler cross and tyrannous. 

"well, I found out, at length, he knew my intend wife. He knew her 
veri well, and at the same time he made everi effort he could to induc 
me to commit some act of disobedi and insubordination; but I would 
not, for it seem to me he wa tri all he could to prevent my do 
my duti with anyth like comfort. 

"however, I learn the caus of all thi afterwards. It wa told me by 
one of the crew. 

"'bill,' said my mate, 'look out for yourself.' 

"'what' in the wind?' said I. 

"'onli the captain ha made a dead set at you, and you'll be a lucki man 
if you escape.' 

"'what' it all about?' said I. 'I cannot understand what he means. I 
have done noth wrong. I don't see whi I should suddenli be treat in 
thi way.' 

"'it' all about your girl, bill.' 

"'indeed!' said I. 'what can that have to do with the captain? he know 
noth of her.' 

"'oh, yes, he does,' he said. 'if it were not for you he would have the 
girl himself.' 

"'i see now,' said I. 

"'ay, and so can a blind man if you open hi eyes; but he want to make 
you do wrong--to goad you on to do someth that will give him the 
power of disgrac you, and, perhaps, of punish you.' 

"'he won't do that,' said I. 

"'i am glad to hear you say so, bill; for, to my mind, he ha made up 
hi mind to go the whole length against you. I can't make it out, unless 
he wish you were dead.' 

"'i dare say he does,' said I; 'but I will take care I will live to 
exact a reckon when he come ashore.' 

"'that is the best; and when we are paid off, bill, if you will take it 
out of him, and pay him off, why, I don't care if I lend you a hand.' 

"'we'll say more about that, dick,' said I, 'when we get ashor and are 
paid off. If we are overheard now, it will be said that we are 
conspiring, or commit mutiny, or someth of that sort.' 

"'you are right, bill,' he said--'you are right. we'll say no more about 
thi now, but you may reckon upon me when we are no longer under hi 
orders.' 

"'then there' no danger, you know.' 

"well, we said noth about this, but I thought of it, and I had caus 
enough, too, to think of it; for each day the captain grew more and more 
tyrann and brutal. I knew not what to do, but kept my resolut of 
do my duti in spite of all he could do, though I don't mind admit 
I had more than one mind to kill him and myself afterwards. 

"however, I contriv to hold out for anoth week or two, and then we 
came into port, and were releas from hi tyranny. I got paid off, and 
then I met my messmate, and we had some talk about the matter. 

"'the worst of it is,' said I, 'we shall have some difficulti to catch 
him; and, if we can, i'll be sworn we shall give him enough to last him 
for at least a voyag or two.' 

"'he ought to have it smart,' said my messmate; 'and I know where he is 
to be found.' 

"'do you?--at what hour?' 

"'late at night, when he may be met with as he come from a hous where 
he spend hi evenings." 

"'that will be the best time in the world, when we shall have less 
interfer than at ani other time in the day. but we'll have a turn 
to-night if you will be with me, as he will be abl to make too good a 
defenc to one. It will be a fight, and not a chastisement.' 

"'it will. I will be with you; you know where to meet me. I shall be at 
the old spot at the usual time, and then we will go.' 

"we parted; and, in the evening, we both went together, and sought the 
place where we should find him out, and set upon him to advantage. 

"he wa nearli two hour befor he came; but when he did come, we 
salut him with a rap on the head, that made him hold hi tongue; and 
then we set to, and gave him such a tremend drubbing, that we left 
him insensible; but he wa soon taken away by some watchmen, and we 
heard that he wa do well; but he wa dread beaten; indeed, it 
would take him some week befor he could be about in hi duties. 

"he wa fear enraged, and offer fifti pound reward to ani one 
who could give him inform as to who it wa that assault him. 

"I believ he had a pretti good notion of who it was; but he could not 
swear to me; but still, see he wa busi himself too much about me, 
I at onc walk away, and went on my way to anoth part of the 
country." 

"to get married?" 

"ay, and to get into business." 

"then, thing are not quit so bad as I thought for at first." 

"no--no, not so bad but what they might have been wors a great deal; 
onli I cannot go to sea ani more, that' quit certain." 

"you needn't regret that." 

"I don't know." 

"whi not know? are you not go to be married?--ain't that much 
better?" 

"I can't say," repli the sailor; "there' no know how my bargain 
may turn out; if she doe well, why, then the cruis is over; but 
noth short of that will satisfi me; for if my wife is at all not what 
I wish her to be, why, I shall be off to sea." 

"I don't blame you, either; I would do so too, if it were possible; but 
you see, we can't do so well on land as you do at sea; we can be 
follow about from pillar to post, and no bound set to our 
persecution." 

"that' true enough," said the other; "we can cut and run when we have 
had enough of it. however, I must get to the village, as I shall sleep 
there to-night, if I find my quarter comfort enough." 

"come on, then, at once," said hi companion; "it' get dark now; 
and you have no time to lose." 

these two now got up, and walk away toward the village; and 
chillingworth aros also, and pursu hi way toward the hall, while he 
remark to himself,-- 

"well--well, they have noth to do with that affair at all events. 
by-the-bye, I wonder what amount of femal are desert in the navy; 
they certainli have an advantag over landsmen, in the respect of be 
tie to tiresom partners; they can, at least, for a season, get a 
releas from their troubles, and be free at sea." 

however, mr. chillingworth got to the hall, and unobserved, for he had 
been especi care not to be seen; he had watch on all sides, and 
no sign of a solitari human be had he seen, that could in ani way 
make the slightest observ upon him. 

indeed, he had shelter himself from observ at everi point of hi 
road, especi so when near bannerworth hall, where there were plenti 
of corner to enabl him to do so; and when he arriv there, he enter 
at the usual spot, and then sat down a few moment in the bower. 

"I will not sit here," he muttered. "I will go and have a watch at that 
mysteri picture; there is the centr of attraction, be it what it 
may." 

As he spoke, he aros and walk into the house, and enter the same 
apart which ha been so often mention to the reader. 

here he took a chair, and sat down full befor the picture, and began to 
contempl it. 

"well, for a good likeness, I cannot say I ever saw anyth more 
unprepossessing. I am sure such a counten as that could never have 
won a femal heart. surely, it is more calcul to terrifi the 
imagination, than to sooth the affect of the timid and shrink 
female. 

"however, I will have an inspect of the picture, and see if I can 
make anyth of it." 

As he spoke, he put hi hand upon the pictur with the intent of 
remov it, when it suddenli wa thrust open, and a man step down. 

the doctor wa for a moment complet staggered, it wa so utterli 
unexpected, and he step back a pace or two in the first emot of 
hi surprise; but thi soon pass by, and he prepar to close with hi 
antagonist, which he did without speak a word. 

there wa a fair struggl for more than two or three minutes, dure 
which the doctor struggl and fought most manfully; but it wa evid 
that mr. chillingworth had met with a man who wa hi superior in point 
of strength, for he not onli withstood the utmost forc that 
chillingworth could bring against him, but maintain himself, and 
turn hi strength against the doctor. 

chillingworth pant with exertion, and found himself gradual lose 
ground, and wa upon the point of be thrown down at the merci of hi 
adversary, who appear to be inclin to take all advantag of him, 
when an occurr happen that alter the state of affair 
altogether. 

while they were struggling, the doctor born partial to the earth--but 
yet struggling, suddenli hi antagonist releas hi hold, and stagger 
back a few paces. 

"there, you swab--tak that; I am yard-arm and yard-arm with you, you 
piratical-look craft--you lubberly, buccan son of a fish-fag." 

before, however, jack pringle, for it wa he who came so opportun to 
the rescu of doctor chillingworth, could find time to finish the 
sentence, he found himself assail by the veri man who, but a minut 
before, he had, as he thought, place _hor de combat_. 

[illustration] 

A desper fight ensued, and the stranger made the greatest effort to 
escap with the picture, but found he could not get off without a 
desper struggle. He was, at length, compel to relinquish the hope 
of carri that off, for both mr. chillingworth and jack pringl were 
engag hand to hand; but the stranger struck jack so heavi a blow on 
the head, that made him reel a few yards, and then he escap through 
the window, leav jack and mr. chillingworth master of the field, but 
by no mean unscath by the conflict in which they had been engaged. 




chapter xci. 

the grand consult broken UP BY mrs. chillingworth, and the 
disappear OF varney. 


[illustration] 

remark wa the chang that had taken place in the circumst of 
the bannerworth family. from a state of great despondency, and, indeed, 
absolut poverty, they had suddenli risen to comfort and independence. 

It seem as if the cloud that had obscur their destiny, had now, 
with one accord, dissipated, and that a brighter day wa dawning. not 
onli had the circumst of mental terror which had surround them 
given way in a great measur to the light of truth and reflection, but 
those pecuniari distress which had press upon them for a time, were 
likewis pass away, and it seem probabl that they would be in a 
prosper condition. 

_the acquisit of the titl deed of the estate_, which they thought 
had pass away from the famili for ever, becam to them, in their 
present circumstances, an immens acquisition, and brought to their 
mind a feel of great contentment. 

mani person in their situat would have been extrem satisfi at 
have secur so strong an interest in the mind of the old admiral, who 
wa veri wealthy, and who, from what he had alreadi said and done, no 
doubt fulli intend to provid handsom for the bannerworth family. 

and not onli had they thi to look forward to, if they had chosen to 
regard it as an advantage, but they knew that by the marriag of flora 
with charl holland she would have a fortun at her disposal, while he 
(charles) would be the last man in the world to demur at ani reason 
amount of it be lavish upon her mother and her brothers. 

but all thi did not suit the high and independ spirit of henri 
bannerworth. He wa one who would rather have eaten the dust that he 
procur for himself by some meritori exertion, than have feast on 
the most delic viand place befor him from the resourc of 
another. 

but now that he knew thi small estate, the titl deed of which had 
been so singularli obtained, had onc realli belong to the family, but 
had been risk and lost at the gaming-table, he had no earthli scrupl 
in call such properti again hi own. 

As to the larg sum of money which sir franci varney in hi confess 
had declar to have found it way into the possess of marmaduk 
bannerworth, henri did not expect, and scarc wish to becom 
possess of wealth through so taint a source. 

"no," he said to himself frequently; "no--i care not if that wealth be 
never forthcoming, which wa so badli got possess of. let it sink 
into the earth, if, indeed, it be buri there; or let it rot in some 
unknown corner of the old mansion. I care not for it." 

In thi view of the case he wa not alone, for a famili more unselfish, 
or who care so littl for money, could scarc have been found; but 
admir bell and charl holland argu now that they had a right to the 
amount of money which marmaduk bannerworth had hidden somewhere, and 
the old admir reason upon it rather ingeniously, for he said,-- 

"I suppos you don't mean to disput that the money belong to somebody, 
and in that case I should like to know who els it belong to, if not 
to you? how do you get over that, master henry?" 

"I don't attempt to get over it at all," said henry; "all I say is, that 
I do dislik the whole circumst connect with it, and the manner 
in which it wa come by; and, now that we have a small independence, I 
hope it will not be found. but, admiral, we are go to hold a famili 
consult as to what we shall do, and what is to becom of varney. He 
ha convinc me of hi relationship to our family, and, although hi 
conduct ha certainli been extrem equivocal, he ha made all the 
amend in hi power; and now, as he is get old, I do not like to 
throw him upon the wide world for a subsistence." 

"you don't contemplate," said the admiral, "let him remain with you, 
do you?" 

"no; that would be objection for a varieti of reasons; and I could 
not think of it for a moment." 

"I should think not. the idea of sit down to breakfast, dinner, tea, 
and supper with a vampyre, and take your grog with a fellow that suck 
other people' blood!" 

"really, admiral, you do not realli still cling to the idea that sir 
franci varney is a vampyre." 

"I realli don't know; he cling to it himself, that' all I can say; and 
I think, under those circumstances, I might as well give him the benefit 
of hi own proposition, and suppos that he is a vampyre." 

"really, uncle," said charl holland, "I did think that you had 
discard the notion." 

"did you? I have been think of it, and it ain't so desir to be a 
vampyre, I am sure, that ani one should pretend to it who is not; 
therefore, I take the fellow upon hi own showing. He is a vampyr in 
hi own opinion, and so I don't see, for the life of me, whi he should 
not be so in ours." 

"well," said henry, "wave all that, what are we to do with him? 
circumst seem to have thrown him complet at our mercy. what are 
we to do with him, and what is to becom of him for the future?" 

"i'll tell you what i'll do," said the admiral. "if he were ten time a 
vampyre, there is some good in the fellow; and I will give him enough to 
live upon if he will go to america and spend it. they will take good 
care there that he suck no blood out of them; for, although an american 
would alway rather lose a drop of blood than a dollar, they keep a 
pretti sharp look out upon both." 

"the propos can be made to him," said henry, "at all events. It is one 
which I don't dislike, and probabl one that he would embrac at once; 
becaus he seems, to me, to have complet done with ambition, and to 
have abandon those project concern which, at one time, he took 
such a world of trouble." 

"don't you trust to that," said the admiral. "what' bred in the bone 
don't so easili get out of the flesh; and onc or twice, when master 
varney ha been talking, I have seen those odd look eye of hi flash 
up for a moment, as if he were quit readi to begin hi old caper 
again, and alarm the whole countri side." 

"I must confess," said charl holland, "that I myself have had the 
impress onc or twice that varney wa onli subdu for a time, and 
that, with a proper amount of provocation, he would becom again a veri 
seriou fellow, and to the full as troublesom as he ha been." 

"do you doubt hi sincerity?" said henry. 

"no, I do not do that, henry: I think varney fulli mean what he says; 
but I think, at the same time, that he ha for so long lead a strange, 
wild, and reckless life, that he will find it veri far from easy, if 
inde possible, to shake off hi old habit and settl down quietly, if 
not to say comfortably." 

"I regret," said henry, "that you have such an impression; but, while I 
do so, I cannot help admit that it is, to a consider extent, no 
more than a reason one; and perhaps, after all, my expect that 
varney will give us no more trouble, onli amount to a hope that he will 
not do so, and noth more. but let us consider; there seem to be some 
slight differ of opinion among us, as to whether we should take up 
our resid at thi new hous of ours, which we did not know we owned, 
at dearbrook, or proceed to london, and there establish ourselves, or 
again return to bannerworth hall, and, by a judici expenditur of 
some money, make that a more habit place than it ha been for the 
last twenti years." 

"now, i'll tell you what," said the admiral, "I would do. it' quit out 
of the question for ani bodi to live long unless they see a ship; don't 
you think so, miss flora?" 

"why, how can you ask flora such a question, uncle," said charl 
holland, "when you know she don't care a straw about ships, and onli 
look upon admir as natur curiosities?" 

"except one," said flora, "and he is an admir who is natur but no 
curiosity, unless it be that you, can call him such becaus he is so 
just and generous, and, as for ships, who can help admir them; and if 
admir bell propos that we live in some pleasant, marin villa by the 
sea-coast, he shall have my vote and interest for the proceeding." 

"bravo! huzza!" cri the admiral. "I tell you what it is, master 
charley--y hors marine,--i have a great mind to cut you out, and have 
miss flora myself." 

"don't, uncle," said charles; "that would be so veri cruel, after she 
ha promis me so faithfully. how do you suppos I should like it; come 
now, be merciful." 

At thi moment, and befor ani one could make anoth remark, there came 
rather a sharp ring at the garden-g bell, and henri exclaimed,-- 

"that' mr. chillingworth, and I am glad he ha come in time to join our 
conference. hi advic is alway valuable; and, moreover, I rather think 
he will bring us some news worth the hearing." 

the one servant who they had to wait upon them look into the room, and 
said,--"if you please, here is mrs. chillingworth." 

"mistress? you mean mr." 

"no; it is mrs. chillingworth and her baby." 

"the devil!" said the admiral; "what can she want?" 

"i'll come and let you know," said mrs. chillingworth, "what I want;" 
and she dart into the room past the servant. "i'll soon let you know, 
you great sea crab. I want my husband; and what with your vampyre, and 
one thing and another, I haven't had him at home an hour for the past 
three weeks. what am I to do? there is all hi patient get well as 
fast as they can without him; and, when they find that out, do you think 
they will take ani more filthi physic? no, to be sure not; peopl ain't 
such fool as to do anyth of the sort." 

"i'll tell you what we will do, ma'am," said the admiral; "we'll all get 
ill at once, on purpos to oblig ye; and i'll begin by have the 
measles." 

"you are an old porpoise, and I believ it all owe to you that my 
husband neglect hi wife and family. what' vampyr to him, I should 
like to know, that he should go troubl about them? I never heard of 
vampyr take draught and pills." 

"no, nor ani bodi els that had the sens of a goose," said the admiral; 
"but if it' your husband you want, ma'am, it' no use your look for 
him here, for here he is not." 

"then where is he? He is run after some of your beastli vampyr 
somewhere, i'll be bound, and you know where to send for him." 

"then you are mistaken; for, indeed, we don't. We want him ourselves, 
ma'am, and can't find him--that' the fact." 

"it' all veri well talking, sir, but if you were a marri woman, with 
a famili about you, and the last at the breast, you'd feel veri 
differ from what you do now." 

"i'm d----d if I don't suppos I should," said the admiral; "but as for 
the last, ma'am, i'd soon settl that. i'd wring it neck, and shove it 
overboard." 

"you would, you brute? it' quit clear to me you never had a child of 
your own." 

"mrs. chillingworth," said henry, "I think you have no right to complain 
to us of your domest affairs. where your husband goes, and what he 
does, is at hi own will and pleasure, and, really, I don't see that we 
are to be made answer as to whether he is at home or abroad; to say 
noth of the bad taste--and bad tast it most certainli is, of talk 
of your privat affair to other people." 

"oh, dear!" said mrs. chillingworth; "that' your idea, is it, you 
no-whisk puppy?" 

"really, madam, I cannot see what my be destitut of whisker ha to 
do with the affair; and I am inclin to think my opinion is quit as 
good without them as with them." 

"I will speak," said flora, "to the doctor, when I see him." 

"will you, miss doll's-eyes? oh, dear me! you'll speak to the doctor, 
will you?" 

"what on earth do you want?" said henry. "for your husband' sake, whom 
we all respect, we wish to treat you with everi imagin civility; but 
we tell you, candidly, that he is not here, and, therefore, we cannot 
conceiv what more you can requir of us." 

"oh, it' a row," said the admiral; "that' what she wants--woman like. 
d----d a bit do they care what it' about as long as there' a 
disturbance. and now, ma'am, will you sit down and have a glass of 
grog?" 

"no, I will not sit down; and all I can say is, that I look upon thi 
place as a den full of snake and reptiles. that' my opinion; so i'll 
not stay ani longer; but, wish that great judgment may some day come 
home to you all, and that you may know what it is to be a mother, with 
five babies, and one at the breast, I despis you all and leav you." 

So saying, mrs. chillingworth walk from the place, feel herself 
highli hurt and offend at what had ensued; and they were compel to 
let her go just as she was, without give her ani information, for they 
had a vivid recollect of the seriou disturb she had creat on a 
former occasion, when she had actual head a mob, for the purpos of 
hunt out varney, the vampyre, from bannerworth hall, and put an 
end consequently, as she considered, to that set of circumst which 
kept the doctor so much from hi house, to the great detriment of a not 
veri extens practice. 

"after all," said flora, "mrs. chillingworth, although she is not the 
most refin person in the world, is to be pitied." 

"what!" cri the admiral; "miss doll's-eyes, are you take her part?" 

"oh, that' nothing. she may call me what she likes." 

"I believ she is a good wife to the doctor," said henry, 
"notwithstand hi littl eccentricities; but suppos we now at onc 
make the propos we were think of to sir franci varney, and so get 
him to leav england as quickli as possibl and put an end to the 
possibl of hi be ani more troubl to anybody." 

"agreed--agreed. it' the best thing that can be done, and it will be 
someth gain to get hi consent at once." 

"i'll run up stair to him," said charles, "and call him down at once. I 
scarc doubt for a moment hi acquiesc in the proposal." 

charl holland rose, and ran up the littl staircas of the cottag to 
the room which, by the kind of the bannerworth family, had been 
devot to the use of varney. He had not been gone abov two minutes, 
when he returned, hastily, with a small scrap of paper in hi hand, 
which he laid befor henry, saying,-- 

"there, what think you of that?" 

henry, upon take up the paper, saw written upon it the words,-- 

"_the farewel of varney the vampyre_." 

"he is gone," said charl holland. "the room is vacant. I saw at a 
glanc that he had remov hi hat, and cloak, and all that belong to 
him. he' off, and at so short a warning, and in so abrupt a manner, 
that I fear the worst." 

"what can you fear?" 

"I scarc know what; but we have a right to fear everyth and 
anyth from hi most inexplic being, whose whole conduct ha been 
of that mysteri nature, as to put him past all calcul as regard 
hi motives, hi objects, or hi actions. I must confess that I would 
have hail hi departur from england with feel of satisfaction; 
but what he mean now, by thi strang manoeuvre, heaven, and hi own 
singular intellect, can alon divine." 

"I must confess," said flora, "I should not at all have thought thi of 
varney. It seem to me as if someth new must have occur to him. 
altogether, I do not feel ani alarm concern hi action as regard 
us. I am convinc of hi sincerity, and, therefore, do not view with 
sensat of uneasi thi new circumstance, which appear at present 
so inexplicable, but for which we may yet get some explan that will 
be satisfactori to us all." 

"I cannot conceive," said henry, "what new circumst could have 
occur to produc thi effect upon varney. thing remain just as they 
were; and, after all, situat as he is, if ani chang had taken place 
in matter out of doors, I do not see how he could becom acquaint 
with them, so that hi leav must have been a matter of mere 
calculation, or of impuls at the moment--heaven know which--but can 
have noth to do with actual information, becaus it is quit evid 
he could not get it." 

"it is rather strange," said charl holland, "that just as we were 
specul upon the probabl of hi do someth of thi sort, he 
should suddenli do it, and in thi singular manner too." 

"oh," said the old admiral, "I told you I saw hi eye, that wa enough 
for me. I knew he would do something, as well as I know a mainmast from 
a chain cable. He can't help it; it' in the natur of the beast, and 
that' all you can say about it." 




chapter xcii. 

the misadventur OF the doctor with the picture. 


the situat of dr. chillingworth and jack pringl wa not of that 
charact that permit much convers or even congratulation. they 
were victor it wa true, and yet they had but littl to boast of 
besid the victory. 

victori is a great thing; it is like a gild coat, it bewild and 
dazzles. nobodi can say much when you are victorious. what a sound! and 
yet how much miseri is there not hidden beneath it. 

thi victori of the worthi doctor and hi aid amount to this, they 
were as they were before, without be ani better, but much the worse, 
see they were so much buffet that they could hardli speak, but sat 
for some moment opposit to each other, gasp for breath, and stare 
each other in the face without speaking. 

the moonlight came in through the window and fell upon the floor, and 
there were no sound that came to disturb the still of the scene, 
nor ani object that move to cast a shadow upon the floor. all wa still 
and motionless, save the two victors, who were much distress and 
bruised. 

"well!" said jack pringle, with a hearti execration, as he wipe hi 
face with the back of hi hand; "save your presence, doctor, we are 
master of the field, doctor; but it' plaguey like captur an empti 
bandbox after a hard fight." 

"but we have got the picture, jack--w have got the picture, you see, 
and that is something. I am sure we save that." 

"well, that may be; and a pretti d----d look pictur it is after all. 
why, it' enough to frighten a ladi into the sulks. I think it would be 
a veri good thing if it were burned." 

"well," said the doctor, "I would sooner see it burn than in the hand 
of that--" 

"what?" exclaim jack. 

"I don't know," said mr. chillingworth; "but thief I should say, for it 
wa somewhat thief-lik to break into anoth man' hous and carri off 
the furniture." 

"A pirate--a regular land shark." 

"someth that is not the same as an honest man, jack; but, at all 
events, we have beaten him back thi time." 

"yes," said jack, "the ship' cleared; no compani is better than bad 
company, doctor." 

"so it is, and yet it don't seem clear in terms. but, jack, it you 
hadn't come in time, I should have been but scurvili treated. He wa too 
power for me; I wa as nigh be kill as ever I have been; but you 
were just in time to save me." 

"well, he wa a large, ugli fellow, sure enough, and look like an old 
tree." 

"did you see him?" 

"yes, to be sure I did." 

"well, I could not catch a glimps of hi features. In fact, I wa too 
much employ to see anything, and it wa much too dark to notic 
anyth particular, even if I had had leisure." 

"why, you had as much to do as you could well manage, I must say that, 
at all events. I didn't see much of him myself; onli he wa a tall, 
out-of-the-way sort of chap--a long-leg shark. He gave me such a dig 
or two as I haven't had for a long while, nor don't want to get again; 
though I don't care if I face the devil himself. A man can't do more 
than do hi best, doctor." 

"no, jack; but there are veri few who do do their best, and that' the 
truth. you have, and have done it to some purpos too. but I have had 
enough for one day; he wa almost strong enough to contend against us 
both." 

"yes, so he was." 

"and, besid that, he almost carri away the picture--that wa a great 
hindranc to him. don't you think we could have held him if we had not 
been fight over the picture?" 

"yes, to be sure we could; we could have gone at him bodily, and held 
him. He would not have been abl to use hi hands. We could have hung on 
him, and I am sure if I came to grappl yard-arm and yard-arm, he would 
have told a differ tale; however, that is neither here nor there. how 
long had you been here?" 

"not veri long," repli the doctor, whose head wa a littl confus by 
the blow which he had received. "I can't now tell how long, but onli a 
short time, I think." 

"where did he come from?" inquir jack. 

"come from, jack?" 

"yes, doctor, where did he came from?--th window, I suppose--th same 
way he went out, I dare say--it' most likely." 

"oh, no, no; he come down from behind the picture. there' some mysteri 
in that picture, i'll swear to it; it' veri strang he should make such 
a desper attempt to carri it away." 

"yes; one would think," said jack, "there wa more in it than we can 
see--that it is worth more than we can believe; perhap somebodi set 
particular store by it." 

"I don't know," said mr. chillingworth, shake hi head, "I don't know 
how that may be; but certain it is, the pictur wa the object of hi 
visit here--that is veri certain." 

"it was; he wa endeavour to carri it off," said jack; "it would be a 
veri good ornament to the black hole at calcutta." 

"the util of put it where it cannot be seen," remark mr. 
chillingworth, "I cannot veri well see; though I dare say it might be 
all veri well." 

"yes--it ugli featur would be no longer seen; so far, it would be a 
good job. but are you go to remain here all night, and so make a long 
watch of it, doctor?" 

"why, jack," said the doctor, "I did intend watch here; but now the 
game is disturbed, it is of no use remain here. We have secur the 
picture, and now there will be no need of remain in the house; in 
fact, there is no fear of robberi now." 

"not so long as we are here," said jack pringle; "the smuggler won't 
show a head while the revenu cutter is on the look out." 

"certainli not, jack," said mr. chillingworth; "I think we have scare 
them away--th pictur is safe." 

"yes--so long as we are here." 

"and longer, too, I hope." 

jack shook hi head, as much as to intim that he had mani doubt upon 
such a point, and couldn't be hurri into ani concess of opinion of 
the safeti of such a pictur as that--much as he dislik it, and as 
poor an opinion as he had of it. 

"don't you think it will be safe?" 

"no," said jack. 

"and whi not?" said mr. chillingworth, will to hear what jack could 
advanc against the opinion he had expressed, especi as he had 
disturb the maraud in the veri act of robbery. 

"why, you'll be watch by thi veri man; and when you are gone, he will 
return in safety, and take thi plaguey pictur away with him." 

"well, he might do so," said mr. chillingworth, after some thought; "he 
even endang hi own escap for the purpos of carri it off." 

"he want it," said jack. 

"what, the picture?" 

"aye, to be sure; do you think anybodi would have tri so hard to get 
away with it? He want it; and the long and the short of it is, he will 
have it, despit all that can be done to prevent it; that' my opinion." 

"well, there is much truth in that; but what to do I don't know." 

"take it to the cottage," suggest jack. "the pictur must be more than 
we think for; suppos we carri it along." 

"that is no bad plan of yours, jack," said mr. chillingworth; "and, 
though a littl awkward, yet it is not the worst I have heard; 
but--but--what will they say, when they see thi fright face in that 
quiet, yet content house?" 

"why, they'll say you brought it," said jack; "I don't see what els 
they can say, but that you have done well; besides, when you come to 
explain, you will make the matter all right to 'em." 

"yes, yes," said chillingworth; "and, as the pictur now seem to be the 
incomprehens object of attack, I will secur that, at all events." 

"i'll help you." 

"thank you, jack; your aid will be welcome; at least, it wa so just 
now." 

"all right, doctor," said jack. "I may be under your hand some day." 

"i'll physic you for nothing," said mr. chillingworth. "you save my 
life. one good turn deserv another; i'll not forget." 

"thank you," said jack, as he made a wri face. "I hope you won't have 
occasion. i'd sooner have a can of grog than ani bottl of medicin you 
can give me; I ain't ungrateful, neither." 

"you needn't name it; I am get my breath again. I suppos we had 
better leav thi place, as soon as we conveni can." 

"exactly. the sooner the better; we can take it the more leisur as we 
go." 

the moon wa up; there were no cloud now, but there wa not a veri 
strong light, becaus the moon wa on the wane. It wa one of those 
night dure which an impercept vapour arises, and render the moon 
somewhat obscure, or, at least, it rob the earth of her rays; and then 
there were shadow cast by the moon, yet they grew fainter, and those 
cast upon the floor of the apart were less distinct than at first. 

there seem scarc a breath of air stirring; everyth wa quiet and 
still; no motion--no sound, save that of the breath of the two who 
sat in that mysteri apartment, who gaze altern round the place, 
and then in each other' countenances. suddenly, the silenc of the 
night wa disturb by a veri slight, but distinct noise, which struck 
upon them with peculiar distinctness; it wa a gentl tap, tap, at the 
window, as if some one wa do it with their fingernail. 

they gaze on each other, for some moments, in amazement, and then at 
the window, but they saw nothing; and yet, had there been anything, they 
must have seen it, but there wa not even a shadow. 

"well," said mr. chillingworth, after he had listen to the tap, tap, 
sever times, without be abl to find out or imagin what it could 
aris from, "what on earth can it be?" 

"don't know," said jack, veri composedly, squint up at the window. 
"can't see anything." 

"well, but it must be something," persist mr. chillingworth; "it must 
be something." 

"I dare say it is; but I don't see anything. I can't think what it can 
be, unless--" 

"unless what? speak out," said the doctor, impatiently. 

"why, unless it is davi jone himself, tap with hi long 
finger-nails, a-tel us as how we'v been too long alreadi here." 

"then, I presume, we may as well go; and yet I am more dispos to deem 
it some devic of the enemi to dislodg us from thi place, for the 
purpos of enabl them to effect some nefari scheme or other they 
have afloat." 

"it may be, and is, I dare say, a do of some sort or other," said jack; 
"but what' can it be?" 

"there it is again," said the doctor; "don't you hear it? I can, as 
plain as I can hear myself." 

"yes," said jack; "I can hear it plain enough, and can see it, too; and 
that is more. yes, yes, I can tell all about it plain enough." 

"you can? well, then, shew me," said the doctor, as he strode up to the 
window, befor which jack wa stand gaze upon one particular spot 
of the shatter window with much earnestness. 

"where is it?" 

"look there," said jack, point with hi finger to a particular spot, 
to which the doctor direct hi attention, expect to see a long, 
skinni hand tap against the glass; but he saw nothing. 

"where is it?" 

"do you see that twig of ivy, or someth of the sort?" inquir jack. 

"yes, I do." 

"veri well, watch that; and when the wind catch it--and there is but 
veri little--it lift it up, and then, fall down again, it tap the 
glass." 

just as he spoke, there came a slight gust of wind; and it gave a 
practic illustr to hi words; for the tap wa heard as often 
as the plant wa move by the wind. 

"well," said mr. chillingworth, "howev simpl and unimport the 
matter may be, yet I cannot but say I am alway well pleas to find a 
practic explan of it, so that there will be no part left in 
doubt." 

"there is none about that," said jack. 

"none. well, we are not beset, then. We may as well consid of the 
manner of our get clear of thi place. what sort of burthen thi 
pictur may be I know not; but I will make the attempt to carri it." 

"avast, there," said jack; "I will carri it: at all events, i'll take 
the first spell, and, if I can't go on, we'll turn and turn about." 

"we can divid the weight from the first, and then neither of us will be 
tire at all." 

"just as you please, sir," said jack pringle. "I am will to obey 
orders; and, if we are to get in to-night befor they are all a-bed, we 
had better go at once; and then we shall not disturb them." 

"good, jack," said mr. chillingworth; "veri good: let us begin to beat 
our retreat at once." 

"veri good," said jack. 

they both rose and approach the picture, which stood up in one corner, 
half reclin against the wall; the light, at least so much as there 
was, fell upon it, and gave it a ghastli and deathli hue, which made mr. 
chillingworth feel an emot he could not at all understand; but, as 
soon as he could, he withdrew hi eye from off the picture, and they 
proceed to secur it with some cord, so that they might carri it 
between them the easier--with less troubl and more safety. 

these prepar did not take long in making, and, when completed, 
they gave anoth inquir look round the chamber, and mr. 
chillingworth again approach the window, and gaze out upon the garden 
below, but saw noth to attract hi attention. 

turn away, he came to the picture, with which jack pringl had been 
standing. they proceed toward the stairs, adopt everi precaut 
they could take to prevent ani surpris and ani attempt upon the object 
of their solicitude. 

then they came to the great hall, and, have open the door, they 
carri it out; then shut the door, they both stood outsid of 
bannerworth hall; and, befor take the pictur up in their hands, they 
onc more look suspici around them. 

there wa noth to be seen, and so, shoulder the omin portrait, 
they proceed along the garden till they convey it into the roadway. 

"now," said jack, "we are off; we can scud along under press of sail, 
you know." 

"I would rather not," said the doctor, "for two reasons; one of which 
is, I can't do it myself, and the other is, we should run the risk of 
injur the picture; besid this, there is no reason for so doing." 

"veri well," said jack, "make it agreeabl to yourself, doctor. see you, 
jack' alive, and I am will to do all I can to help you." 

"I am veri glad of your aid," said mr. chillingworth; "so we will 
proceed slowly. I shall be glad when we are there; for there are few 
thing more awkward than thi pictur to carry." 

"it is not heavy," said jack, give it a hitch up, that first pull 
the doctor back, and then push him forward again. 

"no; but stop, don't do that often, jack, or els I shall be oblig to 
let go, to save myself from falling," said the doctor. 

"veri sorry," said jack; "hope it didn't inconveni you; but I could 
carri thi by myself." 

"and so could i," return mr. chillingworth; "but the probabl is 
there would be some mischief done to it, and then we should be do 
more harm than good." 

"so we should," said jack. 

they proceed along with much care and caution. It wa grow late 
now, and no one wa about--at least, they met none. peopl did not roam 
about much after dark, especi sinc the report of the vampyr 
becam current, for, notwithstand all their braveri and violenc 
while in a body, yet to meet and contend with him singly, and unseen, 
wa not at all a popular notion among them; indeed, they would sooner go 
a mile out of their way, or remain in doors, which they usual did. 

the even wa not precis dark, there wa moonlight enough to save 
it from that, but there wa a mist hang about, that render objects, 
at a short distance, veri indistinct. 

their walk wa uninterrupt by ani one, and they had got through half 
the distanc without ani disturb or interrupt whatever. 

when they arriv at the precinct of the village, jack pringl said to 
dr. chillingworth, "do you intend go through the village, doctor?" 

"whi not? there will be nobodi about, and if there should be, we shall 
be safe enough from ani molestation, see there are none here who 
would dare to harm us; it is the shortest way, too." 

"veri good," said jack; "I am agreeable, and as for ani one harm me, 
they know better; but, at all events, there' company, and there' less 
danger, you know, doctor; though i'm alway compani to myself, but 
haven't ani object to a messmate, now and then." 

they pursu their way in silence, for some distance, the doctor not 
care about continu the talk of jack, which amount to nothing; 
besides, he had too much to do, for, notwithstand the light of 
the picture, which jack had endeavour to persuad the doctor of, he 
found it wa heavi and ungainly; indeed, had he been by himself he would 
have had some troubl to have got it away. 

"we are nearli there," said jack, put down hi end of the picture, 
which brought doctor chillingworth to a standstill. 

"yes, we are; but what made you stop?" 

"why, you see," said jack, give hi trowser a hitch, "a I said 
before, we are nearli there." 

"well, what of that? we intend to go there, did we not?" inquir 
chillingworth. 

"yes, exactly; that is, you intend to do so, I know, but I didn't." 

"what do you mean by that?" inquir chillingworth; "you are a complet 
riddl to-night, jack; what is the matter with you?" 

"nothing; only, you see, I don't want to go into the cottage, 'cause, 
you see, the admir and I have had what you may call a bit of a growl, 
and I am in disgrac there a little, though I don't know why, or 
wherefore; I alway did my duti by him, as I did by my country. the ould 
man, however, take fit into hi head; at the same time I shall take 
some too; jack' as good as hi master, ashore, at all events." 

"well, then, you object to go in?" said chillingworth. 

"that is the state of the case; not that i'm afraid, or have ani caus 
to be asham of myself; but I don't want to make anybodi els 
uncomfortable, by caus black looks." 

"veri well, jack," said the doctor. "I am much oblig to you, and, if 
you don't like to come, I won't press you against your inclination." 

"I understand, doctor. I will leav you here, if you can manag the rest 
of the way by yourself; there are not two hundr yard now to go, so 
you are all safe; so good bye." 

"good bye, jack," said doctor chillingworth, who stood wipe hi 
forehead, whilst the pictur wa stand up against the poles. 

"do you want a hand up first?" 

"no, thank you; I can get it up veri well without ani trouble--it' not 
so heavy." 

"good bye, then," said jack; and, in a few moment more, jack pringl 
wa out of sight, and the doctor wa alon with the omin picture. He 
had not far to go, and wa within hail of the cottage; but it wa late, 
and yet he believ he should find them up, for the quietud and 
calm of the even hour wa that which most chime with their 
feelings. At such a time they could look out upon the face of nature, 
and the freedom of thought appear the greater, becaus there wa no 
human be to clash with the silenc and still of the scene. 

"well," mutter chillingworth, "i'll go at onc to the cottag with my 
burthen. how they will look at me, and wonder what could induc me to 
bring thi away. I can hardli help smile at the thought of how they 
will look at the apparit I shall make." 

thu fill with notion that appear to pleas him, the doctor 
shoulder the picture, and walk slowli along until he reach the 
dead wall that ran up to the entrance, or nearli so, of the gardens. 

there wa a plantat of young tree that overhung the path, and cast a 
deep shadow below--a pleasant spot in hot weather. 

the doctor had been carri the picture, rest the side of it on the 
small of hi arm, and against hi shoulder; but thi wa an inconveni 
posture, becaus the weight of the pictur cut hi arm so much, that he 
wa compel to pause, and shift it more on hi shoulder. 

"there," he muttered, "that will do for the present, and last until I 
reach the cottag garden." 

He wa proceed along at a slow and steadi pace, bestow all hi 
care and attent to the manner of hold the picture, when he wa 
suddenli paralys by the sound of a great shout of such a peculiar 
character, that he involuntarili stopped, and the next moment, someth 
heavi came against him with great force, just as if a man had jump 
from the wall on to him. 

thi wa the truth, for, in anoth moment, and befor he could recov 
himself, he found that there wa an attempt to depriv him of the 
picture. 

thi at onc arous him, and he made an instant and a vigor defence; 
but he wa compel to let go hi hold of the picture, and turn to 
resist the infuri attack that wa now commenc upon himself. 

for some moment it wa doubt who would be the victor; but the wind 
and strength of the doctor were not enough to resist the power 
adversari against whom he had to contend, and the heavi blow that were 
shower down upon him. 

At first he wa enabl to bear up against thi attack; and then he 
return mani of the blow with interest; but the stun effect of the 
blow he receiv himself, wa such that he could not help himself, and 
felt hi sens gradual failing, hi strength becom less and less. 

In a short time, he receiv such a blow, that he wa laid senseless on 
the earth in an instant. 

how long he remain thu he could not say; but it could not have been 
long, for all around him seem just as it wa befor he wa attacked. 

the moon had scarc moved, and the shadows, such as they were, were 
fall in the same direct as before. 

"I have not been long here," he muttered, after a few moments' 
reflection; "but--but--" 

He stop short; for, on look around him, he saw the object of hi 
solicitud wa gone. the pictur wa nowher to be seen. It had been 
carri off the instant he had been vanquished. 

"gone!" he said, in a low, disconsol tone; "and after all I have 
done!" 

He wipe hi hand across hi brow, and find it cut, he look at the 
back of hi hand, and saw by the deep colour that it wa blood, indeed, 
he could now feel it trickl down hi face. 

what to do he hardli knew; he could stand, and after have got upon hi 
feet, he stagger back against the wall, against which he lean for 
support, and afterward he crept along with the aid of it support, 
until he came to the door. 

He wa observ from the window, where henri and charl holland, see 
him come up with such an unsteadi gait, rush to the door to ascertain 
what wa the matter. 

"what, doctor!" exclaim henri bannerworth; "what is the matter?" 

"I am almost dead, I think," said chillingworth. "lend me your arm, 
henry." 

henri and charl holland immedi step out, and took him between 
them into the parlour, and place him upon a couch. 

"what on earth ha happened, doctor?--hav you got into disgrac with 
the populace?" 

"no, no; give me some drink--som water, I am veri faint--veri faint." 

"give him some wine, or, what' better, some grog," said the admiral. 
"why, he' been yard-arm with some pirat or other, and he' damag 
about the figure-head. you ain't hurt in your lower works, are you, 
doctor?" said the admiral. 

but the doctor took no notic of the inquiry; but eagerli sip the 
content of a glass that charl holland had pour out of a bottl 
contain some strong hollands, and which appear to nerv him much. 

"there!" said the admiral, "that will do you good. how did all thi 
damag to your upper work come about, eh?" 

"let him wash hi face and hand first; he will be better abl to talk 
afterwards." 

"oh, thank you," said chillingworth. "I am much better; but I have had 
some hard bruises." 

"how did it happen?" 

"I went by myself to watch in the room where the pictur wa in 
bannerworth hall." 

"where the pictur was!" said henry; "where it is, you mean, do you not, 
doctor?" 

"no; where it was, and where it is not now." 

"gone!" 

"yes, gone away; i'll tell you all about it. I went there to watch, but 
found nobodi or noth there; but suddenli a man step out from 
behind the picture, and we had a fight over it; after which, just as I 
wa get the worst of it, jack pringl came in." 

"the dog!" mutter the admiral. 

"yes, he came in just in time, I believe, to save my life; for the man, 
whoever he was, would not have hesit about it." 

"well, jack is a good man," said the admiral; "there may be worse, at 
least." 

"well, we had a desper encount for some minutes, dure which thi 
fellow want to carri off the picture." 

"carri off the picture?" 

"yes; we had a struggl for that; but we could not captur him; he wa 
so violent that he broke away and got clear off." 

"with the picture?" 

"no, he left the pictur behind. well, we were veri tire and bruised, 
and we sat down to recov ourselv from our fatigue, and to consid 
what wa best to be done; but we were some time befor we could leave, 
and then we determin that we would take the pictur away with us, as 
it seem to be covet by the robber, for what object we cannot tell." 

"well, well--wher is the picture?" 

"you shall hear all about it in a minute, if you'll let me take my time. 
I am tire and sore. well, we brought the pictur out, and jack help 
me carri it till he came within a coupl of hundr yard of the 
cottage, and there left me." 

"the lubber!" said the admiral, interjectionally. 

"well, I rest awhile, and then take the pictur on my shoulders, I 
proceed along with it until I came to the wall, when suddenli I heard 
a great shout, and then down came someth heavi upon me, just as if a 
man had jump down upon me." 

"and--and--" 

"yes," said the doctor, "it was--" 

"wa what?" inquir the admiral. 

"just what you all seem to anticipate; you are all befor me, but that 
wa it." 

"A man?" 

"yes; I had a struggl with him, and got nearli killed, for I am not 
equal to him in strength. I wa sadli knock about, and final all the 
sens were knock out of me, and I was, I suppose, left for dead." 

"and what becam of the picture?" 

"I don't know; but I suppos it wa taken away, as, when I came to 
myself, it wa gone; indeed, I have some faint recollect of see 
him seiz the portrait as I wa falling." 

there wa a paus of some moments, dure which all the parti appear 
to be employ with their own thoughts, and the whole were silent. 

"do you think it wa the same man who attack you in the hous that 
obtain the picture?" at last inquir henri bannerworth. 

"I cannot say, but I think it most probabl that it wa the same; 
indeed, the gener appearance, as near as I could tell in the dark, wa 
the same; but what I look upon as much stronger is, the object appear 
to be the same in both cases." 

"that is veri true," said henri bannerworth--"veri true; and I think it 
more than probabl myself. but come, doctor, you will requir rest and 
nurs after your dangers." 




chapter xciii. 

the alarm AT anderbury.--th suspicion OF the bannerworth family, and 
the mysteri communication. 


[illustration] 

about twenti mile to the southward of bannerworth hall wa a good-siz 
market-town, call anderbury. It wa an extens and flourish 
place, and from the beauti of it situation, and it contigu to the 
southern coast of england, it wa much admired; and, in consequence, 
numer mansion and villa of great pretens had sprang up in it 
immedi neighbourhood. 

betides, there were some estat of great value, and one of these, 
call anderbury-on-the-mount, in consequ of the mansion itself, 
which wa of an immens extent, be built upon an eminence, wa to be 
let, or sold. 

thi town of anderburi wa remark not onli for the beauti of it 
aspect, but likewis for the quiet seren of it inhabitants, who were 
a prosperous, thrive race, and depend veri much upon their own 
resources. 

there were some peculiar circumst whi anderbury-on-the-mount wa to 
let. It had been for a great number of year in possess of a famili 
of the name of milltown, who had resid there in great comfort and 
respectability, until an epidem disord broke out, first among the 
servants, and then spread to the junior branch of the family, and 
from them to their seniors, produc such devastation, that in the 
cours of three week there wa but one young man left of the whole 
family, and he, by nativ vigour of constitution, had baffl the 
disorder, and found himself alon in hi ancestr halls, the last of 
hi race. 

soon a settl melancholi took possess of him, and all that had 
formerli delight him now gave him pain, inasmuch as it brought to hi 
mind a host of recollect of the most agonis character. 

In vain wa it that the surround gentri paid him everi possibl 
attention, and endeavour to do all that wa in their power to 
allevi the unhappi circumst in which he wa placed. If he 
smiled, it wa in a sad sort, and that wa veri seldom; and at length he 
announc hi intent of leav the neighbourhood, and seek 
abroad, and in chang of scene, for that solac which he could not 
expect to find in hi ancestr home, after what had occur within it 
ancient walls. 

there wa not a chamber but which remind him of the past--ther wa 
not a tree or a plant of ani kind or descript but which spoke to him 
plainli of those who were now no more, and whose merri laughter had 
within hi own memori made that ancient place echo with glee, fill 
the sunni air with the most gladsom shouts, such as come from the lip 
of happi youth long befor the world ha rob it of ani of it romanc 
or it beauty. 

there wa a gener feel of regret when thi young man announc the 
fact of hi departur to a foreign land; for he wa much respected, and 
the known calam which he had suffered, and the grief under which he 
laboured, invest hi charact with a great and pain interest. 

An entertain wa given to him upon the eve of hi departure, and on 
the next day he wa mani mile from the place, and the estat of 
anderbury-on-the-mount wa understood to be sold or let. 

the old mansion had remained, then, for a year or two vacant, for it wa 
a place of too much magnitude, and requir by far too expens an 
establish to keep it going, to enabl ani person whose mean were 
not veri larg to think of have anyth to do with it. 

so, therefore, it remain unlet, and wear that gloomi aspect which a 
larg house, untenanted, so veri quickli assumes. 

It wa quit a melancholi thing to look upon it, and to think what it 
must have onc been, and what it might be still, compar to what it 
actual was; and the inhabit of the neighbourhood had made up their 
mind that anderbury-on-the-mount would remain unten for mani a 
year to come, and, perhaps, ultim fall into ruin and decay. 

but in thi they were doom to be disappointed, for, on the even of 
a dull and gloomi day, about one week after the event we have record 
as take place at bannerworth hall and it immedi neighbourhood, a 
travel carriage, with four hors and an out-rider, came dash 
into the place, and drew up at the princip inn in the town, which wa 
call the anderburi arms. 

the appear of such an equipage, although not the most unusu thing 
in the world, in consequ of the mani aristocrat famili who 
resid in the neighbourhood, caused, at all events, some sensation, 
and, perhaps, the more so becaus it drove up to the inn instead of to 
ani of the mansion of the neighbourhood, therebi show that the 
stranger, whoever he was, came not as a visitor, but either mere 
bait in the town, be on hi road somewher else, or had some 
special busi in it which would soon be learned. 

the out-rider, who wa in handsom livery, had gallop on in advanc 
of the carriag a short distance, for the purpos of order the best 
apart in the inn to be immedi prepar for the recept of 
hi master. 

"who is he?" ask the landlord. 

"it' the baron stolmuy saltsburgh." 

"bless my heart, I never heard of him before; where did he come 
from--somewher abroad I suppose?" 

"I can't tell you anyth of him further than that he is immens 
rich, and is look for a house. He ha heard that there is one to let 
in thi immedi neighbourhood, and that' what ha brought him from 
london, I suppose." 

"yes, there is one; and it is call anderbury-on-the-mount." 

"well, he will veri like speak to you about it himself, for here he 
comes." 

By thi time the carriag had halt at the door of the hotel, and, the 
door be opened, and the step lowered, there alight from it a tall 
man attir in a kind of pelisse, or cloak, trim with rich fur, the 
bodi of it be compos of velvet. upon hi head he wore a travel 
cap, and hi fingers, as he grasp the cloak around him, were seen to 
be cover with ring of great value. 

such a personage, come in such style, was, of course, like to be 
honour in everi possibl way by the landlord of the inn, and 
accordingli he wa shown most obsequi to the handsomest apart 
in the house, and the whole establish wa put upon the alert to 
attend to ani order he might choos to give. 

He had not been long in the place when he sent for the landlord, who, 
hastili scrambl on hi best coat, and get hi wife to arrang the 
tie of hi neckcloth, proceed to obey the order of hi illustri 
guest, whatev they might chanc to be. 

He found the baron stolmuy reclin upon a sofa, and have thrown 
asid hi velvet cloak, trim with rich fur, he show that underneath 
it he wore a costum of great rich and beauty, although, certainly, 
the form it cover wa not calcul to set it off to ani great 
advantage, for the baron wa mere skin and bone, and look like a man 
who had just emerg from a long illness, for hi face wa ghastli pale, 
and the landlord could not help observ that there wa a strang 
peculiar about hi eyes, the reason of which he could not make out. 

"you are the landlord of thi inn, I presume," said the baron, "and, 
consequently, no doubt well acquaint with the neighbourhood?" 

"I have the honour to be all that, sir. I have been here about sixteen 
years, and in that time I certainli ought to know someth of the 
neighbourhood." 

"'ti well; some one told me there wa a littl cottag sort of place to 
let here, and as I am simpl and retir in my habit I thought that it 
might possibl suit me." 

"A littl cottage, sir! there are certainli littl cottag to let, but 
not such as would suit you; and if I might have presumed, sir, to think, 
I should have consid anderbury-on-the-mount, which is now to let, 
would have been the place for you. It is a larg place, sir, and 
belong to a good family, although they are now all dead and gone, 
except one, and it' he who want to let the old place." 

"anderbury-on-the-mount," said the baron, "wa the name of the place 
mention to me; but I understood it wa a littl place." 

"oh! sir, that is quit a mistake; who told you so? it' the largest 
place about here; there are a matter of twenty-seven room in it, and it 
stand altogeth upon three hundr acr of ground." 

"and have you the assurance," said the baron, "to call that anyth but 
a cottage, when the castl of the stolmuyers, at saltzburgh, ha one 
suit of recept room thirti in number, open into each other, and 
the total number of apart in the whole build is two hundr 
and sixty, it is surround by eight mile of territory." 

"the devil!" said the landlord. "I beg your pardon, sir, but when I am 
astonished, I gener say the devil. they want eight hundr pound a 
year for anderbury-on-the-mount." 

"A mere trifle. I will sleep here to-night, and in the morn I will go 
and look at the place. It is near the sea?" 

"half a mile, sir, exactly, from the beach; and one of the most curiou 
circumst of all connect with it is, that there is a subterranean 
passag from the ground lead right away down to the sea-coast. A 
most curiou place, sir, partli cut out of the cliff, with cellar in it 
for wine, and other matters, that in the height of summer are kept as 
cool as in the deep winter time. it' more for curios than use, such 
a place; and the old couple, that now take care of the house, make a 
pretti penny, i'll be bound, though they won't own it, by show that 
part of the place." 

"it may suit me, but I shall be abl to give a decis answer when I 
see it on the morrow. you will let my attend have what they require, 
and see that my hors be well look to." 

"certainly, oh! certainly, sir, of course; you might go far, indeed, 
sir, befor you found an inn where everyth would be done as thing 
are done here. Is there anyth in particular, sir, you would like for 
dinner?" 

"how can I tell that, idiot, until the dinner time arrives?" 

"well, but, sir, in that case, you know, we scarc know what to do, 
becaus you see, sir, you understand--" 

"it is veri strang to me that you can neither see nor understand your 
duty. I am accustom to have the dinner tabl spread with all that 
money can procure; then I choose, but not before, what it suit me to 
partak of." 

"wil, sir, that is a veri good way, and perhap we ain't quit so use 
to that sort of thing as we ought to be in these parts; but anoth 
time, sir, we shall know better what we are about, without a doubt, and 
I onli hope, sir, that we shall have you in the neighbourhood for a long 
time; and so, sir, put one thing to another, and then draw a 
conclus from both of them, you see, sir, you will be abl to 
understand." 

"peace! begone! what is the use of all thi bellow to me--i want it 
not--i care not for it." 

the baron spoke these word so furiously, that the landlord wa rather 
terrifi than otherwise, and left the room hastily, mutter to 
himself that he had never come across such a tiger, and wonder where 
the baron could have possibl come from, and what amount of wealth he 
could be possess of, that would enabl him to live in such a princ 
style as he mentioned. 

If the baron stolmuy of saltzburgh had wish ever so much to impress 
upon the mind of all person in the neighbourhood the fact of hi 
wealth and importance, he could not have adopt a better plan to 
accomplish that object than by first of all impress such fact upon 
the mind of the landlord of the anderburi arms, for in the cours of 
anoth hour it wa toler well spread all over the town, that never 
had there been such a guest at the anderburi arms; and that he call 
anderbury-on-the-mount, with all it rooms--al it outbuildings, and 
it three hundr acr of ground, a cottage. 

thi news spread like wildfire, awak no end of speculation, and 
give rise to the most exagger rumours, so that a number of person 
came to the inn on purpos to endeavour to get a look at the baron; but 
he did not stir from hi apartments, so that these wondermong were 
disappointed, and even forc to go away as wise as they came; but in 
the major of case they made up their mind that in the morn they 
should sure be abl to obtain a glimps of him, which wa consid a 
great treat, for a man with an immens incom is look upon in england 
as a natur curiosity. 

the landlord took hi guest at hi word as regard the dinner, and 
provid such a repast as seldom, indeed, grace the board at the 
anderburi arms--a repast suffici for twenti people, and certainli 
which wa a monstrou thing to set befor one individual. 

the baron, however, made no remark, but select a portion from some of 
the dishes, and those dish that he did select from, were of the 
simplest kind, and not such as the landlord expect him to take, so 
that he realli paid about one hundr time the amount he ought to have 
done for what actual pass hi lips. 

and then what a fidget the landlord wa in about hi wines, for he 
doubt not but such a guest would be extrem critic and hard to 
please; but, to hi great relief, the baron declin take ani wine, 
mere wash down hi repast with a tumbler of cool water; and then, 
although the hour wa veri early, he retir at onc to rest. 

the landlord wa not dispos to disregard the injunct which the 
baron had given him to attend care on hi servant and horses, and 
after give order that noth should be stint as regard the 
latter, he himself look to the creature-comfort of the former, and he 
did thi with a doubl motive, for not onli wa he anxiou to make the 
most he could out of the baron in the way of charges, but he wa 
posit pant with curios to know more about so singular a 
personage, and he thought that sure the servant must be abl to 
furnish him with some particular regard their eccentr master. 

In this, however, he wa mistaken, for although they told him all they 
knew, that amount to so littl as realli not to be worth the learning. 

they inform him that they had been engag all in the last week, and 
that they knew noth of the baron whatever, or where he came from, or 
what he was, except that he paid them most liber wages, and wa not 
veri exact in the servic he requir of them. 

thi wa veri unsatisfactory, and when the landlord start on a 
mission, which he consid himself bound to perform, to a mr. leek, in 
the town, who had the let of anderbury-on-the-mount, he wa quit 
vex to think what a small amount of inform he wa abl to carri 
to him. 

"I can tell him," he said to himself as he went quickli toward the 
agent' residence; "I can tell him the baron' name, and that in the 
morn he want to look at anderbury-on-the-mount; but that' all I 
know of him, except that he is a most extraordinari man--indeed, the 
most extraordinari that I ever came near." 

mr. leek, the hous agent, notwithstand the defici of the fact 
contain in the landlord' statement, wa well enough satisfi to hear 
that ani one of appar wealth wa inquir after the larg premis 
to let, for, as he said truli to the landlord,-- 

"the commiss on let and receiv the rental of such a properti 
is no joke to me." 

"precisely," said the landlord. "I thought it wa better to come and 
tell you at once, for there can be no doubt that he is enorm rich." 

"if that be satisfactorili proved, it' of no consequ what he is, or 
who he is, and you may depend I shall be round to the inn earli in the 
morn to attend upon him; and in that case, perhaps, if you have ani 
convers with him, you will be so good as to mention that I will 
show him over the premis at hi own hour, and you shall not be 
forgotten, you may depend, if ani arrang is actual come to. It 
will be just as well for you to tell him what a nice properti it is, and 
that it is to be let for eight hundr a year, or sold outright for 
eight thousand pounds." 

"I will, you may depend, mr. leek. A most extraordinari man you will 
find him; not the handsomest in the world, I can tell you, but handsom 
is as handsom does, say I; and, if he take anderbury-on-the-mount, I 
have no doubt but he will spend a lot of money in the neighbourhood, and 
we shall all be the better of that, of course, as you well know, sir." 

thi then wa thoroughli agre upon between these high contract 
powers, and the landlord return home veri well satisfied, indeed, with 
the posit in which he had put the affair, and resolv upon urg on 
the baron, as far as it lay within hi power so to do, to establish 
himself in the neighbourhood, and to allow him to be purveyor-in-gener 
to hi household, which, if the baron continu in hi liber humour, 
would be unquestion a veri pleasant post to occupy. 




chapter xciv. 

the visitor, and the death IN the subterranean passage. 


[illustration] 

about an hour and a half after the baron had retir to rest, and while 
the landlord wa still creep about enjoin silenc on the part of 
the establishment, so that the slumber of a wealthi and, no doubt, 
illustri personag should not be disturbed, there arriv a horseman 
at the anderburi arms. 

He wa rather a singular-look man, with a shifting, uneasy-look 
glance, as if he were afraid of be suddenli pounc upon and 
surpris by some one; and although hi apparel wa plain, yet it wa 
good in quality, and hi whole appear wa such as to induc 
respect attention. 

the onli singular circumst was, that such a traveller, so well 
mounted, should be alone; but that might have been hi own fancy, so 
that the absenc of an attend went for nothing. doubtless, if the 
whole inn had not been in such a commot about the illustri and 
wealthi baron, thi stranger would have receiv more consider and 
attent than he did. 

upon alighting, he walk at onc into what is call the coffee-room of 
the hotel, and after order some refreshments, of which he partook but 
sparingly, he said, in a mild but solemn sort of tone, to the waiter who 
attend upon him,-- 

"tell the baron stolmuyer, of saltzburgh, that there is one here who 
want to see him." 

"I beg your pardon, sir," said the waiter, "but the baron is gone to 
bed." 

"it matter not to me. If you nor no one els in thi establish will 
deliv the messag I charg you with, I must do so myself." 

"i'll speak to my master, sir; but the baron is a veri great gentleman 
indeed, and I don't think my master would like to have him disturbed." 

the stranger hesit for a time, and then he said,-- 

"show me the baron' apartment. perhap I ought not to ask ani one 
person connect with thi establish to disturb him, when I am quit 
will to do so myself. show me the way." 

"well, but, sir, the baron may get in a rage, and say, veri naturally, 
that we had no busi to let anybodi walk up to hi room and disturb 
him, becaus we wouldn't do so ourselves. So that you see, sir, when you 
come to consider, it hardli seem the right sort of thing." 

"since," said the stranger, rising, "I cannot procur even the common 
courtesi of be shown to the apart of the person whom I seek, I 
must find him myself." 

As he spoke he walk out of the room, and began ascend the 
staircase, despit the remonstr of the waiter, who call after him 
repeatedly, but could not induc him to stop; and when he found that 
such wa the case, he made hi way to the landlord, to give the alarm 
that, for all he knew to the contrary, some one had gone up stair to 
murder the baron. 

thi inform threw the landlord into such a fix, that he knew not 
what to be at. At one moment he wa for rush up stair and 
endeavour to interfere, and at anoth he thought the best plan would 
be to pretend that he knew noth about it. 

while he wa in thi state of uncertainty, the stranger succeed in 
make hi way up stair to the floor from which proceed the bedrooms, 
and, apparently, have no fear whatev of the baron stolmuyer' 
indign befor hi eyes, he open door after door, until he came to 
one which led him into the apart occupi by that illustri 
individual. 

the baron, half undress only, lay in an uneasi slumber upon the bed, 
and the stranger stood opposit to him for some minutes, as if 
consid what he should do. 

"it would be easy," he said, "to kill him; but it will pay me better to 
spare him. I may be wrong in suppos that he ha the mean which I 
hope he has; but that I shall soon discov by hi conversation." 

stretch out, hi hand, he tap the baron lightli on the shoulder, 
who thereupon open hi eye and sprang to hi feet instantly, glanc 
with fix earnest at the intruder, upon whose face shone the light 
of a lamp which wa burn in the apartment. 

then the baron shrunk back, and the stranger, fold hi arms, said,-- 

"you know me. let our interview be as brief as possible. there need no 
explan between us, for we both know all that could be said. By 
some accid you have becom rich, while I continu quit otherwise. It 
matter not how thi ha occurred, the fact is everything. I don't know 
the amount of your possessions; but, from your style of living, they 
must be great, and therefor it is that I make no hesit in ask 
of you, as a price for not expos who and what you are, a moder 
sum." 

"I thought that you were dead." 

"I know you did; but you behold me here, and, consequently, that 
delus vanishes." 

"what sum do you require, and what assur can I have that, when you 
get it, the demand will not be repeat on the first opportunity?" 

"I can give you no such assurance, perhaps, that would satisfi you 
entirely; but, for more reason than I choos to enter into, I am 
extrem anxiou to leav england at onc and forever. give me the 
power to do so that I require, and you will never hear of me again." 

[illustration] 

the baron hesit for some few seconds, dure which he look 
scrutinizingli at hi companion, and then he said, in a tone of voic 
that seem as if he were make the remark to himself rather than to 
the other,-- 

"you look no older than you did when last we parted, and that wa year 
ago." 

"whi should I look older? you know as well as I that I need not. but, to 
be brief, I do not wish to interfer with ani plan or project you may 
have on hand. I do not wish to be a hindranc to you. let me have five 
thousand pounds, and I am off at onc and forever, I tell you." 

"five thousand! the man raves--f thousand pounds! say one thousand, 
and it is yours." 

"no; I have fix my price; and if you do not consent, I now tell you 
that I will blazon forth, even in thi house, who and what you are; and, 
let your scheme of ambit or of cupid be what they may, you may be 
assur that I will blast them all." 

"thi is no place in which to argu such a point; come out into the open 
air; 'wall have ears;' but come out, and I will give you such special 
reason whi you should not now press your claim at all, that you shall 
feel much beholden to me for them, and not regret your visit." 

"if that we come to terms, I no more desir than you can do that ani one 
should overhear our conversation. I prefer the open air for ani 
conference, be it whatev it may--much prefer it; and therefor most 
willingli embrac your proposition. come out." 

the baron put on hi travel cap, and the rich velvet cloak, edg 
with fur, that he possessed, and leav hi chamber a few pace in 
advanc of hi strang visitor, he descend the staircase, follow by 
him. In the hall of the hotel they found the landlord and almost the 
whole of the establish assembled, in deep consult as to whether 
or not ani one wa to go up stair and ascertain if the stranger who had 
sought the baron' chamber wa realli a friend or an enemy. 

but when they saw the two men come down, at all event appar 
amicably, it wa a great relief, and the landlord rush forward and 
open the door, for which piec of servic he got a veri state bow 
from the baron, and a slight inclin of the head from hi visitor, 
and then they both pass out. 

"I have ascertained," said the man who came on horseback, "that for the 
last week in london you have live in a style of the most princ 
magnificence, and that you came down here, attend as if you were one 
of the first nobl of the land." 

"these thing amus the vulgar," said the baron. "I do not mind 
admit to you that I contempl resid on thi spot, and perhap 
contract a marriage." 

"anoth marriage?" 

"and whi not? If wive will die suddenly, and no one know why, who is 
to help it. I do not pretend to control the fates." 

"this, between us, is idl talk indeed--most idle; for we know there are 
certain circumst which account for the strangest phenomena; but 
what roar sound is that which come so regularli and steadili upon 
the ear." 

"it is the sea wash upon the coast. the tide is no doubt advancing, 
and, as the eddi surg roll in upon the pebbl shore, they make 
what, to my mind, is thi pleasant music." 

"I did not think we were so near the ocean. the moon is rising; let us 
walk upon the beach, and as that sound is such pleasant music, you shall 
hear it while I convinc you what unpleas consequ will aris 
from a refus of the modest and moder term I offer you." 

"we shall see, we shall see; but I must confess it doe seem to me most 
extraordinari that you ask of me a posit fortune, for fear you should 
depriv me of a portion of one; but you cannot mean what you say." 

while they were talk they reach a long strip of sand which wa by 
the seashore, at the base of some cliffs, through which wa excav 
the passag from the coast into the ground of anderburi house, and 
which had been so expati upon by the landlord of the inn, in hi 
descript of the advantag attend upon that property. 

there were some rude steps, lead to a narrow arch door-way, which 
constitut an entranc to thi subterran region; and as the 
moonlight stream over the wide wast of waters, and fell upon thi 
littl door-way in the face of the cliff, he becam convinc that it 
wa the entranc to that excavation, and he eye it curiously. 

"what place is that?" said hi companion. 

"it is a privat entranc to the ground of a mansion in thi 
neighbourhood." 

"privat enough, I should presume; for if there be ani other mean of 
reach the house, sure no one would go through such a dismal hole as 
that toward it; but come, make up your mind at once. there need be no 
quarrel upon the subject of our conference, but let it be a plain 
matter of ye or no. Is it worth your while to be left alon in peace, 
or is it not?" 

"it is worth my while, but not at such a price as that you mentioned; 
and I cannot help think that some cheaper mode of accomplish the 
same object will sure present itself veri shortly." 

"I do not understand you; you talk ambiguously." 

"but my acts," said the baron, "shall be clear and plain enough, as you 
shall see. could you believ it possibl that I wa the sort of person 
to submit tame to ani amount of extort you chose to practis upon 
me. there wa a time when I thought you possess great sens and 
judgment when I thought that you were a man who weigh well the chanc 
of what you were about; but now I know to the contrary; and I think for 
less than a thousand pound I may succeed in rid myself of you." 

"I do not understand you; you had better bewar how you tamper with me, 
for I am not one who will be calmli dispos to put up with much. the 
sense, tact, and worldli knowledg which you say you have before, from 
time to time, given me credit for, belong to me still, and I am not 
like easili to commit myself." 

"indeed; do you think you bear such a charm life that noth can 
shake it?" 

"I think noth of the sort; but I know what I can do--i am armed." 

"and I; and sinc it come to this, take the reward of your villany; for 
it wa you who made me what I am, and would now seek to destroy my everi 
hope of satisfaction." 

As the baron spoke he drew from hi breast a small pistol, which, with 
the quick of thought, he held full in the face of hi companion, and 
pull the trigger. 

there can be no doubt on earth that hi intent wa to commit the 
murder, but the pistol miss fire, and he wa defeat in hi intent 
at that moment. then the stranger laugh scornfully, and draw a 
pistol from hi pocket, he present it at the baron' head, saying,-- 

"do I not bear a charm life? If I had not, should I have escap death 
from you now? no, I could not; but you perceiv that even a weapon that 
might not fail you upon anoth occas is harmless against me; and can 
you expect that I will hesit now to take full and ampl reveng upon 
you for thi dastardli attempt?" 

these word were spoken with great volubility, so much so, indeed, that 
they onli occupi a few veri brief second in delivering; and then, 
perhaps, the baron' career might have ended, for it seem to be fulli 
the intent of the other to conclud what he said by fire the pistol 
in hi face; but the wili aspect of the baron' counten was, after 
all, but a fair index of the mind, and, just as the last word pass 
the lip of hi irrit companion, he suddenli drop in a crouch 
posit to the ground, and, seiz hi legs, threw him over hi head 
in an instant. 

the pistol wa discharged, at the same moment, and then, with a shout of 
rage and satisfaction, the baron sprang upon hi foe, and, kneel upon 
hi breast, he held aloft in hi hand a glitter dagger, the 
highly-polish blade of which caught the moonbeams, and reflect them 
into the dazzl eye of the conquer man, whose fate now appear to 
be certain. 

"fool!" said the baron, "you must needs, then, tri conclus with me, 
and, not content with the safeti of insignificance, you must be absurd 
enough to think it possibl you could extort from me whatev sum your 
fanci dictated, or with ani effect threaten me, if I compli not with 
your desires." 

"have merci upon me. I meant not to take your life; and, therefore, whi 
should you take mine?" 

"you would have taken it, and, therefore, you shall die. know, too, as 
thi is your last moment, that, vampyr as you are, and as I, of all 
men, best know you to be, I will take especi care that you shall be 
place in some posit after death where the revivifi moonbeam may 
not touch you, so that thi shall truli be your end, and you shall rot 
away, leav no trace behind of your existence, suffici to contain 
the vital principle." 

"no--no! you cannot--wil not. you will have mercy." 

"ask the famish tiger for mercy, when you intrud upon hi den." 

As he spoke the baron ground hi teeth togeth with rage, and, in an 
instant, buri the poniard in the throat of hi victim. the blade went 
through to the yellow sand beneath, and the murder still knelt upon 
the man' chest, while he who had thu receiv so fatal a blow toss 
hi arm about with agony, and tri in vain to shriek. 

the natur of the wound, however, prevent him from utter anyth 
but a low gurgl sound, for he wa nearli choke with hi own blood, 
and soon hi eye becam fix and of a glassi appearance; he stretch 
out hi two arms, and dug hi finger deep into the sand. 

the baron drew forth the poniard, and a gush of blood immedi 
follow it, and then one deep groan testifi to the fact, that the 
spirit, if there be a spirit, had left it mortal habitation, and wing 
it flight to other realms, if there be other realm for it to wing it 
flight to. 

"he is dead," said the baron, and, at the same moment, a roll of the 
advanc tide swept over the body, drench the living, as well as the 
dead, with the brine of the ocean. 

the baron stoop and rins the dagger in the advanc tide from the 
clot blood which had clung to it, and then, wipe it carefully, he 
return it to it sheath, which wa hidden within the fold of hi 
dress; and, rise from hi kneel postur upon the body, he stood by 
it side, with fold arms, gaze upon it, for some minutes, in 
silence, heedless of the still advanc water, which wa alreadi 
consider abov hi feet. 

then he spoke in hi ordinari accents, and evid care noth for 
the fact that he had done such a deed. 

"I must dispos of thi carcase," he said, "which now seem so lifeless, 
for the moon is up, and if it beam fall upon it, I know, from former 
experience, what will happen; it will rise again, and walk the earth, 
seek for vengeanc upon me, and the thirst for that vengeanc will 
becom such a part of it veri nature, that it will sure accomplish 
something, if not all that it desires." 

after a few moments' consideration, he stooped, and, with more strength 
than one would have thought it possibl a man reduc almost, as he was, 
to a skeleton could have exerted, he lift the body, and carri it 
rapidli up the beach toward the cliffs. He threw it down upon the stone 
step that led to the small door of the excav in the cliff, and it 
fell upon them with a sicken sound, as if some of the bone were 
sure broken by the fall. 

the object, then, of the baron seem to be to get thi door open, if he 
possibl could; but that wa an object easier to be desir than carri 
into effect, for, although he exert hi utmost power, he did not 
succeed in move it an inch, and he began evid to think that it 
would be imposs to do so. 

but yet he did not give up the attempt at once, but look about upon 
the beach, until he found a larg heavi stone, he rais it in hi arms, 
and, approach the door, he flung it against it with such tremend 
force, that it flew open instantly, disclos within a dark and narrow 
passage. 

appar rejoic that he had accomplish thi much, he stop 
cautious within the entrance, and then, take from a conceal pocket 
that wa in the velvet cloak which he wore a littl box, he produc 
from it some wax-light and some chemic matches, which, by the 
slightest effort, he succeed in igniting, and then, with one of the 
light in hi hand to guid him on hi way, he went on explor the 
passage, and tread with extrem caution as he went, for fear of 
fall into ani of the ice-wel which were report to be in that 
place. 

after proceed about twenti yards, and find that there wa no 
danger, he becam less cautious; but, in consequ of such less 
caution, he veri nearli sacrif hi life, for he came upon an 
ice-wel which seem a consider depth, and into which he had nearli 
plung headlong. 

He start back with some degre of horror; but that soon left him, and 
then, after a moment' thought, he sought for some littl nook in the 
wall, in which he might place the candle, and soon find one that 
answer the purpos well, he there left it, have all the appear 
of a littl shrine, while he proceed again to the mouth of that 
singular and cavernous-look place. He had, evidently, quit made up 
hi mind what to do, for, without a moment' hesitation, he lift the 
bodi again, and carri it within the entrance, walk boldli and 
firmly, now that he knew there wa no danger between him and the light, 
which shed a gleam through the dark of the place of a veri faint and 
flicker character. 

He reach it rapidly, and when he got to the side of the well, he, 
without a moment' hesitation, flung it headlong down, and, listen 
attentively, he heard it fall with a slight plash, as if there wa some 
water at the bottom of the pit. 

It wa an annoyance, however, for him to find that the distanc wa not 
so deep as he had anticipated, and when he took the light from the nich 
where he had place it, and look earnestli down, he could see the 
livid, ghastly-look face of the dead man, for the bodi had 
accident fallen upon it back, which wa a circumst he had not 
count upon, and one which increas the chanc greatli of it be 
seen, should ani one be exploring, from curiosity, that not veri 
invit place. 

thi wa annoyance, but how could it be prevented, unless, indeed, he 
chose to descend, and make an alter in the disposit of the 
corpse? but thi wa evid what he did not choos to do; so, after 
mutter to himself a few word express of hi intent to leav it 
where it was, he replac the candle, after extinguish it, in the box 
from whenc he had taken it, and care walk out of the dismal 
place. 

the moonbeam were shine veri brightli and beauti upon the face 
of the cliffs, when he emerg from the subterranean passage, so that he 
could see the door, the steps, and everi object quit distinctly; and, 
to hi gratification, he found that he had not destroy ani fasten 
that wa to the door, but that when it wa slam shut, it struck so 
hard and fast, that the strength of one man could not possibl move it, 
even the smallest fraction of an inch. 

"I shall be shown all thi to-morrow," he said; "and if I take thi 
hous I must have an alter made in thi door, so that it may open 
with a lock, instead of by main violence, as at present; but if, in the 
morning, when I view anderburi house, I can avoid an entranc into thi 
region, I will do so, and at my leisure, if I becom the possessor of 
the estate, I can explor everi nook and cranni of it." 

He then fold hi cloak about him, after pull the door as close as 
he could. He walk slowli and thought back to the inn. It wa 
quit evid that the idea of the murder he had commit did not annoy 
him in the least, and that in hi specul upon the subject he 
congratul himself much upon have so far succeed in get rid 
of certainli a most troublesom acquaintance. 

"'ti well, indeed," he said, "that just at thi junctur he should 
throw himself in my way, and enabl me so easi to feel certain that I 
shall never more be troubl with him. truly, I ran some risk, and when 
my pistol miss fire, it seem as if my evil star wa in it 
ascendant, and that I wa doom myself to becom the victim of him whom 
I have laid in so cold a grave. but I have been victorious, and I am 
will to accept the circumst as an omen of the past--that my 
fortun are on the change. I think I shall be success now, and with 
the ampl mean which I now possess, surely, in thi country, where gold 
is love so well, I shall be abl to overcom all difficulties, and to 
unit myself to some one, who--but no matter, her fate is an after 
consideration." 




chapter xcv. 

the marriag IN the bannerworth famili arranged. 


[illustration] 

after the adventur of the doctor with regard to the pictur about which 
such an air of mysteri and interest ha been thrown, the bannerworth 
famili began to give up all hope of ever find a clue to those 
circumst concern which they would certainli have like to have 
known the truth, but of which it wa not like they would ever hear 
anyth more. 

dr. chillingworth now had no reserve, and when he had recov 
suffici to feel that he could convers without an effort, he took 
an opportunity, while the whole of the famili were present, to speak of 
what had been hi hope and hi expectations. 

"you are all aware," he said, "now, of the stori of marmaduk 
bannerworth, and what an excess troublesom person he was, with all 
deference, to you, henry; first of all, as to spend all hi money at 
the gaming-table, and leav hi famili destitute; and then, when he 
did get a lump of money which might have done some good to those he left 
behind him--hid it somewher where it could not be found at all, and 
so leav you all in great difficulti and distress, when you might have 
been independent." 

"that' true enough, doctor," said henry; "but you know the old 
proverb,--that ill-gotten wealth never thrives; so that I don't regret 
not find thi money, for I am sure we should have been none the 
happier with it, and perhap not so happy." 

"oh, bother the old proverb; thirti or forti thousand pound is no 
trifl to be talk lightli of, or the loss of which to be quietli put 
up with, on account of a musti proverb. it' a larg sum, and I should 
like to have place it in your hands." 

"but as you cannot, doctor, there can be no good possibl done by 
regret it." 

"no, certainly; I don't mean that; utter regret is alway a veri foolish 
thing; but it' question whether someth might not be done in the 
matter, after all, for you, as it appears, by all the evid we can 
collect, that it must have been varney, after all, who jump down upon 
me from the garden-wal in so sudden a manner: and, if the pictur be 
valuabl to him, it must be valuabl to us." 

"but how are we to get it, and if we could, I do not see that it would 
be of much good to anybody, for, after all, it is but a painting." 

"there you go again," said the doctor, "depreci what you know 
noth about; now, listen to me, master henry, and I will tell you. 
that pictur evid had some sort of line at the back, over the 
origin canvas; and do you think I would have taken such pain to bring 
it away with me if that line had not made me suspect that between it 
and the origin pictur the money, in bank notes, wa deposited?" 

"had you ani special reason for suppos such wa the case?" 

"yes; most unquestion I had; for when I got the pictur fairli down, 
I found variou inequ in the surfac of the back, which led me to 
believ that roll of note were deposited, and that the great mistak 
we had all along made wa in look behind the picture, instead of at 
the pictur itself. I meant immedi to have cut it to piec when I 
reach here with it; but now it ha got into the hand of somebodi 
else, who knows, I suspect, as much I do." 

"it is rather provoking." 

"rather provoking! is that the way to talk of the loss of heaven know 
how mani thousand of pounds! I am quit aggrav myself at the idea 
of the thing, and it put me in a perfect fever to think of it, I can 
assur you." 

"but what can we do?" 

"oh! I propos an immedi crusad against varney, the vampyre, for who 
but he could have made such an attack upon me, and forc me to deliv 
up such a valuabl treasure?" 

"never heed it, doctor," said flora; "let it go; we have never had or 
enjoy that money, so it cannot matter, and it is not to be consid 
as the loss of an actual possession, becaus we never did actual 
possess it." 

"yes," chime in the admiral; "bother the money! what do we care about 
it; and, besides, charley holland is go to be veri busy." 

"busy!" said the doctor, "how do you mean?" 

"why, isn't he go to be marri directli to flora, here, and am not I 
go to settl the whole of my properti upon him on condit that he 
take the name of bell instead of holland? for, you see, hi mother wa 
my sister, and of cours her name wa bell. As for hi father holland, 
it can't matter to him now what charley is called; and if he don't take 
the name of bell I shall be the last in the family, for I am not like 
to marry, and have ani littl bell about me." 

"no," said the doctor; "I should say not; and that' the reason whi you 
want to ring the chang upon charl holland' name. Do you see the 
joke, admiral?" 

"I can't say I do--wher is it? it' all veri well to talk of jokes, but 
if I wa like charles, go to be married, I shouldn't be in ani joke 
humour, I can tell you, but quit the reverse; and as for you and your 
picture, if you want it, doctor, just run after varney yourself for it; 
or, stay--i have a better idea than that--get your wife to go and ask 
him for it, and if she make half such a clamour about hi ear that she 
did about ours, he will give it her in a minute, to get rid of her." 

"mi wife!--y don't mean to say she ha been here?" 

"yes, but she ha though. and now, doctor, I can tell you I have seen a 
good deal of servic in all part of the world, and, of course, pick 
up a littl experience; and, if I were you, some of these days, when 
mrs. chillingworth ain't veri well, i'd give her a compos draught 
that would make her quiet enough." 

"ah! that' not my style of practice, admiral; but I am sorri to hear 
that mrs. chillingworth ha annoy you so much." 

"pho, pho, man!--pho, pho! do you think she could annoy me? why, I have 
encount storm and squall in all latitudes, and it isn't a woman' 
tongu now that can do anyth of an annoy character, I can tell 
you; far from it--veri far from it; so don't distress yourself upon that 
head. but come, doctor, we are go to have the wed the day after 
to-morrow." 

"no, no," said flora; "the week after next, you mean," 

"i it the week after next? i'll be hang if I didn't think it wa the 
day after to-morrow; but of cours you know best, as you have settl it 
all among you. I have noth to do with it." 

"of course, I shall, with great pleasure," return the doctor, "be 
present on the interest occasion; but do you intend take possess 
of bannerworth hall again?" 

"no, certainli not," said henry; "we propos go to the dearbrook 
estate, and there remain for a time to see how we all like it. We 
may, perchance, enjoy it veri much, for I have heard it spoken of as an 
attract littl properti enough, and one that ani one might fancy, 
after be resid a short time upon it." 

"well," said the admiral; "that is, I believe, settl among us, but I 
am sure we sha'n't like it, on account of the want of the sea. why, I 
tell you, I have not seen a ship myself for thi eighteen months; 
there' a state of things, you see, that won't do to last, becaus one 
would get dry-mouldy: it' a shock thing to see noth but land, 
land, wherev you go." 

from the preced convers may be gather what were the design of 
the bannerworth family, and what progress had been made in carri them 
out. from the moment they had discov the title-de of the 
dearbrook property, they had ceas to care about the larg sum of money 
which marmaduk bannerworth had been suppos to have hidden in some 
portion of bannerworth hall. 

they had alreadi pass through quit enough of the busi turmoil of 
exist to be grate for anyth that promis eas and competence, 
and that seren of mind which is the dearest possess which ani one 
can compass. 

consequ wa it, that, with one accord, they got rid of all yearn 
after the larg sum which the doctor wa so anxiou to procur for them, 
and look forward to a life of great happi and contentment. On the 
whole, too, when they came to talk the matter over quietli among 
themselves, they were not sorri that varney had taken himself off in the 
way he had, for realli it wa a great release; and, as he had couch 
hi farewel in word which signifi it wa a final one, they were 
inclin to think that he must have left england, and that it wa not 
like they should ever again encount him, under ani circumst 
whatever. 

It wa to be consid quit as a whim of the old admiral's, the 
chang of charl holland' name to bell; but, as charl himself said 
when the subject wa broach to him,--"i am so well content to be 
call whatev those to whom I feel affect think proper, that I give 
up my name of holland without a pang, willingli adopt in it stead 
one that ha alway been hallow in my remembr with the best and 
kindest recollections." 

and thu thi affair wa settled, much to the satisfact of flora, who 
wa quit as well content to be call mrs. bell as to be call mrs. 
holland, sinc the object of her attach remain the same. the 
wed wa realli fix for the week after that which follow the 
convers we have recorded; but the admir wa not at all dispos 
to allow flora and hi nephew charl to get through such an import 
period of their live without some greater demonstr and show than 
could be made from the littl cottag where they dwelt; and consequ 
he wish that they should leav that and proceed at onc to a larger 
mansion, which he had hi eye upon a few mile off, and which wa to be 
had furnish for a time, at the pleasur of ani one. 

"and we won't shut ourselv up," said the admiral; "but we will find 
out all the christian-lik peopl in the neighbourhood, and invit them 
to the wedding, and we will have a jolli good breakfast together, and 
lot of music, and a famou lunch; and, after that, a dinner, and then a 
dance, and all that sort of thing; so that there shall be no want of 
fun." 

As may be well supposed, both charl and flora shrunk from so public an 
affair; but, as the old man had evid set hi heart upon it, they 
did not like to say they posit would not; so, after a vain attempt 
to dissuad him from remov at all from the cottag until they remov 
for good, they gave up the point to him, and he had it all hi own way. 

He took the house, for one month, which had so taken hi fancy, and 
certainli a pretti enough place it was, although they found out 
afterwards, that whi it wa he wa so charm with it consist in the 
fact that it bore the name of a vessel which he had onc commanded; but 
thi they did not know until a long time afterwards, when it slip out 
by mere accident. 

they stipul with the admir that there should not be more than 
twenti guest at the breakfast which wa to succeed the marriag 
ceremony; and to that he acceded; but henri whisper to charl 
holland,-- 

"I know thi public wed to be distast to you, and most 
particularli do I know it is distast to flora; so, if you do not 
mind play a trick upon the old man, I can veri easili put you in the 
way of cheat him entirely." 

"indeed; I should like to hear, and, what is more, I should like to 
practise, if you think it will not so entir offend him as to make him 
implacable." 

"not at all, not at all; he will laugh himself, when he come to know 
it, as much as ani of us; the present difficulti will be to procur 
flora' connivance; but that we must do the best way we can by 
persuasion." 

what thi scheme wa will ultim appear; but, certain it is, that 
the old admir had no suspicion of what wa go on, and proceed to 
make all hi arrang accordingly. 

from hi first arriv in the market town--in the neighbourhood of which 
wa bannerworth hall--it will be recollect that he had taken a great 
fanci to the lawyer, in whose name a forg letter had been sent him, 
inform him of the fact that hi nephew, charl holland, intend 
marri into a famili of vampyres. 

It wa thi letter, as the reader is aware, which brought the old 
admir and jack pringl into the neighbourhood of the hall; and, 
although it wa a manoeuvr to get rid of charl holland, which fail 
most signally, there can be no doubt but that such a letter wa the 
product of sir franci varney, and that he wrote it for the express 
purpos of get rid of charl from the hall, who had begun 
materi to interfer with hi plan and project there. 

after some convers with himself, the admir thought that thi 
lawyer would be just the man to recommend the proper sort of peopl to 
be invit to the wed of charl and flora; so he wrote to him, 
invit himself to dinner, and receiv back a veri graciou repli from 
the lawyer, who declar that the honour of entertain a gentleman 
whom he so much respect as admir bell, wa greater than he had a 
right to expect by a great deal, and that he should feel most grate 
for hi company, and await hi come with the greatest impatience. 

"A devilish civil fellow, that attorney," said the admiral, as he put 
the letter in hi pocket, "and almost enough to put one in conceit of 
lawyers." 

"yes," said jack pringle, who had overheard the admir read the letter. 

"yes, we will honour him; and I onli hope he will have plenti of grog; 
because, you see, if he don't--d--n it! what' that? can't you keep 
thing to yourself?" 

thi latter exclam aros from the fact that the admir wa so 
indign at jack for listen to what he had been saying, as to throw 
a leaden inkstand, that happen to be upon the table, at hi head. 

"you mutin swab!" he said, "cannot a gentleman ask me to dinner, or 
cannot I ask myself, without you put your spoke in the windlass, you 
vagabond?" 

"oh! well," said jack, "if you are out of temper about it, I had better 
send my mark to the lawyer, and tell him that we won't come, as it ha 
made some famili differences." 

"family, you thief!" said the admiral. "what do you mean? what famili do 
you think would own you? d--n me, if I don't think you came over in some 
strang ship. but, I tell you what it is, if you interfer in thi 
matter, i'll be hang if I don't blow your brain out." 

"and you'll be hang if you do," said jack, as he walk out of the 
room; "so it' all one either way, old fizgig." 

"what!" roar the admiral, as he sprang up and ran after jack. "have I 
live all these year to be call name in my own ship--i mean my own 
house? what doe the infern rascal mean by it?" 

the admiral, no doubt, would have pursu jack veri closely, had not 
flora intercept him, and, by gentl violence, got him back to the 
room. No one els could have ventur to have stop him, but the 
affect he had for her wa so great that she could realli accomplish 
almost anyth with him; and, by listen quietli to hi complaint of 
jack pringle--which, however, involv a disclosur of the fact which he 
had intend to keep to himself, that he had sought the lawyer' 
advice--sh succeed in sooth him completely, so that he forgot hi 
anger in a veri short time. 

but the old man' anger, although easili aroused, never last veri 
long; and, upon the whole, it wa realli astonish what he put up with 
from jack pringle, in the way of taunt and sneers, of all sort and 
descriptions, and now and then not a littl real abuse. 

and, probably, he thought likewis that jack pringl did not mean what 
he said, on the same principl that he (the admiral), when he call 
jack a mutin swab and a marine, certainli did not mean that jack wa 
those things, but mere use them as explet to express a great 
amount of indign at the moment, because, as may be well supposed, 
noth in the world could be worse, in admir bell' estimation, that 
to be a mutin swab or a marine. 

It wa rather a wonder, though, that, in hi anger some day, he did not 
do jack some mischief; for, as we have had occas to notic in one or 
two cases, the admir wa not extrem particular as to what sort of 
missil he use when he consid it necessari to throw someth at 
jack' head. 

It would not have been a surpris thing if jack had realli made some 
commun to the lawyer; but he did stop short at that amount of 
pleasantry, and, as he himself express it, for onc in a way he let 
the old man pleas himself. 

the admir soon forgot thi littl dispute, and then pleas himself 
with the idea that he should pass a pleasant day with the attorney. 

"ah! well," he said; "who would have thought that ever I should have 
gone and taken dinner with a lawyer--and not onli done that, but invit 
myself too! It show us all that there may be some good in all sort of 
men, lawyer included; and I am sure, after this, I ought to begin to 
think what I never thought before, and that is, that a marin may 
actual be a use person. It show that, as one get older, one get 
wiser." 

[illustration] 

It wa an immens piec of liber for a man brought up, as admir 
bell had been, in decidedli one of the most prejud branch of the 
public service, to make ani such admiss as these. A veri great thing 
it was, and show a liber of mind such as, even at the present 
time, is not readili found. 

It is astonishing, as well as amusing, to find how the mind assimil 
itself to the circumst in which it is placed, and how society, 
be cut up into small sections, imagin differ thing mere as a 
consequ of their peculiar application. We shall find that even 
people, live at differ end of a city, will look with a sort of 
piti and contempt upon each other; and it is much to be regret that 
public writer are found who use what littl abil they may possess in 
pander to their feelings. 

It wa as contempt and silli as it wa reprehens for a late 
celebr novelist to pretend that he believ there wa at place 
call bloomsbury-square, but he realli did not know; becaus that wa 
mere done for the purpos of rais a silli laugh among person who 
were neither respect on account of their abil or their conduct. 

but to return from thi digression. the admiral, attir in hi best 
suit, which alway consist of a blue coat, the exact colour of the 
navi uniform, an immens pale primros colour waistcoat, and white 
kerseymer continuations, went to the lawyer' as had been arranged. 

If anyth at all could flatter the old man' vaniti successfully, it 
certainli would be the manner in which he wa receiv at the lawyer' 
house, where everyth wa done that could give him satisfaction. 

A veri handsom repast wa laid befor him, and, when the cloth wa 
removed, the admir broach the subject upon which he wish to ask 
the advic of hi profession friend. after tell him of the wed 
that wa to come off, he said,-- 

"now, I have bargain to invit twenti people; and, of course, as that 
is exclus of ani of the family, and as I don't know ani peopl about 
thi neighbourhood except yourself, I want you and your famili to come 
to start with, and then I want you to find me out some more decent 
peopl to make up the party." 

"I feel highli flattered," said the attorney, "that, in such a case as 
this, you should have come to me, and my onli great fear is, that I 
should not be abl to give you satisfaction." 

"oh! you needn't be afraid of that; there is no fear on that head; so I 
shall leav it all to you to invit the folk that you think proper." 

"I will endeavour, certainly, admiral, to do my best. Of course, live 
in the town, as I have for mani years, I know some veri nice peopl as 
well as some veri queer ones." 

"oh! we don't want ani of the queer ones; but let those who are invit 
be frank, hearty, good-temp people, such as one will be glad to meet 
over and over again without ani ceremony--non of your simper people, 
who are afraid to laugh for fear of open their mouth too wide, but 
who are so mighti genteel that they are afraid to enjoy anyth for 
fear it should be vulgar." 

"I understand you, admiral, perfectly, and shall endeavour to obey your 
instruct to the veri letter; but, if I should unfortun invit 
anybodi you don't like, you must excus me for make such a mistake." 

"oh, of course--of course. never mind that; and, if ani disagre 
fellow comes, we will smother him in some way." 

"it would serv him right, for no one ought to make himself 
disagreeable, after be honour with an invit from you; but I 
will be most especi careful, and I hope that such a circumst 
will not occur." 

"never mind. If it should, i'll tell you what i'll do; i'll set jack 
pringl upon him, and if he don't worri hi life out it will be a 
strang thing to me." 

"oh," said the lawyer, "I am glad you have mention him, for it give 
me an opportun of say that I have done all in my power to make him 
comfortable." 

"all in your power to make him comfortable! what do you mean?" 

"I mean that I have place such a dinner befor him as will pleas him; 
I told him to ask for just whatev he likes." 

the admir look at the lawyer with amazement, for a few moments, in 
silence, and then he said, 

"d--n it! why, you don't mean to tell me, that that rascal is here." 

"oh, yes; he came about ten minut I befor you arrived, and said you 
were coming, and he ha been down stair feast all the while since." 

"stop a bit. Do you happen to have ani load fire arm in the house?" 

"we have got an old bunderbuss; but what for, admiral?" 

"to shoot that scoundrel, pringle. i'll blow hi brain out, as sure as 
fate. the impud of hi come here, directli against my orders, 
too." 

"mi dear sir, calm yourself, and think noth of it; it' of no 
consequ whatever." 

"no consequence; where is that blunderbuss of yours? Do you mean to tell 
me that mutini is of no consequence? give me the blunderbuss." 

"but, my clear sir, we onli keep it _in terrorem_, and have no bullets." 

"never mind that, we can cram in a hand of nails, or brass buttons, 
or hammer up a few halfpence--anyth of that sort will do to settl 
hi busi with." 

"how do you get on, old tarbarrel?" said jack, put hi head in at 
the door. "are you make yourself comfortable? i'll be hang if I 
don't think you have a drop too much already, you look so preciou red 
about the gills. I have been get on famous, and I thought i'd just 
hop up for a minut to make your mind easi about me, and tell you so." 

It wa quit evid that jack had done justic to the good cheer of the 
lawyer, for he wa rather unsteady, and had to hold by the door-post to 
support himself, while there wa such a look of content upon hi 
counten as contrast with the indign that wa manifest upon 
the admiral' face that, as the say is, it would have made a cat 
laugh to see them. 

"be off with ye, jack," said the lawyer; "be off with ye. Go down stair 
again and enjoy yourself. don't you see that the admir is angri with 
you." 

"oh, he be bothered," said jack; "i'll soon settl him if he come ani 
of hi nonsense; and mind, mr. lawyer, whatev you do, don't you give 
him too much to drink." 

the lawyer ran to the door, and push jack out, for he rightli enough 
suspect that the quiet of the admir wa onli that calm which 
preced a storm of more than usual amount and magnitude, so he wa 
anxiou to part them at once. 

He then set about appeasing, as well as he could, the admiral' anger, 
by attribut the persever of jack, in follow him wherev he 
went, to hi great affect for him, which, combin with hi 
ignorance, might make him often troublesom when he had realli no 
intent of be so. 

thi wa certainli the best way of appeas the old man; and, indeed, 
the onli way in which it could be done successfully, and the proof that 
it wa so, consist in the fact, that the admir did consent, at the 
suggest of the attorney, to forgiv jack onc more for the offenc he 
had committed. 




chapter xcvi. 

the baron take anderburi house, and decid upon give A grand 
entertainment. 


[illustration] 

It wa not consid anyth extraordinari that, although the baron 
stolmuy of saltzburgh went out with the mysteri stranger who had 
arriv at the anderburi arm to see him, he should return without him 
for certainli he wa not bound to bring him back, by ani mean whatever. 

moreover, he enter the inn so quietly, and with such an appear of 
perfect composure, that no one could have suspect for a moment that he 
had been guilti realli of the terrif crime which had been laid to hi 
charge--a crime which few men could have commit in so entir 
unmov and passionless a manner as he had done it. 

but he seem to consid the take of a human life as a thing not of 
the remotest consequence, and not to be consid at all as a matter 
which wa to put ani one out of the way, but as a thing to be done when 
necess required, with all the eas in the world, without arous or 
awak ani of those feel of remors which one would suppos ought 
to find a place in the heart of a man who had been guilti of such 
monstrou behaviour. 

He walk up to hi own apart again, and retir to rest with the 
same feeling, apparently, of calmness, and the same abil to tast of 
the sweet of repos as had befor character him. 

the stranger' horse, which wa a valuabl and beauti animal, 
remain in the stabl of the inn, and as, of course, that wa 
consid a guarante for hi return, the landlord, when he himself 
retir to rest, left one of hi establish sit up to let in the 
man who now lay so motionless and so fright in appear in one of 
the ice-wel of the mysteri passag lead from the base of the 
cliff, to the ground of anderburi house. 

but the night wore on, and the man who had been left to let the stranger 
in, after make mani effort to keep himself awake, drop into sound 
repose, which he might just as well have done in the first instance, 
inasmuch as, although he knew it not, he wa engag in the vain task of 
wait for the dead. 

the morn wa fresh and beautiful, and, at a far earlier hour than a 
person of hi qualiti wa expect to make hi appearance, the baron 
descend from hi chamber; for, somehow or other, by common consent, it 
seem to be agre that great personag must be late in rising, and 
equal late in go to bed. 

but the baron wa evid not so dispos to turn night into day, and 
the landlord congratul himself not a littl upon the fact that he 
wa readi for hi illustri guest when he descend so unexpectedli 
from hi chamber as he did. 

An ampl breakfast wa dispos of; that is to say, it wa place upon 
the table, and charg to the baron, who select from it what he 
pleased; and when the meal wa over the landlord ventur to enter the 
apartment, and said to him, with all due humility,-- 

"if you please, sir, mr. leek, who ha the let of 
anderbury-on-the-mount, that is, anderburi house, as it is usual 
called, is here, sir, and would be happi to take your order as to when 
you would be pleas to look at those premises?" 

"I shall be readi to go in half a hour," said the baron; "and, as the 
distanc is not great, I will walk from here to the mansion." 

thi messag wa duli commun to mr. leek, who thereupon determin 
upon wait until the baron should announc hi readi to depart 
upon the expedition; and he wa as good as hi word, for, in about 
half-an-hour afterwards, he descend to the hall, and then mr. leek wa 
summoned, who came out of the bar with such a grand rush, that he fell 
over a mat that wa befor him, and salut the baron by dig hi 
head into hi stomach, and then fall sprawl at hi feet, and 
lay hold of hi ankle. 

thi littl incid wa duli apologis for, and explained; after which 
mr. leek walk on through the town, toward anderbury-on-the-mount, 
follow by the illustri personag whom he sincer hope he should 
be abl to induc to take it. 

It wa a curiou thing to see how they travers the street together; 
for while the baron walk right on, and with a solemn and measur 
step, mr. leek manag to get along a few pace in front of him, 
sideways, so that he could keep up a sort of convers upon the 
merit of anderburi house, and the neighbourhood in general, without 
much effort; to which remark the baron made such suitabl and dignifi 
repli as a baron would be suppos to make. 

"you will find, sir," said mr. leek, "that everyth about anderburi is 
extrem select, and amazingli correct; and I am sure a more delight 
place to live in could not be found." 

"ah!" said the baron; "veri likely." 

"it' lively, too," continu mr. leek; "veri lively; and there are two 
chapel of ease, besid the church." 

"that' a drawback," said the baron. 

"A drawback, sir! well, I am sorri I mention it; but perhap you are a 
roman catholic, sir, and, in that case, the chapel of eas have no 
interest for you." 

"not the slightest; but do not, sir, run away with ani assumpt 
concern my religi opinions, for I am not a roman catholic." 

"no, sir, no, sir; nor more am I; and, as far as I think, and my opinion 
goes, I say, whi shouldn't a gentleman with a larg fortun be what he 
likes, or nothing, if he like that better? but here we are, sir, close 
to one of the entranc of anderburi house. there are three princip 
entrances, you understand, sir, on three side of the estate, and the 
fourth side face the sea, where there is that mysteri passag that 
lead down from the ground to the beach, which, perhaps, you have heard 
of, sir." 

"the landlord of the inn mention it." 

"we consid it a great curiosity, sir, I can assur you, in these 
parts--a veri great curiosity; and it' an immens advantag to the 
house, because, you see, sir, in extrem hot weather, all sort of 
provis can be taken down there, and kept at such a veri low 
temperatur as to be quit delightful." 

"that is an advantage." 

mr. leek rang the bell that hung over one of the entrances, and hi 
summon for admiss wa speedili answer by the old coupl who had 
charg of the premises, and then, with a view of impress them with a 
notion of the import of the personag whom he had brought to look at 
the place, he said, aloud,-- 

"the baron stoltmayor, of saltsomething, ha come to look at the 
premises." 

thi announc wa receiv with all due defer and respect, and 
the task of show the baron the premis at onc fairli commenced. 

"here you have," said mr. leek, assum an orator attitude--"her 
you have the umbrag tree stoop down to dip their leav in the 
purl waters; here you have the sweet foliag lend a delici 
perfum to the balmi air; here you have the murmur waterfal play 
music of the sphere to the listen birds, who sit respons upon the 
danc boughs; here you have all the fragranc of the brini ocean, 
mingl with the scent of a bank of violets, and wrap the sens in 
elysium; here you may never tire of an exist that present 
never-end charms, and that, in the full enjoy of which, you may 
live far beyond the allot span of man." 

"enough--enough," said the baron. 

"here you have the choicest exot take kindli to a soil gift by 
natur with the most extraordinari power of production; and all that 
can pamper the appetit or yield delight to the senses, is scatter 
around by natur with a liber hand. It is quit imposs that 
royalti should come near the favour spot without visit it as a 
thing of course; and I forgot to mention that a revenu is deriv from 
some cottages, which, although small, is yet suffici to pay the tith 
on the whole estate." 

"there, there--that will do." 

"here you have purl rill and cascades, and fish-pond so redund 
with the finni tribe, that you have but to wish for sport, and it is 
yours; here you have in the mansion, chamber that vie with the 
accommod of a palace--ampl dormitori and hall of ancient 
grandeur; here you have--" 

"stop," said the baron, "stop; I cannot be pester in thi way with 
your description. I have no patienc to listen to such mere words--show 
me the hous at once, and let me judg for myself." 

"certainly, sir; oh! certainly; onli I thought it right to give you a 
slight descript of the place as it realli was: and now, sir, that we 
have reach the house, I may remark that here we have--" 

"silence!" said the baron; "if you begin with here we have, I know not 
when you will leav off. all I requir of you is to show me the place, 
and to answer ani question which I may put to you concern it. I will 
draw my own conclusions, and noth you can say, one way or another, 
will affect my imagination." 

"certainly, sir, certainly; I shall onli be too happi to answer ani 
question that may be put to me by a person of your lordship' great 
intelligence; and all I can remark is, that when you reach the 
drawing-room floor, ani person may truli say, here you have--i realli 
beg your pardon, sir--i had not the slightest intent of say here 
you have, I assur you; but the word came out quit unawares, I assur 
you." 

"peace--peace!" cri again the baron; "you disturb me by thi incess 
clatter." 

thu admonished, mr. leek wa now quiet, and allow the baron in hi 
own way to make what investig he pleas concern anderburi 
house. 

the investig wa not one that could be gone over in ten minutes; 
for the hous wa extrem extensive, and the estat altogeth 
present so mani featur of beauti and interest, that it wa 
imposs not to linger over it for a consider period of time. 

the ground were most extensive, and plant with such a regard to order 
and regularity, everyth be in it proper place, that it wa a 
pleasur to see an estat so well kept. and although the baron wa not a 
man who said much, it wa quit evident, by what littl he did utter, 
that he wa veri well pleas with anderbury-on-the-mount. 

"and now," said mr. leek, "I will do myself the pleasure, sir, of 
show your grace the subterranean passage." 

At thi moment a loud ring at one of the entranc gate wa heard, and 
upon the man who had charg of the hous answer the summon for 
admission, he found that it wa a gentleman, who gave a card on which 
wa the name of sir john westlake, and who desir to see the premises. 

"sir john westlake," said mr. leek; "oh! I recollect he did call at my 
office, and say that he thought of take anderbury-on-the-mount. A 
gentleman of great and tast is sir john, but I must tell him, baron, 
that you have the prefer if you choos to embrac it." 

At thi moment the stranger advanced, and when he saw the baron, he 
bow courteously, upon which mr. leek said,-- 

"I regret, sir john, that if you should take a fanci to the place, I am 
compel first of all to give thi gentleman the refus of it." 

"certainly," said sir john westlake; "do not let me interfer with ani 
one. I have nearli made up my mind, and came to look over the properti 
again; but of course, if thi gentleman is beforehand with me, I must be 
content. I wish particularli to go down to the subterranean passag to 
the beach, if it is not too much trouble." 

"trouble! certainli not, sir. here, davis, get some links, and we can go 
at once; and as thi gentleman likewis ha seen everyth but that 
strang excavation, he will probabl descend with us." 

"certainly," said the baron; "I shall have great pleasure;" and he said 
it with so free and unembarrass an air, that no one could have 
believ for a moment in the possibl that such a subject of fear 
interest to him wa there to be found. 

the entranc from the ground into thi deep cavern place wa in a 
small but neat building, that look like a summer-house; and now, 
torch be procured, and one lit, a door wa opened, which conduct 
at onc into the commenc of the excavation; and mr. leek head 
the way, the distinguish party, as that gentleman love afterward to 
call it in hi account of the transaction, proceed into the veri 
bowel of the earth, as it were, and quickli lost all trace of the 
daylight. 

the place did not descend by steps, but by a gentl slope, which it 
requir some caution to traverse, because, be cut in the chalk, 
which in some place wa worn veri smooth, it wa extrem slippery; 
but thi wa a difficulti that a littl practic soon overcame, and as 
they went on the place becam more interest everi minute. 

even the baron allow mr. leek to make a speech upon the occasion, and 
that gentleman said,-- 

"you will perceiv that thi excav must have been made, at a great 
expense, out of the solid cliff, and in make it some of the most 
curiou specimen of petrifact and fossil remain were found. you see 
that the roof is vaulted, and that it is onli now and then a lump of 
chalk ha fallen in, or a great piec of flint; and now we come to one 
of the ice-wells." 

they came to a deep excavation, down which they looked, and when the man 
held the torch beneath it surface, they could dimli see the bottom of 
it, where there wa a number of larg piec of flint stone, and, 
apparently, likewise, the remain of broken bottles. 

"there use to be a windlass at the top of this," said mr. leek, "and 
the thing were let down in a basket. they do say that ice will keep for 
two year in one of these places." 

"and are there more of these excavations?" said the baron. 

"oh, dear, yes, sir; there are five or six of them for differ 
purposes; for when the famili that use to live in anderburi hous had 
grand entertainments, which they sometim had in the summer season, 
they alway had a lot of men down here, cool wines, and pass them 
up from hand to hand to the house." 

from the gradual slope of thi passag down to the cliffs, and the 
zigzag charact of it, it may be well suppos that it wa of 
consider extent. indeed, mr. leek assert that it wa half a mile 
in actual measur length. 

the baron wa not at all anxiou to run ani risk of a discoveri of the 
dead bodi which he had cast into that ice-wel which wa nearest to the 
open on to the beach, so, as he went on, he negativ the differ 
propos that were made to look down into the excavations, and 
succeed in put a stop to that speci of inquiri in the major 
of instances, but he could not wholli do so. 

perhap it would have been better for hi purpos if he had encourag a 
look into everi one of the ice-wells; for, in that case, their 
similar of appear might have tire out sir john westlak befor 
they got to the last one; but as it was, when they reach the one down 
which the bodi had been precipitated, he had the mortif to hear 
mr. leek say,-- 

"and now, sir john, and you, my lord baron, as we have look at the 
first of these ice well and at none of the others, suppos we look at 
the last." 

the baron wa afraid to say anything; because, if the bodi were 
discovered, and identifi as that of the visitor at the inn, and who 
had been seen last with him, ani reluct on hi part to have that 
ice-wel examined, might easili afterward be constru into a veri 
power piec of circumstanti evid against him. 

He therefor mere bow hi assent, think that the examin 
would be but a superfici one, and that, in consequence, he should 
escap easili from ani disagre consequences. 

but thi the fate ordain otherwise; and there seem no hope of that 
ice-wel in particular escap such an investig as wa sure to 
induc some uncomfort results. 

"davis," said mr. leek, "these place are not deep, you see, and I wa 
think that if you went down one of them, it would be as well; for 
then you would be abl to tell the gentlemen what the bottom wa fairli 
compos of, you understand." 

"oh, I don't mind, sir," said davis. "I have been down one of them 
befor to-day, I can tell you, sir." 

"I do not see the necessity," said sir john westlake, "exactly, of such 
a thing; but still if you please, and thi gentleman wishes--" 

"I have no wish upon the occasion," said the baron; "and, like yourself, 
cannot see the necessity." 

"oh, there is no trouble," said mr. leek; "and it' better, now you are 
here, that you see and understand all about it. how can you get down, 
davis?" 

"why, sir, it ain't abov fourteen feet altogether; so I sha'n't have 
ani difficulty, for I can hang by my hand about half the distance, and 
drop the remainder." 

As he spoke he took off hi coat, and then stuck the link he carri 
into a cleft of the rock, that wa besid the brink of the excavation. 

the baron now saw that there would be no such thing as avoid a 
discoveri of the fact of the dead bodi be in that place, and hi onli 
hope was, that in it descent it might have becom so injur as to defi 
identification. 

but thi wa a faint hope, becaus he recollect that he had himself 
seen the face, which wa turn upwards, and the period after death wa 
by far too short for him to have ani hope that decomposit could have 
taken place even to the most limit extent. 

the light, which wa stuck in a niche, shed but a few ineffici ray 
down into the pit, and, as the baron stood, with fold arms, look 
calmli on, he expect each moment a scene of surpris and terror would 
ensue. 

nor wa he wrong; for scarc had the man plung down into that deep 
place, than he utter a cri of alarm and terror, and shouted,-- 

"murder! murder! lift me out. there is a dead man down here, and I have 
jump upon him." 

"A dead man!" cri mr. leek and sir john westlak in a breath. 

"how veri strange!" said the baron. 

"lend me a hand," cri davis; "lend me a hand out; I cannot stand this, 
you know. lend me a hand out, I say, at once." 

thi wa easier to speak of than to do, and mr. davi began to discov 
that it wa easier by far to get into a deep pit, than to get out of 
one, notwithstand that hi assert of have been down into those 
place wa perfectli true; but then he had met with noth alarming, 
and had been abl perfectli at hi leisur to scrambl out the best way 
he could. 

now, however, hi frantic effort to releas himself from a much more 
uncomfort situat than he had imagin it possibl for him to get 
into, were of so frantic a nature, that he onli half buri himself in 
piec of chalk, which he kept pull down with vehem from the 
side of the pit, and succeed in accomplish noth toward hi 
rescue. 

"oh! the fellow is onli joking," said the baron, "and amus himself at 
our expense." 

but the manner in which the man cri for help, and the mark terror 
which wa in everi tone, wa quit suffici to prove that he wa not 
acting; for if he were, a more accomplish mimic could not have been 
found on the stage than he was. 

"thi is serious," said sir john westlake, "and cannot be allowed. have 
you ani rope here by which we can assist him from the pit? don't be 
alarmed, my man, for if there be a dead bodi in the pit, it can't harm 
you. take your time quietli and easily, and you will assuredli get out." 

"aye," said the baron, "the more haste, the worst speed, is an english 
proverb, and in thi case it will be fulli exemplified. thi man would 
easili leav the pit, if he would have the patience, with care and 
quietness, to clamber up it sides." 

It would appear that davi felt the truth of these exhortations, for 
although he trembl excessively, he did begin to make some progress in 
hi ascent, and get so high, that mr. leek wa enabl to get hold of 
hi hand, and give him a littl assistance, so that, in anoth minut 
or so, he wa rescu from hi situation, which wa not one of peril, 
although it wa certainli one of fright. 

He trembl so excessively, and stutter and stammered, that for some 
minut no one could understand veri well what he said; but at length, 
upon make himself intelligible, he exclaimed,-- 

"there ha been a murder! there ha been a murder committed, and the 
bodi thrown into the ice pit. I felt that I jump down upon someth 
soft, and when I put down my hand to feel what it was, it came across a 
dead man' face, and then, of course, I call out." 

"you certainli did call out." 

"yes, and so would anybody, I think, under such circumstances. I suppos 
I shall be hung now, becaus I had charg of the house?" 

"that did not strike me until thi moment," said the baron; "but if 
there be a dead bodi in that pit, it certainli place thi man in a veri 
awkward position." 

"what the deuc do you mean?" said davis; "I don't know no more about it 
than the child unborn. there is a dead man in the ice-well, and that is 
all I know about it; but whether he ha been there a long time, or a 
short time, I don't know ani more than the moon, so it' no use 
bother me about it." 

"mi good man," said the baron, "it would be veri wrong inde to imput 
to you ani amount of crimin in thi business, sinc you may be 
entir innocent; and I, for one, believ that you are so, for I cannot 
think that ani guilti man would ventur into the place where he had put 
the bodi of hi victim, in the way that you ventur into that pit. I 
say I cannot believ it possible, and therefor I think you innocent, 
and will take care to see that no injustic is done you; but at the same 
time I cannot help adding, that I think, of course, you will find 
yourself suspect in some way." 

"I am veri much oblig to you, sir," said davis; "but as I happen to be 
quit innocent, I am veri easi about it, and don't care one straw what 
peopl say. I have not been in thi excav for heaven know how 
long." 

"but what' to be done?" said mr. leek. "I suppos it' our duti to do 
something, under such circumstances." 

"unquestionably," said the baron; "and the first thing to be done, is to 
inform the polic of what ha happened, so that the bodi may be got up; 
and as I have now seen enough of the estat to satisfi me as regard it 
capabilities, I decid at onc upon take it, if I can agre upon the 
condit of the tenancy, and I will purchas it, if the price be such 
as I think suitable." 

"well," said mr. leek, "if anyth could reconcil me to the 
extraordinari circumst that ha just occurred, it certainli is, 
baron, the have so desir a tenant for anderbury-on-the-mount as 
yourself. but we need not travers all thi passag again, for it is 
much nearer now to get out upon the sea-coast at once, as we are so 
close to the other open upon the beach. It seem to me that we ought 
to proceed at onc to the town, and give inform to the author 
of the discoveri which we have made." 

"it is absolut necessary," said the baron, "so to do; so come along 
at once. I shall proceed to my inn, and as, of course, I have seen 
noth more than yourselves, and consequ could onli repeat your 
evidence, I do not see that my presenc is call for. nevertheless, of 
course, if the justic think it absolut necessari that I should 
appear, I can have no possibl object to so do." 

thi wa as straightforward as anyth that could be desired, and, 
moreover, it wa rather art put together, for it seem to impli 
that he, mr. leek, would be slighted, if hi evid wa not consid 
sufficient. 

"of course," said mr. leek; "I don't see at all why, as you, sir, have 
onli the same thing to say as myself, I should not be sufficient." 

"don't call upon me on ani account," said sir john westlake. 

"oh! no, no," cri mr. leek; "there is no occasion. I won't, you may 
depend, if it can be helped." 

sir john, in rather a nervou and excit manner, bade them good day, 
befor they got quit into the town, and hurri off; while the baron, 
with a dignifi bow, when he reach the door of hi hotel, said to mr. 
leek,-- 

"of cours I do not like the troubl of judici investig more 
than anybodi else, and therefore, unless it is imper necessari 
that I should appear, I shall take it as a favour to be releas from 
such a trouble." 

"mi lord baron," said mr. leek, "you may depend that I shall mention 
that to the magistr and the coroner, and all those sort of people;" 
and then mr. leek walk away, but he mutter to himself, as he did so, 
"they will have him, as sure as fate, just becaus he is a baron; and 
hi name will look well in the 'counti chronicle.'" 

mr. leek then repair immedi to the hous of one of the princip 
magistrates, and relat what had occurred, to the great surpris of 
that gentleman, who suggest immedi the proprieti of make the 
fact known to the coron of the district, as it wa more hi business, 
than a magistrate's, in the first instance, sinc nobodi wa accus of 
the offence. 

thi suggest wa immedi followed, and that functionari direct 
that the bodi should be remov from where it wa to the nearest 
public-house, and immedi issu hi precept for an inquiri into the 
case. 

By thi time the matter had begun to get bruit about in the town, and 
of cours it went from mouth to mouth with mani exaggerations; and 
although it by no mean did follow that a murder had been commit 
becaus a dead bodi had been found, yet, such wa the univers 
impression; and the matter began to be talk about as the murder in the 
subterranean passag lead to anderburi house, with all the gusto 
which the full particular of some deed of blood wa calcul to 
inspire. and how it spread about wa thus:-- 

the fact was, that mr. leek wa so anxiou to let anderbury-on-the-mount 
to the rich baron stolmuyer, of saltzburgh, that he got a friend of hi 
to come and person sir john westlake, while he, the baron, wa 
look at the premises, in order to drive him at onc to a conclus 
upon the matter; so that what made sir john so veri anxiou that he 
should not be call forward in the matter, consist in the simpl fact 
that he wa noth els than plain mr. brown, who kept a hatter' shop 
in the town; but he could not keep hi own counsel, and, instead of 
hold hi tongue, as he ought to have done, about the matter, he told 
it to everi one he met, so that in a short time it wa gener known 
that someth seriou and startl had occur in the subterranean 
passag to anderburi house, and a great mob of person throng the 
beach in anxiou expect of get more inform on the matter. 

the men, likewise, who had been order by the coron to remov the 
body, soon reach the spot, and they gave an increas impetu to the 
proceedings, by open the door of the subterranean passage, and then 
look earnestli along the beach as if in expect of someth or 
somebodi of importance. 

when eagerli question by the mob, for the throng of person now 
assembl quit amount to a mob, to know what they wait for, one of 
them said,-- 

"A coffin wa to have been brought down to take the bodi in." 

thi announc at onc remov anyth doubt that might be in the 
mind of ani of them upon the subject, and at onc proclaim the fact 
not onli that there wa a dead body, but that if they look out they 
would see it forthwith. 

the throng thickened, and by the time two men were observ approach 
with a coffin on their shoulders, there wa scarc anybodi left in the 
town, except a few rare persons, indeed, who were not so curiou as 
their neighbours. 

It wa not an agreeabl job, even to those men who were not the most 
particular in the world, to be remov so loathsom a spectacl as that 
which they were pretti sure to encount in the ice-well; but they did 
not shrink from it, and, by set about it as a duty, they got through 
it toler well. 

they took with them sever larg torches, and then, one have 
descend into the pit, fasten a rope under the arm of the dead man, 
and so he wa haul out, and place in the shell that wa readi to 
receiv him. 

they were all surpris at the fresh and almost health appear of 
the countenance, and it wa quit evid to everybodi that if ani one 
had known him in life, they could not have the least possibl difficulti 
in recognis him now that he wa no more. 

and the onli appear of injuri which he exhibit wa in that 
dread wound which had certainli prove hi death, and which wa 
observ in hi throat the moment they look upon him. 

[illustration] 

the crush to obtain a sight of the bodi wa tremend at the moment it 
wa brought out, and a vast concours of person follow it in 
process to the town, where the greatest excit prevailed. It wa 
easili discov that no known person wa missing, and some who had 
caught a sight of the body, went so far as to assert that it must have 
been in the ice-wel for years, and that the extrem cold had preserv 
it in all it origin freshness. 

the news, of course, came round, although not through the baron, for he 
did not condescend to say one word about it at the inn, and it wa the 
landlord who first start the suggest of--"what suppos it is the 
gentleman who left hi hors here?" 

thi idea had no sooner got possess of hi brain, than it each moment 
seem to him to assum a more reason and tangibl form, and without 
say ani more to ani one els about it, he at onc start off to 
where the bodi lay await an inquest, to see if hi suspicion were 
correct. 

when he arriv at the public-hous and ask to see the body, he wa at 
onc permit to do so; for the landlord knew him, and wa as curiou 
as he could be upon the subject by ani possibility. one glance, of 
course, wa sufficient, and the landlord at onc said,-- 

"yes, I have seen him before, though I don't know hi name. He came to 
my hous last night, and left hi hors there; and, although I onli saw 
him for a moment as he pass through the hall, I am certain I am not 
mistaken. I dare say all my waiter will recognis him, as well as the 
baron stolmuy of saltzburgh, who is stay with me, and who no doubt 
know veri well who he is, for he went out with him late and came home 
alone, and I order one of my men to wait up all night in order to let 
in thi veri person who is now lie dead befor us." 

"the deuc you did! but you don't suppos the baron murder him, do 
you?" 

"it' a mysteri to me altogether--quit a profound mystery. it' veri 
unlikely, certainly; and what' the most extraordinari part of the whole 
affair is, how the deuc could he come into one of the ice-wel 
belong to anderburi house. that' what puzzl me altogether." 

"well, it will all come out, I hope, at the inquest, which is to be held 
at four o'clock to day. there must have been foul play somewhere, but 
the mysteri is where, and that heaven onli knows, perhaps." 

"I shall attend," said the landlord, "of course, to identifi him; and I 
suppose, unless anybodi claim the horse, I may as well keep possess 
of it." 

"don't you flatter yourself that you will get the hors out of the 
transaction. don't you know quit well that the govern take 
possess of everyth as don't belong to nobody?" 

"yes; but I have got him, and possession, you know, is nine point of 
the law." 

"it may be so; but their tenth point will get the better of you for all 
that. you take my word for it, the hors will be claim of you; but I 
don't mind, as an old acquaintance, put you up to a dodge." 

"in what way?" 

"why, i'll tell you what happen with a friend of mine; but don't think 
it wa me for if it wa I would tell you at once, so don't think it. He 
kept a countri public-house; and, one day, an elderli gentleman came in, 
and appear to be unwell. He just utter a word or two, and then 
drop down dead. He happen to have in hi fob a gold repeater, that 
wa worth, at least a hundr guineas, and my friend, befor anybodi 
came, took it out, and pop in, in it stead, an old watch that he 
had, which wa not worth a coupl of pounds." 

"it wa run a risk." 

"it was; but it turn out veri well, becaus the old gentleman happen 
to be a veri eccentr person, and wa live alone, so that hi friend 
realli did not know what he had, or what he had not, but took it for 
grant that ani watch produc belong to him. so, if I were you in 
thi case, when the gentleman' hors is claimed. i'd get the d--dest 
old screw I could, and let them have that." 

"you would?" 

"inde would I, and glori in it, too, as the veri best thing that could 
be done. now, a hors is of use to you?" 

"I believ ye, it is." 

"exactly; but what' the use of it to government? and, what' more, if 
it went to the government, there might be some excuse; but the 
govern will know no more about it, and make not so much as I shall. 
some jack-in-offic will lay hold of it as a thing of cours and a 
perquisite, when you might just as well, and a great deal better, too, 
keep it yourself, for it would do you some good, as you say, and none to 
them." 

"i'll do it; it is a good and a happi thought. there is no reason on 
earth whi I shouldn't do it, and I will. I have made up my mind to it 
now." 

"well, I am glad you have. what do you think now the dead man' hors is 
worth?" 

"oh! fifti or sixti guinea value." 

"then veri good. then, when the affair is all settled, I will troubl 
you for twenti pounds. 

"you?" 

"yes, to be sure. who els do you suppos is go to interfer with 
you? one is enough, ain't it, at a time; and I think, after give you 
such advic as I have, that I am entitled, at all events, to something." 

"I tell you what," said the landlord of the hotel, "take all thing 
into consideration, I have alter my mind rather, and won't do it." 

"veri good. you need not; onli mind, if you do, I am down upon you like 
a shot." 

the excit conting upon the inquest wa veri great; indeed, the 
larg room in the public-house, where it wa held, wa crowd to 
suffoc with person who were anxiou to be present at the 
proceedings. when the landlord reach home, of cours he told hi 
guest, the baron, of the discoveri he had made, that the murder man 
wa the strang visitor of the previou night; for now, from the 
fright wound he had receiv in hi throat, the belief that he wa 
murder becam too ration a one to admit of ani doubts, and wa that 
which wa univers adopt in prefer to ani other suggest upon 
the occasion; although, no doubt, peopl would be found who would not 
scrupl to aver that he had cut hi own throat, after make hi way 
into the well belong to anderburi house. 

the landlord had hi own misgiv concern hi guest, the baron, now 
that someth had occur of such an aw and mysteri a natur to 
one who wa evid known to him. It did not seem to be a pleasant 
thing to have such an intim friend of a man who had been murder in 
one' house, especi when it came to be consid that he wa the 
last person seen in hi company, and that, consequently, he wa 
peculiarli call upon to give an explan of how, and under what 
circumstances, he had part with him. 

the baron wa sit smoke in the most unconcern manner in the 
world, when the landlord came to bring him thi intelligence, and, when 
he had heard him to an end, the remark he made was,-- 

"really, you veri much surpris me; but, perhaps, as you are better 
acquaint with the town than I am, you can tell me who he was?" 

"why, sir, that is what we hope you would be abl to tell us." 

"how should I tell you? He introduc himself to me as a mr. mitchell, a 
surveyor, and he said that, hear I talk of purchas or rent 
anderbury-on-the-mount, he came to tell me that the princip side wall, 
that you could see from the beach, wa off the perpendicular." 

"indeed, sir!" 

"yes; and as thi wa a veri interest circumst to me, consid 
that I realli did contempl such a purchas or renting, and do so 
still, as it wa a moonlight night, and he said he could show me in a 
minut what he meant if I would accompani him, I did so; but when we got 
there, and on the road, I heard quit enough of him to convinc me that 
he wa a littl out of hi senses, and, consequently, I paid no more 
attent to what he said, but walk home and left him on the beach." 

"it' a most extraordinari circumstance, sir; there is no such person, I 
assur you, as mitchell, a surveyor, in the town; so I can't make it out 
in the least." 

"but, I tell you, I consid the man out of hi senses, and perhap that 
may account for the whole affair." 

"oh, yes, sir, that would, certainly; but still, it' a veri odd thing, 
becaus we don't know of such a person at all, and it doe seem so 
extraordinari that he should have made hi appearance, all of a sudden, 
in thi sort of way. I suppose, sir, that you will attend the inquest, 
now, that' to be held upon him?" 

"oh, yes; I have no object whatev to that; indeed, I feel myself 
bound to do so, becaus I suppos mine is the latest evid that can 
be at all produc concern him." 

"unquestionably, sir; our coron is a veri clever man, and you will be 
glad to know him--veri glad to know him, sir, and he will be glad to 
know you, so I am sure it will be a mutual gratification. it' at four 
o'clock the inquest is to be, and I dare say, sir, if you are there by 
half-past, it will be time enough." 

"no doubt of that; but I will be punctual." 

We have alreadi said the room in which the inquest wa to be held wa 
crowd almost to suffocation, and not onli wa that the case, but the 
lower part of the hous wa cram with peopl likewise; and there can 
be veri littl doubt but the baron would have shrunk from such an 
investig from a number of curiou eyes, if he could have done so; 
while the landlord of the hous would have had no objection, as far as 
hi profit wa concern in the sale of a great quantiti of beer and 
spirits, to have had such an occurr everi day in the week, if 
possible. 

the bodi lay still in the shell where it had been origin placed. 
after it had been view by the jury, and almost everi one had remark 
upon the extraordinari fresh appear it wore, they proceed at onc 
to the inquiry, and the first wit who appear wa mr. leek, who 
depos to have been in compani with some gentlemen view anderburi 
house, and to have found the bodi in one of the ice-wel of that 
establishment. 

thi evid wa corrobor by that of davis, who had so unexpectedli 
jump into the well, without be awar that it contain alreadi so 
disagre a visitor as it did in the person of the murder man, 
regard the caus of whose death the present inquiri wa instituted. 

then the landlord identifi the bodi as that of a gentleman who had 
come to hi hous on horseback, and who had afterward walk out with 
baron stolmuy of saltzburgh, who wa one of hi guests. 

"i that gentleman in attendance?" said the coroner. 

"yes, sir, he is; I told him about it, and he ha kindli come forward to 
give all the evid in hi power concern it." 

there wa a gener express of interest and curios when the baron 
step forward, attir in hi magnific coat, trim with fur, and 
tender hi evid to the coroner, which, of course, wa precis 
the same as the statement he had made to the landlord of the house; for, 
as he had made up such a well connect story, he wa not like to 
prevar or to depart from it in the smallest particular. 

He wa listen to with breathless attention, and, when he had 
concluded, the coroner, with a preparatori hem! said to him, 

"and you have reason to suppose, sir, that thi person wa out of hi 
senses?" 

"it seem to me so; he talk wildli and incoherently, and in such a 
manner as to fulli induc such a belief." 

"you left him on the beach?" 

"I did. I found when I got there that it wa onli a veri small portion, 
indeed, of anderburi hous that wa visible; and, although the moon 
shone brightly, I must confess I did not see, myself, ani sign of 
deviat from the perpendicular; and, such be the case, I left the 
spot at once, becaus I could have no further motiv in staying; and, 
moreover, it wa not pleasant to be out at night with a man whom I 
thought wa deranged. I regretted, after make thi discovery, that I 
had come from home on such a fool' errand; but as, when one is go to 
invest a consider sum of money in ani enterprise, one is natur 
anxiou to know all about it, I went, littl suspect that the man wa 
insane." 

"did you see him after that?" 

"certainli not, until to-day, when I recognis in the bodi that ha 
been exhibit to me the same individual." 

"gentlemen," said the coron to the jury, "it appear to me that thi 
is a most mysteri affair; the deceas person ha a wound in hi 
throat, which, I have no doubt, you will hear from a medic wit ha 
been the caus of death; and the most singular part of the affair is, 
how, if he inflict it upon himself, he ha manag to dispos of the 
weapon with which he did the deed." 

"the last person seen in hi company," said one of the jury, "wa the 
baron, and I think he is bound to give some better explan of the 
affair." 

"I am yet to discover," said the baron, "that the last person who 
acknowledg to have been in the compani of a man afterward murdered, 
must, of necessity, be the murderer?" 

"yes; but how do you account, sir, for there be no weapon found by 
which the man could have done the deed himself?" 

"I don't account for it at all--how do you?" 

"thi is irregular," said the coroner; "call the next witness." 

thi wa a medic man, who briefli state that he had seen the 
deceased, and that the wound in hi throat wa ampli suffici to 
account for hi death; that it wa inflict with a sharp instrument 
have an edg on each side. 

this, then, seem to conclud the case, and the coron remarked,-- 

"gentlemen of the jury,--i think thi is one of those peculiar case in 
which an open verdict is necessary, or els an adjourn without date, 
so that the matter can be resum at ani time, if fresh evid can be 
procur concern it. there is no one accus of the offence, although 
it appear to me imposs that the unhappi man could have commit 
the act himself. We have no reason to throw the least shade of suspicion 
or doubt upon the evid of the baron stolmuy of saltzburgh; for as 
far as we know anyth of the matter, the murder man may have been in 
the compani of a dozen peopl after the baron left him." 

A desultori convers ensued, which end in an adjourn of the 
inquest, without ani futur day be mention for it re-assembling, 
and so the baron stolmuy entir escap from what might have been a 
veri seriou affair to him. 

It did not, however, appear to shake him in hi resolut of take 
anderbury-on-the-mount, although mr. leek veri much fear it would; but 
he announc to that gentleman hi intent fulli of do so, and told 
him to get the necessari paper drawn up forthwith. 

"I hope," he said, "within a few weeks' time to be fairli instal in 
that mansion, and then I will troubl you, mr. leek, to give me a list 
of the name of all the best famili in the neighbourhood; for I intend 
give an entertain on a grand scale in the mansion and grounds." 

"sir," said mr. leek, "I shall, with the greatest pleasure, attend upon 
you in everi possibl way in thi affair. thi is a veri excel 
neighbourhood, and you will have no difficulty, I assur you, sir, in 
get togeth an extrem capit and credit assemblag of 
persons. there could not be a better plan devis for at onc 
introduc all the peopl who are worth knowing, to you." 

"I thank you," said the baron; "I think the place will suit me well; 
and, as the baro stolmuy of saltzburgh is dead, I have some idea 
of marri again; and therefor it becom necessari and desir that 
I should be well acquaint with the surround famili of distinct 
in thi neighbourhood." 

thi wa a hint not at all like to be thrown away upon mr. leek, who 
wa the grand gossip-mong of the place, and he treasur it up in 
order to see if he could not make someth of it which would be 
advantag to himself. 

He knew quit enough of the select and fashion famili in that 
neighbourhood, to be fulli awar that neither the baron' age nor hi 
ugli would be ani bar to hi form a matrimoni alliance. 

"there is not one of them," he said to himself, "who would not marri the 
veri devil himself and be call the countess lucifer, or ani name of 
the kind, alway provid there wa plenti of money: and that the baron 
ha without doubt, so it is equal without doubt he may pick and choos 
where he pleases." 

thi wa quit correct of mr. leek, and show hi great knowledg of 
human nature; and we entertain with him a candid opinion, that if the 
baron stolmuy of saltzburgh had been ten time as ugli as he was, and 
heaven know that wa needless, he might pick and choos a wife almost 
when he pleased. 

thi is a gener rule; and as, of course, to all gener rule there 
are exceptions, thi one cannot be suppos to be free from them. under 
all circumstances, and in all class of society, there are 
single-mind be who consult the pure dictat of their own hearts, 
and who, disdain those thing which make up the amount of the 
ambit of meaner spirits, stand aloof as bright and memor exampl 
to the rest of human nature. 

such a be wa flora bannerworth. she would never have been found to 
sacrific herself to the fanci advantag of wealth and station, but 
would have given her heart and hand to the true object of her affection, 
although a sovereign princ had made the endeavour to wean her from it. 











end of project gutenberg' varney the vampire, by thoma preskett prest 

*** end OF thi project gutenberg ebook varney the vampir *** 

***** thi file should be name 14833.txt or 14833.zip ***** 
thi and all associ file of variou format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.net/1/4/8/3/14833/ 

produc by charl franks, debra storr, sandra brown and the PG 
onlin distribut proofread team. 


updat edit will replac the previou one--th old edit 
will be renamed. 

creat the work from public domain print edit mean that no 
one own a unit state copyright in these works, so the foundat 
(and you!) can copi and distribut it in the unit state without 
permiss and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the gener term of use part of thi license, appli to 
copi and distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a regist trademark, and may not be use if you 
charg for the ebooks, unless you receiv specif permission. If you 
do not charg anyth for copi of thi ebook, compli with the 
rule is veri easy. you may use thi ebook for nearli ani purpos 
such as creation of deriv works, reports, perform and 
research. they may be modifi and print and given away--y may do 
practic anyth with public domain ebooks. redistribut is 
subject to the trademark license, especi commerci 
redistribution. 



*** start: full licens *** 

the full project gutenberg licens 
pleas read thi befor you distribut OR use thi work 

To protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promot the free 
distribut of electron works, by use or distribut thi work 
(or ani other work associ in ani way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agre to compli with all the term of the full project 
gutenberg-tm licens (avail with thi file or onlin at 
http://gutenberg.net/license). 


section 1. gener term of use and redistribut project gutenberg-tm 
electron work 

1.a. By read or use ani part of thi project gutenberg-tm 
electron work, you indic that you have read, understand, agre to 
and accept all the term of thi licens and intellectu properti 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agre to abid by all 
the term of thi agreement, you must ceas use and return or destroy 
all copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in your possession. 
If you paid a fee for obtain a copi of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work and you do not agre to be bound by the 
term of thi agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entiti to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a regist trademark. It may onli be 
use on or associ in ani way with an electron work by peopl who 
agre to be bound by the term of thi agreement. there are a few 
thing that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electron work 
even without compli with the full term of thi agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of thing you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electron work if you follow the term of thi agreement 
and help preserv free futur access to project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compil copyright in the collect of project 
gutenberg-tm electron works. nearli all the individu work in the 
collect are in the public domain in the unit states. If an 
individu work is in the public domain in the unit state and you are 
locat in the unit states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or creat deriv 
work base on the work as long as all refer to project gutenberg 
are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promot free access to electron work by 
freeli share project gutenberg-tm work in complianc with the term of 
thi agreement for keep the project gutenberg-tm name associ with 
the work. you can easili compli with the term of thi agreement by 
keep thi work in the same format with it attach full project 
gutenberg-tm licens when you share it without charg with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are locat also govern 
what you can do with thi work. copyright law in most countri are in 
a constant state of change. If you are outsid the unit states, check 
the law of your countri in addit to the term of thi agreement 
befor downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribut or 
creat deriv work base on thi work or ani other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundat make no represent concern 
the copyright statu of ani work in ani countri outsid the unit 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remov all refer to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the follow sentence, with activ link to, or other immedi 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm licens must appear promin 
whenev ani copi of a project gutenberg-tm work (ani work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copi or distributed: 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.net 

1.e.2. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is deriv 
from the public domain (doe not contain a notic indic that it is 
post with permiss of the copyright holder), the work can be copi 
and distribut to anyon in the unit state without pay ani fee 
or charges. If you are redistribut or provid access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associ with or appear on the 
work, you must compli either with the requir of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permiss for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is post 
with the permiss of the copyright holder, your use and distribut 
must compli with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and ani addit 
term impos by the copyright holder. addit term will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm licens for all work post with the 
permiss of the copyright holder found at the begin of thi work. 

1.e.4. Do not unlink or detach or remov the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens term from thi work, or ani file contain a part of thi 
work or ani other work associ with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribut or redistribut thi 
electron work, or ani part of thi electron work, without 
promin display the sentenc set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
activ link or immedi access to the full term of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribut thi work in ani binary, 
compressed, mark up, nonproprietari or proprietari form, includ ani 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provid access to or 
distribut copi of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the offici version 
post on the offici project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net), 
you must, at no addit cost, fee or expens to the user, provid a 
copy, a mean of export a copy, or a mean of obtain a copi upon 
request, of the work in it origin "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. ani altern format must includ the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens as specifi in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. Do not charg a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copi or distribut ani project gutenberg-tm work 
unless you compli with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charg a reason fee for copi of or provid 
access to or distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work provid 
that 

- you pay a royalti fee of 20% of the gross profit you deriv from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm work calcul use the method 
you alreadi use to calcul your applic taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
ha agre to donat royalti under thi paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literari archiv foundation. royalti payment 
must be paid within 60 day follow each date on which you 
prepar (or are legal requir to prepare) your period tax 
returns. royalti payment should be clearli mark as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat at the 
address specifi in section 4, "inform about donat to 
the project gutenberg literari archiv foundation." 

- you provid a full refund of ani money paid by a user who notifi 
you in write (or by e-mail) within 30 day of receipt that s/he 
doe not agre to the term of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must requir such a user to return or 
destroy all copi of the work possess in a physic medium 
and discontinu all use of and all access to other copi of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accord with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of ani 
money paid for a work or a replac copy, if a defect in the 
electron work is discov and report to you within 90 day 
of receipt of the work. 

- you compli with all other term of thi agreement for free 
distribut of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. If you wish to charg a fee or distribut a project gutenberg-tm 
electron work or group of work on differ term than are set 
forth in thi agreement, you must obtain permiss in write from 
both the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundat as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunt and employe expend consider 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcrib and proofread 
public domain work in creat the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despit these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electron 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limit to, incomplete, inaccur or 
corrupt data, transcript errors, a copyright or other intellectu 
properti infringement, a defect or damag disk or other medium, a 
comput virus, or comput code that damag or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limit warranty, disclaim OF damag - except for the "right 
of replac or refund" describ in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and ani other parti distribut a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work under thi agreement, disclaim all 
liabil to you for damages, cost and expenses, includ legal 
fees. you agre that you have NO remedi for negligence, strict 
liability, breach OF warranti OR breach OF contract except those 
provid IN paragraph f3. you agre that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and ani distributor under thi agreement will not BE 
liabl TO you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punit OR 
incident damag even IF you give notic OF the possibl OF such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limit right OF replac OR refund - If you discov a 
defect in thi electron work within 90 day of receiv it, you can 
receiv a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explan to the person you receiv the work from. If you 
receiv the work on a physic medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entiti that provid you with 
the defect work may elect to provid a replac copi in lieu of a 
refund. If you receiv the work electronically, the person or entiti 
provid it to you may choos to give you a second opportun to 
receiv the work electron in lieu of a refund. If the second copi 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in write without further 
opportun to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limit right of replac or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, thi work is provid to you 'as-is' with NO other 
warranti OF ani kind, express OR implied, includ but not limit TO 
warranti OF merchant OR fit for ani purpose. 

1.f.5. some state do not allow disclaim of certain impli 
warranti or the exclus or limit of certain type of damages. 
If ani disclaim or limit set forth in thi agreement violat the 
law of the state applic to thi agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaim or limit permit by 
the applic state law. the invalid or unenforc of ani 
provis of thi agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemn - you agre to indemnifi and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, ani agent or employe of the foundation, anyon 
provid copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in accord 
with thi agreement, and ani volunt associ with the production, 
promot and distribut of project gutenberg-tm electron works, 
harmless from all liability, cost and expenses, includ legal fees, 
that aris directli or indirectli from ani of the follow which you do 
or caus to occur: (a) distribut of thi or ani project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addit or delet to ani 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) ani defect you cause. 


section 2. inform about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonym with the free distribut of 
electron work in format readabl by the widest varieti of comput 
includ obsolete, old, middle-ag and new computers. It exist 
becaus of the effort of hundr of volunt and donat from 
peopl in all walk of life. 

volunt and financi support to provid volunt with the 
assist they need, is critic to reach project gutenberg-tm' 
goal and ensur that the project gutenberg-tm collect will 
remain freeli avail for gener to come. In 2001, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundat wa creat to provid a secur 
and perman futur for project gutenberg-tm and futur generations. 
To learn more about the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat 
and how your effort and donat can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundat web page at http://www.pglaf.org. 


section 3. inform about the project gutenberg literari archiv 
foundat 

the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educ corpor organ under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt statu by the intern 
revenu service. the foundation' ein or feder tax identif 
number is 64-6221541. it 501(c)(3) letter is post at 
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contribut to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. feder law and your state' laws. 

the foundation' princip offic is locat at 4557 melan dr. S. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but it volunt and employe are scatter 
throughout numer locations. it busi offic is locat at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact link and up to date contact 
inform can be found at the foundation' web site and offici 
page at http://pglaf.org 

for addit contact information: 
dr. gregori B. newbi 
chief execut and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 


section 4. inform about donat to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot surviv without wide 
spread public support and donat to carri out it mission of 
increas the number of public domain and licens work that can be 
freeli distribut in machin readabl form access by the widest 
array of equip includ outdat equipment. mani small donat 
($1 to $5,000) are particularli import to maintain tax exempt 
statu with the irs. 

the foundat is commit to compli with the law regul 
chariti and charit donat in all 50 state of the unit 
states. complianc requir are not uniform and it take a 
consider effort, much paperwork and mani fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. We do not solicit donat in locat 
where we have not receiv written confirm of compliance. To 
send donat or determin the statu of complianc for ani 
particular state visit http://pglaf.org 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribut from state where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibit 
against accept unsolicit donat from donor in such state who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

intern donat are grate accepted, but we cannot make 
ani statement concern tax treatment of donat receiv from 
outsid the unit states. u.s. law alon swamp our small staff. 

pleas check the project gutenberg web page for current donat 
method and addresses. donat are accept in a number of other 
way includ includ checks, onlin payment and credit card 
donations. To donate, pleas visit: http://pglaf.org/don 


section 5. gener inform about project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. 

professor michael S. hart is the origin of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a librari of electron work that could be freeli share 
with anyone. for thirti years, he produc and distribut project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with onli a loos network of volunt support. 


project gutenberg-tm ebook are often creat from sever print 
editions, all of which are confirm as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notic is included. thus, we do not necessarili 
keep ebook in complianc with ani particular paper edition. 


most peopl start at our web site which ha the main PG search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.net 

thi web site includ inform about project gutenberg-tm, 
includ how to make donat to the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundation, how to help produc our new ebooks, and how to 
subscrib to our email newslett to hear about new ebooks. 
